A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD.

Wherein is particularly described all the Monarchies, Empires, and Kingdoms
of the same, with their ACADEMIES.

As also their several Titles and Situations thereunto adjoining.

Written by the Most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, late Archbishop of
Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to sold by Will. Sheares, at the sign of the
Harrow in Britains Burse. 1636.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION of the whole WORLD
Written by the Right Reverend Father in GOD. George Abbott. Late Archbishop of
Canterbury.

COSMOGRAPHIA

(...)

Will:Marshall.Sculpsit.



Printed for Will: Sheares at the Harrow in Britains by 1636.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE whole World.
THE Globe of the Earth does either show the Sea or Land. Of the Seas.
The Sea general, is called by the name of Ocean, which coasteth all the
World, and takes his name in special either of the place near which it
comes, as Oceanus Britannicus, The diver ^^s names given to the Seas, and the
reason why.
Mare Germanicum, Sinus Persicus, Mare Atlanticum, of the hill Atlas in the
West part of Africa: or of the finder out, as Fretum Magellanicum; or of some
other accident, as the Red Sea, because the sand is red, Mare Mediterraneum,
because it runs between the lands of Europe and Africa, Mare Jcarium
because Icarus was drowned there, or the like. There be some few Seas which
have no intercourse with the Ocean, as Mare mortuum, near Palestina, Mare
Caspium sive Hircanum, not far from Armenia: and such a one is said to be in
the North part of America.

Of the Straits or Narrow Seas.
The Straits or narrow Seas, are noted in the Latin by the name of Fretum, as
Fretum Britannicum, the English narrow Seas; Fretum Herculeum, the Straits
between Barbary and Spain; Fretum Magellanicum, etc.

Of the Earth.
The Earth is either Islands, which are those which are wholly compassed by the
Sea, as Britan^ia, Sicilia, Corsica; or the Continent, which is called in the
English, The firm Land, in the Latin, Continens.

The old known firm Land was contained only in Asia, Europe, and Africa.
Europe is divided from Africa by the Mediterranean Sea; from Asia by the River
Tanais: whereby appears, that the North parts of Asia, and Europe in old
time, were but little known and discovered.

Africa is divided from Europe by ^he Mediterrean Sea; from Asia by ^he River
Nilus: and so Asia by ^anais and Nilus, is severed from Europe and Africa.

Of Spain.
TO say nothing of England and Ireland, the most Western Country of Europe, is
Spain, How Spain is bounded.
which is bounded on the South with the Mediterranean, on the West with the
Atlantic on the North with Oceanus Cantabricus, or the Spanish Seas, on the
East with France, from which it is severed with certain Mountains, called
Montes Pyrenei, or the Pyrenay hills.

If we should enquire into the times that were before the coming of the
Carthaginians and Romans into Spain, we shall find nothing but that which
is either fabulous, or near to fables: The Original names of the Cou^t^ey of
Spain.
here it was first called Iberia, ab Ibero slumine, afterward Hispania, ab
Hispano, we may take as a tradition; but their Gargoris, their Habis, their
Geryon exceed belief of any, but those that will take all reports on trust. It
is certain that the Syrians planted a Colony there in the Isle of Gades,
corruptly now called Cadiz, or Cales: These troubled by their Neighbors
desired aid of the Carthaginians, a flourishing neighbor commonwealth,
descended of the Syrians, as well as themselves, who sent first to defend the
Gaditanes against their neighbors, afterward heartned on by their success in
their first Expedition; these Cathaginians, Carthaginians sent to defend the
Gaditanes.
successively sent thither three Captains, Hamilcar, Hasdrubal and Hannibal,
who for the most part subdued the Province, and held it, till by Scipio's and
the Roman Forces, they were dispossessed of it: Yet for many years after, the
fortunes of the Romans stuck as it were in the subduing of that Province, so
that from the time of the second Punick War, until the time of Augustus, they
had business made them in that Country continually, neither could they till
then bring it peaceably into the form of a Province. Spain once a Province of
the Roman Empire


It continued a Province of the Roman Empire until the time of Honorius the
Emperor in whose days the Vandalls came in^o it, conquering and making it
theirs; then the Goths (the Vandalls either driven out, or called over into
Afric) entering, erected there a Kingdom, which flourished for many years,
Saracens and M^^^es er^cted it a Kingdom.
till by the coming of the Saracens and Moors, their Kingdom was broken, who
settling themselves in Spain, erected a Kingdom, changed the names of many
places and Rivers, and gave them new names, such as they retain to this day,
and continued for the space of some hundred of years mighty in that Country,
till they were first subdued by Ferdinand: They were utter^y expelled by Philip
the Third.
afterward, and that now lately utterly expelled by Philip the Third.

After the coming in of these Africans, in this Country there were many
Kingdoms, as the Kingdom of Portugal toward the West; the Kingdom of Granado
toward the South; the Kingdom of Navarre and Arragon, toward the East; and the
Kingdom of Castile in the middle of the Land: but the whole Dominion is now
under the King of Spain. Spain in former (...) 12 sev^^all Kingdoms.


As Damianus a Goes does write in that Treatise entitled, Hispani^, there were
in times past twelve several Kingdoms in Spain, which he names thus:
Castellae antiquae and novae, Leonis Aragoniae, Portugalliae, Navar^ae,
Granatae, Valentiae, Toleti, Galitiae, Algarbiorum, Murtiae, Cordubae: which is
not to be wondered at, since in England, a far less Country, there were in
the time of the Saxons seven several Kingdoms and Monarchies.

In the best Mappes of Spain, the Arms of these several Kingdoms do yet
distinctly appear: where for the Arms of Leons is given a Lion; which
manifestly argues, that whereas by some it is called Regnum Legionis, that
name is false, for it is Leonis, suitable thereunto: for the Arms of Castile is
given a Castle, which was the cause that John of Gaunt, son to Edward the
Third King of England, did quarter with the Arms of England the Castle and the
Lion, as having married Constance daughter to Peter King of Castile; and at this
day the first and chief Coat of the King of Spain, is a Castle quartered with
a Lion, in remembrance of the two Kingdoms of Castile and Leons.

In Corduba (as in times past it was called) stands Andoluzia, near unto
which is the Island called properly Gades, but since, by deprivation of the
word, Cadiz, and commonly Cales, which was lately surprised by the English. The
Kingdom of Granada, Granada ^oo years possessed by the Moors and Saracens
which lies nearest to the Mediterranean, was by the space of seven hundred
years possessed by the Moors and Saracens, who do confess the Religion of
Mahumet: the reason whereof Rodericus Toletanus in the third Book of his Story
does show to be this; Rodericus Toletanus
that whereas the Saracens after Mahumets time, had spread themselves all along
Africa, even unto the Western part of Barbary, a King of Spain called
Rodericus, employed (in an Embassage to them) one Julian, a Nobleman of his,
who by his wise demeanor, procured much reputation amongst the Moors; but in
the time of his service, the King Rodericus destoured the Daughter of the said
Julian; which the Father took in such indignation, that he procured those
Saracens to come over into Spain, that so he might be revenged on his King;
but when those barbarous people had once set foot in there, they could never be
remooved, until the time of Ferdinando and Elizabeth, King and Queen of Spain,
about a hundred years since. The Author before named writes, that before the
coming of those Moors into Spain the King Rodericus would needs open a part
of a Palace, which had been shut long before, and had by descent from hand to
hand been forbidden to be entered by any: yet the King supposing there had
been great treasure therein, broke into it, but found nothing there, saving in
a great Chest, the pictures of men, who resembled the proportion, Attire, and
Armor of the Moors, and a Prophecy joined therewithal, A strange and
unexpected prophecy.
that at that time, when the Palace should be entered, such a people as was
there resembled, should invade and spoil Spain; which fell out accordingly.

The Spaniards that now are, be a very mixed people, descended of the Goths,
which in former times possessed that Land, and of those Saracens and Jews,
which are the basest people of the World.

Portugal added to the Kingdom of Spain.
The Kingdom of Portugal did contain under it Regnum Algarbiorum, but both of
them are now annexed unto Castile by the cunning of the King of Spain, Philip
the Second, who took the advantage after the death of Sebastian, who was
slain in Barbary, in the Year 1578. Then after him reigned Henry, who
sometimes was Cardinal, and Uncle to Sebastian; in whose time, although show
was made that it should be lawfully debated, unto whom the Crown of Portugal
did belong, yet Philip meaning to make sure work, did not so much respect the
right, as by main force invaded, and since (to the great grief of the
Portugals) has kept it. The chief City of Portugal is Lisbone, Lisbone the
chief City of Portugal.
called in Latin Olysippo, from whence those Navigations were advanced, by
which the Portugals discovered so much of their South part of Africa, and of
the East Indies, possessed by them to this day. The City from whence the
Castilians do set forth their ships to the West Indies, is Sevill, Sevill.
called in Latin Hispalis. Another great City in Spain is Toledo, Toledo.
where the Archbishopricke is the richest spiritual dignity of Christendom,
the Papacy only excepted.

The magnificent greatness of Spain and Portugal.
In the time of Damianus a Goes, there were reckoned to be in Spain, four
Archbishoprickes of great worth, three other inferior, and forty Bishoprics;
as also in Portugal, three Archbishoprickes, and eight Bishoprics. He
reckons up also in Spain (besides the great Officers of the Crown) 17 Dukes,
41 Marquesses, 87 Earls or Cou^ts, and 9 Viscounts: as also in Portugal
(besides the Officers of the Crown) six Dukes, 4 Marquesses, nineteen Earls,
and one Vicount. In Spain he says are seven Universities. The Country is but
dry, and so consequently barren, in comparison of some other places. What
commodities it does yield, it may be seen in the Treatise of Damianus a Goes,
which he calls his Hispania.

Not only this great and large Country heretofore divided into so many
Kingdoms, is now under one absolute King, but that King also is Lord of many
other Territories: as namely, of the Kingdom of Naples in Italy, and the
Duchy of Millaine, of the Isles of Sicily, Sardinia, Majorque, Minorque,
Evisa, In the mid-land Sea; of the Islands of the Canaries in the Atlantique,
besides diverse strong Towns and goodly Havens in Barbary, within and without
the Straits. On the back side of Africa he commands much on the Frontiery,
besides the Islands adjoining to the mayn Land. In the Western Indies he has
Mexico, Peru, Brasil, large Territories, with the Islands of the South, and the
North Sea. And Philip the Second getting Portugal as a Dowry to that forced
Marriage, got also all the dependances of that Crown in Afric, the East
Indies, and the Atlantique Sea, the Towns of Barbary and the East Indies
willingly submitting themselves unto him, but the Terceras he won by force
at the first and second Expedition: so if we consider the huge tract of ground
that is under this Kings Dominion, The Empery of the Kingdom of Spain the
great^st in the Christian World.
we will say that the Empery of the King of Spain is in that respect the
largest that now is, or ever was in the World.

Of France.
France how bounded.
THE next Country is France, which is bounded on the West with the Pyrenie
hills, on the North with the English Seas, on the East with Germany, on the
South-east with the Alpe-hils, on the Southwest with the Mediterranean Sea.

The Kingdom of France is for one entire thing, France, o^^ of the most
absolute kingdoms of the World.
one of the most rich and absolute Monarchies of the World, having both on the
North and South side, the Sea standing very convenient for profit of
Navigation, and the land it self being ordinarily very fruitful. The
consideration whereof caused Francis the first King of France, to compare this
Kingdom alone, to all the Dominions and Seigniories of Charles the fifth
Emperor: for when the Herald of the said Charles, bidding Defiance to King
Francis, did give his Majesty the title of Emperor of Germany, King of
Castile, Arragon, Naples, Sicilie, etc. Francis commanded his Herald to call
him so often King of France, as the other had Titles by all his Countries;
implying that France alone was of as much strength and worth, as all the
Countries which the other had.

Concerning this Argument, see the warlike and politic Discourses of Monsieur
de la Nove. He who writes the Commentaries of Religion, and state of France,
does show, that when there had been of late in France, in the days of Francis
the second, and Charles the ninth, three Civil wars, which had much ruinated
the glory and beauty of that Kingdom, Civil wars in France.
when a little before the great Massacre in the year one thousand five hundred
seventy two, there had been peace in that Country scant full two years, yet
so great is the riches and happiness of that Kingdom, that in that short
time, all things were renewed and repaired again, as if there had never been
any such desolation.

Revenue of the Crown of France exceeding great.
The Revenue of the Crown of France is exceeding great, by reason of the Taxes
and Impositions, which through the whole Kingdom are laid upon the subjects:
for their Sizes and Toules do exceed all Imposts and tributes of all the
Princes of Christendom; in as much as there are few things there used, but the
King has a commodity issuing out of them; and not only from matters of
Luxury, as in other States, but from such things as be of necessity, as Flesh,
Wood, Salt, etc. It is supposed at this day, that there be in the Kingdom
thirty thousand men, who are Under-officers, and make a good part of their
living by gathering of the Kings tribute: This is much increased no doubt in
these latter times: but yet of old it was in so great measure, which caused
that speech of Maximilian the Emperor, as Johannes Aventinus witnesses de
Bello Turcico, who said, that the Emperor of Germany was Rex Regum, meaning
that his Princes were so great men; The King of Spain was Rex hominum, because
his people would obey their Prince in any reasonable moderation; The King of
England was Rex Diabolorum, because the subjects had there diverse times
deprived their Kings of their Crowns and dignity: But the King of France was
Rex asinorum, in as much as his people did bear very heavy burdens of taxes
and impositions. In France the offices of Justice bought and sold.
In this Kingdom of France is one great misery to the subjects, that the
places and offices of Justice are ordinarily bought and sold, the beginning
whereof was this: Lewis the 12. who was called a Father of the Country, began
to pay the debts of his predecessor Charles the 7. (which were very great) and
intending to recover unto France the Dukedom of Millaine, and minding not to
burden his people further than was need, thought it a good course to set at
sale all the Offices of the Crown; but with the places of Justice he did not
meddle. But his successors after him took occasion also to make great profit
of them, witness the Author, contra Machiavel. lib. 1. cap. 1. By the customs
of that Country, The Custom of France for mustering and pressing Soldiers.
the King of France has not that absolute power to muster and press out
Soldiers, as in England, and some other places of Christendom the Princes
have: But the manner is, when the King will set forward any Military Service,
he sends abroad his Edicts, or causes in Cities and good Towns, the Drum to
be stricken up, and whosoever will voluntarily follow, he is enrolled.
Notwithstanding he wants few Soldiers, because the Noble and Gentlemen of
France, do hold it their duty, and highest honor, both to attend the King
unto the wars, and to bear their own charges yearly for many months. The
person of the King of France has in former time been reputed so sacred, that
Guicciardine says of them, that their people have regarded them in that
respect of devotion, as if they had been de mi-gods. And Machiavel in his
Questions upon Livie, says, that they doted so upon their Kings, that they
thought every thing did become them which they did, and that nothing could be
more disgraceful, than to give any intimation, that such or such a thing was
not well done by their King. But this opinion is now much decayed; the Princes
of the blood are in the next rank under the King himself.

Paris the chief City of France.
There be many and very rich goodly Cities in France, but the chiefest of all is
Paris, called Lutetia, quasi Luto sita, as some have merrily spoken: which
place is especially honored, first by the presence of the King, most commonly
keeping Court and residence there; secondly, by the great store of goodly
houses, whereof part belong to Noble men, and part are houses of Religion;
thirdly, by the University which is incomparably the greatest, most ancient,
and best filled of all France: fourthly, in that it is the chief Parliament
City of that Kingdom, without the ratification of which Parliament at Paris,
Edicts and Proclamations coming from the King, are not held authentical;
fifthly, by the great traffic of all kind of Merchandise, which is used in
that place.

The Parliament Cities in France, are places where their Terms are kept, and
in several provinces are 7. unto which the causes of inferior Courts within
their distinct Provinces, may be brought by appeal; but the Parliament of
Paris has that prerogative, that appeals from all Courts of the Kingdom, do
lie there. That which we call our Parliament in England, is amongst them
termed Conventus Ordinum, or the States.

The kingdom of France divided into three parts.
France in ancient time (as Casar reports in the first of his Commentaries)
was divided into three parts; Aquitania, which was toward the West; Celtica,
toward the North and West; and Belgica which is toward the North. Belgium is
sometime called Gallia inferior, and sometimes Germania inferior, but we
commonly call it the Low Countries: the government whereof at this day, is not
at all under France, but Gallia Celtica, and Aquitania, are under the French
King.

Gauls, the ancient inhabitants of France.
The ancient inhabitants of this Country, were the Gauls, who possessed not
only all that we now call France, being the greatest part of that the Romans
called Gallia Transalpina, but also a good part of Italy, which they call
Gallia Cisalpina, a people whose beginnings are unknown: this of them is
certain, that they were a Nation of valor; for they not only sacked Rome, but
also carried their conquering arms into Greece, where they sat down, and were
called by the name of Gallogrecians, or Galathians.

Some report also that they entered into Spain, and subdued and inhabited that
part which was called Lusitania, now Portugallia; but howsoever their former
victories and greatness, they were by Julius Caesar subdued, and made a
province of the people of Rome, and so continued under the Roman Empire till
about four hundred years after Christ, when in the ruin and dismembring of
the Roman Empire, the French invaded Gaul, and erected a Monarchy, which has
continued to this day in the succession of sixty four Kings, of three several
races; that is to say, the Merovingians, Carolovingians, and Capevingians,
about twelve hundred years, and now flourishes under Lewis the 13. the now
reigning King of France.

Although the French have done many things worthily out of their own Country,
in the East against the Saracens, although they have for a while held Sicily,
the Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy of Millaine, yet it has been observed
of them, that they could never make good their footing beyond the Alps, France
one of the strongest kingdoms in all Europe.
or in other foreign Regions, howbeit in it self France is one of the
strongest kingdoms in all Europe at this day.

That which we commonly call the Low Countries, Of the Low Countries,
containing 17 several Provinces.
contains seventeene several Provinces, whereof the most part have several
Titles and Governors, as the Dukedom of Brabant, the Earldom of Flanders,
etc. Of which the inheritance at several times did fall on Daughters, who
being married unto the Heir of some of the other Provinces, did in the end
bring the whole Country into one entire government, which was commonly called
by the name of the Dukedom of Burgundy; and yet so, that in the uniting of
them together, it was by composition agreed, that the several Provinces should
retain their several ancient laws and liberties, which is the reason
yielded, why some of those Provinces in our age think themselves freed from
obedience unto the King of Spain, Note.
unto whom by inheritance they did descend, because he has violated their
liberties, to the keeping whereof, at the first composition, he was bound. When
this whole Country did belong unto the Crown of France, the Dukedom of
Burgundy was bestowed by Philip de Valois, King of France, unto John de Valois
a younger son of his, from whom by descent it came at last to Charles the
Bold, otherwise Proud, Duke of Burgundy, who left one only daughter, and she
was married to Maximilian the Emperor, of the house of Austria, from whom the
inheritance descended unto Charles the fifth, Emperor, who yielding it over to
his son Philip the second, did charge him to entreat that people well; which
he forgetting to do, under pretense of rooting out the profession of Religion,
did entangle himself, and all that Country with a very long, bloody, and
wearisome war.

The riches of the States in General.
There is no part of Europe, which for the quantity of the ground, does yield so
much riches and commodity, as the Low Countries do, besides their infinite
store of shipping, wherein they exceed any Prince of Christendom. They were
in time past accounted a very heavy dull people, and unfit for the wars, but
their continual combating with the Spaniards, has made them now very
ingenuous, full of action, and managers of great causes appertaining to fights,
The names of the 17. Provinces.
either by Sea or Land. The 17. Provinces are these; Brabant, Gelderland,
Artois, Valencois, Luxenburg, Flaunders, Henault, Lile, Namurce, Holland,
Zeland, Tornabum, Tornacetium, Mechlin, Vtrecht, and the East and West
Freezeland.

France has many petty governments that do border upon it; as the Dukedom of
Savoy, the State of the Switzers, the Dukedom of Loraine, the Burgundians, or
Walloons, against all which, the King is forced to keep his frontier Towns.

The Salike Law.
There is nothing more famous in this kingdom, than the Salique Law, whereby it
is provided, that no woman, nor the heir of her (as in her right) shall enjoy
the Crown of France, but it goes always to the heir male.

The author of the Commentaries against Machiavel, reputeth it a great blessing
of God, that they have the Salique law in France; and that not so much (says
he) because women by the infirmity of their sex are unfit to govern, for
therein many men who have enjoyed kingdoms, have been, and are very defective:
but because by that means the Crown of France is never endangered by marriage
of a forraigner, to come under the subjection of a stranger. And this is the
opinion of Philip de Comines, in the 8. Book of his Commentaries. This Law is
very ancient among them, so that it cannot certainly be defined when it was
enacted: but by virtue thereof, By this law E^w the 3. King of England, was put
by the Crown of France.
Edward the third King of England, and his Heirs were cut off from inheriting
the Crown of France, whereunto by marriage of a daughter he was heir in
general. And by reason of this Law, Henry the fourth, late King of France,
rather enjoyed that Dominion, than the Son of the Duke of Loraine, who was
nearer of blood by descending from the Elder daughter of King Henry the second.

The Switzers government.
The Switzers are a people called in old time Helvetij, who have no Noblemen, or
Gentlemen among them, but only the Citizens of their Towns, the yearly
Officers whereof, and their Council, do govern their State.

23 Cities or Cantons in Switzerland.
There are in Switzerland, 23 Cities or Towns, which they call their Canton;
although some rather think that name properly does signify the Rulers of
those towns; and of them some do retain to this day the Romish Religion, but
some others have embraced the Gospel. The Country where they live, is not
very fertile, and being far from any Seas, they have no vent for their people,
but by sending them forth as hired Soldiers, which for their pay do fight
oftentimes in Italy and France and sometimes in Germany. Geneva.
Near unto one part of them, stands Geneva, which is challenged by the Duke
of Savoy, to have heretofore belonged to his Dominion; but they pretend
themselves to be a free City; and by the help of Protestant Princes, but
especially by some of the Helvetians, do so maintain it. In this place there
is a rare Law, that if any malefactor, A rare and excellent Law.
who has fled out of his own Country, be convinced of any grievous crime, he
suffers there, as if he were in his own Country: which they are forced to
do, because their Cities would be full of all sorts of Runnagates, in as much
as they stand on the Confines of diverse Princes and States.

Of Germany.
THe next Country unto France on the East side, is Germany, Germany how
bounded.
which is bounded on the West with France, and the Low Countries; on the North
with Denmark, and the Danish Seas; on the East with Prussia, Polonia, and
Hungary; on the South East, with Istria and Jllyricum; on the South with the
Alpehils, and with Italy.

The Governor general of this Country, The Emprour governor of Germany. Who
be the 7. Electors.
is called the Emperor of Germany, who is chosen by three spiritual Princes;
the Archbishop of Colen, called Coloniensis, the Archbishop of Ments, called
Moguntinus, and the Archbishop of Trevers, called Treverensis; and three
temporal Princes, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburge, and the
Count Palatine of Rhene: which if they cannot agree, as to make a Major part in
their Election, then the King of Bohemia has also a voice, whereof it comes
to be said, that there be seven Princes Electors of the Empire.

His manner of Election.
The manner of the choice of the Emperor, was established by a decree, which is
commonly called Bulla aurea, which was made by Charles the 4. Emperor of
Germany, and King of Bohemia, wherein he does set down all the circumstances of
the Election of the Emperor, and appoints the King of Bohemia to be Sacri
Imperij, Archipincerna, which is the Cup Bearer;

The 3. Bishops of Colen, Ments, and Trevers, to be the Archchancellours of
the three several parts of the Empire; the Count Palatine of the Rhene, to be
Sacri Imperij Archidapifer, which should have the setting on of the first dish,
the Duke of Saxony, to be Sacri imperij Archimariscallus, whose office is to
bear the sword; and the Marquess of Brandenburg, to be Sacri Imperij
Archi-Camerarius, or great Chamberlain; all which offices they supply on the
day of the Emperors Coronation.

The Empire went sometimes by succession, and sometimes by election.
It appears by all the Roman Stories, that in times past the Empire went
sometimes by succession, as unto the sons of Constantine, and Theodosius,
sometimes by election, and that either of the Senate, or of the Soldiers, who
oftentimes also in mutiny did elect men unworthy, yet such as fitted their
purpose: But now of late, the Electors do choose some Prince of Christendom,
who has otherwise a Dominion of his own, which may help to back out the
Empire, and therein of late has appeared the great cunning of that which we
call The house of Austria, whose greatest title within this 300. years, was to
be a mean Count of a mean place, namely, the County of Haspurg. But since
that time, they have so planted and strengthened themselves, that there have
been seven or eight Emperors lately of that family; but the Empire is not
tied unto them, as may appear by the possibility, which the Duke of Saxony,
and Francis the great King of France, had to ascend to that dignity.

When Charles the fifth was chosen Emperor, one of the means whereby the
possession has been continued to that house, has been the electing of some
one to be Rex Romanorum, whilst another of his Family was Emperor, which
Charles the fifth effected in his life time for his brother Ferdinandus, who
after succeeded him; Ferdinand Emperor.
and that has been the attempt of Albertus late Cardinal, and now Archduke of
Austria, that he might be established in the hope of the Empire, during the
life of his brother Rodolphus the Second, now Emperor and King of Bohemia: Rex
Romanorum is he, who is far already invested in title to the Empire, so that
upon the death, resignation, or deposition of the then being Emperor, he is
immediately to succeed.

He who is now Emperor of Germany, is called Caesar, or Romani Imperij
Imperator, Caesar, or Romans Imperij Imperator.
but very improperly, in as much as the case is far different from that which
was when the Roman Empire did flourish: for then the Territories thereof were
very great, all under the regiment of one man, unless it pleased him to
associate to himself some other. The Empire divided by Theodosius.
But Theodosius did divide the Empire into two Soveraignties, which were called
the East and West Empires, and made Constantinople to be the chief Seat of
Arcadias, one of his Sons, and Rome to be the principal City of Honorius
the other; which Western Empire continued in his glory but a while; for the
Goths and Lombards, and other barbarous people, did both overrun it, and as
good as extinguish it; in the which case it continued to the days of Charles
the Great, who revived it again: but although there was some show of Dominion
belonging unto him in Italy, yet his principal residence was in France, and
his Successors after him removed it into Germany: A great policy in the
Bishops of Rome.
so that properly he is now to be called Imperator Germanorum. It was a great
policy of the Bishops of Rome, that the Emperor was wrought to leave Jtaly,
and keep himself in Germany: for the Popes did not like to have a strong
Neighbor so near, who might at his pleasure chastise or depose them, if he
saw good. And the cunning of those Popes was such also, that they weakened the
State of the Emperor exceeding much in Germany, by giving great exemptions to
the Princes thereof, Munsters complaint.
in so much that Munster rightly complains.

The Emperor bears the Spread-Eagle with two heads, noting the East and West
Empire: (but says he) one of the heads is quite pulled off; and so be almost
all the Feathers; and in the other Head, although life remains, yet there is
little spirit or vigor.

Surius in his Commentaries of the year 1530 reports, that to the Emperor
of Germany belongs three Crowns: the one of Silver, which intends the
Kingdom of Germany; the second of Iron, which is for the Kingdom of Lombardy,
and the third of Gold, Most of the Princes of Germany take on them as absolute
Governors
which is for the Sacred Roman Empire.

In Germany all are at a kind of commandment of the Emperor: but most of the
Princes otherwise take on them as absolute Governors in their Dominions: so
that they have liberty of Religion; they do make Laws, they do raise
soldiers, they do stamp money with their own Pictures as absolute Princes:
so does the Duke of Saxony, the Archbishop of Colen, and the rest.

The Princes of Germany came to that great strength of theirs, by means of a
base and inferior man, How they came by that great strength.
who aspiring to the Empire (whereof he was unworthy) was content to release
unto the Princes almost all kind of their service and duty; so that their
subjection since that time, is little more than Titulary, yielding only very
small maintenance to the Empire, either in Tribute, Soldiers, or otherwise:
and albeit sometimes they refuse not to come by themselves, or their Agents, to
the Diets and Parliaments holden by the Emperor, yet that is as much for the
safeguard of themselves from the invasion of the Turk, who is not far from
them, as for any other respect; and the pay which they allow in such cases is
rather held by them to be a contribution, than any impositio^ to be admitted by
duty: and yet there is extant a Book where the particulars are mentioned, how
the Princes and free Cities are bound to maintain upon their own charge three
thousand eight hundred forty two Horses, and sixteen thousand two hundred
Foot, for the service of the Emperor, when he shall see cause; but how small a
triffle is that in respect of the strength of so huge a Country?

The Princes themselves are so strong many of them, that they dare encounter
with any who oppugn them, insomuch that whereas Charles the Fifth, was
doubtless the greatest Emperor that had been from the days of Charles the
Great; yet the Duke of Saxony, The strength of the Princes of Germany.
and the Lantsgrave of Hassia, with some few Cities which were confederate with
them, did dare to oppose themselves against the said Charles; and entering the
field with him, did oftentimes put him to great inconveniences: yea, it is
supposed by some, that howsoever he had a hand upon these two, yet his
inability to match the ruffling of some of those Princes, was not the least
cause, why he resigned the Empire to his Brother Ferdinando.

The manner of Germany is, that the Title of Nobility which is in the Father,
The titles of their Nobility.
commonly is imparted to all the sons: so that every Son of a Duke of
Saxony, is called Duke of Saxony; and every Child of the Count of Mansfield,
is honored by the name of Count or Countess of Mansfield: but in the eldest
House the chief livelihood does remain, for keeping upright the dignity of
the Family.

Free States and Cities.
There are also free States and Cities, which have the same authority, as
Argentine, Frankeford, and other.

This is to be noted of the Germans, that they may boast this above other more
Westernly Nations of Europe, A note worthy of observation.
that they are an unmixed Nation: for whereas the Lombards and Goths at
several times have set down in Italy, and mixed themselves with the people
thereof; the Goths, Vandals, and Saracens in Spain, the Francks in Gaul, or
France, and the Normans also; the Saxons, Angles, Danes, and Normans in Great
Britain; they have been free from such inundation and mixture; yea, many of
the people that have inflicted and inhabited these other Nations have come from
thence, so that therein Germany has an advantage of these other Nations that
have been subject hereunto.

Of Italy.
ON the South side of the Alps and Germany lies Jtaly, Situation of Italy.
stretching it self out at length toward the South and East. It has on the
Southside, the Island of Sicilia; on the East, that part of the Mediterranean,
which is called Mare Adriaticum, or Mare superum, which severeth Italy from
Graecia: on the Westside that part of the Mediterranean, which is called Mare
Tyrrhenum, or Mare Inferum; and the upper or more Northern part of it near
Liguria, Mare Ligusticum.

This Country for the figure thereof, is by some likened unto a long leaf of a
tree. It has in the middle of it, which goes all in length a mighty Mountain,
named Mons Apenuinus, which is likened unto the Spina, or Ridge-bone of the
back. Out of this Hill springs diverse Rivers, which run on both sides of it,
into the Adriatic, and Tyrrhene or Tuscane Seas.

As in other Countries, so in Italy in times past, there were diverse several
people, and several Provinces, Jtaly divided into four parts.
like our Shires in England, and so there be at this day: but the mayn division
of Italy is properly into ^oure parts, as in our age we do account it. The
first Lombardy, which ^yeth to the North. The second Tuscane, which boundeth
toward ^he Mediterranean Sea, which way Corsica the Island lies. The third is
^he Land of the Church, which is the Territory of the Bishop of Rome, and
contains in it that which is ^alled Romania; The fourth is Na^les; and in
this division now is all ^taly comprehended.

The North part of this Italy is that, which in ancient time was called Gallia
Togata, or Gallia Cisalpina, ^nhabited then by Frenchmen. It is ^ow called
Longobardia, or Lom^ardy, wherein stand many rich Governme^ts, vernme^ts, as
the Dukedom of Millain, of Mantua, of Florence, and other. It is for the
pleasantness thereof, in respect of the soil, air, waters, and great variety
of wines, and fruits, Lombardy the Garden of God.
likened now by some to Paradise, or the Garden of God.

In this Italy, which was heretofore one entire government, in the flourishing
estate of the Romans, are now many absolute States and Princedomes, by the
great policy o^ the Bishop of Rome, The policy of the Bishops of Rome.
who though^ it the best way to make himself great, to weaken the Empire. So h^
has not only driven the Emperou^ out of all Joaly into Germany, bu^ has
diminished his Majesty i^ both, by making so many petty governments, which hold
themselue^ sovereign Rulers, without relation to any other.

The States of Venice.
As there are many States in Italy so one of the chiefest are the Venetians,
called Resp. Venetorum, or the State of Venice, because they are no^^ governed
by any one, but by the^ Senate and Gentlemen, although they have a Duke with
whose stamp their money is coined, and in whose name all their executions of
Justice are done. But this Duke is every way limited by the State.

City of Venice.
This City of Venice, which joyneth to a corner of Lombardy, stands in
Aestuarium, or shallow of earth, in the North part of the Adriaticke Sea, so
safely, that it is held invincible. There is in it but one street of firm
Land; into the other, the Sea does flow at every tide. They have been a great
and rich State, not only ^ossessing much in Italy, as Padua their University,
and other things which still they do, but a great part of Illiricum, and many
rich Islands in the Mediterraneum, as Candy called commonly Creta, Cyprus,
Zazin^hus, and other.

But Cyprus was taken from them a ^ittle before that fight at Sea, wherein Don
John of Austria, together with ^he Venetians, had so renowned a vi^tory against
the Turk, at the fight ^eer Lepanto.

The Venetians impoverished.
The impoverishing of their State has partly bin by the incroching of the Turk,
but especially by the decaying of that traffic which they had to Alexandria
in Egypt for their Spices, and other riches of Persia, Arabia, and the East
Indies, since the course of the Portugals to those Eastern Countries has been
by Sea by the backside of Africa.

These Venetians, which in time past were great warriors, do now altogether
decline enmity or hostility with all other Princes adjoining and therefore by
all means do take u^ quarrels, and cease controversies b^ wisdom and patience,
temporizin^ with the Turk, the King of Spain and the Emperor, who are mos^
like to offend them.

The manner of their governmen^ and the excellent course which the^ have in
choosing their Duke, is written by Contarenus, The excelleney of their
government.
and some other of their Countrymen. When the^ do make any wars, they seldom^
send forth any General of their own but entertain some Prince of Italy, who is
renowned for the wars.

In Lombardy stands Millain.
In Lombardy stands also the Dukedom of Millain, a most rich and pleasant
thing, which sometime had been governed by a Duke of their own, but of late
has been possessed by the Spaniard, and sometime by the French, and is now in
the government and possession of the K. of Spain.

Tuscany. Flo ence.
In Tuscany, the chief City, and Commander of all the rest, is Florence, where
is supposed to be the best language of Italy, called the vulgar Italian, and
the most circumspect policy of all the governments of Christendom, which has
much bin increased since the time of Machiavel, who was Secretary or Recorder
to that State. This was in times past a free City, but of late by the policy of
the Family of the Medices, it is brought under the subjection of a Duke, which
reigns as an absosute Prince; and by little and little, has so incroched on
his own Citizens and Neighbors round about him, that he has gotten to be
called (and that not unworthily) Magnus Dux Hetruriae, or the great Duke of
Tuscany. The great Duke of Tuscany.
A great part of the rising of the Family of the Medices, which are now Dukes
of Florence, may be ascribed to the cunning carriage of themselves; but it has
been much advanced forward by their felicity, in having two Popes together of
that house, which were Leo the Tenth, and Clement the Seventh, who by all means
labored to stablish the government of their Country upon their kindred; and it
made not the least access thereunto, that affinity was contracted by them with
the Kings of France, when Katherine de Medices, Niece to Pope Clement the
Seventh, was married to the younger son of Francis the first, whose elder
brother dying, that younger came to be King of France, by the name of Henry the
Second: for as in the time of her Husband she laid the foundation of her
aspiring, so after the death of the said husband, when she bare the name of the
Queen Mother. This Queen Mother swayed all at her pleasure in France during
the successive reign of her three sons, Francis the Second, Charles the
ninth, and Henry the third: in all which time, no doubt, she promoted Florence
and the Florentines to her uttermost.

A great part of Italy under the Bishop of Rome.
A good part of Italy is under the Bishop of Rome, which is commonly called, The
land of the Church; where the Pope is a Prince absolute, not only spiritual as
elsewhere he claymeth, but also temporal, making Laws, requiring Tribute,
raising Soldiers, and executing Justice as a Monarch.

The Bishops of Rome do pretend, that Constantine the Great did bestow upon
them the City of Rome, together with diverse other Cities and Towns, near
adjoining, and the Demeans of them all to be as the Patrimony of Saint Peter,
as many times they do term it. But Laurentius Valla, in his set Treatise of
this argument, has displayed the falsehood of that pretense; and in truth, the
greatness of the Popes has risen first by Phocas, who killing his Master the
Emperor of Rome, The manner of the rising of the Popes greatness.
and being favored by the Bishop of that Sea, and so aspiring himself to the
Empire, did in recompense thereof, suffer the Bishop of Rome to be proclaimed
Universal Bishop; and of likelihood gave unto him somewhat to maintain his
estate. And afterward King Pipin of France, and Charles the Great his son,
getting (by means of the said Bishop) the Kingdom of France, and the one of
them to the Empire, did bestow good possessions upon the Papacy; and since that
time the Popes have had so much wit, as by destruction of the Princes of Italy,
by encroaching on the favor of others, the great Monarchs of Europe, and by
their wars and other devices, to keep and increase that Land of the Church,
which in our time is well enlarged by the policy of Clement the Eighth, late
Pope, who has procured that the Dukedom of Ferrara, is or shall be shortly
added to his Dominion.

Rome the chief residency of the Pope.
The chief residence of the Bishop of Rome, is Rome it self, which was first
founded by Romulus, and afterward so increased by others, who succeeded him,
that it was built upon seven hills, and has had only reigning in it seven
Kings; and has been ruled by seven several sorts of chief government: that
is, Kings, Consuls, Decem-viri, Tribunes of the people, Dictators, Emperors,
and Popes.

They first incroached on the neighbors about them in Italy, afterward on all
Italy, Sicily, and some of the Islands, till at length it proved to be the Lady
and chief Mistress of the world: whose incredible wealth and greatness in men,
treasure, shipping, and armor, was so huge, that it did even sink under the
wealth of it self. Whereupon after diverse civil wars, as between Marius and
Sylla, Pompey and Caesar, with others, it was at length revoked unto one
absolute and Imperial government. The Majesty whereof notwithstanding was
afterward somewhat impaired by the building of Constantinople, which was
erected, or rather enlarged by Constantine. the Great, and called Nova Roma.
But when the division was made of the East and West Empire, it received a
greater blow, yet the main overthrow of it was, when the Goths and Vandals
entered Italy, sacked it, and possessed it at their own pleasure; so that it was
(for a time) almost quite forsaken, and had no inhabitants, till the Bishops of
Rome did make means to gather together some to people it again: and since
those times, a good part of the old building upon the Hills, has been quite
decayed and ruinated, and that Rome which now may be called (in comparison of
the old) new Romes is built on a lower ground, where the place was, which in
times past was termed Campus Martius, very near unto Tyber the River, which too
well appears by the sudden inundation of that Tyber; destroying and spoiling,
men, cattle, and houses, as very lately to their great loss was experimented.

The Bishops of Rome, as sometimes for their pleasure or profit, they do
withdraw themselves unto Bologna, or some other Towns of Italy: so the time
was when they removed their court unto Avignon a City in France, standing near
the Mediterranean soa, and not far from Marsiles in Province, where continuing
for the space of seventy years, they so afflicted the City of Rome, for lack
of resort (which is very great when the Pope is there) that the Italians to
this day do remember that time by the name of the Captivity of Babylon, which
continued (as appears by the Scripture) for seventy years. Who so looks on
the description laid down by the Holy Ghost in the Revelation shall see, that
the Whore of Babylon there mentioned, can be understood of no place, but the
City of Rome.

In the South part of Italy lies the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Country
very rich, Nap'es lies in the South part of Italy.
and full of all kind of pleasure, abundant in Nobility; whereof comes to be
said that Proverb, Naples for Nobility, Rome for Religion, Millain for Beauty,
Florence for Policy, and Venice for Riches.

This was heretofore ruled by a King of their own, till the time of Ioane
Queen of Naples, who by deed of gift, did first grant that Kingdom to the
Kings of Arragon in Spain; and afterward by will, with a revocation of the
former Grant, did bequeath it to the house of Anjoy in France. Since which time
the Kingdom of Naples has sometimes been in the hands of the Spaniard,
sometimes possessed by the French, and is now under the King of Spain: The
Dukedom of Calabria.
unto this is annexed also the Dukedom of Calabria.

This Kingdom of Naples lies so near to some part of Graecia, which is now
in possession of the Turk, that it may justly be feared, lest at some time or
other, the said Turk should make an invasion thereunto, as indeed he has
offered diverse times, and sometimes has landed men to the great terror of all
Italy: but for the preventing of that mischief, the King of Spain is enforced
to keep a good Fleet of Galleys continually at Otranto, where is the nearest
passage from Italy, into Greece. I his part of Italy was it which in times
past was named Magna Graecia, but in later ages it has been unproperly called
one of the Sicilies, which was reprooved long since by Aeneas Sylvius, in his
twelfth Epistle; and yet till of late time, the Kings of Spain have been
termed Kings of both the Sicilies.

Diverse Princedomes and States of Italy.
There be moreover in Jtaly many other Princedomes and States, as the Dukedom of
Ferrara, the Dukedom of Mantua, the Dukedom of Vrbine, the Dukedom of Parma
and Placentia, the State of Luca, the State of Genua, commonly called the
Genowayes, which are governed by their Senate, but have a Duke as they have at
Venice. There be also some other, by which means the glory and strength of
Italy is decayed.

Of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway.
AS Italy lies on the South side of Germany, Denmars situation.
so Denmark lies on the North; into the middle of which Land, the Sea breaks
in by a place called the Sound. The Impost of which passage brings great
riches, as an ordinary tribute unto the King of Denmark. This is a Kingdom,
and ruled by an absolute Governor.

On the North and East side of Denmark, Sweden.
lies Suezia, commonly called Sweden, or Swethen; which is also a Kingdom of
it self: Where the King professes himself to be Rex Suecorum, Gothorum and
Vandalorum: Whereby we may know that the Goths and Vandals, which in times past
did waste Jtaly, and other Nations of Christendom, did come out of this Country.

This whole Country which contains in it Norvegia, Suezia, and some part of
Denmark, is Peninsula, being very much compassed about with the Sea: and this
is it, which in Olaus Magnus and Joannes Magnus, is termed Archiepiscopus
Vpsalensis, as also in some of the more ancient Writers, is called Sca^dinavia:
on the North and West side of Sweden, lies Norvegia, Norvegia, or Norway.
or Norway, which is at this day under the government of the King of Denmark,
although heretofore it has been a free Kingdom of it self.

Beyond Norway toward Russia, on the Northern Sea lies Scrichivia, beyond that
Biarmia, then Hapia, or Hapland, Hapland.
a poor and cold Country, near Sinus Boddicus: whereof there is little to be
spoken, but that it is said to be subject to the great Knez or Duke of
Muscovie. But of these afterward.

Within the Sound, on the East part of the Sea, Dantzike.
lies Dantzike, about which are the Towns of the Haustmen, Confederates and
Allies unto the King of Denmark.

These are very rich towns, by reason of Merchandise which down the rivers
they receive out of Polonia, and transport into other parts of Christendom,
through the Sound of the King of Denmark. They live as free people, keeping
amity and intercourse with the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, and with the
Emperor of Germany: but within these late years, Steven Bacour, the King of
Polon, does challenge them to be members of his Crown and Dignity, and by war
forced them to capitulate with him.

There is no great thing to be noted in these Countries; but that from Denmark
comes much corn, to the supply of other parts of Christendom; and that from
all these Countries, is brought great furniture for war, or for shipping;
Riches of Denmark.
as Masts, Cables, Steel, Saddles, Armor, Gunpowder, and the like: And that
in the seas adjoining to these parts, there are fishes of much more monstrous
shape than elsewhere are to be found. The people of those Countries are by
their profession Lutherans for Religion. Their Religion.


Of Russia, or Moscovia.
Russia situate.
ON the East side of Sweden, begins the Dominion of the Emperor of Russia,
although Russia, or Moscovia it self, do lie somewhat more into the East,
which is a great and mighty Monarchy, extending it self even from Lapland and
Finmarke, many thousand miles in length, unto the Caspian sea: so that it
contains in it a great part of Europe, and much of Asia also.

Emperor of Russia.
The governor there, calls himself Emperor of Russia, Great Duke of
Moscovia, with many other titles of princedomes and Cities, whose Dominion was
very much enlarged by the Emperor not long since dead, whom in Russia they
call Iuan Vasiliwich, in the Latin, Johannes Basilides, who reigning long, and
being fortunate in war, did very much enlarge this mighty Dominion.

This man as in his younger days he was very fortunate, and added very much
unto the glory of his ancestors, winning something from the Tartars, and
something from the Christians in Livonia, Lituania, and other confines of his
country: so in his latter age growing more unweldy and less beloved of his
subjects, he proved as unfortunate, whereby it came to pass, that Stephen
Bacour King of Polone, had a very great hand of him, winning from him large
Provinces, which he before had conquered. Gregory the thirteenth, Bishop of
Rome, thinking by his entreaty for peace between those two Princes, to have
won the whole Russian Monarchy to the subjection and acknowledgment of the
Papacy, Possevinus a Jesuit sent by the Pope to the Emperor.
sent Robertus Possevinus, a Jesuit, (but yet a great Statesman) as his agent
to take up controversies, between the Muscovite, and the King of Polone, who
prevailed so far, as that he drew them to tolerable conditions, for both
parties; but when he began to exhort him to the accepting of the Romish faith,
the Emperor being therefore informed by the English Ambassadors (who he very
much favored, for his Lady, and Mistress, Queen Elizabeth's sake) that the
Bishop of Rome was a proud Prelate, and would exercise his pretended authority
so far, as to make Kings and Princes hold his stirrup, yea to kiss his very
feet, he utterly and with much scorn rejected all obedience to him. Whereunto,
when Possevinus did reply, A fine excuse for the Popes pride
that the Princes of Europe indeed in acknowledgement of their subjection to
him, as the Vicar of Christ, and successor of S. Peter, did offer him that
service, as to kiss his feet, but that the Pope remembering himself to be a
mortal man, did not take that honor as due unto himself, but did use to have
on his Pantophle the Crucifixe, or Picture of Christ, hanging upon the Cross,
and that in truth he would have the reverence done thereunto: the Emperor did
grow into an exceeding rage, reputing his pride to be so much the greater,
when he would put the Crucifixe upon his shoe; The Emperors rage against the
Pope.
in as much as the Russians do hold, that so holy a thing as that is highly
profaned, if any resemblance of it be worn but above the girdle.

Possevinus, in a treatise written of his Embassage into that Country, where
he discourses this whole matter, Possevinus fear of the Emperor.
confesses, that he was much afraid, lest the Emperor would have stricken
him, and beaten out his brains with a shrewd staff which then he had in his
hands, and did ordinarily carry with him: and he had the more reason so to
fear, because that Prince was such a tyrant, that he had not only slain, and
with cruel torture put to death very many of his subjects, and Nobility
before, showing himself more brutishly cruel to them, than ever Nero and
Caligula were among the Romans; but he had with his own hands, and with the
same staff, upon a small occasion of anger, killed his eldest son, who
should have succeeded him in his whole Empire.

The people of this country, are rude and unlearned, Chief people rude and
unlearned.
so that there is very little or no knowledge amongst them of any liberal or
ingenuous Art; yea their very Priests and Monks (whereof they have many) are
almost unlettered, so that they can hardly do any thing more than read their
ordinary service: And the rest of the people are, by reason of their ignorant
education, dull and incapable of any high understanding; but very
superstitious, having many ceremonies, and Idolatrous Solemnities; as the
consecrating of their Rivers, by their Patriarch at one time of the year, when
they think themselves much sanctified by the receiving of those hallowed
waters; yea, and they bathe their Horses and Cattle in them; and also the
burying of most of their people with a pair of Shoes on their feet, as
supposing that they have a long journey to go, and a letter in their hand to
S. Nicholas, whom they reverence as a special Saint, and think that he may
give them entertainment, for their readier admission into heaven.

The Muscovites generally have received the Christian Faith; but yet so, that
rather they do hold of the Greek, Difference between the Greek and Latin
Church.
and the Eastern, then of the Western Roman Church.

The doctrines wherein the Greek Church differs from the Latin, are these:
First they hold that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father alone, and not
from the Son. Secondly, that the Bishop of Rome is not the universal Bishop.
Thirdly, that there is no Purgation. Fourthly their Priests do marry; and
fifthly they do differ in diverse of their ceremonies, as in having four Lents
in the year, whereof they do call our Lent, their great Lent.

At the time of the Council of Florence, There was some show made by the
Agents of the Greek Church, that they would have joined in opinion with the
Latins: but when they returned home, their Contrymen would in no sort
assent thereunto.

In the Northern parts of the dominion of the Emperor of Russia, which have
lately been joined unto his territories, as specially Lapland, Biarmia, and
thereabouts, The people of Lapland very heathenish.
there are people so rude and heathenish, that (as Olaus Magnus writes of
them) look whatsoever living thing they do see in the morning at their going
out of their doors, yea, if it be a Bird, or a worm, or some such other
creeping thing, they do yield a divine Worship, and Reverence thereunto for
all that day, as if it were some inferior God. Damianus a Goes has written a
pretty Treatise describing the manners of those Lappians: The greatest part of
the Country of Russia is in the winter so exceeding cold, The extraordnary
sharpness of the weather in winter.
that both the Rivers are frozen over, the Land covered with snow, and such is
the sharpness of the Air, that if any go abroad bare faced, it causes
their flesh in a short time to rot, which befalls to the fingers and toes of
diverse of them: therefore for a great part of winter, they live in Stoues and
Hot-houses: and if they be occasioned to go abroad, they use many Furs;
whereof there is great plenty in that Country, as also wood to make fire: but
yet in the summer time, the face of the soil, and the air is very strangely
altered, insomuch that the Country seems hot, the Birds sing very merrily,
and the trees; grass, and corn, in a short space do appear so cheerfully,
green, and pleasant, that it is scant to be believed, but of them which have
seen it.

Their building is most of wood, even in their chief city of Mosco, Their
buildings of wood.
insomuch, that the Tartars (who lie in the North-east of them) breaking often
into their countries, even unto the very Mosco, do set fire on their Cities,
which by reason of their wooden buildings, are quickly destroyed.

Their government.
The manner of government which of late years has bin used in Russia, is very
barbarous, and little less than tyrannous: for the Emperor that last was, did
suffer his people to be kept in great servility, and permitted the Rulers and
chief Officers at their pleasures, to pill and ransack the common sort; but to
no other end, but that himself might take occasion (when he thought good) to
call the^ in question for their misdemeanor, and so fill his own coffers with
fleecing of them: which was the same course the old Roman Emperor did use,
calling the deputies of the Provinces by the name of Spunges, whose property is
to suck up water, but when it is full, then it self is crushed, and yields
forth liquor for the behalf of another.

The passage by Sea into this country.
The passage by Sea into this country, which was wont to be through the Sound,
and so afterward by land was first discovered by the English; who with great
danger of the frozen seas, did first adventure to sail so far North, as to
compass Lapland, Finmark, Scricfinia and Biarmia, and so passing to the East
by Noua Zembla, half the way almost to Cathaio, have entered the River called
Ob, by which they disperse themselves for merchandise both by water and land,
into the most parts of the Dominion of the Emperor of Russia.

The first attempt.
The first attempt which was made by the English, for the entrance of Moscovia,
by the North Seas, was in the days of King Edw. the 6. at which time the
Merchants of London procuring leave of the King, did send forth Sir Hugh
Willoby, with shipping and men, who went so far toward the North, that he
coasted the corner of Scricfinia, and Biarmia, and so turned toward the East:
but the weather proved so extreme, the snowing so great, and the freezing of
the water so vehement, that his ship was set fast in the Ice; and there he and
his people were frozen to death, and the next year some other coming from
England, found both the Ship and their bodies in it, and a perfect remembrance
in writing of all things which they had done and discovered; where amongst the
rest, mention was made of a Land which they had touched, which to this day ^s
known by the name of Sir Hugh Villobies Land. Sir Hugh Willobies Land.
The Merchants of London did not desist to pursue this discovery, but have so
far prevailed, that they have reached one half of the way, toward the East
part of Chyna, and Cathaio; but the whole passage is not yet opened.

This Empire one of the greatest to the world.
This Empire is at this day, one of the greatest dominions in the world, both
for compass of ground, and for multitude of men; saving that it lies far
North, and so yields not pleasure or good traffic, with many other of the
best situated nations.

Among other things which do argue the magnificence of the Emperor of Russia,
this one is recorded by many, who have traveled into those parts, that when
the great Duke is disposed to sit in his magnificence, besides great store of
Jewels, and abundance of massy plate both of gold and silver, which is openly
showed in his hall, there do sit as his Princes, and great Nobles, clothed in
very rich and sumptuous attire, diverse men, ancient for their years, very
seemly of countenance, and grave, with white long beards, which is a goodly
show, besides the rich state of the thing. But Olaus Magnus, man well
experienced in those Northern parts, does say, (how truly I cannot tell) that
the manner of their sitting is a notable fraud and cunning of the Russian; in
as much as they are not men of any worth, but ordinary Citizens of the gravest,
and seemliest countenance, which against such a solemnity, are picked out of
Mosco, and other places adjoining, and have robes put on them, which are not
their own, but taken out of the Emperors Wardrope.

Of Spruce and Poland.
Prussia bow situated.
IN Europe, on the East and North corner of Germany, lies a Country called
Prussia, in Latin most times Borussia in English, Pruthen, or Spruce, of whom
little is famous, saving that they were governed by one, in a kind of order of
Religion, whom they call the Grand-Master: and that they are a means to keep
the Moscovite, and the Turk from some other parts of Christendom.

This country is now grown to be a Dukedom, and the Duke thereof does admit
traffic with our English, who going beyond the Hants towns, do touch upon
his country; and amongst other things, do bring from thence a kind of
leather, which was wont to be used in Ierkins, and called by the name of
Spruce-Leather-Jerkins. Spruce Leather.


On the East side of Germany, between Russia and Germany, lies Polonia,
Polands Situation.
or Poland, which is a kingdom differing from others in Europe; because the
King there is chosen by Election out of some of the Princes near adjoining, as
lately Henry the third, King of France. These Elections oftentimes do make
great factions there; so that in taking parts, they grow often there into
civil war.

The King of Polonia is almost continually in war, either with the Moscovite,
who lies in the East and North-east of him; or with the Turk, who lies on
the South and South-east, and sometimes also with the Princes of Germany;
whereupon the Poles do commonly desire to choose warriors to their King.

In this Country are none but Christians: but so, Their diverse Religions.
that liberty of all Religion is permitted, insomuch, that there be Papists,
Colleges of Jesuits, both of Lutherans and Calvinists in opinions,
Anabaptists, Arrians, and diverse others.

They hate the Jesuits
But of late years, there has bin made earnest motions in their Parliaments,
that their Colleges of Jesuits should be dissolved, and they banished out of
that Kingdom, as of late they were from France. The reason of it is, because
that under color of Religion, they do secretly deal in State causes, and
many times sow seditions, and some of them have given counsel to murder
Princes: and wheresoever they be, they are the only intelligencers for the
Pope: besides that, many of the Papists (but especially all their Friars and
orders of Religion) do hate and envy them: first, for that they take upon them
with such pride to be called Jesuits, as if none had to do with Jesus but
they, and are more inward with Princes than the rest are. Secondly, because
many of them are more learned than common Monks and Friars. And thirdly,
because they profess more strictly and severely, than others do, the
Capuchins only excepted.

Their chief City Cracovia.
This is that Country, which in times past was called Sarmatia, the chief
City whereof is named Cracovia.

Of Hungaria and Austria.
Hungaria situated.
ON the South-East side of Germany, lies Hungaria, called in the Latin,
Pannonia, which has been heretofore divided into Pannonia superior, and
Pannonia inferior: it is an absolute Kingdom, and has been heretofore rich
and populous. The Christians that do live there, have among them diverse sorts
of Religion, as in Poland.

This Kingdom has bin a great obstacle against the Turks coming into
Christendom; but especially in the time of Johan. Huniades, who did mightily,
with many great victories repulse the Turk. Here stands Bunda, which was
heretofore a great Fortress of Christendom: Bunda:
but the glory of this kingdom is almost utterly decayed, by reason that the
Turk, who partly by policy, and partly by force, does now possess the
greatest part of it; So that the people are fled from thence, and the
Christians which remain there, are in miserable servitude: Notwithstanding
some part of Pannonia inferior, does yet belong to Christendom.

The Turks for the space of these forty or fifty years last past, have kept
continual garrisons, and many times great Armies in that part of Hungary,
which yet remains Christened; yea, and sometimes the great Turks themselves
have come thither in person with huge hosts, accounting it a matter of their
Religion, not only to destroy as many Christians as they can, but also to win
their land; by the revenues whereof they may maintain some Religious house,
which they think themselves in custom bound to erect: but so, that the
maintayning thereof is by the Sword to be won out of the hands of some of
those whom they hold enemies to them.

Hungary is become the only Cockpit of the world, where the Turks do strive
to gain, and the Christians at the charge of the Emperor of Germany (who
entituleth himself King of Hungary) do labor to repulse them: and few
Summers do pass, but that something is either won or lost, by either party.

The corner of Germany which lies nearest to Hungary, or Pannonia inferior,
Austria.
is called Austria, or Pannonia superior, which is an Archdukedome. From which
house (being of late much sprung) come many of the Princes of Germany, and of
other parts of Europe: so that the Crown imperial of Germany, has lately often
befallen to some one of this house.

In this Country stands Vienna, Vienna.
that noble city, which is now the principal Bulwark of Christendom against
the Turk; from whence Solomon was repelled by Ferdinandus King of Hungary, in
the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth. It was in this country, that
Richard the first, King of England, in his return from the Holy land, was
taken prisoner by the Archduke of Austria, and so put to a grievous ransom.

There were lately diverse brothers of the Emperor Rodolphus the second, which
were al called by the name of Archdukes of Austria, Archdukes of Austria.
according to the manner of the Germans, who give the titles of the Fathers
nobility to all the children. The names of them were Mathias, Ernestus, and the
youngest Albertus, who for a good space held by dispensation from the Pope, the
Archbishopricke of Toledo in Spain although he were no Priest, and had then
also the title of Cardinal of Austria, and was employed for Viceroy of
Portugal, by Philip the 2, King of Spain: but after the death of the Duke of
Parma, he was sent as Lieutenant general, and governor of the Low Countries
for the K. of Spain, where since he has attained to the marriage of the
Infanta Isabella Eugenia Clara, eldest daughter to K. Philip the second, and
last King of Spain, and by her has he the style of Duke of Burgundy,
although peaceably he cannot enjoy a great part of that Country.

Through both Austria and Hungary does run the mighty river Danubius, as
through Germany does run the Rheine, The River of Rhine.
whereon grows Vinum Rhenanum, commonly called Rhenish wine.

Of Greece, Thracia, and the Countries near adjoining.
Situation of Dacia.
ON the South side of Hungary, and South-east, lies a Country of Europe,
called in old time Dacia, which is large and wide, comprehending in it
Transylvania, Walachia, Transylvania, Walachia. Moldavia, Servia.
Moldavia, and Servia. Of which little is famous, save that the men are
warlike, and can hardly be brought to obedience. They have lately bin under the
K. of Hungary.

These Countries of Transylvania, Walachia, and Moldavia, have certain
Monarchs of their own, whom they call by the name of Vognode, which do rule
their countries with indifferent mediocrity, while they have the sway in their
own hands, but confining upon the Turk, they are many times oppressed, and
overcome by him, so that often they are his tributaries: yet by the wildness
of the country, and uncertain disposition of the Rulers and their people, he
never has any hand long over them, but sometimes they maintain war against
him, and have slain down some of his Bassaes, coming with a great Army
against them; by which occasion it falls out, that he is glad now and then
to enter confederacy with them: so doubtful a kind of regiment is that, which
now adays is in those Countries.

The river Danubius does divide this Dacia from Mysia, commonly called
Bulgaria, and Russia, which lies on the South from Danubius, and is severed
from Graecia by the mountain Haemus. The mountain Haemus.


This mountain is that, whereof they reported in times past though but falsely,
that who so stood on the top thereof, might see the sea four several ways,
to wit, East, West, North and South: under pretense of trying which conclusion,
(not Philip Alexanders Father, but a latter Philip, King of Macedonia) did go
up to that hill, when in truth his meaning was secretly to meet with others
there, with whom he might join himself against the Romans, which was shortly
the overthrow of that kingdom. It should seem, that about this mountain, it
is very cold, by reason of that jest which Athenaeus reports Stratonicus to
have uttered concerning that hill, when he said, that for eight months in the
year it was very cold, and for other four, it was Winter.

Graecia bounded.
From Haemus toward the South, lies Graecia, bounded on the West by the
Adriatike sea, on the East by the Thracian sea, and Mare Aegeum; on the South
by the maine Mediterranean sea. This contained in old time four special
parts, Peloponnesus, Achaia, Macedonia, and Epirus.

Adjoining whereunto was Illiricum Peloponnesus, Moreah
which is now called Moreah, in the South part of Graecia, being Peninsula, or
almost an Island, for that it is joined by a little strait called Istmos, unto
the rest of Graecia. Herein stood Sparta, S^^^ssus and Helicon
and the ancient state of Lacedemon; the laws thereof were made by Licurgus;
by the due observation of which, Tullie could say in his time, that the title
of Sparta in Lacedemon, had continued in the same means and behavior for the
space of 700. years.

This Sparta was it which so often made war against the Athenians, and this
and Athens were called the two edges of Graecia.

Near the Jsthmos, or Straits, stood the famous City of Corinth, Corinth.
which was in old time called the Key of Greece, and whither S. Paul wrote two
of his Epistles.

Aeneas Sylvius in his Cosmographicall Treatise, De Europa, cap. 22. says,
that the Straits which divide Moreah from the rest of Graecia, are in breadth
but five miles; and that diverse Kings and Princes did go about to dig away
the earth, that they might make it to be an Island: He names King Demetrius,
Julius Caesar, Caius Caligula, and Domitius Nero; of all whom he does note,
that they not only failed of their purpose, but that they came to violent and
unnatural deaths.

From the Isthmos, which is the end of Peloponnesus, or Moreah, begins
Achaia, Achaia.
and spreads it self North-wards but a little way, unto the Hill Othris,
which is the bounds between Achaia and Macedonia: but East and West much more
largely, as Eastward even unto the Island Euboea, Euboea.
with a great Promontory, and Westward bounding unto Epirus.

The Inhabitants of this place, were they which properly are called Achivi;
which word is so often used by Virgil. Here toward the East part stood Boetia,
and upon the Seacoast, Boetia.
looking Southward toward Moreah, was Athens, Athens.
which was famous for the Laws of Solon, for the wars against Sparta, and
many other Cities of Graecia; and for an University of learned men, which long
continued there.

Pernassus and Helicon
In this part of Greece, stood Pernassus and Helicon, so much talked of by
Poets, and Phocis, and Thebes, and briefly all the Cities whereof Livie
speaking, does term by the name of Achai, or Vrbes Achaeorum.

The third Province of Graecia, called Epirus, Epyrus.
lies Westward from Achaia, and extends it self for a good space that way;
but toward the North and South it is but narrow lying along the Seacoast, and
looking Southward on the Islands of Conegra, and Cephalonia. This was the
Country wherein Olympias wife unto Philip of Macedonia, and Mother unto
Alexander the Great, was born. This was also the Kingdom of that noble
Pyrrhus, which made such great wars against the Romans; and in our later age
it was made renowned by the valiant Scanderbeg, who was so great a scourge unto
the Turk, whose life is so excellently written by Martinus Partesius. From the
East part of Epirus Northward, lies a Country, which was never noted by any
famous name; but as it should seem was sometime under Epirus, from which it
lies Northward; sometimes under Macedonia, from which it lies Westward; and
sometimes under Illyris, or Dalmatia, from which it lies Southward; and it may
be that there was in old time diverse free Cities there. Illyricum,
Illyricum which confineth upon Graecia toward the North and West, near unto
the top of the Adriatic Sea, and not far from Venice, is for a good part of
it at this day under the Venetians.

The fourth and greatest part of old Graecia was Macedonia, Macedonia.
which is falsely by the Maps of the Roman Empire, placed on the Westside of
Graecia; for in truth it lies on the Eastside, looking toward Asia the lesser,
being bounded on the Eastside by the Sea called Mare Aegeum, on the Southside
by Achaia, and the Hill Othris, and part of Epirus: and on the Westside, by
certain great Mountains; but on the North by the Hill Haemus.

This was the Kingdom so famous in times past for Philip and Alexander his
son, who conquered the whole World, and caused the name of the third Empire
to be attributed unto this place. Here stood the Hill Athos, whereof part was
dug down by the army of Xerxes the great King of Persia, who warred against
the Grecians. Here was the Hill Olympus, the City of Philippi where the
Philippians dwelt, to whom Saint Paul wrote. Here was Ampollonia, Amphipolis,
Edessa, Pella, Thessalonica and Berea: yea, and the whole Country of
Thessalia, lay on the Southside of this part of Greece.

In this Country of Graecia, were in ancient time many Kingdoms and States,
as at this day there are in Italy; as the Macedonians, the Kingdom of Epirus,
the State of Athens, the government of Sparta, the City of Thebes, and very
many other places; insomuch that almost every Town had a peculiar government:
But now it is all under one Monarchy.

Many famous things from Grecia
From Graecia (in old time) did almost all famous things come. These were they
that made the war against Troy; that resisted Xerxes the mighty King of Persia,
that had the Famous Lawmakers, as Solon in Athens, Famous Laws.
and Lycurgus in Lacedemon; that took away the Monarchy from the Persians; that
brought forth the Famous Captains, Famous Captains.
as Themistocles, Miltiades, Alexander, and many other that were the Authors
of civilitie unto the Western Nations, and to some in the East, as Asia the
less: that gave to Italy and to the Romans the first light of learning:
because from them arose the first Poets, as Homer, The first Poets.
Hesiodus, Sophocles, and diverse other. The great Philosophers, Socrates,
Plato, Aristotle, and all the Sects of the Academicks, Stoics, Peripateticks,
Epicureans, and almost all their Scholars. The great Orators.
The great Orators Demosthenes, and Eschines; and in one word (the
Mathematics excepted, which came rather from the Chaldeans and the Egyptians)
the whole flower of Arts and good Learning.

On the Northeast part of Graecia stands Thracia, Thracia.
which though heretofore it has been distinguished, yet now it is accounted
as the chief part of Greece. Here on the edge of the Seacoast very near unto
Asia, Constantinople.
stands the City called Bizantium, but since Constantinople; because
Constantine the Great did new build it, and made it an Imperial City. This was
the chief residence of the Emperor of Graecia, sometimes called New Rome, and
the glory of the East; where the General Council was once assembled; and one
of the Seas of the Patriarks, who was called the Patriark of Constantinople.
But by the great discord of the Christians, all Graecia, and this City, are
fallen into the hands of the Turk, who now makes it his place of Imperial
abode. It was won in the time of Constantine the last Emperor; so that by
Constantine it obtained his honor, and by Constantine it lost it. In this City
lies resident with the Turk, an Ambassador, or Agent for the King of England.

The Christians that do live now in Graecia, are in miserable servitude unto
the Turk. They disagree in many things from the doctrine of the Church of Rome.

Of the Sea running between Europe and Asia.
Northern parts were not discovered in times past.
IF there were no other argument, that the Northern parts of the World were not
discovered in times past, by any that traveled that way, yet this would
sufficiently avouch it, that there was never thought upon any Land between
Asia and Europe, higher than the river Tanais; which does not extend it self
very far into the North, but is short of the uttermost bounds that was by the
space of four thousand miles; but this River, which by the Tartarians is now
called Don, where it does run, it leaves Asia on the Eastside, and Europe on
the West, but going forward toward the South, it disburdeneth it self into a
dead Lake or Fen (for so it seems) which is called Maeotis-Palus, Maeotis.
Palus, Justin. Ovid.
spoken of in the second book of Iustine, and not forgotten by Ovid de ponto:
and at this day in the dead of Winter, it is usually so frozen, that the
Scythians and Tartarians near adjoining, do both themselves and their catt^ll,
yea, sometimes with Sleads after them pass over, as if it were dry Land. On
the Southern part of this Maeotis is a narrow strait of the Sea, which is
commonly called by the name of Bosphorus Cimmerius, Bosphorus Cimmerius.
because (as it is thought) sometime Oxen have ventured to swim cross there
from Asia to Europe, or backward. When the water has run for a pretty space
in so narrow a passage, there begins a great and wide Sea, named Pontus
Euxinus, Pontus Euxinua.
Whither (as Josephus reports) the Whale did carry the Prophet Jonas, and
there did disburden himself of his carriage, by casting him upon the Land. At
the mouth of this Sea, is a very great strait, known by the name of Thracius
Bosphorus, Thracius Bosphorus.
where the breadth of this Sea is not above one mile, severing Asia and Europe.
On the side of Europe stands Constantinople. On the side of Asia, the City
called Pera, or Galata, which for the neernesse is by some reckoned a part of
Constantinople. When any of the Turks Ianizaries have committed ought worthy
of death, A strange custom among the Turks.
the custom is, to send the same party in the night time over by boat from
Constantinople to Peru, where by the way he is thrown into the water, with a
great stone about his neck, and then there is a piece of Ordnance shot off,
which is a token of some such execution. The Turk is forced to take this
course, lest the rest of his Ianizaries should mutiny when any of their
fellows is put to death.

By reason of the standing of Asia and Europe so near together, and the Sea
running between them, which serves each place with al^ manner of commodities,
it appears that Constantinople is marvel^ lously, richly, and conveniently
seated, and therefore a fit place, from whence the Turk may offer to archieve
great attempts.

After this strait, the Sea opens i^ self more large toward the South and it
is called by the name of Propontis: But then it grows again^ into another
strait, which they writ^ to be in breadth about two mile^ This is called
Hellespontus, Hell^spontus Xerxes Bridge.
having on the one side Abidus in Asia on the other side Sestus, o^ the side of
Europe. This is the place where Xerxes the great Kin^ of Persia did make his
Bridge ove^ the Sea, so much renowned i^ ancient History, which was not
impossible, by reason of the narrow nesse, the foundation of his Bridge being
rested on ships. Here al^ may appear the reason of the sto^^ of Leander and
Hero: which Lea^der is reported for the love of Her^to have oftentimes swom
over th^^ Sea till at last he was drowned. From this strait Southward, the Sea
grows more wide, and is called afterward by the name of Mare Aegeum, Mare
Aegeum.
and so descends to the full Mediterranean.

Of Asia, and first of Tartary.
ON the Northside of Asia, joining unto the dominion of the Emperor of Russia,
is Tartary, Tartary bounded.
in ancient time called Scythia; the bounds whereof did then extend themselves
into a good part of Europe; and therefore was called Scythia Europea: but the
greatest part of it lies in Asia, a mighty large Country, extending it self
on the North to the uttermost Sea, on the East to the Dominion of the Great
Cham, or Prince of Cathaie; on the South down to Mare Caspium. The Tartarians
which now inhabit it, are men of great stature, rude of behavior. no
Christians, Their Religion.
but Gentiles; neither do they acknowledge Mabumet. They have few or no Citie^
among them, but after the manner of the old Scythians, do live i^
Wildernesses, lying under their Carts, and following their drove of cattle, by
the milk whereo^ they do nourish themselves. The^ sow no Corn at all,
because the^ abide not long in any one place; bu^ taking their direction from
the^ North-pole-starre, they remoov^ from one coast of their Countre^ unto
another. The Country is populous, and the men are great warriers fighting
always on horse back with their bow, Their manner of war.
arrows, an^ a short Sword. They have among^ them infinite store of horses,
whe^of they sell many into the Countries near adjoining. Their ordnary food in
their wars is horse flesh, which they use to eat raw^ being chafed a little
by hanging (...) their Saddle.

They have great wars with the Countries adjoining, but especial with the
Muscovite, and sometimes with the Turk: from hence came Tamberlaine,
Tamberlain the Great, a Tartarian.
who brought 7000000 of the Tartarians at once into the field, wherein he
distressed and took prisoner Bajazet the great Turk, whom he afterward forced
to feed as a Dog under his table.

They have now amongst them many Princes and Governors, as those have one,
whom they call the Crim Tartars: and those have another, which are the Tartars
of Magaiae, and so diverse others.

The English have labored (to their great expenses) to find out the way by
the North Seas of Tartaria, to go into Cathay and China; but by reason of the
frozen Seas, they have not yet prevailed: although it has been reported that
the Flemmings have discovered that passage: which would be (very likely) to the
great benefit of the Northern parts of Christendom; yet that report does not
continue, and therefore it is to be thought, that the Flemmings have not
proceeded so far.

Of Cathaie, and China.
NExt beyond Tartaria, on the Northeast part of Asia, lies a great Country
called Cathaie; Situation of Cathaie.
the bounds whereof extend themselves on the North and East, to the utter most
Seas; and on the South to China, The people are not much learned, but more
civil than the Tartars; and have good and ordinary traffic with the Countries
adjoining.

This Country has in it many Kings, which are tributaries, and do owe
obedience unto one, whom they call the great Cham, The Great Can of Cathaie.
or Can of Cathaie, who is the chief Governor of all the Land, and esteemed
for multitude of people and largeness of Dominion, to be one of the greatest
Princes of the World: but his name is the less famous, for that he lies so
far distant from the best Nations, and the passage into his Country is so
dangerous, either for the perils of the Sea, or for the long space by Land. His
chief Imperial City is called Cambalu. On the South side of Cathaie, Cambalu
the chiese City of China.
and East part of Asia, next to the Sea, lies China: and the people thereof,
Osorius describes by the name of Sina, and calls their Country Sinarum
Regio. A very rich Country.
This is a fruitful Country, and yields as great store of rich Commodities,
as almost any Country in the World. It contains in it very many several
Kingdoms, which are absolute Princes in their Seats. The chief City in this
Country is called Quinsay, Quinsay the chief City.
and is described to be of incredible greatness, as were wont to be the
ancient Cities in the East, as Babylon, Ninivie, and others.

This Country was first discovered by the late Navigation of the Portugalls
into the East Indies.

The people skillful in Arts.
The people of China are learned almost in all Arts, very skillful Worke-men in
curious fine works of all sorts, so that no Country yields more precious
Merchandise, than the workmanship of them. They are great Soldiers, very
politic and crafty, and in respect thereof contemning the wits of others,
using a Proverb, That all other Nations do see but with one eye, Their
Proverb.
but they themselves with two.

Petrus Maffaeus, Historiographer to the King of Spain for the Eastern
Indies, does report of them, that they have had from very ancient time among
them these two things, which we hold to be the Miracles of Christendom, and
but lately invented: The one is the use of Gunnes for the Wars, Two rare
wonders invented in China, Guns, and Printing.
and the other is Printing; which they use not as we do, writing from the
left hand unto the right; or as the Hebrews and Syrians, from the right hand
unto the left: but directly downward, and so their lines at the top do
begin again.

Of the East Indies.
ON the Southside of China, toward the Molucco Islands, and the Indian Sea,
lies the great Country of India, extending it self from the South part of the
Continent, The situation of the Indies.
by the space of many thousand miles Westward, unto the River Indus, which is
the greatest River in all the Country, except Ganges, one of the greatest
Rivers in the World; which lies in the East part of the same Indies.

This is that Country so famous in ancient time, for the great riches thereof,
for the multitude of people, for the conquest of Bacchus over it: for the
passage thither of Alexander the Great, throughout all the length of Asia; for
his adventuring to go into the South Ocean with so mighty a Navy, which few or
none had ever attempted before him. And certainly thither it was that Solomon
did send once in three years for his Gold and other rich Merchandise: for the
Scripture says, that he sent his Fleet from Ezion-geber, which stood upon the
mouth of the Red Sea, and it was the directest passage which he had unto the
Eastern Indies; whereas if his purpose had been to send to Peru, as some
lately have imagined, his course had been through the Mediterranean Sea, and the
Straits of Gibraltar.

This Country had in ancient time, In Jndia are many Kingdoms.
many absolute Kingdoms and Provinces: as in the time of Alexander, Porus,
Taxiles, and diverse others. In it were many Philosophers, and men of great
Learning whom they called Gymnosophistae, of whom was Calanus, who burnt
himself before Alexander.

The men of the South part of India are black, Their Cattle very big
and therefore are called men of Jnde. The Cattle of all sorts that are bred
there, are of incredible bigness, in respect of other Countries, as their
Elephants, Apes, Monkies, Emets, and other.

Their riches.
The riches hereof have been very great, with abundance of Gold, insomuch that
the Promontory, which is now called Malacha, was in times past named Aurea
Chersonesus. The commodity of Spice is exceeding great that comes from thence.

The Partugals first discovered the Indies
The Portugals were the first, which by their long Navigations beyond the
Equinoctial, and the farthermost part of Africa, have of late years
discovered these Countries to Christendom: as heretofore to the use of the
King of Portugal, so now of the King of Spain, who is reputed owner of them.

Four Kingdoms by the Portugals discovered.
The Portugals did find diverse Kingdoms at their first arrival in those
parts, as the Kingdom of Calecut, the Kingdom of Cambaia, the Kingdom of
Cananor, the Kingdom of Cochin, and very many other, with the Kings whereof
they first entering League and Traffic, and having leave given to build
Castles for their defense, they have since by policy encroched into their
hands a great part of the Country which lies near unto the Seacoast, and
are mighty now, for the space of many thousand miles together. The K. of Spain
has there a Viceroy, whose residence is commonly in the Imperial City
called God. Chief City God.
They do every year send home great store of rich commodities into Spain.

The Indians Religion.
The people of the Country when the Portugals came first thither, were for the
most part Gentiles, believing in no one God: yea, at this day there are diverse
of them who do adore the Sun as their God, and every morning at the rising
thereof, do use very superstitious Ceremonies, which our Merchants, who do
trade to Aleppo, do oftentimes see; for diverse of these Jndians do come
thither with Merchandise. But the Saracens, who reverence the Prophet Mahomet,
from the Bays or Gulphes of Persia and Arabia, do traffic much thither, so
that Mahomet was known among them: but in one Town called Granganor, they
found certain Christians dissenting in many things from the Church of Rome, and
rather agreeing with the Protestants, which Christians had received (by
succession) their Religion, from the time of Thomas the Apostle; by whom (as it
is recorded in the ancient Ecclesiastical History) part of India was converted.

In this Country of Jndia are many great and potent Kings and Kingdoms, which
had been altother unknown and unheard of in our part of the World, but that we
were beholding to the Portugals for their Discovery; and before their
Navigation thither, by the backside of Africa, to some relations that we had
from the Venetians, who traded and traveled thither by Land out of Turkey. The
names of these Kings and Kingdoms are these; The King of Biarme, the great
Mogol, S^^ Kingdoms.
the King of Narsing, Pegu, Siam. the forenamed King of Calecut, and others.

Of Persia.
Situation of Persia.
THere be diverse Countries between India and Persia; but they are not Famous.
Persia is a large Country, which lies far West from India: it has on the
North Assyria and Media, on the West Syria and the Holy land, but next unto it
Mesopotamia: on the South the mayn Ocean, which enters in notwithstanding by a
Bay called Sinus Persicus.

This is that Country, which in ancient time was so renowned for the great
riches, and Empire thereof. These were they who took from the Assyrians the
Monarchy, and did set up in their Country the second great Empire, which began
under Cyrus, and continued unto that Darius, who was overthrown by Alexander
the Great. In this country reigned the great Kings, Cyrus, The g eat and
famous Kings of Persia.
Cambises, Darius the Son of Histaspes, the great Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and many
others; which in profane writings are famous for their wars against the
Scythians, Egyptians, and Graecians, and in the Scripture, for the delivery of
the Jews from Babylon by Cyrus, for the building of the second Temple at
Jerusalem, and for many things which are mentioned of them in the Prophecy of
Daniel.

The people of this Nation, although they were in former times very riotous, by
reason of their great wealth; yet after they had lost their Monarchy by the
Macedonians, Persians great Soldiers.
they have grown great Soldiers: and therefore as they did ever strongly
defend themselves against the old Romans; so in the time of Constantine, and
the other Emperors, they were fearful neighbors to the Roman government:
and of late time, they have strongly opposed themselves against the Turks,
ever making their party good with them. And yet notwithstanding, in the days
of Amurath the third, father to Mahomet the Turk now reigning, the Turk had a
great hand upon the Persian; going so far with his Army, as that he took
the strong City Tauris standing within the Persian dominions, near unto the
Caspian Sea, but this loss was to be attributed, partly to the great
dissentions which were among the Persians themselves, and partly to the
multitude of the Turk his Soldiers, who by fresh supply did overbeare the
Persian, although he slew down many thousands of them.

They fight commonly on horseback, and are governed as in time past by a King,
so now by an absolute ruler, Sophy of Persia.
and a mighty Prince, whom they tear me the Shaw, or Sophy of Persia. He has
many Countries, and small Kings in Assyria, and Media, and the countries
adjoining, which are tributaries.

Among other the Sophies of Persia, about a hundred years since, there was one
of great power, called Ismael the Persian, who procured unto himself great
fame by his many and valorous attempts against the Turk. Surius in his
Commentaries, writing upon him, says, that upon some fond conceit, the Jews
were strongly of opinion, that he was that Messiah whom unto this day they
expect; and therefore hoped that he should have been their deliverer and
advancer: But he adds in his report, that it fell out so clean contrary,
that there was no man who more vexed and grieved them, than that Ismael did.

Their Religion.
The Persians are all at this day Sarazens in Religion, believing in Mahomet:
but as Papists and Protestants do differ in opinion, concerning the same
Christ, so do the Turks and Persians about their Mahomet: the one pursuing the
other, as Heretics, with most deadly hatred, in so much that there is, in this
respect, almost continual war between the Turk and the Persians.

Of Parthia, and Media.
Situation of Parthia.
ON the North-East side of Persia, lies that Country which in old time was
called Parthia, but now named Arach; of whom, those great wars of the Romans
with the Medians or Armenians, in Tacitus, and ancient Histories are true.

This Country boundeth on Media by the West, and it was in ancient time veryful
of people: whose fight as it was very much on horseback, Their manner of fight.
so the manner of them continually was for to give an onset, and then to
return their ways, even to return again like to the Wild Irish; so that no
man was sure when he had obtained any victory over them.

Great wars of the Parthians against the Romans.
These were the people that gave the great overthrow to that rich Marcus Crassus
of Rome, who by reason of his covetousness (intending more to his getting of
gold, than to the guiding of his army) was slain himself, and many thousands
of the Romans: The Parthians with exprobation of his thirst after money,
poured moulten gold into his mouth after he was dead. Against these, the great
Lucullus fought many battles; but the Romans were never able to bring them
quite to subjection.

Media how situated.
On the West Side of Parthia, (having the Mare Caspium on the North, Armenia on
the West, and Persia on the South) lies that Country which in time past was
called Media, but now Shirvan or Sarvan; which is at this day governed by many
inferior Kings and Princes, which are tributaries, and do owe subjection to
the Sophy of Persia. So that he is the Sovereign Lord of all Media, as our
Englishmen have found, who passing through the dominion of the Emperor of
Russia, have crossed the Mare Caspium, and merchandized with the inhabitants of
this Media.

A famous Nation.
This Nation in former times was very famous; for the Medes were they that
removed the Empire from the Assyrians unto them: which as in themselves it was
not great, yet when by Cyrus it was joined to that of the Persians, it was very
mighty, and was called by the name of the Empire of the Medes and Persians.
Here it was that Astyages reigned, the Grandfather of Cyrus and Darius of the
Medes.

The chief City of Media.
The chief City of this Kingdom was called Ecbatana, as the chief City of
Persia, was Babylon.

It is to be observed of the Kings of Media, that in the Summer time they did
use to retire themselves Northward unto Ecbatana, for avoiding of the heat;
but in the winter time they came down more South unto Susis, which as it
seems was a warmer place: but by this means they were both taken for
Imperial Cities, and chief residences of the Kings of Media; which being
known; takes away some confusion in old Stories. The like custom was
afterward used also by the Kings of Persia.

Of Armenia and Assyria.
Situation of Armenia
ON the West Side of the Mare Caspium; and of Media, lies a Country called by
a general name, Armenia; which by some is distinctly divided into three parts:
the North part whereof being but little, Divided into three parts.
is called Georgia; the middle part Turcomania; the third part, by the proper
name of Armenia. By which a man may see the reason of difference in diverse
writers: Some saying, that the country whence the Turks first came, was
Armenia, some saying Turcomania, and some Georgia; the truth being, that out of
one, or all these Countries they did descend. These Turks are supposed to be
the issue o^ them whom Alexander the Great did shut up within certain
Mountains near to the Mare Caspium.

A memorable Note.
There is this one thing memorable in Armenia, that after the great Flood, the
Arc of Noah did rest it self on the Mountains o^ Armenia, where, (as
Josephus witnesses) it is to be seen yet to this day; the hills whereon it
rests, are called by some Noae Montes.

Armenians Christians.
The people of this Nation, have retained amongst them the Christian Faith, as
it is thought, from the time of the Apostles; but at this day it is spotted
with many absurdities.

Bathing of their children.
Among other Errors which the Church of Armenia has bin noted to hold, this is
one, that they did bathe their children, waving them up and down in flames of
fire, and repute that to be a necessary circumstance of Baptism: Which error
arises by mistaking that place of John the Baptist, where he says, That he
that came after him (meaning Christ) should baptize them with the holy Ghost,
and with fire. In which place the word does not signify material fire, but
expresses the lively and purging operation of the Spirit, like to the nature
of fire.

On the South part of Armenia, bending toward the East, lies the Country of
Assyria, Assyria bounded.
which is bounded on the West with Mesopotamia. This Country was that Land
wherein the first Monarchy was settled, which began under Ninus, whom the
Scripture calls Nimrod, living not long after Noah's Flood, and it ended in
Sardanapalus continuing a thousand and three hundred years.

The King of this Country was Senacherib, Kings of Assyria.
of whom we read in the Book of the Kings; and here reigned Nebuchadnezzar,
who took Jerusalem, and led the Jews away prisoners unto Babylon.

In this Country, is the swift River Tygris, The swift river Tygris. The City
Ninivee.
near unto the which was Paradise: Upon this River stood the great City
Ninivee, called by profane writers, Ninus; which was almost of incredible
bigness, and exceeding populous, by the neerenesse of the River, and
mavelous fruitfulness of the soil, which, as Herodotus writes, did return
their Corn sometime two hundred, and sometimes three hundred fold, and did
yield sufficiency for to maintain it. This City for a long time was the
Imperial Seat of the Monarchy; but being destroyed, (as God foretold it should
be, by the Chaldeans) the residence of the King was afterward removed unto
Babylon, a great City in Chaldea, first built by Semiramis.

Of Chaldea.
Situation of Chaldea.
NExt unto Assyria, lies Chaldea, having on the East side Assyria; on the West,
Syria, or Palesti^a; on the North, Armenia; on the South, the desert of Arabia;

This Country is often called by the name of Mesopotamia, which name it has,
because it lies in the middle of two great Rivers, Tygris and Euphrates. It is
called also by the name of Babylonia, which word of it self properly taken,
does signify only that part of the Country which stands about Babylon.

Babylon the chief City of Chaldea.
The chief City whereof was Babylon, whose ruins do remain unto this day. It
was a rich and most pleasant City for all kind of delight; and was in the
later time of that Monarchy, the Imperial City of the Assyrians, where
Nebuchadnezzar and other their great Kings did lie.

It was to this city that the children of Israel were carried captives, which
thereof was called the Captivity of Babylon.

The Kings of Persia also did keep their residence here, it was buil^ upon the
River Euphrates, some part of it standing on the one side and some part on the
other, having for it is foundresse, Semiramis, the wife of Ninus.

Ammianus Marsellinus reports one thing of this Country wherein the
admirable power o^ God does appear; The admirable power of God in preserving
the people.
for he writes that in these parts are a huge number of Lions, which were like
enough to devour up both men and beasts throughout the Country but withal
he says, that by reason of the store of water and mudde thereof, there do
bree^ yearly an innumerable company o^ Gnats, whose property is to fly unto
the eye of the Lion, as being a bright and orient thing; where biting and
stinging the Lion, he teareth so fiercely with his claws that he puts out
his own eyes, and by that means many are drowned in the Rivers, others starve
for want of prey, and many the more easily killed by the Inhabitants.

It is supposed by Divines, that in this Mesopotamia, between the River Tygris
and Euphrates, Paradise did stand. Note.
This was the Country wherein Abraham the Patriarch was borne: unto which the
Romans could very hardly extend their dominion: For they had much to do to
get the government of any thing beyond the River Euphrates. From this people
it is thought the wisemen came which brought presents to Christ, by the
guiding of the Star.

For as in India, and all the Eastern parts, so especially in this Country,
their Noblemen, and Priests, and very many people, do give themselves to all
Arts of Divination. Here were the great Southsayers, Enchanters, and Wise men,
as they call them. Here were the first Astrologians, Here were the first
Astrologians.
which are so described, and derided in the Scripture: and against the
Inhabitants of Babylon and Chaldea were the Laws of the Romans made, which
are against divining Mathematicians, who in Tullie (...) Divinatione and
Cornelius Tacitus, as also in the Laws of the Emperors, are ordinarily
collected by the name of Chaldeans: and indeed from these, and from the
Egyptians, is supposed to have sprung the first knowledge of Astronomy.

It is thought that a great reason whereof these Chaldeans were expert in the
laudable knowledge o^ Astronomy, was partly because the Country is so plain,
that being without hills, they might more fully and easily discover the whole
fac^ of the Heaven, and partly, because the old Fathers which lived so long not
only before, but in some good part also after the Flood of Noah did dwell in,
or near to these parts and they by observation of their own, did find out,
and discover many things of the heavenly Bodies, which they delivered as from
hand to hand to their posterity: But as corruption does stain the best
things, so in process of time, the true Astronomy was defiled with
superstitious Rules of Astrology (which caused the Prophets Isaiah, and
Jeremiah, so bitterly to inveigh against them,) And then, in their fabulositie
they would report, that they had in their Records, Observations for five and
twenty thousand years, which must needs be a very great untruth, unless we
will qualify it as some have done, expounding their years not of the
Revolution of the sun but of the Moon, whose course is ended in the space of
a month.

Of Asia the less.
ON the North-West side of Mesopotamia, lies that Country which is now called
Natolia, but in times past, Asia minor, having on the North side Pontus
Euxinus, Situation of Asia the less.
on the West, the Hellespont, and on the South, the maine Mare Mediterraneum.
In the ancient writings both of the Graecians, and of the Romans, this is
oftentimes called by the single name of Asia, because it was best known unto
them, and they were not so much acquainted with the farther places of Asia the
Great.

Richness of the Country.
This Country in general, for the fruitfulness of the Land, standing in so
temperate a Climate, and for the conveniencie of the Sea every way, and so many
good Havens, has been reputed always a very commodious and pleasurefull
Country. It is wholly at this day under the Turk. The Mountain Taurus goes
along from the West unto the East part of it.

The greatness of this Country is such, that it has comprehended many
Kingdoms and large Provinces, besides Cities of great fame. On the South-east
part thereof, near to Palestina, lies Cilicia; Cilicia. The city Tarsus.
the chief City whereof is Tarsus, the Country of Saint Paul; the place
whither Solomon sent for great store of his Gold, and provision for the Temple,
whither Jonas also fled, when he should have gone to Niniveh.

In the straits of this Cilicia, near to the Mountain Taurus, Alexander his
overthrow of Darius.
did Alexander give a great overthrow in person to Darius, in the joining of
their first battle.

This place seems to have been very fortunate for great fights; in as much as
there also near unto the straits, was the battle fought out between Severus
the Emperor and Niger; who being Governor of the Romans of Syria, would
needs have aspired to the Empire, but in a battle which was very hardly
fought out, he was overthrown in the straits of Cilicia.

In the very corner where Cilicia is joined unto the upper part of Syria, is a
little Bay, which in times past was named Sinus J sicus, near unto which
Alexander built one of his Cities, which he called by his own name. The City
of Alexandria
But howsoever in times past it was named Alexandria, it is now by the
Venetians and other Christians, called Alexandretta; as who should say, little
Alexandria, in comparison of the other. In Egypt the Turks do call it
Scandar^nd, and it is a petty Haven, where our Merchants do land most of their
goods, which are afterward by Camels carried up to Aleppo. At this day the
City is so decayed, that there be only a few houses there.

Westward from Cilicia lies the Province called Pamphilia; Pamphilia The City
of Seleuchus.
wherein stands the City Seleucia, built by Seleuchus, one of the four great
successors of Alexander the Great.

On the West of this Pamphilia, stands Lycia; Lycia.
and more West from thence confining upon the I Will of Rhodes, is Caria; Caria.
one of the seatownes whereof is Halicarnassus, which was the Country of
Heredotus, who is one of the most ancient Historians that is extant of the
Gentiles, and who dedicated his nine Books to the honor of the Muses.

Here also was that Dionysius borne, who is called commonly Dionysius
Halicarnassus, one of the Writers of the Roman Story, for the first three
hundred years after Rome was built.

The whole country of Caria is sometimes signified by the name of this
Halicarnassus, Halicarnassus.
although it was but one City; and thereupon Artemisia, who in the days of
Xerxes came to aid him against the Gracians, and behaved her self so manfully
in a great fight at sea, when Xerxes stood by as a coward, is entitled by the
name not of Queen of Caria, but of Halicarnassus. Also in the days of
Alexander the Great, there was another Queen, named Ada; who also is honored
by the title of Queen of Halicarnassus.

We have thus far described those Cities of Asia the less, which do lie
from that part that joyneth unto Syria, along the Sea coast Westward; but being
indeed the Southern part of Asia minor.

Now upwards toward the North, Ionia.
stands Ionia, where those did dwell, who had like to have joined with
Xerxes, in the great battle at Sea; but that Themistocles by a policy did
win them from him, to take part with the Gracians. Diodorus Siculus writes,
that the Athenians, who professed to be of kin to those Ionians, were on a time
marveilous importunate with them, that they should leave their own country,
and come and dwell with them: which when the Ionians, hardly, but yet at length
did accept, the Athenians had no place to put them in, and so they returned
with great disgrace to them both.

A little within the Land, lying North and East from Jonium, Lydia.
was Lydia, which sometimes was the Kingdom of Croesus, who was reputed so
rich a King; when he was in his prosperity, making best of his happiness, he
was told by Solon, that no man could reckon upon felicity so long as he lived,
because there might be great mutability of Fortune, which he after ward found
true: For he was taken prisoner by Cyrus, Croesus overthrown by Cyrus.
who was once minded to have put him to death; but hearing him report the
advertisement of Solon formerly given to him, he was moved to think that it
might be his own case, and so took pity on him, and spared his life.

These Lydians being inhibited afterward by Cyrus, to use any armor, did give
themselves to bathes and stews, and other such effeminate things.

Upon the seacoast in Ionia, stands the City Ephesus, Ephesus.
which was one of the seven cities, unto which John in his Revelation did write
his seven Epistles: and Saint Paul also directed his Epistle to the Ephesians
unto the Church which was in this place.

This was one of the most renowned Cities of Asia the less; but the Fame
thereof did most arise from the Temple of Diana, which was there built, The
Temple of Diana.
and was reputed for the magnificence thereof, one of the seven Wonders of the
world. This Temple was said to be two hundred years in building, and was burnt
seven several times, whereof the most part was by lightning, and the final
destruction thereof came by a base person, called Herostratus; who to purchase
himself some fame, did set it on fire.

This was the place of which it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that all
Asia, and the whole world, do worship this Diana.

Tullie reports, De natura Deorum, that Timaeus being asked the reason why
the Temple of Diana was on fire that night when Alexander the Great was born,
gave that jest thereof, that the Mistress of it was from home; because she
being the Goddess of Midwives, did that night wait upon Olympias the Mother
of Alexander the Great, who was brought to bed in Macedonia.

City of Smirna.
Another of the seven Cities unto which John did write, is Smirna, standing also
in Ionia, upon the Sea cost, but somewhat more North than Ephesus; which is the
place where Polycarpus was Bishop, who sometimes had been Scholar unto John
the Evangelist, Polycarpus, scholar to S. John the Evangelist.
and living till he was of great age, was at last put to death for Christ's
sake, when before he had been moved by the Governor of the Country to deny
his Savior, and to burn Incense to an Idol: But he answered, that
fourscore and six years he had served Christ Jesus, and in all that time he
had never done him harm: and therefore now in his old age he would not begin
to deny him.

The third City unto which the Epistle is directed in the Apocalypse, City of
Sardis.
which stands within the Land in Lydia, as is described by the best Writers;
and it was a City both of great pleasure and profit unto the Kings in whose
Dominion it stood: which may be gathered hereby, that when once the Graecians
had won it, Darius Histaspis, or Xerxes, who were Kings of Persia, did give
charge, that every day at dinner, one speaking aloud, should remember him, that
the Graecians had taken Sardis; which intended, that he never was in quiet,
till it might be recovered again.

Four Cities of vote.
There stood also in the Inland, Philadelphia, Thyatira, Laodicea, and most of
all to the North, Pergamus: which were the other four Cities unto which Saint
John the Evangelist did direct his Epistle.

Going upward from Ionium to the North, there lies on the Seacoast a little
country, Aeolis.
called Aeolis: and beyond that, although not upon the Sea, the two Provinces
called Mysia Major, and Mysia Minor; which in times past, Mysia major, and
Mysia minor.
were so base and contemptible, that the people thereof were used in speech as
a Proverb, that if a man would describe one meaner than the meanest, it was
said, he was Mysiorum postremus.

On the West part of Mysia major, did lie the Country called Troas, The City
of Troy.
wherein stood Jlium, and the City of Troy, against which, as both Virgil and
Homer have written, the Graecians did continue their Siege for the space of
ten years, by reason that Paris had stolen away Helena, the wife of
Menelaus, who was King of Sparta.

Eastward both from Troas and Mysia major, a good space within the land, was
the Country called Phrygia, Phrygia.
where the Goddess which was called Bona Dea, or Pessinuntia, or Cybele, the
Mother of the old Gods, had her first abiding, and from thence (as Herodian
writes,) was brought to Rome, as implying that good Fortune should follow her
thither.

In this Country lived that Gordius, who knit the knot called for the
intricatenesse thereof, Nodus Gordianus; Gordius knot.
and when it could not be untied, was cut in sunder by Alexander the Great,
supposing that it should be his fortune, for the loosing of it so, to be the
Conqueror, and King of Asia, as by a prophecy of the same Gordius had been
before spoken.

Yet Northward from Phrygia, lies the Country of Bythinia; Bythinia.
which was sometimes a Kingdom, where Prusias reigned, that had so much to do
with the Romans.

In this Country stands the City Nicea, City of Nice.
where the first General Council was held against Arius the Heretic, by
Constantine the Great, thereof called the Nicene Council. Here stands also
Chalcedon, where the fourth. General Council was held by the Emperor
Martianus, Chalcedon.
against the Heretic Nestorius.

From Bythinia Eastward, on the Northside of Asia the less, stands the
Country of Paphlagonia, Paphlagonia.
where was the City built by Pompey the Great, called by his name,
Pompeiopolis. On the South of Paphlagonia, toward the Island of Asia Minor,
Pompeiopolis.
did stand the Country of Galatia, whereunto Saint Paul wrote his Epistle to
the Galathians. Galatia.
And this also was one of those Countries where the Jews were dispersed, unto
which Saint Peter wrote his first Epistle; as also unto them which were in
Pontus, Cappadocia, and Bythinia; from whence Southward lies the Province
termed Lycaonia: Lycaonia;
And from thence yet more South, bordering upon Pamphilia, which touches the
Mediterranean Sea, lies Pisidia, Pisidia.
concerning which countries we find oftentimes mention made in such Stories as
do touch Asia the less.

From these Southern parts, if we return back again unto the North and East
of Asia Major, The kingdom of Pontus.
lies the Kingdom of Pontus, confining upon that which is named Pontus
Euxinus. In this Pontus did reign Mithridates, Mithridates.
who in his younger days had traveled over the greatest part of Asia, and is
reported to have been so skillful, that he could well speak more than
twenty Languages. His hatred was ever great toward the Romans, against whom;
when he meant first to put his malice in practice, he so combined with the
Naturals of those parts, that in one night they slew more than threescore and
ten thousand of the Romans, carrying their intendment so close, that it was
revealed by none, till the execution was done.

Pompey brought Mithridates to distress.
Pompey the Great, was the man who distressed this Mithridates, and brought him
to that extremity, that he would gladly have poisoned himself, but could not;
in as much as his stomach had been used so before unto that kind of Triacle,
(which by reason of his inventing of, unto this day is called Alithridate)
which is made of a kind of poison allayed, that no venom would easily work
upon him.

Southward from this Pontus stands the old Kingdom of Cappadocia, Cappadocia.
which in times past was observed to have many men in it, but little money:
Whence Horace says: Mancipiis locuples eget aris Cappadocum Rex.

Armenia Minor.
Eastward from this Cappadocia, as also from Pontus, is Armenia Minor; whereof
the things memorable, are described in the other Armenia. And thus much
touching Asia the less.

Of Syria, and Palestina, or the Holy Land.
SOuthward from Silicia, and Asia the less, Syria bounded.
lies Syria; a part whereof was called Palaestina: having on the East
Mesopotamia, on the South Arabia, on the West Tire and Sydon, and the end of
the Mediterranean Sea.

The people of this Syria were in times past called the Aramites. Their ancient
names.
In their language is the translation of the new Testament called Syriacke.

City of Antioch.
In this Country stands Antioch, which was sometimes one of the ancient
Patriarchs Seas, and is a City of reckoning unto this day. Here also stands
now the City of Aleppo, Aleppo.
which is a famous Mart Town for the Merchandising of the Persians, and others
of the East, and for the Turks, and such Countries as be adjoining. Here
stands also Tripolis. Tripolis.


The South part of Syria lying down toward Egypt and Arabia, was the place
where the Children of Israel died well, being a Country of small quantity, not
200 Jtalian miles in length: it was so fruitful flowing with Milk and Honey,
(as the Scripture calls it) that it did maintain above thirty Kings and
their people, Thirty Kings.
before the coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and was sufficient
afterward to relieve the incredible number of the twelve Tribes of Israel.

It is noted of this Country, Note.
that whereas by the goodness of the Climate wherein it stood, and the
fertility of the Soil, (but especially by the blessing of God) it was the
most fruitful Land that was in the World: Now our Travelers by experience do
find the Country, in respect of the fruitfulness, to be changed, God cursing
the Land together with the Jews, the Inhabitants of it. It is observed also
for all the Eastern parts, that they are not so fertile as they have been in
former Ages, the Earth (as it were) growing old, which is an Argument of the
dissolution to come by the day of Judgment.

The River Jordan.
Through this Country does run the River Jordan, which has heretofore been
famous for the fruitfulness of the trees standing thereupon, and for the
mildness of the Air, so that (as Josephus writes) when Snow has been in
other places of the Land, about the River it has been so calm, that men did
go in single thin linen garments.

In this Country stands the Lake, The Lake Asphaltites.
called Lacus Asphaltites, because of a kind of slime called Bitumen, or
Asphaltum, which daily it does cast up, being of force to join stones
exceeding fast in building: And into this Lake does the River Jordan run.

Mare Mortuum.
This Lake is it which is called Mare Mortuum, a Sea, because it is salt; and
Mortuum, or Dead, for that no living thing is therein. The water thereof is so
thick, that few things will sink therein, in so much that Josephus, says
that an Ox having all his legs bound, will not sink into that water.

The nature of this Lake (as it was supposed) was turned into this quality,
when God did destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities adjoining, with fire
and Brimstone from Heaven: for Sodom and the other Cities did stand near unto
Jordan, and to this Mare Mortuum: for the destruction of whom all that Coast to
this day is a witness, the Earth smelling of Brimstone, being desolate, and
yielding no Fruit saving Apples, which grow with a fair show to the eye, like
other Fruit; but as soon as they are touched, do turn presently to soot or
ashes, as besides Josephus, Solinus does witness in his 48 Chapter.

Twelve Tribet of Israel.
The Land of Palestina had for its Inhabitants, all the Twelve Tribes of Israel,
which were under one Kingdom, till the time of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon;
But then were they divided into two Kingdoms, ten Tribes being called Israel,
and two Judah, whose chief City was called Jerusalem. Jerusalem.


Twelve Tribes divided.
The ten Tribes, after much Idolatry, were carried prisoners unto Assyria, and
the Kingdom dissolved, other people being placed in their room in Samaria,
and the Country adjoining.

The other two Tribes were properly called the Jews, and their Land Iudaea;
The Jews.
which continued long after in Jerusalem, and thereabout, till the Captivity of
Babylon, where they lived for seventie years. They were afterward restored,
but lived without glory, till the coming of Christ: But since that time for a
curse upon them and their children, for putting Christ to death, they are
scattered upon the face of the Earth, as Runnagates, without certain Country,
King, Priest, or Prophet.

In their chief City Jerusalem. was the Temple of God, first most gloriously
built by Solomon; and afterward destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. Jerusalem
destroyed.
By the commandment of Cyrus King of Persia, was a second Temple built, much
more base than the former. For besides the poverty, and smalnesse of it, there
wanted five things which were in the former, as the Jews write: Note.
First, the Arc of the Covenant: Secondly, the pot of Manna: Thirdly, the
Rod of Aaron: Fourthly, the two Tables of the Law, written by the finger of
God: And fifthly, the fire of the Sacrifice, which came down from Heaven. Herod
the Great, an Edomite stranger, having gotten the Kingdom, contrary to the Law
of Moses, and knowing the people to be offended therewithal, to procure their
favor, did build a third Temple, wherein our Savior Jesus Christ and his
Apostles did teach.

The City of Jerusalem was twice taken, and utterly laid desolate; Jerusalem
twice destroyed. 1 By Nebuchadnezzar. 2 By Vespasian.
first, by Nebuchadnezzar, at the Captivity of Babylon: and secondly, after
the death of Christ, by Vespasian the Roman (who first began the wars) and
by his Son Titus, who was afterward Emperor of Rome, who brought such
horrible desolation on that City, and the people thereof, by Fire, Sword, and
Famine, that the like has not been read in any History. He did afterward
put thousands of them (on some one day) to be devoured of the Beasts, which was
a cruel Custom of the Romans magnificence.

Although Numbers and Times be not superstitiously to be observed (as many
foolish imagine) yet it is a matter in this place, not unworthy the noting,
which Josephus reports in his seventh Book and tenth Chapter, de Bello
Iudaico, that the very same day whereon the Temple was set on fire by the
Babylonians, was the day whereon the second Temple was set on fire by the
Romans, and that was upon the tenth day of August.

After this destruction, the Land of Iudaea, and the ruins of Jerusalem, were
possessed by some of the people adjoining, till that about six hundred years
since, the Saracens did invade it: for expelling of whom from thence, diverse
Frenchmen and other Christians, under the leading of Godfrey of Bullen, did
assemble themselves, thinking it a great shame, that the Holy Land (as they
called it) the City of Jerusalem, and the place of the Sepulcher of Christ,
should be in the hands of Infidels.

This Godfrey ruled in Jerusalem, by the name of a Duke: but his successors
after him, for the space of 87 years called themselves Kings of Jerusalem:
About which time, Saladine (who called himself King of Egypt and Asia the
less) did win it from the Christians. For the recovery whereof, Richard the
first King of England, together with the French King, and the King of Sicilia,
did go in person with their Armies to Jerusalem; but although they won many
things from the Infidels, yet the end was, that the Saracens did retain the
Holy Land.

Roger Hoveden, in the life of Henry the Second, King of England, does give
this memorable note, that at that time when the City of Jerusalem and Antioch
were taken out of the hand of the Pagans by the means of Godfrey of Bullen,
and other of his Company, the Pope of Rome that then was, was called Vrbanus;
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, Heraclius; and the Roman Emperor, Frederick; and
at the same time when the said Jerusalem was recovered again by Saladine, the
Pope^ name was Vrbanus, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, Heraclius, and the Roman
Emperor Frederick.

Jerusalem in the Turks Dominions.
The whole Country and City of Jerusalem, are now in the Dominion of the
Turk, who notwithstanding for a great Tribute does suffer many Christians to
abide there.

There are now therefore two or more Monasteries, and Religious Houses, where
Friars do abide, and make a good commodity of showing the Sepulcher of Christ,
and other Monuments unto such Christian Pilgrims as do use superstitiously to
go in Pilgrimage to the Holy Land.

The King of Spain was wont to call himself King of Jerusalem.

Of Arabia.
Arabia bounded,
NExt unto the Holy Land, lies the great Country of Arabia, having on the North
part Palaestina and Mesopotamia; on the East side, the Gulf of Persia; on the
South, the main Ocean of India or Aethiopia: on the West Egypt, and the great
Bay, called Sinus Arabicus, or the Red Sea.

This Country is divided into three parts: the North part whereof is called
Arabia Deserta, Arabia divided into three parts.
the South part which is the greatest, is named Arabia Foelix: and the middle
between both that (which for the abundance of Rocks and Stones) is called
Arabia Petrea, or Petrosa.

Of the Desert of Arabia.
The Desert of Arabia, is that place in the which God after the deliverance of
the Israelites from Egypt, by passing through the Red Sea, did keep his people
under Moses for forty years, because of their rebellion; feeding them in the
mean time with Manna from Heaven; and sometimes with water miraculously drawn
out of dry Rocks: For the Country has very little water, almost no Trees,
and is utterly unfit for Tillage or Corn.

There are no Towns nor inhabitants of this Desert: in Arabia Petrosa are
some, but not many.

Arabia Foelix for Fruitfulness of ground, and convenient standing every way
toward the Sea, is one of the best Countries of the World: and the principal
cause why it is called Foelix, is for that it yields many things in
abundance, which in other parts of the World are not to be had; as Frankincense
especially, the most precious Balmes, Mirrhe, and many other both Fruits and
Spices, and yields withal store of some precious stones.

When Alexander the Great was young, after the manner of the Macedonians, he
was to put Incense upon an Altar; and pouring on great store of Frankincense,
one of the Nobility of his Country told him, that he was too prodigal of
that sweet perfume; and that he should make spare, until he had conquered
the Land wherein the Frankincense did grow: But when Alexander afterward had
taken Arabia, and had possession thereof, he sent a Ship load of Frankincense
to the Noble man, and bad him serve the Gods plentifully, and not offer Incense
miserably.

Mahumet born in Arabia.
This is that Country wherein Mahumet was borne, who being of mean parentage,
was brought up in his youth in the trade of Merchandise; but afterward joining
himself with Thieves and Robbers, his life was to rob such Merchants as passed
through Arabia; and to this purpose having gotten together many of his own
Countrymen, he had afterward a whole Legion or more of the Roman Soldiers,
who being offended with Heraclius the Roman Emperor for want of their pay,
joined themselves to him; so that at length he had a great Army, where with
he spoiled the Countries adjoining: And this was about the year of Christ six
hundred.

To maintain his credit and authority with his own men, he fained that he
had conference with the Holy Ghost at such times as he was troubled with the
Falling sickness: and accordingly he ordained a new Religion, consisting
partly of Jewish Ceremonies, and partly of Christian Doctrine, and some other
things of his own invention, that he might inveagle both Jews and Christians,
and yet by his own fancy distinguish his own Followers from both.

The Book of his Religion is called the Alcoran. The Turks Alcaron.
the people which were his Sectaries (whereas indeed they came of Hagar, the
Handmaid of Sarah, Abraham's wife, and therefore should of her be called
Ishmaelites, or Hagarens) because they would not seem to come of a Bondwoman,
and from him whom they suppose a Bastard, they term themselves Saracens, as
coming from Sarah; they are called by some Writers, Arabians, instead of
Saracens, their name being drawn from their first Country.

The Turks Religion.
Mahumet did take something of his doctrine both from the Jews and Christians:
as that there is but on God; that there is a life eternal in another World;
and the ten Commandments, which they do admit and believe: but from the Jews
alone, the false Prophet did borrow diverse things, as that all his males should
be circumcised, that they should eat no Swinesflesh; that they should
oftentimes bathe, purge and wash themselves; which diverse of their people,
which are more religious than the ordinary sort, do five times in the day, and
therefore they have near to their Churches and Houses of Devotion, diverse
Baths; whereinto when they have entered and washed themselves, they do persuade
themselves that they are as clear from sin, as they were the first day they
were born.

The City Mecha.
In this Country of Arabia, stands a City called Mecha, where is the place
where Mahumet was buried, and in remembrance of him there is builded a great
Temple, unto which the Turks and Saracens yearly go on Pilgrimage, (as some
Christians do to the Holy Land:) For they account Mahumet to be the greatest
Prophet that ever came into the World; saying, that there were three great
Prophets, Moses, Christ, and Mahumet: and a the doctrine of Moses was bettered
by Christ, so the Doctrine of Christ is amended by Mahumet. In this respect, as
we reckon the computation of our years from the Incarnation of Christ, so the
Saracens account their from the time of Mahumet.

The Turks, The Turks biginning and their Religion.
whose Fame began now about 300 years since, have embraced the opinions and
religion of the Saracens, concerning Mahumet. Some of our Christians do
report, that Medina a City standing three days journey from Mecha, is the
place where Mahumet was buried, and that by order from himself, his body was
put into an Iron Coffin, which being carried into a Temple, the roof or vault
whereof was made of Adamant, or perhaps of the Loadstone, is attracted unto the
top of the vault, and there hangs, being supported by nothing. But there is
no certainty of this Narration.

This false Prophet (as Lodovicus Vives, de veritate fidei, does write) being
desirous in some sort to imitate Christ Jesus, who foretold that he should
rise again within the space of 3 days, did give out that himself should rise
again, but he appointed a larger time, that was after 800 years, The
blasphemous prophecy of Mahumet.
and yet that time also is expired, but we hear no news of the resurrection
of Mahumet. As the Devil has ever some device to blind the eyes of
unbeleevers, so he has suffered it to be reported, and credited among the
Turks, that as Moses did allude to the coming of Christ, so Christ did
foretell somewhat of the appearing of Mahumet. Whereupon it is ordinarily
received among them, that when Christ, in S. John's Gospel, did say, That
although he departed, he would send them a Comforter, it was added in the
Text, and that shall be Mahumet: But that the Christians in malice to them,
have raced out those words.

Their own Books do mention that Mahumet (while he lived) was much given to
lasciviousness, Mahumet a lasciviou^^s person.
and all uncleanness of body, even with very beasts; and his followers are so
senseless, that in imitation of him they think no such wickedness to be
unlawful: For they are utterly unlearned, and most receive whatsoever is
delivered unto them out of the Alcoran, Mahumet having made it a matter of
death to dispute, sift, or call in question any thing which is written in his
Law.

On the Westside of Arabia, between that and Egypt, lies the Gulf called of
the Country Sinus Arabicus; by some, Mare Erythraeum, but commonly the Red Sea,
The Red Sea.
not of one Erythrus as some suppose, but because the Land and banks
thereabout are (in color) red. This is that Sea, through the which (by Moses)
the people of Israel were led, when they fled out of Egypt from Pharaoh; God
causing by his power, the waters to stand on both sides of them, that they
passed through as on dry Land.

This is that Sea, through which the Spices of the East Indies were in times
past brought to Alexandria in Egypt, and from thence dispersed into
Christendom by the Venetians: which Spices, and Apothecaries drugs are found
to be far worse than before time they were, by reason of the great moisture
which they take on the water, by reason of the long Navigation of the
Portugales by the back part of Africa.

This is that Sea, through the which Solomon did send for his Gold, and other
precious Merchandise unto the East Indies, and not to the West Indies, as some
lately have disputed. Whereout the vanity. of that opinion may appear that
America and the West Indies were known in the time of Solomon. For if he had
sent thither, his course had been along the Mediterranean, and through the
straits of Gibralter, commonly called Fretum Herculeum, between Spain and
Barbary: But the Scripture tells, that the Navy which Solomon sent forth, was
built at Ezion-Geber which is there also said to stand on the Red Sea. So his
course might be Eastward, or Southward, and not Westward.

Mount Horeb.
In the Desert of Arabia is the Mount Horeb, which by some is supposed to be the
same that is called Mount Sina, where many think it was that Abraham should
have offered up his Son Isaac. But this is certain, that it was the place
where God in the Wilderness did give unto the people of Israel his Law of the
ten Commandments, in Thundering, Lightning, and great Earthquake, in most
fearful manner.

Of Africa and Egypt.
FRom Arabia and Palestina, toward the West lies Afric; Situation of Africa.
having on the North side, from the one end of it to the other, the
Mediterranean Sea. The greatest part of which Country, although it has been
ghessed at by Writers in former time, yet because of the great heat of it,
lying for the most part of it under the Zona Torrida, and for the Wildernesses
therein, it was in former time supposed by many, not to be much inhabited: but
of certainty by all, to be very little discovered, till the Portugals of late
began their Navigation on the backside of Africa, to the East Jndies. So exact
a description is therefore not to be looked for, as has been of Asia and
Europe.

The Country of Egypt.
Joining to the Holy Land, by a little Isthmos, is the Country of Egypt, which
is a Land as fruitful as any almost in the world, although in these days it
does not answer to the fertility of former times.

This is that which in the time of Joseph did relieve Canaan with corn, and
the family of Jacob, which did so multiply in the land of Egypt, that they
were grown to a huge multitude, when God by Moses did deliver them thence.

This Country did yield exceeding abundance of Corn unto the City of Rome,
Jts fertility.
whereupon Egypt, as well as Sicilia, was commonly called Horreum populi
Romani.

It is observed from all antiquity, that almost never any rain did fall in the
land of Egypt. Whereupon the raining with thunder and lightning, and fire
running on the ground was so much more strange, when God plagued Pharaoh, in
the days of Moses: But the flowing of the River Nilus over all the Country,
(their Cities only, and some few Hills excepted) does so water the Earth, that
it brings forth fruit abundantly.

The flowing of Nilus.
The flowing of which River yearly, is one of the greatest miracles of the
World, no man being able to yield a sufficient and assured reason thereof;
although in Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, many probable causes and opinions
are assigned thereof.

That there does not use any rain to fall in Egypt, besides other heathen
testimonies, and experiences of Travailers may be gathered out of the
Scripture, for in the 10 chapter of Deuteronomy, GOD does make an Antithesis
between the Land of Canaan, and Egypt, saying, that Egypt was watered as a
man would water a Garden of herbs, that is to say, by the hand: But they
should come into a Land which had Hills, and Mountains, and which was watered
with the rain of Heaven and yet some have written, that ever now and then
there is mistes in Egypt, which yield, though not Rain, yet a pretty Dew.

It is noted of this River, that if in ordinary places it do flow under the
height of fifteen cubits, that then for want of moisture, the earth is not
fruitful, and if it do flow above seventeene Cubits, that there is like to be
a dearth, by reason of the abundance of moisture, the Water lying longer on the
Land than the inhabitants do desire.

It is most probably conjectured, that the falling and melting of Snow, from
those Hills which be called Luna Montes, do make the increase of the River
Nilus. And the custom of the people in the Southern parts of Arabia is, that
they do receive into Ponds and Dams the water that does hastily fall, and the
same they let out with Sluices, some after some, which causes it orderly to
come down into the plains of Egypt.

For the keeping up of these Dammes, the Country of Egypt has time out of
mind, paid a great tribute to Prester John: Which when of late it was denied
by the Turk, Prester John caused all the Sluices to be letten go on the
sudden, whereby he marvellously annoyed, and drowned up a great part of the
Country of Egypt.

Learning very ancient in Egypt.
In Egypt, learning has bin very ancient, but especially the knowledge of
Astronomy and Mathematickes; whereof before the time of Tull^e, their Priests
would report, that they had the descent of 1500. years exactly recorded, with
observations Astrologicall; which as it is a fable, unless they do reckon
their years by the Moon (as some suppose they did, every Month for a year)
so it does argue knowledge to have been among them very ancient.

Their Priests had among them a kind of writing, and describing of things by
picture, which they did call their Hicroglyphica.

This in times ^past was a Kingdom, Their Pyramides, one of the Wonders of the
world.
and by the Kings thereof were built those great Pyramides which were held to
be one of the seven wonders of the world, being mighty huge buildings, erected
of exceeding height, for to show the magnificence of their founders.

There is part of two or three of them remaining unto this day.

Diverse learned men are at this day of opinion, that when the children of
Israel were in Egypt, and so oppressed by Pharaoh, as is mentioned in the
beginning of the book of Exodus, that their labor in burning of Brick, was
partly employed to the erecting of some of those Pyramides; but the Scripture
does only mention walling of Cities.

The Founders of these Pyramides, were commonly buried in, or under them: and
it is not unfit to remember, that the Kings, and great men of Egypt, had much
cost bestowed upon them after they were dead.

For in as much as Arabia was near unto them, whence they had most precious
Balmes, and other costly Spices, they did with charge embalme their dead, and
that with such curious art, that the flesh thereof and the skin, will remain
unputrified for diverse hundred years: and all learned men think thousands of
years: Whereof experiments are plentiful at this day, by the whole bodies,
hands, or other parts, which by Merchants are now brought from thence, and does
make the Mummia which the Apothecaries use: the color being very black, and
the flesh clung unto the bones.

Moses does speak of this; when he says, that Jacob was embalmed by the
Physicians; after the manner of embalming of the Egyptians. But this manner of
embalming is ceased long since in Egypt.

The City Memphis.
In Egypt did stand the great City Memphis, which at this day is called Caire,
one of the famous Cities of the East.

Here did Alexander build that City which unto this day is of his name, called
Alexandria: being now the greatest City of Merchandise in all Egypt: of which
Amianus Marcellinus does observe, that there was never any, or almost has ever
been, but that once in the day the Sun has been ever seen to shine over
Alexandria. This City was one of the four Patriarchall Seas, which were
appointed in the first Nicene Council.

Good Laws made by the Kings of Egypt.
This Country was governed by a King, as long ago as almost any Country in
the World. Here reigned Amasis, who made those good Laws spoken of by
Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus: in whose writings, the ancient customs of the
Egyptians are worthy to be read.

After Alexanders time, Ptolomeus one of his Captains had this Kingdom, of
whom all his successors were called Ptolemies, as before time all their Kings
were called Pharaohs, they continued long friends and in league with the people
of Rome, till the time of Julius Caesar; but afterward they were as subjects to
the Romans, til^ the Empire did decay.

When they had withdrawn themselves from the Romans government, they set up
a Prince of their own: whom they termed the Sultan, or Souldan of Egypt; of
whom, about 400. years since Saladine was one. But when the race of these were
out, the Mamalukes (who were the guard of the Sultane, as the Ianisaries be to
the Turk) appointed a Prince at their pleasure; till that now, about an 100.
years ago, or less, the Turk Selimus possessed himself with the sole
government of the Country: so that at this day Egypt is wholly under the
Turk.

There be Christians that now live in Egypt, paying their tribute unto the
Turk, as others do now also in Gracia.

Aeneas Silvius does report in his History, De mundo universo, cap. 60. that
diverse did go about to dig through that little Istmos or Strait, which at
the top of the Red Sea does join Egypt to some part either of Arabia, or of
the Holy Land; imagining the labor not to be great, in as much as they
conceived the space of ground to be no more than 1500 furlongs. Sesostris the
King of Egypt (as he says) did first attempt this. Secondly, Darius, the
great Monarch of the Persians. Thirdly, Ptolomy, one of the Kings of Egypt,
who drew a ditch a hundred foot broad, thirty foot deep, and thirty seven
Miles and a half long; but when he intended to go forward, he was forced to
cease, for fear of inundation, and overflowing the whole land of Egypt; the
Red Sea being found to be higher (by three Cubits) than the ordinary plain
of Egypt was. But Pliny affirms, that the digging was given over, lest the
Sea being let in, should mar the water of Nilus, which alone does yield
drink to the Egyptians.

Pet. Maffaeus in his Indian story, does tell, that there was a Portugal also,
that of late years had a conceit to have had this work finished, that so he
might have made the third part of the old known world Africa, to have been an
Island compassed round with the Sea.

Men commonly in the description of Egypt, do report that whole Country to
stand in Afric, but if we will speak exactly, and repute Nilus to be the
bound between Asia and Afric, we must then acknowledge that the Eastern part
of Egypt, from Nilus, and so forward to the Red Sea, does lie in Asia; which
is observed by Peter Martyr, in that pretty Treatise of his De legatione
Babylonica.

Although this Country of Egypt does stand in the self same Climate that
Mauritania does, yet the inhabitants there are not black, but rather dunne, or
tawny. Of which color Cleopatra was observed to be; who by inticement, so
won the love of Julius Caesar, and Antony: And of that color do those
runnagates (by devices make themselves to be) who go up and down the world
under the name of Egyptians, being indeed but counterfeits, and the refuse or
rascality of many Nations.

Of Cyrene and Afric the less.
ON the West side of Egypt, lying along the Mediterranean, The Country of
Cyrene.
is a Country which was called in old time, Cyrene; wherein did stand that
Oracle which was so famous in the time of Alexander the Great, called by the
name of the Temple or Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, whither when Alexander did
repair, as to take counsel of himself, and his success, the Priests being
before taught what they should say, did flatteringly profess him to be the
Son of God, and that he was to be adored: So that as the Oracle of Delphos,
and some other were plain delusions of Satan, who did reign in that dark
time of ignorance: so this of Jupiter Hammon, may be well supposed to be
nothing else, but a cousenage of the Priests.

In this Country, and all near about where the Oracle stood, are very great
Wildernesses: where did appear to Alexander for four days journey, neither
Grass, Tree, Water, Man, Bird, nor Beast, but only a deep kind of sand: so
that he was enforced to carry water with him for himself and his company (and
all other provision) on Cammels backs.

At this day, this Country has lost his old name, and is reckoned as a part
of Egypt, and lies under the Turk.

In dry Countries, as in Africa, and the Wilderness of Arabia, they have much
use of Cammels. First, because they can carry a huge burden of water and other
provision: Secondly, because that themselves will go a long time without
drink, traveling (as Solinus writes) four days together without it; but
then drinking excessively, and that especially of muddy and puddle water: And
thirdly, because that in an extremity, those that travel with them do let
them blood in a vein, and suck out the blood; whereby as the owner is much
relieved, so the Camel is little the worse.

Westward from this Country, along the Mediterranean, lies that which in
ancient time was called Africa minor: for as in Asia one part above another was
by an excellency called Asia, or Asia the less: so this part of Afric, was
termed by the Romans, sometimes Africa simply, sometime Africa the less.

In this Country did stand that place so famous, mentioned by Salust, under
the name of Phillenorum arae: which was the bound in that time, between
Afric and Cyrene.

On the North and East part hereof, in the Sea near unto the shore, was that
Quick-sand, which in times past did destroy so many ships, and was called
Syrtis magna: as also on the North and West part, was the other sand called
Syrtis parva. Some part of this Country was heretofore under the Sultan of
Egypt, whose dominion did extend it self so far to the West and there was
divided from the Kingdom of Tunis: but it is now wholly under the Turk, and is
commonly reputed as a part of Barbary. For now, by a general name from the
confines of Cyrene unto the West, as far as Hercules Pillar, is called
Barbary; though it contain in it diverse Kingdoms, as Tunis, Fessa, and
Morocco.

Of Mauritania Caesariensi.
A Part of that country, which by a general name is called at this day
Barbary, has in old time been called Mauritania, which was divided into two
parts: the East part whereof next to Africa minor, was called by the Romans
Mauritania Caesariensis, as the other was called Mauritania Tingitana. In
Mauritania Caesariensi was the Country of Numidia, the people whereof were
used in the Wars of the Carthaginians, as Light-horsmen, and for all nimble
services were very active.

In the East part of this Country standing in the Sea, was that famous City
of Carthage, Carthage a famous City
supposed to be built by Dido, who came from Tyrus.

This City was it, which for the space of some hundred years contended with
Rome, for the Empire of the World. In the Roman Histories are recorded the
great Wars which the people of Rome had with the City of Carthage.

In the first war of the three, the contention was for the Isles of Cicilia,
Corsica, and Sardinia: when the victory fell to the Romans, and the
Carthaginians were glad to redeem their peace with the leaving of those Islands.

The second war was begun by Hannibal, who brake the League, and after he had
taken some part of Spain from the Romans, and sacked Saguntum, a City of
their Friends, came first over the Pyrenay hills to France, then over the Alps
to Italy, where he overthrew the Romans in three great Battles, and much
endangered their estate: he continued in Italy with his Army sixteen years,
till Scipio attempting on Carthage, forced Hannibal to return to rescue his
own Country. There was Hannibal overthrown, and his City put to a great
pension by Scipio, who for his victory there was named Africanus.

In the third War (because the people of Carthage still brake the League)
their City was razed to the very ground by the earnest and continual counsel
of Cato the Elder, fearing evermore so dangerous a Neighbor, though Scipio
Nasica counseled to the contrary: fearing lest if the dread of that enemy were
taken away, the Romans would grow either to idleness, or civil dissension;
which after they did. It is reported of Cato, that he never spoke his
judgment of any thing in the Senate, but his conclusion was thus: Thus I think
for this matter, and withal that Carthage is to be razed down. And Scipio
Nasica would reply in his conclusion: Thus I think for this matter, and
withal that Carthage is not to be razed down.

Livie reports, that the way whereby Cato prevayled that Carthage should be
razed down, was this; while the question was very hot, he brings into the
Sen^te house green Figs, and let the Senators understand, that the same day
three weeks, those Figs were growing in Carthage Town: whereby he made
manifest unto them, that it was possible that an Army might be conveyed from
Carthage to Rome in so short a time as that they would not be able (on a
sudden) to resist, and so Rome might be surprised: whereby they all
concluded, that it was no safety for their City to have a bad Neighbor so near
unto them.

In this Country toward the West, not far from Carthage, stood Vtica,
whereof the younger Cato was termed Cato Vticensis, because he killed
himself there in the civil wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey, because he would
not come within the hands of his enemy Caesar.

Not far from thence westward, stands Hippo, which was the City where S.
Augustine was Bishop.

This whole Country (at this day) is called the Kingdom of Tunis; the King
whereof, is a kind of stipendary unto the Turk: the people that inhabit there
are generally Saracens, and do profess Mahumet.

Some do write that Tunis stands in the very place where old Carthage was;
which is not so, but is situated very near unto the old ruins of the other.
Against the king of Tunis, Charles the fifth had some of his wars by Sea.

Of Mauritania Tingitana.
THe other part of Barbary that lies along the Mediterranean, farthest into
the West, was called in old time, Mauritania Tingitana. The people of which
Country were those which almost in all the old Histories were called by the
name of Mauri: Those of the other Mauritania being rather termed Numidae.

Into the North-west part thereof, did Hercules come, and there did set up one
of his pillars, which answers to the other in Spain, they both being at the
straits of Gilbralter, in times past called Fretum Herculeu^. On the South part
thereof, lay the The kingdom of Bocchus
kingdom of Bocchus, which in the time of Marius, had so much to do with the
Romans. In the west part of this Mauritania stands the Hill called Atlas
minor, Atlas minor. Atlas major.
and on the South part, is the great Hill called Atlas major; whereof the maine
Ocean which lies between Mauritania and America, is called Mare Atlanticum.
This hill is so high, that unto those who stood on the bottom of it, it seemed
to touch heaven with his shoulders.

This Country has been long inhabited by the Saracens; who from thence
finding it to be but a short passage into Spain, did go over (now seven
hundred years ago) and possessed there the Kingdom of Granado, on the South
side of Spain, till they were thence expelled by Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, or
Isabel, King and Queen of Castile. In this Country since that time, have the
Spaniards taken some Cities and Holds; and so also have the Portugals: which by
the diverse event of victory, have often been lost and won by them.

Here it was that the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had diverse of his great Wars
against the Moors, as well as in the Kingdom of Tunis. For the assistance of
one, who claymed to be King of a part of this Country, did Sebastian the King
of Portugale go with all his power into Africa, in the Year 1578. where
unadvisedly bearing himself, he was slain together with two other, the same
day, who claymed to be Kings: so that there it was that the Battle was fought,
whereof it was said, that Three Kings slain in one day at the battle of
Aleazar.
three Kings died in one day, which battle is called the battle of Aleazar,
and was the ruin of the Kingdom of Portugale, and the cause of the uniting it
to the Crown of Spain. Astrologers did suppose, that the blazing Star which
appeared the Year before, did signify that ill event.

This whole Country does maintain in it, besides some Imperial Government,
two absolute Kingdoms: The kingdom of Fez^*
the one of Fezza or Fez, which lies on the North part toward the
Mediterranean and Spain: the other is the Kingdom of The kingdom of Morocco.
Morroco, which lies from above the Hill Atlas minor, to the South and West
part of Mauritania. These are both Saracens, as be also their people; holding
true League with the Turk, and with some other Christian Princes; a League
only for Traffic and Merchandise.

It may be doubted whether it was in this Mauritania Tingitana, or rather but
near unto it, in Mauritania Caesariensi, that which Saint Augustine in his
Book De doctrina Christiana, does of his own knowledge report, that in a
City of that Country was this brutish custom, that once in the year (for
certain days) the Inhabitants of the place did assemble themselves into wide
and large fields, A brutish custom used in this Country.
and there divided themselves each from other, so that perhaps the Fathers were
on one fide, and the children or brothers on the other; and did throw stones
with such violence that many were hurt, and diverse killed with the fury of that
assault.

But S. Austine tells, that he detesting the bruitishnesse thereof, did make
a most eloquent and elaborate Oration or Sermon unto them: whereby he did
prevail with those of the City where he was, that they gave over that
foolish and rude exercise: Yet Leo Affricanus, who lived a hundred years
since, and in his own person traveled over the greatest part of Afric, does
write in his description of Afric, that in one place of the kingdom of Fez,
the like barbarous custom is yet retained.

Of the other Countries of Afric, lying near the Sea.
FRom beyond the hill Atlas major, unto the South of Afric, is nothing
(almost in Antiquity) worthy the reading: and those things which are written
(for the most part) are sables: For toward the South part of Afric, as well
as toward the North parts of Europe and Asia, be supposed to be Men of strange
shapes.
men of strange shapes, as some with Dogs heads, some without heads, and some
with one foot alone, which was very huge, and such like; which that counterfeit
Friar, (who writ that Book which is counted Saint Augustines, ad fratres in
Eremo; and who would gladly father upon Saint Augustine the erecting of the
Augustine Friars) does say, that he saw traveling down from Hippo, Southward
in Africa: But as the Ass in Aesope, which was clothed in the Lions skin, did
by his long cares show himself to be an Ass, and not a Lion: So this foolish
fellow, by his lying, does show himself to be a counterfeit, and not Saint
Augustine.

In the new Writers there are some few things to be observed: as first, that
all the people in general to the South, lying within the Zonatorrida, are not
only blackish, like the Moors, but are exceeding black. And therefore as in
old time, by an excellency, some of them are called Nigritae, so at this day
they are named Negros.
Negros, as then whom no men are blacker.

Secondly, the inhabitants of all these parts which border on the Seacoast,
even unto Caput bonae spei, have been Gentiles, * adoring Images and foolish
shapes for their Gods, Their Religion.
neither hearing of Christ, nor believing on Mahumet, til such time as the
Portugals coming among them, have professed Christ for themselves, but have
won few of the people to embrace their religion.

The Portugals have bear settled themselves.
* Thirdly, that the Portugalls passing along Africa to the East Indies, have
settled themselves in many places of those Countries, building Castles and
Towns for their own safety, and to keep the people in subjection, to their
great commodity.

One of the first Countries famous beyond Morocco, is The country of Guinea.
Guinea, which we call Ginnle, within the compass whereof, lies the Cape,
called the Cape Verde, and the other, the Cape of the three points: and the
Town and Castle named Sierta Liona, at which place (as commonly all Travelers
do touch that do pass that way for fresh water, and other ship provision)
our Englishmen have found Their Commodities for trade.
traffic into the parts of this Country, where their greatest commodity is
Gold, and Elephants teeth; of both which there is good store.

Beyond that, toward the South, not far from the Equinoctial, lies the The
kingdom of Congo.
Kingdom of Congo, commonly called Mani-congo. Where the Portugals at their
first arrival finding the people to be Heathens, without God, did induce them
to a profession of Christ, and to be baptized in great abundance, allowing of
the principles of Religion, until such time as the Priest did teach them to
lead their lives according to their profession; which the most part of them in
no case enduring, they returned back again to their Their Religion.
Gentilisme.

Beyond Mani-congo so far to the South as almost ten degrees beyond the
Tropicke of Capricorn, lies the Lands end; which is a Promontory, now called
Caput bonae spei, which Vascus Gama the Portugal did discover, and so called
it, because he had there good hope that the Land did turn to the North; and
that following the course thereof he might be brought to Arabia and Persia,
but especially to Calecut in India. Which course, when himself, and other of
his Contrymen after him did follow, they found on the Coast up toward
Arabia, the Kingdom of The three Kingdoms of Mosambique, Melinda, Magadazo,
etc.
Mosambique, Melinda, Magadazo, and other; whose people were all Gentiles, and
now are in League with the Portugales, who have built diverse Holds for their
safety. Of which Countries, and manners of the people, he that lists to read,
may find much in the History of Osorius, and Petrus Maffaeus; but there is no
matter of any great importance.

Beyond the Cape toward the North, before you come to Mosambique, between the
Rivers of Cuama and Sancto Spirito, lies the The kingdom of Monomotapa.
Kingdom of Monomotapa, where the Portugales also have arrived, and so much
was done there by the preaching of Gonsalvo de Sylva, a Jesuit, that the King
and Queen of that Country with many others were converted from Their Religion.
Gentilisme to Christianity and baptized: But certain Mahumetans incensing the
King thereof afterward against the Portugales, made him to revolt from his
Religion, and to put to death this Jesuit and diverse others: which Fact of
his, the Portugals assaying to revenge with an Army sent for out of Portugal
they profited little against him, but were themselves consumed by the
discommodities of the Country, and the distemperature of the air.

There are also other Kingdoms in this part of Afric, of whom we know little
besides their names and site in general, as The kingdom of Adel, etc.
Adel, Monomugi, Angola, and therefore it shall be sufficient to have named
them in a word.

Of Abissines, and the Empire of Prestor John.
IN the Inland of Afric, The Situation of the Empire of Prester John.
lies a very large Country, extending it self on the East to some part of
the Red Sea, on the South to the kingdom of Melinda, and a great way farther,
on the North to Egypt; on the West to Manicongo. The people whereof are called
Abissini; and it self the dominion of him, whom we commonly call in English
Prester John; but in Latin some term him Pretiosus Johannes, but the most
part, Presbyter Johannes, writing of him. As he is a Prince absolute, so he
has also a Priestlike or Patriarchall function and jurisdiction among them.
One of the greatest in the world.
This is a very mighty Prince, and reputed to be one of the greatest Emperors
in the world.

What was known of this country in former time, was known under the name of
Aethiopia, but the voyages of the Portugalls in these late days have best
described it. The people thereof are Christians, Their Religion.
as is also their Prince; but differing in many things from the West Church;
and in no sort acknowledging any supreme prerogative of the Bishop of Rome. It
is thought that they have retained Christianity even from the time of our
Savior, being supposed to be converted by the Chamberlain of Candace, the
Queen of Aethiopia, who was instructed concerning Christ, by Philip the
Evangelist, in the Acts of the Apostles. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical story
does make mention of this. But they do to this day retain Circumcision:
whereof the reason may be, that the E^nuch (their Converter) not having any
further conference with the Apostle, nor any else with him, did receive the
Ceremonies of the Church imperfectly, retayning Circumcision: which among the
Jews was not abolished, when he had conference with Philip.

Within the dominion of Prester John, are the Mountains commonly called Lunae
montes.
Lunae montes: where is the first wel-spring and rising of the river Nilus. Yet
there are that fetch the head of this River out of a certain great Lake toward
the South, called Zembre: out of which toward the West runs the River of
Zaire, into the Kingdom of Moni-congo; The River of Zuama or Cuama, toward
the South, to the Kingdom of Monomotapa, or Benomotapa, as this River Nilus
toward the North, through the Kingdom of the Abissines to Egypt, which River
running violently along this Country, and sometimes hastily increasing by the
melting of much Snow from the Mountains, would over-runne and drown a great
part of Egypt, but that it is slaked by many Ponds, Dammes, and Sluices, which
are within the Dominion of Prester John. And in respect hereof, for the
maintenance of these, the Princes of Egypt have paid unto the Governor of the
The Abissines drowned Egypt.
Abissines a great Tribute time out of mind: which of late the great Turk
supposing it to be a custom needless, did deny; till the people of the
Abissins by commandment of their Prince, did break down their Dammes, and
drowning Egypt did enforce the Turk to continue his pay, and to give much
money for the new making of them, very earnestly to his great charge, desiring a
peace.

In this Country also of Prester John, is the rising of the Famous River The
River Nigar.
Nigar, supposed to have in it the most and the best precious stones of any
River in the World, which rising likewise out of a great Lake out of that
Mount, after it has run a good space hides it self for the space of sixty
miles under ground, then appearing again after it has run somewhat further
makes a great Lake, and again after a great Tract, another; and at last after
a long course, falls at Cape Verde, into the Atlantic Sea.

Ortelius in his larger Mappes describes it falling into the Sea, like Nilus in
Egypt, with seven streams or Ostia: but those that travel these parts say,
that there are only some Bays, but there is no River in those parts running
into the Sea, but Senega.

There be other Countries in Afric, Country 3 more in Africa.
as Agisimba, Lybia, interior, Nubia, and others, of whom nothing is Famous:
but this may be said of Afric in general, that it brings forth store of
all sorts of wild Beasts, as Elephants, Lions, Panthers, Tygres, and the like:
yea, according to the Proverb, Africa semper aliquid apportat novi; Oftentimes
new and Strange shapes of wild beasts.
strange shapes of wild beasts are brought forth there; the reason whereof is,
that the Country being very hot, and full of Wildernesses, which have in them
little water, the Beasts of all sorts being enforced to meet at those few
watering places that be, where oftentimes contrary kinds have conjunction the
one with the other: so that there arises a new king of Species which takes
part of both. Such a one is the Leopard, begotten of the Lion, and the Beast
called Pardus, and somewhat resembling either of them. And thus far of Africa.

Of the Northern Islands.
THe Islands that do lie in the North are in number almost infinite: the chief
of them only shall be briefly touched. Very far to the North in the same
Climate almost with Sweden, that is, under the Circle Articke, lies an Island
called in old time Thule.
Thule, which was then supposed to be the farthest part of the world
Northward, and therefore is called by Virgil, Vltima Thule. The Country is
cold, the people barbarous, and yields little Their commodities.
commodity, saving Hawks; in some part of the year, there is no night at all.
Unto this land diverse of our English Nation do yearly travel, and do bring
from thence good store of Fish, but especially our deepest and thickest Ling,
which are therefore called Island-Lings.

It has pleased God, Their Religion.
that in these latter times, the Gospel is there preached, and the people are
instructed in Christianity, having also the knowledge of good Learning, which
is brought about by the means of the King of Sweden, unto whom that Island is
now subject.

There is lately written by one of of that Nation a pretty Treatise in Latin,
which describes the manner of that Country; and it is to be seen in the
first Tome of master Hackluits Voyages.

Southward from thence, lies Frizeland
Frizeland, called in Latin Frizlandia; whereas the Frizeland joining to
Germany, is in Latin called Frizia.

On the coast of Germany, one of the seventeene Provinces is called Zealand, in
it stands Flushen and Middleburge.
Zealand, which contains in it diverse Islands; in whom little is famous,
saving that in one of them is Flishen, or Flushen, a town of war, and
Middleburge is another, a place of good Mart.

Levinus Lemnius, and some of the low Germans, be of opinion, that this City
first was built by Metellus the Roman; and that which now is called
Middleburge, was at the first termed Metelli Burgum.

The States of the Low Countries, do hold this Province against the King of
Spain. These Islands have been much troubled of late with inundation of water.

The Island that lies most West of any fame, is Ireland.
Ireland, which had in it heretofore many Kings of their own: but the whole
Land is now annexed to the Crown of England. The people naturally are rude and
superstitious, the Country good and fruitful, but that for want of tillage in
diverse places, they suffer it to grow into Bogges and Deserts. A rare and
admirable Note.
It is true of this Country (which Solinus) writes of some other) that
Serpents and Adders do not breed there; and in the Irish Timber, of certain
experience, no Spiders web is ever found.

Of Britain.
The most renowned Island in the world is Albion, or Britannia, which has
heretofore contained in it many several Kingdoms; but especially in the time
of the Saxon. It has now in it two Kingdoms, England and Scotland, wherein
are Four languag^s there spoken.
four several Languages; that is, the English (which the civil Scots do
barbarously speak) the Welsh tongue (which is the Language of the old
Britains;) the Cornish, (which is the proper speech of Cornwall,) and the
Irish, (which is spoken by those Scots which live on the west part of Scotland,
near unto Jreland.) The commodities and pleasures of England are well known
unto us, and many of them are expressed in this Verse:

Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana.
England is stored with Bridges, Hills, and Wool;
With Churches, Wels, and Women beautiful.
Their original.
The ancient inhabitants of this Land were the Britains, which were afterward
driven into a corner of the Country, now called Wales; and it is not to be
doubted, but at the first this Country was peopled from the continent of
France, or thereabout, when the sons of Noah had spread themselves from the
East to the West part of the World. It is not strange to see why the people of
that Nation do labor to fetch their pedigree from one Brutus, whom they
report to come from Troy; because the original of that Truth began by
Galfriaus Monumetensis, above five hundred years agone, and his Book
contains great show of Truth, but was noted by Nubringensis, or some Author
of his time, to be merely fabulous: Besides that, many of our English Nation
have taxed the saying of them, who would attribute the name of Britannia unto
Brutus, and Cornubia to Corynaeus, Aenaeas Sylvius, Epist. 1.3. has thought
good to confirm it, saying. The English people (says he) do report, that
after Troy was overthrown, one Brutus came unto them, from whom their Kings
do fetch their Pedegrees; which matter there are no more Historians that
deliver, besides a certain English man, which had some learning in him, who
willing to equal the blood of those Islanders unto the Roman stock and
generositie, did affirm and say that concerning Brutus, which Livie and Salust
(being both deceived) did report of Aeneas.

We do find in ancient Records and Stories of this Island, that since the
first possessions which the Britains had here, it was over-runne, and The
Britains five times conquered.
conquered five several times. First, by the Romans.
The Romans were the first that did attempt upon it, under the conduct of
Julius Caesar, who did only discover it, and frighted the Inhabitants with the
name of the Romans, but was not able so far to prevail upon it, as any way
to possess it: yet his Successors afterward did by little and little, so
gain on the Country, that they had almost all of it, which is now called
England; and did make a great Ditch or Trench from the East to the West Sea,
between their Dominion here, and Scotland. Diverse of the Emperors were here
in person, as Alexander Severus, who is reputed to be buried at York. Here
also was Constantius Father unto Constantine the Great; who from hence married
Helena a woman of this Land, who was afterward Mother to the renowned
Constantine. But when the Romans had their Empire much weakened, partly by
their own discords, and partly by that decay which the irruptions of the
Goths and Vandales, and such like invaders did bring upon them, they were
forced to retire their Legions from thence, and so leaving the Country naked;
the Scots, and certain people called the Tictes, did break in, who most
miserably' wasted and spoiled the Country. Then were the Inhabitants (as some
of our Authors write) put to that choice, that either they must stand it out
and be slain, or give ground, till they came to the Sea, and so be drowned.

Of these Secondly, the P^cts, who used to print or p^un^e their (...)
Pictes, who were the second over-runners of this Island, some do write, that
they did use to cut and pounse their flesh, and lay on colors, which did make
them the more terrible to be seen, with the cuts of their flesh. But certain
it is, that they had their name for painting themselves, which was a common
thing in Britain in Caesar's time, as he reports in his Commentaries, the
men coloring their faces with Glastone, or Ode, that they might seem the more
dreadful, when they were to join battle.

To meet with the cruelty and oppression of these Barbars, the Thirdly, the
Saxon.
Saxons were in the third place by some of the Land called in, who finding the
sweetness of the soil, and commodiousnesse of the Country every way, did
repair hither by great troops, and so seated themselves here, that there were
at once of them seven several Kingdoms and Kings within the compass of
England.

These Saxons did bear themselves with much more temperance and placability
toward those few of the Country that remained, than the Picts had done: but
yet growing to contention, one of their Kings with another, partly about the
bounds of their territories, and partly about other quarrels, they had many
great battles each with other.

In the time of these, Their Religion and devotion.
Religion and Devotion was much embraced, and diverse Monasteries, and rich
Religious houses were founded by them, partly for penance which they would do,
and partly otherwise; because they thought it to be meritorious: in so much
that King Edgar alone, is recorded to have built above four several
Monasteries. And some other of their Kings, were in their ignorance so devoted,
that they gave over their Crowns, and in superstition did go to Rome, there
to lead the lives of private men.

These seven Kingdoms in the end, did grow all into one; and then the fourth
and most grievous scourge and conquest of this kingdom came in, the Fourthly,
the Danes.
Danes, who Lording here diverse years, were at last expelled; and then William
Duke of Normandy, pretending that he had right thereunto, by the promise of
adoption, or some other conveyance from Herald, did with his Normans pass over
into this Land, and obtained a great victory in Sussex, at a place which he
caused in remembrance thereof to be called Battle, and built an Abbey there, by
the name of Battle Abbey. He took on him to win the whole by Conquest, and
did bear himself indeed like a Conqueror: For he seized all into his hands,
gave out Barons, Lordships, and Mannours from himself; reversed the former
Laws and Customs, and instituted here the manners and orders of his own
Country; which have proceeded on, and been by little and little bettered; so
that the honorable government is established, which we now see at this day.

It is supposed, that the Faith of The religion ve y ancient which they n^w
profess.
Christ was first brought into this Land in the days of the Apostles, by
Joseph of Arimathaea, Simon Zelotes, and some other of that time: but without
doubt not long after it was found here; which appears by the Testimony of
Tertullian, who lived within less then two hundred years after Christ: And
there are Records to show, that in the days of Eleutherius, one of the ancient
Bishops of Rome, K. Lucius he first, that here received Baptism and the Gospel.
King Lucius received here both Baptism and the Gospel: in so much that it is
fabulous vanity to say, that Augustine the Monk was the first that here planted
the Christian Faith: For he lived six hundred years after Christ, in the time
of Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome: before which time, Gildas is (upon great
reason) thought to have lived here: of whom there is no doubt, but that he was
a learned Christian: Yea, and that may be perceived by that which Beda has in
his Ecclesiastical Story concerning the coming in of Augustine the Monk,
that the Christian Religion had been planted here before, but that the purity
of it in many places was much decayed, and also that many people in the Island
were yet Infidels: For the conversion of whom, as also for the reforming of the
other, Austine was sent hither, where he behaved himself so proudly, that the
best of the Christians which were here did mislike him. In him was erected the
Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury, which amongst old Writers is still termed
Dorebernia, the Archbishops do reckon their succession by number, from this
Augustine.

Note.
The reason wherefore Gregory the great is reported to have such care for the
conversion of the Ethnicks in Britain, was because certain young Boys were
brought him out of this Country; which being very goodly of countenance (as
our Country Children are therein inferior to no Nation in the World) he
asked them what Contrymen they were; and it was replied, that they were
Angli, he said they were not unfitly so called, for they were Angli, tanquam
Ange^i, Nam vultum habent Angelorum. And demanding further, of what Province
they were in this Island; it was returned that they were called Deires, which
caused him again to repeat that word, and to say, that it was great pity,
but that by being taught the Gospel, they should be saved de ira Dei.

England has since the time of the Conquest, grown more and more in riches,
insomuch that now more then 300, years since, No country like England.
in the time of King Henry the third, it was an ordinary speech, that for
wealth, this Country was Puteus inexhaustus, a Well that could not be drawn
dry. Which conceit the King himself, as Matthew Paris writes, did often
suggest unto the Pope; who thereupon took advantage, abusing the simplicity of
the King, to suck out inestimable sums of money, to the intolerable
grievance of both the Clergy and Temporality. And among other things, to bring
about his purpose, the Pope did persuade the King, that he would invest his
young Son in the Kingdom of Apulia; which did contain a great part of all
Naples; and for that purpose had from thence many thousands, besides infinite
sums which the King was forced to pay for interest to the Popes Italian
Usurers.

Since that time it has pleased God more and more to bless this Land, but
never more plentifully than in the days of our late, and now reigning
Sovereign, whose reign continuing long in peace, has peopled the Land with
abundance of inhabitants, The Riches of the Country.
has stored it with Shipping, Armor, and Munition, has fortified it many
ways, has increased the traffic with the Turk and Muscovite, and many
parts of the earth far distant from us, has much bettered it with building,
and enriched it with Gold and Silver, that it is now (by wise men) supposed,
that there is more Plate within the Kingdom, then there was Silver when her
Majesty came to the Crown. Some Writers of former times, yea, and those of our
own Country too, have reported, that in England have been Mines of Gold, or at
the least some Gold taken out of other Mines: which report has in it no
credit, in as much as the Country stands too cold, neither has it
sufficient force of the Sun, to concoct and digest that Metal. But truth it
is that our Chronicles do witness, that some Silver has been taken up in
the Southern parts, as in the Tinne-Mynes of Devonshire and Cornwall, and
such is sometimes found now, but the virtue thereof is so thin, that by that
time it is tried and perfectly fined, it does hardly quit the cost:
notwithstanding' Lead, Iron, and such baser metals, be here in good plenty.

The same reason which hinders gold ore from being in these parts, that is to
say, the cold of the climate, does also hinder that there is no wine, whose
Grapes grow here. For although we have Grapes, which in the hotter and warm
Summers do prove good, but yet many times are nipped with the frost before
they be ripe, yet notwithstanding they never come to that concocted maturity as
to make sweet and pleasant wine; yet some have labored to bring this about,
therefore have planted vineyards to their great cost and trouble, helping and
ayding the soil by the uttermost diligence they could; but in the end it has
proved to very little purpose.

The most rich commodity which our Land has naturally growing, is The rich
commodity of Wool.
Wool, for the which it is renowned over a great part of the Earth. For our
Clothes are sent into Turkey, Venice, Italy, Barbary, yea, as far as China of
late, besides Muscovy, Denmark, and other Northern Nations; for the which we
have exchange of much other Merchandise necessary for us here; besides that,
the use of this wool does in several labors set many thousands of our people
in work at home, which might otherwise be idle.

Bridges.
Amongst the Commendations of England, as appears in the place before named,
is the store of good Bridges: whereof the most famous are London Bridge, and
that at Rochester. In diverse places here, there be also Rivers of good Name,
but the greatest glory does rest in three: Rivers.
the Thames, called in Latin of Tame and Isis, Tamesis: Severne, called
Sabrina: and Trent, which is commonly reputed to have his name of trente the
French word, signifying thirty, which some have expounded to be so given,
because thirty several Rivers do run into the same: And some other do take
it to be so called because there be thirty several sorts of Fishes in that
water to be found; the names whereof do appear in certain old Verses recited
by Master Camden, in his Book of the Description of England.

One of the honorable commendations which are reputed to be in this Realm,
is the Fair and large Churches.
fairness of our greater and larger Churches, which as it does yet appear in
those which we call Cathedral Churches, many of them being of very goodly and
sumptuous buildings; so in times past it was more to be seen when the Abbeyes,
and those which were called Religious Houses, did flourish; whereof there were
a very great number in this Kingdom, which did eat up much of the wealth of
the Land; but especially those which lived there, giving themselves to much
filthiness, and diverse sorts of uncleanness, did so draw down the vengeance
of God upon those places, that they were not only dissolved, but almost utterly
defaced by King Henry the eight. 1. Archbishopricks, and 24. other Bishoprics.
There are here two Archbishoprickes, and twenty four other Bishoprics
within England and Wales.

It was a tradition among old Writers, that Britain did breed no Wolves in it,
neither would they live here: but the report was fabulous, in as much as our
Chronicles do write, that there were here such store of them, that the Kings
were enforced to lay it as an imposition upon the Kings of Wales, who were not
able to pay much money for tribute, that they should bring in yearly certain
hundreds of Wolves; by which means they were at the length quite rid from
Wolves.

* The Country of Wales had in times past a King of it self, yea, Of Wales.
and sometimes two, the one of North Wales, and the other of South Wales;
between which people at this day, there is no great good affection: But the
Kings of England did by little and little so gain upon them, that they subdued
the whole Country unto themselves; and in the end King Henry the eight,
intending thereby to benefit this Realm and them, did divide the Country into
Shires, appointed there his Iudices itinerantes, or Judges of the circuit to
ride, and by Act of Parliament, made them capable of any preferment in England,
as well as other Subjects. When the first news was brought to Rome that Julius
Caesar had attempted upon Britain, Tully in the elegance of his wit (as
appears in one of his Epistles) did make a flowt at it; saying that there was
no gain to be gotten by it. For gold here was none, nor any other commodity
to be had, unless it were by slaves, whom he thought that his friend to whom
he wrote, would not look to be brought up in learning or Music. Note.
But if Tully were alive at this day, he would say, that the case is much
altered, in as much as in our Nation, is sweetness of behavior, abundance of
Learning, Music, and all the liberal Arts, goodly Buildings, sumptuous
Apparel, rich Fare, and whatsoever else may be truly boasted to be in any
Country near adjoining.

Of Scotland.
The Northern part of Britain is Scotland, which is a Kingdom of it self,
and has been so from very ancient time, without any such Conquest, or main
transmutation of State, as has been in other Countries. It is compassed about
with the Sea on all sides saving where it joyneth upon England; and it is
generally divided into two parts, the one whereof is called the Hye-land, and
the other the Low-land.

The Low-land is the most 'civill part of the Realm, wherein religion is more
orderly established, and yields reasonable subjection unto the King: but the
other part called the Hye-land, which lies further to the North, or else
bends toward Ireland, is more rude and savage: and whether the King has not
so good access, by reason of Rocks and Mountains, as to bring the Noblemen
which inhabit there, to such due Conformity of Religion, or otherwise, as he
would.

This Country generally is more Scotland very poo^e in former times.
poor than England, or the most part of the Kingdoms of Europe: but yet of
late years, the wealth thereof is much increased by reason of their great
traffic to all the parts of Christendom: yea, unto Spain it self, which
has of late years been denied to the English and some other Nations, and yet
unto this day they have not any Ships, but for Merchandise: neither has the
King in his whole Dominion, any vessel called A man of War. Some that have
traveled into the Northern parts of Scotland, do report, that in the
Solstitium aestivale, they have scant any night, and that which is, is not
above two hours, being rather a dimnesse than a darkness. The language of the
Country is in the Lowland, a kind of barbarous English. But toward Ireland
side, they speak Irish: Thereason why it is said that in Britain are sour
languages.
which is the true reason whereof it is reported, that in Britain, there are
four Languages spoken, that is Irish in part of Scotland, English for the
greatest part, Welsh in Wales, and Cornish in Cornwall.

In the Confines between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which are
commonly called the Borderers great Robb^s and Stealers.
Borders, there lie diverse Outlawes and unruly people, which as being subject
to neither Prince by their good wills, but so far as they list, do exercise
great robberies, and stealing of Cattle from them that dwell thereabout: and
yet the Princes of both Realms, for the better preservation of Peace and
Justice, do appoint certain Warders on each side, who have power, even by
Martial Law to repress all enormities.

The Queen of England had on her side three: whereof one is called the Lord
Warden of the Marches.
Lord Warden of the East Marches, the other of the West Marches, the third, the
Warden of the middle Marches, who with all their power cannot so order things,
but that by reason of the outrages thereabouts committed, the borders are much
unpeopled; whiles such as desire to be civil, do not like to live in so
dangerous a place.

It has been wondered at by many that are wise, how it could be that whereas
so many Countries, having in them diverse Kingdoms and Regiments, did all in
the end come to the Dominion of one (as appears at this day in Spain, where
were wont to be diverse Kings, and so in times past in England, where the seven
Kingdoms of the Saxons did grow all into one) yet that England and Scotland,
Note.
being continuate within one Island, could never till now be reduced to one
Monarchy; whereof in reason the French may be thought to have been the
greatest hinderance. For they having felt so much smart by the Arms of England
alone, in so much that sometime all that whole Country almost has been
over-runne and possessed by the English, have thought that it would be
impossible that they should resist the force of them, if both their Kingdoms
were united and joined into one.

The Custom therefore of the Kings of France in former times was, that by
their Gold they did bind unto them the Kings and Nobility of Scotland, and by
that means, the Kings of England were no sooner attempting any thing upon
France, but the Scots by and by would invade England: Whereupon the A Proverb.
Proverb amongst our people grew, That he who will France win, must with
Scotland first begin.

The policy of the French.
And these Frenchmen continuing their policy, did with infinite rewards break
off the Marriage which was intended and agreed upon between King Edward the
sixth, and Mary the late unfortunate Queen of Scotland, drawing her rather to
be married with the Dolphine of France, who was Son to King Henry the
second, and afterward himself reigned by the name of King Francis the second:
But this was so ill taken by the English, that they sought revenge upon
Scotland, and gave them a great overthrow in that battle which was called
Musselborough field.
Musselborough-field.

The people of this Country were in times past so The barbarousnesse of these
Scots in former times.
barbarous, that they did not refuse to eat man's flesh: which as Saint Hierome
does witness of them, he himself saw some of them to do in France, and the
fame thereof went so far, that Chrysostom in one place does allude to such a
matter.

There be many little Islands adjoining unto the great Island Britain; as at
the very North point of Scotland the The Orcades, the people barbarous.
Orcades, which are in number above thirty. The chief whereof is named Orkney:
whereof the people are barbarous.

On the West Side of Scotland toward Ireland, lie the Islands called Hebrides,
in number forty four, where inhabit the people ordinarily called the The
Red-shankes.
Red-shankes. Not far from thence, is the I Will Mona, commonly called the The
I Will of Man.
I Will of Man, the peculiar jurisdiction of the Earls of Darby, with homage
notwithstanding reserved to the Crown of England.

On the North part of Wales, is the Island of The I Will of Anglesey.
Anglesey, which is reputed a distinct Shire.

Toward France side on the South part of England is the I Will of The I Will of
Wight.
Wight, in Latin called Vectis: which is a good hold in the narrow Seas
against the French More near France are the Isles of The Isles of Gernesey and
Iernesey.
Gernesey and Iernesey, where they speak French, and are under the Crown of
England. There are also many other, but of small account. As the Isles of
Teanet, and Sheppy on the side of Kent, the Sorlings or Sully at the end of
Cornwall, in number as it is said 145. Caldey, Lunday, and the Flatholnes,
with Diverse other Islands.
others in the mouth of Severne, Holy-farne, Cocket Islands on the side of
Northumberland. And thus much of Great Britain, and the Islands thereunto
adjoining.

Of the Islands in the Mediterranean Sea.
THere be many Ila^ds in the Mediterranean, renowned in all the old Writers^
but the chief of them only shall be touched. From the Pillars of Hercules
going Eastward, are two Islands not far from Spain, which in times past were
called Iusulae Baleares.
Insulae Baleares, for that the people of them did use (both for their delight
and Armor) Slings, which they continually (almost) carried about with them:
and whereunto, as Pliny writes, they did train up their Children from their
youngest years, not giving them any meat, till they had from some post or
beam cast it down with a Sling. Of these were those Fonditors, or
Sling-casters, which the Carthaginians and Spaniards did use in their Wars
against the Romans. The lesser of these, which lies most West, was called in
old time Minorica: The bigger, which lies more East, was called Majorica, and
now Minorica and Majorica, they are both under the Dominion of the King of
Spain.

More Eastward in the Sea, called Mare Inferum, or Tyrrhenum, lies the Island
of The Island of Corsica.
Corsica, over against Genua: and direct Southward from thence lies the great
The Island of Sardinia.
Island Sardinia. For the quiet possession of which two, the wars were often
revived between the old Carthaginians and the Romans; for these two Islands
lie in the middle very fitly.

The Island of Corsica is subject to the State of Genua, whither the Genoes do
transport things out of the Main, and are ruled by their Governors, as the
Venetians do Candie.

This Island is but barren, either in respect of some other that lie near unto
it, or of the Country of Italy; but yet yields profit, ease, and honor unto
the States of Genua, which have little land beside it.

The Island of Sardinia also is no way so fruitful as Sicily, but it is under
the Government of the King of Spain, and was the same which was promised to
Anthony the King of Navarre, Note.
Father to Henry the Fourth King of France, in recompense of Pamplona, and the
rest of the Kingdom of Navarre then, and now detained from him and his heirs,
by the Spaniard. But this was the device only of the Cardinal of Lorraine,
who intending to draw him to Papistry, and to order his politic purposes, did
make show of this, which was no way meant by the Spaniard.

Further to the East, at the very point of the South part of Jtaly, lies the
great The Island of Sicilia.
Island Sicilia, which some have supposed to have been heretofore a part of the
Continent: but by an Earthquake and inundation of water to have been rent
off, and so made an Island. The figure of this Country is Triquetra, triangled
or three square.

Justin in his fourth Book, does seem to suspect that Sicily was in times
past fastened unto Italy. But Seneca, in Consolatione ad Martian. Cap. 97. does
say plainly, that it was sometimes a piece of the Continent.

There was also a great contention for this Country, between the
Carthaginians and the Romans: but the Romans obtained it, and had from thence
exceeding store of Corn yearly: whereupon Sicily was called Horreum Pop. Romans
Here stood the goodly The City Syracusa. Note.
City called Syracusa, which was destroyed and sacked by Marcellus the Roman.
When (as Livie writes of him) he being resolved to set on fire that City,
which was then one of the goodliest places of the World, could not choose but
break forth into tears, to see how vain and transitory the glory of worldly
things is here.

At that time lived Archimedes the famous Engine-maker.
Archimedes, who was a most admirable ingenious Engine-maker for all kind of
Fortifications: of whom it is said, that by burning Glasses which he made, he
did set on fire diverse ships which the Romans had lying in the Haven.

When the City was taken, he was making plots, and drawing figures on the
ground, for to prevent the assaults of the Romans, and being unknown, he was
slain by some of the Soldiers, which did break in upon him. Some think that
it was he, and not Architas which made the Dove, of which it is written that
it was so equally poysed, that being thrown up into the air, it would hover
or flutter there, and in a good space not fall down.

This was in times past Sicily once a kingdom. 2 Famous Tyrants in it.
a Kingdom, where the two Tyrants, the elder and the younger Dionysius did
reign, where Gelo also, that great friend to the Romans did remain.

It was afterward made a Province, and governed by the Praetor or Deputy of the
Romans: whereof Verres was one, who was so inveighed against by Tully.

It grew afterward to be a Kingdom again, in so much that Tancredus was King
of Sicily, which entertained our Richard the first, when with Philip, the King
of France, he went to the Conquest of the Holy Land. Here was likewise The
tyrant Phalaris. The tyrannies of Sicily were very famous.
Phalaris the Tyrant so famous, King of Agrigentum.

The tyrannies which were used in Sicilie, were in times past so famous, that
they grew into a Proverb; as, Invidia Siculs non invenere Tyranni, tormentum
majus; but they who were the causes of all, did oftentimes speed very ill
themselves, as appears by the elder Dionysius, who being driven out of his
Dominion, did flee into Italy, and was glad there to teach Children, that so
he might supply his necessity. His son grew more tyrannous than the father,
and stood so far in fear of his own people, that many times he caused
himself to be shut up in a Tower, and his Guard to keep the door, that no
body might come at him: he durst not trust his Harbor to shave or clip him,
Note, that cruelty is always attended with fear.
for fear of cutting of his throat: but that which was done, he caused his
Daughter to do, who with the thin inner skin of Walnuts being set on fire,
is said to have taken off the hair of his face.

This was he, whose felicity when Damocles a Flatterer did seem marveilously
to admire, Damocles the flatterer.
he caused him to be set one day at Dinner in his Royal Seat, with dainty
Fare before him, Plate, rich Hangings, Music, and all other matters of
delight; but withal a naked Sword, which was only tied with a single hair of
a Horses Mane, to be hanged directly over him; the fear whereof did so fear
the Flatterer, lest it should fall upon him, that he continually looked
upwards and about him, and took no joy of that which was before him: whereby
Dionysius did evidently teach him, that the State of some Princes, howsoever it
seem glorious, yet it does bring little contentment unto themselves, by reason
of the continual dangers which hang over them.

It is reported of this man, that when all the people of his Country did for
his cruelty continually curse him, there was one Woman which daily did go to
the Churches, and prayed the Gods to lengthen his life: wherewithal when
Dionysius was acquainted, marvelling himself at the reason of it, he sent for
her, and asked what good thing he had done unto her, that she was so careful
evermore to pray for him? Note ^ow the poor woman prayed soy this Tyrant.
But the woman answered, that it was not for love, but for fear that she
begged these things of the Gods: For (said she) I am an old woman, I do
remember when your Grandfather lived, who being very hard unto his people, was
much maligned by them, and they prayed that they might be rid of him: which
falling out, afterward your Father came in place, and he was worse than the
former: which when the Subjects could not endure, they prayed also that he
might die, hoping that the next would be better: Then came your self in
place, who have much exceeded the cruelty of your father: And whereas others
wish that you were gone also, trusting for amendment in the next, I that have
lived so long, and see that things grow worse and worse, do pray that you may
continue, because that if we should have one that should succeed you, if he
walk in the steps of his Predecessors, he must needs be as bad as the Devil
himself; for none else in tyranny can go beyond you.

A good note for all inventers of ^ortures and cruelty, and likewise for time
flatterers.
Phalaris of Agrigentum, was he who proposed rewards unto him who invented new
torments, which caused Perillus to make a Bull of Brass, into the which if
offenders should be put, and fire should be set under, then it would make
them roar like a Bull: But when upon the terror thereof none would so offend
(as to deserve that torment) Phalaris took Perillus, the Author thereof, and
to try the experience, put him into it, whereby Perillus lost his life.

This Country is now also under the King of Spain, who among other titles,
was wont to call himself King of both Sicilies, reckoning this Island for one,
and that part of Italy for another, which is now called Calabria, and was in
the Roman Histories named Magna Graecia.

There is nothing more renowned in all Cicilia, either with new or old Writers,
than the The Mountain Aetna.
Mountain Aetna, which being on the out side often covered with snow, yet by a
sulphurous or brimstony matter, does continually burn within: yea, so that
whereas it was supposed in the ages last before us, that the matter being
consumed, the sire had ceased; twice in our age it has broke forth again, to
the incredible loss of all the Country adjoining, the ashes thereof
destroying vines and fruits, which were within the compass of many miles about.

Agatheas in his History does tell, that in his own time there was an
incredible deal of ashes which did fall about Constantinople, and the places
near adjoining, in so much that the ground was covered with the same; which he
reputeth to have been brought from the Hill in Sicily. But Bodin, in his
Method. Hist. does reprove this as a fable, which can have no show of truth, by
reason of the great distance of the place: notwithstanding it is certain, that
sometimes when it does strongly break out, the Fields and Vineyards, and all
the fruits within the compass of some miles are much hurt therewithal.

The reason of the fire in the mountain of Aetna.
The reason of this Fire was laid down by Iustine in his fourth Book; and is
since approved both by Historians and Philosophers: which is, that within the
ground, there is great store of Sulphur and brimstony matter, which having
once fire in it, is apt to keep it. And whereas all the whole Country is full
of chinks and chaps, and hollownesse within the ground, the matter which
enters there, does minister substance to the continuance of that flame: as we
see that water cast on coals in the Smiths Forge does make them burn more
fervently: and then into the Chinkes and Chaps, the Wind does also enter,
which by blowing and whifling, does both cause the fire never to extinguish,
and sometimes (according unto the strength of the blast) does make flames
break out, either more or less.

There are in the Hill Aetna, two principal places which are like unto two
Furnaces, with Tunnels on the top of them, where diverse times, (but especially
in the Evening and Night) the flame does appear, mounting upwards; and it is
so strong, that oftentimes it brings up with it burnt and scorching stones, and
pieces of hard substances, which seems to be rent out of some Rock, to the
great terror and danger of any that do come near.

This is that place whither Empedocles threw himself, Note.
that he might be reported a God.

This is it whereof Virgil does make his Tract called Aetna: which the Poets
did report to be the Shop of Vulcan, where Cyclopes did frame the Thunderbolts
for Jupiter.

And to conclude, that is it, which some of our gross Papists have not feared
to imagine to be the place of Purgatory. As they have been so foolish to
think, that there is also another place called the Mount Veda in Jseland,
where souls have another Purgatory to be punished in; but there by cold,
which Surius in his Commentaries is so absurdly gross as to report and allow.

The Papists Purgatory is the fiery Aetna.
The Papists have show for their Purgatory in Aetna, out of that Book which is
commonly called by the name of the Dialogues of Gregory the Great: For in that
Book there are diverse things to that purpose. But our best Writers of late,
have discovered that that same Treatise is a counterfeit, being made by a later
Pope Gregory, and not by the first of that name, ordinarily called Gregorius
Magnus: who although he have in his Works diverse things tending to
Superstition, yet he was never so absurd as to write things so unprobable,
foolish, and grounded upon so bare reports as these were.

Such another Hill as the Mountain of Aetna is, was in time past Vesuvius, a
Hill in Campania, which is part of Italy; but this never had the like
continuance as that of Aetna, although in the time of Pliny, the fire did
break forth there, and so strongly, as that the elder Pliny, who spent all his
time in discovering? the secrets of Nature, pressing near to behold it, was
stifeled with the flame, smoke, or ashes, so that he The death of Pliny the
elder.
died in the place, as is most excellently described in the Book of his
Epistles by his Nephew the younger Pliny.

Not far from Sicily, on the South lies the little I Will called in old time
Melita: whence those Dogs come which are so much desired under the names of
Canes Melitenses.

Note.
This is the place where Saint Paul was cast up after his shipwreck in his
journey to Rome, where the Viper hanged on his hand, and did not hurt him.

This Country is now called Malta the only place for repelling the Turks.
Malta, and is one of the places most renowned in the world for repelling of
the Turks: When Soliman the Emperor of them did send against it a most mighty
Army, it was then defended by them, who are called the Knights of Malta, which
by Sea do great spoil to the Galleys of the Turk that pass that way.

There were in times past diverse Orders of Knights, and men that had vowed
themselves to adventure their lives and whole state, for the maintenance of
Christ's Religion, and some places of the Earth, against the Infidels and
Saracens.

The most ancient of all those, were called the The society of the Knights
Templers.
Templers, who were a great corporation or society, consisting of diverse
Gentlemen, younger brothers for the most part, out of all the Realms of
Christendom: Their chief charge was to defend the City of Jerusalem, and the
Relics or remainder of the Temple there, and Sepulcher of Christ: for the
preservation of which places, together with the rest of the Holy Land, they had
given unto them, and purchased for their money, very rich and ample possessions
in England, France, Spain, Jtaly, and other places of Europe, in so much that
in the days of Matthew Paris, he reports that they had under them many
thousands of Mannours.

They had also in every kingdom (where their Order was permitted) a great and
ample house, where some chief of their company did lie, who received the Rents
within that Kingdom, and caused the money to be transported into the Holy
Land, and other Ordinances to be made and executed belonging unto their Order:
of which houses, the Temple that is now in London was a chief one; which had
in f rmer times belonged to the Jews, but was afterward translated to that
use, when the Holy Land was quite taken by Saladine, and could never be
recovered into the hands of the Christians since the Society of these Templers
ceased: The Pope and the King of France, conspiring their ruin.
the Pope and the King of France conspiring their ruin, and their Lands were
dispersed into diverse men's hands.

In the same time when the Templers were in their strength, there was another
sort called the Hospitallers.
Hospitallers, whose condition and employment was very like unto the other,
both of them fighting for the preservation of Palest na.

We read that sometimes these two companies had great jarres between
themselves, whereby grew much hinderance to the Wars against the Infidels.

All these were accounted as Orders of Religion, and therefore it was forbidden
them at any time to marry, without dispensation from the Pope; because not
being entangled to Wife and Children, they might be more resolute to adventure
their lives.

After them grew up the order of the The Knights of Rhodes.
Knights of Rhodes, who since they could not live in the Holy Land, yet would
abide as near unto it as possible they might; and therefore partly to preserve
Pilgrims which should go to visit the Sepulcher of Christ, and partly to
infest the Turks and Saracens: but especially to keep the Enemies of Christ's
Faith from encroaching further upon Christendom: which most earnestly they
did, and do desire: they placed themselves in the Islands of Rhodes, where
daily doing great scath unto the Turk, Solomon the great Warrior could not
endure them, but with a mighty Army so over-laid them, that he won the
Island from them.

The Knights of Malta.
After the loss of Rhodes, the Island of Malta was given unto these Knights by
Charles the Fifth Emperor; whereupon they are now called the Knights of Malta;
for the great Master after he came from Rhodes, went into Candy, and from
thence into Sicily, and so into Jtaly, from thence he made a Voyage into
England, and then into France, and lastly into Savoy, from whence he departed
with the Religion into this Island, and there they continue and behave
themselves as in the former Island; and offering no violence unto Christians,
they much hinder the courses of the Turks from Graecia and Asia, and of the
other Saracens from Fez and Morocco. They are very valiant men, fit to do
great service, either by Land or Sea, as appeared when Solomon did think to
have surprised them and their Island: the description of which war is
diligently laid down by Caelius secundus Curio, in a Treatise dedicated to
Elizabeth Queen of England.

There has been diverse other Orders of Knights, yea, and some of them reputed
to be a kind of Religion in Portugal, France, England, Burgundy, and some
other places of Christendom; but because their service has not been employed
purposely, as these which are before mentioned, we do not touch them in this
place.

Near unto Graecia and Peloponnesus, on the West side toward Italy, is the
Jle of Corcyra, now termed The Isles Corfu.
Corfu; and not far South from that, is Cephalenia.
Cephalenia; and from thence South is Zon.
Zon, called by Virgill, Nemorosa Zacynthus; al^ which Islands are at this day
under the Venetians.

The greatest The commodities of the country.
commodity which that Country does yield, are Currants, which are gathered of a
kind of small Grapes; and for the making whereof, they commonly one time every
summer, for the space of three weeks, have a continual drought, day and
night, in which time, the Currants are laid abroad in the open air, and may not
be taken in; insomuch, that if the season do continue hot and dry, their
Merchandise is very good; but if there fall any rain until the time be
expired of their full drying, the Currants are not good, but do mould and
change their color to be somewhat white, like meal. The state of Venice,
under whom this Island is, does make a great commodity of the impost, or
taxation, which is laid upon this Merchandise, calling the Tribute which is
paid for them, the The Impost laid on this Island, called the Revenue of S.
Mark.
Revenue of S. Mark: for unto that Saint is the City of Venice dedicated, and
they hold him for their Patron.

In this Island (besides the Merchants who repair thither) are diverse Italians,
who be there in Garrison for the Venetians, in one special Castle, which
commands the whole Island.

There are also diverse Friars (...) that Nation, who perform unto their
Contrymen such exercises of Religion as are convenient.

They will not suffer any of our Merchants to have Christian burial among them,
unless at his death he be confessed after the Romish fashion: whereupon some
have been forced to convey over some (...) their dead bodies into Morea (which
is not far distant) to be buried there among the Greeks and after their
fashion.

The natural Inhabitants (...) Zant, the Inhabitants Greeks.
Zant, and Greeks, both by Language and Religion, and observ^ all fashions of
the Greekish Church in whose words (being now much corrupted and depraved)
there may yet be found some tokens and remainders of the old, pure, and
uncorrupted Greek.

There are in this Country great store of Swine kept, whereof the Inhabitants
do feed, and carry them into Morea; but the Turks there (by their Mahumetane
profession) will taste no Swines flesh.

In Zacynthus our English Merchants have an House of abode for their traffic.
South-east from Morea lies the great Island Creta.
Creta, where Minos sometimes did reign, so famous for his severity.

This Country was then called Hecatompolis, as having in it an hundred Towns
and Cities.

Here stood the The Labyrinth of Dedalus.
Labyrinth, which was the work of Dedalus, who conveyed the house so by the
manifold turnings, infiniteness of Pillars and Doors, that it was impossible
to find the way; yet Theseus (by the help of Ariadne the Daughter of King
Minos) taking a bottom of thread, and tying the one end at the first door,
did enter and slay the Minotaur, which was kept there, and afterward returned
safe out again.

The most noted liars.
The ancient Inhabitants of this Country, were such noted liars, that beside
the Proverbes which were made of them, as Cretense mendacium, and Cretisandum
est cum Cretensibus, the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to Titus, who was left
there by him as Bishop of that Island, does cite a verse out of the Heathen Poet
Epimenides, that the Cretians are ever liars, evil beasts, and slow bellies.

The Island Candie.
This Island is in our days, called Candy, being the place from whence our
Sugar of Candy is brought. It is under the Venetians, and reputed a part of
their Seigniory: Although the Turk, when they had taken Cyprus, did think
also to have surprised it: but that it pleased GOD by the means of Don John of
Austria, in the behalf of his brother the King of Spain, and the Venetians,
to give the Turk that great overthrow at Sea, in the fight near unto Lepanto.
Yet since that time (no doubt) the Turks have a greedy eye upon the Island of
Candy.

Between Creta and Peloponnesus, lies Cithera where was the fine Temple of
Venus.
Cithera. There was the fine Temple of Venus, who thereof by the Poets, is
called Citheraea. The Islands are many, which lie in the Sea called Mare
Aegeum, from the bottom of Greece, unto the top of the Hellespont, as all the
Cyclads, Euboia, and the great Island Samos, and Chios; ^o Scyros where
Achilles was borne, and was King of that Country: There is also Lesbos and
Diverse small Islands.
Cemnos, Mytelene, and Ithaca where Ulysses was King, and Androse, whither
Themistocles was sent by the Athenians for Tribute, as Plutarch lays down
the History: Note.
Themistocles did tell them that he came to demand Tribute, or some great
Imposition upon them, being accompanied with two Goddesses, the one was
(Eloquence) to persuade them; and the other (Violence) to enforce them.
Whereunto the Andraeans made answer, that they had on their side two Goddesses
as strong, whereof the one was (Necessity) whereby they had it not; and the
other was (Impossibility) whereby they could not part with that which they
never possessed. Of these places, something may be read in the old History of
the Greeks. Diverse of these did strive that Homer was borne in them; but of
certain, many of those Kings which Homer says came with Agamemnon to the
siege of Troy, were Kings but of those small Islands.

Eastward from thence, not far from some part of Natolia, or Asia the lesser,
is the The Island of Rhodes.
Island of Rhodes, the friendship of the Inhabitants whereof was in ancient time
very much defired by the Princes that had to do that way: so that Alexander
first, and the Romans afterward, did embrace their league.

Here was that huge and mighty Image of the Sun, which was called Colossus
Rhodius.

This Country was long defended by those who were called the Knights of
Rhodes, against the power of the Turk, and it was a great Bulwark to defend
Christendom, till that in the year one thousand five hundred twenty and one,
Solomon the Great Turk, did win it from the Christians by force.

From thence Southward is the I Will The I Will Carphathus.
Carphathus: but in the farthest end of the East part of the Mediterranean, is
The I Will of Cyprus.
Cyprus, which about three hundred years since, was a Kingdom, and did afford
great aid unto the Christians that went to conquer the Holy Land; but it is
now under the Turk. The chief City thereof is The City of Famogusta.
Famogusta, which is an Archbishops Sea: for Christians, for their Tribute, do
yet live there. In this Country in old time was Venus much honored, and
therefore she was called Cypria, as also Paphia, because she had a Temple in a
City there called The City Paphos.
Paphos.

The Island Tyrus.
Near unto Syria stood the Island Tyrus: against the pride whereof, the Prophets
do much speak: this was a rich City for Merchandise and Navigation in old
time; and is the place from whence Dido, and the builders of Carthage did come.

The destruction of it is most famous by Alexander the Great. Of the rest of
the small Islands we do say nothing.

Of the Islands in the Jndian Sea.
THe Islands are very many that do lie in the Seas adjoining to the East-
Indies; but the most famous among them shall only be touched. Among old
Writers, as especially appears by Solinus, was well known that which was
then called Taprobana, which lies near the Aequinoctiall Line. It was in that
time a Monarchy, where the Kings reigned not by succession, but by election:
and if any of them did grow intolerable, he was deposed and enforced to die,
by withdrawing from him all things necessary. This is now called The Island of
Sumatra.
Sumatra, and has in it diverse Kings.

Not far from thence lie Eastward the two Islands called Two Jlands, Iava
major and Iava minor
Javamajor, * Java-minor; which were all known to the old Writers, as in
general may be noted, that all the East-part either in the Continent, or in
the Islands, have very many small Kings and Kingdoms.

From whence yet more East, lies a great number of Isles, which are now called
the The Islands of Moluccoes, the great Riches which the King of Spain receives
from hence yearly
Moluccoes, which are places as rich for their quantity as any in the World;
from these it is that the Spaniards have yearly so great quantity of all
kinds of Spice, neither is there any place of all the East- Indies, that does
more richly furnish home their Carrects, then do these Moluccoes.

The Islands which are called by that name are by some of our Writers accounted
to be at least four and twenty or five and twenty; and some of them which
are the bigger, have in them two or three Kings a piece: and some of them which
are less, are either the several Dominion of several Kings, or else two or
three of them do belong to some one Prince. Note.
When Sir Francis Drake did compass the whole World, he came near unto
these, but did not touch at any of them; but Master Candish taking at large a
journey, was in one or more of them, where he found the people to be
intelligent and subtle, and the Kings of the Country to take upon them as
great state as might be convenient for such petty Princes.

Some of these Islands the Spaniards in right of the Portugals have got into
their own possession, with the Kings of some other they have leagued; and a
third sort utterly detest them. More Northward over against China, lies a
Country consisting of a great many Islands called Iapona, of The Island of
Iapan.
Iapan, the people whereof are much of the same nature with the men of China:
this Country was first discovered by the Jesuits, who in a blind zeal have
traveled into the farthest parts of the World to win men to their Religion.
This Island is thought to be very rich.

About the parts of Iapan, there are diverse people, whose most ordinary
habitation is at the Sea, and do never come into the Land, but only for their
necessities, or to furnish themselves with new vessels, wherein they may abide;
but lying not far from the Land, they have Ducks, and other Fowls swimming
about them, which sometimes they take into their Boats and Ships, and in such
sort do breed them, to the maintenance of them and their Children.

Into this Iapan of late days have our English also sailed, as into other
parts, of the East- Indies, and there erected a Factory.

The rest that be either near unto Asia or Africa, because there is little
written of them, we pass over, Div^rs small Iionds only named.
only naming them, as the Philippina, Borreo, Bandara: as also on the side of
Afric, the Island of Saint Laurence, called by the Inhabitants Madagascar,
Sumatra, and other of less note: And yet we do find in Solinus and Pliny,
but especially in Pomponius Mela, that it was known in old time, that there
were many Islands near unto the East- Indies, which as it might be first
discovered by the trafficking of the Ilanders into the Continent; so no doubt
that Navy which Alexander sent out to Jndia to descry and coast through the
Eastern Seas, did give much light thereunto, partly by that which themselves
did see, and partly by those things which they heard in such places, or of such
persons as they met with in their travel.

Of the Islands in the Atlanticke Sea.
THere be many Islands which be westward from Africa, and from Europe: as those
which are called the Island of Gorgades.
Gorgades, that lie in the same climate with Guinea, which are four in number,
not inhabited by men, but they are full of Goats. Peter Martyr in his first
Decade, the sixth Book, says that the Admiral Colonus, in the year of Christ
1498 sailing to Hispaniola with eight Ships, came to the I Will The I Will Madera.
Madera, from whence sending directly the rest of his Ships to the East-
Indies, he in one Ship with deckes and two Carayels sailed to the
Equinoctial, between which and the I Will Madera, in the midst way, lie
thirteen Islands of the Portugals, in old time called Hesperides.
Hesperides, now Cabonerde, two days sailing distant from the inner parts of
Ethi^pe: one whereof is called. Bonavista.
Bonavista, Northward from thence, in the same climate with the South part of
Morocco, lie those which are called Canariae Islands.
Canariae, or the fortunate Islands, which are seven in number: being most
fruitful and very pleasant, and therefore called by that name, Fortunatae
insulae, This is famous in them, that it has pleased all Cosmographers to make
their Meridian to be their first point where they do begin to reckon the
computation of their Longitude, and unto them after three hundred and
threescore Degrees to return again.

From these Islands it is, that those strong and pleasant Sacks, which are
called From hence the best Canary Sack^s.
Canary Wines are brought; and from thence are fetched those that they call
Canary Birds. These Islands are under the Crown of Spain: The heat of the
Country is very great, and therefore fitter for concoction; but besides that,
the soil of it self is accommodated thereunto, and by reason of them, both
these Islands do bring forth a Grape, which is sweeter in taste then any other
Grape, and has that property with it, that the Wine which is made thereof,
does not fume into the head, like other Sack, but does help the stomach, and
exercise the force of it there. The slips of their Vines have been brought
into Spain and some other places of Europe, but they have not sorted to the
same purpose, as they do in their native Country.

There do grow also in these Isles, From hence great store of Sugarcanes*
good store of Sugarcanes, which yield plentifully that kind of commodity
unto Spain, either for Marmalets (wherein they much delight) or for other uses.

Peter Martyr in the beginning of his Decades, which he has written De Orb
novo, does particularly touch the names, and some other things of these Islands.

On the backe-side of Africa also just under the Aequinoctiall, is the The I Will
of S. Thomas.
I Will of Saint Thomas, inhabited by the Portugals; which Island was taken in the
latter time of Queen Elizabeth by the Dutch: it is reported that in the
midst of this Island is an Hill, (and over that a continual Cloud, wherewith
the whole Island is watered, (such a like thing as this is reported of the The
I Will of Cloves.
Isle of Cloves:) The air of this Island is unwholesome, and there is hardly
seen any Portugal or stranger that comes to dwell there, which lives till he
be above forty years of age.

More Northward from Afric lie those Islands which are called The Islands of
Azores.
Azores Insulae, being six or seven in number: of which Tercera is one of the
chief, of whom, the rest by some are called Terceras, which are far
inferior in fruitfulness unto the Canaries, These were first under the Crown
of Portugal, and one of them was the last which was kept out from the King of
Spain, by the Prior Don Antonio, who afterward called himself King of
Portugal; but the Spaniard at last took this Tercera from him, and does
possess all these Islands, together with the rest of the Dominion, which did
belong to the Portugals.

He who list to see the unadvised proceedings of Don Antonio, both in parting
with Lisbon, Note the unadvisednesse of Don Antonio.
and the rest of Portugal, as also in losing these Islands which last of all
held out for him, let him read Conestagio of the uniting of Portugal to the
Crown of Castile. But these Azores have in times past yielded much Oade, which
thereupon in England was called Jsland Oade; but now they are the place where
the Spaniards do commonly touch, and take in fresh water, both going and
coming to and from America, finding that to pass directly without turning on
either hand toward America is very hard, by reason of the strong current of
the water from the Gulf of Mexico, and so forward to the East: and therefore
they are enforced either to go lower to the South, and so to water in some
part of Guinea, or thereabout, or else to keep up as high as these Islands.

Of America, or the new World.
ALthough some do dispute out of Plato, and the old Writers, that there was
not only a guess, but a kind of knowledge in ancient time, that besides
Europe, Asia, and Africa, there was another large country lying to the West,
yet he that shall advisedly peruse the conjectures made thereupon, may see that
there is nothing of sufficiency to enforce any such knowledge, but that all
Antiquity was utterly ignorant of the new found Countries toward the West.
Whereunto this one argument most forcible may give credit, The people of
America utterly void of all manner of God, or goodness.
that at the first arriving of the Spaniards there, they found in those places,
nothing showing traffic, or knowledge of any other Nation; but the people
naked, uncivil, some of them devourers of men's flesh, ignorant of shipping,
without all kind of learning, having no remembrance of History or writing
among them; never having heard of any such Religion as in other places of the
World is known, but being utterly ignorant of Scripture, or Christ; or Moses,
or any God, neither having among them any token of Cross, Church, Temple, or
Devotion, agreeing with other Nations. The reasons which are gathered by some
late Writers out of Plato, Seneca, and some other of the Ancient are rather
conjecturall, The reasons conjecturall of a new found World.
that it was likely that there should be some such place, then any way
demonstrative, or concluding by experience, that there was any such Country:
and the greatest inducement which they had to persuade themselves that there
was any more Land toward the West then that which was formerly known, was
grounded upon this, that all Asia, Europe, and Africa, concerning the Longitude
of the World, did contain in them but 180 Degrees: and therefore it was most
probable, that in the other 180, which fills up the whole course of the Sun
to the number of 360 degrees, GOD would not suffer the water only to possess
all, but would leave a place for the habitation of men, beasts, flying and
creeping creatures.

I am not ignorant that some, who make too much of vain shows, out of the
British Antiquities have given out to the World, and written something to that
purpose, that Arthur sometimes King of Britain, had both knowledge of these
parts, and some Dominion in them: for they find (as some report) that King
Arthur had under his government many Islands and great Countries toward the
North and West: which one of some special note has interpreted to signify
America, and the Northern parts thereof, and thereupon have gone about to
entitle the Some have entitled the Queen of England Sovereign of these
Provinces.
Queen of England to be Sovereign of those Provinces, by right of Descent
from King Arthur. But the wisdom of our State has been such, as to neglect
that opinion, imagining it to be grounded upon fabulous foundations, as many
things are which are now reported of King Arthur; only this does carry some
show with it, that now some hundred of years since, there was a Knight of
Wales, who with shipping and some pretty Company, did go to discover those
parts, whereof as there is some record of reasonable credit amongst* the
Monuments of Wales, so there is this one thing which gives pregnant show
thereunto, that in the late Navigation of some of our men to Norumbega, and
some other Northern parts of America, they find some tokens of civility and
Christian Religion; but especially they do meet with some words of the Welsh
Language; as that a bird with a white head should be called Pengwinn, and other
such like: yet because we have no invincible certainty hereof, and if any
thing were done, it was only in the Northern and worse parts: and the
intercourse betwixt Wales and those parts, in the space of diverse hundred
years, was not continued, but quite silenced: we may go forward with that
opinion, that these Western Jndies were no way known to former ages.

God therefore remembering the Prophecy of his Son, that the Gospel of the
Kingdom should before the day of judgment, be preached in all coasts and
quarters of the World, and in his mercy intending to free the people, or at the
least some few of them, from the bondage of Satan (who did detain them in
blockish ignorance) and from their Idolatrous service unto certain vile
spirits (whom they call their Zemes, Their Religion.
and most obsequiously did adore them) raised up the spirit of a man worthy of
perpetual memory (one Columbus the first discoverer of America.
Christophorus Columbus, borne at Genua in Italy) to set his mind to the
Discovery of a new World, who finding by that compass of the old known World,
that there must needs be a much more mighty space (to the which the Sun by
his daily motion did compass about) then that which was already known and
discovered; and conceiving that this huge quantity might as well be land as Sea,
he could never satisfy himself till that he might attempt to make proof of
the verity thereof.

Being therefore himself a private man, and of more virtue then Nobility,
after his reasons and demonstrations laid down, whereby he might induce men
that it was no vain thing which he went about, he went unto many of the
Princes of Christendom, and among others to Henry the seventh, King of
England, desiring to be furnished with shipping, and men fit for such a
Navigation: but these men refusing him, partly because they gave no credit to
his Narration; and partly lest they should be derided by their neighbor
Princes, if by this Genoe-stranger they should be cousened; but especially, for
that they were unwilling to sustain the charges of shipping, at last he
betook himself unto the Court of Ferdinandus, and Elizabeth, King and Queen
of Castile, where also at the first he found but small entertainment, yet
persisting in his purpose without weariness, and with great importunity, it
pleased God to move the mind of Elizabeth the Queen, to deal with her husband
to furnish forth two Ships, for the discovery only, and not for conquest:
whereupon In the year 149. America discovered by Columbus.
Columbus in the year one thousand four hundred ninety and two, accompanied
with his brother Bartholomeus Columbus, and many Spaniards sailed far to the
West, for the space of threescore days and more, with the great indignation
and often mutinies of his company, fearing that by reason of their long
distance from home, they should never return again; insomuch that the
General, after many persuasions of them to go forward, was at length enforced
to crave but three days, wherein if they saw not the Land, he promised to
return; and God did so bless him, to the end that his voyage might not prove
in vain, that in that space, one of his Company did epsy fire, which was a
certain^ Argument that they were near to the Land; as it fell out indeed.

The first Land whereunto they came, was an Island, called by the Inhabitants
The Island Haity
Haity, but in remembrance of Spain from whence he^ came, he termed it
Hispaniola and finding it to be a Country full of pleasure, The riobes of the
Country.
and having in it abundance of Gold and Pearl, he proceeded further, and
discovered another big I Will, which is called The Island Cuba.
Cuba, of the which being very glad, with great treasure he returned unto
Spain, bringing joyful news of his happy success.

When Columbus did adventure to restrain the time of their expectation within
the compass of three days, engaging himself to return if in that space they
saw no Land; there be some write, that he limited himself not at all
adventures; but that be did by his eye discern a difference in the color of
the Clouds which did arise out of the West, from those which formerly he had
seen; which Clouds did argue by the clearenesse of them, that they did not
arise immediately out of the Sea, but that they had passed over some good space
of the Land, and thereby grew clearer and clearer, not having in them any new
or late risen vapors, but this is but conjecturall.

The pride of the Spaniard laboring to abscure the same of Columbus.
The Spaniards, who are by nature a people proud, have since the death of
Columbus labored to obscure his fame, envying that an Italian or stranger
should be reported to be the first discoverer of those parts.

And therefore have in their writings since, given forth that there was a
Spaniard which had first been there, and that Columbus meeting with his Cards
and Descriptions, did but pursue his enterprise, and assume the glory to
himself.

But this fable of theirs does savor of the same spirit wherewithal many of
them in his life time did reproach him, that it was no matter of importance to
find out these Countries, but that, if that he had not done it, many other
might and would. Which being spoken to Columbus at a solemn Dinner, he called
for an Egg, and willed all the Guest^one after another to set it up on end.
Which when they could not do, he gently bruising the one end of it, did make
it flat, and so set it up, by imitation whereof each of the other did the same:
whereby he mildely did reprove their envy toward him, and showed how easy it
was to do that which a man had seen done before.

To go forward therefore: Columbus being returned to Castile, after his welcome
to the Princes, was made Great Admiral of Spain, and with a new Fleet of
more Ships was sent to search further, which he accordingly did, and quickly
found the main Land, not far from the Tropic of Cancer.

Which part of the Country, in honor of Spain, he called Hispania nova.
Hispania nova; in respect whereof at this day, the King of Spain does entitle
himself Hispaniarum Rex.

Some there be which write, that Columbus did not discover further than the
Islands; and that he spent the greatest part of his former labors in coasting
Cuba and Hispaniola, to see whether they were Islands, or a Continent; and that
some other in the mean time did thrust themselves forward and descryed the
firm Land: Among whom Of whom this Country had its name.
Americus Vespucius was the chief, of whose name a great part of the Country
is called at this day America.

They found the people both of the main Land and Islands very many in number,
naked, without Clothes or Armor; sowing no Corn, but making their Bread of a
kind of Root, which they call Maiz. Men most ignorant of all kind of
Learning, admiring at the Christians, as if they had been sent down from
Heaven, Manner of the prople.
and thinking them to be immortal, wondering at their Ships, and the Tacklings
thereof; for they had no Ships of their own, but big Troughes, which they
call their Canoes: being made hollow (of the body of a Tree) with the sharp
bones of Fishes: for Iron or such like Instruments they have none.

Although it do appear, that by the Wars of one of their petty Princes, or
Kings, whom they call Cassickes, had against another, many thousands of the
Inhabitants of those Countries were continually wasted and spoiled: yet the
number of them was so great, in every part of the West Indies, that in
Hispaniola alone, there were supposed to be by computation of the Spaniards
(first arriving there) not so few as 2000000, which yet by the The cruelts of
the Spaniards.
cruelty of the Spaniards were so murdered, and otherwise made away, that
within fifty years after, as their Writers report, there were scant any
thousands in that Island remaining of them.

The like is to be said of the populousness of other Coasts and quarters there.

The Their Armor.
Armor which those people did wear, when they entered into the Wars was
nothing but some slight covering, either made of Wood or shells of Fishes, or
of Cotton-wooll, or some such foolish matter. For they had no use at all of
Iron or Steel; but the most part of them came without any kind of clothing,
or covering, yet armed with Bows and Arrows, which were made sharp in the
end with the scraping of Fish-bones, or with Fishbones themselves put on the
end like an Arrow-head; and that oftentimes they dipped in a kind of most
venomous poison: Some other of them had for their Weapons great Clubs,
wherewith they did use to beat out the brains of those with whom they did
combat.

Note their Bread.
They had amongst them no good nor wholesome food, for even that Maiz, whereof
they made their bread, had in the root thereof a most venomous kind of liquor,
which is no better than deadly poison, but they crush out that juice, and
afterward do prepare the root, so that it makes them a kind of Bread.

No good Literature amongst them.
There was no sort of good Literature to be found amongst them, nay they could
not so much as distinguish any times, the one from the other, but by a blockish
kind of observation of the course of the Moon, according to which they made
their computation; but without any kind of certainty, saving for some few
Months which were lately past, but for the set calculating of ought which was
done diverse years before, they could do nothing therein, but only grossly
aim at it.

But that in all ages it has appeared, that Satan has used ignorance as one
of the chiefest means whereby to increase Idolatry, and consequently to
enlarge his Kingdom; it were otherwise incredible, that any who have in them
reason, and the shape of men, should be so brutishly ignorant of all kind of
true Religion, Devotion, and Understanding.

For the adoration which they do give, was only unto certain foul Spirits,
which they call by the name of their Zemes. In remembrance of whom, diverse of
them did keep in their houses certain things made of cotton wool, in the
manner of Puppets, or like Childrens Babies, and to these they did yield a
Reverence, supposing some divine nature to be in them, because sometimes in the
evening, Note how the Divill did strangely delude th^se people.
and in the night time they had such illusions offered unto them, as that they
saw these their Puppets to move and stir up and down in their houses, and
sometimes to utter voices, and give diverse significations of such things as
they would have to be done, or not to be done: Yea, and that with such effect
from the Devil also, that if their wills, and commandments were not fulfilled,
there was some vengeance or punishment executed upon them or their Children,
the more to keep them in awe and servilitie to the great enemy of Mankind.

Not long after the Spaniards entered those parts, there were in diverse of the
Islands, and some part of the Main, such incredible Tempests and Disturbances
of the Air, by Wind and Rain, Thunder and Lightning, as that the like had
never been seen nor heard of in the memory of man: which are ordinarily
interpreted to be the special work of the Devil: who not unfitly is termed
by Saint Paul the Prince of the Air, as having a liberty given him of God,
there sometimes to do strange Executions: and of likelihood, he did make
these stirs, Note the malice of Satan.
either grieving that the name of Christ was at all brought into those parts,
or else seeking to fright the Inhabitants from associating themselves with
those who brought (although but superstitiously) the knowledge of God, and the
Redeemer, being desirous that they should look for more such distemperatures
and vexations, if they would confederate themselves with them.

he ad^tion of (...) ople be ap^^^ of the (...), and ^^ping
The people were so ignorant of all humane and civil conversation, and
trafficking into those parts, at the first coming of the Christians thither,
that they thought they could never sufficiently admire their persons, their
Shipping, or any other thing which they brought with them: Whereupon they
without ceasing, gazed on the manner of their Ships, seeing them to be so
great, and consisting of diverse Plancks: But they were never satisfied with
staring upon their Mastes, Sails, Cables, and other Ropes and Tacklings,
whereunto they had never beheld any thing like before: and yet nature and
necessity had taught them to make unto themselves certain Vessels for the Sea,
of some one tree, which they did use to get down, not with cutting, but with
fire: and when it lay along upon the ground, they did use also fire, either to
burn away that which was tough and unfit without, or to make it hollow within:
although they have also the shells and bones of Fishes, whereby they made it
smooth.

But some of these Troughes or Canoes were so great, that sometimes above
twenty men have been found rowing in one.

The mighty bigness of the Trees of ^rasile.
The Trees of America, but especially in Brasilia, being so huge, that it is
reported of them, that several Families have lived in several Arms of one
Tree, to such a number as are in some petty Village, or Parish in Christendom.

They conceived them to be some Gods.
Among other strange opinions, which they conceived of the Spaniards, this was
one, that they were the Sons of some God, and not borne of mortal seed, but
sent down from Heaven unto them: and this conceit was the stronger in them,
because at the first, in such conflicts as they had with them, they could kill
few or none of them: the reason whereof was, partly the Armor of the
Spaniards, and partly the want of Iron and Steel upon the Arrows which the
Americans did shoot: but they were not very long of that opinion, that they
were immortal, but reformed their error, both by seeing the dead corpse of
some of the Christians, and by trying an experiment upon some of them also: for
they took of them, and put their heads under the water, and held them till
they were choked; by which they knew them to be of the same nature as other
men.

They admired and feared a Letter.
Among other points which did show the great ignorance, and unlettered stupidity
of these Indians, this was one, that they could not conceive the force of
writing of Letters; in so much that when one Spaniard would send unto another,
being distant in place, in India with any Provision, and would write a Letter
by him, what the fellow had received from him: The poor Indian would marvel
how it should be possible that he to whom he came should be able to know
all things which either himself brought, or the sender directed: And thereupon
diverse of them did think, that there was some kind of Spirit in the Paper,
and marvellously stood in fear of such a thing as a Letter was.

This Country yields great abundance of strange Herbs, the like whereof are
not to be found in other parts of the World: Some very rare Beasts.
as also some very rare Beasts, as one among the rest, who by Peter Martyrs
description, has some part like an Elephant, some part like an Horse, and
diverse other parts like diverse other Beasts; Nature having studied to express
a great many several Creatures in one.

There are also found at the Sea, or within some Rivers, The Sea Crocodiles.
Crocodiles, but not of that hugeness as those that breed in Egypt, in the
River Nilus, whereof some are described by Pliny, to be at the least four
and twenty Cubits in length, which argues the Crocodile to be the greatest
Creature in the World, that comes of an Egg.

Some rare stones.
There are also thereabouts, some extraordinary Stones growing in the Land, as
above others, the Blood stones, whereof there are great store: but especially
there is one thing of great beauty and worth, that is, the abundance of
Pearls, which are taken in Shell fishes, and are of as great quantity, as any
that be in the Seas near to the East Judies: so that the true cause of the
plenty of Pearl in Europe, in this our age, beyond that incomparably which
has been in the days of our Forefathers, is to be ascribed to the Discovery
of these Newfound Lands.

Diverse trees not elsewhere found.
There are also here diverse trees which are not to be found elsewhere: and
many Roots, which serve for diverse purposes.

The abundance of Kine and Bulls.
Among other things (whereof there is great plenty in those Western parts) is
the abundance of Kine and Bulls: whereof they report, that there is such store
in Cuba and Hispaniola, that there are killed down diverse thousands every
year, whereof the Spaniard makes no other use, but to take the Tallow, or the
Hide; which serves them in their shipping, and for diverse other purposes, but
the flesh, of the most part of them, they suffer for to putrify, as making
little account of it: partly because of the heat of the Country, wherein they
eat little flesh, and partly because they have great store of Hens, and other
more dainty meat, whereupon together with fish they do very much feed.

It may seem a kind of miracle unto him who looks no higher than the
ordinary rules of Nature, and does not respect the extraordinary and unlimited
power of God: that whereas a great part of America does lie in the Zona
torrida, in the selfsame Climate with Aethiopia, and the hottest parts of the
East Jndies, where the Inhabitants are not only tawny, as all be in Egypt,
and in Mauritania, but also cole-blacke, and very Negroes; here there should
be no man whose color is black, except it be those which are brought out of
Africa, but that the people should be of a reasonable fair complexion: which
is to be ascribed only unto Gods peculiar Will, and not to that which some
foolishly have imagined, that the generative seed of those people should be
white, and that other of the Aethiopians black; for that is untrue, in as much
as the Aethiopians case does not differ from the quality of other men.

The Spaniards did find the people to be here most simple, The condition of the
people of America.
without fraud, giving them kind entertainment, according to their best
manner; exchanging for Knives, and Glasses, and such like toys, great
abundance of Gold and Pearl.

It is certain, that by the very light of Nature, and by the ordinary course
of humane shape, there were among this people very many good things, as
affability in their kind, Hospitality toward strangers, which had not
offended them, according to their ability, and open and plain behavior, Their
Religion.
yea, and in some parts of the West Indies there was an opinion in gross, that
the soul was immortal, and that there was life after this life: where beyond
certain Hills (they know not where) those which dyed in defense of their
Country, should after their departure from this life, remain in much
blessedness: which opinion caused them to bear themselves very valiantly in
their fights, either striving to conquer their enemies, or with very good
contentment enduring death (if it were their hap to be taken, or slain) in as
much as they promised themselves a better reward elsewhere: Tet many grievous
sins by them committed.
But withal, as it could not choose but be so, there were many other grievous
sins amongst them, as Adoration of Devils, Sodomie, Incest, and all kind of
Adultery: Ambition in very high measure; a deadly hatred each to other: which
proceeded all from the Fountain of ignorance wherewith Satan had blinded their
eyes: yet there were among them some which by a kind of blind Witchcraft,
had to evil purpose, acquaintance and intercourse with foul spirits.

Their Attire.
The manner of their Attire, or beautifying themselves, which diverse of these
people had severally in several parts, did seem very strange unto them who
came first into that Country. For some of them did adorn themselves with the
shells of Fishes, some did wear Feathers about their heads, some had whole
Garments made of Feathers, and those very curiously wrought, and placed
together of diverse colors: to which purpose they did most use the Feathers of
Peacockes, or Parrots, or such other Birds, whose covering was of diverse
colors. Yea, in very many places they had their lower lips bored through with
a great hole, and something put into them, as also into the upper parts of
their ears, being pierced in like manner: which as it seemed in themselves to
be a point of beauty, so it made them appear to other men to be wonderful
ugly.

Infinite store of Gold and Silver in America,
The quantity of Gold and silver which was found in those parts was incredible,
which is the true reason wherefore all things in Christendom (as Bodin. de
Repub. observes) do serve to be sold at a higher rate than they were in the
days of our Forefathers, when indeed they had not so: for as he notes, it
is the plenty of Gold and Silver which is brought from this America, that
makes money to be in greater store, and so may more easily be given than it
could be in the days of our Predecessors.

Precious Mines.
But for the thing it self, it is testified by all Writers that there were in
those parts very great Mines of the most precious Metals, that in the Banks of
Rivers, with the washing of the water, there was diverse times fretted out very
good and big pieces of Gold, which without melting or trying, was of
reasonable perfection; and the like was to be found in many places of the
Land, when the people did dig for their Husbandry, or for any other use.

This made the Inhabitants there (for the commonnesse of it) to account Gold
and Silver but as a vile thing, and yet by the reason of the color of it for
variety sake, to be mingled with the Pearl, diverse of them did wear it about
their necks and about their arms. And yet we do find that in some part of
the West Indies, the Kings did make some reckoning of Gold, and by fire did try
it out to the best perfection, as may appear by Attabaliba his ransom.
Attabaliba, who had a great House piled upon the sides with great wedges of
Gold ready tried, which he gave to the Spaniards for a ransom of his life,
and yet they most perfidiously did take his life from him.

The Country people exchanged it for any, bables.
But the mean account ordinarily which the people had of Gold, did cause them
very readily to bring unto the Spaniards at their first arrival great store of
that Metal which they very readily exchanged for the meanest Trifles, and
Gew-gaws, which the other could bring, even such things as wherewith Children
do use to play. But there was nothing more acceptable unto them, then Axes and
Hammers, Knives, and all tools of Iron, whereof they rather make account to
cut down their Timber, to frame it and to do other such necessaries, to their
convenient use belonging, than to fight or to do hurt each to the other, and
therein may appear the great variety of Gods disposition of his Creatures here
and there; when in all that main Continent of America, but especially in that
which lies between or near the Tropickes, there is no Iron or Steel to be
found, which without doubt gave great way to the Conquest of the strongest
places there, as of Mexico by name, when armed men with Gunnes, and other
instruments of War, were to fight against them which were little better then
naked; and it was rightly upbraided by one of his Contrymen to Ferdinandus
Cortesius, upon one of his returns from America, having made exceeding boast
of his great victories in those parts, and coming afterward in service into
Afric, where he being hardly laid unto by the Moors, and showing no valor
at all, it was remembered unto him, that it was an easy thing for him to do
all those exploits which he cracked so much of in the West- Indies, in as much
as the people there had nothing to resist.

They dreaded men on Horseback.
There was (...) ^^ing more dreadful to those ^^^rmed men, than the sight of
Horses and men riding upon them, whereof a very few did quickly over-beare many
thousands of them, even almost in the beginning of the discovery of those parts.

Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, then King and Queen of Castile, and after them
Charles the fifth, the Emperor, who succeeded in their right, partly to stir
up their subjects to action, and partly to procure unto themselves the more
treasure with less expense and trouble of their own, did give leave unto
diverse of their Subjects, that by special commission they might pass into
those parts, and there have several Quarters and Countries allotted unto them,
where they might dig and try out Gold and Silver, on condition, that they did
allow clear unto the King the The King had the fifth part for his tribute.
fifth part of such commodities as did arise unto them; and therefore near unto
every Mine and Furnace, the King had his special Officers, which did daily
attend and take up his Tribute. And to the end that all things might the better
be ordered, both there and in Spain (concerning the affairs of those
Countries) the King caused a A Coun. sell at Sivill for the government of
America.
Counsel, and Counsell-house, to be newly crected at Sivill, where all things
should be handled that did grow to any controversy: and where the
intelligences and advertisements might be laid up as in a place of Record,
which should from time to time be brought out of America: Of this Counsel,
Peter Martyr (who wrote the Decades) was one, and continued there till he was
very old: and therefore might upon the surest instructions set down these
things which he committed to story.

Note the Spaniards cruelty.
The desire of gain caused the Spaniards to seek further into the Countries:
but the tyranny and covetousness of the Spaniards was such, in taking from
them their goods, in deflowring their Wives and Daughters; but especially in
forcing them to labor in their Gold Mines without measure, as if they had
been Beasts, that the people detesting them, and the name of Christians for
their sakes, did some of them kill themselves, and the Mothers destroyed their
Children in their bellies, that they might not be borne to serve so hateful a
Nation: and some of them did in war conspire against them; so that by
slaughter and otherwise, the people of the Country are almost all wasted now
within a hundred years, being before many millions: and those which remain
are as slaves, and the Spaniards almost only do inhabit those parts. His
insolency and tyrannizing pride.
It is not unknown to all the parts of Europe, that the insolency of the
Spaniards is very great, even over Christians, tyrannizing, and playing all
outrages wheresoever they get men in subjection, and this makes them so
hateful to the Portugalls at home, to the Italians in Millaine and Naples, but
especially to the Low Country men, who have therefore much desired to shake
off the yoke of their Governor. Their beastly bas^^esse.
Besides that, they are men immoderately given to the lust of the Flesh, making
no conscience (even at home) even to get Bastards in their young days, and
reputing it no infamy unto them to frequent Harlots and Brothel-houses: but
when they are abroad, especially in Warlike Services, they are very outrageous,
impudently and openly deflowring men's wives and daughters. It may easily then
be guessed, what disorder they kept in the West Indies, where the Countries are
hot, and the Women were not able to resist their insolences, and how they did
tyrannize over the poor unarmed people, making them to drudge for them, not
only like slaves, but bruit beasts: which gross oversight of theirs, was at
the first so apparent, that all of good minds did complain thereof, as
appears by Peter Martyr himself, who in his Writing to the Pope, and other
Princes, does much deplore the ill usage of them; who in name were Christians,
toward those simple Infidels. And certainly, it caused many of them to Note
their 1 ^^ma^ity.
blaspheme the Name of GOD, and of Christ, and to renounce their Baptism
whereunto they were either forced or entreated, when they measured the God of
the Christians by the actions of his Servants, whom they found to be
Blasphemers and Swearers, riotous and great Drunkards, ravenous, tyrannous and
Oppressors, unsatiable, covetous, Fornicators, beyond measure given to
incredible Wantonness, and exercising even among themselves all kind of envy,
contention, murders, poysonings, and all sort of inhumane behavior.

Not long after the arrival of the Spaniards there, The Friars complaint of
their cruelty.
there were certain Friars and religious men, who moved with some zeal to
draw the people there to the Christian Faith, did travel into those parts,
that so they might spread abroad the Gospel of Christ: and when they came
there, beholding the intemperance of their Countrymen, which turned many away
from the profession of Religion, they were much moved in their hearts, and
some of them by Writings, and some other of them by traveling personally back
again into Spain, did inform the King and his Court, how dishonorable a
thing it was to the Name of Christ, that the poor people should be so abused:
and how improbable it was that those courses being continued, any of them would
hardly embrace the Faith.

The earnest Petition of these, caused Charles the Fifth, the Emperor and the
King of Spain, by his Edict and open Proclamation published in the West
Indies, to give liberty unto the Inhabitants and Naturals of the place, that
they should be in the state of Freemen, and not of bond: Note.
but his Subjects were so inured proudly to domineere over them, that this did
little amend the condition of the people.

Since these days (notwithstanding) the blind zeal of the Spaniards has
been such, as that the Kings have been at some cost, and other men also have
been at great charge to erect diverse Monasteries and Religious Houses there,
and many have taken the pains to go out of Europe, (as they think for Christ's
sake) to reside as Monks and Friars in America.

There be established some Bishoprics there, and other Governments
Ecclesiastical; and the Mass is there published, and Latin Service,
according to the custom of the Church of Rome; laboring to root out their
infidelity, but mingling the Christian Religion with much Popish Superstition.

By reason that the Country is exceeding rich and fruitful, the Spaniards
with great desire did spread themselves toward the North, where they found
some more resistance, although nothing in comparison of Wariours, but the
greatest of their labor was, to conquer the Kingdom of Mexico, Mexico
described.
which Mexico, is a City very great, and as populous almost as any in the
World; standing in the midst of a great Marsh or Fen. The Conqueror of this,
was Ferdinandus Cortesius, so much renowned in Spain unto this day.

If there were any thing at all in these West- Indies, which might savor of
civility, or any orderly kind of government, it was in the Kingdom of Mexico:
where it appeared unto the Spaniards, that there is a certain settled state,
which was kept within compass by some decrees and customs of their own: and
which was able to make some resistance (as it may be termed) if it be compared
with the other Inhabitants of America: although little, if it be conferred
with the courses of Christendom: But the policy of the Spaniards was, that by
private means they came to understand of a King that confined near unto
Mexico, who as he was of good strength, so was he of exceeding malice toward
these his Borderers, and by his Forces and intelligence, Ferdinandus Cortesius
and his Company came to have their will upon Mexico.

A great Lake.
In this Country there stands a very great Lake, which at the one end is
very large, and almost round; but toward the other end does contract it self
again into a narrow room, and then spreads wide again and round, only
about the third part of the compass of the greater end. In the lesser of the
two, there are set some Houses in four or five several places, which
represent our Villages: but in the greater part of the Lake stands Mexico it
self, being a City built of Brick, to a good and elegant proportion, where
the water issues into diverse streets of it, as it is in Venice, and from some
part whereof there are diverse Bridges unto the main Land, made also of Brick:
but from the other sides men do come by Boats, whereof there is abundant store
continually going in that Lake.

The Writers do record, that there is to be found in this City abundance of
all kind of Provision, but especially Fruits, and other delightful things,
which are brought in from other parts of the Country.

Mexico the chief City of all those quarters.
This was the chief City of all those quarters, before the arrival of the
Spaniards there, and in subjection thereunto were many large Provinces,
extending themselves every way: so that the King of this place was a Prince of
great estate: and accordingly thereunto, the Spaniards at this day have made it
their chief and Royal City, where the King keeps his Viceroy of Mexico for
the West Jndies, as he has his Viceroy at Goa for the East Indies: but from
thence have all the parts of America: (but especially that which they call
Hispania nova) their directions, and hence they fetch their Laws, Ordinances,
and Determinations, unless it be such great causes as are thought fit to be
referred to the Council of Spain.

The Gulf of Mexico.
The Sea which confineth nearest unto this City is called the Gulf of Mexico:
where as in diverse other Bays or Gulphes, the Stream or Current is such, that
Ships cannot pass directly to and fro, but especially out of the Gulf, but
they are forced to take their course, either high to the North, or low to the
South.

Diverse Islands in the Gulf of Mexico.
In and near unto this Gulf are diverse Islands, conquered and inhabited by the
Spaniards, as the forenamed Cuba, and Hispaniola, where the Spaniards were
visited by our English in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and their Towns of
Sancto Domingo, and Saint Iago, taken by Sir Francis Drake, as also Iarvaica,
and Boriquen, otherwise called the Island of Saint Phu, where the Earl of
Cumberland took the Town of Porto Ricco, and many other Islands of less note.

In the Sea coasts of all this Nova Hispania, the Kings of Spain have built
many Towns and Castles, and therein have erected diverse Furnaces and Forges,
for the Trying and Fining of their Gold.

They that do write of the discovery of the West- Indies, do report, that
when Columbus at the first went thitherward, in their greatest distraction and
doubtfulnesse of mind, whether to go forward or backward, and Columbus had
begged only two or three days respit, there was one of his Company, who after
the Sea manner, going up to discover the Land, did epsy some fire: for the
which being so happy and lucky a token, he did hope to receive at the hands of
the King of Spain, some bountiful Reward: but when he returned home, there
was Note,
nothing at all given unto him, which he took with that male contentedness
and disdain, that he fled over into Africa, and there among the Moors, did
apostatate and renounce the Christian Faith, so that he became a Sarazen.

Of the parts of America toward the North.
THe rumor of the discovery of these parts being blown over Christendom, and
the great quantity of the Land together with the fruitfulness thereof, being
reported abroad, some other nations did enterprise to set foot therein; as
namely the Frenchmen, who sent certain Ships to a part of this Country,
lying North from Hispania nova some few degrees, without the Tropicke of
Cancer; into which when they had arrived, because of the continual greenenesse
of the ground and Trees: (as if it had been a perpetual spring) they call it
And named it Florida.
Florida: where after some few of them had for a time settled themselves, the
Spaniards took notice of it, and being unwilling to endure any such
neighbors, they came suddenly on them, and most cruelly slew them all, without
taking any ransom. And the French in revenge of this deed of the Spaniards,
came in again afterward into this Country, and slew those that were the
slayers of their Country men. Yet the Spaniards, for want of men, are not able
to inhabit that Country, but leave it to the old people.

The French had built in Florida upon the The River Mayo.
River of Mayo, where they were visited by our Sir John Hawkins, a Fort which
they called Fort Carolin, and had reasonably assured themselves for their
defense against the Natives: but some malicious spirits amongst them fled to
the Spaniards, with whom they returned again into Florida to the murder and
overthrow of their own Countrymen.

He who list to see both the attempt of the Frenchmen for the inhabiting of
that part, and the usage of the Spaniards toward them; let him read the
Expedition into Florida, which is the end of Benzo his Story concerning the
New found World; and there he shall find both the covetous and insatiable
nature of the Spaniards; who would not endure the French near unto them,
although there was Land sufficient, and much to spare for both of them; also
their perfidiousnesse in breaking of Oaths and Promises, and their Note the
Spaniards unchristian cruelty.
unchristian cruelty, whereby they massacred all.

The Spaniards also to the number of three hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse
under the conduct of Ferdinando de Soto, entered Florida, about the year of the
Lord 1550, and there conquered a thousand miles wide and large, and after four
or five years continuance in that Country, betook themselves again from
thence, and went to New Spain, landing at Panuc in Ships and Vessels that
they had built in Florida. And in all that time notwithstanding many conflicts
with the Natives, and diverse discommodities and wants which they sustained in
the Country, they lost but two hundred men.

After this departure of the Spaniards out of Florida, brought thither by
Ferdinando de Soto, who died in the Country; after the defeat of the French,
and their revenge again taken on the Spaniards, the King of Spain sent
thither some small Forces to take possession of the Country, and set down
there: for no other end as it is thought, but to keep out other Nations from
entering there: the one half whereof set down on the River of Saint Augustine,
and the other half a dozen leagues from thence, to the Northward, at a place
by them called Saint Helena.

In the year 1586. as Sir Francis Drakes Voyage.
Sir Francis Drake came coasting along from Cartagena, a City in the main
Land to which he put over, and took it after he departed from Sancto
Domingo, when the mortality that was amongst our English had made them to give
over their Enterprise, to go with Nombre de Dios, and so over Land to
Pannaenia, there to have stricken the stroke for the Treasure: he was on the
Coast of Florida, in the height of thirty, our men described on the shore a
place built l^ke a Beacon, which was made for men to discover to Sea-ward: so
coming to the Shore, they marched along the Rivers side, till they came to a
Fort built all of whole Trees, which the Spaniards called the Fort of Saint
John, where the King entertained half his Forces that he then had in the
Country, which were a hundred and fifty Soldiers: the like number being at
Saint Helena, all of them under the government of Petro Melendez, Nephew to
the Admiral Melendez, that a fifteen or sixteen years before had been to
bring with our English in the Bay of Mexico; this Fort our English took, and
not far from thence the Town also of Saint Augustine upon the same River,
where resolving to undertake also the Enterprise of Saint Helena, when they
came to the Havens mouth, where they should enter, they durst not for the
dangerous shols: wherefore they forsook the place, coasting along to Virgina,
where they took in Master Ralph Lane and his Company, and so came into
England, as you shall hear when we speak of Virginia.

In these Northern parts of America, but especially within the maine
Continent, some have written (but how truly I cannot tell) that there is a
Sea, which has no intercourse at all with the Ocean: so that if there be any
third place beside the Mare Caspium, and the Mare Mortuum in Palestina, which
retains in it self great saltness, and yet mingleth not with other Seas, it
is in these Countries.

There is also in new Spain, a great salt Lake, as big or bigger then the
dead Sea of Palestine, in the midst of which stands the great City of
Tenustitan, or Mexico, the Mistress or imperial City of those parts: and on the
banks or sides of that Lake; many other Cities also beside, which though they
are but little in comparison of the greatness of Tenustitan, yet of themselves
are great. This Tenustitan is supposed to consist of sixty thousand houses, as
you may read in the third Chapter of the fifth of the Decades: and this City
standing in the midst and center of this salt Lake, go which way you will from
the Continent to the City, it is at least a league and an half or two
leagues, on the Lake unto it: some of the other Cities are said to be thirty,
some of forty thousand Houses: the names of these are Four Cities more in
America.
Mesiqualcingo, Coluacana, Wichilabasco, Iztapalapa, and others: the Lake
though it be in the midst of the Land, has his fluxus and refluxus, his
ebbing and flowing like the Sea, and yet seventy leagues distant from the Sea.

But certain it is, that toward the South of these parts which is the
Northern part of Hispania nova, above Mexico, there The burning Hill in
America.
is a burning Hill, which oftentimes breaks out into flames, as Vesuvius in
Campania, did in the time of the elder Pliny, and as Aetna has done many Ages
since and before.

Peter Martyr in the fifth of his Decads says, that eight leagues from
Tenustitan or Mexico, as Ferdinando Cortes went thither from the Chiurute
Calezthere, is a Hill called of the Inhabitants Popecatepeque, as much as to
say, a smokie Mountain, at the top whereof there is a hole of a League and a
half wide, out of which are cast A strange fire.
fire and stones, with Whirlewindes; and that the thickness of the ashes lying
about the Hill is very great. It is reported also elsewhere of this Hill, that
the flames and ashes thereof often times destroy the fields and Gardens
thereabouts. When Cortes went by it, he senten Spaniards, with Guides of the
Country, to see and make report thereof unto him: two of which ten venturing
further then the rest, saw the mouth of this fiery Gulf at the Hills top, and
had they not happily soon returned toward their Fellows, and sheltred
themselves under a Rock on the side of the Hill, such a multitude of stones
were cast out with the flame, that by no means they could have escaped.

Of Virginia, the first plantation.
The Englishmen also, desirous by Navigation to add some thing unto their own
Country, as before time they had traveled toward the farthest North part of
America; so lately finding that part which lies between Florida and Nova
Francia was not inhabited by any Christians, and was a Land fruitful and fit
to plant in: they sent thither two several times, two several Companies, as
Colonies to inhabit that part, which in remembrance of the Virginity of their
Queen, they called Virginia. But this Voyage being enterprized upon by private
men, and being not thoroughly followed by the State, the possession of this
Virginia, for that time was discontinued, and the Country left to the old
Inhabitans.

The second plantation.
I here was some English people, who after they had understood the calmnesse of
the Climate, and goodness of the foil, did upon the instigation of some
Gentlemen of England, voluntarily offer themselves, even with their Wives and
Children, to go into those parts to inhabit; but when the most of them came
there (upon some occasions) they returned home again the first time, which
caused that the second year, there was a great company transported thither,
who were provided of many necessaries, and continued there over a whole Winter,
under the guiding of Master Lane: but not finding any sustenance in the Country
(which could well brook with their nature) and being too meanly provided of
Corn and Victuals from England they had like to have perished with Famine; and
therefore thought themselves happy, when Sir Francis Drake, coming that way
from the Western Indies, would take them into his Ships, and bring them home
into their Native Country. Yet some there were of those English, which being
left behind, ranged up and down the Country (and hovering about the Sea
coast) made means at last (after their enduring much misery) by some Christian
Ships to be brought back again into England.

While they were there inhabiting, there were some children borne, and baptized
in those parts, and they might well have endured the Country, if they might
have had such strength as to keep off the inhabitants from troubling them in
tilling the ground, and reaping such Corn as they would have sowed.

The third plantation.
Again, in the days of our now reigning Sovereign, in the year of our Lord,
1606. the English planted themselves in Virginia, under the degrees 37, 38, 39.
where they do to this day continue, and have built three Towns and Forts, as
namely Iames-Towne and Henrico; Fort Henricke, and Fort Charles, with others,
which they hold and inhabit; sure retreats for them against the force of the
natives, and reasonably secured places against any power that may come against
them by Sea.

In the same height, but a good distance from the coast of Virginia, lies the
Island called by the Spaniards, La Bermuda, but by our English, the Of the
Summer Islands.
Summer Islands, which of late is inhabited also by our Contrymen.

Northward from them on the coast, lies Norumbega, which is the South-part of
that which the Frenchmen did, without disturbance of any Christian, for a time
possess. For the Frenchmen did discover a large part of America, toward the
Circle Articke, and did build there some Towns, and named it of their own
Country, Nova Francia.

As our Englishmen have adventured very far for the discovery of new found
Lands: so with very great labor and diligence they attempted to open something
higher than Nova Francia: and therefore with some Ships they did pass
thither, and entered upon the Land, from whence they brought some of the people,
whose countenance was very tawny, and duskie; which comes not by any heat,
but the great cold of the Climate, chilling and pricking them: but the
digestion and stomach of these people is very good, in so much that like unto
the Tartars and some other Northern Nation, their feeding was (for the most
part) upon raw meat, their manners otherwise being barbarous, and suitable to
their Diet.

They had little leatherne Boats, wherein they would fish near the brinckes of
the Sea, and at their pleasure would carry them from place to place on their
backs.

Notwithstanding, all their pains there taken, it was a great error and
ignorance in our men, when they supposed that they should find good store of
Gold-mines in those quarters: for the Country is so cold, that it is not
possible to find there any full concoction of the sun, to breed and work
such a metal within the ground; and therefore howsoever they brought home
some store of earth, which they supposed to be Oar, and of shining stones,
yet when it came to the trial, it prooved to be nothing worth, but verified
the Proverb, All is not gold that glisters.

In very many parts of these Northern Countries of America, there is very fit
and opportune fishing, some pretty way within the Sea, and therefore diverse
Nations of Europe, do yearly send Fishers thither, with shipping and great
store of salt: where when they have taken fish and dried it, and salted it at
the land, they bring it home into Christendom, and utter it commonly by the
name of New-found-land-fish. The fish of Newfound land.


The English about the year 1570 did adventure far for to open the North
parts of America, and sailed as far as the very Circle Articke, hoping to
have found a passage by the North to the Molluccoes, and to China, which
hitherto, neither by the North of Asia, nor by the North of America, could be
effected by them, by reason of the very great Cold and Ice in the Climate.

The rest of the Island (being a hugh space of Earth) has not hitherto, by any
Christian, to any purpose been discovered but by those near the Seacoast it
may be gathered, that they all which do there inhabit, are men rude and
uncivil, without the knowledge of God. Yet on the North-west part of America,
some of our Englishmen going through the Straights of Magellan, and passing
toward the North, by Hispania Nova, have touched on a Country, where they
have found good entertainment, and the King thereof yielded himself to the
subjection of the Queen of England: whereupon they termed it Nova Albion.
Nova Albion.

Sir Francis Drake, who touched upon that Country, and for some pretty time had
his abode there, does report in his Voyage, that the Country is very good,
yielding much store of diverse Fruits, delightful both to the eye and taste:
and that the people are apt enough by hospitality to yield favor and
entertainment to strangers: but it is added withal, that they are marveilously
addicted to Witchcraft, and adoration of Devils; from which they could not be
persuaded to abstain, even in the very presence of our Contrymen.

Of Peru and Brasile.
The Portugales discovery of Brasile.
WHen the Portugals had first begun the Navigation by Afric into the East
Indies, some of the^ intending to have held their course Eastward unto Caput
bonae spei, were driven so far Westward by Tempest, that they landed in a
large and great Country, which by a general name is called Brasilia, where
they began to enter Traffic, and with Towns and Castles, to plant themselves,
before that the Spaniard had discovered Peru, which is the South part of
America. So that at this day, whatsoever the King of Spain, has in Brasilia,
it is in the right of the Crown of Portugal.

We may read in Guicciardine, how when the Spaniards toward the West, and the
Portugales toward the East, had descryed many New-found-lands, there grew
great contention between them, what should be appropriated unto the one, and
what might be seized on by the other; therefore for the better establishing of
peace amongst them, they had both recourse unto Alexander the sixth, who was
Pope in the year 1492. and somewhat before and after: and he taking on him
after the proud manner of the Bishops of Rome, to dispose of it, which belonged
not unto him, did set down an order between them; which was, that all the
degrees of Longitude, being 360 in the Globe, being divided into two parts, the
Spaniards should take one, and the Portugals the other: so that in this
division they were to begin in those degrees, under which some of Peru
stands; from the which they counting forwards toward the East, did allow
Brasilia, and 180 degrees to the Portugals Eastward, and so from Brasilia
Westward to the Spaniards as many: so that he had in his portion all America
except Brasilia.

A large Country and much inba^ited.
This Country is large, having in it many people, and several Kingdoms, which
are not all possessed by the Portugals; but so, that other Christians, as
namely the Frenchmen being driven out of their Country for Religion, have set
foot in there, though afterward again they have abandoned it.

What the Portugals do at this day in Brasilia, I know not; but it is likely
now, that whatsoever there is held by the Christians, is reputed to be under
the Spaniards, as many other parts of Brasile promiscuously are: yet certain
it is, that now almost 40. years since some of the Frenchmen, which professed
sincere religion, and could not then be suffered quietly to live in France, did
provide certain shipping, and under the conduct of one Villagagno a Knight of
Malta, but their own Countryman did go thither, and continued there by the
space of one year, having Ministers and Preachers amongst them, and the
exercise of the word and Sacraments: but after by the evil counsel of some of
the chief Rulers of France, which were addicted unto the Pope, the heart of
Villagagno was drawn away, insomuch that he contumeliously using the Pastors,
and chief of that Company, did force them to retire into France: so that the
habitation there was then utterly relinquished, and has not since been
continued by any of the French.

There is a learned man, one Johannes Lyreus, who was in their voyage, and has
written a Tract, called Navigatio in Brasiliam, which is very well worth the
reading, not only to see what did befall him and his Company, but what the
manners of that people, with whom they did converse. The Inhabitants here are
men also utterly unlearned; but men more ingenious than the common sort of the
Americans; goodly of body, and straight of proportion, going always naked;
reasonable good Warriors after their Country fashion, using to fat such
enemies as they take in the Wars, that afterward they may devour them,
which they may devour them, which they do with great pleasure. For diverse of
the people of those Quarters, as the Caribees, and the Cannibals, and almost
all, are eaters of man's flesh.

The abundance o Brasile wood.
In this Country grows abundance of that wood which since is brought into
Europe, to die red colors, and is of the place whence it comes called Brasil
Wood; the Trees whereof are exceeding great.

The people of Brasil, where Lyrius and his fellows lived, are called by the
name of Tauvoupinambaltii, by description of whose qualities, many things may
be learned concerning the rest of the Inhabitants near thereabout.

First then, they have no letters among them, and yet seem to be very capable
of any good understanding: as appeared by the speech of some of them, reproving
the Frenchmen for their great greediness and covetousness of gain, when they
would take so much pains, as to come from another end of the World to get
Commodities there.

Their Religion.
Their computation is only by the Sun and Moon, who they hold to be of a
Divine nature: and although they know nothing truly concerning God, yet they
have a dark opinion that the soul does live after the separation from the
body.

Their apparel.
The men and women thorowout the whole Country do go stark naked, even very
few of them having any thing on to cover their Privities, only some of them do
pull some kind of ornaments through their ears, and the most of them have
their lower-lip bored through with a great hole, therein putting some device or
other.

The proportion of the Inhabitants.
They look very disguisedly, but they are all wonderful straight of limb and
proportion, insomuch that the Author writes, that in all the time wherein he
lived among them, he saw not one crooked backed or misshapen in any part:
whereof seeking to, give a reason, he ascribes it to this, that their
Children are never swathed, nor bound about with any thing when they are first
borne, but are put naked into the bed with their Parents to lie; which beds are
devised of Cotton wool, and hung up between two trees not far from the
ground, in the which slagging down in the middle, men and their wives and
their children do lie together.

But whether this be the true reason of the straightness of their bodies, it
may be doubted, from the authority of Saint Hierome, who in one of his
Treatises mentioning that the Children of the noblest and greatest Romans in
his time, were very crooked, when other which were bred of meaner parents were
not so, imputes it to this cause, that the Gentlewomen of Rome, in a kind of
wantonness, did not suffer their Infants to be so long swathed as poorer
people did, and that thereby their joints and members not being tied and
restrained within compass, did fly out of proportion.

Certainly howsoever there may be some reasons naturally given of these
things, it is much to be ascribed to the immediate will of God, who gives and
takes away beauty at his pleasure.

Note.
The men of these parts are very strong, and able of body, and therefore either
give sound strokes with their Clubs wherewith they fight, or else shoot strong
shoots with their Bows, whereof they have plenty, and if any of them be taken
in the Wars (after they have been crammed of purpose to be eaten of their
enemies) they are brought forth to execution, wherein mavelous willingly they
do yield themselves to death, as supposing that nothing can be more honorable
unto them, than to be taken, and to dye for their Country. He therefore who
is to kill the other, does with very much insolency and pride insult over him,
which is to be slain; saying, thou art he which would have spoiled and
destroyed us and ours, but now I am to recompense thee for thy pains, and the
other without all fear replies; Yea I am he that would have done it, and
would have made no spare, if I had prospered in mine intent, and other such
suitable words, showing their resolution to conquer, or willingly to dye in the
common cause of themselves and their people, The Canibals, or man-eaters, which
is the Country custom.
It is strange to see the inhumane and unnatural custom which many of the
people of the West- Indies have, for there are whole Islands full of such
Canibals as do eat man's flesh; and among the rest, these Tovonpinambaltij are
famous that way, who when they are disposed to have any great meeting, or to
have any solemn feast, they kill some of their adversaries whom they keep in
store for that purpose, and cutting him out into collops, which they call
Boucan, they will lay them upon the coals, and for diverse days together, make
great mirth in devouring them: wherein they have this fashion, very strange,
that so long as they are in their eating banquet, although it continue diverse
days, they do never drink at all, but afterward, when they are disposed to
fall to drinking of a certain liquor which they have amongst them, they will
continue bousing at it for two or three whole days, and in the mean time
never eat. In many parts both of Hispania nova, and Peru, as also in the
Islands near adjoining, they have an herb, whereof they make great use; of
which some is brought into diverse parts of Europe, under the name of Their
great use of Tobacco.
Tobacco, Paetum, or Nicosiana, although we have also much counterfeit of the
same: the people of those parts do use it as Physic to purge themselves of
humors, and they apply it also to the filling of themselves, the smoke of it
being received through a leaf, or some such hollow thing, into the nostrils,
head and stomach, and causing the party which receives it, to lie as if he
were drunk or dead for a space, needing no food or nourishment in the mean
while. Whereof it cannot be denied, but that it is possible that by prescript
of Physic, it may be serviceable for some purposes among us, although that
also it be very disputable, in as much as they who speak most highly of it,
must and do confess that the force of it is obstupefactive, and no other,
whereby it produces his own effects, and wisemen should be wary and sparing
in receiving of such a thing. But when we do consider the vain and wanton use
which many of our Countrymen have of late taken up in receiving of this
Tabbaco, not only many times in a day, but even at meat, Note.
and by the wa^ to the great waste both of their purse and of their bodies, we
may well deplore the vanity of the Nation, who thereby propose themselves as
ridiculous to the French, and other our Neighbors. And certainly, if it were
possible that our worthy, warlike, and valiant Progenitors, might behold hold
their manners, (who do most delight therein) they would wonder what a
generation had succeeded in their rooms; who addict themselves to so fond, and
worse then effeminate passion.

Benzo, who lived among them of the West Indies, does call the smell of it a
Tartarus and hellish savor: And whosoever looks into those Books, which our
Christians traveling thither have written, concerning those West Indies, shall
find that the Inhabitants there, do use it most as a remedy against that
which is called Lues Venerea, whereunto many of them are subject, being
unclean in their conversation; and that not only in Fornication and Adultery
with Women, Note this ye Tobacoonists.
but also their detestable and execrable sin of Sodomie.

After that the Spaniards had for a time possessed Hispania Nova, for the
desire of Gold and Pearl, some of them travailed toward the South: and as by
water they found the Sea Westward from Peru, which is always very calm, and
is by them called the South Sea, as the other wherein Cuba stands is termed
the North-Sea, so by land they found that huge and mighty Country, which is
called A description of the people of Peru.
Peru, wherein the people are (for the most part) very barbarous, and without
God; men of great stature, yea, some of them far higher than the ordinary
sort of men in Europe; using to shoot strongly with Bows made of Fish-bones,
and most cruel people to their enemies.

Our English people who have travailed that way, do in their writings confess
that they saw upon the South of Peru, very huge and tall men, who attempting
upon them when they put to land for fresh water, were much frighted with their
Gunnes, or else doubtless had offered violence unto them; which our men
fearing, got them away as speedily as they could.

There was one Petrus de Cieca, a Spaniard, who when he had travailed two and
twenty years, returned back again into Europe, and wrote an excellent Book
of the Discovery of that whole Country. And he amongst other things does
record, that there are found in some parts of Peru, very huge and mighty bones
of men that had bin Giants who dwelt and were buried there.

The Riches of the Country of Peru.
Amongst these the Spaniards (partly by force, but especially by perfidious
treason) did get infinite sums of Gold and Pearls, wherewith being allured,
they hoped for more, by reason that a great part thereof lies under the Zona
Torrida, and that caused them to spread themselves here, and there, as far as
they durst in the Country, where in some places they dug Gold out of the
Earth; and in some other they found it ready dug and tried unto their hands
by the people of the Country, which had used that trade before their coming
thither.

Among other creatures which are very famous in this Peru, there is a little A
strange story of the Beast Cincia.
beast called Cincia, which is no bigger then a Fox, the tail whereof is long,
the feet short, and the head very like a Fox, which has a bag hanging under
her belly, whereinto she does use to put her young, when she sees them in
danger of any hunter or passenger.

That Petrus de Cieca (of whom mention was made before) tells that himself
saw one of them, which had no less then seven young ones lying about her: but
as soon as she perceived that a man was coming near unto her, she presently
got them into her bag, and ran away with such incredible swiftness as one
would not have imagined.

After the Spaniards had conquered Mexico, they discovered Peru, traveling
toward the South, and as they prevailed against the Mexicans, taking part with
an enemy Neighbor: so finding two brothers striving in Peru, Guascar and
Atabaliba, they so demeaned themselves in their difference that they ruined
both, and got there incredible store of Gold.

The first attempters against the Peruvians
The first that attempted against the Peruvians and destroyed their Kings, were
James of Almagra, and the two brothers of Pizarroes: but dealing trecherously
and cruelly with the Peruvians, the long enjoyed not their victory, but all of
them died a violent death.

The people of Peru are in many places much wiser than those of Cuba,
Hispaniola, and some other parts of the Continent where the Spaniards first
landed, and therefore they have some orders and solemn customs among them; as
among the rest, they do bury their dead with observable Ceremonies, laying up
their bodies with great solemnity into a large house prepared for that purpose.

They have also in one Province there a custom of carrying of news and
messages very speedily, to the end the King and Governor of the Country may
presently take advertisement of any thing which falls out; and this is not on
Horseback, or by the Dromedary, or Elke, as they use in other places, but
only men who pass over Rocks and through Bushes the next way, and in certain
set places there be always fresh Posts to carry that farther which is brought
to them by the other.

The Spaniards have here and there scatteringly upon the Seacoasts set up some
Towns and Castles, but are not able to possess almost any thing of the Land:
neither have they as yet discovered the inward parts thereof, though daily they
spread themselves more and more; in so much that it is supposed, that within
these seven years last past, they have gotten into Guiana, where in former
time no strength of that Nation has bin.

Guiana
Guiana is a Country which lies to the North-sea, in the same height as Peru
to the South (as it is described) about five degrees from the Aequinoctiall,
and that (as I take it) toward the South.

The richness and pleasantnes of the Country.
The Country is supposed to be exceeding rich, and to have in it many Mines of
Gold (which have not yet been touched, or at least but very lately) and to be
exceeding fertile, and delightful otherwise, although it lie in the heat of
Zona Torrida: but there is such store of Rivers and fresh waters in every part
thereof, and the soil it self has such correspondency thereunto, that it is
reported to be as green and pleasant to the eye as any place in the World.

Some of our Englishmen did with great labor and danger, pass by water into
the heart of the Country, and earnestly desired that some forces of the English
might be sent thither, and a Colony erected there: by reason of the distance of
the place and the great hazard, that if it should not succeed well, it might
prove dishonorable to our Nation; and withal, because the Spaniards have
great companies and strength, although not in it, yet many ways about it, that
intendment was discontinued.

In diverse parts of this Peru, and near unto Guiana, there are very many great
rivers, which as they are fit for any navigation that should be attempted to
go up within the Land, so otherwise they must needs yield health and
fruitfulness to those that inhabit there. The greatest of these Rivers is
that which some call Oregliana, or the The River of the Amazones.
river of the Amazones. And next is the river Maragnone, and down toward
Magellane straits Rio de la Plata: and our Englishmen do speak of the river
Orinoque; In the greatest of which, this is famous, that for a good space after
they have run into the maine sea, yea, some write 20. or 30. miles, they keep
themselves unmixt with the salt water, so that a very great way within the Sea,
men may take up as fresh water, as if they were near the Land.

The first of our Nation that sailed to Guiana, and made report thereof unto
us, Sir Walter Raleigh did first discover it to the English.
was Sir Walter Raleigh, who traveled far up into the Country upon the River
Orinoque: after him, one or two voyages thither did Captain Kemmish make, and
now lately Captain Harcourt, with others, have visited that Country, where our
men continued the space of three or four years, being kindly entreated of
the natives, who much desire them to come and make some plantation amongst
them, hoping by them to be defended against the Spaniards, whom they They hate
the Spaniard, and love the English.
greatly hate and fear. When Sir Walter Raleigh came to Guiana, he overthrew
the Spaniards that were in Trinidado, and took Bereo their Captain or
General prisoner: he loosed and set at liberty four or five Kings of the
people of that Country, that Bereo kept in chains, and sent them home to their
own: which deed of his did win him the hearts of that people, and make them
much to favor our English at this day.

Diverse also of that Country, which amongst them are men of note have been
brought over into England, and here living many years, are by our men brought
home to their own Country; whose reports and knowledge of our Nation is a
cause that they have been well entreated of these Guianians, and much desired
to plant themselves among them.

A strange Story.
Our men that traveled to Guiana, amongst other things most memorable did
report, and in writing delivered to the world, that near unto Guiana, and not
far from those places, where themselves were, there were men without heads;
which seemed to maintain the opinion to be true which in old time was
conceived by the Historians and Philosophers, that there were Acephali, whose
eyes were in their breasts, and the rest of their face there also situated: and
this our English travelers have reported to be so ordinarily and confidently
mentioned, unto them in those parts where they were, that no sober man should
any way doubt of the truth thereof.

Now because it may appear that the matter is but fabulous, in respect of the
truth of Gods creating of them, and that the opinion of such strange shapes and
monsters as were said to be in old time, that is, men with heads like Dogs,
some with ears down to their ankles, others with one huge foot alone,
whereupon they did hop from place to place, was not worthy to be credited,
although Sir John Mandevill of late age, fondly has seemed to give credit and
authority thereunto, yea, and long since, he who took upon him the name of
Saint Augustine, in writing that counterfeit Book Ad fratres in Eremo: It is
fit that the certainty of the matter concerning these in Peru, should be
known: and that is, that in Quinbaia, and some other parts of Peru, the men
are borne as in other places, and yet by devises which they have, after the
birth of Children when their bones and grisbles, and other parts are yet tender
and fit to be fashioned, they do crush down the heads of the Children unto
the breasts and shoulders, and do with frames of wood and other such devises,
keep them there, that in time they grow continuate to the upper part of the
trunk of the body, and so seem to have no necks or heads. And again, some
other of them thinking that the shape of the head is very decent, if it be
long and erect after the fashion of a Sugar-loafe, do frame some other to that
form by such wooden Instruments, as they have for that purpose, and by binding
and swathing them do keep them so afterward. And that this is the custom of
those people, and that there is no other matter in it, Petrus de Cieca, who
traveled almost all over Peru, and is a grave and sober Writer, in his
description of those Countries does report.

Their strange devises to take fowls.
There be in some parts of Peru, people which have a strange device for the
catching of diverse sorts of Fowls, wherein they especially desire to take such
as have their feathers of pyed, orient, and various colors; and that not so
much for the flesh of them, which they may eat, as for their feathers, whereof
they make garments, either short, as Cloakes, or as Gowns, long to the ground,
and those their greatest Nobles do wear, being curiously wrought, and by
order, as appears by some of them being brought into England.

And here by this mention of feathers, it is not amiss to specify, that in
the Sea, which is the Ocean lying betwixt Europe and America, there be Diverse
flying fishes.
diverse flying Fishes, yet whose wings are not feathers, but a thin kind of
skin, like the wings of a Bat or Reare-mouse: and these living sometimes in the
water, and flying sometimes in the air, are well accepted in neither place:
for below, either ravenous Fishes are ready to devour them: or above, the
Sea-Fowles are continually beating at them.

Some of the Spaniards desirous to see how far this Land of Peru did go
toward the South, traveled down, till at length they found the Lands end,
and a little straight or narrow Sea, which did run from the main Ocean
toward Afric, into the South Sea.

One Magellanus Straits.
Magellanus was he, that found this Straight, and although it be dangerous,
passed through it, so that of his name it is called Fretum Magellanicum, or
Magellane Straights.

And this is the way whereby the Spaniards do pass to the backside of Peru and
Hispania Nova, and whosoever will compass the whole World (as some of our
English men have done) he must of necessity (for any thing that is yet known)
pass through this narrow Straight. Ferdinandus Magellanus, having a great mind
to travel and being very desirous to go unto the Malucco Islands by some
other way, then by the backside of Afric, if it might be, did in the year
1520, set forth from Sivill in Spain with five ships, and traveled toward the
West Indies, and went so far toward the South as that he came to the lands
end, where he holding his course, in a narrow passage toward the West, for the
space of diverse days, did at the length, peaceably pass through the
Straights, and came into a great Sea which some after his name, do call Mare
Magellanicum, some others Mare pacificum, because of the great calmnesse and
quietness of the waters there; but most commonly it is termed the The So th Sea.
South Sea; the length whereof he passed in the space of three Months and
twenty days, and came unto the Moluocos, The Molucco^s.
where being set upon by the East Indian people, himself and many of his
company were slain: and yet one of his Ships (as the Spaniards do write)
called Victoria, did get away from those Moluccoes, and returning by the Cape
Bonae Spei, on the South side of Afric, came safe unto Spain.

Magellanus the first that ever compassed the World.
So that it may be truly said, that if not Magellanus, yet some of his company
were the first that did ever compass the World, through all the degrees of
longitude.

Johannes Lyrius in the end of his Book De Navigatione in Brasiliam, does tell
that Sir Francis Drake of England, when he passed through Magellane straits, and
so to the Molucco Islands, and then homeward from the East by Afric, did in a
devise give the Globe of the Earth with this word or motto, Primus me
circumdedisti: which is not simply to be understood that never any had gone
round the World before him, but that never any of fame; for Magellane himself
was slain (as before is noted) or else he did doubt of the truth of that
narration, that the Ship called Victoria, did return with safety into Spain.

The Maps which were made at first concerning America, and Peru, did so
describe the Western part of Peru, as if when a man had passed Magellane
Straits, and did intend to come upwards toward Nova Hispania, on the further
side, he must have borne much West, by reason that the Land did shoot out with
a very great Promontory, and bending that way.

But our Englishmen which went with Sir Francis Drake, did by their own
experience certainly find that the Land from the uttermost end of the Straits
on Peru side, did go up toward the South directly, without bending to the
West; and that is the cause wherefore all the new Maps and Globes, especially
made by the English, or by the Dutch, who have taken their directions from our
men, are reformed according to this new observation.

When the Spaniards had once found an ordinary passage from the South Sea
toward the Moluccoes, they never ceased to travail that way, and discovered
more and more: and by that means they have found out diverse Islands not known
in former Ages; as two for example sake, a good distance from the Moluccoes,
which because Insulae Latronum.
they be inhabited by men which do steal not only each from other, but do
pilfer away all things that they can from such strangers as do land
thereabouts, they are called Insulae Latronum.

They have also descryed some other near unto the East Indies; which they now
term, Jnsulae Solomonis.
Insulae Solomonis. But the most renowned of all, are those of whom the name is
given Philippinae.
Philippina, in remembrance of Philip the Second King of Spain, at whose cost
they were discovered.

Their Rich^s.
These Philippinae, are very rich, and from thence is brought abundance of
costly Spices, and some other rich Merchandise; yea, and Gold too.

There were also some other Islands descryed by Magellanus himself, which he
called Insulas infortunatas.
Insulas infortunatas, as being of quality contrary to the Canaries, which are
termed the fortunate Islands: for when he passing through the South Sea, and
meaning to come to the Moluccoes (where he was slain) did land in these
Islands, thinking there to have furnished himself with victuals, and fresh
water, he found the whole places to be barren, and not inhabited.

Of the Countries that lie about the two Poles.
HAving laid down in some measure the description of the old known World,
Asia, Africa, and Europe, with the Islands adjoining unto them: and also of
America, which by some has the title of New-found-world: it shall not be
amiss briefly to say something of a fifth and sixth part of the Earth: the one
lying near the South Pole, and the other near the North: which are places that
in former times were not known, nor thought of.

When Magellanus was come down to the Southern end of Peru, he found on the
further side of the Straits a maine and huge land lying toward the South-Pole,
which some of his name called since Regio Magellanica.
Regio Magellanica, and that so much the rather, because he touched upon it
again before he came to the Moluccoes.

Since his time, the Portugales traveling toward Calecut, and the East-
Indies, there have some of them bin driven by tempest so far; as to that which
many now call the South Continent; and so diverse of sundry Nations, have there
by occasion touched upon it.

It is found therefore by experience, for to go along all the degrees of
longitude, and as in some places, it is certainly discovered to come up so
high toward the North, as to the Tropicke of Capricorn, so it is conjectured,
that toward the South it goes as far as to the Pole. The ground whereof is,
that never any man did perceive the Sea did pass through any part thereof: nay,
there is not any great River which has yet been described to come out of it
into the Ocean: whereupon it is concluded, that since somewhat must fill up the
Globe of the Earth from the first appearing of this land unto the very Pole,
and that cannot be any Sea, unless it should be such a one as has no
intercourse with the Ocean (which to imagine is uncertain) therefore it is
supposed that it comes whole out into the Land to the Antarticke Pole: which
if it should be granted, it must needs be acknowledged withal that this space
of Earth is so huge, as that it equalleth in greatness not only Asia, Europe,
and Africa, but almost America, being joined unto them.

Things memorable in this Country are yet reported to be very few; only in the
East part of it over against the Moluccoes, some have written that there be
very waste countries and wildernesses; but we find not so much as mention
whether any do inhabit there or no. And over against the promontory of Afric,
which is called Caput bonae spei, there is a Country which the Portugals
called Psittacorum Regio.
Psittacorum regio, because of the abundant store of Parrots which they found
there.

Near to the Magellane straits, in this South part of the world, is that land
the Spaniards call Terra del fuego: Terra del fuego.
those also which have touched at it in other places, have given to some parts
of it these names, Boach, Eucach, and Maletur, but we have no perfect
description of it, nor any knowledge how or by whom it is inhabited.

A description of the people.
About this place the said Portugals did at one time sail along for the space
of 2000. Miles, and yet found no end of the land. And in this place, they
reported that they saw inhabitants, which were very fair and fat people, and
did go naked: which is the more to be observed, because we scant read in any
writer, that there has bin seen any people at all upon the South-coast.

More toward the East not far from the Moluccoes, there is one part of this
country, as some suppose, although some doubt whether that be an Island or no,
which comes up so high toward the north, as the very Aequinoctial line, and
this is commonly called Nova Guinea.
Nova Guinea, because it lies in the same climate, and is of no other
temperature then Guinea in Afric is.

I have heard a great Mathematician in England, find fault both with Ortelius
and Mercat^r, and all our late Makers of Maps, because in describing this
Continent, they make no mention of any Cities, Kingdoms, or Commonwealths
which are seated and placed there: whereof he seemed in confidence of words to
avouch, that there be a great many, and that it is as good a Country as almost
any in the world: Note.
But the arguments why he gathered it to be so he did not deliver; and yet
notwithstanding it may be most probably conjectured, that the Creator of the
world would not have framed so huge a mass of Earth, but that he would in his
wisdom appoint some reasonable creatures to have their habitation there.

Concerning those places which may be supposed to lie near unto the Northern
Pole, there has in times past something been written, which for the
particularity thereof might carry some show of truth, if it be not thoroughly
looked into. It is therefore by an old tradition delivered, and by some
written also, that there was a Friar of Oxenford, who took on him to travail,
into those parts, which are under the very Pole; which he did partly by
Negromancie (wherein he was much skilled) and partly again by taking
advantage of the frozen times, by means whereof he might travel upon the Ice
even so as himself pleased: It is said therefore of him, that he was directly
under the Pole, and that there he found a very huge and black Rock, which is
commonly called. Nigra Rupes.
Nigra Rupes, and that the said Rock being diverse miles in circuit, is
compassed round about with the Sea, which Sea being the breadth of some miles
over, does run out into the more large Ocean by four several currents,
which is as much to say, as that a good pretty way distant from the Nigra
Rupes, there are four several Lands of reasonable quantity: and being
situated round about the Rock, although with some good distance, are severed
each from other by the Sea-running between them, and making them all four to
be Islands almost of equal bigness. But there is no certainty of this report,
and therefore our best Mathematicians in this latter age have omitted it.

Our travelers of later years have adventured so far, to their great danger,
in those cold and frozen Countries, that they have descryed Groin-Land.
Groin Land; which lies as far or beyond the circle Artick, but whether it go
so far out as unto the Pole, they cannot say: which is also to be affirmed
of the Northern parts of America, called by some Estote-land; for the opening
whereof our Englishmen have taken great pains, as may easily appear by the
new Globes and Maps, in which all the Capes, Sounds and Furlongs, are called by
English names. Their purpose was in attempting this voyage, to have found out a
passage to China, and Cathaio, by the north parts of America: but by the snowes
which fell in August and September, as also by the incredible Ice there, after
many hazards of their lives, they were forced to return, not knowing whether
there be any current of the Sea, that might lead to the East- Indies, or how
far the Land does reach Northward.

In like sort, some of our English Merchants to their great charges, set forth
Fleets to descry the Seas toward the East, yet going by the North, and there
have found many unknown Countries, as Nova Zembla.
Nova Zembla, Sir Hugh Willoughbies Land.
Sir Hugh Willoughbies Land, and other more: but of certain what is very near
unto the Pole, they could never find. They have also so far prevailed, as to
reach one half of the way toward Cathaio by the North, going East-wards:
insomuch that by the river Ob, and by the Bay of Saint Nicholas, they bring the
Merchandise downward into Russia: But whether the Sea do go through out even
to the farthest Eastern parts; or whether some great Promontory do stretch
out of the maine Continent unto the very Pole, they cannot yet attain to know.
These things therefore must be left uncertain, to further discoveries in
future ages.

UNIVERSITIES.
In England.
1 Oxford. 2 Cambridge.
Universities in Spain.
1 Toledo, lat. 40.10. long. 16.40. 2 Sivill, lat. 37.30. long. 14.20. 3
Valencia, lat. 39.55. long. 21.10. 4 Granada, lat. 37.30. long. 17.15. 5 Saint
Iago, lat. 40.5. long. 15.40. 6 Valladolib, lat. 42.5. long. 15.45. 7 Alcalade
Henaros, lat. 40.55. long. 17.30. 8 Salamanca, lat. 14.20. long. 14.4 9
Carageca, lat. 42.22. long. 22.20. 10 Siguenca, lat. 14.35.20. lo. 18.20 11
Lerida, lat. 42.20. long. 18.20. 12 Huesca, lat. 42.50. long. 21.20. 13 Lisbon,
lat. 38.50. long. 10.50. 14 Coimbra, lat. 40. long. 11.25. 15 Ebora, lat.
37.38. long. 20.
In the I Will Majorica.
1 Majorica.
In Polonia.
1 Cracovia. 2 Posue.
In Prussia.
1 Koningsberg.
In Lituana.
1 Wild.
In France.
1 Paris, lat. 48.10 long. 23. 2 Poicters, lat. 46.10. long. 19 10. 3 Lions,
lat. 44.30. long. 25.40. 4 Angers lat. 47.25. long. 18.10. 5 Avignon, lat.
42.30. long. 25.50. 6 Orleans, lat. 47.10. long. 22. 7 Burges, lat. 46.20.
long. 22.10. 8 Cane, lat. 49.45. long. 19.20. 9 Rhemes, lat. 48.30 lon. 25.25.
10 Bordeaux, lat. 44.30. lon. 17 50. 11 Tolouse, lat. 43.5. long. 20.30. 12
Nismo, lat. 42.30. long. 25. 13 Montpellier, lat. 42. long. 24.30. 14 Bisanton,
lat. 46.30. long. 27.48. 15 Lole, lat 46.10. long. 27.
In Jtalie.
1 Rome, lat. 41.20. long. 38. 2 Venice, lat. 44.50. long. 37. 3 Padua, lat.
44.45. long. 31.10. 4 Bononia, lat. 43.33. long. 35.50. 5 Ferrare, lat. 44.
long. 36. 6 Millan, lat. 44.40. long. 33. 7 Pavia, lat. 44. long. 33.5. 8
Turin, lat. 43, 45 long. 31.30. 9 Florence, lat. 42.35. long. 35.50. 10 Pisa,
lat. 42.40. long. 35. 11 Sienna, lat. 42.20. long. 36.15. 12 Modena, lat.
13.50. lon. 35.40.
In Bohemia.
1 Prage.
Of Germany.
1 Collen, lat. 51. long. 30. 2 Basil, lat. 47.40. long. 31. 3 Mentz, lat. 50.
long. 31. 4 Wisburge, lat. 50. 5 Triers lat. 49.50. 6 Heidleberge, lat. 49.25.
long. 33. 7 Tubinge, lat. 49.50. 8 Ingolstad, lat. 49.40. 9 Erfurt, lat. 50. 10
Leistgige, lat. 51.10. 11 Wittenberg, lat. 51.20. 12 Frankford in Order, 52.10.
13 Rostoch, lat. 53.40. 14 Grisswald, lat. 53.50. 15 Friburg, lat. 48. 16
Marburg, lat. 50.40. 17 Vienna, lat. 48.40. 18 Diling, in Switzerland, near
Dovaw.
In Germania inferiori.
1 Lovaine, lat. 51. long. 23. 2 Doway, lat. 50.30. long. 29. 3 Liege, lat.
50.30. long. 29. 4 Leiden, lat. 52.10. long. 27 20.
In Denmark.
1 Cobenbagen, lat. 56.50. long. 34.30.
In Moravia.
1 Olmnes.
In Scotland.
1 S. Andrews. 2 Aberdon.
Of England.
In England are contained Shires, 52 Bishoprics, 26 Castles, 186 Rivers, 555
Chases. 13 Forests, 18 Parkes, 781 Cities, 25 Parish-Churches, 9725 Bridges.
956
FINIS.

