The Fortress of Faith, defended both by the Scripture, and Doctors, gathered
by the learned German Bodonius. And translated out of Latin into English by
Edward Crane.

printer's or publisher's device

IMPRINTED AT LONODN, in Fletestreat by VVylliam Griffith. Anno Domint. 1570.

Cum Priuilegio.

woodcut depicting eagle

2. Esdras. cha. 7. There is no judge more just then God, and there is none
more wise then the most highest.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and my singular good Lady and mystres, Lady Anne Duches
of Sommersett her grace: your humble servant Edward Crane wishes long life
with preservation of wealth and honor.
AS in all Arts and Sciences, (most honorable Lady) crafti conclusions and
devilish enue^sions have snbtilly crept in, and diseatfully perverted the
natural and true use thereof, in like case, ye and much more, such false
invasions from time to time, have not let to assay the snbuersion of the true
and sincer Religion, for such has been, and is the fond and foolysh fancy of
diverse, that they can never content themselves to ground their sure faith and
Religion on gods holy word, and such elect vessels as he has chosen for the
better declraring and expounding thereof. But seking other means and ways,
than those that god has appointed, at the length grow not only themselves to
great confusion, but blind and disceaue the poor and simple wits of their
hearers if more be not the great mercy of god. To their everlasting damnations,
Math. 23.
such they are that Christ calls blind guides, whom he cries woe unto, for
if the Blind lead the Blind then fall they both into the pytte. They follow
the trade af Iuglars, who by disceauing the eyes makes that to appear which
in deed is not. But of these hipocrtitical Wolves invested in Lammes skins
our Savior has given us sufficient admonition and warning. Under the pretense
of sincer life they bolster up and maintain a huge heap of sin and no
maruayle for when man forsakes his maker and cleaves to himself what can
come thereof but sin and diuelishnes. For such as is the tree of necessity
such must be the fruit, for who has gathered fygges of Briars, or Reasons of
thorns. But the chief occasions of this blind fancy of man, may well
bethought to have been chefely too. The one is Philowtie or self Love, the
other avarise or covetousness, for if we were not overwhelmed and drowned in our
own conceyptes, we would well consider our own weakness, and if we knew our
selves then would we not leave the true word of God and stick to our selves
wherefore not in vain says the Ethnike Poet, this is a golden sentence which
came from heaven (...): Know thy self. If we had this knowledge, then would
we not promise farther then we were hable to perform, then would we not
leave the true way, and seek by ways, then would we not leave the door of
the Sheapefold, and clime up other ways. Then would we not forsake the holy
scriptures, and cleave and adhere to our own inuensions. Lib. Retract.
Therefore right well says Augustine caueant ergo etc. Let such take heed lest
that by their lip wisdom they void themselves of the cross of christ, and
so stumble at the stombling block, they follow not the example of Paul, for he
says Quod accepi, id tradidi vobis, that which I have received that do I
preach and deliver unto you, he dorst go no farther then his commission
extended unto, for he knew himself to be no master, but a messenger, But
these men will be messengers accounted and yet they be masters, for they frame
their messadge other ways than their charter or commission gives them
liberty, if in the world it be accounted treason for the Ambassador to do
other messadge then that is given him of his Prince, then what Treatours are
these to the Prince of Princes, and Lord of Lords, who says he that adds or
deminisheth one jot from his word, heapeth to himself damnation. And because
man is thus blinded in his own conceypte and is so deceived in himself,
therefore does he leave the troth, and embrace falshod, therefore does he forsake
God and his word, and stick to himself and his own imaginations? The second
cause of these blind errors may well be thought to be coueteousnes of private
gain and lucare, for there can be no better credence or proof than experience
it has been well tried in this our age, ye as also in the ages past what
gaynes and riches have been gotten by such vain, ungodly, and unlawful
practices as has been used, salvation has been made traffic and marchandies
to be bought and sold with money Remission and forgeuenes of sins, which cost
our Savior Christ his most precious blood, by receiving of pardons and
therefore well paying, was often times granted. I need not to rehearse all such
detestable enormities, and covetous poolinges of christian souls as has been
in vere, and all under the ^oulloure and pretense of pure and true Religion:
Which is as much to say a binding and cooplinge of us and our Faith to Christ
and gods holy word for it came of Religio to bind again. Etymologye.
But whereas they should bind us to Christ they loose us from him and bynd us
to their vain imaginations, foolish fancies, and deuelysh traditions, and yet
in any wise must they be called, Christ's vicares on earth, and faithful
servant, but this practice is no new thing for ever since the beginning the
Deuell could turn himself into an angel of light otherwise his persuasions
would not be followed neither could he get his pray, these men may well be
compted to be of a Crokidelles kind, who in the river neele when he wants his
pray, has no way to get the same but by disimulatio^ for he fayneth himself
to weep and lament til such time he gets the man into his danger which
being moved with pity comes to viset him, but then greedely does he deuouer
him, but these are worse then Crokydelles, for he deuoureth but the body, but
these deuouer both body and souls, and all for the fylling of their own
purses, and satisfying of their covetous mind if then these bye ways ought to
be left, then let us follow the hye and beaten way: Let us only imitate our
Savior Jesus Christ and his most holy appostles, for he says exce dedi vobis
exemplum behold I have given you an example, so that we ought to frame our
selves after his example, our lives after his life, and so we ought to
interpretate as he has given us authority and commission: therefore these holy
doctors and interpretators of the holy scriptures, which have endeavored
themselves to declare and expound the hid mysteries of the holy ghost which
also from time to time have been approved and allowed to be right and true
expositors. would well be considered and followed. Therefore have I gathered
together in this little volume the interpretation of our most ancient Fathers
upon certain places: whereof most doubts both have, and daily do arise and
for the better confirming of their credit I have set before their words, such
textes of the holy scriptures as they do most ground upon, and in these few
questions you may easily and well perceive what false and erroneous opinions
have been raised of the rest, therefore God grant us so to way and diligently
consider hereof that we may truly know his blessed will and pleasure as also
frame our lives and works thereafter to his glory and to the help of our poor
brothers necessity. Amen.

Your graces most humble servant E. Crane.

THE EPISTLE TO the Reader.
Since that, (gentell Reader) in this our age we do plainly see many Books and
innumerable sort thereof to be setforth, which do not only clean overthrow
the mind of the Reader: But also do allure and draw thee in, into schisms,
and most pestiferous sects: Therefore I did think^ it would be a more fit
work to renew the old moniments, and works, of our Fathers, which by
occasion of time, and rashness of writers, have been perverted, then to setforth
any new matter. And such works ought most chefely to have credit given to
them, which have there original of our excelent root and stock: and which
does flow out of a good stone, and run out of a most excellent fountain or
welspringe, as are those which be drawn out of the Buttries of the old
Catholic Doctors, which under the choice of words have powered (out the divine
spirit) in such sort, that all the world may easily understand, and choose
an immortal life: as also know what is good, and what is evil, and as soon as like unto diligent and paynefull Bees, you have drawn out the sweet honey
more precious then Rosemarie out of the sweet flowers of our holy Fathers and
has laid them up in the hyue of your mind, there is no doubt but that you
shall have floddes of water of life, sesoninge, and with force watering the
poor thirsty Church of our Savior Christ, farthermore every purpose or Art
has his princes of whom it is led by, as of capitaines which does most sone
and with great expidition bring our purpose to that effect which otherwise our
wits would hardly comepasse, as I know him which is setforth or fygured to
me by the shape of an other which goes or passes by so in our life we shall
sone addicte our selves to follow other men's examples, as it is said of old
lively examples sticks in ye mind whereof as Heronimus does witness the Romans
did follow as leaders and capitaynes, the Camillians the Fabricians, and the
Scipians: The Philosophers, has appointed masters of there Art. Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. The Poets do follow Homere, Virgill, Menander,
and Terens, The historians Thucidides, Salust, Herodatus, and Liuius. The
Orators Licias, Graccus, Demosthenes, and Tullie. The Painters or caruers,
Appelles, Dedalus, Jason. But we which labor for and seek the most excellent
gifts of the mind and the knowledge of Christian doctrine, have so many and so
great examples of our most worthy forfathers that we lack nothing pertaining
to thaugmenting or establishing of a Christian life. Since that therbe an
innumerable number of interpretors or Prophets of the word of God, and
Canonical scriptures I thought good out of so great a number to choose certain
which both by sincerity and pureness of doctrine by integrity of manners, by
vehimens of teachinge. By sharpnes of wtte does both much affect and delight as
also make us well instructed prepared and Armed not that the doctores themselves
would have us farther to credit or believe them then they do agree with the
holy Scriptures, as Augustine does witness in many places, but chefely in his
book of (Retractiones) wh^^ he says, I nether can, nor ought to deny. But as
there were in my forfathers, so there are in my, so many and huge works many
things which by just judgment and without any temeritie may well be erected,
but they have made Arroes and darts against these Antechristes in the Church.
For never since the days of the Apostles unto this our time, upon whom the
ends of the world are come, the Church of Christ has been free from those
enemies, althought continually the truth remains invincible, yet falsehood
does never leave of taduaunce her self against it, if in this world there might
be the end of lying, the Church of Christ should be in quiet. But this most
detestable evil, and sin, does never rest to knock at the heart of man, and
with, such arguments as one would not think, to disquiet the Catholic
faith, therefore it is necessary for the folowers of the troth, wisely to forsee
these captious Arguments, and being uncovered and brought to light, with the
mallet of verity and truth to beat them down, yea and even to the death, and
bloudsheding for verities sake, Eccle. 4.
to fight against them, and chefely because the holy Scriptures does admonish
and say, Roma. 16.
Be not dismayed or asrayd to speak the word for thy soul, and for the troth
even to death, for Paul does desire the Romans to mark them which cause
division and give occasions of evil contrary to the doctrine which they had
learned and to avoid them, for they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies, and with sweet preaching and flattering
words, disceaue the hearts of the innocents, it may be that the Apostle did
admonish the Romans that they should not be wavering in faith and in the word,
that they should shonne and put away Heritikes and seducers of souls. But it
is commanded unto us that we should preach the word, and should stand to it at
all times and seasons, we should correct, we should persuade, we should chide
and chasten them withal patience and doctrine, for the time shall come, and
now it is, when they shall not away with true and wholesome doctrine, but shall
get them masters according to their own desires which have itchchinge ears
and which turn their hearing and sense from verity and truth, unto fables.
Therefore the Apostle does exhort us to watch, to labor, and to do the works
of true gospellers, let that terrible sentence of S. Chrysostom never be out
of our ears, saying, he is not only a Treatour to verity, that does openly
setforth a lie in stead of troth, but he also that does not freely without
fear speak the troth. Augustine says the like in his Epistle to Casulan: who
soever for fear of any power does hide the truth, such a one does provoke the
wrath of god upon him, because he does more fear man then God. But gentle
Readers I do beseech and persuade you that do wisely and simply love the words
of troth, that you do not contemn this treasure that you have now in your
hands, but both to love it and set it forward, for this one little Book does
declare that which being contained in many volumes, would be hard tattaine
unto, and this shall lead you to understand and perceive other hid secrets of
the Scriptures and by thenstruction hereof, you may easily judge the scismes
and subtelities, of the damnable company. This Book shall wake them that
sleep shall spur forward them that run, and shall convert you withal
your heart unto the living God, and shall after one unspeakable sort, where as
now you see as it were in a glass in the dark, make you see the troth face
to face: Thus gentle Reader farewell, and take in good part I beseech thee,
these my simple doings.

Of the fall of Adam, and of original sin. liber. Gene. 20.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, Roma. 5.
and death by the means of sin. And so death went over all men in so much
that all men sinned. etc.

By a man came death, 1. Cori. 15.
and by a man came the resurrection of the dead, for as by Adam all dye even so
by Christ shall all be made alive. etc.

Augusti. lib. against fortunate in the disputation.
I Say that there was free will in him that was first made and created, Free
will was in the first man.
he was so made, that nothing could resist his will if he would have kept the
precepts and commandments of God: But afterward of his own free will and
mind he sinned, but we be cast into a necessity, that come of his seed and
stock, Gala. 5.
therefore so long as we do bear the image of an earthly man, Roma. 8.
that is, Gene. 2.
so long as we walk after the flesh, which is called the old man, Gene. 3.
we have a necessity of our custom, that we do not that that we would. The
law of sin.


But the grace of God has inspired his love into us and has made us subject
unto his own will: to whom it is said you be called into liberty, and the
grace of God has delivered me from the law of sin and death, the law of
sin is that whosoever sins should dye we be delivered from this law when
we begin to be just, the law of death is by the which it is said unto man,
thou art earth, and in to earth thou shall return. For of it we men are so
made, because we be earth, in to earth we shall return again for the desert
of sin in the first man, but by the grace of god, which does deliver and make
us free from the law of sin and of death, being turned to righteousness we be
so delivered, that afterward that flesh that did torment us in pains remaining
in sin: shall in the resurrection be given us again and shall by no
adversity or contraritie trouble or hinder us to keep Gods commandments and
precepts.

God made man from the beginning and left him in the hand of his own counsel
he gave him his commandments and precepts: Eccle. 15.
if thou will observe the commandments: and keep acceptable faithfulness
forever, they shall preserve thee. He has set water and fire before thee,
reach out thine hand unto which thou will: Before man is life and death, good,
and euel, look what him likes shall be given him.

Augusti. lib. of the new soinge. cap. 8.
WHat freewil can do, Freewil is sufficient unto evil.
not being helped, in Adam it is declared: unto evil it is sufficient but not
unto good, unless it be helped of God, for the first man received freewill fully
and the Lord set before him as the Scripture says: fire and water: and said
put thine hand unto which thou will: he did choose fire and left the water.
Behold the just Judge: that he chose being free he had. He would have evil,
and evil followed him, behold farther, that just Judge doing mercy: For when
he did see, that man, by the abuse of his freewill, had in himself as in a
Root had damned all his progeny and stock: he being not requested or
desired came down from Heaven, and with his humility, healed mankind which
perished through his own pride those that went astraye he brought unto life,
strangers he brought and lead unto a country: therefore let not man glory in
himself, but let him glory in him that made him.

The beginning of man's pride, is to fall away from God: Eccle. 10.
and why? his heart is gone from his maker, for pride is the oraginall of all
sin.

Augusti. lib. of correption and grace. Cap. 10.
IT is demanded of us, what our opinion is, Of y^ grace that was given to Adam
before his fall.
as touching the gift that was given unto the first man, which certainly was
made perfect without any vice. Therefore we do surely confess, and rightly
believe, that God, the Lord of all, which created all things very good, and
forknew that euel would come of good, and that it would be more honor and glory
unto himself, to make of evil good again then not to suffer evil to be, did
so ordain and appoint the life both of Angel and man: that in it he might
first show what their freewill could do, without grace, secondly what his
great mercy was of it self, thir^ly what his just Judgment could and would do
not being restrained by mercy.

Cap. 11. The first man had not this grace, that he should never have a will to
be evil, but he had that grace in which if he would have remained, he should
never have been evil, without, that grace, for all his free will he could not
be good. But by his free will he might leave that grace, therefore God would not
have him to be without his grace, whom he left in freewill, because freewill is
sufficient to evil but not unto good, unless it be helped of the everlasting
goodness, which help if man had not forsaken of his freewill, Grace given the
elect after their fall.
he had ever been. But he forsook, and was forsaken, the help was such that
he might leave it when he would, and in which he might remain if he would,
this is the first grace that was given unto the first Adam, but it is of more
strength and efecacie in the second Adam: the first is that man might be just,
if he would. But the second is more, for by it man is made to have a will and
such a will as is joined with a fervent love so that volupteousnes of the flesh
wishing and desiring contrary to the spirit, we do overcome and conquer be the
spirit, by this grace given of God, we have not only a power, and strength*
but also a will and desire both to receau^ good and to remain in good, so that
we have both will, and power, which was not in the first man, God gave him a
help without which he could not remain, if he would, but for to have a will
he left (...) in his own power and freewill, therefore he might have remained,
if he would, because he gave him an help by the which he might, and without
which he could not but because he would not remain, by thee living God. It was
his fault, whose reward should have been if he would have remained, he had
power if he would. But he had not will to his power, for if he had, he had
still remained if he would, which not to will came of his own freewill, which
then was so free, that it might choose either good or evil. Therefore these two
sentences that differ between themselves must with a vigilant eye and
diligently be considered, Posse non mori, et non posse mori. two cannot dye,
and not two can dye, too cannot sin, and not too can sin* too cannot leave
good, and not too can leave good. The first man had potuit non peccare, potuit
non mori, potuit non disserrere bonum, that is to say? He might not have
sinned, he might not have died, he might not have least good: But shall we
say, non potuit peccare, he could not sin, that had such a free will, Gene.
3^.
or non potuit mori. He could not dye. To whom it was said, it thou do sin
thou shall dye the death or not, potuit bonum disserrere, he could not forsake
and leave good, since that by sin he left it and is therefore dead, therefore
the first liberty was, posse non peccare, too cannot sin, but the second is
greater, non posse peccare, he cannot sin, the first immortality was, posse
non mori, he might not have died. But the second shall be a great deal and much
bigger he cannot dye, the first power and strength to remain in felicity, was
Bonum posse non disserrere: He might not have left good for he might have
chosen, but the second shall be Bonum non posse disserrere, he can not leave good.

Cap. 12. Now after, that great liberty was utterly lost, for the desert of
sin, our great infirmity must be helped and restored by some more excellent
gifts. for it pleased god that he might extinguish and put out the pride of
man's presumption, that is to say of man, that no flesh should glory before him,
but of his own deserts which he might have had, but now has lost: and by that
he might have had them* but that he has lost the^ y^ is by his frewil,
wherefore now he remaynes only to be delivered by the grace of his Savior,
therefore let not the unjust glory or pride in themselves, because they have not
whereof to be proud, nether the just ought to pride, because they have not their
own glory but receive it of an other to whom they say, Psalm. 3.
thou art my worship and the lifter up ^f my head. Therefore the Lord would
not have his beloved to glory or triumph in their own strength, but in him,
that does not only give them such help as he gave to the first man, To
remain in good comes only of God.
without they could not stand if they would: But also works this will in
them: therefore both power and will to remain in everlasting joy is given them
by the larges and free gift of Gods grace, The work of God in man's will.
their will is so inflamed and setforward of God his spirit, that therefore the
can because they will, and therefore the will because God works in them will.
For if the Lord should leave them to their own will and liberty, in the
infirmity* of this life, wherein notwithstanding the must, for the correction
of their pride, exercise virtue, as in the help of God, without which they
could not stand, they might have remeaned, if they would neither God neded not
to work in them will, but now amongst so many tentations their will by
infirmity must needs fall, and therefore now they cannot remain, because of
infirmity they cannot have a will, or else cannot so will, as they ought:
Therefore the weakness of man's will, is provided for and lead by the guidinge of
Gods grace, and therefore although it be weak and infirm yet it will not
bewearied, neither will by any adversity be overthrown, The will of a good man
is derected by ye grace of God.
it is so brought to pass, that the will of man, being full of inbecilitie and
weakness. Yet does remain in the little goodness by the virtue and gift of God,
whereas the will of the first man being strong and hole, having also the
benifite of freewill could not remain in one more large goodness, he suffered
the strong man to do what him listed, but the weak he has helped that by his
gift the should both have a will for good and also remain therein, Luke. 22.
as says Christ* I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, it is
understand to be said unto him that is build upon the rock: and the man of God
has not only found mercy that he might be faithful, 1. Cori. 1.
but also that hsi faith should be steadfast that he that does rejoice should
rejoice in the Lord.

S* Augustine in his Epistle to Paulinus.
LEt them not stumble at the stumbling block: supersticiously or
presu^pteously, defending and mayntayning nature and freewill, as have done the
Philosophers and wisemen of this world, which have taught that of their own
will they could live well and blessedly: Let such take heed least by the
wisdom of words, Against ye defendours of freewill.
or rather glosinge thereof they make the cross of Christ in vain, and this is
to stumble at the stumbling block: for since that nature could not remain and
keep her self in that integrity and perfect state wherein she was created,
neither without the grace of God could preserve that life that was given her,
how now without the grace of God can she receive it again being once lost.

S. Augustine in the Epistle to vatal, 107.
IF we will truly defend freewill, Our frewil is made fre by ye grace of God.
let us not put away that whereof it is made free, for he that puts away
grace whereby our freewill is made free to decline from evil, and to do good,
such on will yet have his freewill still to remain in bondage, and not free.

Therefore Saul said unto David, 1. Re. 16.
blessed art thou my son David in doing thou shall do, and in strength, thou
shall have strength.

Man being in honor, Psalm. 4. 8.
and not having understanding, was compared to brute Beasts, and is made like
unto them.

Augusti. of Genesi. lib. 8. Cap. 6.
NEther he yt made althings very good and precious, Obedience is the greatest
virtue.
in Paradise made any evil. But the evil that happened unto man, was the
transgression and breakinge of the precept and commandment it was therefore
expedient and necessary, that man being under God, should have some thing
prohibited and forbidden him, that by his obedience the Lord might be known,
honored, and worshipped: which virtue of the rest is the chefest, so that the
greatest vice that is in a reasonable man is disobedience, and to have a will to
use his own power, and strength: to his great destruction. Therefore man should
not have known, that he had a Lord over him a ruler or superior, if he had
not been commanded somewhat: The tree of knowledge of good and evil.
therefore that tree was not evil, but it was called the tree of knowledge of
good and bad, so that if after the restraynt man should eat thereof, in it
should be the breaking of the commaundment that by the experience of punnishment
man might learn what difference was between the goodness of obedience, and the
evil of disobedience: Farther you must not think this to be said in a figure,
but that it was in deed a very tree of woodde, at that this man was not given
it for the woodde or for the fruit that grue thereon, but for the matter that
should follow if he did touch it.

Augusti. again. Cap. 1. 3.
THE sinner did covet and desire nothing else, but not to be under the rule
and government of God, when he committed that which I would to God, he had never
committed, he ought only to have had respect and to have considered the
precept and commandment of his Lord and ruler: which if he had only
considered what else should have been considered but the will of God, what
else should have been preferred before man's will but Gods will, the Lord why
he commanded it lies in himself, but the servant should have done that he was
commanded.

God created man to be undestroyed, Sapi. 2.
ye, after the image of his own lykenes made he him: nevertheless, through
envy of the Deuell came death into the world: and they that hold of his side,
do as he does.

S. Augustine in his Enchiridion, cap. 104.
IT was requisite and necessary that man should at the first be so made and
created, The creation of ye first man Adam
that he might have power either to do good or euel, nether without reward for
well doing, neither without ponishment for evil doing. But afterward it shall be
so, that he shall not have will to do evil neither therefore shall he want
freewill: for his freewil shall be the more free that it sha(...) not at all
serve sin, but the order is not to be ouerpassed, in which God would show,
how good it was, that man might sin although it is better that he cannot
sin, for the first immortality was that he might dye. But the second shall be
greater that he shall not dye.

Augusti. Cap. 105.
THe first state man lost by freewill, Adam lost immortality by freewill.
but the second state he gets by grace, if he had not sinned, the first
state he had of deserte, albeit not without grace: for since that freewill was
so apt to sin it was not sufficient to keep righteousness, without the help
of the grace of God: for as to dye is in a man's own power when he list, as with
too much eating, or with not eating at all he may kill himself if he will, but
cannot help himself again without medicine, so man in Paradise leaving
righteousness by his own will was sufficient to kill himself: But to save
himself he was not sufficient without the great mercy and grace of God Thus
far as touching freewill.

Of honoring of saints.
I Am the Lord and this is my name and my glory will I give to none other,
Esai. 42.
neither mine honor to graven Images. Behold old things are come to pass and
new things I do declare, and or ever they come I tell you of them.

I am he, Esai. 43.
before whom there was never any God, and their shall be none after me, I am
even, I am the only Lord and beside me there is no Savior.

I am the first and the last, Esai. 44.
and besides me there is no God who is like unto me.

Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, Math. 11.
and I will refresh you.

Ascribe unto the Lord, Psalm. 29
worship and strenght give unto the Lord the honor due unto his name:
worship the Lord with holy worship.

And they made a Caulfe in Oreb, Psalm.
and honored a graven Image and turned the glory of the living god into the
similtitude and lykenes of a Caulfe that eats heye, they have forgotten God
that saved them.

See whether such things be done there whether the Gentiles themselves deal so
falsely and untruly with their Gods, Ieremi. 2.
which yet are no Gods in deed. But my people have given over their hie glory
for a thing that may not help them and much farther he says in that Chapter.

Put away the strange Gods that are in among you, Gene. 35.
and be clean, and change your garments for we will arise and go up to Bethel.

Hear O Israel the Lord our God is Lord only. Deuteronomy. 6.


This is our God, Barauch. 3.
and there shall none other be compared unto him, it is he that has found out
all wisdom and has given her unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his
beloved, afterward did he show himself upon earth, and dwell among men.

Because they have turned the troth of God into a lie, Roma. 1.
and have worshipped and served the creature, rather then ye Creator which is
blessed for ever. Amen.

Through him, Roma. 11.
by him, and in him, are all things. To him be honor and glory forever. Amen.

Augusti. lib. of true Religion Cap. the last.
LEt us not love vissible sightes, least flying from verity, and louinge
shadows, we be cast into darkness, let us not ground our Religion upon our
fantasies, for better is a little that is true, then a great deal fained of
our own mind. Let us not have Religion of worshipping of dead men, for if they
have lived godly, it is not to be thought that such do seek honor: But they
wist that we should honor him, by whose gift, we may be made partners of
their everlasting joy. Therefore they are to be worshipped for example sake,
and not to be prayed unto for Religion: For this is the working of our
salvation, that the power of God and his consubstantiall wisdom coeternall
with the Father would voutsafe to take the nature of man, by which he might
teach us that, that is to be honored of man that is to be honored of all
reasonable cretures, and that we should believe that the most excellent
Angels, We ought to worship one only God.
and ministringe spirits of God do wish that with them we should worship
and honor the lyving God, by whose contemplation and sight they be blessed,
for we be not blessed by beholding and looking one the Angels, but by the
beholdinge of God, for whose sake we do love the Angels: therefore we do
honor them in loving of them, and not in serving of them, neither in building
of Temples and Churchches to them for they would not have themselves so to be
honored of us, for we our selves being good are the Temples of God, Apo. 19.
therefore it is well written that the Angels them selves do forbid man to
honor them. But to honor and worship one only God, under whom both they
and we remain as fellow servants.

Hillarie upon Math. canon. 27.
BEcause y^ foolish Virgins, Eueri man shall bear his own burden.
their lamps being extincte and gone out, could not go meet the Bridegroom,
they desired and prayed the wiser virgins to lend them oil, to whom they made
answer, that they could give them none, least paraduenture they should not
have sufficient for all, whereof we be taught that other men's works and merits
cannot help us, for every man must buy oil for his own Lamp.

Augustine upon the 15. Psalm 50. verse. The hill of God. etc.
I Have lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my salvation,
neither yet comes my help from the hills or of the hills. But from and of
the living God that made both Heaven and earth.

Augustine in Opere imperfecto. upon Mathi. Capite. 32.
TEll me O thou foolysh priest? We ought not to trust in creaturs
is not the Gospel of Christ daily preached to the people in the Churchches,
and is it not daily tought? then if being tought them it does not profitte
them, how can it save them being hanged about their necks Father whether is the
strenght and operation of the Gospel in the figures of letters, or in the
understanding of the senses, if it be in the figures, then is it well hanged
about their necks? But if it be in understanding then is it better to put it
into thy heart, Aut. 29.
then to hang it about thy neck, other meaning to show themselves more just
do hang the Gospel about the hems and skertes of their garment, or at their
heir or looks: O detestable impiety and ungodliness, which will rather show
godliness in their garments outwardly then in the precious body of Christ: For
he that is not saved by eating and receiving his body, will be saved by the
holiness of the hemes of his garments: despairing in the great mercies of his
goodues, does put his trust in the coote or gown of a Temperall or wordly man.
But what will they say, O did not Paul give his handkercher and gerdell to
heal the weak? Yes certainly, before the knowledge of god was known in man,
it was necessary and reason that by the godliness of man Gods power might be
known: Marc. 7.
But now it is madness since that now we know the power of God what is it
necessary that we should know it by the power of man, another does thus
interpretate this place saying? By the observations of times and days
delatinge at large their words and earnestly teaching that by conuersasion of
health and salvation, of whom Christ spoke, in vain they worship me teaching
the precepts and doctrine of man: for they magnify the hemmes and seames of
their clothes. For when they praise the superfluous observations of their own
righteousness, to be pleasing unto God they do as it wear magnify the seames
of their clothes.

Exodus. 20.
THou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor y^ likeness of any thing
y^ is in heaven above, nor in y^ earth beneth neither in the waters under the
earth, for I am the Lord thy God strong and Ielous.

I am the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 2. 8.
you shall not make to your selves any Idol or graven Image, neither shall you
set a stone in your land to worship it.

You shall overthrow their Alters, Deuteronomy. 7.
and break down their pillars, cut down their groves and burn their graven
Images with fire for thou art an holy people v^thy Lord thy God.

Cursed be the man that makes an^ carved or molten Image, an abomination unto
the Lord, the work of the hand^ of the hole crafts man and puts in (...)
secret place, in like case these places which are too many to rehearse. 3. Para.
33. Psalm 105. Psalm. 96. Esai. 30. Deuteronomy. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. 1. Reg. 7. Mala. 3.

John Chrysostom upon Math. Homely. 45. Cap. 23.
HOw will you fly the judgment (...) Hell and damnation: By the building your
graves or Sepulcres of the saints, or rather by purging your hearts from
rancour and malise? will God judge as man judges, man judges man by work,
but God judges the heart? What righteousness is this to honor the saints and
holy men, and to contemn sanctitte and holiness. The first degree of godliness
is first to love godliness and then the godly, for the saints were not before
sanctity or holiness, but holiness was before the saints. Therefore well do they
honor y^ righteous or just that does tread underfoot or spurn at justice or
righteousness: how will you escape? will the saints whose graves and moniments
you adthorne and decree deliver you, the saints cannot be friends to them to
whom the Lord is enemy: for can the family or household be inquiet, if the
Lord or master be against it? How will you escape? will paraduenture a bare or
unfruitful name deliver you because you do seem to be the people of God? what
does it profit that harlot, if she be called a chaste woman and is not, so
shall it nothing avail the sinner, if he be called or name the servant of
God: In the end how will you avoid or escape, The honor of God is not in
ontwarde works.
the punnishment of Hell fire: which do build Churches and yet do not follow
the faith of the eclesiasticall truth. Which read the Scriptures and yet do not
believe them, which name the Prophets, and Apostelles, and Martirs and yet do
not imitate the Martirs, nor follow their confession. Neither have you hard him
that says, Math. 7.
not every one that says unto me Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in Heaven: For as all
that do call on the Lord are not the Lords so not all that name the Apostelles
and Martirs are true worshippers of them, but they do truly worship and
honor them that imitate and follow their works and faith.

I am thy Lord God and Savior worship none other God but me: Exo. 15.


Do not turn unto Idols neither make you feigned Gods for I am the Lord your
God. Leuit. 19.


Among the Gods there is none like unto the Lord, Psalm. 87
and there are no works like unto thy works, all nations that thou have
created shall come and worship before the Lord: and shall glorify thy name,
because thou art great and doing great things, and thou art the only God and
God alone.

Manoah said unto the Angel of the Lord we will keep thee still, Iud. 13.
until we have made ready a kydd and have set it before thee. And the Angel of
the Lord said unto Manoah, though thou make me abide I will not eat of thy
bread, and if thou will offer a burnt offering thou must offer it unto the
Lord. etc.

And I will speak my judgments with them. Hie. 1.
etc.

Have not thou seen what he has done. Hie. 2.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man. Hie. 17.


He that loved us and washed us from our sins. Apo. 1. 3.


Their is but one God and one mediator. 1 Timo. 2.
etc.

Though their be many Gods and many Lords yet to us is there but one God, 1.
Cor. 8.
for the better understanding of the case Read these places at large and you
shall find the words most plain.

John Chrisostomes Homely of the profect of the Gospel. Thom. 6.
THe woman of Canaine came and prayed unto Christ for her daughter: which then
was possessed of a deuel crying after him with a loud and shryll voice and said
have mercy upon me Lord for my daughter is sore vered of a Dyuell: Behold the
strange and Barberus woman, and an outcast from the law of the Jews and what
was she otherwise then a dog and such a one as was not worthy to have her
request and desire granted her for says Christ it is not fit to take the
bread from the children and to cast it unto dogs. Yet notwithstanding for the
continual feruentnes of her prayer she is made worthy not only to be number
among the children which before was coumpted as a dog, Every maus own prayer
does most please God.
but was also sent away with great praise and commendacion at Christ his hand,
for he said, O woman, great is thy faith: then since that Christ himself said
great is thy faith we need no farther demonstration or inquisitio^, of this no
man's glory and commendation so that hereby you see that she which was unworthy
by continuance of prayer is made worthy and we more plainly learn, that we
our selves praying do more profit us the^ when other men pray for us? this
woman cried and the disiples came unto him saying send her away for she cries
and yaleth after us: and unto them he said I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of Israel: But when she herself came and continually cried saying
Lord, yet the whelps do eat of the cromes of their masters table, then he
rewarded her and said, be it unto thee as thou will: Now you see how he did
deny when others prayed, but when she herself came and faithfully prayed and
cried constantly, unto him, he granted her piticion, for unto them he said I
am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But unto her he
said great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, so likewise in the
beginning and at the first he did not answer: The silence of the Lord to the
Cananite.
But when she came once twice, and thrice: then he granted her request and in
the end he teaches us that he did drive of and prolonge his answer: not
meaning thereby to drive her away: But that he might openly and to all men
setforth and declare the patience of the woman, for if he had prolonged the
time for her repulse and to drive her away he would not have given to her, her
request at the last: and we should not have known the constant and vnwaueringe
faith of the woman from the beginning unto the end: for his disciples said:
send her away Lord: for she calls and cries after us: you hear her voice
only, but I see her mind and know what she will say: I will not that the
treasure of her mind and heart: should be hid and unknown: But I tarry and
hold my peace that it might be setforth: and openly known to every man:
considering we be not ignorant of all these things: although we be sinners and
unworthy to receive the benifites and goodness of God: Yet let us not be weary
of praying neither let us dismay our selves although we lack intercessours and
advocates knowing that he himself is our refuge and healpe: and let us come
with a good corrage and cherefully unto the Lord: neither if he do differ or
prolonge the time let us so go away and leave of for we know that it comes
of his great mercy and good will unto us so to defer and prolonge.

Farther we need no advocates or spokesmen with God: In y^ same Homely.
neither need we to make many cerymonies to blind other men's eyes: with God we
need no spokesmen.
But although thou art alone and has no spokesman and by thy self prays
heartily unto god: thou shall not be void of thy purpose neither the Lord will
so sone grant and give us our request when other men prays for us, as when
we pray for our selves ye although we be full of sins.

The same upon Genesis Homely. 52.
WE be constrained to rehearse all this story that we may learn: that we do
not so much profit our selves: By the prayers of others as when we do pray our
selves and chefely when with a vigilant and wakefull mind we pray, for she
having the disciples to pray for her did not avail any thing at all, until
she came herself and with her own mouth requested his mercy.

Why have you left the Lord of Israel, Iosue. 22.
buylding and Alter of sacrilege, and leaving the honor of the true God.

This evil be far from us, Iosue. 22.
that we should go from the Lord and leave his steps, buildinge Alters for
burnt offerings and sacrifices otherwise then to the true Lord.

The Lord is my rock, 2. Reg. 5.
my strenght and my Savior, my strong God and I will trust in him my buckler y^
horn of my salvation. My lifter up, and my refuge which will deliver me from
iniquity. 4. Reg. 5.


I do well know that there is none other God on the earth but only in Israel.

Their gold and silver shall not deliver them in the day of the fury and wrath
of the Lord. Ezech. 7.
etc. Ezech. 20.


We shall be as the Gentilles and nations of the earth honouringe stocks and
stones: Ezech. 26.
I live says the Lord because More at large it does apere.
with a strong hand and stretched out arm and in fury and wrath will reign
over you, etc.

John Chrysostom. To. 1.
WE say these things: that you should not only hear? we ought to follow y^
manners of ye saints.
But that you should also follow that which you hear, that is to say
canstancie and all righteousness that no man for desperation of himself should
dye, albeit heretofore the body has been slothful, that every one of us
cannot place our hope in our own godliness and in tegritie of manners: But only
in the mercies of God.

Cirill in his Book of Treasure. 4. Cap. 2.
FArthermore they that are justified by the righteousness of God, No
righteousness comes to us of man.
kepinge the gift, they observe the commandments but to make others just and
righteous they cannot, for no man being sanctified by the perticipiation and
receiving of the holy ghost? of his own will and power can give the same unto
others, for it is only the fountain and welspring of godliness that can do it:
for we see that the Angels are sanctified by the perticipiation of grace but
they are never found to have given or imparted that godliness unto men. Neither
blessed Moses being set to ouersee the lxx. Nume. 11.
elders did himself give the spirit of God to them, but as it is written, God
came down in a cloud and took of the spirit that was upon him and gave it
unto ye lxx. elders, therefore such as are sanctified by grace may keep that
godliness: But to in part or give it to others they cannot, for the son of
God did not justify or sanctify his disciples as of his own power being a
son, John. 20.
but as the fountain and root of righteousness being in that respect God
himself he said take ye the holy Ghost.

Clement in his 5. Book to James the Lords brother.
Certainly what thing is so ungodly, It is an ungodly thing to give thanks
and to pray to stocks or stones and vain Images.
what is so ungrate a thing as to receive a benifite or good turn of god: and
to give thanks therefore unto stocks and stones: Therefore he washed and
understand your salvation from whence it comes, for God has mede and lacks
no man's help, neither requires he any thing, neither of any man can he be
harmed. But it is we that must be helped and reliued, it is we that may be
hurt or harmed of him and not he of us.

Clement in the same place and Book before rehearsed.
WE honor visible Images as we should honor God himself, which certaynely
is false for if truly you will honor the Image of God, doing well to man thou
shall honor his Image for in euere man is the Image of God, what is the true
Image of God.
but the similitude of god is not in every man: But it is only in such as have
a lowely spirit and pure mind, therefore if you will honor the Image of God,
the truth is to do well, and unto man which is created and made to the Image
and likenys of God: The honoring of god
to give meat to the hungery, drink to ye thirsty, clothes to the naked,
harbor to ye harbourles: and this is only that, that is given unto ye Lord
god. Then what manner of honoring the Lord is this? to run to Images of stones
and stocks? and to unprofitable and dead figures: honoringe, them, and
contemning man in whom the very character and Image of God apeareth in deed:
Yea rather be sure hereof that he that does murder, that does commit
Fornication or adultery, or does any other thing to the hurt and harm of
man: In all such thing he does dishonor the Image of God, for it is great
dishonor to God to have man hurt or harmed: Therefore understand that this is
the inward persuasion of the Serpent that does persuade you to be godly in
honoring these insensible and dead stocks: and not to be ungodly in
contemning or neglecting our duty, to the sensible and reasonable creature,
and very Image of God in dead man.

When you shall pass over Iordayne and come into the land of Chanaan and drive
away all the inhabiters thereof, Nume. 23.
and break their titels, and throw down their Images, and leaye wast all
their proud and mighty things. Esaie. 6.


Who dare then make a God, or fasshion an Image that is profitable for
nothing, behold all the fellowship of them must be brought to confusion, and
truly the workemasters of them are men, they shall all be gathered together,
they shall stand and tremble and be confounded one with another. etc. Read the
Chapter and see farther.

Unhappy are they and among the dead is their hope, Wisdo. 13.
that call them Gods which are but the works of men's hands: Gold silver, and
the thing that is found out by cunning, ye similitude of beasts, or of any
vain stone that has been made by hand of old. Read also the xv. Chapter,
where more at large you shall find this declared.

Augustine in his 10. Book entitled De ciuitate Dei.
VVOrthyly are such called blessed as are in Heaven in the presence of God his
seat: which by the participiation of their creator are made to rejoice: by
his euerlastingnes and eternity are made strong: by his truth are made blessed
and holy, and because we here are mortal and miserable, they do mercifully
love us that we might be with them immortal and blessed: But they would not
that we should pray or sacrifice unto them: but only unto him: to whom both
they and we do sacrifice and pray: for we with them, and they with us together
are one City unto the Lord, Psalm. 80.
as it is said in the Psalm. O thou City of the Lord glorious things are said
of thee.

Augustine upon John Heart. 23. Chapter. Cap. 5.
THis is Christian Religion that we should worship one only God and not many
Gods: All holiness comes of one only God.
because none can make the soul blessed, but one only God by the
participiation of God, the soul is blessed, and not by the gift of another
holy or blessed spirit, neither yet by the gift of an Angel is it sanctified:
for thou shall not be made blessed of an Angel: But of whom the Angel is
blessed, of him shall thou receive blessing. Therefore who so shall honor or
pray unto saints either to be mediators or spokesmen between God and us,
either who so hops to have their requests fulfilled at their hands is far
disceyued and transgresses the holy will and commandment of his Lord and
maker.

Of repentance and confession in three sorts, that is toward God, Brotherly,
and Public confession toward God.
I Have made my fault known unto thee, Psalm. 31.
and mine unrighteousness have I not hidden, I have said I will confess mine
unrighteousness against my self unto the Lord, and thou have remitted the
ungodliness of my sin.

I confess mine own iniquity, Psalm. 50.
and my sin is ever before me to thee only have I sinned and done evil in
thy sight.

Confess your selves unto the Lord, Psalm. 50.
because he is good, and his mercy endures for ever.

If we do confess our sins, 1. John. 1.
God is faithful and just, that he may remitte our faults, and to purge us
from all iniquity.

Brotherly confession.
IF thou offerest thine offeringe at the Alter, Math. 15.
and there remembrest, that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there
thine offereng before the Alter, and go first to be reconsiled unto thy
Brother, and then come and offer thine offering.

Confess your sins and offenses one to another, James.
and pray one for another.

Forgive thy Brother that hurts or offends thee, Eccle. 28.
and then when thou prayest thy sins shall be forgiven the, one man reserueth
wrath to another, and seeks vengeance of God, seeing he has not mercy one a
man like unto himself, and yet asks mercy for his own sins.

Public confession and Excomminication.
IF thy brother have sinned against thee, Math. 18.
go and correct him between him and thee, if he hear thee, then have thou
wone thy Brother: but if he will not hear thee, then take to thee one or two
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses might stand all troth, and verity,
and if he harken not to them declare it to the Church, if he give no ear unto
the Church, then account him as an ethnicke and hethen. etc.

August. to Seleucian Epist. 105.
Repentance is a daily pain and punnishment of good and faithful men by the
which we do knock our breast and say, forgive unto us our debts. etc. And in
these words humbling our souls daily we do repent us of our sins.

August. in his third Sermond upon the nativity of our Lord.
NOthing makes true repentance but the hatred of sin and the love of God,
when thou do so repent that in thy mind thy sin does seem bitter unto
the, which before in thy life did seem sweet and pleasant unto thee, and when
that which before did delight thy body, does now trouble and disquiet the same,
then do thou fithe aright, and say only to the Lord, have I sinned and done
evil in thy fight. etc.

Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. Honiely. 31. Cap. 12.
IT is a good thing, that a man should confess and acknowledge his faults and
continually to have them in memory, for there is no greater remedy for them,
The continual remembrance of our sins is profitable.
then the continual memory thereof, and nothing makes man more to fly evil,
therefore let us persuade our selves that we have sinned, and let not only our
tongue pronounce it, but let also our conscience confess it, and let us not
only say we be sinners, but let us call to account and well remember every
sin particularly: I do not command thee that thou should openly show thy
self and accuse thee to others, but I will that, that thou should obey the
prophet, Too says these words Ca. 4.
which says. Reueyle and open thy life to the Lord, therefore before God
confess thy sins, Psalm. 36.
and before the true judge with prayer pronounce thy faults, not with the
tongue, but with the memory of thy conscience, and then trust that thou shall
obtain mercy, if continually thou do bear in mind and memory thy sins
thou shall never pretend or think evil to thy neighbor.

Chrysostom upon the Psalm. Miserere. Home.
DEclare and open thy sins that thou may wash them away, The Profet of
confession.
if thou be ashamed to tell them to any man, then daily repeat and record
them in thy mind, I do not command thee to tell them to thy servant which
will shame thee with them, but to God which heals thee to them, if thou do
not confess thy sins, do thou think that God does not know them, will he
demand of thee whether thou have offended, when thou did he was present,
when thou committest thy sin he knows it, thou wast not ashamed to sin
and offend, yet thou art ashamed to confess thine offenses, therefore in this
life confess thy sin that in the life to come thou may have rest.

Ambros of the repentance of Peter the apostle. 46. Sermond.
PEter burst out a wepinge, Math. 26.
yet with his mouth he said nothing, I find that he wept, The confession of
Peter thapostle.
but I find not what he said, I read of his tears, but what satisfaction he
made I read not, truly Peter wept and held his peace, for that which is
repented is not excused, yet that sin which cannot be defended and
mayntayned, may be washed away for tears do wash away the sin: Which to
confess in words wear shame, therefore tears are sins of repentance, and
forgiveness neither do they shame the demaunder but purchases his request,
inward, tears, are after a sort prayers, which although by outward request
they demand not for giuenes yet they deserve it they tell not there cause and
yet they do obtain mercy, and tears are more profitable then babbling with
the lyppes, for talking may err. But tears unfeigned cannot err, words
oftentimes does not declare the hole cause fully, but weping does fully declare
the affection, and therefore Peter did not speak with words by which he did
sin, by which he did abanden and forsake faith, left using them in his
confession sith he had used them in his denial he should not be thought to have
confessed aright from the heart and therefore he did rather confess his sin
by tears and lamentation then by outward words, therefore when we do sin we
must first lament and bewail our sins, and then pray faithfully, so that by
this example we do learn how to confess our faults so that the Apostells
denyinge of Christ is profitable unto us, and his amendment twice more
profitable for our learning and instruction.

S Hieron. upon Math. Chappiter. 16.
And I will give the keys of the kingdom of Heaven to thee. etc.
THis place the Bishops and priests not understanding did somewhat ascribe
unto themselves of the pride of the Pharisees, so that they thought they could
both damn innocents, and save themselves being sinners, whereas before God
there life is called to account and not the sentaunce of the priest. We read in
Leuiticus of leapers, where they be commanded to show themselves to the
priests. Not that the priest could choose the Leoprosye.

But that by his knowledge he could desarne who was, a leaper and who was not.

Ambrosius lib. of Cayine and Abell.
Sins are remitted by Gods word, whereof the Priests and Levites are
interpreters only.

John Chrysostom, Tom. 6. Sermond upon repentance and confession.
NOw it is not necessary to confess onr selves to present witnesses and in
thy cogitation and thought make confession of thy sins without any witness
and let God only behold thy confession, for he will not aid thee with thy
sins. But, if thou dosse confess them he gives remission thereof.

The same To. 7. Ho. 9. of Repentance.
THis is a place of medicine, and not of Judgment it gives not punishment but
the remission of sins that thou sholdest only confess thy faults and
offenses unto God above.

Ciprian lib. of the fall of man.
THe servant cannot remitte that, that is committed against the Lord and
Master.

Turn to the Lord and leave thy sins and pray before the^ face of the Lord,
Eccle. 17.
and so shall thou lessen thine offenses, turn to God, and fly from thy self
and from thine own righteousness etc.

Augustine upon John tract.
Et tibi dabo claues Regni and.
THe Rock was not called Petra or a Rock of Peter, Math. 12.
but Peter took his name of Petra? That is to say, a Rock, even as, Christ
takes not his name of a Christian, but a Christian of Christ, therefore the
Lord said, upon this Rock will I build my Church because Peter said, thou art
Christ the son of the living. Therefore upon this Petra and Rock which thou
have confessed, I will build says Christ my Church, and the Rock was Christ*
upon the foundation Peter also himself did build, and no man can lay other
foundation then that, that is alredye laid which is Jesus Christ. etc.

Augustine upon the Lords words in Math. Sermond. 13.
THou, says he, art Peter, and upon this Petram or Rock which thou have
confessed, I upon this Rock which thou have acknowleged saying, thou art
Christ the son of the living God. Will I build my Church as who would say I
will build thee upon me, and me upon thee for men buildinge on themselves said
I am of Paul. I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, he is Peter, But others which
would not be builded upon Peter said. I am of Christ, and the Apostle Paul
when he hard that he was chosen and Christ forsaken, is, says he, Christ
divided? Is Paul crucified for you? And are you Baptized in the name of Paul?
Whereas it is not so in Paul neither in Peter: But in the name of Christ, that
Peter the man might be builded upon Petram thy Rock and not Petra the Rock,
upon Peter the man. etc. As farther he said, Lord, if it be thou, command me
to come upon the waters to thee for I cannot do this in my self but in thee,
he did confess what his own strenght was of himself, and what he was of him,
We can do all things but by the Lords strenght and power.
by whose will he did believe he could do that, that infirmity and weakness of
man's nature could not do, therefore if it be thou command me, which when thou
have commanded shall be done that which my strenght cannot achiue and do by
presuming, thou can in commaundinge, and the Lord said come, and without any
doubt Peter at the word of the commander, and at the presence of him that
sustained him without any tarying leapt into the waters and walked one them, so
that he could do this that the Lord commanded not of himself, but of the
Lord, Ephe. 5.
for you wear some time darkness, but now are you light in the Lord, that no
man can do, in Paul, no man in Peter, nether in any other of the Apostles,
that is he hable to perform and do in the Lord, therefore did Paul well
contemninge himself, and aduaunsing or commending him for I, says he, was not
crucified for you. etc.

Theophilactus upon John. Cap. 8.
TO remite sins is only the property of God, To remitte sins is only in
the power of God.
therefore he says, every one that sins is servant unto the sin, and you
are therefore servants because you have sinned, farther because it was likely
they would say, albeit we be bond men to such servitude, yet have we
sacrifices and priests which will purge us from our offenses, and he says
that they also are servants, for all men, says he, he have sinned, and have
need of the grace of God, Roma. 3.
therefore your priests since they have sinned, they be servants and bondmen
to sin having no power to remit sins, Hebrae. 5.
which S. Paul with plain words does testify. The priest has need to offer
for himself as well as for the people because he also is subject to infirmity
the servant says he tarieth not in the house, that is to say, he has no
power to put out any man, because he is not the master of the house, but the
son is Lord of the house, and ever remains in the house, for in my Fathers
house says he are many mans^ons, therefore your Priests which are servants
have no power to forgive or remitte sins, but I the son which abide in the
house with power and principality, since I am Lord of the house, give you all
your liberty, for all things are mine, and I am of like and equal power and
strenght with my Father, and if I do make you free then with true liberty are
you redeemed.

Augustine upon the Epistle of S. John. tract. 2.
I write unto you little Children because your sins are forgiven you through
his name. 1 John. 2.

But by whose name are our sins forgiven? Sins ar forgiven by the name of
God only.
by the name of Augustine? Or by the name of Donatus? You may see what
Augustine is and likewise Donatus, neither are your offenses remitted, by thee
of Paul nor of Peter, for when they did divide the Church, and did desire to
separate the unity into parts, charity as a mother bringing forth her
littelones does in the Appostle open her bowelles, and bewayling them with
tears calls them back again to one name, which would have made to
themselves many names and repelleth them from her love that Christ might be
beloved saying was Paul crucified for you, either wear you baptized in his
name? 1 Cor. 1.
What says she? I will not that you should be mine but with me, be with me,
for we are all his which dyed for us which was crucified for us.

Origin upon Math. Hom. lia, 1.
Thou art Peter and upon this Rock. etc.
BEcause Bishops and Priests do take advantage of this text, saying that
they have received of Christ those keys of the kingdom of Heaven ye Peter had
because ye such as were bound of them on earth, He only has ye power that
Peter had that does his works.
were also bound in Heaven, and those that were losed one earth of them, were
losed in Heaven, that is to say had remission of their sins it is to be
thought that they say well it they do the works of Peter. wherefore it was
said to him, thou art Peter. etc. If the powers of hell do not prevail
against them then are they such as the Church of Christ is builded and
established upon, otherwise, it is a skorne, that we should say that he that
is bound in the bands of his sins and draws his sins like a long cord,
1 Thy. 3.
and is laden with the yoke of his offenses, because only that he is called a
Bishop to have such power and authority, The works of a Bishop.
that such as are here losed of him are also losed and made free in Heaven, or
that they that he byndeth are bound in Heaven also, therefore let the Bishop,
that binds or loses another be irreprehensible, let him be the husband of
one wife, sober, chaste, decent, full of hospitality, hable to teach, no Wine
bibber, no runner up and down, but modest. No brauler, not coueteous of money,
gouerninge well his household. Having his children subject in all chastity. If
he be such one, he will not unjustly bind upon earth, neither without
judgment unloose or make free, but if there be any man, that I may so say. A
Peter and shall think that he can so bind, that it shall be bound in Heaven,
and y^ he can so lose that it shall be losed in Heaven, he deceaueth himself not
understand the meaning of the scriptures. But being inflamed with his pride
falls into the judgment of the Devil.

Of the Sacrament of Christ's Body and blood.
I Am the Bread of life that came down from Heaven, John. 6.
and whosoever shall eat of this Bread shall live everlastingly, and the Bread
that I will give you, is my flesh, for the life of the world.

The Cup of Blessinge, which we bless, is it not the communication of
Christ's blood? 1 Cor. 10.
and the Bread which we break is it not the participasion of the Lords body?
Because many are one, and one body, which do participate of one Bread and one
Cup.

So often as you shall eat this bread and drink of this Cup, 1 Cor. 11.
you shall show the Lords death until his coming again.

The words of Beda, and Augustine as touching the Sacrament of the altar.
The Cup of blessing. etc. 1 Cor. 10.
THis which you see on the Altar of the Lord, the other night you did se, but
what it was, or what was the meaning thereof, or of how worthy a thing it was
a Sacrament, you have not yet hard, therefore that which you saw, is Bread and
wine which your eyes can testify. But your faith does requier to be
instructed, that the Bread is the Body of Christ and the Wine his blood, this
is shortly spoken and paraduenture it does satisfy your Faith, yet it would
have farther enstruction. For the Prophet says, unless you do believe you
shall not understand, therefore now you may say unto me you have commanded us
to believe then teach us to understand, Esaie. 6.
for paraduenture this thought may rise in your minds. We know from whence our
Lord Jesus Christ did receive his flesh, of the virgin Marie being an infant
he was nursed and received suck, he daily grew in age, until he became a
young man, of the Iuesse he suffered persicution. and being hanged on Cross
was thereon crucified, he was Buried and the third day he rose again,
assendinge into Heaven thither has he lift up his body. From whence he shall
return to judge both the quick and dead, and at this present there he is
sitting one the right hand of God the Father, then how is the bread his body,
and the wine his blood. Brethren therefore these are named Sacraments, because
in them there is one thing seen and another thing understood thereby, that which
you see has a corporal and bodyly shape and figure, but that which is
understand has a spiritual fruit and commodity, therefore if thou will
understand the Body of Christ hark what the Apostle says to the faithful, 1
Cor. 12.
you are the Body of Christ and the members, we are the Body of Christ.
therefore if you are the Body of Christ and members thereof, then your mystery
and Sacrament is set on the table of the Lord and yet you take it for the
Lords Sacrament, and you answer Amen, to that which you are, and by your
answer thereto you do subscribe, therefore thou hear the Body of Christ, and
in answering Amen thou art a member there of, if thy Ame^ be ture, why the^ is
this done in the figure we take away nothing of our own, then hear what the
Apostle says again, for when he spoke of this Sacrament he said. We being
many are made one Body and one bread, understand and rejoice, godliness, truth,
charity and unity, in these being one bread we many are one Body, consider
that the bread is not made of one corn but of many, when you were evil
intreted, then you were as it were ground, when you are baptized, you are as it
were kneded and put together. When you have received the sanctifiing of the
holy Ghost you are as it were, baked. Therefore be that, that you see, and
receive and take that, that you are. This the Apostle said astouchinge the
bread, even so brethren consider of the wine whereof it is made wine, Actor. 4.
for many Berries and Grapes grow in one cluster, How the wine is made.
but the Ieuise and liquor thereof does run into one unity and substance, so
our Lord Jesus Christ, has sealed us. And has made us being a mystery of
peace t'apertayne unto him, and the Sacrament of our union he has consecrated
in his most blessed table. Whosoever receaueth the Sacrament of unity, and
keapeth not the bond of peace, receaueth it not to his profitte, but as a
^itnesse against himself.

Augustine upon John tract. 26. Cap. 6.
HE that eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me and I in him,
Iobn. 6.
this is to eat that food, and to drink that drink to remain and abide in
Christ, and to have Christ abiding in him. And by this we see that he that
abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without dout does not
spiritually eat Christ neither drinks his blood although carnally and
visible with his teath he do receive the Sacrament of the body and most
precious blood of Christ.

Christ entered not into the holy place made with hands which were examples of
true things, Hebreos. 9
but he assended into heaven that now he might apeare in the fight of God for
us, not that he should oftentimes offer up himself. etc.

Thou wast afflicted with penury and scarsenes and god gave thee Manna for meat
with both thou and fathers knew not: Detro. 8.
that he might show unto thee that not only by bread man lives, but by every
word that comes out of the Lords mouth.

Augustine quinquam. Psalm. 89.
WHen the Lord spoke of his Body. He said unless a man eat my flesh he
cannot have life everlasting, and farther says. The words that I spoke unto
you are spirit and life, therefore understand spiritually what I have said unto
you. You shall not eat this body which you see neither shall you drink that
blood that they will shed which shall crucify me but I have commended unto you
the Sacrament which being understand spiritually shall gue you life.

Libro sententiarum Augustine.
HE eats the Bread of life, and drynketh of the cup of eternity that
abides in Christ, for he that is disceuered from Christ, neither does eat
Christ's flesh nor drink his blood, although daily he receaueth the Sacrament
to the judgment of his great presumption.

Origin in Leuiti. Homely. 7.
Understand that they are figures that are written in the holy scripture, and
therefore as spiritual and not as carnal, understand and examine that, that is
said therein. for it carnally you do understand them they do hurt you and not
nurrishe you. There is both in the old Testament a letter that kylleth as also
in the new Testament, if hit be not understand spiritually for if thou do
follow the letter where as it is said, unless you eat my flesh and drink my
blood. This Letter kylleth you, will thou that I show in the scriptures
another Letter that kylleth he, says he. That has not a sword let him sell
his coat and buy a sword, behold this Letter is of the Gospel, and yet it
kylleth. But according to the meaning and sprite you understand it it kills
not, but there is therein contained a quickninge spirit, and therefore whatsoever
is written either in the law or in the Gospel spiritually understand as
spiritual, Luc. 22.
for he that is spiritual judges all things and is himself judged of no man.

In the same place Homeli. 9.
ANd thou that art come to the true Bishop that has apeased Gods wrath to
thee wards by his own blood. The flesh and Blood of the word of God.
And has reconsiled thee to the Father, stick not only to the blood of the
flesh. But rather learn the blood of the word, and hear what he says
himself for this is my blood, that shall be shed for you in remission of sins.

Bernard upon Qui habitat Verse 3. Sermond. 3.
Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood etc. And
they said this commaundment is hard and they al went backward. But what is to
eat his flesh and to drink his blood but to communicate with his Passions,
and to follow that conversation which he lead in the flesh, which the Sacrament
offered one the Alter does signify where we do receive the Lords Body, that as
we see the form of Bread enter into our bodies we know thereby what
conversation he had one the earth, that he does enter into us to dwell by faith
in our hearts. For when righteousness enters into us, he enters that of God is
made our righteousness. etc.

Augustine of the Lorder words according to Luc. Sermond. 8.
Give us this day our daily Bread. When I spoke of the Sacrament I told you,
that before the words of Christ that, that is offered is called Bread, but
after Christ's words be spoken then is it not called bread but the body,
where as he says our bread he says it (...), Supersubstantiall Bread.
that is to say, supersubstantially is it not the Bread that enters into the
Body. But it is the Bread of everlasting life that sustaineth the substance of
our souls.

Chrysostom Tome. 1. Homely. 1. ex Capi. 15.
THE Sacrament of Peace is that Sacrament that does not agree with the seking of
money and Simony, The Sacrament of peace.
for if Christ did not spare himself for our sakes, whose suffering and death
we are not worthy of, if we spare not our soul for which Christ gave himself,
and yet do we spare our monye? Therefore let no Judas nor vserrer approach to
this Table, whereof both shall perish by the desire of money and Brass.
Wherefore let us fly this pit neither let us think it sufficient to our
salvation that if thou do rob and spoil infaunts and widows to offer thy
golden Challies besette with precious stones in this Table, will thou honor
this sacrifice, then offer thy soul for which Christ was offered and make that
golden. For if thy soul he a lompe of lead, what shall the Golden Vessels
prophitte thee, and surely that Table was not of silver, neither was the Cup
of gold wherein Christ gave to his Disciples his most precious blood, it were
they all most precious and honorable because they wear replenished with the
holy Ghost, will thou honor the Body of Christ, then despise him not when he
is naked, and seem not to clothe him in the Church, and to suffer him to starve
and dye for cold abroad, for he that said this is my body, and did also
fulfill by his word the dead said also you saw me a hungered and did not feed
me, and forasmuch as you did it not to one of these litleones, The body in the
Sacrament.
you did it not to me this body of Christ does not want clothing and our
outward Raiment, but it requiteth a clean soul. But this body of Christ which
is the company of the poor, would be harbroued and carefully cloched,
therefore let us learn to sinowe Christ, and to honor him according to his
will as he would be honored, for he that is honored, does delight to be
honored, with that honor which he most requires, and not with that honor as
likes us best. Even so Peter thought that he did honor Christ well when he
would not suffer Christ to wash his feet, which certainly was contrary,
therefore honor him as he will, destribute thy goods and riches to the poor,
in the Table of Christ thou nedest not vesseles of gold but bring with thee a
pure, sincere, and golden hac^e answer me here to, what auaeleth it if thy
Table be throw out besette with plate and yet thou dyest for hunger. Therefore
first feed the hungrye, and afterward of the surplusage make honorable
vessels for the Table, For what proffitte comes if thou makes a golden
Challesse, and (...) therein so much as a little cold water, therefore so honor
Christ as he will be honored and so receive the Sacrament as he would thou
should receive it, (...) that (...) otherwise, is in haunger of Hell (...).

This man after he had offered one offringe for sin everlastingly sits one
the right hand of God, Hebre. 10
hereafter loking till his enemies he made his (...).

With one oblation has de everlastingly fulfilled he offringe, Hebre. 9.
for those that are sanctified. For where is the remission of sins, Eodem loco
there is no more offering for sin.

But by his own blood he entered (...) into the holy place, and there found
Remission. etc.

That he should not often offer by himself as did the hye Priest. etc.

Augustine the. 10. Book Deciuitote Dei, Cap. 5.
THE visible sacrifice is a testimony of an invisible sacrifice, Etimologie, of
the word.
that is to say a holy sign.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON in Fletestreat at the sign of the Faucon by VVylliam
Gryffirh, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones Churchyard.

Anno Domini. 1570.

woodcut depicting griffin


