The four chiefyst offices belongyng to Horsemanshippe, That is to say. The
office of the Breeder, Of the Rider, of the Keeper, and of the Ferrer. In the
first part whereof is declared the order of breding of horses. In the second
how to break them, and to make them horses of service, Conteyninge the whole
art of Ridynge lately set forth, and now newly corrected and amended of many
faults escaped in the first printynge, as well touching the bittes as
otherwise. Thirdely how to diet them, as well when they rest as when they
travel by the way. Fourthly to what diseases they be subject, together with
the causes of such diseases, the signs how to know them, and finally how to
cure the same. Which books are not only paynfully collected out of a number
of aucthours, but also orderly dysposed and applied to the use of this our
country. By Tho. Blundeuill of Newton Flotman in Norff.

Imprinted at London by VVyllyam Seres dwelling at the west end of Paul's
church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS SINGVLER GOOD LORD, THE Lord Roberte Dudley,
Earl of Leycester, Barron of Denbighe, Knight of the honorable order of the
Garter, Master of the Queens majesty's horses, and one of her highness pryuie
council. Thomas Blundeuil wissheth perfect felicity.
AFTER THAT I had put forth the Art of Riding, and saw how tha^kfully it
pleased not only your Honor, but also the most part of the Ientleme^ of this
Realm, to accept the same: I was so much encoraged thereby as I sought to make
the said book more periecte, by addinge thereunto three other books, whereof
the first should treat of the breedynge of Horses, the second of their diet,
to preserve them long in health, and the third of their diseases: declarynge
therewithal the causes, signs, and cures of the same, which books how
necessary they be, and how meet they are to accompany the Art of Riding, the
matter it self (being well handled) would evidently show. For then it should
be a perfect work, comprehending the four chiefyst Offices belonging to
Horsemanshyppe, that is to say: The office of the Breeder, of the Ryder or
Breaker, of the Keeper, and of the Ferrer. For as towchinge the Bitmaker and
Saddler their offices, the first is indifferently well declared already in the
Art of Riding: and the Sadler his office, shall be taught herafter in another
little book of additions, which I entende God willing to join to this volume,
briefelye co^prehendyng all the good precepts of a later Writer, now being
your Honors most excellent Ryder, called master Claudio Corte: Not only
touching that office, but also touching diverse of the other Offices before
recited. Which Book shall supply to all the wants of such necessary
things, as either Gryson in his book or I perhaps have neclygently omytted.
And truly, your Honor deserves no little praise, for procuryng so synguler a
man into this Realm: For besides his perfection in riding, he is so well
learned, wise, courteouse, and modest withal, as his acquaintance, company,
and friendship ought to be right dear unto al civil Ientlemen, and specially
to those that delyght in Horsemanshyppe. But now to return unto my purpose,
for that I saw it lay not in me to perform this work, so as it might
answer every man's expectacion, and specially of such as are more ready to
find faults, then to amend them, I did almost repent me of mine enterprise
and good desire: and the rather, for that I had no one certain Author to
follow, that either wrote of these matters to the full, or in such order as
did satisfye my mind, but should be driven to deal with a great nombre of
Authors, whose sayings and experiences, together with mine own small
knowledge gotten by traueling in foreign countreies: I must not only orderly
dispose: but also apply the same to the use of this our country. Which thing
being more laborious (the^ some perhaps take it,) I had clean given it over if
your good Lordshyp had not ben, by whom I was so much hearted, as I could not
chose but to take the same in hand, and to go thoroughe withal so well as I
could: And therefore if any man receives any commodity thereby (as I doubt not
but he shall, if he will vouchsafe to read all that I have written from the
beginning to the ending) he shall have most cause to be thankful to your
Honor for the same. And I believe your thanks and praise should be so much
the more, if it would please your Honor to be a mean that the Queen's highness
may not only cause such statutes as were made in her noble Father and dear
Brothers time, (both of good Memory) touching the breedinge of horses upon
commons to be put in execution: but also that all such parkes within this
realm, as be in her highness hands, and mete for that purpose, might not
wholly be employed to the keeping of Dear, (which is altogether a pleasure
without profyt) but partly to the necessary breeding of Horses for service,
whereof, this realm of all others at this instant has greatest need. The lack
of which, if any invasion should chance (which God defend) would quickly appear
(I fear me) to the great peril and danger of this her highness realm. And her
Majesty geuyng this good example, I doubt not but that the most part of the
noble men and Ientlemen of this realm having parks or grounds impaled mete for
such use: would follow the same. And to the intent that no covetousness might
hinder so good an act: I would wish the covetous mind and desire of all men to
be brideled by a law and discipline. Whereby it would be provided that not only
a sufficient nombre of able Horses may be bred within this Realm: but also
that the same horses may be broken, kept mainteyned, and exercysed accordyngly.
Monsieur de l' Angeay in his book of war, would have no man to keep a hackney
or easy horse to ride on him self: unless he kept also a horse mete for
service in the field. Which thing I fear me would not please us English men
at al, which of late days are more given to private ease and singular
commodity, then to a wealth public or common profit. Notwithstanding, if a
good law (as I said before) were made as well for the breding, as exercising of
great horses, and Gueldinges meet for service: and the same straightly
executed by uncorrupted officers, which in mine opinion would be skillful
Surueiours for the breeds and expert muster masters for the horses of service.
And also that such Surueies be made twice a year at the least, and that the
Musters of the horses of service be taken throughout the whole realm four
times in a year, that is to say quarterly, and al in one day, for the avoiding
of false Musters: I believe that in short space we should not only have plenty of
good horses, but also that the Ientlemen of this realm would so far pass
the Frenchmen and al other nations in this exercise, as they now excel us:
whereby this realm should be of such force, as our enemies would always be
afraid to attempt any enterprise against us. Wherefore me thinks your honor
cannot by any one way deserve more praise or better gratify al true English
hearts, then by seking to bring to pass so nedeful a thing as this is:
whereunto because I know your Lordshyp to be of your own good nature and
disposicion so ready and prone, as no man more: I leave therefore to trouble your
Honor any further, prayenge God long to prosper the same.

Always pressed to serve your Lordship. Th. Blundouill.

A short Preamble declarynge in what points the knowledge of a Horsebreder
chiefly consists, whereon depends the order of this book.
WHO so is desirous, and therewith able to have a good race or breed of Horses
(for to have skyll in this matter without good will, and ability, to execute
the same, would little prevail) ought first to know, whether his ground be
meet for that purpose or not, and how to sever the same accordyngly.
Secondlye it behooves him to know the diverse kinds of Horses and Mares, to
the intent that he may provide himself of such as are most worthy to be
kept, and will thrive best in his ground. Thyrdly how to use them when he
has them, as well at, and before the time of engendrynge, as after that the
Mares have conceived and foled. And also how to use their ofsprynge, as well
during their foleage, as at their full age: so as they may redownde to his
most commodity, and with least labor and charge. Of which three general
points, with what order I treat in this book: the contents of the chapters
hereafter following, do plainlye declare.

The Contents of the Chapiters.
Which grounds are meet for Races, and which be not. Also how such
grounds ought to be divided or severed, and to what end such division
serves. Cap. i. O the diverse kinds of Horses and Mares, according to the
Countries from whence they come, and which be best. Cap. ii. Of the Turkey
Horse. Of the Horse of Barbary. Of the Horses that come from the Isles of
Sardygnia and Corsica. Of the Napolitan, or Courser of Naples. Of the Iennet of
Spain. Of the Hungarian. Of the high Almayne. Of the Flaunders Horse. Of the
Frizelande Horse. Of the Swiethlande Horse. Of the Iryshe Hobbye.
A comparyson of the Races above rehearsed, as towchyng the Climates under
which they be bredde, and which of them will thryue best here in England:
and are most meet to serve every Breders sundry purpose or intent. Cap. iii.
How to choose Stallions and Mares, meet for breed, and of what age they
ought to be. And finallye how the Studdes ought to be tame, and not wild.
Cap. iiii. At what time of the year it is best for Horses and Mares to
engender. And in what sort they ought to be put together. And how to know
when a Mare desires the Horse. Also how many Mares one Stallion is able to
cover in one year. And fynallye when the stallions should be removed from
them. Cap. v. What order is to be observed, towchinge the covering of Mares,
when the Stallions do not run with them in the pastures, but are kept in the
stable, and how the same stallions should be dieted. Also at what time of the
day the Mares ought then to be covered. And finally how to know whether they
have conceived or not. Cap. vi. How to make your Mares to conceive either
horse foles, or Mare foles, and of what color you lust to have your self.
Cap. vii. Whether Mares should be forced to abide the horse, though they have
no lust, or not. And how to make both horse and Mare, having no lust, to have
a lust to engender. Also how to abate their lust if need require. Cap. viii.
Which Mares should be covered every year, and which not. And how to do,
that those Mares which you would have to bear every year, shall not go
barren. Cap. ix. How mares should be used after they have conceived, and are
with fool, and what causes them to cast their foles before their time. Cap.
x. How to help a Mare that is in danger at the time of her foling. And how
you shall cause her to expel her secundine or Clean. Cap. xi. How to make a
mare to cast her fool that is not worthy to be bred, or for some other needful
cause. Cap. xii. How Mares should be used after they have foled. Also how
long the foles should suck. And how they ought to be used during their
foleage. Also how to harden their houes. Cap. xiii. How to know of what
stature, making, and disposicion, the foles when they are new foled, will be
when they come to age. Cap. xiiii. Of the growth as well of Marecoltes, as
horsecoltes. And how to know which will continue in goodness, and live
longest. Cap. xv. When, and how Coltes should be weaned from their da^mes: and
how they ought to be severed according to their kinds and ages. Cap. xvi. Of
the guelding of Coltes, and for what cause they be guelt, also at what age, and
in what time of the year they ought to be guelt. Cap. xvii. At what age and in
what time of the year it is best taking up of Coltes to break them, and how
they ought at their first halteringe to be used. Cap. xviii. How, and at what
age a Coltes mouth should be cut, or certain of his teethe drawn, when
the bitte for fault thereof can not have his true resting place. Cap. xix. Of
the Culling out of refuse Mares and Coltes. And also of those that should be
reserved for the maintenau^ce of the Studde or Stock. Cap. xx
Thus ends the contents of the Chapters following.
What things are to be considered in those grounds that should be appointed
to the breedinge of horses. Also how such grounds ought to be divided, and to
what end such division serves Cap. i.
AND first as towchinge the ground, two things are to be considered, that is,
the quantitye and qualitye. The quantitye for two respects. First to the
intent it be not charged with more Cattle then it is able to bear, for the
Cattle not being sufficiently fed can not prosper. The second respect is,
for that the greater the ground is, the more particions are needful, partlye
for change of pasture sake, for according to the old proverb, change of
pasture makes fat Calves. And such particions would be made with high pale,
rail, or else deep ditche, and very thick quick set. For Horses, Mares, and
wild Coltes, are not so easelye kept in as other cattle is. But chiefly such
particions are nedeful, as well for the stallions to run every one severally by
him self, together with his own Mares, during the time of engendring, as also
for the Coltes when weanynge time commes, to be severed from their dammes, of
which two points we shall speak hereafter in their due places more at
large. Moreover by such particions, besides the comoditie of the grass and
hay that shall be preserved thereby, for winter store, the ground it self
being parhaps before very ample, waste, and wild, and thereby enclininge the
Cattle to be of like nature, shall be brought to a more formality, and so the
beasts them selves shall be made the more domestical, and famylyar. And the
rather if they be handeled and made tame in their youth, whereof we shall talk
hereafter more at large. Notwithstanding I would not have the ground so
straitened with particions, but so as they may have sufficyent scope to run
and travel to and fro therein for their living. For as to much labor, leanes,
and poverty, depryueth them of lust to enge^der, even so overmuch rest and
fatnes, lets conception, and causes a dangerous folyng. Wherefore I would
wyshe the Mares to be kept in a mean estate until they have foled, and then
to be best fed, to the intent that they may have abundance of milk in their
dugges, which matter shall be talked of hereafter more at full in his proper
place. But now to appoint how many acres of ground will serve a mare and her
ofspringe until they are mete to be broken: I think it not needful, since the
goodness of the ground must rule that matter, and partlye the discrecion of
the owner, who by experiens ought to know his own ground best, for all
grounds be not of like fertilitye. Neither do I think that any owner is so
ignorant, but that he knows an Horse or a Mare to be a greater feader then
any other kind of Cattle, and therefore had need to have greater allowance.
Yet consideringe that the Horse biteth nerer the ground then any other Cattle
(the sheep, and the Cony only excepted) whereby he gathers more food out of
one acre of ground, then any other beast can do almost out of an acre and a
half: Me thinks that a third part more then will serve a Cow and her
ofspringe, should also feed a Mare and her ofspringe, so that they be well
provided for in winter season. For at hard meat they be to hard for all other
Cattle, by reason they have sharper teth, and do both Chowe, and also swalowe
down their meat with more speed. And therefore of winter meat they had need
to have double allowaunce. And such winter meat for Mares and Coltes would
be good sweet hay, and well stacked up in the dryeste and warmest places of
those grounds where as they should be wintered. Nyghe unto which stackes would
be built howses mete to harber as well the Mares with their foles as the
weanlynges, (but severally by them selves) in time of snow and such like
stormy and cold weather, or else to avoid that cost and charge of
buildynge, the hay may be laid upon houelles made with great forked posts
and strong rafters, in such sort as the cattle may both stand, and lie
dry underneath the same, within which Houelles may be placed either standing
or hanging rackes at such heyghte, as the foles together with their da^mes
may reach unto the hay, that shall be cast therein. And if such Houelles
were enclosed with high hedge or hurdle, they should be so much the warmer,
and defend the Cattle the better from the cold wind. Nygh unto which
Houelles, or howses, let there be one pasture always kept vntowched, and
not fed on until Shroweftide, betwyxte the which time and the myddest of May
is always most danger of hunger bayne. Thus having talked sufficientlye as
towchyng the quantity and deuisyon of the ground, let us also speak somewhat
of the qualitye thereof. The qualitye chieflye consists in four points. The
first is to have plenty of short and sweet grass for common feade, and also
of long and rank grass as well for hay, as for the Mares that give suck.
The second is to lack no good water and fresh sprynges. The third to have
dry layer. The fourth to have shade and shelter, either of trees or of high
bushes, to defend the Son, the wind, and stormye weather. And the dryer,
the harder under foot, and the higher that such ground is, the better, yea,
and it is as very needful that some part thereof might be craggye and
stonnye, (so as it be not barren of grass) and specially for the Coltes to
run in when they be weaned from their da^mes. For to travel to, and fro, in
such grounds for their living, shall make them to have strong legs, and
hard houes.

By this means you may perceive that neither rank, marryshe, cold, or
wette grounds be mete for the purpose, for such kinds of grounds, partly
for lack of sweet, and fyrme food, the grass thereof being rank, sower, and
waterishe, and partly for lack of dry layer, most commonly, do bring forth no
other but slow, heavy, dulle, gross hedded, side bellied, and gouty legged
Iades. And therefore I would wyshe him that would have a good race, to foresee
that his ground be endowed with such properties as are before rehearsed.

Of the diverse kinds of Horses and Mares according to the countreies from
whence they come, and which be best. Cap. ii.
I Mean not here to treat of all the kinds of Horses, that be in the world,
for that were an infynite work, and never attempted heretofore by any writer
that I could read. For as Oppianus says, there be as many kinds of Horses,
as there be diverse countries and nations. And to say the truth it would be to
small purpose. For what would it avail you to hear (onles it were for
noueltyes sake) that in some contreys there be horses no bigger then Ra^mes,
and in some Countries horses be made like Unicornes, in some Country again
Mares to conceive with the western wind, without the help of any Stallion,
whose Coltes do not live above three years. Wherefore leaving all such
strange kinds aparte, I will only talk of the most worthy, and specially
of such as have been known of late days by good experience, to prosper very
well in this land, and be not unknown to the most part of the Ientelmen of
this Realm, which kinds be these here following. The Turk, The Barbarian,
the Sardynian, the Napolitan, the Iennet of Spain, the Hungarian, the high
Almaine, the Frizeland Horse, the Flanders Horse, and the Iryshe Hobby. Of
which kinds, whilst I speak, I must needs also make some mention of the
best kinds that have been either in Asia, Affricke, or Europe, from whence
these be descended, though parhaps more bastardly then I would wish, and all
for lack of that industry and diligence which has been used by our
forefathers in times past in bredinge them, in somuche as we can assure our
selves in this our age of no certain race, yea it suffices now to believe the
seller that says, the horse is of such a country* or race, and therewith be
somewhat fair to the eye, and then al is good enough, though he be never so
stark a Jade.

Of the Turkye Horse.
BUt now beginning first with the Turk, because he comes fartheste of, me
thinks it were not amiss to co^sydre that as Turkey it self is of long time
since, become a great Empire extending very far into all the three parts of the
world abouesaid, comprehendyng diverse kingdoms and countries, and yet
altogyther, is commonly called by the name of Turkey: Even so, the horses that
come from any of the Turks dominions, or frontiers of his next neighbors, be
called Turkey horses. and therefore I think it good here to declare unto you the
opinions of the old writers, touching the races that have been in those
countries, now subject to the great Turk, or therabout, to learn thereby (if it
may be,) whether those that we call Turkye horses, be so in deed or not, and of
which of those races, they seem most lykely to discende. And first we will
begin with the chief races of Asia, which be the Parthians, the Medes, the
Armenians, the Cappadocians, and many others. The Parthians (says Absirtus) be
great of stature, bold, courageous, and sure of footemanshyp. Vegetius also
says, yt they be very well rained, and have an easy ambling pase. But the
Medes do excel them in comlynesse of shape. The Armenians and Capadocians, do
descend of the Parthians, and be like them in all poincts: saving that they are
somewhat more heavy headed. The horses of Greece, as A sirtus says, have good
legs, great bodies, comely heads and be of an high stature, and very well
made forward, but not backward, because they are pyn buttocked,
notwithstanding they be very swifte, and of a bold courage. But of all the
races in Greece, both the horses and Mares of Thessalia, for their beauty,
bygnes, bowntie, and courage, of all Aucthors are most celebrated. For which
cause Xerexes at his coming in to Greece made a runninge of Horses in Chariottes
to be proclaimed only in Thessalia, because he would have his own horses to
run with the best Horses in Greece. Julius Caesar also, being Dictatour of
Rome, knowinge the courage of these Horses, was the first that ordained the^ as
a spectacle before the people to fight with wild bulls, and to kill them. The
Pelleians and Magnesians are also very well commended. The Pelleians be so
named of a town in Thessalia called Pella. And the Magnesians of Magnesia, a
regiou of Macidonia next adioyninge to Thessalia. The Epirotes be froward and
disobedient to the bit, notwithstanding Paulus Iouius making mention of the
last great wars which the Uenetians had, not only with the Turks, but
also in a manner with all Chrystendome, gives the Epirotes great praise for
their swiftness and nimblenesse. In so much as the Uenetians (as he says)
esteemed their horses more, and waged their riders better the^ any other
horsemen that served them at that time. But the Horses of Tracia which is now
the chefest part of Turkey in the which Constantinople the head city and seat
of the great Turk stands, be accounted worse then all the rest. For the
most part of the writers do discryue them after this sort. The Thracians be
foul and evil fashioned, having rough bodies, great shoulders, and risinge
backs like unto Camelles, crooked legs, and go roulinge and unseemly, as well
in their pace as runninge. Notwithstanding, the Horses that I have seen come
from Turkey as well into Italy as hither in to England, be indifferent fair
to the eye, though not very great nor strongly made, yet very light and swyfte
in their running and of great courage, and therefore seem to discende of the
Grecian race, before dyscribed by Absirtus, But their traueylinge pace is
neither Amble, Rack, nor Trotte, but a certain kind of easy train. Albeit
for the most part they be evil mouthed, by reason that in Turkey they be never
ridden (as I have learned) until they be x. or.xii. year old, whereby they wax
so hedde strong, as they be not easily brought to make a good stop. yea, if
when you will run him at his setting forth, you say but this word ( Braye)
unto him he will never leave runninge so long as his breath will serve him,
shonnynge nothing that shall stand in his way, if he may go over the same by
any means possible, for they be of nature very courageous, and will do more by
gentle means then by stripes or great threatninges, for that makes them more
desperate, and brings them clean out of order. Thus much of the Turk.

Of the Horse of Barbary.
THe Barbaryan is a horse that commes out of Barbaria a Country in Affrycke,
conteinyng under it the two Regions of Mauritania, liyng against Spain,
whereof the one is called Mauritania Tingitana. And the other is called
Mauritania Cesariensis. It conteyneth also the country of Numidia, and that
part which is called Africa Minor, that is to say, the lesser Affricke, so
that Barbaria stretches very far. And there be many good Races within the
same, and in the frontiers of the regions there about, as the Mauritanians, the
Libians, Cireneyans, the Numidians, and many others. The Mauritanians be much
commended of the writers, not only for their good shape and swiftnes in
runninge, but also for that they be excellently well breathed, and thereby are
both able to maintain a very long cariere, and also to abide any kind of
labor and travail, yea and beside that they will abide the sight and rorynge
of a Lion, whereof there is great store and plentye in that country. Next
unto these are the Libians, which be of like goodness and of like shape, sauinge
that the Libians be stronger made, longer bodied, thicker rybbed, and brother
brested, and of all Horses, as Aelianus says, they do require less tending
and keeping. For their masters in that country when they travail by the way,
do neither wipe their legs, courry them, nor litter them, nor pare their
houes, and as soon as their journey is done they turn them forth to the
pasture, and make no more a do. Again the Mares of this kind or race, as the
auctours write, be so delighted with Music, as the herdeman or keeper, with
the sound of a pipe: may lead them whither he will him self. The Cireneians
(as Absirtus says) be great of stature, and have small and gaunte bellies,
they be swyft in running and sure of fotemanship, and in labor good at length,
for which causes they were much used in the old time to run for wagers in
Chariottes. But those horses that we commonly call Barbarians, do come out of
the king of Tunnys land, out of Massilia and Numidia, which for the most part
be but little horses, but therewith very swifte and able to make a very long
Cariere, which is the cause why we esteem them so much. And it should seem
by Vigetius, that this race came first from Spain: who affirms them to be
very swyfte in runnynge, and meet for the saddle. Thus I end with the races
of Barbary.

Of the Horses of Sardygnia and Corsica.
THE Horses that come out of the Isles of Sardignia and Corsica, as Uolateranus
says, have short bodies, and be very bold and couragyous, and unquiet in their
pace, for they be of so fierce and whote colericke complexion: and therewith so
much used to running in their country, as they will stand still on no ground.
And therefore this kind of horse requirith a discrete and patient Ryder, who
must not be over hasty in correctyng him, for fear of marryng him all together.

Of the Courser of Naples.
THE Napolitan which we commonly call a Courser of Naples, is a trim horse,
being both comely and strongly made, and of so much goodness, of so ientle a
nature, and of so high a courage as any horse is, of what country so ever he
be. He is easily known from all other horses, by his no less clean, then
strong making, his lymmes are so well proportioned in every point, and partly
by his portlynes in his gate, but chiefly by his long slender head, the
nether part whereof, that is to say from the eyes downewarde, for the most
part is also somewhat bending like a hawks beak, which makes him to Reyne
with the better grace, and yet the Italians do both write and say, that these
Coursers be nothing so strong now as they have been in times past, partly
parhaps for that like industry of late days has not been used in breding
them, as in times past, and partly for that nature does decay every day more
and more, as well in man as in beast. But how so ever they be, in mine opinion,
their Ientle nature and docility, their comelye shappe, their strength, their
Courage, their sure footemanshippe, their well reynyng, their loftye pace,
their clean trotting, their strong galloppyng, and their swift running well
considered (all which things they have in manner by nature) they excel numbers
of other races, even so far as the fair greyhoundes the foul mastiffe
Curres.

Of the Iennet of Spain.
THe Iennet of Spain is finely made both head, body, and legs, and very
seemly to the eye, sauinge that his buttockes be somewhat slender, and for
his fine making lightness and swiftnes withal, he is very much esteemed, and
especially of noble men, as Camerarius says, which Oppianus also affirms,
saying: that the Iennet in swiftnes passes the Parthyans and all other Horses
what soever they be, even so far as the Egle excedeth all the birds in the
air, and as the Dolphin passes all the fishes in the sea, but therewith he
says that they be but small of stature, of small strength and of small courage,
al which things seem to agree very well with those Iennets that be brought
hither into England, unless it be the last point. For I have heard some of the
Spaniards to set such praise on their Iennets courage, as they have not let
to report that they have carried their ryders out of the field, I can not tell
how many miles, after yt the Iennettes themselves have been shot clean
through the bodies with harquebusshes. Which report I have hard to be true by
diverse of our own Soldiers, which if it be true in deed, it does the better
counteruaile their small stature and little strength, which is manifest to al
men's eyes that do behold them, and yet Absirtus seems to be of a contrary
opinion: who writes of them in this sort. The horses of Spain (says he) be
great of stature, having fine heads, and right up bodies, very well compacte
together in all parts, saving that their buttockes be somewhat to slender.
They be strong and able to endure great labor, and commonly they be neither
to fat nor yet to lean, and in their travail they need not to be quickened
with the spur, and yet they be nothing mete to run or to pass a cariere,
because there houes be not good. And as from their Foleage unto their full age,
they be very obedient and tractable, so from thence forth they wax to be
curste and froward. All which things parhappes might be truly said of the
Spanyshe horse, in Absirtus time, for the most part of his sayings are
verefied by good experience even in these our days, unless it be as touching
his greatness of stature and strength, which may be decayed sense his time.
And perhaps those horses whereof he writes were of another climate then
ours, which may cause much alteration, both in stature and strength. For
Albertus says, that those Horses which are bred betwixt the third clyme, and
the end of the sixth, are always of greatest stature, and specially those that
are bred in Spain. Notwithstanding those that be bred in the seventh climate
which is more toward ye North, though they be not fully so great, yet they be
stronger and also will endure much more labor. The pace of the Iennet is
neither trotte nor amble, but a comelye kind of going, like the Turk. Thus
much of the Iennet.

Of the Hungaryan.
THe Hungarian by Vegetius is described thus, the Hungarian says he, has a
great and hoked head, and his eyes stand almost without his head, his
nosetrilles are narrow, and his Jaws broad, his neck is long and rough, with
a mane hanging down beneth his knees, he has a large bulk, a right back, a
long bushe tail, his legs be strong, his pastournes small, and his houes full
and broad, his guts are hollow, and al his body is full of empty corners, his
buttockes are not half filled with fat, neither do the brawnes or his
muscles appear, of stature he is more in length then height, and therewith
somewhat side bellyed, his bones are also great, he is rather lean then fat,
which leanesse is so answerable to the other parts of his body, as the due
proportion observed in his deformytye makes the same to be a bewtye. And as
towching his inward disposition, he is as Vigetius says, both temperate and
wise, and able to abide great labor, cold and hunger, and therefore very mete
for the war. Camerarius also says, that they be very swifte, and if they be
provoked by some iniurye, they will both byte and stryke, otherwise not. Their
pace is a hard trotte.

Of the Almayne Horse.
THe Almaine is commonly a great horse, and though not finely, yet very
strongly made, and therefore more meet for the shocke then to pass a cariere,
or to make a swyfte manege, because they be very gross and heavy, yet by
industry they are made lighter behind then before, for their riders do use in
their maneging to make them to turn always with their hinder parts, and not
with their fore parts: like Jack anapes, when he is made to come over the
cheyne, whereby they keep their Horses head always upon the enemy. The
disposition of this horse (his heavy moulde considered) is not evil, for he is
very tractable and will labor indifferently well by the way, but his pace for
the most part is a very hard trotte.

Of the Flanders Horse.
THe Flaunders horse in his shape, disposition, and pace, differs in a manner
nothing from the Almayne horse: saving that for the most part he is of a
greater stature and more puissant. The Mares also of Flaunders be of a great
stature, strong, long, large, fair and fruytefull, and besides that, will
endure great labor, as is well seen, for that the fleminges do use none other
drawght, but with those Mares in their wagons, in the which I have seen two
or three Mares to go lightly away with such a burden, as is almost
incredible.

Of the Fryzeland Horse.
THe Fryzelande Horse is no very great Horse, but rather of a mean stature,
being therewith strong and well compacte together, and has very good legs.
And Vigetius says that the Fryzelande horses be very swyfte in runnyng, and
able to mainteyne a long course. And in deed I have seen of them my self that
would make a good cariere, and manege very well, and also do the Coruetti so
truly as any Iennet of Spain. But then the dysposition of this horse is so
deuelish, so stubborn, and so froward, as onles the Ryder which first breaks
him be very bold, and therewith circumspect to correct him in time, he shall
never bring him to any good, for he will do nothing without strypes, which
also being given out of time, will make him so restiefe, that neither fair
means nor foul means, will ever win him from that vice again. The pace of
this horse is a good comely trotte.

Of the Sweathland Horse.
THe Sweacian or Sweathland horse, so far as I can conjecture, by those that
the King his Imbassadours have of late days brought with the^ into this
Realm, whereof I am sure there be diverse here yet remainyng, is no great or
strong Horse, but of a mean stature and strength, and I fear me scante well
condicioned. And I am induced to think so the rather, for that they be most
commonly pyed, and of two sundry colors: or their legs at the least be
all white, eue^ up to the belly, their bodies being of another color, which as
Gryson says, is a sign of small force: al be it the ientilmen in that
country delight much to have their Horses of diverse colors, and to wear as
it were diverse lyuereis. Besides that, many of them be wall eyed, which is also
a token of a shrewed and a stubburne disposition. Notwithstanding I have seen
of them with good handling, to make an indifferent good manege, whereby I take
them to be docible, and also because they come out of a cold Country, I
believe they will abide much hardness.

Of the Iryshe Hobby.
THe Iryshe Hobby is a pretye fine horse, having a good head, and a body
indeferently well proporcioned, saving that many of them be slender and pin
bottocked, they be tender mouthed, nimble, light, pleasant, and apt to be
taught, and for the most part they be amblers, and therefore very mete for the
saddle, and to travel by the way, yea and the Iryshe men both with darts and
with light spears, do use to skyrmishe with them in the field. And many of
them do prove to that use very well, by means they be so light and swyfte,
notwythstanding I take them to be very neashe and tender to keep, and also to
be somewhat skyttishe and fearful, partlye parhaps by nature, and partly for
lack of good breakinge at the first.

A comparison of the races above rehearsed as towching the Clymates under which
they be bred, and which of them will thryue best here in England, and are most
mete to serve every breders sundry purpose and intent. Cap. iii.
Hitherto we have talked of diverse kinds of Horses and Mares, and therewith
declared to you their shapes, natures, and disposition. Now it rests that we
briefly compare these kinds together, that we may not only know those that
be most meet to be bredde within this Realm in general, but also that the
desire and intent of every breader in particular may be satisfied. For some man
perchance would have a bread of great trottinge horses mete for the war, and
to serve in the field. Some other again would have a bread of ambling horses
of a mean stature, for to Journey and to travail by the way. Some again
would have perhaps a race of swift runners to run for wagers, or to galloppe
the bucke, or to serve for such like excercises of pleasure. But the plain
countriman would perchance have a breed only for draughte or burden. And
first you shall understand that generallye those horses and Mares will thryue
best in this Realm that be bredde under a clymate, being of the like
temperature, that this our clyme is, or at the least not much differynge from
the same. Wherefore naturallye me thinks, the Turk, the Iennet of Spain, the
Barbaryan, and the Sardignian, being bred in far whotter countries then this
is, should not be able to endure the cold of this Country: nor to like here
so well as there, from whence they come. For though I have seen them to bread
here, and their ofspryng to grow to a perfect stature, and to be like in shape
to their Syres and Dammes, yet for the most part they be but neashe and tender,
and do require more attendaunce and fine keeping then others do. And yet I will
not deny, but that in contynuance of time their natures may be altered, and
such tenderness may wear away well enough, and specially those that come out of
Islande, sooner then thothers, because they are more able to endure both heat
and cold, and their nature does agree the better with this Country, being
also an Islande. The Napolitan although he be bredde under a hoter climate then
ours is, yet that Region is very temperate of it self: and therewith so
fruitful as it is called the gardeyn or paradise of Italy, and the Horses
there bred be of so strong and healthful complexion, as they will not quayle
wheresoever they go, and that they prosper so well here in this land, as in
any other foraine Country: not only the Queens Majesty's race, but also other
men's races, and specialy Sir Nicholas Arnoldes race does well testify, from
whence I have seen so far coltes to come, and to prove so well in their
doings as ever I saw in the Realm of Naples, who for his industry and
diligence showed in that behalf, as he is worthy to be much commended and
praised, so I wish that all Ientlemen having abilitye would do the like: So
should they neither lack good Horses to serve their country in time of neade,
nor yet to serve them selves in their own affairs. Now as touching the rest
of the races before mentioned, as the Hungarian, the high Almaine, the
Flaunders horse, the Fryzeland Horse, and the Irishe Hobbye. Daily experyence
teaches that they do prove very well here, because either they come out of
colder countries then this is, or at the least not out of much whoter: yea and
some of them do prove better here then at home, and specially such as come
from sower grass and wet grounds, as the Flaunders horse and mare, both which
do wax here to be fyner limined, cleaner made, and therewyth lighter and more
nymble, then they be at home. But now to answer the diverse intentes of the
breaders, I would wish him that seeks to have a race of good Horses, mete to
serve in the field, to get a Napolitan Stallion if it be possible, if not,
let him take the high Almayne, the Hungarian, the Flaunders or the Fryzeland
horse: so that he be of a convenient stature, well proporcioned, and mete for
the porpose. What things are requisite in a Stallion shall be declared hereafter
in his place, and let those Mares that shall be put to such stallyons be of an
high stature, strongly made, large and fair, and have a trotting pace, as the
mares of Flaunders and some of our own Mares be, for it is not mete for diverse
respects that horses of service should amble. But if any man seek to have a
race of fine amblinge Horses, to traaile by the way: then I would wish his
stallio^ either to be a fair Iennet of Spain, or at the least a bastard
Iennet, or else a fair Irish ambling Hobby, and the mare to be also either a
bastard Iennet, bredde here within this realm, having an amblyng pace, or else
some other of our amblynge Mares, so that she be fair and well proporcioned.
And if any man desire to have swyft runners, let him chouse a Horse of Barbary,
or a Turk to be his stallion, and let the Mares which he shall put unto him be
like of stature, and making unto him so nigh as may be: for most commonly
such Sire and Dame, such Colte. And sith all writers do so much praise the
Horse of Barbary, not only for his swiftnes in running, but also for his
hardness, in that he neadeth small attendaunce and kepinge, and will not
surfeit upon every little sweat or cold, as some others do: He therefore that
delyghteth in huntyng and hawking, had need as me thinks, to chouse this Horse
above al others to be his Stallion, to the intent he may have such Coltes of
him as will be able to continue in such extreme exercyses, as to gallop the
bucke, or to follow a long winged Hawk. Either of which excercyses, kills
yearly in this Realm many a good gueldyng. But now to content the Countryman
his desire, which seeks to bread horses for draught or burden, where should
I wyshe him to provide him self of Mares and Stallions, better then here in
England, whereas he may easily find a number of strong Iades, more mete for
that purpose then for the saddle, and all for lack of good order of breding,
which if it might be ones observed in this realm I believe there would be so
good and so fair horses bred here, as in any place in Christendom. But as for
the Carte horse, so that he be great of stature, deep rybbed, side bellied, and
have strong legs and good houes: and therewith will stoop to his work, and
lay sure hold on the ground with his feet, and stoutelye pull at a pinch, it
makes no matter how foul or evil favored he be. Notwithstanding I have
known some Carriars that go with Carts, to be so exquisite in their choice of
horses, as onles they had been as comely to ye eye as good in their work they
would not buy them, in so much as I have seen sometime drawing in their Carts
better proporcioned horses then I have known to be fynelye kept in stables, as
jewels for the saddle. The horse that is mete for the Carte, may serve also for
the burden, because he is strong and able to bear much, but the packman
requires besides strength, three other things in his horse. First, that he be
a good traueiler, secondlye, that his hoofes be so good as he need not to be
often shod, thirdlye that he be no unreasonable feader, for the avoiding of
exspences, for which cause I think our packemen here in England, do most
commonly go with gueldings, which lacking ye fervent heat that stoned horses
have, cannot consume so much meat as they do, but chiefly perhaps because the
gueldings are more easy to rule by the way then horses. Thus having
sufficiently talked of diverse kinds of Horses and Mares, and which be metest
for this Realm, as well in general, as to serve diverse uses in particular, I
will now show you how to chouse a stallion or mare mete for bread.

How to chouse Stallyons and Mares mete for generation, and of what age they
ought to be. Also how to know their ages as well by their teth as other wise.
Cap. iiii.
Sith it is naturally given to every beast for the most part to engender his
like, as well in conditions as in shape of body, it is very requysite therefore
for him that would have a good race, to be very circumspect in chosing the first
Stallions and Mares, from whom he would have his race to descend, to the
intent he may reap thereof both pleasure and profit, and not bestow his cost
and labor in vain. In chousing then a stallyon, three things (as me thinks
are chiefly to be considered) that is, his bewtye, his goodness, and his age.
And first as towching his bewtye, yt consists only in color and shape, of
which two things because I have already according to Grysons opinion
sufficientlye treated in the book of the art of Rydinge, I shall not need
therefore now to trouble you with many words, but only to make as it were a
brief resital of the same. Of al colors then these be the best, the brown
bay, the dapple gray, the bright bay, the rone, the white lyard, the pure black
with a white star in his foreheade. And in any wise let the Stallion be al of
one color, and that very clear and bright, and not pyed, or of diverse
colors, albeit to have some white or black mark in place conueniente, is
very bewtifull, as to have a white star in his forehead, or the outermost
parts of his body black, as the tippes of his ears, his main, or his tail,
or else some of his feet to be white, according as his color does most
properly require, of which things we have talked at large in the book of
ridyng. Now as towching his shape it would be in this sort, let him have a
short and slender head, a wide mouth, and wide nosethriels, slender Jaws,
great eyes and black, boulting outward and not hollow inward, short ears
and sharp poynted like a mouse, a neck rather long then short, great
toward his breast, slender toward his head, the creast whereof would be
rysyng in the mids, and therewith neither to thick nor to thin, having a
crispe main, and hanging naturally on the right side, a broad breast, and full
of apparaunt muscles or brawnes of flesh, also broad shoulders, a large bulk,
and gaunt belly, a straight and sharp poynted wythers, a short and plain
back, great round buttockes, a long and busshye tail, a yard and stones of a
mean syse, one stone not hanging sider then another, but trussed up round
together, large thighs, and long hawnches behynd, strong legs, and great
iointes, as well before as behind, short pastournes with long fewterlockes, also
round, smouth, black, hard, hollow, and sounding houes: and finally let his
whole body together, have roundenes according to his length, and be in all
points so well proporcioned, as he may seem both high of stature, strong of
lym, and also liuelye to the eye. Thus much of his shape, and now of his
goodness. His goodness may be partly natural, and partly artificial, neither of
which can be thoroughly known but by his doings. His natural goodness
chiefly consists in his healthfulnes of body, in abundance of good seade,
in his strength, agilitie, swiftnes, good disposition, and aptenes to be
taught, yea and in his pace, galloppinge, runninge, bearinge of his head and
ears, all which things may be also much helped by art. But to reyne well, to
bear his head steaddely, to be ready of turn, and light of stop, to
handle his feet orderlye, to keep his ground, and to obey his Riders will at
all assayes: proceadeth rather of art then of nature, which artificial
goodness, whether he has or not, the book of rydinge does plainly teach you
how to judge. Albeit for a Stallion which should chieflye serve to cover
Mares, such artificial goodness is not so material as the natural good
things before mentioned, amongst the which there is one chief point, and yet
cannot perfectly be known, onles you might se him to cover a Mare, and that is
to wete, whether his seade be good or not, which at that time may very well
be known in this sort. Take of it betwixt your thombe and your finger, or in
a lock of woll, and if in your fealing or towsyng of the woll it seems to be
fyrme, fast, and slymye, it is good, but if it be over lyquyd or waterishe, it
is naught, and if the horse be slow in covering, or does it not with a lively
spirit and courage, or has but one stone, or great wartes growing on his
stones, or have naturally any white specke in any of his eyes, he is not mete
to be a Stallion, for all the Coltes that he shall begette will have the like
defectes. Wherefore so nigh as you can let your Stallion be without al faults
Now as towching the age of the Stallion, although most men in these our days
make no matter thereof: because he may get foles until he be.xx. or.xxx.
years old, yea and so long as he lives, so that he be helped, and therefore
in most places of this Realm they appoint no horses to that use but such as
be very old, and therewith parhaps both lame and blind. Yet the men in the
old time made a great matter thereof, and allowed no Stallion to be very good,
but from.v. years to xiiii. affirming that as one perfect thing does bring
forth another perfect, so that which is imperfect brings forth his like. And
as a Horse is accounted imperfect until he be.v. years old, for that his
iointes before that time be not thoroughly knitte, neither is he grown to his
full strength, so at.xiiii years he begins again to wax imperfect,
because that nature in him by that time is sore decayed, insomuch as decrepit
age and death it self by nature does then shortly follow after. Albeit I will
not deny, but that good keeping and a strong complexion may cause one horse
to continue in lust and courage much longer then a another. For Albertus writes
that he knew a Soldier, which served in the field on a horse that was.lxx.
year old, and yet was compted an able horse. Niphus also says that the
Emperor Ferdynandus the first, had in his stable a horse that was.lxx years
old. And I my self have seen stallions that have been.xx. years old and above,
that have gotten vere fair Coltes to the eye. And yet I believe not like in
perfection to those that the same Stallion might have gotten in his more lustye
age, for the Coltes of old stallions for the most part, be dull and slow,
and have tender hofes, and are more subject to diseases and surfeites then
others. Wherefore I would wish al you that would have a perfect race, not to
admit any horse to be your Stallion, that is as I said before, under.v. or
much above.xiiii. onles he be very lustye and strong, and therewith be very
hayle of body and lym. And whilst I talk here of the horses age, it is mete yt
I show you also how to know the same. Some seek to know a horses age in this
sort, they pull his skin with their hands from his flesh, holding it so a
pretye while together, and then let it go again, marking whether the skin
retourneth imediately to his place or not, without leauinge any sign or
wrinkle where it was touched, for then they judge the horse to be young. But if
the skin will not fall down quickly again of his own accord, they take him
to be old, and to lack that natural heat and warm blood, which should
nourishe his outward parts. But most men use to judge a Horses age by his
teeth, taking yt to be the most certain way of knowledge, specially until he
be full seven years old and upward, for every Horse when he is two years
old, does cast his two former teeth, as well above as beneath: and every year
after until he be vi. years old he fails not to cast other.ii. in like
manner. Then in the sixte year, those which he first cast be closed, but in the
seventh year all his teeth be full closed, so as the mark goes clean out,
whereby a man should judge his age. Notwithstanding after the Horse begins
to enter into old age, his temples will wax hollow, and the hear of his
brows hoare and white, his teeth also will be greater and thicker in substance,
fowler in color, and one standinge further out, or higher then another, which
they do not so long as the horse is young, but stand eue^ and round together.
Thus much of the Stallion. Now let us speak somewhat of the Mare, which would
be also good in her doings bewtifull and young. For as Absirtus says, the
Mare that should be for bread, would be of a co^ely stature, and broad set,
as well behind as before, and well knitte together, having a slender head, and
a large body, so as she may be sightly to the eye, and not to be les then three
years old, nor much more then ten. Notwithstanding some write yt it makes no
matter though she be covered and do conceive imediatly after that she be two
years old and upward, so that she be full three years old at her foling. For
the Female kind in all beasts, as they be colder of nature, so they come sooner
to their perfection then the Male kind, and likewise decay sooner, wherefore
some hold opinion, that their foling after.x. years of age is unprofitable,
affirming such coltes to be naturally dull and slow, albeit I have seen Mares
of.xx. years old and above, that have brought forth very fair and lively
Coltes to the eye. yea Aristole says that a Mare may bear foles all her life
long. And also that she does live longer then a Horse, who as he says, may
live until he be.xxxiii. but the Mare may live till she be.xl. Affirming her
to be inclined to the act of generation as much as any beast living.
Notwithstanding I would wish you to keep for bread no mare that is much above
ten years, onles you have good experience of her Coltes, and be well assured
of her continuance in courage and lustines. And in any wise let your breding
Mares which you keep for studdes be made so tame and domestical as may be,
so shall you not only easily drive them, and remove them from place to place,
but repe some comodity of their work: which if it be moderate, it can not
hurt their teaming, whereas if they should be wild, they would be very
comberous to keep, yea and many times through their rashness destroy the
foles in their bellyes: neither can you bring them to the horse, nor take their
foles from them, when you would weane them without great trouble. At what age it
is best to tame them we shall show you hereafter in his proper place.

At what time of the year it is best for Horses and Mares to engender, and in
what sort they ought to be put together: And how to know when a Mare
desires the Horse. Also how many Mares one Stallion is able to cover in one
year. Finally when the stallions should be removed from them. Cap. v.
AFter that we have taught you how to chouse both Stallion and Mare mete for
bread, it is requisite that we show you now in what time of the year it is
best to put them together, that they may engender, and what order is to be
observed therein. Most writers do affirm that the best time is the spring, or
as Palladius says, from the.xxii. of March, until the.xxii. of June. Because
the mare goinge a full year, or at the least eleven months, and.x. days
shall by this means fool in such time of the year as grass is most
plenteful, whereby she shall have the more abundance of milk, to feade her
fool, and the air shall be so temperate as the fool shall neither be perched
with the hot son, nor pinched with cold weather. But forasmuch as our
mares for the most part here in England go not with fool above eleven months,
and also for that the coldenesse of the Country will not suffer the grass to
spring and grow so sone here as in Italy, or such like hot countries. I would
not wyshe the mares to be covered before the beginning of May, so shall the
foles fall in April, before which Month, there grows but little grass.
Again the Mares of them selves before May will have little lust to the
horse, for fault of full bitte, and warm weather, which should engender lust.
And yet as I said before, according to Aristotle, there is no kind of beast
more enclyned to that act then the horse and mare, insomuch as if they may not
be suffered to engender when lust provoke them, they will run mad. It is
easy to know when they lust, by their inordinate runnyng and flingyng here and
there, and that as some write, not toward the East or West, but most
commonly toward the south or north, setting the tail bolt upright. Again
one mare will woo another, and they will pysse often. The time then of the year
mete for generation, being come, it is requisite that these two beasts be put
together which you may do diverse manner of ways. The first and best way, and
specially for him that has many Mares and stallions, is to put every one of
his Stallions by him self (being before rested and well fed for the purpose)
into a several pasture, full of grass and well fenced with high pale or rail,
as I said before in the first Chapter, in which pastures would be either
some good shade, and shealter to defend them from the son and rain, or else
some house or houel made of purpose, and so to let them run there from the
beginning of May until the midst of June, during which time you may turn
i^to every one of those Stallions so many Mares as he is well able to cover,
which hability is to be measured by his youth, strength, and lustines. For if
he be young and lusty he may cover ix. or, x. mares very well and if he be old
and feeble, he had need to cover the fewer, for to cover many is a great
feblishing to the Horse: Albeit in Italy, to a young Horse they will not let to
appoint.xii. or.xv Mares. And Aristotle says, that a Horse may Cover.xxx.
Mares in one year. Also Herodotus writes that the king of Babylon, having
(besides his horses of service,) viii. hundredth Stallions, did appoinete every
year unto those stallions.xvi. thousand Mares, so that every stallion had for
his singulall share.xx Mares. Yea and some let not to write, that in Siria
there was some times a race of.xxx. thousand Mares, to whom were appointed but
three hundred stallions: so that every horse had to cover an hundred Mares.
Whereby it seameth that horses in times paste have been of a far stronger
nature, then they be now in these our days. But in any wise when ye let the
stallion and the mares thus run together, have always a good eye to the fence,
that it be strong and sure, for fear that none of your own stallions or
strange horses break in, to disturb any of them, for they will fight
together in such time most cruelly. Neither is there any beast more Ielous of
his mate then the horse of his wives (if it be lawful so to term them)
insomuche as he will not suffer them to feed out of his sight, nor to stray one
from another, but will keep them always together, and nygh unto him self,
which runnynge and keeping together breadeth such a mutual love betwixt them,
as thereby they are on both sides the more enclyned to generation. And the
Mares by this means do more naturally, more spedely, and also more easily
conceive, then if they should be served out of a stable, for there many times
of ten that be served, five do not take, of which kind of seruyng I will
speak in the next Chapter folowinge. Notwithstanding so sone as the mares have
all conceived, which you shall know by such means as shall be showed you
hereafter. I would wyshe you to remove the Stallions from them and not to
suffer them to run with the Mares all the year, as some do, for that is not
good for ii. co^syderations. For first you should lose the use of your horse,
which being after covering time somewhat rested and well meated, may serve you
in your other affairs: Secondlye it were very dangerous for the Mares that be
with fool: For Arystotle says, there be three kinds of beasts more lecherous
then all others: That is to say, the Mare, the Sow, and the third I dare not
name, for fear of offendinge, for where as all other beasts when they be with
young will abstain from thact of generation, these.iii. kinds (as he says)
do not refuse it eue^ in that time. And though the mares do refuse it, as most
commonly they will, whatsoever Aristotle says, yet the horse perhaps when
prouander prycketh him will force them, and so perchance by striving with them
make them to cast their foles: Wherefore I can in no wise consent that they
should run all the year together, but only until such time as the Mares
have conceived. Thus much for great races, where as be many Mares and
Stallions, for those that keep but one Stallion and a few Mares do like better
to have their Mares severally served one after another then to run al together
with the stallion, affirming that by this means the stallion shall not beat
him self so much, nor spend more sede upon one Mare then upon another, and for
this purpose a very small portion of ground might serve to keep the stallion,
so that it be a battlyng ground, full of grass and well fenced, with high pale
or rail, as some large orchard or pond yard, nighe unto the mansion house, of
which kind of grounds, as I have seen diverse, so did I never see any that
pleased me better then one which I saw in Darbishire, in a town nigh unto
Darby, called Marketon, whereas a very honest gentleman and a good householder,
named master Mondey dwells, who keeps a good strong stallion and half a
dosen fair mares, whose Coltes do prove very well, whereof your lordship has
one called Markha^, so named according to the name of his old master, Master
Thomas Markham of Olerton which horse as he is indifferent well proportioned,
so was he once made by Abraham, master Astle is man as ready a horse in all
points, as any was then about the Court, the piece of ground which I lyked so
well at this Gentleman's house, was a pond yard, environed about with a high and
strong pale, and also with a very thick quickset without the pale, the
quantity of which ground the pondes deducted, is skant.iii. acres, but the
qualitye and goodness thereof is such, as it does not only keep his Stallion, all the Summer, that is to say, from the midst of April until hallontyde (before
which time he does not take him in, onles it be betwixt whiles to work him,
as in harvest time, and so to put him forth again) but also.ii. milch kine,
and.xx. sheep (as he says) all the year long, besides the feeding of his
mares, whilst they tarry with the Stallion to be covered, whereof every one
coming seuerallye, one after another, taryeth.iii. days with him at the
least, and than be turned into a park which he has hard by, the ground
whereof is very mete for that purpose, neither does he bestow any prouander on
his Stallion during the covering time, for to say the truth he is so full fed
with sweet grass as he has no need thereof. And in mine opinion there lacks
nothing, but some little houel or house to be placed in some mete corner, for
the stallion to shrewde himself therein in the heat of the day, and when it
rayneth, for the hot son, or percyng rain does greatly feblish a horses
back. Thus much I thought good to write of this piece of ground, to the intent
that every man, mynding to have a race, might enclose a like piece of ground in
quantitye at the least, though not altogether in qualitye, to keep his stallion
in the summer season, the commoditye whereof in short time will counteruayle
the charges.

What order is to be observed touching the covering of Mares, when the
Stallions does not run with them in the pastures, but are kept in the stable.
And how the same stallions should be fed. Also at what time of the day the
Mares ought then to be covered, and finally how to know whether they have
conceived, or not. Cap. vi.
BUt if ye have no such several ground as is both able to feed your Stallyon
and Mares duringe the coueringe time, as also to keep them from breaking out.
Then you may keep your Stallion still in the stable, and bring the mares thither
to be covered, which is a more chargeable and troublous way of covering then ye
other before mentioned. For first your stallion against that time must be well
fed, with sweat hay and prouander, yea rather duringe the coueringe time
with sweat grass, if it may be gotten, and his prouander as some write,
would be either dried wheat or dried pease, myngled with wheat branne, or else
fitches which be much praised of all authors to be given in that time, and
now and then he must have a good mashe made of water and wheat meal, and
that shall be to make him lusty. Also he may not be labored by the space of
six wekes or two Months before: but suffered to rest, and yet I mean not to
rest al to gether without any kind of exercise, but rather to be ridden now
and then moderately, to get him a stomach to his meat. For as over much
labor dries up his moystnesse, and makes his spirits and power feeble: so
ouermuche rest and fatnes bredeth superfluous humors, which on the other side
will as much weaken him, by quenching his natural heat, and cause his seade
to be cold and moist, which seldom or never takes, or if it take, it
engenders rather females then Males, but moderate exercise preserves his
natural heat, and sweet nourishing food increases good blood, and causes
his sead to be perfect, that is to say, hot and moist, and in substance
neither to much, nor to little, to thick, nor to thin, but in a mean, and that
is best, and will sonest take. The less he drinks when he has to cover any
Mare, the better, for if he drinks over much, it will put his wind in
ieopardye. More over behind your stable, or else behind some other house not
far from your stable, would be some pretty close yard or court made of
purpose, into the which the Mare would be first brought, and that very year
lie in the morninge, when the son ryseth, or else in the Evening at the sons
going down. For those.ii times are thought by the writers most mete for
generation, and will do the horse less hurt then to cover in the heat of the
day. Albeit Aristotle says that the mare for her part is more desirous to be
covered about the mydday, because perhaps she being the colder beast of the
twain, heat does then most chiefly provoke her lust. Well, the Mare then
being thus brought in, ye may cause your horse keeper to bring forth the
Stallion, who if he has been well fed, and moderately exercised, as I said
before, so sone as he sees and smells the mare, he will immediately fetch iii.
or iiii. faults, and bound aloft with all four for joy, even in your horse
kepers hand, who must not be afraid but rather ready to help the horse in his
busynes, so sone as he shall leap the Mare, by putting his yard with his hand
into the right place, whereby the Mare shall be the more spedelye, the more
easelye, and also the more substauncially served, by means that the horse
shall spend no labor in vain, nor waste any part of his seade. And after that
the mare has been covered once: let your horse keeper lead the Stallion a
little a side, and walk him a while fair and softlye behind some house or
wall clean out of her sight to breathe him. And when he is well breathed,
bring him in again, and let him cover the mare the second time, and then lead
him out again, and so the third time if ye will, continuing to do this every
Evening or morning the space of.ii. or.iii. days, until you think that she
be sped. Betwixt which times, se that your horse be well rubbed and fed, and
to the intent that the Mare cast not out the seed which she receives, it
shall not be amiss in the end of every last coueryng, imediately to bestow
one paile of water on the raynes of her back, and to cast another into her
tail, and that shall make her to hold. You shall know whether she has
conceived or not, as Absirtus says, best within.x. days next after following.
For if you offer the horse again at.x. days end, and she refuses, it is an
evident sign of her conceptio^. Her coat also as Pliny says, of what color
so ever she be, will show more full and bryghte to the eye, imediately after
conception, then it did before.

How to make your Mares to conceive either Horse foles, or Mare foles, and of
what color you list to have your self. Cap. vii.
BUT now whilst we are about the covering of Mares, me think it were not
amiss, to show you what pretty means, and sleightes, men in the old time
used, to have Coltes of such kind and color as they them selves have
desired. And first as touching the kind, Democritus affirms that if ye tie
the left stone of the stallion with a thredden late, or point, or such like
thing he shall beget a horse fool, and if ye teye the right stone, he shall
beget a Mare fool. And this rule (as he says) is general to all other
beasts. Affricanus also says, that if ye cause your Horse to leap the mare,
when the wind blows in the North, he shall beget a horse fool, and if in the
South, a mare fool. Again some write, that if the mare be covered the third
day before the full moan she shall bring forth a horse fool, and if the third
day after the full moan, a mare fool. And I take this to be a very good rule,
and seldom to fail, and specially if the mare at that time have lately foled.
Again some hold opinion, that if the Mare be covered with in v. or vi. days
after her foling, and in the spring of the moon, that she shall bring forth a
horse fool, and the rather if the horse be suffered to woo her, and to stand
in her sight so^ewhat tofore he cover her, which order, master Garret
lieutenaunt of the Pentioners does diligently observe, when he causes his
mares to be covered, who affirms yt in observing this rule, he never failed
to have a horse Colt at his pleasure, who I assure you is no less expert in
bredinge then skillful in rydyng, and therewith so desirous to have good horses,
as he lets not to hyer a great deal of ground, paying by the year forty
pence for the acre, to feed his mares and coltes, in which his doing me
thinks, he deserves much to be commended. But to know what kind the mare
has conceived, the Authors write that if the horse after he has covered the
Mare comes down from her back on the right side, it is a sign that she is
conceived with a horse fool, and if on the left side with a mare fool. Now as
touching the color, they write that if the stallion be clad with a covering
of such color as you desire the fool to be, at such time as he does cover
the mare you shall have your desire. Some again write that it is better to dye
or stayne the hear of the Stallion with such color as you like best and then
to make him to continewe in the mares sight whilst she burns in lust, before
he leap her, to the intent (as I take it) that thimpression may be the more
fervent. And as this saying is grounded of a good natural reason, so it may be
proved by a most true and unfeigned example, recited in the Bible, in the
thirty chapter of Genesis. Whereas you may read how Jacob after that Laban his
master and father in law, had given him in recompense of his service, all the
black Lambs and speckeled kyddes, that should come of the Ewes, and Goats,
which he kept: By puttinge straked rods in the sight and face of the Ewes,
when they went to Ram, and of the she Goats when they went to bucke, made
all the ofsprynge of Labans flock to be black and spotted: whereby in short
space he became as rich in cattle, as Laban his father in law. For truly
at the time of concepcion, all the powers of the beast are so open, and the
matter it self so tender, as it is apt to receive every light impression.

Whether Mares should be forced to abyd the Horses though they have no lust or
not, and how to make both Horse and Mare, having no lust, to have a lust to
engender. Also how to abate their lust if need require. Cap. viii.
IF the mare will not suffer the horse to leap her, some have used (as both
Varro and Pliny writes) to force her thereunto whether she will or not, by
tyinge her to a post, set up in the myddest of such a close yard or Court
as is talked of before, which thing is used even at this present day at
Tutbery, whereas the Queens majesty has a race. And though I know that some
of them do conceive, and prosper well nough after it, yet I can not praise it,
because it is both dangerous and also unnatural: for the act of generation
ought to be with pleasure, and not with pain, neither doethe that which is
peinfully conceived, thryue for the most part, so well as that which is
conceived with pleasure. Wherefore I would wyshe all men, rather to follow
Camerarius advice, which is not to force her: but to make her first to desire
the Horse, by putting a little stoned nagge unto her, to woo her four or
five days before you would have her covered, which nagge would be so fettered,
as he may not cover her, though she would perchance enclyne unto him: which
when you perceive she does, remove the nagge from her, and put the Stallion
unto her: so shall she stand still of her own accord, and receive the stallion
the more wyllyngely. But the reddyest means to make a mare to desire the
horse, is (as Columella says) to annointe her matrixe with the joyce of a
certain herb called of him Scilla, and of Palladius Squilla, which some of
our physicians do call a sea Oynion, because it grows as well in the sea, as
on the land, and has a head or root like an oynio^. It is very good also to
rub her matrixe with nettles, which as Russius says, will not only cause the
mare to suffer the Horse to leap her, but also to engender with him. Which
otherwise many times perhaps she cannot do, for want of natural heat in her
matrixe. That the nettle is a prouoker of venery, it is not unknown to the
plain wives of the countreye: which when their hens will not lay, nor
suffer to be trodden, do use to nettle their tails, and that makethe them (as
they say) to desire the Cock, and also to lay. Again, Anatolius says, that
to annoynte her matrixe with hens dunge and turpentine mingled together, will
marueilously provoke her lust. But if you see that your horse has no lust to
engender, then make as though you would drive the mare from him, and that
will make him the more desirouse of her. It is good also to wipe the matrixe of
that mare which desires the horse, with a sponge, and to put that to the
Stallions nose, the savor whereof will provoke his courage. Also the pyssill of
a Stagge being bourned, and made into fine powder, and put into strong wine,
will provoke his courage, if his yard and stones be washed therewith. But I
have been taught by men of experience, that if a good quantity of the powder
aforesaid, together with these powders following, that is of Annisesedes, of a
root called Satyrion, and of Basyll, of each like quantity, be given the horse
to drink in a warm mashe made of water and wheaten meal, the night before
you would have him to cover any mare: it will not only provoke his courage, but
also make his seed of such force, as it will hold and not quail. And the
less that either horse or mare drynketh whylste they attend to generation,
the better it shall be for them: for over much drink, will not only make the
seed thin and watery, and so as it shall not hold, but also as I said
before, make the horse pursye: yea, and put his wind in ieoperdie. But if you
see, that after the time of covering the stallion continues still to full of
lust and courage, then it shall be good to annoint his stones with a little
salet oil, and that will abate his courage, and the sooner, if you stepe a
little lettise in the oil somewhat before. The same medicine also will abate a
Mares courage (if her matrixe be anointed therewith. And some write, that the
cuttynge of her maine does abate her courage. These medicines perhaps will
offend the delycate ears of some persons, that are more nyce then wise. But I
trust, the discrete man will not be offended to hear them: but rather learn
discretely to use them as need shall require. For I assure you, they were no
fools that wrote them, but learned, wise, and men of great experyence.

Which mares should be covered every year and which not. And how to do that
those mares that you would have to bear ever year, shall not go barraine.
Cap. ix.
PAlladius and Columella would have those Mares that be very beawtyful and fair
and therewyth have not only been well horsed, but also have horse foles
suckinge on them: not to be covered every year, but every second year, or
rather third year, to the intent that their foles may suck the longer time,
and also be fed with the more pure milk. And as for all other mares, they would
have them to bear every year, and to be covered again so soon as their
foles are.v. or.vi. days old so that they be in good lust, and not to poor.
And to the intent that none such should go barren, it shall be necessary not
only to enforce them, by such ways as have been showed you before, to the
horse in the spring time, but also about Laminas or in the beginning of
August, and to suffer a Stallion to run with them three wekes or a month to
the intent that if any of them chanced not to conceive at the first coueringe,
they may now be served. But be sure that some one of the Mares be ready to
be covered, when you turn the stallion into them, least perpaps he beat
as well those that be with fool as the others, and so do more harm then good.
And by using this order you shall be sure to keep no Mare barren all the year,
unless that the Mare be barren by means of some sickness. Whereof I shall treat
hereafter when I come to the diseases of horses, and there show you how to cure
the same.

How Mares should be used after they have conceived and are with fool, and
what causes them to cast their foles before their time. Cap. x.
AFter that your Mares have conceived, you must beware you labor them not
over much, and specially that they bear no heavy burdens, for fear of
killing their foles in their bellies. Also you must see that whilst Summer
lasts, they go in a good pasture, not having over rank grass, but short and
sweet, and that they lack no good water. And in winter when the grass
fails, that they be fed with sweet hay, and that they lie dry and warm
in some busshy close, wood, or grove, or else under some houel, but so as they
be not skanted of room, nor thronged up together, for that is dangerous, and
may cause aborsment, that is to say, to cast their foles before their time.
Anatolius also says that the change of strange pasture or water will cause
aborsement. Again Russius says that if they chance to eat the maste of
Cerre trees, they shall be in danger of aborsement. Or if any of them be
covered with an Ass after that she has conceived by a horse, or chance to
tread upon a wolf, or where a wolf has trodden it will cause her to cast her
fool. Also all stinking savors, as the snuffing of candles, or torches, or
such like, will cause aborsement, as some authors write, as well in Mares, as
in women. Wherefore all such things would be foresene, and in any case keep
your Mares whilst they go with fool, neither to lean nor yet to fat, but in
good plight, for if they be to lean, they will either cast their foles, or else
bring forth staruelinges. Again if they be to fat, every place of their bodies
will be so filled, as the foles within their bellyes cannot have room
sufficient to grow, and to prosper, by means whereof, either the foles shall
be but little ones, or else the Mares them selves shall be in great danger,
at the time of their folynge, by reason that their cundittes be overmuch
strayghtned with fat. And therefore the Scythians which is a people of the
North, used (as Aristotle writes) moderately to journey, and to travel their
Mares, after they were quickened, to the intent that they might have the
easier folynge. For truly moderate labor and exercise, at that time must
needs do them much good. But to travel them imediately upon conception, or
when they be very great and ready to fool, is dangerous. For the fruit of the
womb in all beasts, maybe well compared to the fruit of the Apple tree,
which at the first blossominge, and also when it is through ripe, and mellow,
will be blown down with every light wind, but in the middle time betwixt
both, it cleueth so fast unto the branches of the tree: as it will scant be
thrown down with coudgelles.

How to help a Mare that is in danger at the time of her folyng. And how you
shall cause her to expel her secundyne or clean. Cap. xi.
BUt if it so happen that a mare by any myschaunce, be in danger at the time
of her folynge, then it is neadefull to help her, causynge one to hold her
nostrilles in a gentle manner, close in his hand, and so to stop her breath,
and it shall make her to fool with more ease, and also the sooner, which is not
very paynefull for any man to do, for so much as the Mare foleth standing,
whereby he shall not need greatelye to stoop. Again if the secundine, which
is the skin wherein the fool is wrapped, does not come all out naturally of
the own accord, then use this remedy. Take a good handful or two of Fenell,
and boil it in water, then take half a pynte of that, and another half pynte
of old wine, and put thereunto a fourth part of oil, and mingle them
altogether over the fire, and being but luke warm, pour it into the mares
nostrilles, and hold her nostrilles close with your hand, to keep it in a
pretty while after. And that shall forse the secundine to come forth, which
for the most part, both she and all other beasts do immedyately eat, and
swallowe up again into their bellyes. Which thing the plain folks of the
country (if they can prevent it) will not suffer their milche kine to do, in
their time of cauluing, saying: that it will make them sick and vnlustye. And
truly I believe it does the mares no great good. Some Authors write, that when
the mare does eat up her secundyne or clean, (for so the plain folks
term it) she snappeth away also with her teeth a certain peace of flesh,
growing like a fygge upon the foles foreheade, called of the Greeks and Latins,
Hippomanes. Of the virtue whereof, in matters of love many monsterous tales, by
many learned Authors are recyted. Whereof I think it not good to make the
unlearned partners. And therefore I leave to speak of it any further.

How to make a Mare to cast her fool that is not worthy to be bredde, or for
some other needful cause. cap. xii.
IF a fair mare in old time had been covered with a foul Royle, or had been
with fool out of season, or at such time perhaps, as she must run for some
great wager, then they would use means to make her cast her fool before her
time, and that was done either by force of hand, or by medecin. For if the
fool were so far grown that it had hear, they would cause one to thrust his
hand into the Mares womb, and to take the fool by the hedde, and to crushe it
in pieces. And if it had no hear, then they would destroy it with medecines not
needful here to be written. Notwithstanding in mine opinion the surest way
(if greater cause do not otherwise require) were to tarry till she has foled of
her own kind, and then to kill the fool.

How Mares should be used after they have foled. Also how long the foles
should suck, and how they ought to be used during their foleage, also how to
harden their houes. Cap. xiii.
IT is nedeful immediately after the mares have foled, or rather a seuennight or
a fortenight before they be ready to fool, to put them into the warmest,
swetest, and rankest pasture that you have, to the intent they lyinge warm and
dry, and faringe well, may have plentye of milk to feed their foles. For
nothing does hinder the growth of the foles more then cold, and penury.
Moreover Anatolius says, that it is very necessary about two or three
months after their folinge, to chase them about the ground to and fro, or
otherwise to exercise them with some moderate labor, to make their milk come
down into their dugges. And to the intent that the foles may be fair and
fat, all the writers with one consent would have them to suck.ii. years, and
specially if they be horse foles, yea some would have them to suck til they
offer to cover their dammes, and less then one year though they be Mare foles,
none that ever I could hear or read of does allow. And yet here in England
they will scant suffer them to suck.vi. months, but will weane them before
they be full half a year old, which truly I cannot commend, for though many
of them do prove to be great of bone and tall of stature, yet the pyth within
is not firm nor sound, neither can they be so strong, so healthful, or live
so long, as those most commonly do, which suck a long time. For that sweet
and most natural moisture and nutryment, whereof they be deprived in their
youth, will never be gotten again so long as they live. Wherefore I wysh those
that seek to have strong and healthful Coltes, to let them suck one year at
the least. In old time as it appears by Varro and Columella, they used for
warmeth sake to house both Mares and foles, until their foles were ten days
old, and then to put them forth into the pasture. Also when the foles were
five Months old, they used now and then to bring them into the house and
there would give them ground barley mingled with wheat branne, and such other
soft kind of food. And being a year old, they would give them firmer
prouander, as dried Barley, and Branne, contynuing so to do, until they
were.ii. years old. All which time the coltes also sucked, and chiefly they
did this to make them domestical and familiar, and partly to make them fat and
lustye, and partlye again to acquaynt them with all kind of meats, but
therewith they would touch them or handle them so little as was possible, for
fear of hindering their grows. And among the rest of their diligent cares,
in bringing up this necessary beast, they had a special regard to his
houes, that they might be tough, firm and hard, and therefore whenever they
stood in the house, they would suffer no dounge to remain any while by them,
for fear of burning their houes. And if they saw they were any thing
enclyned to have tender houes, they would make an oyntmente of the ears of
garlycke, of swynes grease, goats grease and brymstone, that had not been
tried in the fire, and so annointe their houes therewith, both without and
within, which ointment did make their houes very toughe and hard, and to that
intent they would strew stones under their feet, whereas they stood. Moreover
when they fed abroad in the pasture, they would drive them up to the highest
and most stony grounds, which as Russius says, does not only harden their
houes, but also make them to have strong legs, and to tread suerlye upon
the ground. But as touching the hardening of houes, we shall talk more thereof
when we come to treat of the diseases of horses.

How to know of what stature, making, and disposition the foles when they are
new foled will be, when they come to age. Cap. xiiii.
THe foles that have very long legs, even from their birth, do prove most
commonly to be tal of stature, for the legs of al iiii. foted beasts, be
almost so long at the first day of their birth, as they wylbe ever after.
Again those will be both stronglye, and finelye made, which in their very
youth have great bodies, and well knyt together, little heads, black eyes,
short and sharp ears, broad nosethrils, wide mouths, broad necks, with
good thick creastes, broad breasts, plain backs, gaunt bellies, brawnye
thighs, nimble knees, that will easelye bow in their goinge, strong legs,
short pastourns, round, hard, and hallow houes, so as they may sound again
when they tread upon the ground, and the harder and the fuller they tread
upon the ground, the better houes they seem to have. Now the signs of their
disposition and courage as Varro says, be these, to be liuelye and sturringe,
not to be afraid of every noise, or sight, to run wantonly before their
fellows, and to strive to be foremost, also to offer to leap over every hedge
and dyke, or to go over a bridge, or to pass the water, again if they will be
quicklye stirred, and therewith sone pacified, it is a sign that they will be
tractable, and easy to be broken in time to come.

Of the growth as well of mare Coltes, as horse coltes, and how to know which will
continue in goodness, and live longest. Cap. xv.
I Think it good here also to let you understand thopinions of ye writers,
touching the growth as well of mare foles, as horse foles, for though that horse
foles be fashioned in their dammes bellyes, sooner then the mare foles, yet the
mare foles being once foled, do arryue to their full growth of height and
length in.v. years, whereas the horse foles be not at their full grouth of height
and length, before they be full six years old, from which time forth as
Arystotle says, till they be ten years old, they grow only in largenes and
thicknes. And Absirtus says, that those which have white or balde faces, do
not wax old so sone as others. Again the same Author says, that those
Coltes which have tender houes, do not continue in their vigor and strength,
above viii. years after that they be at their full growth of height and length,
neither are they mete any more to be Iourneyed. Because the Crowns of their
houes will fall down so low, as they shall skant be able to stand on their
feet. But if they have good houes, then they will continue in their vigor.x.
years after their full growth and above. Moreover the said author says,
those horses which have from their youth upward hard houes, will live until
they be.xxviii. or xxix. years old, but they seldom arrive to.xxx. but those
that have soft houes do not live above.xxiiii. years. But as touching the
lives of horses we have talked already sufficientlye before in the fourth
chapter.

When and how coltes should be weaned from their dammes. And how they should
be severed according to their kinds and ages. cap. xvi.
WHen your Coltes have sucked.ii. years or one year at the least. And specially
if they be horse coltes, (for mare coltes may suck a lesser time, according
as you your self shall think it good to have your mares covered again the
next year following or not,) then about shrouetide it is good (as some men
write) iii. days before the full of the moon to take the^ early in the morning
from their dammes, and to shut them up all that day, and all that night
without meat, in a house appoyncted for that purpose, and standing clean
out of their dammes hearing. The next day in the morning to put them again to
their dammes, and to let them suck their bellies full, yea, even until they
swel again, that done, take them away for all a do, and to keep the^ in
thaforesaide house the space of.xiiii. days, nigh unto which house would be
some pretty sweet pasture reserved of purpose, to the intent that from the end
of the.xiiii. days until the month of May, (before which time there is
little grass growing) the coltes may feed and play themselves therein every
fair day. But when May is once come, then put the^ forth into some good
pasture, whereas they may have plenty of short and sweet grass, for over rank
grass will hurt their reins, and make them thick necked, and in any case see
that therewith they lie warm and dry, and lack no water, for if waynlinges
suffer either hunger, thirste, or cold, and specially in the first year
whiles they mourn for their dammes, they will never prove to be good, but will
be small of stature, of small strength, and full of diseases. But after that
the colts be two years old and upward and have clean forgotten their da^mes.
I would wish them to run in a large, hard, and hungery ground, but so as
with their traueyling, and taking pains for their living, they may fill them
full once in the day at the least, for fear of hinderinge their growthe. Your
Coltes being thus weaned and kept, shall prove to be light, nimble, hard, and
strong horses, and to have strong legs and hard houes, and not to surfeit of
every little cold, as those do which be fed in somer season with rank
grass, and lie cold and weate in winter. More over to the intent there may
be no dysorder amongst your coltes: see that ye sever them, according to
their kinds and ages, that is to say, to put horse foles by themselves in one
pasture, and mare foles by them selves in another pasture. Again, put
yerelinges, two yerelings, and three yerelings, every age by it self severally,
so shall not the greater wrong the lesser, for among equalles is altogether
love and fellowshippe without any dyscorde. Wherefore you see that particions,
as I said in the begi^ning of this book, are so nedeful in that ground which
should be appointed for breding of horses, as nothing more.

Of the gueldinge of Coltes, and for what cause they be guelt, and also at what
age, and in what time of the year they ought to be guelt. cap. xvii.
THe Coltes that do naturally amble, or may easily be brought to it, either
by trauerse, or else by hand without trauerse (which in mine opinion is the
better way) most men in this realm do more delyght to have them guelte then
stoned, for they love not only to ride easily by the way, but also very fast,
and therewith to have their horses so quiet, as they may be easily governed,
which things are not commonly seen in stoned horses, for their abou^daunt heat
will not suffer them to be so quiet, nor yet to labor so far in a day as
Gueldinges may, because the guelding lacking his stones has no such hot blud
in his body as he had before he lost them. Yea to be guelt (as some
authoures write) is such a Cooler, as it tameth both man, and beast, in their
greatest madness, and clean heals them of that disease, when nothing else
will. Moreover, gueldinges do not neygh so often nor so loud as stoned horses
do. For the which cause, the Sarmatians in all their secret enterprises and
exploytes, do use to serve upon gueldinges and not upon stoned horses. And also
our light horsemen here in England do in like manner serve upon gueldings in the
wars, and for that cause they do not only guelde ambling coltes, but also
trotting coltes, which they think partly mete for that purpose, and partly
for their servants to ride on, and to carry their males and cloak bags after
them. Of both which sort of gueldinges I believe this realm has so fair and
so many, as any one country in all Christendom. Wherefore I think it good
here to show you the age, and at what time of the year and Move it is best to
guelde such coltes. And first as touching the age, it is best doing when the
Colt is almost.ii. years old, for to guelde him yo^ger will hinder his growth
very much. Again if he be much elder his neck will wax great, and the
strings of his stones will be so hard and strong, as they will not be broken,
but must needs be cut, which as Russius says, is very dangerous. Albeit our
gueldours here in England be so cunning and expert in that faculty, as they
make no matter thereof, for they will cut both old and young, at what age
soever they be, and warraunt them to do well enough. And some I assure you do
evil inoughe, and specially if the meetest time for that purpose, as well of
the year, as of the moon be not dewlye observed. Wherefore I would wyshe you
to suffer none of the guelders to take your Coltes in hand onles it be in the
spring, as in May, or in the beginning of June, or else about the fall of the
leaf, as also when the moon is in the wane. For those two seasons are most
temperate, yt is to say, neither to hot nor to cold, the excess of either of
which qualities, is very noisome to those that be newlye guelt, and causes
many to peake out of the way. And therefore after that they be guelt, you
must see that they go in a warm pasture, and that they be not overmuch
chased to and fro, or otherwise dysquieted, but moderatelye exercised until
they be perfectlye whole.

At what age, in what time of the year it is best taking up of Coltes to
break them, and how they ought at their first haltering to be used. Cap.
xviii.
THey use in most parts to take up their Coltes when they are but.ii. years
and the vantage, or.iii. years old at the most, whereby their iointes not being
knytte, if they be not the more discretly used their backs may be soon swayde
or pinched, and besides that their legs will grow full of splentes and
wyngalles, and become crooked and lame, before they be half old. Wherefore I
wish that according to Federico thempeperours order, no horse Colt might be
taken up to be broken, before he were.iiii. years old and the vantage, and
that would be done in some cold season of the year, when they may best
endure to travel, as about Octobre, to the intent that after they have been
broken in the winter season, when extreme heat cannot anoy them, by driving
them into faint sweates, they may be suffered, when spring time comes, and
plenty of grass is upon the ground, to rest in the stable certain days,
whilst they be scoured and fatted with grass, and so to get up their flesh
that they lost whilst they were in breakinge, of which scouringe and
fattinge, we shall treat hereafter more at large, when we come to speak of the
dieting of horses, for ye preserving of their health. In some places, as at
Tutburye, ye Coltes are so wild as after they be driven into a house they are
feign to be snared with a snare made of a strong halter, coming through a
ring of Iron, and put upon a long pole, and so cast about that Coltes neck,
which should be taken up, and strained so hard, as it may strangle him for the
time, before they can fasten any halter or collar upon his head, which wildnes
partlye perhaps comes for that the ground is wast and wild, for lack of
perticions, as I said before in the first Chapter. But chieflye for that they
be never housed, handeled, nor made familier with man in their youth, which is
very nedeful, and was not omitted by the mean of old time as I showed you
before in the.xiii. Chapter, and for lack thereof many a good colt at his first
taking up, through his own stryuing is utterly marred, and maimed for ever.
Wherefore I wyshe them to be made domestical in their youth, in such sort as
is in the Chapter before declared, so shall they not need to be forced by any
such extremity when they should be taken up, and the first collar or halter
that you put on a Coltes head, would be made as Russius says, of woollen yarne,
or else of horse hear, and that very gross and broad brayded, to the intent it
may not cut his head when he strives withal. Moreover unto that halter would
be fastened.ii. strong reanes, on each side one, that the Coltes head may be
fast teied unto the manger on both sides, whereby he shall not rear nor hurt
his legs. And until he be some what gentle and tame, it shall be needful also
to set another Colt by him that is already tamed, that his keeper may have the
safer access unto him, who must use all gentle means possibly, to win him,
and show him no manner of cruelty, using often to stroke his back and neck
with his hand, whereunto he shall bring him the sooner, if he let him eat no
meat, but that which he shall be content gentlye to receive at his hand, for
hunger will tame the wild tygre, and for.iii. or.iiii. days let him not go
out to drink, but make him to drink in the stable, and when he will suffer to
be touched, then stroke all the other parts of his body, and specially his
legs, to the intent he may suffer to be courried, and that his keeper may lift
up his feet, and knock him first fair and softly with a stone upon his
hones, and then harder and harder, whereunto if he be often used, it shall make
him very easy to be shod, and also when his keeper leads him to water, let
that tamed Colt which stands with him, always accompanye him, going somewhat
before him, to thinte^t yt the other may follow, and so learn to be led in
hand, which once had, then bring him with fair means to suffer the Cauetsane
or headstraine to be put on his head, and to be sadeled and guirded, and use to
lead him to water being so saddeled, to the intent it may not seem strange unto
him, neither within the house, nor abroad. And when he is brought to this
tamenesse, then it shall be good to put a pair of soft pastorns on his
forefete, and also as Russius says, to tie one of his hinder feet with a
woollen coard, so as he can not much sture any way, and that shall preserve
his legs (as he says.) Nigh unto which, no doung must be suffered to lie,
for fear of burning his houes, but see that he stand clean, warm, and dry*
and that he be well meated, often courryed and clothed. And in any case let no
shrewed boys or unruly persons come into the stable, to ticke or toye with
him, or otherwise to fraye him, for if he chance to get any evil property at
the first, it will be very hard ever after to bring him from it. And after that
he is brought to such pass, as he will suffer to be handeled, haltered,
saddeled, shodde, and also to be led where a man will, then let him be ridden,
broken, and scholed, according to Grisons precepts, declared unto you in my
last book entytled the art of ridyng. But now as touching the mare Coltes, it
were best to take them up, when they are.ii. years old, and the vauntage, to
the intent that they may be handled and broken, either by working the^, or else by
riding them moderately, but rather by working them until they be.iii. years
old. At which age, as I have have said before, they are most mete to be
covered, and being made tame before, you shall have the less trouble with
them, at such time as you would have them to be covered.

How and at what age a coltes mouth should be cut, or certain of his teeth
drawn, when the bitte for fault thereof can not have his true restinge place.
Cap. xix.
OUr common breakers of horses, when they chance upon a colte that has so
narrow a mouth, as it is not able to receive a bitte high enough, they use to
cut his mouth wider in riding him, with a very sharp square brake, made of
purpose which is not good, for it makes him ever after either to have to
tender or to hard a mouth, and for the most part rather to hard then to
tender, by means of the hard and cornye flesh which afterward grows on
both sides of his mouth, where he was so raggedly torn, cut, and gawled.
Wherefore it were much better to cause an expert horse leache to slyt his mouth
equally on both sides with a sharp knyfe or rasor so high as shall be nedeful,
and then to sear it with a hot iron, and to heal it in such sort as the sides
thereof may grow no more together, but appear to be a natural mouth, and of
that widenes even from the coltes birth, and before his mouth be parfectly
whole, I would wish him not to be ridden with any manner of bitte at all, but
only with a hedde strain. Yea, in mine opinion it were so much the better if
his mouth were cut and healed up again before he were taken up to be broken,
for the sooner it is done, the lesser it shall be seen, so that it be not done
while he sucketh, for then perhaps the sorenes of his mouth would let his
suckinge, and so hinder his growth. Now as touching the drawing of certain
teth which may also be a great impediment that the bit can not have his true
restinge place, you shall hear the very words of Laurentius Russius,
wrytinge in this sort. Because it is very hard, yea, and almost impossible
(says he) that a Horse can have a parfecte good mouth, unless the.ii. tusshes,
and also other ii, called of him the plain teeth, and of us the cheek teeth,
or wange teeth, be clean pulled out: (for after that a horse is thoroughly
warmed, if he has the said teeth, his rider shall hardly hold him.) It is very
requisite therefore that the foresaid.iii. teeth, that is to say, on each side
of his nether Iawe.ii. after that the horse is.iii. years and a half old, be
clean drawn out by an expert hand, with instruments mete for that purpose,
so as his Iawe may not be hurt, and so soon as they be out, let the sore
gum be rubbed well with salt, somewhat brayed or broken before, that done,
see that his mouth be not touched for iii. dais after, look also that the
stable where he stands be closse shut, so as the wind may not annoy him, and
until he be whole. Forget not every day after that he has drunk, first to
cleanse the sore places from such fylth as there remains of his meat, and
then to rub it a new, with salt as before, for such continual rubbing with
salt will suffer no evil flesh there to grow, and if any do grow, then
first scarifye the same with your nails, and rub it again with salt. Some
use to wash the sore place only with warm wine, and some add thereunto both
honye and pepper, and rub it after with salt, some again wash it only with
wine and honey, and put on no salt. But truly if it were first washed with
wine, and after rubbed with salt, it were so much the better. Moreover until
the place be perfectlye whole, forget not when soever you put any bit in his
mouth, to cleanse first the sore place, fair and softly with your finger.
Thus far Russius has spoken, whose words do sound with good reason, and are
confirmed by diverse learned Authors, albeit I my self never saw horse teeth
drawn in all my life, and yet I must needs confess that I have seen some
horses though not many, which have had their tusshes standing so high, as it
has seemed unto me very necessary, either to draw them, or else to file them
hard down to the gummes, which some men take to be the surest way for saving
of the horses Iawe. Notwithstanding in mine opinion, the best way (if the
horses mouth be not already to wide) were to slit his wickes higher, and to
make rome for the bitte that way, but to say the truth, few coltes or none
being well bred in this realm have need of either of the^ both, neither have
our colts for the most part, any tusshes come up at that age whereof Russius
talks. And truly I can not but marvel at that he apointeth two tusshes to
be drawn on each side of his nether iawe, (if I understand him aright) whereas
every horse has but one beneath, and a another above, and I do no less
maruayle to read in Aristotle, that a horse should have in all.xliiii. teeth,
since, I could never se any horse that had above.xvi. that is to say, in the
fore part of his mouth vi. beneath, and vi. above, and on each side of his
mouth.ii tusshes, one above and a another beneath: nevertheless I thought good
to let you understand the writers opinions herein, committing the execution of
all things unto your own discretion.

Of the cullinge out of refuse mares and Coltes, and also of those that should
be reserved for the maintenance of the stock. Cap. xx.
ALthough a man have never so fair stallions and mares, yet by some evil
aspecte of the planettes, or else by some other unhappy by chance, or by the
negligence of the kepers, the Coltes do not always come to such proof as a
man would have them, and therefore I would wysh the owner, though he dwell far
of, twyse a year at the least to survey his ground, and all the cattle therein,
to the intent that if there be any not mete to be kept, either for barrennes,
for age, or for deformity, they may be made away, and sold at those fayres and
markets which best serve to such purposes, yea, and if the cattle be well used,
his increase will be such, as once in.iii. or.iiii years after the first.iii.
years be past, he shall be feign either to sell or to give away of the fayreste
that he has, for otherwise his ground would be quickly surcharged, and not
hable to feed them. Albeit I would wish him to sell or give so, as he need not
to buy him self to mayntaine his stock, unto which he must have always a
special regard, in chosing out from time to time the fairest and largest
bodied coltes, as well of males as females, that he can find amongst the
whole race, to be reserved for the maintenance of his studde or bread. For as
I said in the beginning, onles the parents be well chosen, the offspring can
never be good. Moreover, it is necessary that such survey be often made for the
shifting of the cattle, according as both kind and age of the cattle, and also
the time of the year requires, least otherwise perhaps they may be pynched,
both with cold, and penury, which be the greatest enemies that Coltes can
have. Again, many contagiouse sycknesses do often chance amongst this
kind of cattle, at which time, if the infected be not removed from the
wholle: the one infecteth the other, and so they dye all.

For faut of which seuering sir John Birron of Notinghamshire, a very good
knight and a notable housekeper, told me this last summer that not long since
he lost in one year, as many mares and Coltes as were worth a M. marks. But
to say the truth in such a contagious time, it is not only necessary to sever
the sick from the hole: but also very needful, that medicine be ministered
as well to the whole, as to those that be not to far gone, for the sauegard of
their lives, whereof I shall speak hereafter more at large, when I come to
treat of the curing of their diseases, and in the mean time, I shall desire
you to take all that which I have hitherto written touching the breding of
horses in good part, so shall I have cause to think my labor well bestowed.

FINIS.
THE ART of Riding.

Newly corrected and amended of many faults escaped in the first Pryntynge: as
well touching the matter, as the Bittes: Whereof many were evil drawn, and
as evil cut: but now made perfect through the dilygence of the first Author.
Tho. Blundeuill of Newton Flotman in Norff.

Imprinted at London by VVyllyam Seres dwelling at the west end of Paul's
church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS SINGVLER GOOD LORD, THE Lord Roberte Dudley,
Earl of Leycester, Barron of Denbighe, Knight of the honorable order of the
Garter, Master of the Queens majesty's horses, and one of her highness pryuie
council. Thomas Blundeuil wissheth perfect felicity.
IT is now (my singular good Lord) almost two years since I determined with
my self, to have translated into our vulgar tongue, the four books of
Grison, treatinge in the Italion tongue, of the art of Rydinge and breaking
great Horses, and to have given the same unto your L. as M. Secretary Cicill
can well testifye. Who I thank him of his goodness vouchsafed to peruse my
first draught, and misliked not the same. But after that I had translated two
books thereof, and saw to what inconuenie^ce I was bound: having to follow so
doubtful phrases, and manners of speaking, and so confuse an order of writing,
as in my judgment he uses, (being in deed a far better doer, then a writer)
by means whereof he is constreyned to make many repeticions of one thing,
and to use more words then need: I could not satisfy my self therewith. And
therefore leaving to translate any further. I sought how to bring so good a
matter as that is, into a new form and better if it might be, and thereby to
make it the playner and also the briefer, in which my doing I trust, if
Grison him self were living, I should not offend him at all. For since it was
his intent to make other men partakers of his excellent knowledge in this art,
so necessary to be learned, and therefore of right to be published: it would not
grieve him then to have his meaning so plainly expressed in an other tongue, as
the readers might casely understand the same. Which whether I have so done or
not, I refer that to your L. judgment, who has no small skill, not only in
both tunges, but also in the art self, wherein your H. is a chief master,
as well by knowledge as also by office, and therefore most mete to be both judge
and patron of this book. Which if it shall please your H. to receive with a
willing hand, and seem to allow my doing therein, by encouraging the esquires
and ryders of the stable in breakyng the Queens Ma. horses, sometimes to follow
thinstructions thereof (and the rather for that old Alexander their first
master, was him self as I understand, sometime Grysons scholar) and so give
an example to all others in like manner to follow the same: And specially now
whilst the queen's Majesty minds so graciously to provide for ye breding and
keeping of great horses, which no doubt should be to the great profiting of
this our common weal: In the most parts whereof, partly for lack of art, and
partly for lack of exercise, chiualry is sore decayed: I shall not only think
my labor well bestowed: but also to have received ye greatest reward yt I could
possible wish or desire. Yea, and shall be encouraged thereby, to attempt
hereafter some other thing of more weight. Wherein I may show my self
thankful to your L. for so courteously accepting this my labor and good
will, which is and shall be always bent to do your H. such poor service as I
can.

A Chapter to the Reader, towchynge the order observed in this book: very
necessary to be read and well considered before he enter any further.
Endeavoring my self gentle reader for your better understanding to reduce
Grysons book, which in the Italion tongue does treat of the art of riding,
and of breaking great Horses, into a more brief and compendious way of
teachinge, then he to my Judgment has therein observed: I sought first to
what end such labor was chiefly to be employed upon great horses. And I
found that either it was to make them horses of service, or else horses of
pleasure, called Stirers. Then I considered what things were incident to an
horse of service, and what to a horse of pleasure or Stirer. And of those
things which were common to them both, and which were appertayning to each one
perticulerly. And first I found that to a horse of service belonged these
chief points here folowinge. That is to say, to trot clean and lustely, to
stop lightly, to turn on both hands redely, to galloppe stronglye, to maneg
with single turn surely, and last of all to pass a carire swiftly. And in
all his doings from the beginning to the ending, to reane well, and to bear
his head steddely. Al which things are also common to ye stirrer, but then it
is requisite that the stirrer besides all this, learn to bound alofte with
all four, and to yarke withal, to gallop the gallop galliarde, to fetch the
Capriole, to do the Coruetti, and such like kind of saltes. But yet this
suffices not, unless I might also know the nighest means for a horse to
attain to these feats, and what order was therein to be observed, which
whilst I sought, behold the riders office wholly discovered, whereby I might
well perceive that unless the rider were first instructed in all those things
that appertayned unto his office: the horse could never be well broken.
Wherefore minding to comprehend all things in iii. books, I thought it most
mete to begin with the ryder in teaching him first how to know a good horse,
and apt to be taught, as well by his color and marks, as shape, to the intent
he bestow not his labor upon a Jade, or Roile. Then how to tame him, and to
make him so gentle as he may suffer to be ridden. After that, how to sit him
and to behave him self in ye point like a horseman. Then I proceeded further,
declaring the iii. chief points, wherein the perfection of a horseman
consists. That is to say, in knowing how to help, to correct, and to
cherishe his horse, and with what instruments, and generally how and when to
use them, and so I end the first book. That done I come to the horses lessons,
which he has to learn for his part, declaring what order is to be kept
therein: to which soever of those ii. ends beforesaid. he be broken. And to
every lesson I join such helps and corrections, as are mete to be used for
redress of such faults, as most commonly chance therein: which faults for
the most part I call errors making a distinction between errors and vices,
attributing errors to the lack of knowledge, and vices to nature, or evil
custom. As these be vices, to be restif, to be rammege, to lie down in the
water, to be skittishe, which for distinction sake I do otherwise call general
faults, because they may chance in every lesson. Of the most part, of which
faults I do treat severally in the third book, declaring therewith the
corrections of the same. For otherwise I shoulbe be driven to make many
digressions, and to interrupte the tenoure of my talk which I love not to do.
And I say here of the most part, because there be some vices so peculier and so
incident to certain of the horses lessons, as I am forced to myngle the
correction of the same, even amongst the errors, as occasion requires, and yet
thereby no order broken at all, as any man of judgment, I am sure will easily
confess. Then the horse being thoroughly broken in all points, mete for him to
learn: be he horse of service or styrrer: I finallye teach you how to ride him
to the best show before a prince. And there ends the second book. In the
third book I treat only of the corrections of the general vices aforesaid,
and of the diversity of bits, and to what purpose every one serves. The order
of all which three books shall more plainly appear unto you, by the
contents of ye chapters hereafter following. And though Gryson seems to use
the like order, that I do in the very beginning: yet he does not continue the
same, but immediately makes so many dygressions, and interlaceth so many and
diverse matters together, as were enough to confound the memory of a very
dyscrete reader. And yet Gryson not to be blamed, for not observing that order
or Metheode in writing, which perhaps he never had learned: But rather much
to be praised and commended of almen, for uttering in the best manner he could,
that his assured knowledge which he had gotten with great labor and contynuall
exercisyng him self in ryding, the space of xl. years and above. Of which
knowledge what lack we Englishmen have had, and specially have at this
present, is best seen at a mustre, when the Queens Majesty has need of horse
and horsemen, where ofttimes you shall see some that sit on their horses like
wind shaken reeds, handlinge their hands and legs like weauers. Or if the
horseman be good; then the horse for his part shall be so broken, as when he
is suffered to go forward, he will go backewarde. And when his ryder would have
him to turn on the right hand, he will turn clean contrary. And when he
should stop, he will arm him self, and run away, or else stop sooner
then his ryder would have him or use such like toys. For redress of which
faults, both in man and beast, this book is chiefly set forth, with the
rules. whereof, if you that lack knoweledge shall vouchsafe to acquainte your
selves, not only by reading, but also by exercise of riding, I doubt not but
by your spedye profityng therein, you shall have just occasion to be
thankful, both to Gryson for the first invention of the matter, and also to
me for disposing and reducing the same into a plain form and order of
teaching. And you shall have very good cause also to be thankful unto my dear
friend M. John Asheley M. of the Queens Majesty's Jewel house. For by ye daily
practicing of the rules of Gryson his book, I saw him without the help of
any other teacher, bring two of his horses, and specially that which he
calls his Balle, unto such perfection, as I believe few gentlemen in this
realm have the like. Which evident proof together with his encouraging me unto
it, made me the more willing to take the matter in hand. In hope that other
men would with like diligence use the like exercise, wishinge all gentelmen
lackyng his qualityes, to be his like indede. And that not only in this
exercise, but also in many other his virtuous exercyses, as well of mind as of
body. To the intent they may deserve as he does the love, favor, and
commendacion of all men, whereof I have no doubt at all, because I my self do
know a number of young gentlemen that be given in these our days, to such
cyuill, and commendable exercyses, (as God geuinge them grace to continue
therein,) in time to come they will be no small ornament unto this realm.
Which I pray God to grant, and there I end bidding you well to fare.

A Table declaring the contents of the three books following. The first book
treats of the riders office and is divided into these Chapters.
OF the colors of horses, and which be best Cap. i. Which horses be well
marked, and which be not. Cap. ii. What shape a good horse ought to have. Cap.
iii. How to tame a wild horse or Colte, at what age, how to make him come to a
block, and what kind of bridle, or rather halter, and saddle, you shall first
put upon him. Cap. iiii. What the rider ought to do, before he take his horse
back, and being mounted, how he ought to sit in his saddle. Cap. v. Of the
three chief points wherein consists the perfection of a horseman, and how
many kinds of helps and corrections there be. Cap. vi. To what end such
helps and corrections serve. ca. vii. Of the voice, of the tongue, and sound
of the lyppes. Cap. viii. Of the rod. Cap. ix. Of the bridle and reanes. Cap.
x. Of the Caulfes of the legs, and of the heles. Cap. xi. Of the stirruppe.
Cap. xii. Of the Spur. Cap. xiii. Of the musroll and the martingale. Cap.
xiiii.
The second book treats of the horses lessons, and is divided into these
Chapters.
OF the horses lessons and order thereof in general. Cap. i. Of treadinge the
ringe, and to what end it serves. Cap. ii. The helps and corrections mete to
be used whilst he treads the ringes. Cap. iii. Of stoppinge. Cap. iiii. Of
going back, and whereto it serves, and how you shall teach your horse to do
it. Cap. v. Of aduauncinge before, whereto it serves, and how, where and when
you shall teach him to do it. Cap. vi. Corrections to be used when your horse
aduaunceth to high, and out of order, or when you would not have him. Cap.
vii. How to make him yarke, and to be light behind. Ca. viii. How to teach
your horse to turn redelye on both hands. Cap. ix. How to correct your
horse, when he is harder to turn on the one side then on the other. Cap. x.
Six other corrections for the same fault. Of the whole tournes and double
tournes, how and when to teach your horse to make them. Cap. xvii. Helps and
corrections mete to be used for the redress of such errors, as most commonly
do hap in making the double tournes. Cap. xviii. Of the Chambetta, what it is,
whereto it serves, and how you shall teach your horse to do it. Cap. xix. Of
maneginge, and how many kinds of maneges there be. Cap. xx. Thorder of
maneging with haulfe rest, whole rest, and without rest, all three with single
turn, or half turn Cap. xxi. Of maneging with double tournes. Cap. xxii. Of
the helps and corrections which are meet to be used for redress of such
errors and faults, as commonly chance in maneging. Cap. xxiii. How and when
to teach your horse to pass a Cariere. Cap xxiiii. Of thorder of leaping and
boundinge alofte, and how and when you shall teach your horse to leap, and
yarke withal, and also to gallop the gallop gallyarde. Cap. xxv. How you shall
teach your horse to do the Capriole, and to dance the Coruetti, and also to go
sidelinge, either with his whole body or with his rumpe only. Ca. xxvi How to
ride a horse to the best show before a Prince, and where best standing is for
him to see. Cap. xxvii.
The third book treats of the corrections of vices, and of the diversity
of bittes and is divided into these Chapters following.
Of the corrections of vices in generalll. Cap. i. OF the vices of the head and
neck, and first how to correct your horse when he bears his head or neck
awry. Cap. ii. How to correct your horse when he bears not right the lower
part of his head, called of the Italions Mustacchio, and may be called of us,
the mosell, which comprehends both nose and mouth. Cap. iii. Certain causes,
why it is better for a horse to bear his head under then right out, or to
cast it up alofte. And then how to correct him, if he will not bring in his
head, and reane as he ought to do. Cap. iiii. How to correct your horse when
he ducketh down his head, and bears to low. Cap. v. How to correct that
horse which does over reach in his goinge, that is to say, does smite his
forefeete with his hinder feet. Cap. vi. How to correct that horse which when
he is chastised for any fault with the spur, uses to shake his head, or
ears, also how to know by the moving of his ears when he is maliciouslye
disposed, and how to correct him for the same. Cap. vii. How to correct your
horse when he whyneth, intending to strike with his heles, or to do some
shrewdnes being in the company of other horses. Cap. viii. Of restifnes, of
the kinds and causes thereof. Cap. ix. Remedies against restifnes, proceeding of
vile courage. Cap. x. Remedies against restifnes, procedinge of stubbornes, and
stout courage. Cap. xi. Other corrections to be used against restifnes, when
the ryder lacks art, and knows not by order of ridyng, how to get the
mastery of his horse, and to make him to know his fault. Cap. xii. Of the
contrary vice unto restifnes, which is to run away, of the causes thereof, and
how to correct the same Cap. xiii. How to correct that horse that will rear
right up when he is corrected for any fault with a stick upon the head. Cap.
xiiii. How to correct that horse that will fall down to the ground, when he
is a little werye or provoked to do any thing which he would not willingly
do. Cap. xv. How to correct that horse which passing through any water, will
lie down in the same, and what is the cause of such vice. Cap. xvi. How to
correct that horse which is skittish or fearful and will start at every
thing, and whereof such vice proceeds. Cap. xvii. How to embolden your
horse, and to make him hardye against other horses. Cap. xviii. How to make
your horse to abide both staff, sword, great noise, gunshot, or any other
thing. Cap. xix. OF the vices of the mouth, and causes thereof in general. Cap.
xx. How to correct that horse which will either draw up the bitte with his
tongue, or defend the same with his neither lip. Cap. xxi. How to correct that
horse which will mow or wry with his mouth, and the causes whereof such vice
does proceed. Cap. xxii. Of the kinds of byttes, together with their names,
and parts belonging to the same. Cap. xxiii. Of the chekes and eyes of bittes,
and also of the kirble and how they ought to be made. Cap. xxiiii. Of closse
bittes, and for what mouths they are most mete, and also what vices they do
correct. Ca. xxv. Of open bittes in general. Cap. xxvi. Of broken ports, and
vpset mouths, how they ought to be made, and what vices they do correct. Ca.
xxviii. Of whole ports, how they ought to be made, and what vices they do
correct. Cap. xxviii. Of whole ports with trenches above, how they ought to
be made, and for what mouths they are most mete. Cap. xxix.
EXAMPLES RECITED BY GRIson as well in his preface, as in the latter end of his
book, not only commending the aptnes of a horse to learn his stout courage,
and long continuance in his goodness, but also the worthiness of the art it
self, whereunto is also adjoined, who first found out ridynge, and who
invented the bittes, and who first used the service of horses in the field.
Aptnes to learn.
THere is a city within the kingdom of Naples, called Sibarye, in the which
sometime horses did learn to dance at the sound of a Simhpan.

Stout courage.
ALexander the great, had a horse called Bucephalus which being decked in
royal ornaments, would suffer no man to ride on him, but king Alexander him
self. Which horse being sore hurt at the taking of Thebes, would not
suffer Alexander to leave his back, for to mount upon any other. Such was both
his courage and also love toward his master, who did not forget to
recompense the same. For when the horse died the king caused him to be
solemplye buried: and for a perpetual memory thereof, builded even there, in
stead of a sepulcher, a fair city, and named it after the horses name,
Bucephalia. Julius Caesar also had a horse which would suffer no man to take his
back, but Caesar him self.

Long continuance.
King Charles the viii. departing out of Italye, only with v. C. horsemen,
encountered the duke of Millane, being united with the Venetians, with Ferara
and with Mantua: And until he came unto Furnouo, he knew none otherwise but
that he was so strong as his enemies, which were in all a.M.v.C. horsemen,
whereof though the king was advertised, and therewith hard all men say, it
was meet to give place, and to save himself: Yet he trusting in the great
knowledge and valiantnes of his horsemen, and specially of his general called
Il Signior Giouanni, Giacomo Friulzi, a Gentleman of Millan, would not so do,
but said: he would through, whatsoever became of it. And therefore having
sent before his carriage (the spoil whereof, brought many of the gredye
Italions into disorder) he him self being mounted upon a great black Spanish
horse, which had but one eye, and was.xxiiii years old, followed with his band
immediately after, and gave the onset, whereas both he and the horse did so
valiauntlye, as in that conflict, there were slain and taken on the contrary
part.xvii. of the chiefest conductiers. Whereby his enemies being discomfited,
he quietlye from thence passed on, in his journey. And the king would
afterward many times say that the valiant courage of his horse, was the
occasion of that victory. Which horse after that he came unto the city of
Molina besides that he was no more traueled, but well fed, and tenderly kept,
so long as he lived, he was also solemply buried, when he died, by the
appointment of the Lady of Burbon, sister unto the king.

Another example of continuance.
WHen the great Captain came to the Exployte of the kingdom of Naples (the
camp lyinge then at Cerignola) it chanced that whilst the Vicerov of France,
being there with many barons, prepared him self to fight with the Spanyardes:
The next day following, there came a knight of Naples called il signior Giacomo
Guindazzo, who not having his horses there, went to the Signior Troiano
Carracciolo, prince of Melfe, praying him to lend him a horse, only to serve in
the filled that day. To whom the prince, being of his own nature very courteous,
and liberal withal, gave him leave to go into his stable, and to take his
chose of all the horses there. Whereupon the said Giacomo went thither: And
having vewd them al he chose out a great bay horse, which lately came from the
covering of mares, and was.xxvii. years old. And though the prince persuaded
him to take a younger horse, yet he being expert in that facultye, and knowing
which horses were best in deed, would not so do: neither was he deceived in his
choice. For the battle being fought the next day, the horse did his part
notable well. In so much, as though he were sore hurt, and had many grievous
wounds: yet he would never give over, but continue to the end, and thereby
saved his riders life: So as both horse and man, after many valiaunte acts
showed: departed the field with the great admiracion of all men, that did
behold them. And finallye Grison attributes so much honor and praise to a
horse, as he says, that the worthy state of knighthoode, took his first
beginning of this beast, which in the Italian tongue is called Caualle: And
thereof comes Caualiero, which is so much to say in English, as a horseman
or knight. Wherein I believe, Gryson took his example at the latin word, having
also like deriuation. For a horse in latin is called Equus, whereof is derived
this word Eques, yt is a horseman or knight. But then most commonly they join
this word auratus unto it, saying: Eques auratus, that is a golden knight, for
that he was wont to wear gylt spurs, as I take it. Or else Eques torquatus,
that is a cheaned knight, for that he wears a chean. With which kind of
ornaments, horsemen deseruynge well in the field were sometime rewarded in
sign of honor due to their virtue. And though in these days rewarding of
virtue begins to cease: yet the self same names of honor do still
remain.

The worthynes of the art.
Moreover to prove that the art of riding and of breakyng great horses, is no
vile art: Gryson uses the aucthoritye of the noble Poet Virgill: Who in his
Eneidos, calls king Picus, for a more excellencye and greater praise, a tamer
or breaker of horses. He gives also the like title in diverse places of his
book to Mesaphus, the son of Neptune the god, of the sea, who as Poets feign,
begot upon Medusa the winged horse, named Pegasus, which fleyng up to the
heavens, was transformed into those sterres that be now called after his name.
The poets feign also that Bellerephons the son of king Glaucus, was upon
this horse back, when he slew the monstrous Chimera.

The first inuentours of Riding and of byttes, and also of the seruyng with
horses in the field.
THis Bellerophons, as some men say, was the first that invented Rydinge on
horseback. And the Pellitrones a people of Lapithia, found out afterward the
manner of bridles, byttes, and rings, to guide horses withal. But they of
Thessalia were the first that used the service of horses in the wars, which as
Gryson says, proceeded of a judgment, no less profitable then divine.

Thus ends the examples of Gryson.
Of the colors of horses, and which be best. Cap i.
A HORSE for the most part is colored according as he is complexioned, and as
he is complexioned, so is he also well or evil condicioned. Again he is
complexioned according as he does participat more or less of any of the.iiii.
Elements. For if he has more of the earth then of the rest, he is melancholy,
heavy, and faint hearted, and of coulor a black, a russet, a bright or dark
dunne. But if he has more of the water, the^ is he flegmatique, slow, dull,
and apt to lose flesh, and of coulor most commonly milk white. If of the
air, then he is a sanguine, and therefore pleasant, nimble, and of color is
most commonly a baye. And if of the fire, then is he cholorique, and therefore
light, whote, and fiery, a sterer, and seldom of any great strength, and is
wont to be of Color a bright sorel. But when he does participate of all the
four Elements, equallye and in dew proportion, then is he perfect, and most
commonly shall be one of these colors folowinge. That is to say, a brown
baye, a dapple graye, a black full of silver hears, a black like a moore, or
a fair rone, which kinds of horses, are most commendable, most most
temperate, strongest, and of gentellest nature. And next to these are such as
be most like in color to them: as the bright bay, the dark baye, that has
neither learinge look, mealy nose, nor white flank, The bright sorell, the
flyebitten white, the white liard like silver, having his outermost parts
black, as the tippes of his ears, his maine, his tail, or all four feet.
And if he has a list from his maine to his tail, he is so much the better.
To these also may be added the ashye graye, having al his.iiii. feet striped.
And note this, that as all well colored horses, are so much the better for
having some sign of adustion, that is to say, some black mark, at the least
in their nethermost parts: So of all evil colored horses, those are best
which have their outermost parts black. But if he be a bright sorell, a
brown bay with read flanks, a perfect black, or of any other color,
betokening Color adust: Then to mittygate his fiercenes, he had need to have
some white mark. Wherefore sith good marks be as necessary as good colors,
I will treat of them particularly in the next chapter folowinge.

Which horses be well marked and which be not. Cap. ii.
THe horse that has any white mark, is called of the Italyons Balzano, but
specially when he is white footed, And of white feted horses there be iiii.
good, and.vii. bad.

The good be these.
The first is he that has a white forefoote on the far side.

The second, that has a white hynderfoote, on the near side.

The third, that has both his hinder feet white.

But note that such white must not mount above the pastorns, for that were an
evil sign, betokening debility, and such horses be not called Balzani, but
Calzati, which is so much to say in english, as hosed.

The seven bad.
The first is he that has a white forefote on the near side.

The second, that has a white hinderfoote on the far side, and is called of
the Italyons Arzeglio.

The third, that has both his forefeete white.

The fourth, that has his forefoote and hinderfoote both on the farside
white, and is called of the Italions Trauato, that is to say, trauersed.

The.v. that has his forefoote and hinderfoote both on the near side white,
and is likewise called Trauato.

The syxt, that has his forefoote on the neareside, and his hinderfoote on the
farsyde crossewyse both white, and is called of the Italions Trastrauato,
cross trauersed.

The.vii. that has his foorefoote on the farreside, and his hinderfoote on the
neareside crossewise both white, and is also called Trastrauato.

And note, that if any of the white fete betokenyng either good or evil, be
mingled or spre^t with black spots, it confirms so much the more, the
good or evil signification thereof. It is an excellent good mark also for a
horse to have a white star in his forheade, or a white list or fyllet,
coming down on his head, without touching his brows, and not fully arriving
to his nose.

The horse that has a white rumpe or tail, is called of the Napolirans
Rapicano, and is most commonly a good horse, but if he have any white therwyth
before: that sygnifieth him to be of small force.

The horse that is flyebitten only on the shoulders, or on the flanks, can
neither be strong, nor able to endure any hardness. For such a horse most
commonly is foled in the heat of summer, betwixt July and August, when flies
are stirring, from the stinging whereof he is not able to defend him self,
neither with head nor tail, and therefore is called of the Italions
Attaffanato that is, flyestong or fliebitten.

And besides that, his damme can have no plentye of milk to feed him with, the
grass being burnt up with heat. The white horse that is altogether black
fliebitten, or red fliebitten, is a good horse.

But if he be a Lyard and marked with a few read or tawney flyebitinges, only
on his chekes, or on his nose, that is a sign of a stubborn Jade and
headstronge. The whall eyed horse called of the Italyons Gazzo, is most
commonly wilye, and full of shrewde toys.

The horse, whose balls of his eyes are white, seyth not well in time of snow.

The horse that has no kind of white mark, is most commonly tractable, but
then he is ramege, that is to say, he will keep no just pace, in his going,
but fares as one that goth with.ii. minds, twyxt going and not going.

And though to have no white mark may chance to all couloures: yet it
chances most to the black and dark bay. And note that when such blacknes
proceadeth of choler adust: the horse is furious, bold and wily, and is called
of the Italions Zaino. But if of melancholy natural, then he is fearful, dull
and slow, which things are more easy to be known by his doings then by his
marks.

The horse that has an Ostriche fether either on his forheade, on both sides
of his maine, or on the one side, or else behind on his buttockes, or in any
place where he himself can not see it, can never be evil horse.

But though the horse be never so well colored and marked, yet is he little
worth, onles his shape be accordinglye. And therefore I will show you what
shape a good horse ought to have, beginning at his neither parts, whereon a
good horseman ought first to fyxe his eye and mind.

What shape a good horse ought to have. Cap. iii.
A Good horse then would have a black, smoth, dry, large, round, and hollow
houe, and if it be soft or tender, and broad about the hele, it is the greater
sign of lightness.

The reason is, for that the horse from the day of his foling, treads light
upon the ground, for he is afraid to trust to his houes, being as yet very
tender, and therefore straineth his forelegs, and his back the more. The
crowns above his houes would be small and heary. His pastors short, and that
neither to low, nor yet to high, so shall he be strong beneth, and not apt to
founder. His joints great with long feawter locks behind, which is a sign
of force.

His legs straight and broad.

His knees great, lean and plain.

His thighs full of sinews, the bones whereof would be short, equal, just
and well proportioned, and the brawnes thereof when he stands with his legs
together, must be much more distaunt one from another above toward the
breast, then beneath.

His shoulders, long, large, and full of flesh.

His breast, large and round.

His neck rather long then short, great toward the breast, bending in the
midst, and slender toward the head.

His ears small or rather sharp, and standing right up, being of a just
length and largenes, according to the stature of the horse.

His forehead, lean and large.

His eyes, black and great.

The hollownes of his brows well filled and shooting outward.

His jaws slender and lean.

His nostrels so open and puffed up as you may see the read within, apt to
receive air.

His mouth great.

And finally, his whole head together would be like a sheapes head.

His maine would be thin and long, albeit I do not mislike the opinion of
those that would have it to be thycke, so that it be not ouerthycke, for as
the thynnesse betokens aptness to be taught, so does the indifferent
thicknes betoken strength.

His wythers or walleys would not only be sharp pointed, but also right and
straight, so as a man may plainly see from thence the departure of his
shoulders.

His back would be short, and that neither rysinge nor falling, but even
and plain, so shall it be strong. Which you shall sone try, if you ride him.

For the horse that has a strong back, either in his going, or gallopynge,
will continuallye gather his body round together, aduauncyng himself behind,
and liftyng up his rumpe, which the Italyons call Aggruppiggiare: yea, and will
do the like when soever you shall require it, or at the least will not shrynke
or distend his back, but will keep it always at one stay. Whereas if he has a
feeble back, either he will go rollyng behynd, or else if he aduaunceth him self
for a while at the first setting forth, yet he is not able to continue withal.
His sides would be long and large, with a small space betwyxt the hindermost
rybbe, and the hucklebone. His belly long and great, but orderly hidden under
his ribbs. His flanks not gawnte, but full, having natural freezeled hears
growing on both sides, and the higher that such hears mount, the better.

His rumpe round and plain, with the fall of a little gutter, and with a large
space betwixt the.ii. hucklebones. His thyghes large and long, with bones well
fashyned and full of flesh on either side. The hammes whereof if they be lean,
dry and straighte, and the houghes large and crooked like a Heart, it is a
sign of swyftnes. But if the hammes be crooked, and the houghes straight, it is
a sign that he is good for travel.

His tail would be full of hears, and long down to to the ground, the
tronchen whereof must be of a measurable bygnes, and well couched betwixt his
thyghes, notwithstanding, some do say that a thin tail and cryspe is as
good.

His stones and yard would be small. And finallye all his members would be
corespondent to the greatness of his body, which altogether would be fashioned
much like a stag, somewhat lower before, then behind, but not ouermuche, for
that were dangerous in runnyng. And the greater and stronger the horse is, the
meeter for the war, and the lyghter and more nymble he be, the meter to make a
styrer.

Thus having showed you how to know a good horse and apt to be taught, as well by
his color and marks, as shape: It rests now that I teach you how to break
him, and to handle him, and first if he be wild or a Colte, how to tame him.

How to tame a wild horse or Colte, at what age, how to make him to come to a
block, and what bridle and saddle you shall first put upon him. Cap. iiii.
ALthough you may begin to handle your horse when he is full.ii. years old,
and upward, yet it were better to tarry until he be.iii. years and a half
old, so shall he be the better able to endure travel, the joints of his body
and legs being then somewhat knyt together. For which cause the Emperor
Federico, would not have a horse to be ridden before he were full.iiii. years
old. And at the first handlynge of him, you shall put on his head a certain
Collar or halter, called of the Napolitans Cauazana, made in such sort as is
hereafter expressed in the first figure of the third book, which I caused to
be cut of purpose, because that Grison would in no wise have a young horse to
be ridden at the first with any bitte, for fear of marryng his mouth. In
stead of which Cauetsane, our Riders in England use a Cheane not much unlike
in effect unto the cauetsane, but yet in my judgment not so mete for a young
horse, for that it strayneth the tender gristle of his nose to sore, which
kind of halter or Cauetsane, partly for shortness of speech, and partlye for
likeness of sygnification, I will call from henceforth a headstraine. And in
puttinge the head strain on, you must use your horse so gently, as he may
not only be content to were it, but also to be quietly led thereby. Whereunto,
with gentle handlynge you shall quickly bring him. Neither must you use any
other kind of bridle than this, or any other saddell for fear of hurting his
back, then a soft pad of straw. Until your horse can trot clean, keep the
ring, stop and turn roundly on both hands. And in learning to sit close in
the pad, you shall also sit close in your saddle, but whatsoever saddle you put
upon his back, see that it stand always more forward then backward, onles
the horse be ouerlow before. For the more forward that the saddle does stand,
the horseman shall sytte therein the more right up, and with the better grace.
The horse than being thus brideled and saddled: Cause him to be brought forth
to some block, whereas if he will not stand still whylst you take his back,
then let him that brings him make much of him, and sometime threaten him with
his voice, and thrust him with his hands on the right side toward the block,
whereupon you shall stand, continually cheryshing him with your hand, to
the intent he may suffer you to get up. But if he be so froward and so
stubborn, as he will not come nighe the block: Then al to rate him with a
terrible voice, and beat him your self with a good stycke upon the head
betwyxt the ears, not leauinge him until you have made him to come to the
block, whether he will or not. Remembrynge always to make much of him when he
shows himself obedient unto you. Or if you will, you may observe this manner
followynge.

Lead him into some new plowed ground, and there take the reanes of the
headestraine by the outermoste end in your right hand, and cause some other
manne to take a stick in his hand, and by beating the horse therewith upon the
rumpe, to force him to trot, or gallop, so fast as he may drive, tournynge
still round upon the right hand, during which time, you shall not remove
forward your right foot from the place where you are. But only go round with
your left foot, toward the horse, accompaniynge him in every turn, so as
you your self may remain always in the midst of the Circle, which the
horse makes. And immediately after the horse has been well tossed, and wearyed,
with continual tournynge on the right hand: you shall change foot and hand,
and keeping still your place, cause him to make as many tournes on the left
hand. And thus you may turn him and toss him on both hands, until you have
gotten the mastrye, and whollye subdued him. But if the horse be so stubborn,
and so froward, as one is not sufficient to make him to go tournynge so often
about: Then besides the help of more persons, with wandes in their hands, you
your self may have also in your left hand, a longer wand then any of theirs
and changing tournes, you shall also change the rod into your right hand. By
means whereof, it is possible that you your self alone, by beatynge him
sometime with the one hand, and sometime with the other, shall make him without
the help of any other, to go frelye about. For this kind of correction is so
grievous to any horse, of what age so ever he be, but specially to a Colt, that
it will make him so gentle as a lamb, and to suffer you to do with him what
you list. Thus having taught you how to tame your horse in such sort, as he
shall suffer you to take his back: It is requisite that before you mount upon
him, I put you in remembrance what you have to do. And than being mounted,
how to sit him, and how to behave your self in all points, like a horseman.

What the Ryder ought to do, before he take his horse back, and being
mounted, how he ought to sit in his saddel. Ca. v.
FIrst than see that your horse be surely guirded, and if he be come to wear a
bytte, see that the kurble thereof be fastened as it ought to be. And when you
are mounted, make the reanes of your bridell even, and of a just length,
without styrrynge your horse, until you have sattled your self and your
clothes about you. That done, make him to go forward about.ii. paces fair
and softly, and then stay again. After that, pace him or trot him to the
place where you mind to break him. But after that he comes to wear a bit,
and is throughlye broken: then to keep him in ure with the double tournes
heareafter taught: you shall in the end of the foresaid two paces, give him
also six whole tournes, that is to say first.ii. on the right hand then.ii. on
the left, and last of all.ii. on the right. Or else if you will but.iii. whole
tournes, that is for each hand one, so as the first and last be on the right
hand. And see that you do not only sit him boldly, and without fear, but
also conceive with your self that he and you do make as it were but one body.
And that you both have but one sense and one will. And accompanye him with your
body in any mouinge that he makes, always beholding his head right betwixt
his ears, so as your nose may directlye answer his foretop. Which shall be a
sign unto you to know thereby, whether you sit right in your saddle or not,
and whether your horse bears his head right or not. And let the ridge bone
of your back be even with his. And let your left hand holding the reanes of
the bridle, be even with his creast, and in any wise keep your thighs and
knees close to the saddel, holding down your legs straight like as you do
when you are on foot. And let your feet rest upon the stirruppes in their
due places, both hele and toe standing in such sort, as when you shall
turn your head, as far as you can on the one side, without mouyng your
body, and lookyng downward to your stirrup: you shall perceive that your toe
does directlye answer the tip of your nose. And according as the saddle is
made, so shall you ride long or short. But always let your right stirrup be
shorter then the other by half a hole, and keep your stirrup leathers always
under your knees: albeit to ride with the stirrup leather above the knee, was
thought by men of old time, more comlye, being partly then constrained
thereunto, for that their horses were barded after such a sort, as unless they
did ride so, and that with very long spurs besides, they could not reach
their bellies. Notwithstanding, to ride as we do now a days is a great deal
more sure. But to sit a horse well, or to ride both sure and clean is not
sufficient to make a perfect horseman, and therefore it is necessary that here
I also declare unto you, wherein the perfection of a horseman chiefly
consists.

Which be the things that make a perfect horseman. Cap. vi.
GRison says, that besides the help of a good Constellacion, enclining you
to follow continually, with a fervent zeal the scoole of Mars: to make you a
perfect horseman, three things be requisyte. First, to know how and when to
help your horse. Secondlye, how and when to correct him. And thyrdly, how and
when to cheryshe him, and to make much of him.

Which iii. things being as general kinds, have many specialties and
particularities belongyng unto them. And though they do seem whollye to
appertain to the office of the Ryder, yet can I not make you throughlye to
understand them, until I come to entreat of the Lessons, which the horse
for his part has also to learn. Because in deed they must go both together.
Notwithstanding to the intent I may use fewer words hereafter, (you being
somewhat instructed before) I will treat of them here in so good order as I
can. For though I can not show you, when and how to use these things in time,
until I come to the horses lessons, yet I may show you which they be, how
many there be, to what end every one serves, and generally the use of the
same. And first you shall understand, that you may help your horse.vii.
manner of ways. That is to say, with your voice, with your toungue, with your
rod, with the brydell, with the caulfes of your legs, with your stirruppe,
and with your spurs. Again you may correct him vii. manner of ways, yt is to
say, with your voice, rod, calves of your legs, bridle, stirrup, spurs, and
with treading the ring, in such sort as shall be hereafter expressed: but you can
cherish or coye him no more but.ii. manner of ways, yt is to say, either with
your voice in speaking to him gently, or else by clawing him on the neck with
your hand, or with the nether end of your rod. And though that helps and
corrections in the doing, seem in a manner all one: yet are they diverse,
having respect to the time, for the one goth before error, and the other
comes after. For you help your horse to the intent he should not err: But you
correct him for that he has already erred: But it is not so easy to know the
due time and measure of helping him, as it is to know when and how to correct
him. And therefore I would not wyshe you to be to busye in helping him,
until you can keep time and measure, with both hand and heel, lest your
horse not understanding your mind, grow to some disorder. But rather use for a
while, only to correct him, when he erreth, so shall he be afraid to do the
like again. And in the mean time, by exercise, you shall learn as well the
time of helping, as of correcting, and so much the sooner, for that you see
the instruments wherewyth you help or correct, be all one.

To what end such helps and corrections serve. Cap. vii.
THe voice is that which any horse fears most, and is needful in all
disorders. The wand or rod serves to correct the disordering of his head, and
to drive shrewde toys out of his mind.

The brydell corrects both head, neck, and mouth, and makes him to reane
well, and does help much to embolden, or to man him.

The caulfes of the legs, and likewise the stirrups, orders as well the
hinder parts, as foreparts the of horse The Spurs do not only make him
steddye and just, but also subject and quick to understand his riders mind.
The correction of treading the ring, makes him just, as well in his manege, as
in every other feate.

Of the sound of the voice, toungue and lyppes. Cap. viii.
BUt first as touching the voice, you shall understand that according as the
sygnification of the noise or word is: So is it either a correction, a help,
or a cherishing. For if you would correct him for any shrewde toye or
obstinacye, you must al to rate him with a terrible voice, saying to him. Ah
traitor, Ah villain, turn here, stop there, and such like. But if you would
help him at any time, then you must use a more mylde and cheerful voice, as
when you run him, to say hey, hey, or now now. Likewise if you would have him
to go back, you must say with a low voice, back boy, back I say. Also if
you would help him to advance at the stop, you must say cherfully hup, hup,
likewise to make him light behind, you must say darier, darier, or use such
terms as you shall think good. But if you would cherish your horse or coy
him for doing well, then your voice must be most mild of al. As when you say,
hola, hola, or so boy so, or use such like coying words. And whilst we talk
here of the voice, it shall not be amysse also, to show you that the sound of
the tongue is a very necessary help, and meet to be used, as well at the
stop, as in the tournes, both single and double, I mean that sound which you
commonly make, by turning up the typ of your tongue almost into the middle palate
of your mouth, and then suddenly losing it again from thence with a Chirke.
There is also another sound of the lyppes as necessary to be used as any of
the rest, at such times as shall be hereafter taught, and that is made by
closing your lips hard together, and then in openyng them again somewhat wide,
pronouncing as it were, this word powgh.

Of the rod. Cap. ix.
THough some think that the correction and help of the rod, or cogell, is
not needful, and that it makes the horse to fearful, yet experience
teaches the contrary. And specially if it be used as it should be, that is to
say, if you correct him not therewith, out of time, but even in the self same
instaunt that he erreth. And assure your self that to correct a stubborn
horse, it has no fellow. For if you beat him but once well, and surely
therewith betwixt his ears, and upon any part of his head, (his eyes excepted)
you shall need to give him the less correction ever after. But touching the
rod, diverse things are to be considered. As first, when to bear a rod,
secondlye how to take it, when it is first offered: thirdlye, how to bear it
at all times: fourthlye, to what end it cheiflye serves: and finallye how and
when to use it as a help, correction, or cheryshinge to your horse. And as
touching the first.ii. points, I say that if you break a young horse which
was never handled before, you shall bear no rod in any wise, until he come to
be ridden with a byt, and then at the first time that the rod is offered you,
you must take it gently, for not making him afraid thereof: and having
received it, you must coye him on the neck therewith, either by clawinge him
on the withers with the nether end thereof, or else with the middle of the rod,
liyng cross upon his maine, and that shall make him to abide it the better
ever after. Now to ye other.ii. points. In learning how to bear your rod, as
well when you pace or trot your horse, as also when you manege or run him:
you shall also learn thereby how to handle both spear, and sword, to which
end the bearing of the rod chieflye serves. Wherefore it shall not grieve me
here to show you the order thereof. And first when you do but pace or trot
your horse, you shall bear the rod in your right hand, with the point
right up, toward your right shoulder, holdinge the neither end thereof
betwixt your thombe and your other fingers, distended and not clsosed. And
when you would occupye it, you shall let the point fall either on the left side,
or on the right, according as occasion shall require.

But when you manege your horse, you shall streatche out your arm toward
your right thighe, and couche your rod crosswise ouertwharte the horses neck,
and when he has made his first course, and turned on the right hand: Then a
little before the end of his second course, when he is in a manner ready to turn
on the left hand, you shall lift your rod from thence, and hold it with the
point right forth, on the right side of his head, not far from his eye, or else
somewhat lower toward the eye of the bit* and as he changes tournes to and
fro, so shall you change the placing of your rod either of the one side, or of
the other. Which be the.ii. chief warding places of the sword.

Or if you will, you may hold your rod as you would do a spear, when you
run, that is with the point upward, and the nether end low toward your
thigh, but not resting upon your thigh, and a little before that ye come to the
place of tourning, you may let the point fall on that side, which is requisite,
and so soon as your horse has made his turn, to hold it again, with the
point up as before, whereby you shall learn to charge and discharge a staff.

Now as touching the usage of your rod in helpinge or correcting your horse,
(for the way of cherishinge him therewith is before taught) because I cannot as
I have heretofore said, teach you the particularities thereof, until I come
unto the horses lessons: Let it suffice you therefore in the mean time, to
learn these general rules here following. First if your horse will not turn
on any side that you would have him, then beat him with your rod on the
contrary side. As for example, if you would have him to turn on the right
side, then beat him on the left shoulder, and if you would have him to turn
on the left side, then strike him on the right shoulder. Likewise if he be
harder or heauyer, or go more disorderlye on the one side then on the other,
bear your rod for the most part on that side, to the intent the sight thereof
may put him in remembrance of his fault. Again, when you would have him light
before, strike him on the forepartes, as on his shoulders, and forelegs, and
when you would have him light behind, strike him on the flanks, rompe and
hanches. In what time, and how much, shall be taught you hereafter.

Of the Bridle and reanes. Cap. x.
GRison compares the bridle unto the stearn of a ship, for as the ship is
wholly guided by the stearne, so the horses head is only ruled by the bridle,
and therefore this is an instrument which requires many considerations, not
only for the diverse fashions of bittes, together with the members thereof, as
the cheeks, kurbles, ports, trenches, and such like, meet to serve diverse
mouths, and to correct diverse vices, as heareafter shall be declared in the
third book at large, and set out with figures: but also for the knowing how
and when to use the same. For it is the riders part, first to know when to
ride his horse with a bit, then with what manner of bit, and how to use the
same, at the first putting of it in to the horses mouth, and in what part of
his mouth the bit has to rest. Then how to hold the reanes, when even
together, and when one shorter then another, and what measure he shall keep
with his hand, in bearinge hard or loose, high or low, when to use false
reanes and when to leave them, when and how to correct him with the bridle,
and when to help him: of all which things I entende here to speak briefly,
and so plainly as I can. First therefore when your horse can trot clean, and
keep the ringe, yea, and stop and turn indifferently well on both hands.

Then take a plain Cannon with right chekes, such a one as has been somewhat
worn before, and put it on with the headstall over his headstraine, making
him with the reanes thereof by little and little to feel it in his mouth, and see
that the bit lie upon his nether gummes a little above his great teeth or
tushes, which is the due resting place thereof. And if the bit were first
anointed with a little honey and salt, it would make him the more to delight in
it, and to be always champing thereon, and to stay his mouth upon it the more
temperatly. For if his mouth be distempred at the beginning it is not afterward
so easily helped, which thing is little considered of our English horsemen,
that use to ride their young horses even at the first, with so rough a brake or
bit as may be gotten, which is one of ye chiefest causes why we have so many
headstrong Iades. Now as touching the holding of the reanes, you must hold
them in your left hand, so as your little finger and ringe finger may be
betwixt the two reanes, and that your thombe may lie close upon the reanes,
with the brawne thereof turned toward the pomel of your sadell, and if you
have no rod when you manege him, or run him, the^ you shall take the overplus
of the reanes that hangs down, by the midst in your right hand, holdinge
the same hard by your right thigh. And the more that you turn the nether end
of your left fist inward and the the upper end outward, the more you shall
bring in your horses head, but therein you must use discretion, according as
occasion shall serve. And in deed to say the truth, that point appertains
not so much to the holding of the reanes, as to the bearing of your bridle hand
whereof there be.iii. manner of ways. The first is to bear it low beneath the
pomell of the saddel, even upon the wythers, and that is to correct him. The
second is, to bear it somewhat higher about the middle of the pommell, and that
is to maintain him. The third is to bear it upon the uppermost edge of the
pommell, and never much higher, and that is to be used only when you would
manege him, or make him to do any thing. For to bear the bridle hand over
high, as the unskillful Numidians in Affrike use to do, is disalowed for diverse
respects. First for that it werieth the arm: Secondly, if need were, you
could not have so much power to stop your horse when you would. Thirdly, being
in the field against your enemy: the bearing of your hand so high, would be
a trouble unto your defense, and a commodity to your enemy, for that he might
easily cut your reanes a sunder. Finallye, you can have no steaddy hand upon
your horse, any time together, whereby your horse shall never reane well, nor
yet have a steddye head. For who so will have his horse to bear his head
stedily, and to reane well: let him bear his hand rather low then high, so
shall he be able to keep it always at one stay, which is one of the chiefest
points of horsemanship. Notwithstanding, if your horse be any thing
headstronge, then when you manege him, or otherwise handle him, bear not to
stiff a hand, but rather somewhat light and temperate, for the more you force
him, the less he will yeald. But if he has no such fault, then do always as
I told you before. And remember always when you turn your horse, to draw
neither your arm nor hand, more of one side then of another, but to keep it
even with the horses creast, and only by tourninge your fist a little inward,
or outward, to signify unto him on what hand you would have him to turn.
And note, that for a while it shall not be amysse, when you ride you ride your
horse, to let him wear his bridle, and his headstraine both together, until
he be somewhat acquainted with the bridle, for then you may take away his
headstraine, and in stead thereof, put on a pair of false reanes, which are
very necessary for a young horse in the beginning, to make him bear his head
right, for bearing the ordinarye reanes, always just and even, you may shorten
the false reanes, on any side at your pleasure. Which false reanes, when your
horse begin to wax somewhat perfect in his doings, you may also take away,
and ride him only with the ordinarye reanes, and if he happen afterward for
lack of them to hang more of one side then of another, or to bear his head
or neck awrye: you may correct it by bearinge the contrary reane shorter
then the other, as for example: if he wrieth more on the left side, then on
the right, then holding the bridle, as I taught you before, pull in the right
reane with your forefinger, and so hold it just betwyxt your forefynger and
your thombe, and if need be, you may also join your long finger unto your
forefinger, to hold it the faster. But if he wryeth more on the right side,
then on the left, then you shall shorten the left reane by puttinge.ii.
or.iii. of your neythermost fingers betwixt the reanes. But as touching the
true order of correcting, and helping your horse with the bridle, in time and
measure. It shall be declared unto you hereafter, as occasion shall serve: and
therefore in the mean time let these general rules suffice you.

Of the caulfes of the legs, and of the heels. Cap. xi.
I May well show you how to correct or help your horse, with the caulfes of
your legs, and with your heles, and where to strike him, together with the
diversity of the strokes, and the names thereof, and to what end every one
serves. But to tell you exactly in what time, and with what measure, until I
come unto the horses lessons, I can not. But of one thing I will advertise you
in any wise at the first, not to be to rash, but to use such temperance and
moderacio^, as you may cause your horse, by little and little to understand your
meaning, without any disorder or confusion. And therefore it were best doing with
him whilst he learneth his first lesson, which is to tread the ring, as shall be
hereafter declared unto you at large: in the which, according as you shall see
occasion, you shall help him, or correct him, by strykyng him somewhat behind
the foremer guirt, which is the right spurrynge place, either with the one
Caulfe alone, or with both together, with the one heel alone, or with both
even together, or together not even, or else with one immediately after another.
For so many kinds of strokes there be, serving sometime to diverse purposes,
and therefore have diverse names accordingly. For the first is called the single
stroke of the contrary leg, wherewith you must help him to turn, on which side
you would have him. As for example, if you would have him to turn on the
right hand, then you must touch him with your left leg. If on the left hand,
then with your right leg. And likewise when he hangs more on the one side in
his goinge, then on the other, or be stiffer necked of any side, or bear not
his head right, you must correct him for the most part with the single
stroke on the contrary side. The second is called the double stroke, or even
stroke, because you must strike him in the spurring place with both legs even
together, which properlye and chieflye is to make him to go forward.
Notwithstanding, it serves also many times to make him to turn, to stop, to
advance, and for many other purposes, as you shall preceyue hereafter. The
third may be very well called the closing stroke, because it makes the
horse to close his turn, round and just. And the order of it is thus. When you
would have your horse to close his turn well (as for example on the right
hand) then in his turning, touch him with both legs together, but not even,
that is to say, with your left leg in the true spurring place, and with your
right leg somewhat more behind, toward the horses flank, which manner of
striking Grison calls in his language Attondare. The fourth serves only as a
correction for sundry vices hereafter to be declared, and then you must strike
your horse in the spurring place.iii. or.iiii. times together with one leg
after another, so fast as your legs may walk, which kind of strokes Grison
calls Botti roris pondenti, but in our tongue, methinke it were not amiss to
call it the bonching stroke, because your legs must go like.ii. bonching
betles. Or else the clinching stroke, fetchinge a similitude from the
botewrightes, whose hammers when they clinche the nails, do answer one
another. In all which.iiii. kinds of strokes, if you can learn to keep time
and measure, with your legs and heels, you shall be the better able to keep
time also with your spurs, when you come to ride your horse with spurs.
For there is none other dyfference betwixt them, but that the stroke of the one
touches the quick, and the other not. Because the one is blont, and the other
sharp.

Of the stirrup. Cap. xii.
Though the correction or help of the stirruppe be seldom used, yet it is a
good help to a young horse in the beginning, until he be somewhat broken. For
if he carries his head or neck awrye, or hang of one side more then of
another. By strykynge him with the stirrup under the shoulder on the contrary
side, you shall make him to amend his fault.

Of the Spur. Cap. xiii.
Having declared unto you in the beginning (when I showed you how many kinds
of correctio^s and helps there were) to what end ye spur serves, and also now
in a manner last of all, in speaking of the vsyng of your legs and heels, in
what part of his body, you should spur your horse, and how many kinds of
strokes there were and when to be used: it rests now that I show you when
it is time to make your horse both to abide the spur, and also to know the
spur, and all the helps thereof, and where, and how you shall do the same. And
first you shall understand that in old time men were so ignorant, as they
would never spur their horses until they were not only staide of head, but
also perfect in all such orders, as were used in those days. So that though
their horses were.vi. or.vii. years old, yet could no man assure him self of
their goodness. For most commonly when they came afterward to be spurred,
either they waxed so stubborn and so deuelish, as they would not abide the
spur, but fall a leaping and flinging, and tryinge of masteries to cast their
riders: or else they became so restife, and so dull therewith, as they would
abide it to well; and stand even still, not once moving for it, and the more
they were spurred, the worse they would be. And although that those riders had
extraordinarye means, to make a horse to abide the spur, whether he would or
not, as by forcyng him when they spurred him to plunge into some great water
or sea, or to behange him with spurs made of purpose to molest him, or else
perhaps as I have seen some ryders do, to behange him with a pair of stuffed
boots or with sand bags, having spurs or pryckes to grieve him whilst
they chase him to and fro: And so to weary him that way: yet they had no ways
to make him to know ye help of the spur, and thereby to understand the riders
meaning, and all for lack of knowledge and good consideration. They lacked
knowledge, for that they would never almost spur their horse but when they
ran him, so that the spur served them in a manner to none other purpose.
Again, they lacked consideration, in that they suffered their horses to go so
long before they spurred them. For they might well think that it was not so
easy to make a horse either to abide or to know the spur, when he is grown in
age, strength and lusty courage, as when he is young, simple and fearful, and
apt to rule, as a man will himself. And therefore* I would wysh you not to
diffarre the time so long but after that your horse has worn the bridle half
a score of times, let him learn to know the spur, be he never so young,
lean, or feeble. Which would be done, either whilst you cause him to trot the
ring in some new deep plowed ground, in helping him therewyth as hereafter
shall be taught, or else when you trotte him in the like ground right out. And
though you may give him therewith a Cariere if you will: yet to avoid all
disorders that might thereof ensue, the surest and redyest way is only to trot
him: for otherwise you must tarry until he can run a Cariere well, and stop
as he ought to do, which perhaps would be to long. And of whatsoever
disposition or metal the horse be, dull, or quick: Forget not in any wise, in
the self same instant that you put spurs unto him, to help him with your
voice, or else with the sound of your lips, and that shall put bye all shrewde
toys, whereof perhaps he might otherwise show you some, as to leap, to
flinge, to cast his head betwixt his legs, to lie down, or such like. And if
you see that the spur does make him to spring forward, and to amend his
pace, then make much of him, and so by little and little, you shall bring him
acquainted with the spur well enough, and in time to know all the helps and
correctyons of the same.

But if you have to spur a horse that is somewhat in years, and of nature
ramege or restyffe. Then see that in any wise you spur him not at the first,
either when you trot him, or run him, but only whilst you pace him fair
and softlye, through some town or City, and so going, suddenly put spurs
unto him, helping him in the self same instant, with your voice, or with the
sound of your lips, and force him therewyth to fall into a swyft trot, the
length of.xx. or.xxx. paces, which if he does, make much of him, and for a
while use him thus half a score times in a day, until he be perfect in that,
which when you see he is: Then you may go into the field, and there whilst
you trot him in some new plowed ground, spur him and help him as before,
making him to gallop as hard as he may drive, a pretty way together, and then
stay, making much of him, if he did well: Thus procedynge from soft pace to
trot, and from trot to gallop, by continual exercise, you shall make him both
to fear the spur, and also to know the help thereof. Notwithstanding there
be some horses of nature very liuelye and sensible, which through evil
breaking at the first, and afterward by sufferance, have been so evil
accustomed, as they will never yield to the spur, but so soon as they feel
it, they will leap and flyng, and take on like Sprites. Wherefore if any such
horse chance to come into your hands, first for a while, ride him without
spurs, and use him to tread the ringes, until he has learned to go
quietlye in the same, and to keep the true pathe. Which when you see he does,
then ride him both with spurs, and also with a good wande in your hand. And
whilst he treads the ring in some new plowed ground with deep forrowes, when
time is, touch him with your spurs at sundry times thryse, and if he will
then play his vagary, beat him forwith with your wande upon the head on both
sides, and betwyxt the ears, and upon his forelegges, all to ratinge him at
the self same present, with a terrible voice, and never leave him until you
have made him to yield unto the spur, without making any resistaunce at al,
and to the intent yt he may suffer the pryche of the spur the better, it shall be
necessary to weery him, sometime with continnall turninge and trotting him
round, and ouertwhart the forrowes, and sometime by trotting and galloppinge
him right out, in one path to and fro. By means of which travel, and often
spurring him together, he shall fall into such a sweat and heat, that the
strokes shall grieve him the less. By means whereof, he shall not only be
content to abide the spur, but also learn by the stroke thereof, to know your
will, and to obey the same, and so much the more, if you shall not forget when
he does well, to make much of him. But note by the way, that this last order
belongs to a horse of a great courage, or if you should in such sort molest
or weary a horse of a dull sprite, he would give over, and for faintnes become
restiffe: and therefore a good consideration must be had as well to the horses
strength, as to his vice.

But now though I showed you in the last Chapter before, how many kinds of
strokes of the spur there were, and generally how and when to be used, yet let
it not grieve you that I repeat here some part thereof once again with some
little addition not to be left out. First then when soever your horse will not
turn, as you would have him, or be stiffer necked of one side the^ of an
other, or will not carye his head right, nor continue his trot, you shall
correct him always with the single stroke of the contrary spur, but if he
wexe slow in his trot, bearing his head and neck right, then you shall correct
him with the even stroke of both spurs together, for that stroke properlye
serves to quicken him, and to make him go forward, and improperly for the other
purposes in the former chapter rehearsed. It is requisite also that I show you
somewhat more plainlye how to correct your horse, with one spur after another,
which I called before, the clinchinge stroke, the order whereof is thus. When
your Horse commits a fault of any side, as for example on the left side,
then give him with one spur immediately after another, three strokes. Whereof the
first and last must be on the right side, but if he erreth on the right side,
then the first and last stroke must be on the left side. And note that after
your horse will abide the spur, and also knows the helps thereof it shall not
be good to spur him often, but only when you see it very nedeful, as to
direct his head and neck, when he raineth not well, or to help him in his
single or double turns, when you manege him, or else to give him swiftnes when
he passes a Cariere, for overmuch spurringe will make him swing tayled, and
specially if he be a Gennet or Turkye horse, whose tails be always lose, and
at liberty, and are not tied as the Coursers be.

Of the musroll and the martingale. Cap. xiiii.
TO these foresaid kinds of helps and corrections, I think that Grison
would have also added the musroll and the martingale, but that they seemed
perchance unto him extraordinarye things, and not meet to be used, but at
certain times, and specially the Martingale. Which though it was first
invented by Euangelista, an excellent rider, and a great horsemaister of
Millan, not only to make the horse to have a steddye head, but also to make
him light before in his aduauncyng, and in his going to gather his body round
together: yet Grison seems not greatly to allow it: albeit he says, it may
be used, when the horse is very heavy before, and marueylouslye unstaid of
head, neither would he have the horse to wear it above.xv. days together at
the most. Thinkyng it in deed, a great deal better, to bring the horse from
such faults, by such means, as are by him hereafter taught. But he praises
much the musroll, saying that if the horse do naturallye keep his mouth close
together, that then it can not hurt him: but if he hold it open, then it does
not only help him, but also correct him of that fault in such sort, as after
that he has been used a little thereunto, it will make him steady, both of
mouth, head, and neck, and to reane as he should do.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ART OF RIDYNG.
Of the horses lessons in general, and order thereof, and in what time of the
day he should be taught. Cap. i.
THus having declared unto you, with what instruments you should help or
correct your horse, and generallye how, and when to use them, and also how
and when to cherysh him, as things only appertaynyng to the Riders office: I
think it therefore now mete to show you what your horse has to learn for his
part, and also what order you shall keep in breaking him, for if a horse be
taught vnorderlye, he shall never be perfect in any thing. As for example, if
you (as some men do for lack of skyll) would use to galloppe your horse
before he can stop well in his trotte, or to run him before he can stop well in
his gallop, or to manege him with a swyft gallop, before he can stop, advance,
and turn redilye on borh hands: you should mar him for ever. And therefore
take heed that ye duelye follow this order hear following.

First you must use great diligence in making him to tread loftely, to keep
one path, and to trot clean, which is one of the chiefest points of al,
because it is harder by nature, for a Colte to trotte well, then to go softly,
to run, or to gallop.

Secondly, you must teach him to be light at stop.

Thirdely, to advance before, and to yarke behind.

Fourthly, to turn redilye on both hands, with single turn and double
turn.

Fifthly, to make a sure and ready manege.

Sixtlye, to pass a swift Cariere.

And finally if your horse be nimble, and apt thereto by nature, you may make
him a sterer, by teachinge him to bound aloft, and to yarke withal: to gallop
the gallop galliarde, to featch the capriole, to do the Coruetti, and such like
kind of sawltes: and in all his doyinges from the beginning to the ending, you
must see that he reane well, and bear his head stedilye, which is the
foundation of all the rest.

And by observing this order, with all the rules thereto belonging, in such
sort as shall be hereafter taught: ye shall within the space of four or six
months, make your horse perfect in all points. Notwithstanding there be
some young horses, so slow of growth, as although they can do their things
orderly, yet they show no strength or forse in their doings, until they be
five or six years old, because their joints before that time are not full
knit, nor their mouths throwly steyed. And note that from six years to
fiftene a horse being not maimed nor hurt, may very well continue in his
goodness: yea and some horses perhaps will continue until.xx. years and
above as the examples before recyted, do well testyfye.

Moreover see that you teach your horse early in the morning, before you give
him his prouender, not faylyng in the beginning of his breaking, until he be
somewhat perfect, to ride him every day once. And afterward to ride him twyse
in a weke shall suffice, unless you see that such rest does cause him to
forgette his lessons, for then until he has gotten that which he had lost, it
shall be requisite to ride him again every day one hour at the least, or so
long time as he is able well to endure, leauyng him always with a good mouth.
For to take ouermuche of a horse at once, is the next way to make him fainte
hearted, and restiffe.

The order of treading the ring, and to what end it serves. Cap. ii.
TO the intent than that your horse may have a lofty pace, trotte clean, and
learn to keep one pathe, you shall first cause him to be brought into ye
fyelde, nigh unto some new plowed ground, and the deper the forrowes be, the
better to make him lift his feet. Whereas after that you have taken his back,
you shall trot him right out, about the length of a C. paces. That done, you
shall enter a good way into one of the forrowes, in such part of the land, as
you may have space inoughe, and mould enough, round about you, and there on
the right hand overthwart the forrowes, make him to tread out twice together, a
round ring, containing in Circute about xxv. or.xxx. paces: and being come
about at the second time to the place where he began: cause him to tread out
the like ring on the left hand. About the which, after that he has also
gone.ii. times, let him begin again on the right hand, and so to shift from
ring to ring, treading every one still twice about, until he has gone about
the left ring four times, and about the right ring six times, for as he
must begin with the right ringe, so must he end with the same. Whereby he
shall always make two tournes more on the right hand then on the left.

That done, trot him right out in the self same forrow where he began first,
or in some other forrowe on the out side of the right ringe, the length of.xxx.
paces, and there, by pulling in your bridle hand stop him, and stay a good
while together, making him to stand still, and to keep his head and body
right in the path. And when you have so done, then turn him fair and softlye
on the right hand, taking rowme inoughe at the first, for fear of making him
soft necked* and being come again into the path: trot him back again to the
place from whence he came, and there you shall light of on his back. And to
encourage him the more against the next time, you may if you will, take of his
padde. Neither shall you use him any otherwise than thus, for the space of
eight days together. But after that the eight days be expired: Let him go,
increasing every day his ring turns, by.ii. and by.ii. until he come to xxii.
that is to say.x. for the left ring, and.xii. for the right. Which nu^bre as
Grison says, makes.v. large turns and a half, appointinge four goinges
about, to every such turn, and he calls them large tournes, in respect of
the narrow turns, whereof we shall speak hereafter in their place. Neither
would he have this number of ryng turns for a certain space, to be either
augmented or diminished. But though you see here, that the horse by this
means learneth.iii. lessons at once, that is to say, first to tread the ring,
secondly to stop, and thirdlye to turn: yet to avoid confusion, I will
not treat of them all at once, but of every one particularly by him self. And
first to the intent you should the better understand, of what sort the rings
ought to be: behold here this figure following, lively expressing both ringes
together, with the forow, and place of stopping and tourning.



THere is also another fashion of a Ring, which because it serves only as a
correction when your horse is harder to turn on the right hand then on the
left, I will not therefore speak of it here, but reserve it until I come to
treat of the correction of that fault.

If your horse be weak and feeble, you may cause the ringes to be trodden out
before with some other horse, to the intent that he may have the better will to
follow in a way ready beaten to his hand, and also if he chance to swerve
out of the path, he shall the sooner perceive his error, and thereby the
quicklier return in to the right path again. And though your horse be not
weak: yet it shall be best at the first, not to tread out the ringes with a
trot, but rather with a soft pace, until the path be somewhat beaten, that he
may see his way where he goth, and then to follow on with an indifferent trot,
yea and if your horse be ouerliuelye, or to quick, you shall not suffer him to
trotte the ringes at all. But only to pace them fair and softly for a certain
days together, until he be somwat staid and acquainted with them. For
otherwise he will bear to hard upon your hand, and seek to flee out.

And when the ringe paths, through continual treading wax somewhat hard:
you may shift into a new place, where the ground is newly eared with deep
forrowes, and that as I said before, shall make him to lift high. Albeit
Gryson in his fourth book, does not allow often chaunginge in the beginning,
unless that necessitye so forces, saying that the horse being continualy
taught in one place, shall the better remember his lessons: yea and also his
corrections, whereby there shall be bredde in him as it were an habit of well
doing. Notwithstanding when you come to manege your horse, or to pass a
Carier, I would not wish you to use always one place, or one length, lest he
be to seek when you change places, thinking that he should not do it any
other where, or if he do it, not to pass his accustomed length, and so
perchance stop before you would have him.

But there be some which will not use their horses to two ringes, but to one
only, which is very evil for a young horse, because it will make him fainte
hearted and fearful, for when he comes to the place where he is wont to be
turned, he will strive to go forth right, and so perhaps become restiffe, or at
the least, not go in the ringe so euenly and so iustlye as he should do.
Notwithstanding to a horse of some years, and of a lively spryte, it may
sometime be very well allowed, and specially if he be styffe necked, and hard
to turn: yea, and also to show, that though the form of the rings be
thereby somewhat altered: yet he should always keep in one tewne. After that
your horse have worn the bridle a while, and is well acquaynted therewyth,
you may increase your ringe turns every day, by two for each ring, until ye
come to.xlvi. which make a xi. large turns and a half, that is xxii. for the
left ringe, and.xxiiii. for the right, according as your horse shall be in breath
and hable to endure it, otherwise a less number may suffice, for ouermuche
labor does weaken a young horse, which weakness does not appear in some,
until they be.iiii. or.v. years old, for at the first the fear that he
has of his rider, makes him to unite his force together, and to bear it out
the more stoutelye. But after that he is well acquaynted with his ryder, he will
not show so much force in his labor and travel as he did before, but his
natural weakness will than appear, and so much the more, as he shall grow
in greatness, and be laden with flesh. Notwithstanding the number of turns
above said, is convenient for any horse of an indifferent strength, for lxii.
turns may suffice any horse, be he never so strong or good of breath unless
he be to vnreasonablely strong, in age, evil broken before, and used to
liberty: for than, to break him of his stubburnnes it shall not only be
requysit to give him.lxii. turns, but also Cxxii. But that seldom for fear
of weakeninge his back, yea and perchance every member besides. But most
commonly after the wearinge of his bridle, observe the number of xlvi, which
you shall not increase, but upon such occasion as is before said, nor yet
diminish the same, onles it be when you trot him and turn him to and fro in
manege wise, after that you be come out of the rings, whereof we shall treat
hereafter in his place.

The helps and corrections mete to be used whilst he treads the ringes, also
when you shall gallop the ringes, and to how many pourposes it serves.
IF your horse in treading the ring, trotteth not fast enough, or be ramege,
that is to say, not kepinge a just pace, but fares as one that were in two
minds, not caring whether he went on, or not: or if he will suddenly stop
before his lesson be ended, then quicken him often with your voice, or with
the sound of your lips, before mentioned, and by little and little, make him to
know the help of your leg and heel, by stryking him sometime with one leg or
heel, and sometime with both, according as his fault shall require. The order
whereof is before declared in the first book the.xi. chapter and to make him go the
iuster it shall be good for the most part to hold your contrary leg in his
sight, and likewise your rod, when you come to bear one, as for example, if he
be stiffer on the right side then on the left, then hold out your left leg, and
lay your rod cross over his left shoulder. But if he be harder on the left
side, then hold out your right leg, and hold your rod right out, not far
from the horses right eye, remembering alwares to hold the raines of your
bridle, the one shorter then the other, in such sort as I taught you in the first
book the.x. chapyter. But if he be ramege either by nature or by evil
breaking, then make him to tread the ringes first with a swift trot, and than
with so hard a gallop, as he can drive, helping him in due time with your
voice, rod, or spur, as occasion shall require, and that shall make him to forget
toys, and to attend his way, but see that you gallop him not first, for
fear of making him restiffe. And this way serves to correct a great meanye
of other faults, as the lightness and playinge with his head, and when he
draws up his tongue, and will not stay his mouth upon the bit as he ought to
do. Or if he go iumping without order, or slinging with his heles, likewise if
he be to hasty or furious, this will stay him, and cause that he shall
afterward stop the better in his Cariere, and not run away. Also if he use to
pysse always when he is handled, this taken in time will correct him. And
finally if he be slow and dull, this will quicken him. But if he be very
liuelye and quick of himself: than you shall do clean contrary to this,
that is to say, you shall neither give him swift trot nor gallop. And
whenever you gallop your horse, remember always to help him more or less
with your voice, rod, or spur, according as the qualitye of the horse shall
require, and when he does well, to cherishe him. But though the gallopping of
the ring, serves to so many good purposes as you have hard, yet for ye most
part, let him tread the ringes with a good round trot, and not to gallop them
at all, unless some of the foresaid occasions do so require.

Of stopping. Cap. iiii.
HItherto we have spoken of treading the rings only, now we will show you
how you shall teach your horse to stop. I told you before, that having ended
your number of your ring turns, you should trot your horse right out in the
middle forrowe betwixt the ringes, until you come to the place of stop, and
there to stay a good pretye while together, kepinge his body right in the
path, which if he will not do, but stand ouerthwartly, either with his
forepartes, or hinder parts, or else perchance with his whole body, clean out
of the path: Then see that ye touch him at the first, neither with heel nor
rod, least he not knowinge the one nor other, be distempred, and perchance
fall a runnyng away. But you shall appoint a footeman to stand at the place of
stop, who shall direct him into the right path, by thrusting him with his hands
on that side, which stands out of order. And this way is not only good for a
young horse, but also for any other horse, that is in age, and by means of
evil breaking, has been accustomed to stop wrong, but than the footeman
besides thrusting him with his hands, may also chastise such a horse with a
rod, by strikinge him therewith on that side that he erreth, or if you will not
so do, you may cause your horse to go still in the same path a yard or.ii.
further forward, and there stop him, holdinge the reane of his headstrain
straiter on that side, whereon he most forces your hand, then on the other, and
that shall keep him whether he will or not, in the right path.

And after that he begins to be somewhat obedient unto you, you may direct
him into the right path when he stops wrong, with the overplus of the reanes
of his headstraine, by beating him therewith moderately, upon that shoulder or
romp that stands farthest out of order. But beware in any wise that you
strike him with no rod, before he come to wear a bridle.

It is very good also to trot him to some hanging ground, called of the
Italions Pendino, and there to stop him somewhat down the hill, but therein you
must use good discretion in chosing such a ground as shall be mete for the
purpose. For a young horse many times will be afraid to stop down the hill, and
specially if it be over steep, yea, and it may do him more harm then good,
being an occasion perchance that he shall never after be light of stop.
Wherefore at the first it shall be best to stop him in such a ground as shall be
neither to stepe nor yet to plain, but betwixt both, as that is, which
something falls, and rises immediately again. So shall not the horse be
afraid of it. And afterward when he is growe^ in age, and has more force and
strength, you may be the bolder to stop him upon a sleeper ground, according
as you shall think it needful. And let this suffyse you for this time,
because we shall be forced to speak more of stopping in the chapters next
following.

Of going back, and to what end it serves, and how and when you shall teach
your horse to do it. Cap. v.
AFter that your horse has worn the bridle, and knows the rod and spur,
you shall teach him when he has stopte, be it upon a hanging ground, or
otherwise, to go backward iii. or.iiii. steps, which will not only stay
his mouth, and make him light of head, but also to lift his legs, and to be
the more apt to advance before. For the which cause it were necessary to
talk of this before I proceade any further.

To teach your horse then to go back: you must so sone as he has stopte,
pull in your bridle hand moderately, according as the horses resistaunce shall
require, and so keepyng your hand steddye without geuinge him any liberty,
stryke him fair and softlye upon the bowing of his neck with your rod,
saying unto him with a soft voice in that instaunt, back, back I say, and
solicit him in that sort a pretty while together: for the which if he will not
move his legs, or does make any resistance, then spur him in time, first
with one spur, and then with another, but most on that side whereas you see
his hinder parts to stand most out of order, to the intent that he may go
right in the path. And besides this, you may have a footeman to stand at the
place of stop, with a rod in his hand, who in the self same time, that you
pull in the bridle, shall knock him fair and softelye with his rod upon the
knees, and seldom or never upon the snowt. And sometime let him only
threaten him without beatyng him at all, but if this will not suffice, then
let the same man take the chekes of the bitte in his hand, and so force him
to go back, not leaving to molest him, sometime one way, and sometime
another, until at the least he has made him to pull back one foot. And when
soever he does well, be ready immediately to cherish him for the same, and then
let him stay a while. That done, cause him to do the like again, by pulling
in the bridle only and none otherwise. For the making much of him before, will
cause him to go back of his own accord with both legs, if not, than by
correctynge him in such sort as is aforesaid, you shall force him to go back
whether he will or not.

Of aduauncyng, whereto it serves, and where, how, and when, you shall teach
him to do it. Cap. vi.
TO advance, is a term used of our horsemen, signifying that which the horse
does, when at the stop he lifts up both his forefeete, even together
somewhat above ground, and lets them fall again twice or thrice together,
which the Italions call Far le posate and it is so necessary a thing, as
without it the horse can never manege well nor turn redelye, as hereafter you
shall well perceive, wherefore when your horse can stop well, and will also go
backward when you would have him, it is mete to teach him to advance.

And as it is not amiss to teach it him, when you stop him in the forrow
betwixt the two ringes, so is it very good also to go into some long sandye
way, which is even and plain, and there after that you have trotted him right
out with a very swyft trot, the length of.xl. foot, or theraboute, to stop
him, helpyng him immedyately with your voice, and also with both spurs even
together, and sometime with your rod, by stryking him therewith on the right
shoulder, but seldom on the left. And if he will not advance for that, no not
so much as with his right leg: Then keeping still a steady hand upon him,
correct him immediately twyse or thrice together with the even stroke of your
spurs, or else with one spur after another, helpinge him always with your
voice, as by saying unto him huppe, hup, or such like word. And immediately
after, trot him out again the like distaunce with a swift trot, and at the
stop do as you did before, continuing still the same, until you have made him
to lift his feet from the ground, and to advance thrice, or twice together
at the least, which when he does, though it be but meanlye, yet make much of
him, and coye him with your right hand, or with your stick, by claweinge
him therewith on the neck, nigh unto the withers, suffering him there to stay a
while: That done, trot him forth again, and at the next stop, you shall see
that so soon as he hears your voice, he will advance of his own accord, not
only with one leg, but with both, yea, and so many times together, as you
will have him. And in so doing, you shall seldom help him with your spurs,
orrod, but only with the calves of your legs, and with your voice, which must
always be one. And if the ground where he stops be somewhat hanginge, it
shall be so much the more easy for him, but after that he can advance, and
does understand the helps of the voice, rod, and spur, beware that ye use
not to give him such short stops one after another, least he take a custom to
stop sooner, and therewith to aduau^ce higher then you would have him: but
rather trot him right out the just length of a Cariere, toward the knoll of
some hill, and there stop him upon the browe thereof, or steper down,
according as the quality of the horse shall require, helpinge him as is
aforesaid. For assure your self, that a hanging ground is very necessary, and
specially when the horse is not apt of himself to bow his houghes behind,
for the horse that is naturallye light, has not so much need of a hanging
ground, because that he with a little help in a plain ground will learn to
stop even upon his buttocks, which is the chiefest grace of the stop, for onles
the horse in his stop does bow his houghes orderly, and run slyding on his
hinder legs, neither stop, nor advancing shall be praise worthy.

When your horse can stop and advance well in his trot: then you may teach
him in the like grounds to do the same upon a gallop, vsinge the self same
order, helps and corrections, that are above written. And forget not in any
wise to make much of him when he does well, but for the most part let him
continue the doing thereof upon a trot, for that shall make him so light and
so perfect, as when you come afterward to gallop him, or to run him, he shall
not be to seek therein.

Corrections to be used when your horse aduaunceth to high, or out of order, or
when you would not have him. Cap. vii.
IF your horse aduaunceth to high, or lifts not up his feet even together,
and with such grace as he ought to do, correct him immediatlye with the even
stroke of your spurs, and sometime with your rod also, stryking him therewyth
upon the flanks, that done, put him forward again the length of a short
maneginge course, and there stop, helpinge him to advance with your voice,
and if need be, with the caulfes of your legs, or with your spurs, or else
with your rod upon his right shoulder, and sometime with altogether, according
as you shall see it needful. Or after that you have corrected him you may if
you will, without putting him forward, turn him and go back again in the
self same path a good pretty way, and then to return from thence with a good
round trot, and to stop him upon the same knoll, where he stopte before, and
so to continue retournyng still to and fro, until he has amended his fault,
and aduaunceth as you would have him, which when he does, make much of him,
and let him slaye a good while after, for the longer that you stay him the
more perfect you shall make him.

If your horse has gotten an evil custom to stop, and to advance withal,
suddenly, or oftener then you would have him, which fault most commonly is
incident to young horses. Then correct him immediately with your voice, and also
with your rod upon his flanks, and sometime upon his forelegges, yea, and if
need be, with your spurs every manner of way, forcinge him to go forward,
and not to advance, but when you shall provoke him thereunto, either with voice,
spurs, legs, or rod, or with all together, according as the horses
quality shall require, for some horse is so vile of courage and so dull of
understanding, as if you always use to help him with your spurs at the
stop: Then so often as you shall spur him, to make him to go forward, he
will by and by stop and advance, and the more you spur him, the worse he
will be, and so perchance become restiffe, wherefore you must use great
diligence, and good discretion, in making him to know by the hard or loose
bearing your bridle hand, when you help him with your spurs to go forward,
and when to stop. And until he be perfect therein, it shall be best to help
him at the stop, only with your voice, and not to use your spurs or rod,
but when you do correct him else or when you would have him to go forward.

When and how to teach your horse to yarke, and to make him light behind. Cap.
viii.
IF your horse be of a convenient age, and grown to his full strength, and
therewith have a good back, and hable to endure, (for otherwise it should do
him more harm then good): Then having taught him to stop, and to advance
before, you may teach him also to yarke behind, by helping him in his
aduauncyng, with your voice, and with your rod, beating him therewith behind,
sometime on the one side, and sometime on the other, and if need be, you may
also help him with the even stroke of your spurs, not leaving to molest him
in such sort, until you see that he begins to gather up his rompe, and to
lift his hinder legs, which doing, you shall leave beatinge, and make much
of him, and afterward you shall see that with a very little help, he will
fall unto it of his own accord, you may also if you will, appoint a footman that
has some skill, to stand behind you, with a long rod in his hand, who at the
stop whilst your horse aduaunceth, may help him with his voice, and by beating
him on the haunches, and on the romp, cause him to yarke, which way is very
good, so that your horse be not over liuelye, and therewyth also naturallye
headstronge, for than perchance it will make him to spring forward, and to
fall a runnyng, wherefore until he has a staide mouth, it were better to use
the first way, or else to bring him unto it in the stable in this sort.

When you come into the stable, stand behind him with a long rod in your
hand, and beat him therewith on the midde rompe, helpyng him in that instant
with that voice wherewith ye use to make him light behind not ceassyng to molest
him in that sort until he gather up his rompe, and cast out both his heels
even together, and that of a just height twice or thrice together, which doing,
you shall leave beating, and make much of him, suffering him to rest a good
while after. Thus solicitynge him twyse or thryse a day, you shall make him so
light and so ready of his heels, that he will yarke so soon as he shall but
hear your voice, or the whiske of your rod, and when he can do it well in
the stable, then to make him the more perfect therein abroad, you may when you
ride him, cause a footman to stand behind you with a long stick in his hand,
who by threatninge him, and beating him on the Rompe, may cause him to yarke so
often as you shall think it meet, and if your horse be very light and
nimble of him self, you may teach him also to leap at the stop, and to
yarke withal, but since that leapyng is more mete for a stirring horse, the^
for a horse of service, and also for that there be diverse kinds of leapes, I
will not therefore treat of that here, but diffarit, until I have showed you
the order of tourning and maneging.

How to teach your horse to turn redily on both hands. Cap. ix.
I Entende to speak here of the narrow and strait tournes, and not of the
large tourns, otherwise called the ringe tournes, for we have talked of them
sufficiently before. And first you shall understand, that of the narrow
tournes, there be three kinds, that is to say, half turn, whole turn,
and double turn. The half turn is when the horse turns on the one side,
and that sets his head that way that his tail before stood, and is called
the half turn, for the horse makes but half a circle, but if he doubleth
the same, and sets his head that way it stood at the first: then it is
called a whole turn, for in tourning round about he makes a circle complet.
And.ii. such whole turns make a double turn, which Gryson calls Voita rad
doppiara who appoints to every such turn four half tournes, which may
be otherwise called single tournes. And note that in turning, diverse things
are to be observed. First that he bring in the contrary leg upon the other,
and that he carry his legs neither to high, nor to low, also that he keep
his ground, neither preassyng forward, nor yet reling backward in his turning,
also that he keep his body in one stay, wrything neither head, neck, nor any
part of his body, but to come in whole and round together, and to close his
courne in so narrow a rowme as may be. But first you shall teach him to make
the single or half tournes in this sort and order here following.

When you are come out of the ringes, trot your horse right out in the middle
forrowe unto the place of stop, and there, after that you have stopped, turn
him fair and softly on the right hand, taking rowme enough at the first, as
I showed you before, for fear of making him soft necked, that done, give him
the like turn on the left hand, and then turn him again on the right hand,
remembering always to begin with the right hand, and to end with the same,
and see that in every turn he bring in the contrary forefoote, upon the other
forefoote, as for example, when you turn him on the right hand, cause him to
lift up his left forefoote, and to bring it in over the right forefote, which
you shall do by helping him with your voice, or with the sound of your tongue,
before taught in the first book the.viii. Chapter in saying to him, turn
here, and by strykinge him with your rod moderatly upon the left shoulder. And
when you turn him on the left hand, help him with your voice or tongue, as
before, and with your rod on the right shoulder to bring in the right
forefoote over the left forefoote. Which act Grison calls Incauallare, which
is so much to say, as to lap one thing over another.

And note that though your horse at the first does not bring in his contrary
foot over the other orderly, but perchance under the other, yea, and that
with knocking his legs together: it makes no matter, for the grief thereof
shall be a good correction unto him, and in time shall make him to amend his own
fault. But if he be harder to turn on the one hand then on the other, then
you shall help him with the contrary leg or Spur, or with your rod, by
beatyng him upon the contrary shoulder, and sometime to make him to close his
turn truly, it shall be needful to help him with the closing stroke of your
heels or spurs. Which kind of help is necessary for two causes: First,
for that it will make him to turn roundly as well with his hinder parts, as
with his forepartes: Secondly, because some horse is so quick and so lively,
as when he is touched, but only on the contrary side, he will turn perhaps
with to stiff a neck, loking the contrary way, or contrariwise, he will wry
his head or neck to much on that side that he has to turn, or else turn
beyond the place, and out of the right path, in which he should close his
turn. Albeit such help is not commonly to be used, but at certain times,
when some great necessity requires it, for the first helps are more kindlye,
and therefore ought to be more ordinarye. But if he be so hard of any side, as
the foresaid helps can not make him to turn when you would have him: then
you may use these corrections here following.

How to correct your horse when he is harder to turn of the one side then on
the other, which fault is called of the Italyons Credenza. cap..x.
BUt first I think it mete to show you the causes of that fault, and then how
to correct it, and you shall understand, that there be diverse causes, whereof
one, may be the natural inclination whereby every horse is more apt to turn
on the left side then on the right. Secondlye, the hardness of the bitte
pynchinge his mouth on the one side: may so grieve him, as he dare not turn on
that side. Thirdlye, lack of knowledge how to handle his legs, and to reane
with his neck, may cause him to turn so frowardlye and so vnwillinglye, as
he feelinge himself never so little wearye, will turn no more at that time,
for any thing that ye can do. But to say the truth, wearines and lack of
breath, may cause any horse be he never so well broken, to do the same.
Fourthlye the ignorance of the Rider in helping him otherwise then he should
do, may make the horse so amassed, as he knows not what to do, understanding
not the Riders intent. Fifthlye, the horse may be evil broken, and thereby made
harder of one side, then of another, for than if he be angered never so little,
he will not turn perhaps on that side that you would have him, and the
worse, if he shall perceive that you be afraid of him, and that you will suffer
him to have his own will, and to turn which way he list, for that shall be an
occasion to make him more stubborn, and to continue still in his fault. But
now, though Griso^ here according to every one of these causes, could appoint
proper correctio^s (which in deed were ye best order of teaching) yet to avoid
confusion as he says, he will not so do, but rather teach you such general
kinds of corrections as may amend that fault, of what cause so ever it
proceeds. And because that every horse, as I said before, is more apt by
nature to turn on the left hand, then on the right, he shows you first how
to correct the hardness of the right hand in this sort here following.

Make your horse in some new plowed ground to tread out.ii. ringes, like
unto these here after figured, which differ not so much from the.ii. ringes
before described, in shape, as in the order of treading of them. For whereas
you were wont before to go twice about in the right ringe, folowinge still the
right hand, and then to go twyse about the left ringe, folowinge than the left
hand: Now you shall go about each ringe three times, following still the right
hand, in both of them. And where as before.iiii. goinges about made a large
turn, now six goinges about shall do no more then make a large turn, and
the reason is this, for if you should go out of the right ringe at the second
turn for to enter into the left ringe, and would follow still the right hand
(as you must do) then you should lack a good deal of closing the second
turn, as you may easly perceive by a little cosidering of the figure in the
right ringe, whereof I have marked the place where you should go out, for to
enter into the left ring, with this letter A, and the place of closing your
turn with B, betwixt which two letters is contained that portion of the
Circle, which should be wantinge, wherefore you must needs go thrice about,
to the intent the second turn may be fully ended, and as for the overplus, it
shall make no matter. To these rings is also added a middle forrowe with two
places of stopping and turning, mete to manege your horse therein, to and fro,
whereof we shall treat hereafter in his due place more at large.



THus you may continue shifting from ring to ring, and following still the right
hand, until you see that he begins somewhat to yealde, which I believe he
will do, by that time yt you have trotted him about.xlv. times, which make.vii.
large turns and a half, that is to say.xxi. times about the left ring,
and.xxiiii. times about the right ringe, or if that suffiseth not you may trot
him.xxvii. times about the left ringe, and.xxx. times about the right ringe,
which makes.ix. large turns and a half, and that is a convenient number for
any horse having that fault, though he be right good of breath. And when he
has ended his ringe tournes, you may trot him right out in the middle forrowe,
the length of a good Cariere, and there after that you have made him to stop,
and to advance, you shall make much of him, and suffer him to stay a good
while, holding as well than, as at all other times (until he has amended his
fault) the right reane of his bridle shorter then the other, and after that he
has so pawsed and is quiet, you shall cause a footeman that has some skill to
stand right against him with a stick in his hand, and whilst you move your
fist to turn your horse on the right hand, the footeman in the same instaunt
shall strike him with his stick on the left side of his nose, and not leave
beatyng him until he turn, not forgetting always whilst he beat him, to
use that sound of the tongue, which I taught you before. And to the intent that
the horse at such time rear not right up, he may beat him sometime upon the
legs, by which so molesting him, doubt ye not, but that you shall make him to
turn as he ought to do, and having turned, you shall first make much of
him, and then trotte him back again in the same path or forrowe, even hard
to the edge of the ringes, from whence ye came. Whereas you shall appoint
another footman to stand with a rod in his hand, to the intent that when you have
stopped your horse again there, and are ready to turn him (which must be still on
the right hand) the footeman may rate him by saying turn villain, or such
like words, yea, and if need be, also beat him in such sort as the other man
did before. But if your horse be very hard to turn, then to make him do it
the more easily, you may at every end of the path after that he has stopped and
advanced, make him to go back about.ii. paces, and in his goinge back,
turn him, but after that he begins to fall somewhat unto it, beware that ye
use not then to make him go back, least he get an evil custom to make his
tournes altogether abandonate, and to much upon his hinder loins.

Thus by trotting him up and down and tourninge him to an fro.vi. or.vii.
times together, when you come out of ye rings, you shall in the space of iii.
days thoroughly correct that fault, which fault, if it were not ouermuche, I
would not wyshe you in his going to and fro, to turn him every time on the
right hand, but first on the right hand, and then on the left interchaungeably,
but so as the first and last turn may be always on the right hand, using
always such helps and corrections as are abouesaid. But if your horse be
harder to turn on the left hand then on the right, then begin first with the
left ring, observing order meare contrary in all things to the first, which I
am sure that you can do of your self without any more words.

Sire other Corrections for the fault abouesaid, whereof the first here follows.
YOu may also correct that fault without ridinge him in any ring, or
otherwise in this sort.

First cause him to be brought into some long narrow way, enclosed on both
sides with hedge, dike, or wall, and there after that you have reaned up his
head, by staying the reanes of the bridle with the button upon his neck, if he
be hard to turn on the right hand, fasten the one end of a good long cord
or thong to the middle of the bit on the right side, and tey the other end unto
his surcingle on the same side, straining it good and hard, for to make him
bow his neck: that done, let him so remain alone in the midst betwyxt you
and him that brought him, or some other whom you shall think mete, having each
of you a rod in your hand, with the which rods you shall chase him betwixt
you from one to another, by strykinge him always when he comes toward
either of you, upon the left side of the nose, and no where else, and that shall
make him turn on the right hand, not forgetting always when you beat him, to
help him with the sound of the tongue before declared, and you shall see that in
a very little while, the only sound of the tongue and the sight of the rods, will
make him to turn of his own accord without any beating at all. Yea the sound
of the tongue it self is so good a warning unto him, as if he be once
accustomed thereunto he will not tarry the beating, and though sometime, he hap
to fall down in his turning, it makes no matter, for he will rise again
alone, yea, and that shall be a very good correction unto him. And when you see
that he begins to wax somewhat weary, lousen the thong from the surcingle,
but not from the bit, and immediately get up on his back, taking the louse
end of the thong in your right hand, which shall serve in stead of a false
reane, and trot him forth the length of.x or.xii. paces, and there stop him,
where as one must stand with a rod in his hand, ready first to threaten him,
and then if need be, to beat him therewith upon the left side of the nose, for
to make him turn. And in the same instaunt, you shall not only help him with
your tongue, but also by straining a little the thong which is in your right
hand. And having turned, trot him back again to the place from whence he
came, whereas may stand also another footman to help him at the stop, as the
former did, to turn again on the same side: or for lack of another man, you
may turn him the second time on the left hand, and so trot him forth
toward the first man.

Thus trotting and tourning him to and fro, you shall correct him quickly of
that fault, neither shall you need to use the help of straining the cord or
thonge in his turn above twice or thrice at the most. For the sound of the
tongue, the fear of the footmans rod, and the holding of the right rean of his
bridle, shorter then the other, shall suffice. And note that as the thong being
put on the right side of the bit does correct the horses hardness on the same
side: so likewise if it be put on ye left side it will correct the horse that is
hard to turn on the left side, for sides and places of correction only
changed, the order is all one in both.

The second correction for the same fault.
YOu may also correct that fault by teying a Cord unto the headestraine on
that side that the horse is hard to turn, so as it may run through the ring
thereof, to the intent that when you pull the cord, it may strain the horses
head, and being let go, it may slack again: the louse end of which cord,
let some footman hold in his hand, and whylst you being on his back do help
him with your tongue to turn, let the foteman pull the Cord, whereunto if
the horse be used a while, he will afterward turn of him self, so soon as he
shall hear the sound of the tongue without the help of the cord.

The third Correction for the same.
TAke a cord about a yard long, and tey the one end thereof unto the uppermost
eye of the bridle on that side that ye horse is not hard to turn, and let it
come betwyxt his nether lip, and neither goomes, and so pass through the
uppermost eye of the bit on the other side, being strayned so hard as the horse
can well endure it, and there stay it by making a knot only upon the cord, hard
by the cheke of the bit, without casting the cord about the iron, so as it can
not slyppe: the louse end of which cord, when you ride your horse, you shall
hold in your hand in stead of a false reane, and so often as you pull that
cord, and help him with your tongue, you shall force him to turn whether he
will or not. And least a Cord perhaps will gaul your hand, you may if you
will, make it all of leather, saving that which must be in the horses mouth,
for otherwise it would not grieve him.

The fourth correction.
THe fourth correction is by putting the kirble hook on that side that the
horse is most hard to turn: on the back side of which hook next to the
horses lip, would be made.ii. little sharp pryckes, fashioned like cocks spurs.
Which kind of hook, Grison calls in his language, Guancietto, or if you
will, you may set those pricks on the back side of the link, whereon the said
hook hangs, which link is made like an.s. in this sort.S. so shall they
prick him higher toward the mouth. And though some horse is corrected by
having those pryckes placed on the contrary side, yet it is more kindly to have
them placed where I have showed you before. Or in stead of both these ways,
you may cause.iii. little nails to be set on the back side of his
portsmouth, and it shall be as good. But beware in any wise that ye seek not to
correct this fault by putting any Iron engine within the horses mouth, as some
men do, which will cause a bit to be made of purpose, having the one side
rougher then the other, which is the high way to distemper the horses mouth,
and to make him so as he shall never stay well upon any bitt. Notwithanding a
scache welted on the inside is very necessary sometime for such purpose, as I
will show you hereafter when I come to speak of the diuersytye of bittes, and
whereto they serve.

The fifth correction.
IF he will not turn on that side that you would have him, then let him turn on
the other side, as he will him self: and after that he has begun, let him not
leave. But beat him upon the head betwixt the ears, and all to rate him with
your voice, forcing him to turn continuallye on that hand, so fast as he may
drive, even till he be almost out of breath, and ready to give over for very
wearines, and you shall see that with a little help, he will be easelye
entreated to turn on the other side: which don, you shall make much of him, and
being once well corrected after this sort, it is possible that he will never
have that fault again.

The sixth Correction.
GO into some soft ground newly plowed with deep forrowes, and there first pace
him fair and softlye to and fro, the length of a maneging course, then follow
on with a good round trot, and when he will not turn on that hand that you
would have him, all to rate him with a terrible voice, and beat him with a
Cogel upon the head, betwixt the ears, and upon both sides of the head, and
most upon that side whereof he is most easy to turn, prouokyng him to turn
the other way, which if for all this, he will not do, then without any
respect, sometime run him, sometime trot him, and sometime gallop him, as fast
as he may flynge, now right out, now overthwart, and now round about, as
you your self shall think it most nedeful, not leauyng to beat him, nor
suffering him to rest in any place, until you have gotten the mastry. And though
he chance to arm himself to run away with you, whether ye will or not, never
care for it, but rather correct him so much the more with your voice in
ratinge him and cryinge out unto him, and afterward stop him, prouokinge him
in that your anger once again to turn, which if he will not do, then renew
again the self same correction, not leaving him until you have made him to
turn as he should do. And to the intent that in his tourning, he rere not right
up, you shall beat him with your rod, from time to time betwixt the forelegges,
but if he turn freely about with out stop or stay, then make much of him,
suffering him to pawse a while, that done, you may pace him to and fro fair and
softly, and so often as he will not turn orderlye, use such hasty correction
as before. And in so doing, I doubt not, but you shall break him of that fault
the first day that you shall so ride him, yea, perchance in less then one
hour. For there is no way to be compared unto this, but when you begin to
take this way, you must determine with your self, not to depart the field,
though you tarry there from morning until night, until you have clean broken
him from that fault. For otherwise you shall confirm him in his stubbornness,
and make his fault incurable. Thus we have spoken hitherto of single turns: it
rests now therefore that we talk somewhat of whole tournes and double
tournes, for we shall have occasion to talk more of syngle tournes when we
come to treat of the order of maneginge.

Of the whole turns and double turns, how and when to teach your horse to
make them. Cap. xvii.
AFter that you be come out of the ringes, and that your horse has stopped,
advanced, and pawsed a while, in such place and order as is aforesaid: Then
whilst he is quiet, and stands even with his body, give him.ii. whole
tournes on the right hand, one immediatlye after another, helping him with
your tongue, or with your rod upon the contrary shoulder, or else with the
caulfe of your left leg, and seldom with your spur. That done, give him
other.ii. whole turns on the left hand, using like helps, and then.ii.
tournes again on the right hand, and then stay a while, making much of him.
And see that in his turning, he bring over the contrary leg orderlye, and
that in closing his turn, he set his head even where it stood at the first.
And note here that you may begin the double turns.ii. manner of ways, for you
may chose whether you will have him to turn at the second or third bownde of
his aduauncing, or else at the first bound, which in deed requires not so
much obseruaunce of time and measure as the other does.

But if your horse be not very apt unto the double tournes, it shall not be
amiss to ride him into some long lane or way, and at the hither end thereof,
immediately upon his stop, to give him one or.ii. whole tournes fair and
softlye on the right hand, that done, to put him gently forward about.ii.
paces, and there to give him the like tournes on the left hand, and then to
go.ii. paces further, and there to turn him again in like manner on the right
hand, and so to follow on in turninge him still at every.ii. paces end,
helpinge him always with your tongue, with your rod, with the contrary leg or
spur, yea, and if need be, with the closing stroke of both spurs. And when
you are come to the farther end of the lane or way, give him.iii. whole
tournes, whereof the first and last must be on the right hand, and so leave of
for that time. But note this by the way, that when soever he fails, in so
going, to turn well on any side, that than you must turn him again, at the
next.ii. paces end on the same side, and also correct him with the contrary
spur, continuing still so to do, until he has amended his fault, which if he
do, you shall make much of him. And if the way or lane be short where you
break him, than being come to the farthest end thereof, you may turn back
again in the self same path, using the former order in making him to turn at
every two opaces end, so long time together as you shall think mete. After
this, you must seek to make him swift in his double turns, for it is not
enough to bring over the contrary leg orderly, and to turn truly and
decently, but also he must turn swyftlye and roundlye, for which intent you
shall use this order folowinge. Make him to trotte or gallop the length of a
short Cariere, and there stop, causinge him to advance once, twice, or
thrice together: that done (helpinge him with your voice and left spur, yea,
and if need be, with the closing stroke) first turn him loftelye on the right
hand, setting his head that way his tail stood, which shall be half a
turn, and there stay a while, then close it up with another half turn on the
same hand, setting his head and all his body in the same path, even as it was
at the first, and then make him to do as much on the left hand, and so to
change from hand to hand, endyng always on ye right. And by often soliciting
him in this sort, you shall not only make him to turn swiftly, but also
loftelye, or of an indifferent height, even as you list your self. And when
you see him ready inowe in this, then you may cause him to close the whole
turn roundlye together, without making any stop or stay at the first half
turn. If your horse know how to handle his forelegs, then give him on each
hand.ii. hole tournes allowing two half tournes to one hole turn, and at the
end of every third half turn, help him with your tongue, rod, or contrary
spur, and if need be, with the closyng stroke, so shall he close the last half
turn, both quickly, roundlye, and comely: but as the.ii. last half tournes
would be done spedely, so would the.ii. first haulfe turns be done leysurely.
For in those it suffices that the horse go orderly with his legs, and keep the
right path. And by obseruinge this order a while, you shall see he will be so
swift and ready in the first turns, as in the last. Notwithstanding for a good
time you shall not use to hasten him, but only at the closing of every hole
turn. And when he can once make all the tournes in such order and so
swiftlye as they should be done, then ordinarily, give him on each hand.iii.
hole turns, whereof let the first be so fair and softly as may be, so shall he
carry his forelegs orderly, and be better able to keep a swift time and measure,
in accomplishing the other ii. turns. And though that any of these.ii. ways
heretofore prescribed, is marvelous good to make any horse be he never so dull,
to be ready and nimble in the double tournes, yet must you be able to discern
by your own discretion which of them is most mete for every horse, and for
what purpose. For if you would have your horse to yarke in making the double
turns, this way is not so mete for that purpose as ye first, for in every
half turn, you must help him to yarke once. So that in every whole turn
he shall yarke twyse. That is to say, once forward, and once backward, which he
can not do, unless he pause somewhat at every half turn, according to ye
first order before taught. But if your horse be hard and dull of the spur, and
unapt to the double tournes, then if he can bring over the contrary leg, ride
him into some straight way, or else into the plain field, and there make him
to turn so fast as he can, and help him continually with your spurs,
beating him therewith in such sort, as he may have bloudye sides, by the
girthes, and give him on each hand.vii. whole tournes or there about, observing
always that number wherewith you first began, helping him also with your rod
on the contrary shoulder. And though he seems as then to care but little for
it, yet in riding him again the next day following, when his sides shall be
sore, by means of the foremer pricks, being then cold and tender, and not
whote, as they were the day before: you shall see that the spur will quicken
him after another sort, and make him to remember wherefore he was last
corrected. And so by vsinge afterward the ordinarye helps, you shall make him
so ready in the double tournes, as you will desire. And you may use like order
also, when the horse is very liuelye and sensible of him self: sauinge then
you shall not need to ride him again the next day following. For the first time
shall suffice to make him obedient to your will, and make him keep such
measure and time in his turning, as he ought to do. It is good also if the
horse be slow, sometime to trotte him out the length of a short maneging course,
and when he comes toward the end thereof, to gallop him, and at the stop
cause him to turn the first half turn, and then immediately upon the same,
to close the other haulfe turn on the same hand, and then make much of him
suffering him to pawse a while, yea, and it is possible that without pawsing
at all, you shall perceive such redines in the horse, as you may follow on
with another whole turn, and so to give him on each hand.ii. whole turns,
remembering always to hasten him with your tongue, so much as you possiblye
may, which shall not only make him ready in his tournes, but also to know
the very meaning of the help, which after that he has once obtained, you
shall need no more to give him these maneging courses, for than he will turn
at any time that you will have him.

Helps and corrections meet to be used for the amending of such faults, as
most commonly hap in making the whole or double tournes. Cap. xviii.
IF your horse at the closing of any turn uses to swerve of any side, then a
little before he stop, or else in his very stopping, strike him with the
Caulfe of your leg, on the same side, and if need be, with your spur,
pricking him more or less as you shall see it needful, and that shall force
him to make a just stop, and to keep the right path. So as afterward he shall
need no such help, being in deed than superfluous. But although he can stop
well, and be very ready of turn: yet when soever he doubleth, help him always
with your tunge, and sometime with your rod, and leg: and that shall hasten
him, and make him to go swiftly about, and to close well.

If your horse foltereth with his legs in his tourninge, for fault of not
bringing over the contrary leg, or lyfteth not his feet orderly, or turns
not fast inowe about, then every time that he has ended his turn: stay
there, and so soon as he is stayed, if his tournes were not well made of any
side: first strike him once or twice with the spur on the contrary side, then
give him as much with the spur on the other side, and last of all, on the same
side, that you stroke him first, and kepinge him still in the same pathe,
turn him again as you did before, and at the last you shall see by that this
correction, he will amend his fault, and so doing, you shall make much of
him.

But if your horse in his doubling, makes his tournes to much forward, and
you can by no ordinary means bring him from it, then ride him with his head
toward some wall or tree, and when you are within a very little of the said
wall or tree, stop him, and turn him, forcinge him always to close his last
turn toward the wall or tree, so shall he be forced to keep still one place
in his turning. Or you may if you will, without any wall or tree correct that
fault by bearyng a stiffer hand on him then you were wont to do, but so as you
distemper not his mouth, and look how much ground yt he incroched in closing
of his turn forward, when he has done, make him to go as much again
backewarde. Or you may correct him thus: Ride him into some were ground, new
plowed with deep forrowes, and there pase, trot, or gallop him the length of a
maneging course, until such time as he has made a plain path, and beaten out
evident marks of stop, and there cause him to double,, and you shall see that
after the first time, he will not be so hasty in preassing forward, because it
will gryeue him to leave the beaten path, to plunge into the mire. And look as
the making him to go bacward, will correct him of his stelyng forward, so you
may correct his reling backwarde in his tourning, by making him in the end to
go as much forward. You may also correct both faults thus: If he girde
forward, then make him to double in a plain ground, at the foot of some
hill, and to close his turn upward toward the hill. And if he reele backward
in his doubling, then cause him to close his last turn from the hillward.

Of the Chambetta. Cap. xix.
BUt besides all this, there is one other point belonginge to the tournes, as
well single as double, but specially to the single turns of a manege, which
gives a better grace unto them then any thing else. And that is when the horse
holds up his forefoote on that side that he should turn. Whilst he brings
over the contrary leg, and sets it not down again until he has closed
his turn: which act Grison calls, La ciambetta, for by this means he
shall carye both his forefete clean above the ground, and turn a great
deal better then when he trayleth his feet upon the ground. For which feat,
for that in our tongue we have no proper name, I will therefore call it from
henceforth the Chambetta, and you shall teach your horse to do it in this sort:
Ride him into some narrow way, or cause a dyke to be made of purpose, in manner
and form following, first let it be so long as a common maneginge course, not
above.ix. inches deep, and in the bottom one foot and a half broad, from
which bottom the two sides, and the two ends of the dike must rise shoryng:
So as it may be a great deal broader above at the brynkes then beneath,
having the very fashion of a Trow bote, or punt: Or if you will, you may make it
of a greater depth, but then it must have breadth in the top accordingly: And
the Rider must be the more circu^spect as well in bearyng his bridle hand, as in
timelye helping of his horse. The dike then being thus made: Ride into it, and
there give your horse on each hand.ii. or.iii. tournes, whereof always let the
first be fair and softly to the intent that he may close the others more
spedely, according to the order of doubling, as I taught you before, and you
shall see that in closing his tournes, the narrowness of the rowme shall so
trouble him, as for fear of knocking his contrary leg against the other, he
shall be glad to lift up the other leg, and so to come aloft with both legs
together, above ground. But you must beware that in stead of lifting up his
legs, he reeleth not backewarde, nor in his tourninge goes clean out of the
dyke, for that were a foul fault, and much against your purpose, and
therefore you must bear a temperate hand, and be ready to use such kind of
helps, corrections and cheryshinges, as are meet and necessary in that
behalf, and have been heretofore taught. And to make him the more ready
therein, you may often pase or trot him to and fro in the dike, and turn him
at each end on both hands, or but on one hand only, changing hands at
every end. Yea and sometime it shall be good to turn him in the same dyke at
every.ii. paces end, as I taught you before, speaking of the double tournes:
and hereby the horse will take such a custom, as he will do the like
whenever you shall provoke him thereunto, by helping him either with your
tongue, or contrary spur, or with both spurs together. And in stead of this
dike, you may if you will, seek out some narrow golled way by rage of
water, which will be as good, so that it be neither to deep nor to shallow, the
sides whereof would be somewhat shoring, yea, both such golled way, dike, and
every other way, where you pace or trot your horse to and fro, should be the
better, if the ground at the stopping place were somewhat hanging down the
hill: So should it keep him from going either forward or backewarde in his
turning. Also if your horse have been somewhat broken before, and know what
correction is (otherwise it will be to hard for you to do) you may teach him the
Chambetta standinge still in the Stable in this sort. Take a stick in your
hand, and go and stand on the right side of the horse, hard by the maunger to
the which he is tied, and knock him with your stick on the right foreleg,
sometime under the knee, sometime in the mids of the shanke, sometime on the
nether joint, and sometime behind on the bowyng of the ham of the same leg,
helpyng him continually with your tongue or voice, in saying unto him, hup, hup,
and never leave him until you have made him to hold up that leg, which when
he does, beat him no more, but only threaten him by wagging the rod, to
the intent he should not set down his foot, but hold it up still, so long
as you shall think it good. And so often as he sets it down unbidden:
help him and correct him as before, never leaving until he hold it up again,
which whilst he does, you shall do well to make much of him, by clawynge him
with your rod on the withers, for that shall encourage him to do the like
another time. And if you would have him to do the like with the left leg,
then stand on his left side, and use the self same order. And when you see yt
he will do it with both legs only for fear of the stycke: Then you may also
teach him to do it for fear of the spur, in this sort: stand you on his
right side with the rod in your hand, and cause another to stand on his left
side with a spur, nail, sharp stick or goade in his hand, and in the same
instaunt that you do beat him with your rod on the leg: let the other prycke
him in the common spurring place, with his spur, helping him with the sound of
his tongue, or with his voice, as before, you holding your peace, and so soon
as the horse shall hear that sound or voice, and feel the stroke both of rod
and spur, he will lift up his right leg, which when he has done, you shall
change sides, and in the same sort, make him to do as much with his left
leg. And thus using him a while, you shall make him to lift up which you
will, so soon as he shall hear but the sound of your tongue or voice, and
feale the spur on the contrary side, without the help of any man to stand by
him with a rod in his hand: yea, and to hold it up still a quarter of an hour
together. And perhaps many times he will do the same without the help of
the spur, being afraid to set it down, so long as you are there present. But
if (as it happeth many times) the horse when you prick him so with the spur,
will not lift up the contrary leg, but only the leg of the same side that you
spur him: then in the same instaunt that you spur him, if he be not curste
and shrewed, strike him with your foot on the contrary leg, which warning
will make him to remember himself. Or else for a more surety, you may have a
stick in your other hand, and knock him therewith on thinside of his
contrary leg: and beside that, every time that he so erreth, either in not
liftinge up the contrary leg: or else in lifting up the other, remember alwais to
double the stroke of the spur, and that shall so correct him, as afterward if
you do but make an offer to touch him with the spur, it shall suffice to make
him to hold up the contrary leg, so long time together as you will your
self. Neither care you for the frowardnes of any horse, but the more froward
he is, the more roughly correct him. But though your horse in this sort may
learn ye Chambetta in one day, yea, and perchance in less then.iii. hours:
yet to keep him in ure withal, and that he may do it afterward, the more
redilye in his maneginge, it shall be necessary to spend every day one hour
with him in the stable, in making him to hold up first one leg, and then
another. Thus when you have taught your horse to do the Chambetta in the
stable: You may also teach him to do it abroad, being upon his back, in this
sort. When you are mounted, cause him to stand still a good pretty while
together, and bear a steady hand upon him: making him to reane truly with his
head, and appoint a footeman to stand on your right side, with a stick in
his hand, and in the same instaunt that you help your horse with your tongue
or voice, let the footman beat him upon the right leg with his stick, not
leaving so to molest him until he lifts up his foot, which doing, you
shall make much of him, by clawynge him on ye withers. That done, let the
footeman change sides, and make the horse to do as much with his left leg, and
when the horse understands those helps, then besides ye help of your tongue
or voice, you may touch him also with your contrary spur, which if it does
make him to hold up the true leg, then spur him no more, but make much of
him, and when he knows once the help of the spur, you shall need no more the
help of the footman with his rod, for then if he erreth at any time, by
helping him with your tongue or voice, and by doubling the stroke of the
spur, you shall quicklye make him to amend his fault. And besides these
helps, for a more surety if need be, you may have a rod in your hand, and
correct him therewith your self like as the footman did before, but I believe
that after a little exercise (if the horse be not to dull) the help of your
tongue, and the moving only of your contrary leg will suffice without any
more business. And to keep him in ure withal: remember always whenever you
take his back to make him hold up first one leg, and then another, so shall he
afterward be perfect when he comes to be maneged, either with single or
double turn, but he shall do it the more redily in the double turn, if he be
used to do it first in the single turn. It shall be very necessary also to trot
him or to gallop him, and to turn him to and fro in some such way as is before
described, by means whereof if the horse be of any gentle nature, and therewith
somewhat staid of head, he may quicklye learn the Chambetta without the help
of any of the former inventions, which notwithstanding are necessary for
shifts sake, to answer the diverse qualityes of horses: for all horses will
not learn alike. Thus having taught you the order of treading the ryng, of
stopping, of aduauncing before, of yarkinge behind, of tourninge, with single
turn and double turn, yea, and that with the Chambetta also: I think it
mete now to show you the order of maneging, and how many kinds of maneges
there be.

Of maneging, and how many kinds of maneges there be. Cap. xx.
THis Italion word Maneggiare is as much to say in English, as to handle with
skill, as when we say, he can handle his horse or weapon very well, and
amongst the Italions it is taken as a general word, comprehendinge four
especial kinds of maneginge: whereof one is, when they make their horse to
double his tournes, which they call Raddopiare: an other is, when they make him
to gallop the field, going in and out, as they do in skirremishe: the third
is, when they make him to leap a loft, and to fetch diverse saultes: the fourth
is, when they pace, trot or galloppe him a good while to and fro in one self
path, the length of.xx. or.xxx. paces, or there about, turning him at each end
thereof, either with single turn, whole turn, or double turn, which Grison
calls Maneggiare a Repolom, But we English men do only call this last
kind a manege, and that absolutely without any other addicion. For amongst our
horsemen this word manege or maneging signifies none other thing, but only
that foresaid kind of gallopping and turning to and fro in one self path.
And therefore we use commonly to say, this horse can manege well, or make a
good manege, whereof there be also three kinds. That is to say, manege with
haulfe rest, manege with whole rest, and manege without rest. Which Grison
terms thus, Manegio a mezzo tempo, a tempo, and contra tempo. The manege with
half rest is when you cause your horse at the end of every maneging path,
after he has stopped, to advance twyse together, and at the second bound to
turn. Whereby you rest always one bound. The manege with whole rest is, when
you turn him at the third bound, and so you rest two bounds. The manage
without rest is, when you turn him immediately upon the stop, without any
tarriaunce at all, which only kind of manege our English Ryders most
commonly do use, and not the other two. Notwithstanding, they be very
necessary and mete to be used, according as the horse is strong or weak.
For the very strong horse requires the manege with the hole rest. And the
horse of an indifferent strength, the manege with the haulfe rest. And the
weak horse the manege without rest. But the manege with the haulfe rest is
most necessary of all, and the best mean to make a horse perfyght in the other
two But note that in all.iii. kinds of maneges, you must observe well those
general precepts that I gave you before, touching the single and double
tournes. That is, to see that your horse keep always one path, and one place
of stop, and in his tourninge that he keep his ground and carry his head,
neck, legs, and whole body orderly, without preasing forward, or reling
backward, or swaruinge on either side: and also that he close his turn
roundly, and in so narrow rowme as may be. And finally, to see that as well in
his turns, as courses, he keep always like time and measure, and that the one
be not swifter then the other, and such like. All which things, by vsinge
such helps and corrections as I have partlye already, and shall hereafter
more at full declare: you shall easily make your horse to do. Thus having
showed you how many kinds of Maneges there be, and which they be, and what
you must generally observe in teaching them: I will now declare unto you the
order of them al, beginning first with ye* manege the haulfe rest.

Of manege with half rest. Cap. xxi.
WHen your horse can stop well, advance before, and turn redilie on both
hands, then being come out of the rings, trot him right out, either in the
middle forrow unto the common place of stop, or else in some other soft
ground, the length of.xx. paces, or there about, and even as he is ready to
stop, help him with your voice, making him to advance twyse together, and at
the second bound, turn him on the right hand, helping him with your tongue,
with the rain of his headstrain or false rain, with your rod, with the calves
of your legs, or with your spurs, more or less, according as occasion shall
require, and see that in his tourninge he move his forepartes orderly, staying
him self upon his hinder loins, bowing his houghes decently, which is the
bewtye and chyefest grace of his turn. That done, immediatlye trotte him back
again in the self same path, unto the place from whence you came. And there
after stop at the second bound of his aduauncing, turn him on the left hand,
and so follow on observing like order, until you have gone to and fro,
about.xii. times, changing hands at every time. And at the last stop of all,
you shall cause him to advance twyse together, and so depart: and this is the
order of the manege with half rest. In the which after that he has been
somewhat exercised, you shall not need to help him when he is ready to stop,
but only to bear a steady and straight hand, and to help him with your tongue
or voice in his tourning. And you shall see that he of himself will turn
roundlye, and with a good grace without any more help.

Of manege with whole rest. Cap. xxii.
THEN after that he can make the manege with half rest well, if he be of much
force, and very light withal, you may teach him to make the manege with whole
rest, causing him at every stop to advance thrice together, and at the.iii.
bound to turn, and at the last stop of all, to advance again thrice
together, and so to depart. But unless he be very strong in deed: I would
wyshe you to turn him most commonly at the second bound, rather then at the
third, so shall he be able to turn the more redily, and to keep the better
time and measure in his turning.

Of manege without rest. Cap. xxiii.
BUt if your horse be of no force, or of a heavy mould, then you may teach him
the manege without rest, by turnyng him suddenly upon the stop, wherein also he
shall never be perfect, unless he be first used to the manege with haulfe rest,
but remember that in the manege without rest, you cause your horse at ye last
stop to advance once at the least. For it is none error at al but a comely
sight in all.iii. kinds of maneges, at the last stop to advance twyse or
thryse. And note that in all these.iii. kinds of Maneges, it is praise
worthy, when the horse in his aduauncinge, bow his houghes behind, and
tourneth round with the Chambetta. For which purpose it were not amysse to
manege him sometime in such place whereas the ground si at each end of the
manegynge path, somewhat hanging. Note also that in maneging your horse, it is
no small help unto him in every turn that he makes, to accompany him with
your person in this sort folowinge. When he turns on the right hand, turn
you your left shoulder toward his left ear, more or less, as need shall
require, kepinge your body for all that still right in the midst of the
saddle, so as the raynes of your back may directly answer the ridge bone of
his back. Nevertheless, when you feel him to bend his hinder houghes, then
lean you somewhat backward, for that shall make him to close his turn the more
roundlye and swiftlye. And when he tourneth on the left hand, accompanye him
with your right shoulder, toward his right ear, obseruyng like order as
before. If your horse be very weak or feeble, either by nature, or by
ouermuche travel, then it shall be good, sometime to manege him with a soft pace,
and not to trot him, using him for the most part to that kind of manege which
shall be most meet for his strength, least by often chau^ging, you clean
disorder him, and he never become pertect in any of them. When your horse can
make all these three kinds of maneges, both with soft pace and with trot: Then
you may manege him in any of the said kinds with a gallop, giving him on each
hand but one single turn, and see that the first and last be always of the
right hand. And a little before you turn him, remember to hold your rod on the
contrary side, whereby your horse shall know on what side to turn: and at the
stop make him to advance, helping him with your voice, or with your rod, or
with the even stroke of your spurs, or of the calves of your legs. And in
two of the foresaid kinds of maneginge (if your horse be redye of his
heels, and light behind, you may also make him to yarke as well at his stop, as
in his turn. That is to say, in the manege with half rest, and in the manege
with whole rest: for in the manege without rest, it cannot be decent. But in
the other.ii. you may at the first, or second bound of his aduauncing, help him
with your voice, rod or spurs, to yarke there once, and at the closing of his
turn to yarke again. So as at every end of the manegynge course, he shall
yarke twice, once forward and once backward. Or if you will, you may cause him
to yarke at each end but once and that would be at the closing of his turn,
settinge his head that way, that his tail before stood. But before you
gallop him, it were good to pace him and to turn him fair and softlye in the
same path to and fro, about.xii. times. Which shall make him the redier when he
is afterward maneged with a gallop, yea, and if you did the like, after that
you have maneged him with a gallop, so that you first suffer him to breath a
while, it should do him no harm, as you shall well perceive if you manege him
again the next day following. And beware that in maneging your horse, ye
gallop him not at the first to swyftlye, for so shall he never be able to
continue with one time and measure, neither in his courses, nor yet in his
tournes, for after a while every one shall be slower then another, which
should be very unseemly, and therefore good respect would be had to the
quality of the horse, whether he be able to endure a swift manege or not. For
if you perceive that he is naturallye strong, and has a good mouth, and can
turn redily on both hands: then you may be ye bolder to give him a swift
manege. But if he be to lively, or else be laden with great cheeks, or hard of
mouth, or if he be feeble of back and legs, then albeit he seems to have a
gentle mouth, by means perhaps of good breaking, yet you must gallop him with
the more respect. Notwithstanding if he has strength in his back and loins,
then the other defectes be not so much material, but that with good breakinge he
may be maneged any manner of way, but the surest way for all manner of horses is
to manege him with a soft pace, or with a trot, and seldom with a gallop.

And note that if there be any stones in the maneging pathe, or on any side of
his stoppinge place, where he tourneth, it is not good to take them away, for
the fear thereof shall make him to lift his feet the better, and to go the
more surely, yea, if there be none at the place of turnyng, it were necessary
to put one or two great ones: for the fear of those stones would make him to
turn with the Chambetta. When your horse is perfight in all the things
abouesayde. Then if you will: you may manege him sometime in, and out, like the
writhing of a Serpent, thus figured. But use it not often, and specially with a
young horse.

Hitherto we have spoken of maneginge with single tournes. Now therefore we will
talk a little of maneging with double tournes.

Maneging with double tournes. Cap. xxiiii.
ALthough maneging with the double tournes appertains rather to the sterrer,
then to the horse of service, yet it shall not be out of time to talk thereof
in this place. And note that you may teach your horse to manege with ye double
tournes two manner of ways, whereof the first is in this sort. Pace him or trot
him right out the length of twenty or thirtye paces as you did before. And when
you come to the place of stop, let him advance once, twice, or thryse
together, according as the kind of manege which you would have him to make,
shall require, geuyng him there a double turn, and half a turn on the right
hand, which makes in all.v. single turns: or if he be very strong, you may
give him.ii. double tournes, and half a turn on the right hand, which
amounts to.ix. single or half turns. That done, trot him back again in the
self same path, and give him the like number of turns on the left hand, and so
follow on still, continuing the same order so long as you think your horse can
well endure, and then at the last stop make him to aduau^ce twice or thrice
together, and so leave. The second way is thus. When you come to the place of
stop, give him at the first but half a turn on the right hand, and suddenly
changing hands, let him close the double turn on the leaft hand, that done,
trot him back again in the self same path, unto the other end, and there
likewise give him half a turn on the left hand, and immediatlye let him
close the double turn on the right hand, and so to follow on with double turn
and half turn, mocked through out: and atthend let him stop and advance, as
before is said. And note that in both these ways of maneging, in the
beginning, the tournes would be made fair and softly, to the intent the horse
may carry his legs the more orderlye. When your horse can double, being
maneged with a soft pace and trotte, then you may make him to double after one
of these two sorts, being maneged with a gallop, which must be more or less
swift according as the horse may endure, and be able to keep like time and
measure, so well in his courses, as in his turns. For the double turns, and
specially two on each hand do strain a horse, his loins and synewes very
sore, if he be weke or not very light of nature. Wherefore if your horse have
any such defect, and yet you would have him to double in his manege, then for a
while, let him use to make on each hand but one double turn: so shall he
turn the more roundlye, and close his tournes the better, yea and with the
more strength of his back, which will not decay so soon with that, as with
making.ii. double tournes, and in process of time it is possible that you
shall make him to turn so often together, as you will your self. But if he
be of so gross a molde, as he is not apt to close his turn well, then use him
in no wise to double, least that he neither make double nor single turn as he
ought to do.

Of the helps and corrections which are mete to be used for the redress of
such faults as commonly chance in manegyng. Cap. xxv.
ANd first as touching the ordinarye helps, I say, that if your horse have
been well broken before, and taught to turn redily on both hands (as he ought
to be before you manege him) then he needs the less help. For so soon as he
shall hear the sound of your tongue or voice, and feel the staying of the
bridle, he will not tarry to be spurred, but turn roundlye of his own
accord: notwythstanding, according as he is more or less sensible in the
beginning of every maneging course that he makes, it shall not be amiss to
help him with the even stroke of your spurs, yea and also to do the like a
little before he comes to the place of stop helpinge him also with your voice,
for that shall make him to close his turn with the better grace. But if he be
dull and heavy, then it shall not only be necessary to help him in the
beginning of each course, but also in the midst, and likewise at the end of
the same, in such order as is abouesaid. And in his tourninge, remember to
help him when need is, with ye contrary leg or spur and sometime with the
closyng stroke of both spurs, as you have been hertofore taught. And when
your horse goes out of the way, and will not keep the right path, then corect
him with your rod, strikyng him upon the fla^ke, or with your spur upon that
side ye he swarueth. If your horse be young, and not grown to his full strength,
it is possible that sometime for his own ease, he being come to the place of
stop, will turn sooner then he should. Wherefore you shall do well at the
stop to make him advance twice or thrice together, and then to stand still a
while, making much of him: that done, help him with your voice to turn,
wherein if he also make to much haste* and keeps no time, stay him again upon
the same another while, and so you shall quickly bring him from that fault,
and make him to manege with what time and measure you will your self. Also if
your horse have that fault, by means yt he is ouerliuely, and to rash, there
is no better mean to bring him from it, then by using him unto the manege with
whole rest, and to stay a pretty while together, after yt he has adua^ced,
making him always to turn low by the ground, and to bring over the contrary
leg, or to turn with ye Cha^betta. Again, there be some horses so froward,
and so spightfull, which by means of evil breaking, and overmuch beating,
when they come to the turning place, they will make either to large a turn, or
else without time or measure. For correction whereof use to manege him with a
soft pace until he be almost within his length of the tourning place, and then
trot him swiftly, or gallop him unto thend, whereas after you have given him a
turn truly closed on the right hand stay him a while, that done, pace him
forth fair and softlye, until he be almost at the other end, and then
galloppe him to the place of stop, whereas after he has turned, stay him again
like as you did before, and so continue, maneging him still after that sort,
until you have gone to and fro viii. times, and at the last stop make him to
advance, or if you will, you may after his first turn, first pace him ii. or
iii. steps, then trot him swiftly until he come somewhat nigh to thend, and from
thence gallop him to the place of stop, observing ye order in every course from
ye beginning to thending, and afterward being so^what amended of his fault,
you may after ye stay upon his turn, use to gallop him al ye way, for a
certain season, until he be thoroughly perfect in his turn: which when he is,
see that you stay him no more upon his turn, but immediately put him forward.
For to stay upon the turn, is unseemly, and not to be allowed, but only for
corrections sake. There be many horses which through evil breaking when they
are maneged, will turn their rumpes and hinder loins, before they turn their
forepartes. For remedy of which fault, you shall use these ways following.

Trotte him right out in the forrowe of some new plowed ground, correcting
him continuallye, and that not only in his goinge, but also when he is ready
to stop, and likewise in his turning, sometime with the contrary leg, and
sometime with the contrary spur, and if that will not suffyse to make him
leave his fault, then manege him alongest by some wall or tylte, and ride so
nigh unto it as you can. Which wall or tilt in the first course would be on
your left hand, and in the second on your right hand: and so changing from
hand to hand, help him in each turn, with the contrary leg, or spur, more or
less according as need shall require. Or else manege him in such a fashioned
dike, as I have before descrybed, for to teach your horse therein the Chambetta:
And by one of those ways, you shall make him to amend his fault, and to
turn orderly, as you would have him.

If your horse in his turnynge use to wryth his body on that side he tourneth,
as though he would fall down, which is a very foul fault, then manege him
often with a swyft trotte, either in the forrowe of some new plowed ground, or
else in some path overthwart the forrowes: and at the first turn him always
low by the ground, helping him with such helps and corrections as are before
taught, so shall you bring him to make a true turn, and just in every
condition.

You may also correct him for the self same fault, or for making to large a
turn, by geuinge him a chocke with the bridle on that side of his mouth, that
he so erreth. And for the most part such wrythinge tournes do chance in the
manege without rest, wherein as they are unseemly to many men's judgments, so
are they much more unseemly in the other two kinds of maneges.
Notwithstanding, if your horse be weak and feeble, then somewhat to ease him,
you may suffer him whilst he boweth his houghes behind in his stopping to wrye
his body a hand breadth on that side that he tourneth, so shall he close his
turn the more redilye, but otherwise see that you use it not.

But if your horse in any of the maneges make a faulse turn, or tourneth
higher or lower then you would have him, as for example on the right hand,
then so sone as he has turned even in his going forward, correct him once or
twice with your left spur, yea, and if need be, with both spurs at once,
and being come to the other place, turn him again on the right hand, and so
follow on with your manege unto the place where he turned first on the right
hand, and there turn him on the left hand, by which changing of hands, you
shall alter the common order of tourning in maneging: which altering sometime is
very necessary not only for the correction of the faults abouesaid, but also
to know thobedience and redynes of your horse. For if he be used always to
one order of tourninge, it is possible that he will not turn sometime on that
hand, that you would have him. And if he make a false turn on the left
hand, then correct him by observing the contrary order.

There is some kind of horse, which when you have maneged him.x. courses to
and fro, he will in the end suddenly force your hand, either by casting up his
head aloft, or by chopping it down, and so fall a running, not for that the
bridle grieueth him, or for any great desire he has to run or to travel, but
only for that he thinks so to escape your hands, and that you should
trouble him no more, but suffer him to rest. Which fault so often as he uses,
see that you sharply correct him for it without showing him any favor at all,
not leauyng to beat him upon the head betwyxt theares with a good stick, and
to rate him with a terrible voice, shewinge your self fierce and cruel upon
him, until you have brought him unto obedience, and made him to know that
running away will not help him. Which correction he should remember the
better, if it were his hap to deserve it, being maneged upon a ground newly
plowed with deep forrowes, the travel wherein together with the correction,
would be so paynefull unto him, as he would beware ever after, how he ran
away before his lesson were ended. And having thus subdued him, leave him not
so: but manege him a fresh, first with a round trot, and then with a gallop,
according as you shall see him in breath: and in the end make much of him, by
which so vsyng him, you shall see that afterward he will manege so long time
together as you will have him, and likewise be ready to stop at Commandment,
yea, and if need be to stop in a Cariere, being run with an vnkerbled bridle.

How and when to teach your horse to pass a swyft Cariere. Cap. xxvi.
Until your horse be perfect in all points before taught, and specially that
he can stop well, and therewith advance before, as well in his trot as in his
gallop: I would not wyshe you in any wise to run him, unless it were in the
very beginning of his breakinge, to give him a Cariere, or two, only to know
his swyftnes, and disposition, and so to leave of, until he be better broken,
and made mete to be run. Which when he is, you shall use this order folowinge:
Ride him into some fair plain sandy way, void of al stumbling stones, and to
acquaint him with the way: Pace him fair and softly the length of a good
Cariere, which must be measured, according as the horse is made. For if he be a
mighty puissaunt horse, and great of stature: Then the Cariere would be the
shorter. So likewise must it be when you would have him to bound aloft in his
Cariere: But if he be made like a Iennet, or of a middle stature: then the
Cariere path may be the longer, yet not ouerlong. At the end whereof, let him
stop and advance, and at the second bound turn him fair and softly on the
right hand, and so stay a little while. Then suddenly saying with a lively voice
Hey or Now, put him forward with both spurs at once, forcing him all the way
to run so swiftlye and so roundlye, as he can possiblye even to the end, to
the intent he may stop on his buttockes. That done, turn him on the left hand,
and pace him forth fair and softlye unto the other end of the Cariere path,
and there stop him and turn him again on the right hand, as you did before,
and so leave.

And note that the chiefest points to be observed in the running of a Cariere
are these: first to see that the horse gather roundlye, and go smoothlye away,
bearyng his head stedely: Secondly, that he run swiftlye: and thirdlye, that
he stop lightlye. Whereunto you shall bring him, by no means so well, as by
often vsyng him to tread the rings with a very swyft trot, which shall make
him so nymble of his legs, so swyfte, and so staide of head, as when he
comes afterward to be run, it shall be no grief unto him: which was well
observed by the great rider M. Cola Pagano. Who until he saw his horse well
stayde of head, and throughlye broken, he would never run him. For after that
he had spent four months or half a year, yea, and perchance a whole year
in breaking him, in such order as I have heretofore taught, he would teach
him to run in less then.viii. days, and that so swyftlye, so smoothlye, so
stronglye, and with such stedines of head, and lightness at stop: as it could
not be amended. Yea and when he would have an horse texcell, and be very fine
in deed: he would teach him nothing from the beginning to thending, but
that he should do it first perfectlye well upon a soft pace, and then upon a
trot, and seldom or never upon a gallop, unless necessity so forced. And
above al things he would be sure never to manege him with a swift gallop, nor
yet to make him pass a Cariere. But after that he saw him perfect in the
rest, he would appoint him to his Ryder, who could require nothing but the
horse was ready to do it, were it to manege with single turn or double turn,
or run as many Carieres as the Rider would have him, with such order and
time as it was marvelous to behold. And as I would not have you to run your
horse before he be thoroughly broken: so after that he can run, I would not
wysh you to exercise him therein above once in two months. Yea, and if it were
more seldom, the better, and specially if he be naturally hard of mouth.

For nothing does distemper an horses head and mouth so much as often
runninge, and it greatly diminishes his strength, and if his hinder legs be
weak, it makes him also to over reche, which is very perilous.

The order of boundinge aloft, or leapinge, how and when you shall teach
your horse to leap. Cap. xxvii.
Although the rules before taught, do suffice to make a horse of service. Yet
if your horse be light, a Stirrer, and nimble of nature, you may besides
these, for pleasures sake, teach him many other proper feats. As to bound
aloft, and to yarke withal, to gallop the gallop gallyarde, to fetch the
Capriole, to do the Coruetti, and such like sautes, whereof I purpose here
somewhat to treat, thinkinge it now meet so to do, and not before, because
that unless your horse be first perfect in the foremer lessons, it were in
vain to teach him any of the lessons following. And first as touching leaping
or boundinge alofte, you shall understand, that to do it with a good grace, and
as it ought to be done: The horse had not only need to be made light by art,
but also to be light by nature, for in his leaping, he must advance him self,
gathering his body round together, and rise even from the ground, keeping his
head at one stay, and in his due place. And when he leapeth, he must yarke
withal. Which if you would have him to do at the stop: you shall help him
in his aduauncyng, and specially when he rises aloft, at the second bound,
with theuen stroke of your spurs, and with your voice, yea and with your rod
also, by striking him therewith, sometime behind, on the midde rompe, and
sometime on either side of his rompe, where he seems most to hang, and if he
rise not lightlye inowe before: then beat him therewith upon the right
shoulder, by means of which helps, you shall see him immediatlye to bound
clean above ground, gathering his body short together, and to yarke
wythall. And note by the way, that the help of the caulfe of your legs, will
make some horse to rise higher then the help of your Spurs: therefore in
such cases your own discretion must be used. But in the beginning, so soon
as he has made one true sault or leap, and yarked withal, forget not to make
much of him, suffringe him to stay upon it a good while, without molestynge
him any more for that time, yea rather you shall do very well to light of his
back even there. And so cause him to be led from thence fair and softlye
into the Stable, or at the least, if you will not light of, to depart with a
soft pace: So shall you encourage him against the next time to do the like, or
else better. For until your horse understands your mind, and knows
perfectlye the order of leaping, and how to gather up his body short and
round together: it is not good to force him ouermuche, but only at the end of
his pace, trot, gallop, or Cariere, to help him as I showed you before, to make
two, three, or four leapes, and no more, so shall they be both loftye and
semelye.

Whereas otherwise in making many, he may hap to do them faintlye,
layselye, and without any good grace. Yea, and perchance not without danger
of rearing right up, wherein a hanging ground would do good service. But then
at the first it would not be to much enclininge, or over stepe down.
Notwithstanding, if your horse be light and a sterer by nature: you may take
the more of him, and increase the number of his lessons as you shall think
good. Having then only care that he keep his ground, that he spring out on
neither side, nor disorder his head, but bear it stedely. In which things he
must be made perfect before, by often trottinge the ringes in such order as is
before taught. And then being staide of head, you may by using the former
helps, cause him in a lusty strong gallop at every two paces end, to bound
aloft, once or more, as you list your self, but so as he may do it well,
keeping one self time and measure from the beginning to thending, and that the
last leap be with no less force then the first, but with more force, if it may
be. And therefore the number of his leapes, and the length of his race would
be measured according to the Horses strength, and as he is in breath, and
able to endure. And this kind of gallop, is called the gallop gallyard.

And when your horse is once perfect, you need not to galloppe him but seldom,
so shall he galloppe the more stronglye, which would be done when you come out
of the ringes. In the which for that cause, you must trot him at that time the
fewer times about. And so you shall see that at his coming out, he will enter
into his gallop with a lustye courage, and bound all the way of his own
accord, at every.ii. paces end, even until he come to the place of stop,
or at the least, if he does not this, I am sure that helpinge him but only
with your voice, he will not fail to fetch.ii. or.iii. leapes at the stop,
without any more business.

How to teach your horse to do the Capriole or Goats leap, and the
Coruetti, and also how to make him go sidelinge so well with his whole body,
as with his rompe only. Cap. xxviii.
CApra in Lattin or Italion, is a beast, which we call a goat. Which beast
being disposed to play, uses in his running a pretty kind of iumping and
doubling with his legs above ground, making a certain semblau^ce of
yarking and yet yarketh not in ded. Which kind of saulte or leap, because the
Italions have not only counterfeited in their dauncinge, but also have taught
their horses to immitate the same (for when the horse boundeth aloft, he must
advance his rompe, and make as though he would yarke, and yet do not) it is
called therefore by the name of Capriole, which if you will, in English you
may term the Goats leap: But for so much as Goats be not every where to
represent that kind of leap: I would wyshe you therefore for your better
understanding, sometime to behold our little Lambs, whilst they run and
play together, and you shall see them liuelye to do the same.

The Coruetti is a certain continual prauncing and dancing up and down still
in one place, like a bear at a stake, and sometime sideling to and fro, wherein
the horse makes as though he would feign run, and can not be suffered. The
name is derived of this Spanishe word Corua. Which is as much to say as
thelbowe or hinder heel of the horse, because in doing this feat he does
labor much upon his hinder legs. Which kind of prauncyng, the Spaniardes
do use most upon their Iennettes, and specially when they ride short after the
Turkye fashion. Because in that sort it makes the better show, and they
esteem it so much, as they call the horse that can do it well, in their tongue
Hazedor, that is to say, a doer.

Thus for your better understanding, I have thought good to interpret unto you
these two terms Capriole and Coruetti, which two feats, because they do not
much differ (as Gryson says) there is but one order in teachinge to be
observed in both, wherefore if you would teach your horse to do the Capriole,
use to trot him for a certain days upon some long hill, or hanging ground,
and stopping him upon the knoll of the hill, make him to advance twyse
together: that done, immediately help him with the sound of your lyps, to trot
two paces further, and to stop, and to advance again twyse, as he did before,
and so to continue in stopping and aduauncing twice together, at every two
paces end, all the length of the hill downward, and there stay. Thus vsinge him
a while, you shall see that afterward instead of those two trotting steps
at every time that he stops and aduaunceth, if you help him with this
word hup, and with your rod, he will gather up his rompe twice together,
and so go from stop to stop, aduauncinge both his forefeete and
hinderloynes, with time and measure, cariying his forelegges orderlye, and so
fetch the Capriole so often times together, as you will, yea and by helpinge him
with your rod a little behind, you may make him at every time that he so
aduaunceth with his rumpe to yarke withal. But note that if your horse be
weak and feeble in his hinderpartes, it shall be best for him to make those two
trotting steps low by the ground. Or else in his lifting to observe
always one time and measure, aduauncing therwyth orderly, without gatheringe
up his rompe, which kind of Capriole is not to be dyspraised. In this sort if
your horse be very light, and you your self therewith accustomed to ride short
upon him, after the Turkey fashion: You may teach him also ye Coruetti, but if
he be great of stature and that you ride long upon him after our fashyo^, then
the Capriole is most mete for him, which Capriole being done low by the
ground, does not differ much from the Coruetti, saving that in doing the
Capriole, your horse must always be going forward. But he may do the Coruetti
not only in going forward, but also in keeping still one place, whilst he
stands aduauncing up and down upon all.iiii. feet, yea, and sometime going
backewarde, and sideling, and every way. And to the intent he may do it the
sooner, it were not amiss sometime to make him go sidelinge with his whole
body, by helping him with the contrary spur: as for example, when you would
have him to draw to the left side, then bearing your bridle hand even and
steady, clap your right leg close to his belley, and hold it there still,
making him to feale the spur on the right side, for the which if you see that
he moves his body such way as you would have him, then suddenly pull away
your leg from thence, and make much of him, that done, make him to do as much on
the other side with your left leg, not leaving to molest him in that sort on
either side, until you have made him understand the meaning thereof. And so
with a little exercise so sone as he shall feel you to stay your bridle hand,
and to offer to touch him either with your leg or spur, on the contrary side,
he will go sidelinge so much or so little as you will have him. But if you
would have him go sidelinge with his Rompe only, and not to move his
forepartes, which in deed is very necessary, and specially for a horse of
service, to make him keep his head always toward the enemy in fightinge
hand to hand: then besides the foresaid help of the contrary leg or spur,
you must also turn your bridle hand somewhat on that side that you touch
him. And you may also help him with your rod, by striking him therewith on the
contrary flank behind. Note also that you may make your horse to do the
Capriole in giving him a lustye gallop, if you can help him at every two
steps to keep time and measure. But as I said before, unless your horse be
naturally light of his body, and nimble of his legs, it is impossible by art to
make him to do any of these things well, and to say the truth, they be
things that may be very well spared, and specially in horses of service, which
being once used to such delighting toys, do forget in time of need their
necessary feats. For when they are spurred to go forward or to pass a
Cariere, they fall a hopping and dancing up and down in one place, likewise
when in their manege they should make a spedy, round, and just turn, either
single or double, they will not turn but leysorlye with the Coruetti, and
therefore I would wyshe none of the Queen's maiestyes horses to be used unto
the Coruetti, but such as are only kept for pleasure, whereof it is
sufficient to have in her highness stable.ii. or.iii. at the most.

Thus having declared unto you what is necessary as well for the horse of
service, as for the Sterer, and with what order to break them: I think it
meet also to show you now in the end, how to ride such a horse, being
once throughlye broken in all the feats above said, to the best show before a
Prince or noble man.

How to ride a horse to the best show before a Prince, and where best
standing is for him to see. Cap. xxix.
SOme do think it good for those that would see, to stand right before the
stopping place, and some would have them to stand on the right hand of the
Ryder, even with the stoppinge place, and some on the same hand, not even with
the stoppinge place, but lower down toward the middle Cariere, distaunt from
the stopping place the length of a maneging course. Of all which three
standinges, that right before the stoppinge place, in my judgment is worst,
for two causes: First for that the rowme perhaps may be unmeet to receive
any number of men: Secondly, it is perilous. For if ye horse be headstronge
and should chance to break the kirble, the raynes, or porthe mouths of his
bridle, he might run headlonge upon the lookers on. And therefore I would not
wyshe a Prince or noble man to take view of a horse in that place, unless it
were from a house, out of a window, or from some skaffolde. But rather to
stand on the one side toward the midde Cariere, and distaunt from the stopping
place the length of a maneging course, so shall he stand without danger, and
see the beginning, the middle, and ending. And it should be so much the better
if he stand on the right hand of the Ryder, for so the Ryder at both ends of
the maneginge path, in maneging his horse, shall turn his face always
toward the Prince, and not his back. The place of standinge, then being
thus appointed, and the Prince there ready to behold what your horse can do.

Ride first fair and softlye toward the Prince, to do your reverence: that
done, depart with a good round trotte toward the farthest end of the Cariere
path, bearing your rod with the point upward, toward your right shoulder,
according as I have taught you heretofore, and being come to the end, let the
point of your rod fall toward the left shoulder of your horse, and make him
to turn an haulfe turn on the right hand: and then to stay a little while,
that done, pass him forward, first three or four steps fair and softly,
and immediatlye after, put spurs unto him, geuinge him a lively, swift, and
lustye Cariere, and pass before the Prince unto the place of stopp, whereas
after that he has stopped, even upon his buttockes, then at the first, second,
or third bonnde of his aduauncing, according to that kind of Manege that you
will use, or that the horse can do most redily, and can best endure: You shall
turn him on the right hand, and so go back again in the self same path,
the length of a maneging course, and there stop him, and turn him on the left
hand, and so obseruinge always one time and measure, manege him to and fro,
as often together, as you shall think meet, but let the last stop be at thend
where the Prince stands, who shall be then hard by you, on your left hand.
Or if you will, when you pass the Cariere, you may stop him somewhat short
of the Prince. And after that he has advanced, put him forward the length
of a maneging course, and there according to the manege that you would have
him to make, turn him on the right hand, and so come back again in the self
same path, unto the place where you did stop him before, at the end of his
Cariere, and there stop him, and turn him on the left hand, and so give him
to and fro.iiii. maneginge courses. And if the horse be very strong, you may
give him.vi. And by this means the first and last turn shall be on the right
hand, and the last stop also before the Prince.

You may also stop your horse when you first run him even right against the
Prince, or else.ii. or.iii. yardes beyond him, and so without puttinge him any
further forward, in his aduauncing to turn him on the right hand, and then
to follow on with that kind of manege that he can most readelye make, not
passinge the number of two or four Courses at the most, stopping suddenly upon
the last turn which must be on the right hand where he stopped first, so shall
the Prince be on your left hand. And after that you have stopped your horse, in
which so ever of these places it be, make him to double on each hand once or
twice together, and immediatlye after, or else before, intertaigne him with
the Capriole and Coruetti. But he should do the Capriole with a liuelier
courage, if he were put unto it, before he pass the Cariere and manege, being
both done, you may make him to double again as before. But maneging and
doubling after a Cariere, belongs to a horse of great force. Which in deed
should represent in all his doings the very order of fight observed in the
field, which is but little used now a days, because of the general weakness
of our horses: therefore I will teach you an other order of riding your
horse, to the show in such sort, as he shall seem to have more strength, then
he has in deed. Which is done only by observing clean contrary order to ye
first. For whereas you did first make him to pass a Cariere, now you shall
first manege him, not geuinge above.vi. or.viii. courses if you will have them
to be swift or of like time, unless the horse be the stronger, for then you
may give him ten or twelve courses, and using any of these foresaid numbers,
you shall be always driven to make the last stop where you first began. And
having aduau^ced, give him either six double turns, that is on the right
hand.ii. on the left hand two, and on the right hand two, or if you will, but
three tournes in all, whereof the first and last must be on the right hand. And
if he can do the Capriole well, you may cause him to do it immediately upon the
same: nevertheless, it were more ease for him to do it before he double. That
done, go to the end of the Cariere path, and give him a lively Cariere,
stopping him a little before you come at the prince, who shall stand then on
your right hand, and after that he has aduau^ced, let him double as before.
For it is always more ease for a horse to double in the end of a manege, or a
Cariere, then at any other time. You may also after he has run, stopped, and
advanced, let him breath a while in the self same place, and then give him
what kind of manege you shall think good, wherein good discretion must be used
to consider the quality, strength and condition of the horse, to thintente that
order, time, and measure, may be kept accordinglye.

Here ends the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE ART OF RIDINGE.
Of the corrections of vices in general. Cap. i.
MIndinge to treat here of the corrections of such vices, as horses have
either by nature or evil custom: I think it most mete to begin first with
those vices, that be incident to the chiefest parts and members of the horse,
that is say, the mouth, head and neck, upon the ordering or disordering
whereof, chieflye depends the making and marringe of the horse. But for so
much as the most part of the vices of the mouth, are corrected by the qualitye
of the bitte: I purpose therefore to reserve them until I come to talk of
the diversities of bittes.

Of the vices of the head and neck, and first how to correct your horse,
when he bears his head or neck awry. Cap. ii.
I Will show you diverse ways, wyshing you when need requires to prove them
all, and then to use that as your ordinarye remedy, which you shall know by
experience to do your horse most good. First use to correct him with the
contrary spur, as for example, if he bears awrye on the left hand, strike
him once or twyse with the right spur, turning inward your bridle hand somewhat
toward the right side. And if he bears awrye on the right hand, then use
the contrary order. But if he be very stiff necked on the right side, and
soft plying or bowinge on the left, then use to hold the right reane shorter
then the left, in such order as is taught you before in the Chapter of the
bridle and reanes in the first book: You may correct him also by giving him
suddenly a chocke with the bridle in his mouth, upon his nether gummes on the
contrary side, and you may give him such chocke two manner ways, that is to
say either by choppinge down your bridle hand on that side that he erreth,
geuinge him the chocke on the contrary side, and so to pull up your hand
again immediatlye into his due place: Or else by turning your hand only
inward, and straininge the bit hard to his nether gummes on the contrary
side without any chopping down of your hand at all, which kind of
correction if it be given with a temperate and staid hand, it is marvelous
good to correct the foresaid vice in any horse of what sort soever he be. It
is very good also, and specially when he hangs or boweth with his whole body
more of one side then of another, to hold the calfes of your leg always close
to his bellye, on the contrary side, nigh unto the fore guirt, to the intent you
may be redye from time to time, not only to prycke him a little, with the
spur of the same leg, but also when need requires, to touch him therewith
well and surely. Whereof when you perceive that he begins to have some
fear, and thereby to amend his fault, you shall do well suddenly to remove your
leg from that place, and in that instaunt to make much of him. So that
afterward if he does but feel the caulfe of your leg coming toward his
bellye, he will immediately amend his fault, and bear his head on what side you
will have him, you may also correct ye stiffnes of his neck by beating him with
your stirrup upon ye shoulder, or with your foot under the fore shoulder, upon
ye same side that his neck is so stiff, which will make him to look that
way, to see what is yt so greueth him which whilst he does, let slack the
contrary reane, and suddenly pull away your foot, and make much of him, and
using him so a while, you shall make him both to know his fault, and also to
amend the same. It is good also to correct him with the rod by striking him
therewith on ye contrary side, either in ye flank or else more forward nygh unto
ye fore guirt. But the correction of the contrary spur is of a more
efficacye, and much more commendable, notwithstanding for a need you may use
both, and in any wise forget not whensoever he hangs more of the one side then
of another, to hold always the contrary reane shorter then the other, but
otherwise let the reanes be always even. And to the intent you may bear them
always even from the beginning: Ride a young horse at the first with false
reanes, which you may for the correction of your horse make short or long of
any side at your pleasure, and yet hold your ordinarye reanes always even
together, and of one length, as I told you before in the Chapter of the bridle
and reanes, and note, that it is exceadinge good to use these corrections,
whilst you make your horse to tread the ringes, so often about on both hands
as you shall think most requisite for his strength. And if he be very hard
of neck on the right side, it shall not be amysse whilst he treads the
right ringe to lay your right hand upon the midst of the right reane, and
by straininge it harder then the other, to make him to hold his neck that way
whether he will or not. And if he be harder on the left side then to do the
like with your left hand, whilst he treads the left ring, making your right
hand for that time the bridle hand: Notwithstanding it were more sightly to
shorten the left reane without shifting your hand, in such order as I have
told you before in the first book. And to the intent you may force him the
more to come wholye on that side that you would have him, it were not amiss in
some place where none may see you, to counterpayse him by bending down your
body and head on the self same side that the horse is stiffnecked, staying
your legs so as ye fall not, beholdinge always his eye on that side, wherewith
also he will look you in the face, and thereby shall be forced to correct his
own fault, in tourning his neck that way that you would have him, which
kind of counterpaising you may use sometime in riding him in and out, the
length of a mile, yea, and also sometime when he treads the ringes, not
forgetting to turn your bridle hand also accordingly. But if you would have
him to be just of body, head, and neck, quicklye then use to trot or pace him
to and fro, the length of.v. yardes or there about, making him at every end to
stop and to turn, helpinge him with your tongue, spur, or caulfe of your
leg, on the contrary side and sometime with the closing stroke, bearing
always a steady hand, which would be moderatelye turned toward the same
side. And if you see that he does not bring over the contrary leg orderlye,
bearing his head and neck, even and just, then never leave correctinge of him
with the contrary spur all the way, until he come at the other end, and
there make him to turn again on the same hand, that he turned on before,
continuing still to travel him on the same side, until he has amended his
fault: which if he does, then you may turn him on both hands
interchaungeably, so as your first and last turn be on the right hand. And
travel him in such sort to and fro to the number of thirty courses, or so
long as you shall se him hable well to endure, to the intent you may leave him
with a good mouth, remembrynge always to make much of him when he does well,
and not to help him with the spur, but when need shall require, but only
with your tongue which must be alwais one.

How to correct your horse when he bears not right the lower part of his
head, called of the Italions Mustacchio, and may be called of us the Mosel,
which comprehends both nose and mouth. Cap. iii.
IF your horse then use to carye his mosell awrye: put three little short nails
on the inside of his portsmouth, on the contrary side, and ride him with a
musroll, having also.iii like nails, yea, and if he carye his whole head
awrye out of all measure, then put.iii. like nails also on his headstall on
the contrary cheke. For otherwise the first two corrections shall suffice. But
if such vice has been long rooted in him, then all three corrections shall be
little enough, And if the headstall and mosell, be made of double leather, you
may so fasten the nails betwixt the two leathers, as the pricks shall be next
unto ye horses cheke, and the heads of them covered with the upper lether. Or
if you will, you may put them in a thin plate of iron, made no brother then the
leather which plate being fastened to the inside of the leather, shall be the
greater correction unto him. But let him not wear those nails above ten
days, for though you take them away, yet the place will be so sore, where they
stood, as the horse will be afraid to bear his head any more awrye, thinkinge
that the nails be there still to prick him. And note that such nails will
correct some horse if they be put on the self same side that he wrieth his
head, so well as though they were put on the contrary side: It is good also to
put such nails on the back side of the link, susteyninge the kurble hook
in such order as I told you before, in the.xiiii. Chapter of the second
book. But to some horse which perhaps through the negligence of the rider
has accustomed to carry his nose, yea and also his neck clean awrye, so as
the muscle of his neck seems to be naturally bent and crooked: it is
requisite not only to use the remedy abouesaid: But also to tey the one end
of a thonge unto the middle eye of his bitte, or to the ringe of his musrol on
that side whereon he is so stiff, and the other end unto his surcingle, in
such sort as I showed you in the second book in the first correction of the
Credenza. And so to let him stand a long while together. And you may also if
you will, ride him for a certain days tied in that sort, but then the thong
would be strayned somewhat straiter. Or in stead of the thonge, you may put on
his headstraine, and tey the reanes of that unto the surcingle on his stiff
side, which shall be of more force. And until he carry his head just, let but
one use to ride him, and such one as has some skill, for all riders hands are
not like. And therefore often variyng of hands, may make his fault incurable.
Wherefore all the ways above taught, are invented to help him that lacks
knoweledge, or has not a staid hand. For assure your self that whosoever ever has
a good judgment, a temperate hand, and can observe such rules and precepts
of ridinge, as are before taught, he shall never need any of these
inventions, to correct either this vice or any other.

Certain causes why it is better for a horse to bear his head under then
right out, or to cast it up aloft, and then how to correct him, if he will
not bring in his head and reane as he ought to do. Cap. iiii.
Although some do think it good that the horse should have his head always
at liberty, and not to be restrained of his natural fierceness: yet I, in no
wise can allow it. For first you shall understand that his foreheade is the
strongest part of his head, and his nose or mosell is the weakest part, and
tenderest, the more he thrusts out his mosell, the more he distendeth his
back, and has the less force therein. And therefore can never make good
manege, observe time, keep order, nor continue in breath any while together,
whereas by bringinge in his mosell, and the thrustinge out his foreheade, he
aduaunceth himself, and gathers strength in his back, vnitinge his force
together: and thereby also shows lightness and nimblenesse in all his
doings. Secondlye, he shall see his way the better, and be in less danger
of falling when he runs. And though he should fall: yet he shall be more
hable to recover him self again, then when he holds his mosell right out.
Thirdly in runninge against his enemy, he shall be hable to do or suffer more
with his forehead, then with his mosell being the tenderest part of him.
Fourthlye he shall not be so apt to rere right up upon every light occasion,
as otherwise he might do. Finallye the horse that reaneth well, and brings
in his mosell: shall always be a great deal better stayed both of head and
neck, and have a better mouth, that he that bears his mosel right out.
Wherefore if your horse will not bring in his head at any time that you
slaye him with the bridle hand, then holdinge your hand still at that stay,
correct him sometime with your right spur, and sometime with your left, and
sometime with both spurs together. And in the self some instaunt, it shall be
good also sometime by thrusting him with your right hand upon the neck, to
force him to bring in his head, but if he will not yield for all that, than by
pullinge the bridle toward you, make him to go back about.iii. paces, and
then to return fair and softlye to his first place, continuynge so to do a
good meanye of times together. And every time that he thrusts out his nose,
correct him in manner above said, never leauinge him until you have made him to
amend his fault. And if he be very hard to be brought thereunto: it shall be
good to strike him sometime with your stirrup upon the shoulder, or with your
foot under the shoulder, holdinge it still there, to make him look that way.
But if ye se that the prycke of the spur does cause him to bring in his head:
then make much of him without molesting him any more. And by thus using him,
you shall make him to reane as you would have him, either going, or standing
still.

How to correct your horse when he ducketh down his head, and bears to
low. Cap. v.
IF he ducketh down his head whilst you stand still in any place, then stay
your bridle hand, and suddenly correct him with one spur alone, or with both
together, not sufferinge him to remove from that place. And also if he uses
that toy going, then correct him in like manner, without making him to alter his
pace any whitte at all, Not failinge at every time that he so does, to use
like correction. And if in ducking down his head, he bears it more of one
side then of another, correct him on the contrary side, and not on that side
whereon he hangs. And if he be very hot and furious, then immediatlye after
such correction lay your hand upon his neck or withers: in token of
cherishinge him, and that shall keep him from runninge away. And so by
sufferinge, he shall learn to know his fault, and to amend the same. But if
your horse use to ducke down his head when you stop him: then beside bearing
a temperate and staid hand, you must give him the chocke of the bridle with the
right reane. And in that instaunt correct him sometime with one spur, and
sometime with the other. That done, return from whence you came: And from
thence trotte him, or gallop him to the self same place where you stopped
before. And there stop him again, holdinge the right reane in the midst
with your right hand, being always ready therewith to give him the chocke upon
the right side of his mouth, and by mouinge the bitte fair and softly in his
mouth, sometime with the same reane: make him to know that you hold the reane
in that hand of purpose. Whereof the horse will be so much afraid, as he will
no more cast down his head. And until he leaves his fault, never fail in
this sort, to correct him. And likewise when he does well, forget not to
cherysh him. And though a false reane for this purpose would do well, and
specially for a Colte, yet it is not so good a correction as to use the
ordinarye reane. But if to give him the chocke with the right reane will not
suffice to correct his vice, then give him the chocke upon both sides of his
mouth with your left hand, holding both reanes together. And by vsinge
sometime the one correction, and sometime the other, you shall make him to leave
that vice well enough.

How to correct that horse which does ouerreache in his going, that is to
say, does smite his forefeete with his hinderfeete. Cap. vi.
THis fault is most commonly incident to a young horse, and therefore besides
making his shoes shorter behind then otherwise they ought to be, you must also
favor him whilst he treads the ringes, not encreasyng the number of his
tournes, nor quickeninge his pace, but according as his strength and breath
shall require, which by often riding him a little at once, will increase every
day more and more. And then if he ouerreache, whilst he treads the ringes,
correct him with the spur on the contrary side, to the turn which he
makes. But if he ouerreacheth in going right out, then correct him on that
side of his belly, whereon you see his neck to be most stiff. And sometime you
may also correct him with your rod upon the one or oother shoulder. It is good
also to make him to trot or to gallop in some stony ground. Or else for want of
such a ground, to strowe the ring paths full of stones, of all sorts, that
is to say, both with great, mean, and small. And that will make him to lift
his feet in such sort as he shall seldom ouerreach. Notwithstanding, if his
houes be not very sound and good: I would not wysh you to use this way, for
fear of riuing his houes, which of our horseleches is called a false quarter.
And of the Italions Halso quarto. But rather make him to leave this fault by
well feding him, and by riding him moderatelye without taking overmuch of him
at once, to thintente he may increase in strength and breath, which once had,
then the gryefe of his ouerreaching, will be a good correction unto him of it
self. Moreover if you caused the ringe path to be dug full of stairs or
degrees, it would keep him from ouerreaching, and sometime it were not amiss
to make him go a swashe ouerthwhart the forrowes in some ground newly plowed
with deep forrowes. Thus having showed you diverse ways of correcting this
fault, I wish you now to use your own discretion in choosing that which
shall be most meet for your horse, whose qualities you ought best to know.

How to correct that horse which when he is chastised for any fault, with
the spur, uses to shake his head or ears. Also how to know by the moving
of his ears, when he is maliciouslye disposed, and how to correct him for the
same. Cap. vii.
Every time that he so shakes his head, or ears, when he is corrected,
double the strokes on the self same side that you did correct him on before,
never leauinge him until you have made him to hold his head still, and
patiently to suffer such correction as you give him. And in no wise let any
fault escape unpunished, but always correct him immediatlye for the same,
sometime with the one spur, and sometime with both together, and sometime with
one after another. The order of all which strokes is taught before in the
first book in the.xi. and.xiii. Chapters. If your horse in his going lifts up
one ear, and holds down the other, and fares as though there were a fley
in that ear: then I advise you take heed to your self. For most commonly
when he does so, he minds to play you some shrewed toy, as to plunge alofte,
to run overthwart, or to fall down, or to do some like desperate act. Wherefore
suddenly interrupt him of his purpose, by geuinge him two or three strokes with
the contrary spur, on the contrary side to that ear, which he most moves.
And serve him so, as often as he shall use that toye: And if it be abroad in
the plain field it should not be amysse in the self same instaunt that you
spur him: to chastise him also with a terrible voice: and by geuinge him a
chocke with the bridle on the one side of his mouth. Yea and besides all this,
if he be very froward and cursed, let not to correct him also with a good
stick by beating him therewith well and surely upon the head betwixt the
ears. Which correction though he be never so proud and stubborn: yet being
given but once in time, and as it should be, it will so chastise him as he
shall be glad ever after to leave such fantastical toys, so long as you are on
his back. And so doyinge, forget not to make much of him, leaving him
always with a good mouth: But note that some time a fly entering in deed, into
your horses ear: or the pricking of his hedstal, may cause him to shake his
ear, or to hold it otherwise then he ought to do, meaning no shrewdnes at all.
And then it* shall suffice to correct him moderatelye with the contrary spur,
only to make him that he think no more upon the fly, which perhaps stingeth
him, or any other thing that grieueth him, but to forget it, and so to
attend his way.

How to correct your horse when he whyneth, intending to strike with his
heles, or to do some shrewdness, being in the company of other horses. Cap.
viii.
ALso if your horse when you are in the company of other horsemen chance to
whyne, or if you perceive that he means to do some shrewdnes, as to byte or
stryke, correct him immediately with the single stroke of the contrary spur,
doubling the same according as occasion shall require, as well in his going right
out, as in his standinge still. Albeit if he show any sign of shrewdness
toward his fellows* in marching forward, it were not amysse to correct him
with the clinching stroke, and sometime by giving him the chocke of the bridle,
on the one or both sides of his mouth. And if that will not suffyse, then you
may all to rate him with a terrible voice, and correct him with your rod on
the one or other flank. Yea, and perchance it shall be nedeful also to give him
therewith a stripe or two upon the head betwixt the ears.

Of restifnesse of the kinds and causes thereof. Cap. ix.
IF a horse be restyffe, it proceadeth for the most part through the fault of
the rider, and of one of these two causes. For either the horse is to vile, or
else to stout of courage. If he be vile, then being over wearied, he will for
faintnes give over, and go no further. But if he be proud and stout, then
felinge himself somewhat weary and out of breath, he will fall a leaping and
yarkynge, thinking to be eased of his travel that way or perhaps will do the
like in the beginning immediately after his rider be mounted: And if he
perceive that his rider be afraid of him, then he will take such a stomach
unto him as he will suddenly stay and stop there, inaugre his riders head. Of
which two kinds of restifnes, that which proceadeth of vileness of courage
is the woorst* But there be some horses not only stout and lustye of
courage, but also ramege, that is to say having two minds betwyxt going and
not going, when they list. Which kind of horses if they chance to become
restyffe: they be worse then any of the rest.

Remedies against restyfnes proceadyng of vile courage. Cap. x.
IF your horses restyfnes proceadeth of vile courage, then ride him into some
long way or lane closed in, on both sides with wall, dyke, quickset, or high
hedge. But at the one end thereof* cause certain men to stand behind your
horse with staves and stones in their hands. And if he will not go forward,
then let them suddenly stryke him with their staves upon his hams, and legs
behind, and likewise whorle their stones at the same places, al to ratinge him
in that same instaunt with a terrible voice. During which time you your self
must sit still, keeping silence. And let them not cease beatinge and cryinge
out unto him until they have made him to go orderly forward as he should do.
Which when he does, then immediatlye let them stay both hand and voice, and
make you much of him, by clawyng him on the neck. That done, make him to go
from the one end of the lane to the other, to and fro, about eight times. And
then light of his back, or else pace him fair and softly to the stable. And
for a certain days, see that you use none other order than this, until he be
clean rid of that vice. Wherein so often as he does offend, return you to
the foresaid correction. For this is a proved and an infallible way to bring
any horse from his restifnes. Which correction you might use also in the
plain field, in some new plowed ground, but for werying of the footmen, whose
travel should be greater there to follow the horse every way that he flies
out, then in a lane. And the more that your horse goes backward whilst he is
so corrected, let the footmen lay on the faster, and cry out the louder. And
besides that, sometime it shall not be amiss to turn his head toward that
way that he would so feign flee out. And so in your anger force him, by
beatinge him all the way upon the head with a cogell, and by cryinge out unto
him, to gallop so hard as he ca^ drive, ye length of a good Cariere. And then
turn him again toward the way from whence you began to gallop him, and make
him to go forward, correctinge him at that time, more with your voice, then
with your cogell. And if he goth quietlye, then leave cryinge out, and make
much of him. For I am sure he will be glad at length to yield, rather then to
be so beaten. But if he continue still in his frowardnes, and will not go
forward, then you may give him half a turn, and immediatlye by pullinge in
the bridle, make him to go backward about ten paces in so hasty wise as you
can. That done, turn his head again toward that way in the which he
would not go forward, and then sodenlie put him forward. Which doing for the
most part will make him to take his way. And to the intent he may be the sooner
and the more throughlye corrected of this vice, you may besides all this tey a
good long cord unto his tale, winding it about, like as you do when you trym
your horses tail with a ribbon or lace, the last knot whereof would be
fastened together with some of the hears, for fear of slippinge, which knot
if you can not make, then tey the upper end of the cord unto the hinder
buckle of the sadle, serving the crooper, and so it shall not slip away. The
nether end of which cord must hang down and traile after the horse upon
the ground. And when your horse will not go forward, or goth backewarde, let
one of the footmen pull the cord hard unto him, which when the horse
feleth, the fear to be pulled and hayled will make him to spring forward. And
so doing the footman must in the self same instaunt let go the cord, and (to
be sure) besides the pulling of the cord: Let the rest of the fotemen also al
to rate the horse with their voices, layinge on with their staves, and
whorlynge their stones, And by vsinge him thus a while, you shall correct him
of this vice well enough.

Remedies against restifnesse procedinge of stubbornes and stout courage. Cap.
xi.
BUT if you perceive that such restifnes proceadeth of to much courage and
stubbornness which the horse has gotten through the fearefulnes of his
rider: then ride him into some plane field newlye plowed. And there if he
(whilst you give him his lesson) chance to stop in deed, or mind to stop,
and so to become restiffe: then immediatlye all to rate him with a terrible
voice, beating him upon the head betwyxt the ears, and upon the forelegs with
a good stick. And the more resistaunce that he makes, in leapyng, or going
overthwart or seeking to fall down flat, or to lie down on the one side, or
to do any other shrewdnes, increase you his correction so much ye more,
as well in rating him, as in beating him. And to molest him the more, give him
the ringe tournes on the one side, or on the other, or on that side whereon he
himself does most lean. By means whereof you shall so tame him, as he saying
his resistaunce not to prevail, shall be content from thenceforth to go
quietlye and orderlye. And in so doing, forget not to make much of him, both
with your voice, and also by clawynge him with your hand upon the neck. That
done, trot him even there, to and fro, about ten times. Then galloppe him, and
last of all, pace him. Faylinge not to correct him in like sort so often as he
shall offend in the like vice. But note by the way that when the horse once
knows the correction of the stick or cogell: it shall suffice to correct him
with a terrible voice. And specially if he be ramege, and of two minds.
Against which fault, there is no correction of more efficacye. For the voice
corrects without disorder. And it makes the horse afraid without puttinge
him in despair, whereas the cogell many times makes him desperate and faint
hearted. unless he be corrected therewith in time. After which correction he
must also be cherished, and much made of, to the intent he may understand that
his vice was the cause of his correction. For the rod used in this sort has no
small virtue. And note that though the corrections taught as well in the last
Chapter as in this, may indifferentlye serve to correct this vice, proceadinge
of any of the two causes aforesaid, yet they be more kindly used when each
vice is corrected with his proper correction according to the order above
declared.

It is possible also that you may correct this vice, by holding a sharp nail
in your hand, to prycke him continuallye behind on the rumpe, never remouinge
the nail from thence, for any resistaunce or striuinge that he makes, until
he has left his stubbornness, and is content to go quietlye. Which done,
take away your hand, and claw him with the same immediatlye upon the neck.
That done, you may pace, trot, gallop, or manege him as you shall think good.

Other corrections to be used against restyuenesse when the ryder lacks
art, and knows not by order of ridynge, how to get the mastrye of his horse,
and to make him to know his fault. Cap. xii.
LEt a footeman stand behind you with a shrewed cat teyed at the one end of
a long pole with her belly upward, so as she may have her mouth and claws at
liberty. And when your horse does stay or go backward, let him thrust the
Catte betwixt his thyes so as she may scratch and bite him, sometime by the
thighs, sometime by the rompe, and often times by the stones. But let the
footman and all the standers by, threaten the horse with a terrible noise, and
you shall see, it will make him to go as you would have him. And in so doing,
be ready to make much of him.

Also the shirle cry of a hedgehog being strayt teyed by the foot under the
horses tail, is a remedy of like force, which was proved by Master Vincentio
Respino, a Napolitan, who corrected by this means an old restiue horse of the
kings in such sort as he had much a do afterward to keep him from the
contrary vice of runninge away.

The like correction also may be given with a whelpe, or some other loud criyng
and biting beast being teied to the crooper, so as he may hang down under the
horses tail, having a long cord fastened unto him Which cord passing between
the horses thyes, ye rider shall hold in his right hand to molest the horse
therewith, by pulling it, and letting it go as he shall se it nedeful. Or instead of such a beast, there may be teied a piece of iron of a foot in length,
or more, and three fingers broad, made full of pricks like thorns, with a
cord fastened thereunto as before. But note that all these ways rehearsed: are
not to be commonly used but only in time of need, and that with great
discretion. For otherwise you shall but amase your horse, and drive him into
despare, so as he shall never understand your meaning. And to say the truth,
they are of little importance in respect of the remedies taught before in the
last chapter. And therefore I would wish you chieflye to use them being
sufficient alone. I warraunt you to correct any manner of restiuenes. Neither
do I allow the ways that men were wont to use in old time. To correct a
restyue horse by teying a cord with a riding knot unto the horses stones which
cord passed under the horses bellye unto the riders right hand, holding the
same, and straining it when need did require. Which in deed is more hurtful
then profitable: and therefore not mete to be used but in some extremetie, for
the correction of a stubborn horse, accustomed to fall down in the water. Of
which vice we shall treat hereafter at large.

Of the contrary vice unto restyuenesse, which is to run away, of the causes
thereof, and how to correct the same. Cap. xiii.
THe vice of running away, does not only procead of the hardness and euilnes
of the horses mouth, but also many times through the fault of the rider, not
having knoweledge, nor stomach, as I said before, to tame a horse that is of
to lively a courage, and therewith perhaps hard of mouth, whereby the horse
gets an evil custom, either not to stop at what time as the ryder would
have him, or else if he stop, to stop without order. For redress of which
vice you may use these remedies here folowinge.

If you chance then upon an old horse accustomed to run away when he should
stop, you must begin to ride him with more respect then you would do a
colt. And first ride him into some long way or lane enclosed of both sides.
And there teach him to stop, first upon a soft pace, then upon a trot, and
afterward upon a galloppe. And when soever he stops, make him to advance
withal, by helpinge him in such sort as is before declared in the first
book. But because of his evil custom, see that ye run him not of a long
season. And to be sure that he shall not fall, or run away at the stop of him
self, when you gallop him appoint a footeman to stand before him at the place
of stoppinge, with a stick or a cogell in his hand, wherewith, after your
horse has stopped, and advanced, let the footeman by stryking him softly upon
the forelegges, but seldom upon the snowte, make him to go.iii. or.iiii. steps
backward. Whereunto if he be used a while, you shall see that afterward so
soon as he has stopped, he seeing the footman standing there, and felinge the
drawinge back of your bridle hand, he will go back of his own accord,
without any beatinge at all. And when he is once perfect as well in his
stoppinge, as in his going back, then gentlye give him a Cariere, forcinge
him in his runninge, neither with voice, spur, nor stick. And only when ye
come nigh unto the place of stopping, help him with your voice to stop. And
for ye more assurance, let the footeman in the self same instaunte also help
him with his voice, and threaten him with his cogell. Yea, and if he perceive
that the horse will needs pass forward, let him give him a good blow with
his cogell upon the snoute, which blow I believe shall not need, if you
observe well the order before taught. For the help of your voice, the pulling
in of the bridle, and the sight of the footman shall suffice to make him to
stop as he should do. And in so doing, see that you make much of him, suffering
him to pause a while. That done, make him to go backward, even as you did
before, when you did pace, trot, or gallop him. And after that, pace him to and
fro in the cariere path, about.vi. times, staying always at the accustomed
stopping place, and so depart, and see that you run him no more of a good while
after, but only use the order above declared, upon a soft pace, trot, or
gallop, not forgetting always to have a footeman at the place of stop, which
footeman besides his cogell, may also have stones in his hand, to whorle at
the horses snout, when need requires, which I do seldom or rather never
allow, unless he has the stedier hand, or if you will, you may cause two
footmen to stand before him, each of them having a good long staff in his
hand: At the upper end whereof, would be teyed a little boundell of straw,
which being kyndled, let the footmen when the horse will not stop, thrust
them into his nose, the fear of the flame whereof flashyng before his eyes, and
the fire parching his skin, together with the smoke entringe into his nose,
will make him to stop. But though this correction for a need, is very good:
yet I would wish you to use the order before declared, which is sufficient I
warraunt you, to make him stop with the bridle only, without the help of any
such extreme remedy.

It has been seen many times that some Ryder has corrected his horse of
this fault, by runnyng him in the plain field out of breath, continually
beatynge him and spurrynge him in his anger, so as the horse has been glad to
stop of him self, which correction has taken so good effect, as the ryder
geuinge him a just Cariere the next day following, has made him to stop with
the least pullinge in of the bridle that might be. But this correction is very
perilous, and inoughe to kill a horse, and therefore is not mete to be used, but
only when he being to stubborn does ouermuche force you, and will needs run
away with you whether you will or not.

Besides the first order above rehearsed, for his better correction, you may
also bitte him according to the quality of his mouth, whereof we shall treat
herafter. And unto that bit, or to any other, you may fasten a cord, which
must pass between his gummes, and his nether lyp, in such sort as I showed you
before, in ye second book in the third correction of the Credence. Of which
cord when his mouth is once throughlye corrected, he shall have no need* nor
yet of any other help, but of the bridle only. But in any wise let him
continue in his ringe tournes, which being ended, use him to stop, and to
advance upon the knoll of some hill downewarde.

And note this by the way as a general rule, that the correction of the footman
with stick or cogell is never to be used but when some great necessity
requires it For it may make the horse to fearful, onles the foteman have the
more skill, and can observe in his correction both time and measure.

How to correct that horse that will rere right up when he is corrected for
any fault with a stycke upon the head. Cap. xiiii.
AS often as he uses this vice, fail not you in ye self same instant that he
ryseth and hangs aloft, to beat him well and surely with a good long stick
upon the forelegges somewhat beneth the knees, yea and if he be very much
accustomed to this vice it shall not be amiss somewhat before he rises to give
him one blow upon the legs at the lest. And for the more suretye, and to
make him the more afraid, it shall be nedeful to bear the rod with the point
downwarde right before his knees, always in his sight. And being corrected a
while after this sort, you shall see that he shall leave that fault well enough.

How to correct that horse that will fall down to the ground when he is a
little werye or provoked to do any thing which he would not willingly do.
Cap. xv.
CAuse some expert footeman having a good cogell in his hand, to be somewhat
nigh you, at such time as you ride your horse, to the intent that when he
perceyueth the horse makes any offer to lie down, he may be ready with his
cogell or staff, to threaten him, and to fray him with a terrible voice,
gesture, cou^, tenaunce, and by cruelly looking him always in the face, more
or less according as time and occasion shall require. Which will be such a
terror unto the horse, as whilst he looks all amassed on the footeman, he
will have no mind to lie down, but stand still, attending to his rider: who
in the mean while, must sit still in his saddel, without making any noise,
or mouinge at all. Afterward make him to trot the ringe turns, whereas you may
cause also more men to stand with staves in their hands, and to do as the
footman did before. And if he will needs fall down there, then let them hold
him up whether he will or not, cruelly correctinge him, both with their voices,
and also with their staves, by beatinge him upon the head betwixt the ears,
or upon any part of his body next to hand. And if this do not correct his
vice, truly the fault is in the footmen, lackinge perhaps such terrible
voices, cruel looks and gestures, or such order and time of correcting, as
should serve the purpose. And therefore it were good for such men to have in
their hands fiery staves made in such sort as is before declared in the last
chapter save one, the fear and smart whereof will keep him from lyinge down
whether he will or not, which correction may be used for a restiue horse, by
fieringe him behind betwyxt the thyghes.

This vice also may be corrected by the help of a footeman, having in his
hand a squirt full of water, which he must squirt in the horses eyes, when he
offreth to lie down, which is a good remedy also against the Credence. But
these remedies last mentioned, are to be used by riders of small skill. For an
expert Ryder will correct any vice by true art without the help of any such
toys.

How to correct that horse which passing through any water will lie down in
the same, and what is the cause of such vice. Cap. xvi.
This vice undoubtedly proceadeth of a natural disposition, incident to that
horse which is foled under the sign of Leo. Which is a hot and fierye
sign. Albeit all horses foled under this sign have not this fault in deed:
Neither can it be known by the Ostriche feather in the horses neck, nor yet
certainelye discerned at the changing of his teeth, what so ever other men
say, but only by his plain lyinge down in the water. For the which fault
there is no better remedy, then this here following.

Cause a servant to ride him into some river or water, not over deep, and
appoint three other footmen with cogels in their hands, to follow him hard
at the heels into the water, to thintente that when the horse begins to lie
down, they may be ready to leap upon him and with the help of the Rider to
force him to ducke his head down under the water, so as the water may enter
into his ears. Not suffrynge him to lift up his head again of a god while
together, but make him by main force to keep it still under, continuallye
beating him all the while with their cogels, and rating him with loud and
terrible voices. That done, let him only lift up his head to take breath and
air. During which time cease not also to beat him still upon the head,
betwixt the ears, which done, ducke his head with like violence once again,
into the water. And then let him rise up upon his feet. And whilst he is
passing through the water, let the men follow after, beatinge him, and ratinge
him all the way until he be clean out of the water, and then leave. For
otherwise it were dysorder. Then the next day following, let him be ridden
again in the same water. And so sone as his ryder sees that the horse makes
any offer to lie down, yea and sometime before he perceyueth it, let him
immediatlye prevent him of his purpose, by touching him with his spurs, and
by beatynge him upon the head betwixt the ears, and upon the flank with his
stycke, thretninge him with a terrible voice. And you shall see, it will make
him to forget his lying down, and to pass through quietly. Yea, and it is
possible that this correction alone without the help of the other before
declared, will suffice to bring him from this vice. And to both these
corrections, you may also if you will add the help of ye cord teyed with a
ridinge knot, about the horses coddes, which cord the ryder may strain and
let go, according as he shall see occasion as well to prevent the horse of his
lying down, as also when his head is kept under the water, the grief whereof
together with the other corrections will the sooner cause him to leave this
vice.

How to correct that horse which is skyttish or fearful, and will start at
every thing, and whereof such vice proceadeth. Cap. xvii.
A Horse may be fearful, for that he is young, and has not been rydden
perhaps where sundry syghtes are. And therefore if you chance to ride him
through some town or fair, he is afraid of every thing that he sees.
Likewise if he has been skared before time with any thing that has offended
him. either with noise, sight, or otherwise, so often as he shall hear or see
the same, he will be afraid. And finally, fearfulnes may proceade for lack of
perfect sight, which is worse then all the rest. According to all which
causes, remedies do follow here orderlye. But first as touching the young horse,
which is afraid of such things as he never saw before. See that in no wise
ye do beat him for the same, least he take the thing that he beholds and
shonneth, to be the cause of his smarte, and so become more fearful then he
was before: But rather stay there a while, and by gentle means make him by
little and little, to go toward the thing whereof he is afraid, which doing,
make much of him. And you shall see that by standinge sometime still to look
upon it, and sometime by going toward it, he shall be so well acquainted
therwyth, as he will not fear it. And when he comes at it, let him stay
there a pretty while together, to the intent he may be the more assured thereof.
But if your horse be afraid of any thing which has offended him before
time, so as he will by no means pass by it: Then see that you your self molest
him no manner of ways, but appoint some footeman standinge byhinde you, to
provoke him forward, with the sound of his lyppes, and by threatninge him
with his voice, and if need be, by beatyng him with a staff upon the rompe,
and upon the hinder legs. And when he begins to go forward, make you
much of him all the way. For so a young horse must be handled. But if your
horse be throughlye broken in all points mete for him to learn, and knows
what all manner of corrections and helps mean: Then if he chance to be afraid
of any thing, and so, suddenly stops, goinge by the way, let not
immediatlye to put him forward, by helpinge him with your voice, legs,
spurs, or rod, or all together, without any stayinge to acquaint him with the
thing whereof he is afraid. And that shall make him to go always forward as he
ought to do.

But if your horse be afraid of any thing for lack of perfect sight, then
beat him not, but rather by making much of him, encourage him by little and
little to go forward, helping him sometime with your voice. And if you see
that he stands doubtful, betwyxt going and not going, then suddenly to put
all doubts and fearful imaginations out of his mind, help him not only
with your voice, but also with your spurs: And it will make him to pass
forth without any stay.

Note also that to embolden a young horse, so as he may abide any thing, it
is very good to ride him often in the night season, and in the day time in some
town amongst artificers, and especially amongst smithes, peuterers, armorers,
brasiers, tinkers, and such like. And likewise amongst furriers where diverse
colored skyns hang in sight, and also abroad in the fyeld where dead
carcasses lie new flayne, to the intent that no manner of sight or noise may
seem strange unto him. And when so ever he will not come nygh any such thing,
then use ye order before declared.

It is good for a certain days to let him wear such a whurleguig as
children run withal against the wind, made like wyndmyll sails, fastened to
his headstall upon his foretop, or on the one side of his head, under his ear.
For besides that, the swyft turnynge about thereof before his eyes, does help
much to assure him. The whitenes also of the same, whylst it tourneth about,
does take away those impressions of shadows from his sight, which before were
wont to fray him. But though this be a great help to embolden the most part
of horses: yet there be some horses of such a nature, as after they have worn
it, they will be the worse for it, and become more fearful then they were
before, which so soon as you perceive, use it no more, but rather use the
means and order before declared.

Note also that when you use the foresaid whurleguygge, you may make it of what
color you will, as either black, red, yealow or blewe, according as you shall
think it most needful, for the assuryng of your horse.

How to embolden your horse, and to make him hardy against other horses.
Cap. xviii.
USe to encounter upon a soft pace or trot, with another horseman, face to
face, in one self path so as your horses dosse not one another, least your
horse receyuyng some harm become more fearful then before, yea, rather when
you are almost one upon another, if the other horse be not fearful, nor will
give place of him self, then cause his Ryder to make him to recoyle back, by
pulling in his head with the bridle. And that shall be a good encouraging to
your horse, and make him the bolder always to go toward any other horse.
Or if you will, you may encounter one with the other, riding in two sundry
paths, the one lyinge cheke by cheke within a foot of the other, being both
of one length, each of them conteynyng about ten paces, to the intent that in
manegynge your horses to and fro upon a trot, you coming one toward
another, from two contrary ends may both mete right in the midst of your
course. And so pass one hard by another. Which you shall be sure to do, if both
of your horses keep like time and measure as well in their trottyng as in their
turnynge. And look on what hand so ever the one tourneth, the other must do
the same, and in the self same instant. And like order must be observed
afterward, when you manege them also upon a gallop. Thus by passing and
repassyng, and often metynge without iustlynge: your horses shall be so well
acquaynted as the one will not be afraid of the other. Having the company of
an other horseman, you may also embolden your horse whylst you trot the rings
in this order following. First enter both together into the right ring, and
then turnyng tail to tail, follow you the right hand, and let him follow
the left, in the self same ring, enlargyng the ryng path so, as in your
metyng, whylst you go about, you may touch one another. And when you have gone
twyse about the right ryng, enter both together into the left ring, and there
turnynge tails observe like order as before. And so shyft from ring to ring,
treadinge the same first with a good round trot, and then if you will, with a
gallop. And thus by often meting, both horses shall be well acquainted, and the
one assured of the other, whereby with time, your horse shall wax so hardye, as
he shall be afraid of no horse. It is very good also to stand still with your
horse hard by the ringe, lookinge on whilst an other horse trotteth and
galloppeth the ringes, or to stand right at the stopping place, when another
horse passes a Cariere, or on the one side, so as the other horse in his
running, may pass hard by your horse, and to the intent that your horse for
fear, turn not away, when the other horse comes any thing nigh him, it
shall be good to have the company of some other horseman, being mounted upon
such a horse as is bold, and will not be afraid, standing a little of from
you, whose ensample should be a good encouraging unto your horse. And to go
sometime in the company of such a horse, through some City or town, would
be also a good boldninge unto him.

How to make your horse to abide both staff, sword, great noise, gunshot,
or any other thing Cap. xix.
USe first to acquaint him thoroughly with the rod, so as he may not be afraid
thereof, by often coying him therwyth upon the neck, and by holdinge the point
right forth, sometime betwixt his ears, and sometime on the one or other side
of his head, so as it may be always in his sight. And when he is thoroughly
assured of the rod: then appoint some footman having a staff in his hand, to
stand in your way, whereas you should pass. And as you are coming
toward him, let the footman by little and little, make signs as though he
would lay your horse on the head with his staff. And then encourage your
horse to go forward toward the footman, who in the same instaunt must
retire backewarde, as though he would flee away. And by using him so a while,
you shall see that he will not be afraid of the staff at all. And after that
he can abide the staff, make him by ye like means to abide the sword. But let
the footman beware that strike him neither with staff nor sword, least you
utterly discourage him for ever. After this you may cause three or four, or a
great number of footmen to stand in his way, making a great howtinge and
showting before him, threatninge him with loud voices, against whom encourage
him to go forward, first with a soft pace, secondly with a trot, and thirdlye
with a gallop. At which time let the footmen retire back, faininge to run
away. And if such footmen had staves and swords in their hands, to
threaten him withal, it should make him so much the bolder.

To make him abide gunshot, or any other like terrible noise, let him go hard
by another horse, or rather betwyxt two other horses that have been accustomed
to the like noise before time, and are afraid of nothing. And as you are
rydinge together, cause three or four dagges or archabushes to be discharged.
First a pretty way of, and then nigher hand, according as your horse begins
to abide them. During which time cease not continually to make much of him so
well with your hand, by clawyng him on the neck, as also with your voice,
and so by little and little, you shall bring him at length to abide any thing.

Of the vices of the mouth, and causes thereof in general. Cap. xx.
Being now come to show you how to correct a horse that has a naughty mouth
as well by vsinge diverse kinds of bittes, mete for that purpose, as otherwise:
I think it first mete to tell you the causes whereof such euilnes of mouth
proceadeth, and how many vices thereon depends: And finallye how to correct
the same. And first you shall understand that a horse may have an evil mouth,
either because his chinne or bearde, where the kurble should lie, is to hard,
or the places where the bit should rest on both sides of his mouth, called of
Grison Le bar be to hard, or his tongue is to hard. Or contrariwise, for yt
al these foresaid places perhaps are to tender, so as he dare not stay his
mouth as he should do, upon ye bit. Again his mouth may be to little, or his
jaws may be to great, and to thick. Of which causes do proceade diverse vices,
as to draw up the bit, with his tongue, even as though he would swalow it up,
not suffering it to rest upon his gu^mes or bars where it should rest. Which
vice Gryson calls beuer la briglia, that is to drink the bridle, likewise to
bear his tongue always out of his mouth. Also to bear to hard upon the bit,
which in Italion is as much to say, as Titar di bocca. Also to wrye with his
mouth, holdinge the nether part thereof one way, and the upper part another way,
which in Italion is to say Far forfici: That is to make sheares. There is also
another vice like unto this, but not so foul: And that is, to wrie a little
with his jaws aloft, but not so much beneth, which Griso^ calls Gangheggiare
a word derived of this word Gangha, signifying the iaw. Also to defend ye bit
with his nether lip, so as it can not rest upon his bars called in ye Italion
Far Chiomazzuoli. Of some of which vices, there be also other particular causes,
which shall be declared herafter, when we come to ye correctio^s of ye same. But
Griso^ says, that whilst some have sought to correct these vices aforesaid, by
often chaunginge of rough and sharp bittes, they have clean marred their
horses mouths. And therefore he wishes you in any wise to abstain from all
such kind of bits. And to seek rather to bring your horse to have a good
mouth, and specially whilst he is young, by ridynge him with a gentle bit, and
by bearinge a temperate hand, vsinge such helps, corrections, and
cherishi^nges, as are taught before, whilst you teach him to tread the ringes,
with trot, or gallop, to stop, to advance, to turn, to manege, or to pass a
Cariere, which Cariere, the more seldom it be used, and with the less fury,
the better mouth shall your horse have. For assure your self, it is art and
good order of riding, which makes the good mouth, and not the bit.
Notwithstanding the qualitye of the byt is not utterly to be rejected, yea,
rather when the horse begins to wax perfect in his doings, and is well
broken, and somewhat staid of head, it shall be very necessary to ride him with
such a bit, as shall be most mete to serve his mouth, be it hard or soft, to
the intent he may bear the lighter, and with the more stay, and also be the more
subject to his rider. For the which cause Grison has set forth in figures. L.
sundry bittes together with the names and uses of the same, as hereafter shall be
declared. But for so much, as certain vices of the mouth, may be corrected as
well by other means, as by the help of diverse bits. I will first declare
those kinds of corrections, and then afterward, treat of the correcting with
bittes, and therewith show you all the kinds, names, parts, and properties of
the same.

How to correct that horse which will either draw up the bytte with his tongue,
or defend the same with his neither lyppe. Cap. xxi.
TAke a piece of whip cord, about a spanne long, and tey the one end thereof
unto the eye of the bit, under the kurble, that done, turn down the horses
nether lyp, to the intent you may easily bring the cord betwixt his said lip,
and his nether gummes, unto the other eye of the bit, and there to be tied and
fastened, and the more the cord be streyned, the harder and stronger shall the
bit be. And if the knots at both ends be handsomlye knyt, no man shall
perceive the misterye thereof. Or if you will, in stead of the cord. you may
there put a little cheane. And by this means not only the vices above
rehearsed, are throughlye corrected, but also mani times diverse other vices, as
the putting out of his tongue, the bearing hard upon the bit. And also the
hardness of his bars, so as he shall be hable therewyth to make no resistaunce.
And such cord or cheane will do as much, being put to a plain Cannon or
scache, as if it were put to a harder bytte.

How to correct that horse, which will mow or wrye with his mouth, and the
causes whereof such vices does proceade. Cap. xxii.
THough this vice does chieflye proceade of the noughtines of the horses
mouth, yet many times the ridinge him with to high a port bit, which perhaps
the horse can not suffer, may be cause thereof, or the distempred hand of his
ryder, not knowing how to handle him and to make him to suffer the bridle of
what mouth so ever he be, hard or soft. But to remedy the same vice
proceadynge of the first cause, use to ride him with a musroll strait buckled
to his head. And so often as he moweth with his mouth, correct him first with one
spur, and then with another, but most with the spur on the contrary side.
And sometime also give him the chocke with the bridle, upon the one or other,
or else upon both sides at once of his mouth, bearing always a steddye and a
temperate hand. Yea, and for his more correction, you may also sometime stryke
him with your stirrup, or foot, under, or upon the shoulder on the contrary
side. Not failing to correct him sometime one way, and sometime another, so
often as he shall offend. And at length you shall bring him from that fault well
inoughe. But if the port of his bit be the only cause of this vice, then you
shall not need to use these corrections, but only to ride him with a close
bitte, or not so open, being hard or soft, accoryng as the horses mouth
shall require, whereof we shall now immediatlye treat.

Of the kinds of bittes together with their names and parts belonging to the
same. Cap. xxiii.
OF byttes some be close, and some be open. The open bittes are otherwise
called of our bitmakers port byttes. Of which ports some are whole and some
are broken. Again of the broken ports, some are fashyoned like geese necks,
and they be round. And some like Cattes fete: and they be square. Of which
square ports so many as are made with Olives, pears, or campanelles, Grison
calls them Cattes fete. But our bitmakers do call all kind of square
ports, vpset mouths without any difference, also some of the broken ports
and vpset mouths, are locked together with one plyght within another, some
with a riuet nail, and some with a piece. And according as every byt, as well
of the close, as open, is fashioned, so is it named. And therefore some are
caled Canon bittes, some scaches, some melon bittes, some pear bittes, some
campanels or bell bittes, some bastonets, and some Cattes feet. Of which names,
the first four are all redye well known unto our bitmakers, through the help
of old Alexander the Italion rider who taught them first, both the shapes and
also the names of the same. And sins that time they have also learned to make
all the rest of the bittes, though they have not so many proper names for the^,
as Grison gives them, wherefore such names as they have not, I trust it shall
not grieve them to learn now at Grisons hand. And specially I englishing the^
so aptly as I can, vsyng therein I am sure for the most part their own terms.
For I have not been negligent in learning at their hands, how to call every
part of the byt by his proper name, as the chekes and eyes thereof, the Ieiues,
the rols, ringes, and buttons, the whole port, broken port, or vpset mouth,
with one plight within another, or with piece, the trench, the flappe, the top
roll, and the water cheyne, the nether cheines and the kurble, and diverse other
terms belongyng to their art, not here nedeful to be rehearsed. Note also that
of the broken ports and vpset mouths, some be complete, and some be not. The
co^plete be those, which have both water cheines, and also trenches above. For
ye others have but the one or the other, only. And for that cause I think Grison
calls the^ but half bits, as the half Canon, the half scach, the half Cats
foot. etc. But besides all this, he teaches you of what fashyon the Cheeks
ought to be made, to serve diverse mouths, either short or long, right out, or
compassed. Also of what heyght the upper eyes of the chekes ought to stand,
and how high the broken ports and vpset mouths ought to be, and which
kind of closinge is best, either with one plight within another, or with a
riuet nail, or with piece, and also how the whole port ought to be made: And
finally how the kurble ought to be made. But for so much as the chekes and eyes
thereof, and also the kurble are members common to both kinds of bittes, so
well to the close as open, I will therefore first treat of them, and then of the
rest in their places, because the shapes of the close byttes shall be first
presented unto you. And next to them, the broken ports vpset mouths, and
Cattes feet. And last of all, the whole ports, as well without trenches, as
with trenches above.

Of the chekes and eyes of byttes, and also of the kurble, and how they ought
to be made. Cap. xxiiii.
Until your horse then be thoroughly stayed of head, and specially if he bear
to low, and bring his head in to much, let the cheeks of your bridle be
right out: and not compassed. For the ryghter they be, with the nether ends
coming to the manward, the less the bridle shall force the horses head, yea
rather it shall make him to carye his head the hier, and his mosell the more
outward. But the more compassed the chekes be, with the nether end shootyng
out forward, the more they bring in his head. And therefore when the horse is
once throughlye stayde, it shall be most mete to use the compassed chekes,
which besides making the horse to reane kindly, do also give the better grace
unto the bitte in his mouth, and do make it the more comlye and sightlye.
Again, such chekes must be long or short, according to the greatness of
stature and strength of the horse. And also partlye according as he bears his
head. For if he be great of stature and weak of back, or carries his head
low and not steady, then the chekes would be somewhat longer then they be
commonly used, and that shall make him to bear high. Albeit such length must
very seldom be above a span. For onles necessitye so requires, it is better
that the chekes be short, then long, so that comelynes touching the stature of
the horse be observed. And note here by the way, that according to Grison, the
cheke called of him La guardia, is only that part, which extends from the
nethermost eye, susteyning the Ieyue downewardes. For all the rest upward, he
calls Stanghetta. For the which our bytmakers have no propre name: And
therefore from henceforth I will call it the head of the cheke, which head
contains the great eye, whereunto the Ieyue is fastened, and a little hole
above that, for the water cheane, and also the upper eye, whereunto the
portesmouth is put, which head together with the upper eye, if it mount high,
it makes the horse to bear high, both with neck and head. But if the head
be short, so that the eye stands low, then it causes a contrary effect. But
onles some necessitye did otherwise force, I would wyshe it always to he in a
mean, neither to high nor to low, but aunswerable to the rest of the bitte.

Of the kurble.
NOw as touching the kurble, it would be good and strong, and made with round
linkes, fashioned in this sort like an. S. Neither do I allow for the most part
any other fashion to be used than this, how hard or tender, soever the horse
be of chinne or beard. For the more that a hard chinne is broken with roughe
kurbles, as those be which are made with square linkes and sharp poynted,
like diamantes: the harder his chyn wylbe, through the cornye flesh which
will grow thereon, when it is whole. And so make the horse to care less for
the bridle then he did before. And again on the other side, though the horse
be never so tender of chyn, yea, and also very tender of his bars or gummes,
which kind of horse is very hard to find, yet I would have neither his bit
nor his kurble to be covered with cloth, as some men use to do. For though he
be so tender in deed, yet it is not that which will give him boldness to stay
his mouth upon the bitt as he should do, yea rather I would wyshe you for a
certain time to ride him without any kurble at all. And when ye see that he
begins to stay somewhat upon the bridle, then make him a kurble of double
fillet lace, otherwise called ynkle, of an inche broad, teying it no strayter,
but so as it may keep the bytte always at one stay in his mouth, which fyllet,
when he is once perfect, you may take away, and put in stead thereof, the
kurble before declared. Or if you will, you may make him a kurble flat and
smoothe, like a flaggon cheane, and that perhaps shall offend him less.

Of close byttes, for what mouths they are most mete, and also what vices they
do correct, which vices you shall easlye find by the tytles following, and the
fashions of the byttes, by the numbers set in the margent, answering the
numbers of the fygures orderlye, set altogether in the latter end of this
book. Cap. xxv.
FIrst then you shall understand that close bittes are only mete for horses
of a good nature, at the least of not to froward a nature, whose mouths
such byttes may easlye frame: yea, and some of them are more meet to be used
in the first breaking of a horse, then any other bytte, as I told you before
in the first book, willing you to ride your horse first with a Cannon bytte
with right cheeks, of what mouth soever he be, yea, and until he be throughlye
stayed of head, and perfect in all his doings I would never have you to change
it.

For a gentle mouth.
But afterward if your horse have a gentle mouth, then you may ride him with a
Cannon, having compassed chekes.

For a mouth somethyng hard.
If his mouth be somewhat hard, then you may ride him with a scache.

For a tender mouth, and not great.
If his mouth be not great, but tender and good,

Against defendyng with the lip.
Take a melon bit, let the melons be somewhat rounder

For the same fault, and for holdyng out his tongue.
You may also take for the same vice a scach with a or buttons be not over
broad, you may put three plaiynge rings on a side. And such kind of bit is
very good for a horse that will put out his tongue.

Other bittes for the former fault of the lyp, but not to be used very often.


And note that though round melon bittes, campanelles, scaches and bastonets
with buttons, be close byttes, yet they be somewhat like unto the open bits, in
that they partly give liberty unto the tongue. But beware that you make none of
these bittes or any other with a gagge or spoone in the midst, as was used in
old time, and yet is at these days, in some places of the world, for that is
very naught. But if you would give your horse some thing to play on, then in
stead of such gagge or spoone, you may place in every one of these bits, a
playinge ryng or two, on each side next unto the middle ioynte. And though
there were none at all, it made no great matter.

Of open byttes in general. Cap. xxvi.
Having sufficientlye spoken of close byttes, how they ought to be made, and
whereto they serve: I purpose now to speak of the open bits, otherwise called
port byttes, which be of more value, because they set the tongue at more
liberty, which can make no resistau^ce, the bit being out of his reach. Yea,
these byts be so proper to correct any vice of the mouth, as by the help of
them joined with art, and good order of rydinge, any horse may be made to
have a good mouth. And first beginning with the broken ports, and vpset
mouths I will show you how such ports and vpset mouths ought to be made,
and how they may be locked, joined or fastened together, and which kind of
lockynge is best. And then what vices they do correct, observing for the
finding of the vices, and fashions of the bits, the order before declared and
kept.

Of broken ports and vpset mouths, how they ought to be made, and what vices
they do correct. Cap. xxvii.
YOu shall understand then, that so well broken ports as vpset mouths ought to
be made all of one piece together with the Ieyues, and so to rise up with a
round or square, meting only in the top, whereas they must be joined together
with a riuet nail, or with one plight with in another: or else with a piece,
according as shall be most meet to serve the horses mouth. For a ryuet or piece
does make the bit harder, then when it is locked with one plight within
another. And therefore such ports as are joined with one plyght within another
are metest for most mouths. And do best stay both head and neck. And note
that the square ports, otherwise called vpsetmouthes, must not be fully so
wide in the top, as they are beneath, neither must they or the round ports be
to high or to low, for as over high forces to sore, so ouerlowe gives to
little liberty. And therefore I would wyshe them to be in a mean, according
as ye horses mouth shall require, but so as it may give liberty unto his
tongue, and not hurt the roof of his mouth, for that were a foul fault, and
yet little considered in times past.

For a horse that has tender bars, and does swalow up his tongue.


For a horse that has not tender bares, and yet swaloweth up his tongue.


For a horse that has somewhat hard bars, and swalloweth up his tongue.
TAke a scache with an vpset mouth complete, and

For the same vice, and for defending with the lyp.
YOu may for the same vice make both this scach, and also the close scach with
a round welt, about ye

For a horse that will draw up the bit with his tongue.
TAke a half scache with an vpset mouth, having a

For a horse that has a little mouth and hard bars.
TAke a Cats foot or vpset mouth complete, made

For a horse that has a dry mouth and hard, and reaneth low, and perhaps
defends with the lyps.


Of whole ports, how they ought to be made, and what vices they do correct.
Cap. xxviii.
Though whole ports ought to be round, and made all of one piece, and not
broken, or joined together in the top, as the others are, yet they must be
broken beneath, and joined on both sides unto the Ieyues, whereon the pears or
belles are put. For those that run whole out with their arms, with out any
breakyng at all, be to roughe, and therefore never good nor mete to be used.
And on the top of such port, must hang the flap or player. Note also that of
whole ports, some are made without trenches, and some have trenches above. But
I will show you first the use of them without trenches.

For a horse that has very hard bars.
TAke a whole port with olyues, or with smoothe

For a horse that has a great mouth and hard bars.


For a horse that is hard of mouth, and defends very much with his nether
lyppe.
TAke a whole port with pears, or else with campanels, the shapes whereof are
expressed in the.iii. and.iiii. figures. And you may chose whether you will
have such campanels embossed out, or else flat at the ends. Moreover as well
the pears, as Campanels, may have on each out side a playing roll, and thereby
the bit shall be of more sort and efficacy.

Of whole ports with trenches above, how they ought to be made, and for what
mouths they are most meet. Cap. xxix.
ALso you may make every one of these foresaid whole ports with trenches
above, full of little rings, beads, or buttons, which trenches would be
fastened as well to the port, as to the holes, whereas the water cheane is
wont to be placed, and not to the great eye of the cheke, where the Ieyues are
fastened. As they used in old time, and do still at these days in some
places. And the higher the holes be, whereas such trenches should be
fastened, the harder shall the bitte be. having hard bars, and hard mouth.
The shapes of which bittes, you may see in the.5.6.7. and.8. last figures, but
now to conclude although every one of the byttes before rehearsed from the
beginning to thendinge, may serve as you have hard, to some good purpose
(being used in time) and in deed be so sufficient to correct any vice of the
mouth, without doing the horse any harm, as I would wyshe you to seek no
further, yet do they little prevail, unless the Ryder have a good discretion,
and be able to discern one mouth from an other, and to know when and how
much to increase or to diminishe the qualitye of the bit, and how to apply
the same, which if he can do, and has besides that, the true art of Ryding,
he shall not need the help of so many bits, but only of these three, that is
the Cannon, the scach, and the whole port with smooth melons, or with olives,
which three bits with art do suffice to frame any horses mouth of what sort
soever he be.

The shape or figure of the headstraine, to be made of good rownde coarde.


A plain Canone.


A plain Scach.


A smoothe Melon byt.


A smoothe Melon byt somewhat rounder then the other.


A Melon byt, having on each side two playing ringes next the middle ioynte.


A Pear bytte.


A pear byt, having on each out side one playing ring.


A Pear byt, having on each side two playing ringes next the middle ioynte.


(...) you shall see it needful. This medicine before rehearsed, is called of
the aunciente writers Diapente, that is to say, a composition of five simples,
and is praised to be a sovereign medicine and preservative against all inward
diseases, and therefore they would have such as travel by the way, to carry of
this powder always about with them. There be many other medicines which I
leave to write, because if I should rehearse every man's medicine, my book
would be infinite. I for my part would use no other than either that before
expressed, or else Wine and Triacle only.

Of the diseases in the head. The.xvi. Chapter.
THe Head is subject to diverse diseases, according to the diverse parts
thereof: for in the pannicles, or little fine skynnes, cleauyng to the bones,
and covering the brain, do most properlye breed headeache, and mygram.
Again, in the substance of the brain, (which in a horse is very little or
none) do breed the Frenzy, Madness, Sleping evil, the taking, and
forgetfulness. Finally, in the ventricles or celles of the brain, and in
those cunduyets through which the sprightes animal do give feelyng, and
mouyng to the body, do breed the turnesicke, or staggers, the falling evil,
the night mare, the Appoplexye, the Palsy, and the convulsion or crampe. the
Catharr or Rheum, which in a horse is called the Glaunders, but first of
headeache.

Of Headeache. The.xvij. Chapter*
THe headeache either comes of some inward cause, as of some choleric
humor, bred in the panicles of the brain, or else of some outward cause, as of
extreme heat, or cold, of some blow or of some vyolent savor. Eumelus says,
that it comes of raw disgestion, but Martin says, most commonly of cold.
The signs be these. The horse will hang down his head, and also hang down
his ears, his sight will be dim, his eyes swollen, and waterish, and he will
forsake his meat. The cure. Let him blood in the palate of his mouth. Also
pourge his head with this perfume. Take of Garlic stalks a handefull, all
to broken in short pieces, and a good quantitye of Franconcense, and being put
into a Chaufingdish of fresh coals, hold the Chaufingdishe under the horses
nosetrilles, so as the fume may ascend up into his head, and in using him
thus once or twice, it will make him to cast at the nose, and so purge his
head, of all filthe. Pelagonius says, yt it is good to pour into his
nosetrilles, wine wherein has been sodden Euforbium, Centuarye, and
Franconcense.

Of the Frenzy and Madness of a horse. The.xviij. Chapter.
THe learned Physicians do make diverse kinds, as well of Frenzye, as of
Madness, which are not needful here to be recyted, sithe I could never read
in any Author, nor learn of any Ferrer, that a horse were subject to the one
half of them. Absirtus, Hierocles, Eumelius, Pelagonius, and Hipocrates, do
write simply de furore and rabie, that is to say, of the madness of a horse.
But in deed Vegetius in his second book of horseleach craft, seems to make
four mad passions belonging to a horse, intituling his Chapters in this sort,
de Appioso, de Frenitico, de Cardiacis, de Rabioso, the effects whereof
though I fear me it will be to no great purpose, yet to content such as
perhaps have read the Author as well as I my self: I will here briefly
rehearse the same. When some naughty blood (says he) does strike the fylme or
pannicle of the brain, in one part only, and makes the same grievously to
ache, then the beast becomes Appiosum, that is to say, as it seems by his
own words next following, both dull of mind and of sight. This word
Appiosum, is a strange word, and not to be found again in any other Author,
and because in this passion, the one side of the head is only grieved, the
horse turns round, as though he went in a Myll. But when the poison of
such corrupt blood does infecte the mid brain, then the horse becomes
Frentike, and will leap and flyng, and run against the walls. And if such
blood fills the veins of the stomach, or breast, then it infecteth as well
the heart, as the brain, and causes alienation of mind, and the body to
sweat, and this disease is called of Vegetius, Passio cardiaca, which if Equus
Appiosus, chance to have* the^ he becomes Rabiosus, yt is to say, stark
mad. For (says he) by over much heat of the Liver, and of blood, the
veins and artiers of the heart, are choked up, for grief and pain whereof,
the horse byteth him self, and gnaweth his own flesh: thus far Vegetius. Of
two sorts of mad horses I (believe) I have seen my self here in this Realm.
For I saw once a black Sweathlande horse (as I took him to be) in my Lord of
Hunnisdons Stable at Hunnisdon, coming thither by chance with my lord Morlay,
which horse would stand all day long bytyng of the Maunger, and eat little
meat or none, suffering no man to approach unto him, by which his doings, and
partly by his color and complexion. I judged him to be vexed with a melancholy
Madness, called of the Physicians Mauia, or rather Melancholia, which comes
of a corrupt Melancholy, and fylthy blood or humor, sometime spread throughout
all the veins of the body, and sometime perhaps remaining only in the head,
or else in the splen, or places next thereunto adjoining. The other mad horse
was a Roane of Master Asheleys, Master of the Jewel house, which with his
teeth crushed his Masters right forefinger in pieces, whylest he offered him a
little hay to eat, whereby he lost in a manner the use of his whole hand, to the
great grief of all his friends, and also of all the Muses, which were wont
to be much delighted with such passing sweet Music as that his fine
quauering hand could sometime make, upon diverse Instruments, but specially
upon the Virginalles. This horse I say though he could eat his meat, drink
his drink, and sleep, yet if he were never so little offended, he would take on
like a spright, and both byte and stryke at any man that came nygh him* yea
and would byte him self by the shoulders most tirribly, pulling away lumpes
of flesh, so broad as a man's hand, and when so ever he was rydden, he was
feign to be musled with a mussell of Iron, made of purpose to keep him from
biting, either his Ryder or him self, which no doubt proceeded of some kind of
frenzye or madness, whereunto the horse was subject, by means that hot
blood (as I take it) abounded, over much in him. But now as touching the
causes, signs, and cure of a horses madness, you shall hear the opinion of
old writers, for Martin never took such cure in hand. Abfirtus, and the other
Authors before mentioned say, that the madness of a horse comes either by
means of some extreme heat, taken by trauelyng, or long standing in hot
sun, or else by eating over many Fitches, or by some hot blood resorting
to the pannycles of the brain, or through abundance of Choler, remaining in
the veins, or else by drynking of some unwholesome water. The signs be these,
he will byte the Maunger, and his own body, and run upon every man that
commes nygh him, he will continuallye shake his ears, and stare with his eyes,
and foam at the mouth, and also as Hypocrates says, he will forsake his meat,
and pyne him self with hunger. The cure. Cause him to be let blood in his
legs abundantly, which is done (as I take it) to convert the blood from his
head. Notwithstanding it were not amiss, to let him blood in the neck and
breast veins. Then give him this drink. Take the root of wild Coucumber,
and boil it in harse red wine, and put thereunto a little Nitre, and give it
him with a horn luke warm, or if you can get no Coucumber, then take Rewe,
and Mynts, and boil that in the wine. It were not amiss also, to add
thereunto a handefull of black Elleborus, for that is a very good herb
against madness. Eumelius says, that if you give him man's dong in wine to
drink three morninges together, it will heal him, also take of black
Elleborus two or three handefull, and boil it in a sufficient quantitye of
strong Vyneger, and therewith rub and chause both his head, and al his body
once or twice in a day, for the oftener his head is rubbed, the better, and
often excercyse is very profitable to all his body. Some again would have
the skin of his head to be pierced in diverse places with a hot Iron, to
let out the evil humors, but if none of all this will prevail, then the last
remedy is, to gelde him of both his stones, or else of one at the least, for
either that will heal him, or else nothing. As touching the diet and usage of
a mad horse, the Authors do not agree, for some would have him kept in a
close, dark, and quiet house, void from all noise, which Absirtus says, will
either make him madder, or else kill him out of hand. His diet would be thin,
yt is to say, without any prouender, and that day that he is let blood, and
receives his drink, they would have him to fast until Even, and then to
have a warm wash of Barlye meal, yea me thynkes it were not amiss, to feed
him only with warm mashes and hay, and that by little at once, until he be
somewhat recovered.

Of the sleeping evil. The xix. Chapter.
THIS is a disease forcyng the beast continually to sleep, whether he will or
not, taking his memory and appetyte clean away, and therefore is called of
the Physicians, Lethargus: it proceeds of abundaunce of phlegm, moysting the
brain over much. It is easy to know, by the continual sleeping of the horse.
The cure of this disease according to Pelagonius, Vegetius, and others, is in
this sort. Let him blood in the neck, and then give him this drink. Take of
Camomyl, and Motherwort, of each two or three handefull, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, and put thereunto a little wheat branne, salt,
and Uineger, and let him drink a pynte of that every day, the space of three
or four days together. It is good also to perfume and chaufe his head, with
Time, and Peniryail sodden together in Vinegar, or with Brymstone and Feathers
burned upon a chaufing dish of coals, under his nose, and to provoke him to
neese, by blowing Pepper, and Perithre, beaten to powder, up into his
nosetrils: yea and to annointe the palate of his mouth, with Honey and Mustarde
mingled together, and in his drink which would be always warm water, to put
Parsely sede, and Fenel sede, to provoke urine. His legs also would be
bathed, and his Houes filled with wheat bran, salt, and Uineger, sodden
together, and laid to, so hot as he may endure it, and in any case suffer him
nor to sleep, but keep him waking, and styrring, by continual crying unto
him, or pricking him with some sharp thing, that can not pass clean through
the skin, or else by beating him with a whip, and thus doing he shall recover.

Of a horse that is taken. The.xx. Chapter.
A Horse is said to be taken, when he is depryued of his feeling, and moving,
so as he is able to stir no manner of way, but remains in such state or
form, as he was taken in. Which disease is called of the Physicians by the
Greek name Catalepsis, and in Laten Deprehensio, or Congelatio, and of
Vegetius, Sederatio, which also calls those beasts that have this disease
lumenta sideratitia. The Physicians say, that it comes of abundance of
Phlegm, and Choler, mixte together, or else of Melancoly blood, which is a
cold dry humor oppressing the hinder parts of the brain. But Vegetius says,
that it comes of some extreme outward cold, striking suddenly into the
emptye veins, or of some extreme heat, or of raw disgestion, or else of some
great hunger, caused by long fasting. It is easy to know by the description
before mentioned. And as touching the cure, Vegetius says, that if it come of
cold, then it is good to give him to drink, one ounce of Laserpitium, with
wine and oil mixed together, and made luke warm, if of heat, then to give it
him with water and honey, it of crudite, then to heal him by fasting, if of
hunger, then by feeding him well with pease. But Martin says, that this
disease is called of the French men Surprius, and it comes (as he says)
most chiefly of cold, taken after a heat, and he wissheth a horse that is
thus taken, to be cured in this sort. First to be let blood on both sides of
the breast, and then to be put in a heat either by continual sturring, and
molesting him, or else if he will stir by no means, then to bury him all
save the head, in a warm donghill, and there to let him lie, until his
lymmes have some feeling. And before you so bury him, it shall be good to give
him this drink. Take of Malinesy three pyntes, and put thereunto a quarterne of
Sugar, and some Cynamon and Cloves, and let him drink it good and warm, and
until he be perfectly whole, let him be kept warm, and often excercysed, and
walked up and down in the stable, and thinlye dyeted. and drink nothing but
warm water, wherein if you put foam Fenell, and Perslye seed, to provoke him
to vryne, it shall be the better. And if he cannot dong, let him be raked, and
have a glister made of the broth of Mallows, and fresh butter.

Of the Staggers. The.xxi. Chapter.
THis is a doosinesse of the head, called of the Latens Vertigo, and of the
Italians as I remember, Capistura. It comes of some corrupt blood, or
gross and toughe humors* oppressing the brain, from whence proceeds a
vaporous sprighte, dissolved by a weak heat, which troubles all the head.
The signs be these: dymnesse of fight, the reeling and staggering of the
horse, who for very pain will thrust his head against the walls, and forsake
his meat. The cure according to Martin is thus. Let him blood in the temple
veins, and then with a knife, make a hole of an ynche long ouerthwarte his
foreheade, hard underneath his foretoppe, and raise the skyn with a cornette,
thrusting it upward toward the headstal, a good handefull, and then put in a
teynt dypt in Turpentyne, and Hogs greece molten together, renewing the taynte
every day once, until it be whole, and do the like upon the rydge of the
rumpe, but me thinks it were better to do the like in the powle of his head,
or nape of his neck, for so should the evil humors have both ways the
easyer and spedyer passage: And as touching his diet, let him have continuallye
warm drink, and mashes, and once a day be walked up and down fair and
softly, to excercyse his body.

Of the Falling evil. The.xxii. Chapter.
THis is a kind of convulsion or Crampe, called of the Latens by the Greek
name, Epilepsia, in Italion, il morbo caduco, depriving the beast at certain
times and for a certain space, of the use of feeling, hearing, and seeing, and
of all the other senses. And though it be a disease, that has been seldom
seen, to chance unto horses, of this country, yet it appears by Absirtus,
and also by Vegetius, and diverse others, that horses be subject thereunto. For
Absirtus writing unto his friend Tiberius Claudius, says, that unto horses
chances many times the falling sickness. The signs whereof are these. The
horse will fall down suddenly, partlye through the resolution of his members,
and partly through discention of his synewes, and all his body will quiver and
quake, and sometime he will foam at the mouth. Vegetius again writes in this
sort, by a certain course of the Moon, horses and other beasts many times do
fall, and dye for a time, as well as men. The signs whereof are these. Being
fallen, their bodies will quyuer and quake, and their mouths will foam, and
when a man would think that they would dye out of hand, they rise suddenly
up, and fall to their meat. And by feelyng the grystle of their nosetrilles
with your finger, you shall know whether they will fall often or not, for the
more cold the gristle be, the oftener, and the less cold it be, the seldomer
they will fall. The cure. Let him blood abundantly in the neck veins, and
within five days after, let him blood again in the temple veins, and let
him stand in a warm and dark stable, and annoint all his body, with
comfortable oyntements, and his head and ears with oil de Bay, and lyquid
Pitch or Tar, mingled together. And also put some thereof into his ears, and
then make a Biggin for him of some soft warm skin, as of a shepes skin,
or else of Canuas, stuffed underneath with woll, and make him this purging
drink. Take of Radishe roots two ounces, of the root of the herb called in
Laten Panax, or Panaces, and of Scammony, of each one ounce, beat all these
things together, and boil them in a quarte of honye, and at sundry times, as
you shall see it needful, give him a good sponefull or two of this in a
quarte of Ale luke warm, whereunto would be put three or four sponefull of
Oil. It is good also to blow the powder of Motherwort, or of Pyrethrum, up
into his nosetrilles, and if the disease do continue still for all this, then it
shall be needful to pearse the skin of his foreheade, in diverse places with a
hot iron, and to let out the humors oppressing his brain.

Of the night Mare. The.xxiii. Chapter.
This is a disease oppressing either man or beast, in the night season when he
slepeth, so as he can not draw his breath, and is called of the Latens Incubus.
It comes of a continual crudity, or raw disgestion of the stomach, from
whence gross vapors ascending up into the head, does oppress the brain, and
all the sensityue powers, so as they can not do their office, in giving perfect
feeling and moving to the body. And if this disease chaunsing often to a man,
be not cured in time, it may perhaps grow to a worse mischief: as to the
Falling evil. Madness, or Appoplexie. But I could never learn, that horses
were subject to this disease, neither by relation, nor yet by reading, but
only in an old English writer, who shows neither cause nor signs how to
know when a horse has it, but only teaches how to cure it with a fond
folishe charm, which because it may perhaps make you gentle reader to laugh,
as well as it did me, for recreation sake I will here rehearse it. Take a
Flynte stone that has a hole of his own kind, and hang it over him, and
write in a bill. In nomine patris. etc.

Saint George our Ladies knight,
He walked day so did he night,
Until he her found,
He her beat and he her bound,
Till truly her troth she him plyght,
That she would not come within the night,
There as Saint George our Ladies Knight
Named was three times, Saint George.
And hang this Scripture over him, and let him alone. With such proper charms
as this is, the false Friars in times paste were wont to charm the money out
of plain folks purses.

Of the Appoplexie, and Pawlsye. The.xxiiii. Chapter.
THe Appoplexye is a disease, depriving all the whole body of sense, and
moving. And if it deprive but part of the body, then it is called of the
Latins by the Greek name Paralisis, in our tongue a Pawlsie. It procedes of
cold, gross, and tough humors, oppressing the brain all at once, which may
breed partly of crudites and raw disgestion, and partly by means of some
hurt in the head, taken by fall, strype, or otherwise. As touching the
Appoplexye, few or none writing of horsleach craft, do make any mention thereof.
But of the Pawlsye Vegetius writes in this manner. A horse (says he) may have
the Pawlsye as well as man, which is known by these signs. He will go
groueling, and sydelyng like a Crabbe, carrying his neck awry, as if it were
broken, and goes crokedly with his legs, beating his head against the
walls, and yet forsakes not his meat, nor drink, and his prouender seems
moist, and weate. The cure. let him blood in the temple vain, on the contrary
side of the wrying of his neck, and annoynte his neck with comfortable
oyntmentes, and splent it with splentes of wood, to make it stand right, and
let him stand in a warm stable, and give him such drinks as are recyted in
the next Chapter following. But if all this profits not, then draw his neck
with a hot iron, on the contrary side, that is to say on the whole side, from
the neither part of the ear down to the shoulders, and draw also a good
long stryke on his temple, on that side, and on the other temple, make a little
star in this sort * and from his raynes unto his mid back, draw little
lines in this manner and that will heal him.

Of the Crampe or convulsion of the Synewes and Muskles. The.xxv. Chapter.
A Convulsion or Crampe, is a forcible and paynefull contraction or drawing
together of the Synewes and Muskles, which does happen sometimes throughout the
whole body, and sometime but in one part, or member only. And according as the
body may be dyuerslye drawn, so do the Physicians and also mine Authors,
that write of horseleach craft, give it diverse names. For if the body be
drawn forward, then they call it in Greek Emprosthotonos, in Laten Tensio ad
anteriora. And if the body be drawn backewarde, it is called in Greek
Opisthotonos, in Laten Tensio ad posteriora. But if the body be stark, and
strayte, bowing neither forward, nor backewarde, then it is called symplye in
Greek Tetanos, in Laten Distentio, or Rigor. Which names also are applied to
the like convulsions of the neck. Notwithstanding Vegetius writing of this
disease, intytuleth his Chapters de Roborosis, a strange term, and not to be
found again in any other Author. A Convulsio^ as I said before, may chance
as well to one part or member of the body, as to the whole body, as to the
eye, to the skin of the foreheade, to the roots of the tongue, to the Jaws,
to the lips, to the arm, hand, or leg, that is to say, when so ever the
Synewe or Muskle, serving to the moving of that part, is evil affected, or
grieved. Of which Convulsions, though there be many diverse causes: yet
Hipocrates brings them all into two, that is to say, into fullness, and
emptiness: for when a Convulsion proceeds either of some inflammation, of
superfluous eating or drinking, or for lack of due purgation, or of over much
rest, and lack of exercise, all such causes are to be referred to repletion,
or fullness. But if a Convulsion come by means of over much purging or
bleeding, of much watching, extreme labor, long fasting, or by wounding, or
pricking of the Synewes, then all such causes are to be referred unto
emptynesse. And if the Convulsion proceed of fullness, it chances suddenly,
and all at once. But if of emptenesse, then it comes by little and little,
and laysurelye. Besides these kinds of Convulsions, there is also chau^cing
many times in a man's fingers, legs, and toes, another kind of Convulsion,
which may be called a windye Convulsion, for that it procedes of some gross,
or toughe vapor, entered into the branches of the Sinews, which makes them to
swel, like a Lute string, in moist weather, which though it be very paynefull
for the time, yet it may be sone driven away, by chaufyng, or rubbing the
membre grieved, with a warm cloth. And this kind of Convulsion or Crampe,
chances also many times to a horses hinder legs, standing in the stable.
For I have seen some my self, that have had one of their hinder legs drawn
up with the Crampe, almost to the bellye, so styffe and hard as no man has
been able to stir it, neither could the horse him self, set it down to the
ground of a long season, which I think might be sone remedyed. First by
continual chaufing and frotting his leg, with a good wispe, and then by
teying up the other hinder leg, or else the forelegge on the sore side,
whereby he should be forced to set down the payned leg. Thus far I have
discoursed of the Convulsion of Synewes, and of the causes thereof, according
to the opinions of the learned Physicians. Now I will brieflye show you, the
causes, signs, and cure thereof, according to the doctrine of mine Authors
that write of horseleache craft. Absirtus says, that this disease does come,
either by dryuing the horse into a sweat, when he halteth, for that he has
trodden upon some nail, or by taking cold after iourneying, and sweating in
Winter season, whereby his lips are clong together, or by long lying and rest
after sweating, whereby the Sinews of his forelegges be nummed, or by having
some stripe of his priuye members, or by long trauelyng in the cold
Mountains, where snow and Ise does abound. For Theomnestus writes, that
coming out of Paeonia, with the king and his army, and passing over the
mountains, to go into Italye, there fell such abundance of Snow, as not
only many Souldyers dyed, sytting still on their horses backs, with their
weapons in their hands, being so stark and styffe, and cleaving so fast to
their Saddelles, as they could not easelye be pulled out of them: but also
diverse Horses in their going were so nu^med, as they could not bow their
legs, yea and some were found stark dead, standing still on their feet, and
few horses or none escaped at that time, free from the Convulsion of Sinews,
in so much as Theomnestus his own horse which he loved dearlye, was sore vexed
therewith. The signs to know whether a horse be troubled with the Co^vulsion
of the synewes or not, be these. His head and neck will be so stiff and
stark, as he can bow it no manner of way, his ears will stand right up, and his
eyes will be hollow in his head, and the fleshye parts thereof, in the great
corners, will be turned backewarde, his lips will be clong fast together, so
as he can not open his mouth, and his tongue so nummed as he can neither eat
nor drink, his backebone and tail will be so stiff, as he can not move it
one way nor other, and his legs so stiff, as they will not bow, and being
laid he is not able to rise, and specially on his hinder legs, but falls
down on his buttockes, like a dog when he sits on the ground, and by
means of the Convulsion in his back, his bladder also for neighbourhode sake,
suffers, whereby the horse can not stale, but with great pain. The cure. Put
him into a sweat, either by burying him all save the head in some warm
dunghill, or if he be a horse of price, carye him into a hot house, where as
is no smoke, and let him sweat there. Then annoint all his body, head, neck,
legs, and all, with oil of Cypres, and oil de Baye mingled together. Or
else with one of these ointments. Take of Hogs grease two pound, of
Terepenthin half a pound, of Pepper beaten in powder one Dram, of new Wax
one pound, of old oil two pound, boil all these together, and being made
very warm, annoint all his body therewith. Or else with this ointment. Take of
new wax one pound, of Terepenthin four ounces, of oil de Bay as much, of
Opoponax two ounces, of Deares sewet and of oil of Storax, of each three ounces,
melt al these together, and anoint all his body therewith. It is good also, to
bath his head with the decoction of Fitches, or else of Lupins, and make him
this drink. Take xx. graynes of long Pepper, fynelye beaten into powder, of
Cedre two ounces, of Nytre one ounce, of Lacerpitium as much as a Bean, and
mingle al these together, with a sufficient quantity of white wine, and give
him thereof to drink a quart every Morning and Evening, for the space of three
or four days, or else this drink. Take of Opoponax two ounces, of Storax
three ounces, of Gention three ounces, of Manna Succary, three ounces, of Mirre
one scrupple, of long Pepper two scrupples, and give him this with old wine,
or make him a drink of Lacerpitium, Cummin, Annis seeds, Fengreke, Bay buryes,
and old oil. In old time they were wont to let him blood in the temples,
which Absirtus does not allow, saying, that it will cause the Synewes of his
lyppes to dry up, so as the horse not being able to move them, shall pine for
hunger. As touching his diet, give him at the first warm mashes, and such
soft meat as he may easelye get down, and wet hay, bringing him to harder
food by little and little. And in any case, let him be kept very warm, and
rydden or walked once a day to excercyse his legs, and lymmes. Theomnestus
cured his horse as he says, by placing him in a warm stable, and by making a
clear fire without any smoke round about him, and the horse not being able to
open his Jaws of him self, he caused his mouth to be opened, and put therein
soppes dypt in a confertion, called Entrigon Conditum, and also anointed al
his body with a medicin, or ointment called Acopu^, (the making whereof
hereafter follows) dissolved in Cypres oil, which made him to fall into a
sweat, and being before half dead and more, brought him again to his
feeling, and moving, so as he did rise and eat his meat.

The receyt of the medicine or ointment called Acopum.
TAke of Euforbium two ounces, of Castoreum four ounces, of Adarces, half a
pound, of Bdellium three ounces, of Pepper one pound, of Fox greece two
ounces, of Opoponax four ounces, of Lacerpitium three ounces, of Amoniacum
half a pound, of Pygions dong as much, of Galbanum two ounces, of Nitrum five
ounces, of Spumanitrie three ounces, of Ladanum one pound, of Perethrum, and
of Bay buryes, of each three ounces, of Cardamomum eight ounces, of the seed of
Rewe half a pound, of the seed of Agnus Castus four ounces, of Parslye two
ounces, of the dried roots of Ireos, or Flower de Luce, five ounces, of Isoppe
and of Carpobalsamu^ one pound, of oil of Flower deluce, and oil de Bay, of
each one pound and a half, of oil of Spiconard three pound, of Oleum Ciprinum,
three pound and half, of the oldest oil Olive that you can possible get six
pound, of Pitche not smelling of the smoke, one pound eight ounces, of
Turpe^tine one pound, Melte every one of these that will melte, severally by
them selves, and then myngle them together, with the rest of the simples beaten
into fine powder, and after that they have been a little boiled on the fire,
take it of, and strain it into a fair vessel, and whenever you will give
your horse any thereof, give it him with wine. And if with long keeping it waxes
hard, then soften it with oil of Cypres, so as it may be good and thick.
This confection is both a medicin, and also an ointement, and is called of the
old writers Acopum. Which if it be put into a horses nosetrilles, it will draw
out all noisome humors, and discharge his head of all grief, yea this
medicine heals all Convulsions, coldes, and dryness, or withering of the
body, and dryueth away all werynesse, and tyering.

Of cold in the head. The.xxvi. Chapter.
ACcording as the cold which the horse has taken is new, or old, great,
or small, and also according as humors do abound in his head, and as such
humors be thick or thin, so is the disease more or less dangerous. For if
the horse casts little or no matter out of his nose, nor has no very great
coughe, but is only heavy in his head, and perhaps lightlye cougheth now
and than, it is a sign that he is stopped in the head, which we were wont to
call the pose. But if his head be full of humors, congealed by some extreme
told, taken of long time paste, and that he casts foul, filthye, and
stinking matter out at the nose, and cougheth grieuouslye: then it is a sign,
that he has either the Glaunders, or Stranguyllion, Mourning of the Chain, or
Consumption of the Lungs. For all such diseases do breed for the most part of
the Rheum, or distillation that comes from the head. Of the cures thereof we
leave to speak, until we come to talk of the diseases in the throat, minding
here to show you how to heal the Pose, or cold before mentioned. Martin
says, it is good to pourge his head by perfuming him with Franconcense, and
also to provoke him to neese, by thrusting two Goose feathers dypt in oil de
Bay up into his nosetrilles, and then to trotte him up and down, the space of
half an hour, for these feathers will make him to cast immedyately at the
nose. Laurentius Russius would have him to be perfumed, with wheat,
Peniryall, and Sage, sodden well together, and put into a bag so hot as may
be, which bag would be so close fastened to his head, that all the savor
thereof, may ascend up into his nosetrilles, and his head also would be
covered and kept warm: and to provoke him to neese he would have you to bind
a soft cloute, anointed with Soap, or else with Butter, and oil de Bay, unto
a stycke, and to thrust that up and down into his nostrilles so hye as you
may conveniently go, and let him be kept warm, and drink no cold water. Yea
it shall be good for three or four days, to boil in his water a little
Senegreke, Wheat meal, and a few Annis seeds. And every day after that you
have purged his head, by perfuming him, or by making him to neese, cause him to
be trotted up and down, either in the warm Sun, or else in the house,
half an hour, which would be done before you water him, and give him his
prouender.

Of the diseases in the eyes. The.xxvii. Chapter.
HOrses eyes be subject to diverse griefs, as to be waterish, or bloudshotten,
to be dymme of sight, to have the pyn and web, and the haw, whereof some
commes of inward causes, as of humors resorting to the eyes, and some of
outward causes, as of cold, heat, or strype.

Of weping or watering eyes. The.xxviii. Chapter.
THis as Laurentius Russius says, may come sometime by confluence of humors,
and sometime by some stripe, whose cure I leave to recite, because it does not
differ much, from Martins experience here following. Take of Pitche, Rosen, and
Mastick, like quantity, melt them together. Then with a little stick, having a
cloute bound to the end thereof, and dipte therein: annoint the temple veins
on both sides, a handefull above the eyes, as broad as a Testerne, and then
clap unto it immediately, a few Flocks, of like color to the horse, holding
them close to his head, with your hand, until they stycke fast unto his
head, then let him blood on both sides (if both eyes be infected) a handful
under the eyes. Russius also thinks it good, to wash his eyes once a day,
with pure white wine, and then to blow therein a little of Tartarum, and of
Pomys stone, beaten into fine powder.

Of bloudshotten eyes, for a blow, or ytching, and rubbing in the eyes.
The.xxix. Chapter.
MArtin never used any other medicine, than this water here following wherewith
he did always heal the foresaid griefs. Take of pure rose water, of
Malmesy, of Fenell water, of each three sponefull, of Tutia, as much as you may
easily take with your Thombe and Finger, of Cloves a dosen beaten into fine
powder, mingle them well together, and being luke warm, or cold, if you will,
wash the inward parts of the eye, with a fether dipped therein, twice a day,
until he be whole. Russius says, that to blood shotten eyes it is good to
lay the white of an Egg, or to wash them with the juice of Selidony.

Of dimnesse of sight, and also for the Pynne and web, or any other spot in
the eye. The.xxx. Chapter.
IF the Horse be dim of sight, or has any pearl growing in his eye, or thin
fylme covering the ball of his eye, then Russius would have you take of Pommis
stone, of Tartarum, and of Sal Gemma, of each like wayght, and being beaten
into very fine powder, to blow a little of that into his eye, continuing so to
do every day once, or twice, until he be whole. Martin says that he always
used to blow a little Sandyuoire into the eye once a day, which simple he
affirms to be of such force, as it will break any pearl or web in short
space, and make the eye very clear and fair. Russius amongst a number of
other medicines, prayseth most of all the powder of a black Flynte stone.

Of the Haw called of the Italians l'vnghia de gli occhi. The.xxxi. Chapter.
THis is a gristle covering sometime more than the one half of the eye. It
proceeds of gross, and toughe humors, discending out of the head, which Haw,
as Martin says, would be cut away in this sort. First pull both the eye
lyddes open with two several threedes, stitched with a nedle to either of the
lyddes. Then catch hold of the Hawe with the stych of another nedle and
threde, and pull it out so far as you may stay it upon your finger, to the
intent that you may cut it round the breadth of a penny, and leave the black
behind. For by cutting away to much of the fat, and black of the eye, the
horse many times becomes bleare eyed. And the Haw being clean taken away,
squirt a little white wine, or beer, into his eye.

Of Lunatike eyes. The.xxxii. Chapter.
VEgetius Writes de Oculo Lunatico, but he shows neither cause nor signs
thereof: but only says that the old men termed it so, because it makes the
eye sometime to look, as though it were covered with white, and sometime
clear. Martin says that the horse that has this disease, is blind at
certain times of the Moon, in so much as he sees almost nothing at all
during that time, and then his eyes will look yealowishe, yea and somewhat
reddyshe, which disease according to Martin is to be cured in this sort.
First use the plaster mentioned before in the Chapter of wateryshe or weping
eyes, in such order as is there prescribed, and then with a sharp knyfe make
two slittes on both sides of his head, an ynche long, somewhat toward the
nose, a handful beneath the eyes, not touching the vain: and with a cornet
loosen the skin upward, the breadth of a grote, and thruste therein a round
piece of Leather, as broad as a twopenny piece, with a hole in the midst, to
keep the hole open, and look to it once a day, that the matter may not be
stopped, but continuallye run the space of ten days, then take the Leather
out, and heal the wound with a little Flax dypte in the salve here
following. Take of Turpentyne, of Honey, of Wax, of each like quantity, and
boil them together, which being a little warmed, will be lyquid to serve your
purpose, and take not away the playsters from the temples, until they fall
away of them selves, which being fallen, then with a small hot drawing iron,
make a Star in the midst of each temple vain, where the plaster did lie.
Which Star would have a hole in the midst, made with the button end of
your drawing iron in this sort.

Of the Cancer in the eye. The.xxxiii. Chapter.
THis comes of a rank and corrupt blood disce^ding from the head, into the
eye. The signs. You shall see read pymples, some small, and some great, both
within and without upon the eye lyddes, and all the eye will look read, and be
full of corrupt matter. The cure according to Martin is thus. First let him
blood on that side the neck, that the eye is grieved, to the quantity of a
Pottell. Then take of roche Alum, of green Corporas, of each half a pound,
of white Corporas one ounce, and boil them in three pyntes of running water,
until the half be consumed, then take it from the fire, and once a day wash
his eye with this water, being made luke warm, with a fine linen cloth, and
cleanse the eye therewith, so as it may look raw, contynuing thus to do every
day once until it be whole.

Of diseases incident to the ears, and powle of the head, and first of an
Impostume in the ear. The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
IMpostumes breed either by reason of some blow, or brousing, or else of
evil humors congealed in the ear by some extreme cold. The signs be
apparent, by ye burning and painful swelling of the ear and parts therabout.
The cure according to Martin, is in this sort. First ripe the Impostume with
this plaster. Take of Lynesede beaten into powder, of wheat flower, of each
half a pynte, of Honey a pint, of Hogs grease, or Barrows grease one pound.
Warm all these things together in an earthen pot, and stir them
continually with a flat stycke, or sclyce, until they be thoroughly myngled
and incorporated together, and then spread some of this plaster being warm
upon a piece of linen cloth, or soft white Leather, so broad as the swelling
and no more, and lay it warm unto it, and so let it remain one whole day,
and then renew it with fresh ointment, continuing so to do until it break:
then lance the sore so as the matter may have passage downewarde, and taynt it
to the bottom, with a taynt of Flax dipped in this ointment. Take of Metrosatu^,
of oil Olive, and Turpentine, of each two ounces: and mingle them together, and
make him a Byggen of Canuas to close in the sore, so as the taynte with the
oyntement may abide within, renewing the taynt once a day, until it be whole.
But if the horse have pain in his ears without any great swelling or
Impostumation, then thrust in a little black woll dipte in oil of Camamyll,
and that will heal it.

Of the Powle evil. The.xxxv. Chapter.
This is a disease like a Fistula growing betwixt the ears and the Powle or
nape of the neck, and proceeds of evil humors, gathered together in that
place, or else of some blow or brouse, for that is the weakest and tenderest
part of all the head, and therefore sonest offended, which rude Carters do
little consider, whylest in their fury they beat their horses upon that place
of the head, with their whipstockes, and therefore no horses be more subject
to this disease, than Carte horses. And this disease comes most in Winter
season. The signs. You shall perceive it by ye swelling of the place, which by
continuance of time will break of it self, rotting more inward than outward,
and therefore is more perilous if it be not cured in time, and the sooner it be
taken in hand the better. The cure according to Martin is thus. If it be not
broken, ripe it with a plaster of Hogs grease, laid unto it so hot as may
be, and make a Byggyn for the powle of his head to keep it from cold, which
Biggen would have two holes open, so as his ears may stand out: and renew
the plaster every day once until it break, keeping the sore place as warm as
may be. And if you see that it will not break so sone as you would have it,
then there as it is softest, and most metest to be opened: take a round hot
iron as byg as your little finger, and sharp at the point, and two inches
beneath that soft place, thrust it in a good depenesse upward, so as the
point of the iron may come out at the rypest place, to the intent that the
matter may discende downward, and come out at the nether hole, which would
be always kept open, and therefore taynt it with a taynt of Flax dypt in
Hogs grease, and lay a plaster of Hogs grease also upon the same, renewing
it every day once, the space of four days, which is done chiefly to kill the
heat of the fire. Then at the four days end, take of Turpintyne half a
pound, clean washed in nine sundry waters, and after that thoroughly dried, by
thrusting out the water with a felyce on the dyshes side, then put thereunto
two yolks of Eggs, and a little Saffron, and myngle them well together: that
done, search the depth of the hole with a wholle quill, and make a taynt of a
piece of sponge, so long, as it may reach the bottom, and so big as it may
fill the wound, and annoint the taynt with the foresaid ointment, and thrust
it into the wound, either with that quill, or else by winding it up with your
finger and thombe, by little and little, until you have thrust it home: and
then lay on the plaster of Hogs grease made luke warm, renewing it every day
once or twice, until it be whole. But if the swelling cease, then you need
not to use the plaster, but only to taynt it, and as the matter decreaseth,
so make your taynt every day lesser and lesser, until the wound be perfectly
whole.

Of the Uyues. The.xxxvi. Chapter.
THe Uyues be certain kirnels growing under the horses ear, proceeding of some
rank or corrupt blood resorting to that place. which within are full of little
white graynes, like white salt kirnelles. The Italians call them Viuole, which
if they be suffered to grow, Laure^tius Russius says, that they will
grievously pain the horse in his throat, so as he shall not be able to swallow
his meat, nor to breath. They be easy to know, for that they may be felt, and
also seen. The cure according to Martin, is in this sort. First draw them
right down in the mydst with a hot Iron, from the rote of the ear, so far
as the tippe of the ear will reach, being pulled down: and under the root
again draw two strykes on each side, like an arrowe head in this form then
in the midst of the first line, lance them with a launcet, and taking hold of
the kirnelles with a pair of Pynsons, pull them so far forward, as you may
cut the kirnelles out, without hurting the vain, that done, fill the hole with
white salt. But Hierocles would have them to be cured in this sort. Take a
piece of Sponge sowsed well in strong Uineger, and bind that to the sore,
renewing it twice a day until it has rotted the kirnelles, that done, lance
it in the nethermoste part where the matter lies, and let it out, and then
fill it up with salt finely brayed, and the next day wash all the filth away
with warm water, and annoynte the place with Honey and Fytch flower myngled
together. But beware you touch none of the kirnelles with your bare finger,
for fear of venoming the place, which is very apt for a Fistula to breed in.

Of the cancorous Ulcer in the nose. The.xxxvii. Chapter.
THIS disease is a fretting humor, eating and consuming the flesh, and making
it all raw within: and not being helped in time, will eat through the gristle
of the nose. It comes of a corrupt blood, or else of sharp hunger,
engendered by means of some extreme cold. The signs be these. He will bleed
at the nose, and all the flesh within will be raw, and filthy stinking
savors, and matter will come out at his nose. The cure according to Martin, is
thus. Take of grene Corporas, of Alom, of each one pound, of white Corporas
one quarterne, and boil these in a Pottell of running water until a pynte be
consumed, then take it of, and put thereunto half a pynte of honey: then cause
his head to be holden up, with a drinking staff, and squirt into his
nosetrilles with a squirte of Brass, or rather of Elder, some of this water
being luke warm, three or four times one after another, but betwixt every
drinking, give him liberty to hold down his head, and to blow out the
fylthy matter, for otherwise perhaps you may choke him. And after this, it
shall be good also without holding up his head any more, to wash and rub his
nosetrilles with a fine cloute bound to a white sticks end, and wet in the
water aforesaid, and serve him thus once a day until he be whole.

Of bleeding at the nose. The.xxxviii. Chapter.
I Have seen horses my self, that have bledde at the nose, which have had
neither sore nor Ulcer in their nose, and therefore I can not choose, but say
with the Physicians, that it comes by means that the vain which ends in
that place, is either opened, broken, or fretted. It is opened many times by
means that blood abounds to much, or for that it is to fine or to subtle,
and so pearceth through the vain. Again it may be broken by some vyolent
strain, cut, or blow. And finally it may be fretted, or gnawen through, by
the sharpness of the blood, or else of some other evil humor contained
therein. As touching the cure. Martin says, it is good to take a pynte of
red Wine, and to put therein a quarterne of Bole Armeni, beaten into fine
powder, and being made luke warm, to pour the one half thereof, the first
day into his nosetril that bleedeth, causing his head to be holden up, so as
the lyquor may not fall out: and the next day to give him the other half. But
if this preuayleth not, then I for my part, would cause him to be let,
blood in the breast vain, on the same side that he bledeth at several times.
Then take Franconcense one ounce, of Aloes half an ounce, and beat them into
fine powder, and mingle them thorowlye with the whytes of Eggs, until it be
so thick as Honye, and with soft Hares hair, thruste it up into his
nosetrill, fylling the hole so full, as it can not fall out, or else fill his
nosetrilles full of Asses dong, or Hogs dong, for either of them is excellent
good to restrain any flux of blood.

Of the diseases in the mouth, and first of bloody ryftes or Choppes in the
palate of the mouth. The.xxxix. Chapter.
THis disease is called of the Italians, Palatina, which as Laurentius Russius
says, comes by eating hay or prouender, that is full of pricking seeds,
which by continual pricking, and fretting the forrowes of the mouth, do cause
them to rancle, and to blede corrupt and stinking matter, which you shall
quickly remedy as Martin says, by washing first the sore places with Vinegar
and salt, and then by annoynting the same with Honey.

Of the Bladders in a Horses mouth which our old Ferrers were wont to call the
Gigges. The Italians call them Floncelle. The.xl. Chapter.
THese be little soft swellings or rather postules with black heads* growing
in the insyde of his lyppes next unto the great Iaw teeth, which are so
paynefull unto the horse, as they make him to let his meat fall out of his
mouth, or at the least to keep it in his mouth vnchowed, whereby the horse
prospers not. Russius says, that they come either by eating to much cold
grass, or else of pricking, dusty, and filthy prouender. The cure whereof
according to Martin, is in this sort. Slytte them with a launcet, and thrust
out all the corruption, and then wash the sore places, with a little Uineger
and salt, or else with Alom water.

Of the Lampasse. The.xli. Chapter.
THe Lampasse, called of the Italians Lampastus, proceeds of the abundance
of blood, resorting to the first forrowe of the mouth, I mean that which is
next unto the upper foreteeth, causing the said sorrow to swell so hye as the
horses teeth, so as he can not chowe his meat, but is forced to let it fall
out of his mouth. The remedy is to cut all the superfluous flesh away, with a
crooked hot Iron, made of purpose, which every smyth can do.

Of the canker in the mouth. The.xlii. Chapter.
THis disease as Martin says, is a rawnesse of the mouth and tongue, which is
full of blisters, so as he can not eat his meat. Which proceeds of some
unnatural heat, coming from the stomach. For the cure whereof. Take of Alom
half a pound, of Honye a quarterne of a pint, of Colombine leaves, of Sage
leaves, of each a handefull. Boil all these together in three pintes of water,
until a pint be consumed, and wash the sore places therewith, so as it may
bleed, continuing so to do every day once until it be whole.

Of the heat in the mouth and lips. The.xliii. Chapter.
SOmetime the heat that comes out of the stomach, breeds no canker, but
makes the mouth hot, and causes the horse to forsake his meat. The cure
whereof as Martin says, is in this sort. First turn up his upper lip, and
iagge it lightlye with a Launcet, so as it may blede, and then wash both that
and all his mouth and tongue, with vinegar and salt.

Of the tongue being hurt with the Bytte, or otherwise. The.xliiii. Chapter.
IF the tongue be cut or hurt any manner of way, Martin says, it is good first
to wash it with Alom water, and then to take the leaves of black Brimble, and
to chop them together small with a little Larde, that done to bind it within a
little cloute, making it round like a ball, then having dypt the round end in
honey, to rub the tongue therewith: continuing so to do once a day, until it
be whole.

Of the Barbles, or Pappes underneath the tongue. The.xlv. Chapter.
THese be two little Pappes called of the Italians Barbole, growing naturally
(as I think,) in every horses mouth, underneath the tongue, in the nether
Jaws, which if they shoot out of any length: Russius says that they will
hinder the horses feeding, and therefore he and Martin also, would have them to
be clipped away, with a pair of sheeres, and that done, the horses mouth to be
washed with Uineger and Salt.

Of the pain in the teeth, and gummes, of the Wolfes teeth, and Iaw teeth.
The.xlvi. Chapter.
A Horse may have pain in his teeth, partly by descent of humors from his
head, down into his teeth and gummes, which is to be perceived by the
rankness and swelling of the gummes, and partly by having two extraordinary
teeth, called the Wolfes teeth, which he two little teeth growing in the upper
Jaws, next unto the great grinding teeth, which are so paynefull to the
horse, as he can not endure to chowe his meat, but is forced either to let
it fall out of his mouth, or else to keep it still half chowed, whereby the
horse prospers not, but waxes lean and poor: and he will do the like also,
when his upper Iawe teeth be so far grown, as they ouerhang the nether Iawe
teeth, and therewith be so sharp, as in moving his Jaws they cut and race the
insydes of his chekes, even as they were raced with a knife. And first as
touching the cure of the pain in the teeth, that comes by means of some
distillation: Vegetius says, it is good to rub all the outsyde of his gummes
with fine Chaulke, and strong Uineger mingled together, or else after that you
have washed the gummes with Uineger, to strew on them the powder of Pomegranate
pills. But me thinks that besides this, it were not amiss to stop the temple
veins, with the plaster before mentioned, in the Chapter of weping and
waterish eyes. The cure of the wolfes teeth, and of the Iaw teeth according to
Martin, is in this sort. First cause the horse head to be tied up to some
Rafter or Post, and his mouth to be opened with a cord, so wide as you may
easelye see every part thereof. Then take a round strong Iron tool, half a
yearde long, and made at the one end in all points like unto the Carpenters
Gouge, wherewith he pearceth his holes to be bored with a Wimble, or Awgor, and
with your left hand set the edge of your tool at the foot of the Wolfes
teeth, on the outsyde of the Iawe, turnyng the hollow side of the tool
downewarde, holding your hand steadely, so as the tool may not slip, nor
swerve from the foresaid tooth: then having a mallet in your right hand,
stryke upon the head of the tool one pretty blow, and therewith you shall loosen
the tooth, and cause it to bend inward: then staying the midst of your tool
upon the horses nether Iaw, wrinch the tooth outward, with the insyde, or
hollow side of the tool, and thrust it clean out of his head, that done,
serve the other Wolfes tooth on the other side in like manner, and fill up the
empty places with salt finelye brayed. But if his upper Iawe teeth, do also
ouerhang the nether teeth, and so cut the insyde of his mouth, as is
aforesaid, then keeping his mouth still open, take your tool and Mallet, and
pare all those teeth shorter, running along them even from the first unto the
last, turning the hollow side of your tool toward the teeth, so shall not the
tool cut the insides of his cheeks, the back or round side being turned
toward the foresaid cheeks, and that done wash all his mouth with Uineger
and salt, and let him go.

Why the diseases in the neck, wythers, and back, be declared here, before
the diseases in the throat. The.xlvii. Chapter.
Having hitherto spoken of the diseases incident to a horses head, and to all
the parts thereof. Natural order requires that we should now descend into ye
throat, as a part next adjacent to the mouth. But for so much as the diseases
in the throat have not only affinity with the head, but also with the Lunges
and other inward parts, which are many times grieved by means of
distillation coming from the head, and through the throat: I will first speak
of the diseases incident to the neck, wythers, and back of a horse, to the
intent that when I come to talk of diseases, as Rheumes and distillations do
cause: I may discourse of them orderlye, without interruption

Of the Crycke in the neck. The.xlviii. Chapter.
Because a Crycke is no other thing, but a kind of Convulsion, and for that we
have spoken sufficientlye before, of all the kinds thereof in the Chapter of
Convulsion: I purpose not here therefore to trouble you with many words. But
only show you Russius opinion, and also Martins experience therein. The Crycke
then called of the Italians Scima, or Lucerdo: according to Russius, yea and
according to Martin is, when the horse can not turn his neck any manner of
way, but hold it still right forth, in so much as he can not take his meat
from the ground, but by times, and that very slowlye. Russius says it comes
by means of some great wayght laid on the horses shoulders, or else by over
much drying up of the Synewes in the neck. The cure whereof according to
Martin, is in this sort. Draw him with a hot iron from the root of the
ear, on both sides of the neck, through the midst of the same, even down
to the breast, a straw deep, so as both ends may meet upon the breast. Then
make a hole in his forheade, hard under the foretoppe, and thruste in a
cornette upward, betwixt the skin and the flesh, a handful deep, then put
in a goose feather doubled in the midest, and anointed with Hogs grease, to
keep the hole open, to the intent the matter may run out the space of ten
days. But every day during that time, the hole must be cleansed once, and the
Feather also cleansed, and fresh anointed and so put in again. And once a day
let him stand upon the bitte, one hour or two, or be ridden two or three
Miles abroad, by such a one as will bear his head, and make him to bring it
in. But if the Crycke be such, as the horse can not hold his neck straight,
but clean awry, as I have seen diverse my self: then I think it not good, that
the horse be drawn with a hot Iron, on both sides of the neck, but only on
the contrary side. As for example, if he bend his head toward the right side,
then to draw him as is aforesaid, only on the left side, and to use the rest
of the cure as is above said, and if need be you may splent him also with
handesome staves meet for the purpose, to make his neck stand right.

Of Wennes in the neck. The.xlix. Chapter.
A Wen, is a certain kyrnell like tumor or swelling, the insyde whereof is
hard like a grystell, and spongious like a skin full of Wrettes. Of Wens
some be great, and some be small. Again some be very paynefull, and some not
paynefull at all. The Physicians say, that they proceed of gross and vicious
humors, but Vegetius says that they chance to a horse, by taking cold, or by
drinking of waters that be extreme cold. The cure according to Martin is thus.
Take of Mallows, Sage, and read Netels, of each one handful, boil them in
running water, and put thereunto a little butter, and honey, and when the herbs
be soft, take them out and all to brouse them, and put thereunto of oil of Bay
two ounces, and two ounces of Hogs grease, and warm them together over the
fire, mingling them well together, that done, plaster it upon a piece of
Leather, so bygge as the Wen, and lay it to so hot as the horse may endure it,
renewing it every day, in such sort, the space of eight days, and if you
perceive that it will come to no head, then lance it from the midst of the
Wen downewarde, so deep as the matter in the bottom may be discovered and let
out, that done, heal it up with this salve. Take of Turpentyne a quarterne,
and wash it nine times in fair new water, then put thereunto the yolke of an
Egg, and a little English Saffron beaten in powder, and make a taynt or roll
of Flax, and dippe it in that ointment, and lay it unto the sore, renewing the
same every day once, until it be whole

Of swelling in the neck after blood letting. The.l. Chapter.
THis may come of the Phlegm being rustye, and so causing the vain to rancle,
or else by means of some cold wind striking suddenly into the hole. The cure
according to Martin, is thus. First annoint it with oil of Camomill warmed,
and then lay upon it a little hay wet in cold water, and bind it about with a
cloth, renewing it every day, the space of five or syx days, to see whether it
will grow to a head, or else vanishe away. If it grow to a head, then give
it a slytte with a Launcet, and open it with a Cornet, that the matter may come
out. Then heal it up, by taynting it with Flax dypt in Turpentine, and Hogs
grease, molten together, dressing it so once a day, until it be whole.

How to staunch blood. The.li. Chapter.
IF a horse be let blood, when the sign is in the neck, the vain perhaps
will not leave bleeding so sone as a man would have it, which if any such thing
chance, then Russius says, it is good to bind thereunto, a little new
horsedong, tempred with chaulke, and strong Uineger, and not to remove it from
thence, the space of three days, or else to lay thereunto, burnt Sylke, Felt,
or Cloth, for all such things will staunch blood.

Of the falling of the Crest. The.lii. Chapter.
THis comes for the most part of pouertye, and specially when a fat horse
falls away suddenly. The cure according to Martin, is thus. Draw his Creast
the depenesse of a straw, on the contrary side, with a hot iron, the edge of
which iron, would be half an ynch broad, and make your beginning, and ending,
somewhat beyond the fall, so as the first draught may go all the way hard upon
the edge of the main, even underneath the rotes of the same, bearing your
hand right downewarde, into the neckewarde, then answer that with an other
draught beneath, and so far dystante from the first, as the fall is broad,
compassing as it were all the fall: but still on the contrary side: and betwixt
those two draughtes right in the midst, draw a third draught, then with a
button iron of an ynche about, burn at each end a hole, and also in the
spaces betwixt the draughtes, make diverse holes distant three fingers broad one
from an other, as this figure does show you: that done, to slake the fire,
annoint it every day once, for the space of nine days, with a Feather dipped in
fresh butter molten. Then take of Mallows and of Sage, of each one handful:
boil them well in running water, and wash the burning away, until it be raw
flesh. Then dry it up with this powder. Take of Honey half a pynte, and so
much slect Lyme as will make that honey thycke, like paast. Then hold it in a
fire pan over the fire, until it be baken so hard, as it may be made in
powder, and sprincle that upon the sore places.

Of the maunginesse in the Main. The.liii. Chapter.
THe Maungynesse procedes of rancknesse of blood, or of pouertye, of
lowsynesse, or else of rubbing where a Maungy horse has rubbed, and of filthy
dust lying in the Main, for lack of good dressing. The signs be aparaunt by
the ytching and rubbing of the horse, and the scabbes. fretting both flesh, and
skin. The cure according to Martin, is thus. Take of fresh grease one pound,
of Quicksyluer half an ounce, of Brimstone one ounce, of Rape Oil half a
pynte, mingle them together, and stir them continually in a pot with a
sclyce, until the Quicksyluer be so wrought with the rest, as you shall
perceive no Quicksyluer therein. That done, take a blunt knyfe, or an old
horsecombe, and scratch all the maungy places therewith until it be raw, and
bloody, and then annoint it with this ointment, in the sun shine, if it may
be, to the intent the ointment may sink in: or else hold before it a fire
pan, or some broad bar of Iron made hot, to make the ointment to melte into
the flesh. And if you se that within the space of three days after, with this
once anointing, he leave not rubbing: then mark in what place he rubbeth, and
dress that place again, and you shall see it heal quicklye.

Of the falling of the hair of the Main. The.liiii. Chapter.
IT falls for the most part, because it is eaten with little worms, fretting
the roots in sunder, which according to Martin, you shall remedy in this
sort. Annoint the main, and creast with Soap, then make strong Lie, and wash
all the main and creast withal, and that will kill the worms within twice,
or thrice washing.

Of griefs in the Wythers. The.lv. Chapter.
TO a horses Wythers, and back, do chance many griefs and sorances, which
as Russius says, do sometime proceed of inward causes, as of the corruption
of humors, and sometime of outward causes, as through the galling and pinching
of some naughty saddle, or by some heavy burden, laid on the horses back, or
such like. And of such griefs, some be but superficial blisters, swellings,
light galls, or brousinges: and be easelye cured. Some again do pearce to
the very bone, and be dangerous, and specially if they be nigh the back
bone: let us first then show you the cure of the smaller griefs, and then of
the greater.

Of Blystringes, or small swellings in the wythers or back, and of gallings.
The.lvi. Chapter.
WHen so ever you se any swelling rise, then Martin would have you to bind a
little hot horse dong unto it, and that will assuage it. If not, then to
prycke it round about the swelling, either with a fleame, or else with a
sharp poynted knife, not to deep, but so as it may pearce the skin, and
make the blood to issue forth. That done. Take of Mallows, or else of
Smallage, two or three handful, and boil them in running water, until they be
so soft as pappe. Then strain the water softlye from it, and brose the herbs
in a Treane dishe, putting thereunto a little Hogs grease, or else Salet oil,
or shepes Sewet, or any other fresh grease, boil them and stur them together,
not frying them hard, but so as it may be soft and souple, and then with a
clout lay it warm upon the sore, renewing it every day once, until the
swelling be gone. For this will either drive it away, or else bring it to a
head, which lightly chances not, unless there be some gristle or bone
perished. Russius bids you, so sone as you see any swelling rise, to shave
the place with a Rasor, and to lay thereunto this plaster. Take a little
wheat flower, and the white of an Egg beaten together, and spread it on a
Linen cloute, which being laid unto the swelling, two or three days, and not
removed, will bring it to a head, and when you come to take it of, pull it away
so softly as you can possibly, and where as you se the corruption gathered
together, then in the lowest place thereof, pearce it upward with a sharp iron
somewhat hot, that the corruption may come out, and annoint the sore place
every day once, with fresh butter, or Hogs grease. But if the skin be only
chaufed of, without any swelling, then wash the place with water and salt, or
else with warm wine, and sprincle this powder thereon. Take of vnsleyet Lyme* a
quantitye beaten in to fine powder, and mingle it with honey, until it be so
thick as Paast, and make rolls or balls thereof, and bake them in a fire pan
over the fire, until they be so hard, as they may be brought to powder, for
this is a very good powder to dry up any galling or sore. The powder of Mirre
or burnt Silk Felt or cloth, or of any old post, is also good for such
purposes, but when so ever you use this powder of Lyme and Honey, let the place
he first washed as is aforesaid.

Of great swellings and inflammations in a horses Wythers. The.lvii. Chapter.
IF the swelling be very great, then ye cure according to Martin is thus.
First draw round about the swelling, with a hot iron, and then cross him him
with the same iron in this manner then take a round hot iron having a sharp
point, and thrust it into the swelling place on each side upward toward the
point of the Wythers, to the intent that the matter may issue downewarde, at
both the holes. That done, taynt both the holes, first with a taint dipped in
Hogs grease, to kill the fire, and also annoint all the other burnt places
therewith, continuing so to do, until the swelling be aswaged, renewing the
taints every day once, until the fiery matter be fallen away, and then taint
him again with washed Turpentyne, mingled with yolks of Eggs, and Saffron,
in such manner, as have been beforesayd renewing the taynte every day once, until
it be whole. If you see that the swelling, for all this go not away, then it is
a sign of some impostumation within, and therefore it shall be necessary to
lance it, and to let out the corruption, then take of honey half a pint, of
Uerdigreace two ounces beaten to powder, and mingle it together with the honey,
then boil them in a pot until it look red, then being luke warm, make
either a taynt, or plaster, according as the wound shall require, renewing the
same every day once until it be whole. But the sore may be so vehemente, that
for lack of loking to in time, it will pearse downewarde betwixt both
shoulders, toward the intrayles, which is very dangerous, yea and as Russius
says, mortal, because the corruption of the sore, infecting the Lungs, and
heart (which be the vital parts, and chief preseruers of life) the body must
needs decay. And therefore, Martin would have you to fill the hole with the
salve last mentioned, and to thrust in after it a piece of sponge, as well to
keep the hole open, as also to suck out the corruption, renewing it every day
once, until it be whole.

Of the horns or hard bones, growing under the Saddle side. The.lviii.
Chapter.
THis is a dead skin like a piece of leather, called of the Italyans Corno,
that is to say a horn, for that it is hard under hand, and comes by means
of some strayt saddle, pinching the horse more on the one side than on the
other: or else on both sides equally. The cure whereof according to Martin, is
in this sort. Annoint them with fresh butter, or Hogs grease, until they be
mollifyed and made so soft, as you may either cut them, or pull them away,
and then wash the wound with man's stale, or with white wine, and dry it up with
powder of vnslect Lyme.

Of Wennes or knobbes, growing about the Saddle skyrtes. The.lix. Chapter.
THese be great hard knobbes, growing most commonly betwixt two ribs,
aparaunt to the eye, which by their hardness, seem to come of some old broose,
and are called of the Italians le Curte. The cure whereof according to Martin,
is thus. First mollifye them, by anointing them with hot Hogs grease, every
day once or twice, the space of eight days, and if you perceive that it will
come to no head with this, then lance it from the middle downward, that the
matter may come out: then taint it with washed Turpentine, yolks of eggs, and
saffro^ mingled together, as is aforesaid, renewing the taint every day once
until it be whole.

Of the Nauill gall. The.lx. Chapter.
THe Nauill gall is a broose on the back behind the Saddle, right against the
Nauel of the horse, and thereof it takes his name. It comes either by
splytting of the Saddle behind, or for lack of stuffing, or by means of the
hinder buckle, fretting that place, or else by some great wayght laid on his
back: you shall perceive it by the puffed up, and spongy flesh, loking like
rotten lights or lungs, and therefore is called of the Italyans Pulmone or
Pulmoncello. The cure whereof according to Martin, is thus. Cut it round about
with a sharp knife or rasor, even to the bone, leaving no rotten flesh
behind: that done. Take the white of an Egg, and salt beaten together, and
lay that playsterwyse unto the sore, upon a little toawe, renewing it once a
day, the space of two days. Then take of honey a quarter of a pynte, and of
Uerdigreace one ounce, beaten into powder, and boil them together in a pot,
stirring it still until it look red, and being luke warm, make a plaster with
toawe, and clappe it to the wound, washing and clensing well the wound
first, with a little warm vinegar, or white wine, continuing so to do once a
day, until it begin to heal, and to skin, then dry it up, by sprincling
thereon this powder following. Take of Honey a quarterne, and as much of slect
Lyme as will thicken the honye like unto paast, and in a fire pan over the fire
stir it still until it be hard baked, so as it may be beaten into powder,
but before you throw on the powder, wash the wound first, with warm Ueneger,
contynuing so to do, until it be perfectelye skynned and whole.

Of the swaying of the back. The.lxi. Chapter.
THis is called of the Italians Mal feruto, and according to Russius, and
Martins opinions, comes either by some great strain, or else by heavy
burdens. You shall perceive it, by the reeling and rolling of the horses hinder
parts, in his going, which will folter many times, and sway, sometime
backewarde, and sometime sydelyng, and be ready to fall even to the ground,
and the horse being laid, is scante able to get up. The cure according to
Martin is thus. Cover his back with a sheep skin, coming hot from the
sheep back, laying the fleshye side next unto his back, and lay a warm
howsyng cloth upon the same, to keep his back as warm as may be, and so let
it continue, until it begin to smell: then take the old skin away, and lay
a new unto it, continuing so to do the space of three weeks, and if he amend
not with this, then draw his back with a hot iron right out on both sides
of the rydge of his back, from the pitche of the buttocke, unto a handefull
within the Saddle, and then again overthwart, in this sort. And let every
line be an ynch dystaunt, one from another, and let not such strykes be very
deep, but so burned as every one may look yellow, then lay upon the burning
this charge here following. Take of Pitch one pound, of Rosen half a pound,
of bole Armonie half a pound made in powder, and half a pint of Carre, and
boil all these together in a pot, stirring it until every thing be molten,
and thoroughly mingled together, then being luke warm, dawbe all the burning
therewith very thycke, and thereupon clap as many Flocks of the horses color,
as you can make to bide on, and remove it not before it fall away of it self,
and if it be in Summer, you may turn him to grass.

Of weakness in the back. The.lxii. Chapter.
IT does appear by Laurentius Russius, that there is an other kind of
weakness in the back, called in Italion le got, or morsecatura, de le
reni, that is to say, the fretting or biting of the raynes, which as the
said Russius says, proceeds of abundaunce of humors, resorting to that
place, whereby all the hinder parts of the horse do lose their feeling and
strength, and the horse falls down to the ground: yea and such humors many
times resorting to the heart, do suffocate the same, and in two or three
hours do cause the horse to dye. The remedy according to Russius, is in this
sort. Let him blood abundantly in the neck, and draw his back with a hot
iron, in such sort as is declared in the last Chapter. He says also, it is
good to make him swim through a River, and to roll him upon the haunches, nigh
the huckle bones: and to make the hair to grow again, it is good as he
says, to anoint the place with Hogs grease, and three leaued grass stamped
together.

Of Hyde bownd. The.lxiii. Chapter.
HYde bound is when the skin cleaves so fast to the horses back, that a
man can not pull it from the flesh with his hand, which Ruellius calls
Coriago, it comes for the most part of poverty, or else when the horse
after some great heat, has been suffered to stand long in the rain or wette
weather, for that will cause the skin to shrink, and to cling to his rybbes. It
is known by the leanness of the horse, and gauntnesse of his belly, and by
the fast sticking of the skin unto his ribs, when you pull at it with your
hand. The cure according to Martin, is thus. Let him blood on both sides the
bellye, in the flank veins betwixt the flank, and the girding place, that
done, give him this drink. Take a quart of good white wine, or else of good
Ale, and put thereunto three ounces of good Salet oil, of Comen one ounce, of
Annis seeds two ounces, of Lycoras two ounces, beaten all into fine powder,
and give it him luke warm with a horn. And when he has drunk, let one
standing at his huckle bone, rub him hard with his hand along the back,
and overthwart the rybbes the space of half an hour, that done set him in a
warm stable, and let him stand in litter up to the belly, and cover all his
back and rybbes with a sack, first thoroughly soked in a Tub of cold water,
and then well and hard wrong, and over that cast an other cloth, and girde it
fast with a sursingle, stuffing him well about the back with fresh straw,
continuing thus to do every day once the space of a week, during which time
give him no cold water, but luke warm, and put therein a little ground malt.
The wette sack will cause the back to gather heat of it self, and the skin
to losen from the flesh, and if you will bestow more cost, you may annoint all
his body, with wine and oil, mingled together, according to the opinions of
the old writers, which no doubt is a very comfortable thing, and must needs
supple the skin, and losen it from the flesh.

Of the diseases in the throat and lungs, and why the griefs of the shoulders
and hippes be be not mentioned before amongst the griefs of the withers and
back. The.lxiiii. Chapter.
SOme perhaps would look here that for so much as I have declared the
diseases of the neck, wythers, and back, that I should also follow on now,
with the griefs of the shoulders and hippes. But sith that such griefs, for
the most part do cause a horse to halt, and that it requires some skill to
know when a horse halteth, whether the fault be in his shoulder, hippe, leg,
ioynte, or foot, I think it not good to separate those parts a sunder,
specially sith nature has joined them together, that is to say, the shoulders
to the forelegges, and the hippes to the hinder legs. And therefore according
to natures order, I will treat of them in their proper place, that is to say,
after that I have showed you all the diseases that be in the inward parts of
a horses body, not only above the midriffe, as the diseases of the throat,
lungs, breast, and heart, but also under the Midriffe, as those of the
stomach, Liver, Guts, and of all the rest. And first as touching the
diseases of the throat, the Glaunders, and Stranguyllion, to all horses is most
common.

Of the Glaunders, and Stranguyllion, so called according to the Italion name
Stranguijlione. The.lxv. Chapter.
MOst Ferrers do take the Glaunders and Stranguylion to be all one disease, but
it is not so, for the Glaunders is that which the Physicians call Tonsille, and
the Stranguylion is that which they call in Laten Angina, in Greek Synanchi,
and we commonly call it in English, the Squina^cy, or Quinzie Toncille is
interpreted by them to be inflammations of the kirnelles called in Laten
Glandes, in Italion glandule, which lie on each side of the throat, underneath
the rote of the tongue, nigh unto the swallowing place, of which word glandes
or glandule, I think we borrow this name Glaunders, for when the horse is
troubled with this disease, he has great kyrnelles underneath his Jaws, easy
to be seen or fealte, payning him so, as he can not easily swallow down his
meat, which comes first of cold distillation out of the head. But if
such kirnels be not inflamed, they will perhaps go away of them selves, or else
by laying a little hot horse dong and straw unto them, the warmth whereof will
dissolve them, and make them to vanishe away. But if they be inflamed, they
will not go away, but increase and wax greater and greater, and be more
paynefull every day than other, and cause the horse to cast continually
filthy and stinking matter, out at his nose. The cure whereof according to
Martin, is thus. First ripe the kyrnelles with this plaster. Take of Branne
two handefull, or as much as will thicken a quart of wine, or Ale: then put
thereunto half a pound of Hogs grease, and boil them together, and lay it
hot to the sore with a clothe, renewing it every day until it be ready to
break: then lance it and let out all the matter, and taynt it with a taynt of
Flax, dipte in this salve. Take of Turpentyne, of Hogs grease, of each like
quantity, and a little wax, and melt them together, and renew the taynt every
day until it be whole. Laurentius Russius says, that this disease is very
common to Coltes, because in them does abound fluxible moisture, apt to to be
dissolved with every little heat, and so turn to putrefaction, and therefore
if the horse be not over young, he would have you first to let him blood in
the neck vain, and then to lay unto the sore a ryping plaster, made of
Mallows, Linseede, Rewe, Wormwood, ground Iue, oil of Bays, and Dyalthea,
and to annoint his throat also, and all the sore place, with fresh butter. And
the sore being ripe, to lance it, or else to roll it, that the matter may
come forth. But if the kirnelles will not decrease with this, then pull them
away by the roots, and to dry up the vlcerous place with an oyntmente, made of
vnslect Lyme, Pepper, Brymstone, Nitrum, and oil Olive. It shall be good also
to purge his head by perfuming him every day once, in such sort as have been
before declared. And let the horse be kept warm about the head, and stand in
a warm stable, and let him drink no cold water. But if you see that after
you have taken away the kirnelles, the horse does not for all that leave
casting fylthy matter at the nose, then it is to be feared, yt he has some
spice of the mourning of the Chyne, for both diseases do proceed of one cause,
and therefore I think good to speak of it here presentlye.

Of the mourning of the Chyne. The.lxvi. Chapter.
This word mourning of the Chyne, is a corrupt name, borrowed of the French
tongue, wherein it is called Mort deschyen, that is to say, the death of the
back. Because many do hold opinion, that this disease does consume the marye
of of the back, for remedy whereof, they use strange kinds of cures. For some
taking it to be a Rheum, go about to stop it, by laying Astrictyue, or
byndyng charges, unto the nape of the neck. Some again do twyne out the pyth
of the back with a long wyar, thrust up into the horses head, and so into his
neck and back, with what reason I know not. Well I know, that few horses do
recover that have this disease. Some again think that the Lungs of the horse
be rotten, and that the horse does cast them out at his nose. But Martin
says, that he has cut up diverse horses which has been judged to have died of
the mourning of the Chyne, but he could never find either back or Lungs to
be peryshed, but only the Liver, and most commonly that side of the Liver,
which answers the nosetrill whereat he casts, whereof we will talk in
his proper place, when we come to speak of the diseases in the Liver. The
Italians do call this disease Ciamorro, the old Authors do call it the moist
Maladye, whereof Theomnestus makes two differences. For in the one, the matter
which he does cast at the nose is white, and does not smell at all, and in the
other, that which he casts is a filthy and stinking corruption. They proceed
both of cold humors, congealed in the head, but more abounding in the one,
than in the other: by reason perhaps, that the horse was not cured in time:
for of cold, first comes the Pose, and the Cough, then the Glaunders, and
last of all the mourning of the Chyne. When the horse casts matter at the
nose, that is not stinking, he may be easily cured, by such remedies as have
been before declared in the Chapter of the Pose. But if the matter be very
filthye and stinking, then it is very hard to cure. Notwithstanding it shall
not grieve me to write unto you here, the experience of Theomnestus, and of
Laurentius Russius. Theomnestus cure is thus. Take of water and honey called of
the Physicians Hedromel, a quart, and put thereunto three ounces of oil, and
pour that into his nosetril every morning, ye space of three days, and if that
do not profit him, then let him drink every day, or once in two days, a
quarte of old wine, mingled with some of the medicine, or rather the precious
meat, called of the old writers Tetrapharmacum, and that will restore him to
his former estate. Laurentius Russius says, that of all diseases there is none
more perilous, nor more to be suspected, than the Rhewine which comes of
cold, for horses have large Cunduits, and are full of moisture, and therefore
if cold once enter, it finds matter enough to work on, to breed continual
distillation, as well outwardlye at the nose, as inwardly, discending down to
the vital parts* in such sort, as it does suffocat the same. The signs
according to the said Russius be these. The horse does cast matter continually
at the nose some time thin, and sometime thick, his nosetrils, ears, and all
his outward parts, will be cold to the feeling, his eyes, head, and all his
body heavy, and he will coughe, and have small appitite to his meat, and less
to his drink, and sometime he will tremble and shake. His cure is in this
sort. Purge his head, partly by perfuming him, and partly by making him to
neese in such sort, as has been before taught in the Chapter of the Pose,
which ways of perfuming and purging the head, as they be good, so does
Russius praise these two here following to be most excellent. The first is this.
Take of the stalks of vitis Alba otherwise called Brioni, or wild Uine, two
or three good handful, and broose them betwixt two stones, and being so
brosed, put them into a Linen bag, and fasten the bag to the horses head,
so as he may receive the scent up into his nosetrilles, without touching the
herb with his mouth, and this will cause the humors to come down
abundantlye. The second medicine. Take of Euforbiu^ beaten into fine powder
three ounces, of the juice of Betes one pound, of Swines blood half a pound.
Boil all these together until they be thoroughly myngled, and lyquid like an
ointment, and then take it from the fire, and put thereunto one ounce more of
Euforbium, and mingle them again thoroughly together, and preserve the same in a
box to use at needful times, in this sort. Make two styffe long rowles, or
tampins, of linen cloutes, or such like stuff, sharp poynted like Sugar
loves, which tampins are called of the Physicians in Laten Pessi, and being
anointed with the ointment aforesaid, thruste them up into the horses
nosetrilles, and let them abide therein a pretty while, then pull them out, and
you shall see such abundaunce of matter, come forth at his nose, as is
marvelous to behold. Russius also prayseth very much this medicine here
following. Take as much of the middle bark of an Elder tree, growing on the
water side, as will fill a new earthen pot, of a mean syse, putting thereunto
as much clear water, as the pot will hold, and let it boil until the one
half be consumed: and then to be filled up again with fresh water, continuing
so to do three times, one after an other, and at the last time, that the one
half is consumed, take it from the fire, and strain it through a lynnen cloth.
Then take two parts of that decoction, and one part of Hogs grease, or
butter, and being warmed again together, give the horse to drink thereof one
horn full, and pour an other hornefull into his nosetrill that casts, and
when so ever you give him this medicine, let the horse be empty and fasting,
and keep him without meat also. two or three hours after. For this is a very
good drink for any sickness, that comes of cold. Moreover open the skin
of his foreheade, and of his temples, and also of his tail, with a sharp hot
iron, that the corrupt humors may issue outward. That done. Take hot Bricks,
or else a pan fresh burning coals, and hold it nighe unto his bellye, and
flanks, to the intent they may be thoroughly warmed, and being so warmed,
annoint them all over, with oil de Bay, or Dialthea, to defend his body from
the cold, and let his head be well covered, and all his bellye kept warm.
Yea and it were good to bathe his head sometime as Russius says with a bathe
made of Rhewe, Wormwood, Sage, Ieneper, Bay leaves, and Hysop. And let his
drink be warm water myngled with wheat meal, yea and to make it the more
comfortable, it were good as Russius says, to put thereunto some Cynamon,
Gynger, Galingale, and such hot spyces. And his meat in Winter season would be
none other but sodden corn, or warm mashes, made of ground Malt and wheat
Branne: in Summer season if he went to grass, I think it would do him most
good, so that he go in a dry warm ground, for by feding always downward, he
shall purge his head the better as Russius says. Thus much of the Glaunders,
and mourning of the Chyne. Now we will speak somewhat of the Stranguylion,
according to the opinion of the old Authors, though not to the satisfaction
perhaps of our English Ferrers.

Of the Stranguylion or Squynancye. The.lxvii. Chapter.
THe Stranguylion called of the Latens Angina, according to the Physicians, is
an inflammation of the inward parts of the throat, and as I said before, is
called of the Greeks Sinanchi, which is as much to say in English as a
strangling, whereof this name Stranguylion as I think is deryued, for this
disease does strangle either man or beast, and therefore is numbered amongst the
perilous and sharp diseases, called of the Latens Morbi acuti, of which
strangling the Physicians in man's body make four differences. The first and
worst is, when no part within the mouth, nor without, appears manifestly to
be inflamed, and yet the pacient is in great peril of strangling. The second
is, when the inward parts of the throat only be inflamed. The third is when
the inward and outward parts of the throat be both inflamed. The fourth is,
when the Muskles of the neck are inflamed, or the inward joints thereof so
losened, as they strayten thereby, both the throat, or wesand, or windpipe, for
short breath is incident to all the four kinds before recyted, and they
proceed all of one cause, that is to say, of some Colorick or bloody fluxion,
which commes out of the branches of the throat veins into those parts, and
there bredeth some hot inflammation. But now to prove that a horse is subject
to this disease, you shall hear what Absirtus, Hierocles, and Vegetius and
others do say. Absirtus writing to his friend, a certain Ferrer or
Horsleache, called Aistoricus, speaks in this manner. When a horse has the
stra^guylion, it quickly kills him, the signs whereof be these. His temples
will be hollow, his tongue will swell, and hang out of his mouth, his head
and eyes also will be swolle^, and the passage of his throat stopped, so as he
can neither eat nor drink. All these signs be also confirmed by Hierocles.
Moreover Vegetius rendereth the cause of this disease, affirming, that it
proceeds of abundance of subtle blood, which after long travel, will
inflame the inward or outward muskels of the throat or wesand, or such
affluence of blood may come, by use of hot meats after great travel, being
so alteratiue, as they cause those parts to swell in such sort, as the horse
can neither eat nor drink, nor draw his breath. The cure according to
Vegetius, is in this sort. First bath his mouth and tongue well with hot
water, and then annoynte it with the gall of a Bull, that done, give him this
drink. Take of old oil two pound, of old wine a quarte, nine Figs, and
nine Leekes heads, well stampte and brayed together. And after you have boiled
these a while, before you strain them, put thereunto a little Nitrum
Alexandrinum, and give him a quarte of this every morning, and evening.
Absirtus and Hierocles, would have you to let him blood in the palate of his
mouth, and to pour wine and oil into his nosetrilles, and also to give him to
drink this decoction of Fygges and Nitrum, sodden together, or else to annoint
his throat within with Nitre oil, and honey, or else with honey and Hogs dong
myngled together, which differs not much from Galen his medicine, to be given
unto man. For he says, that honey mingled with the powder of Dogs dong that
is white, and swalowed down, does remedy the Squinancye presentlye. Absirtus
also prayseth the oyntmente made of Bdellinum, and when the inflammation
begins somewhat to decrease, he says it is good to purge the horse, by
giving him wild Concumbre, and Nitre to drink. Let his meat be grass, if it
may be gotten, or else wet hay, and sprinkled with Nitre. Let his drink also
be luke warm water, with some Barley meal in it.

Of the Cough. The.lxviii. Chapter.
OF Coughes some be outward, and some be inward. Those be outward which do
come of outward causes, as by eating a feather, or by eating dusty or sharp
bearded straw, and such like things: which tycling his throat, causes him to
Coughe. You shall perceive it by wagging and wrying his head in his choughing,
and by stamping sometime with his foot, laboring to get out the thing that
grieueth him, and can not. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take a Willow
wand, rolled throughout with a fine Linen clout, and then annoynte it all over
with honey, and thrust it down his throat, drawing your hand to and fro, to
the intent it may either drive down the thing that grieueth him, or else
bring it up, and do this twice or thrice, annoynting at every time the stick
with fresh honey.

Of the inward and wet Coughe. The.lxix. Chapter.
OF inward Coughes some be wet and some be dry. The wet cough is that, which
comes of cold, taken after some great heat given to the horse, dissoluing
humors, which being afterward congealed, do cause obstruction and stopping in
the lungs. And I call it the wet coughe, because the horse in his coughing, will
void moystye matter at his mouth, after that it is once broken. The signs be
these. The horse will be heavy, and his eyes will run a water, and he will
forsake his meat, and when he cougheth, he thrusts out his head, and
reaches with great pain at the first, as though he had a dry cough, until
the Phlegm be broken, and then he will cough more hollow, which is a sign of
amendment. And therefore according to Martins experience, to the intent the
Phlegm may break the sooner, it shall be necessary to keep him warm, by
clothing him with a double cloth, and by litteryng him up to the bellye with
fresh straw, and then to give him this drink. Take of Barlye one Pecke, and
boil it in two or three Gallons of fair water, until the Barlye begin to
bruste, and boil therewith of broused Lycoras, of Annis seeds, of Raysins, of
each one pound, then strain it, and to that lyquor, put of honey a pynte, and
a quarterne of Sugercandy, and keep it close in a pot to serve the horse
therewith four several morninges, and cast not away the sodden Barley with the
rest of the strayninges, but make it hot every day to perfume the horse
withal, being put into a bag, and tied to his head, and if the horse will
eat of it, it shall do him the more good. And this perfuming in Winter season
would be used about ten of the clock in the morning, when the sun is of some
heyght, to the intent the horse may be walked abroad, if the sun shine, to
excercyse him moderately. And until his coughe wear away, fail not to give
him warm water, with a little ground Maulte. And as his cough breaks more
and more, so let his water every day be less warmed, than other.

Of the dry Coughe. The.lxx. Chapter.
THis seems to come of some gross and tough humor, cleaving hard to the
hollow places of the lungs which stops the wind pipes, so as ye horse ca^
not easly draw his breath, and if it continue, it will either grow to the
Pursick, or else break his wind altogether. The signs be these. He will cough
both often, dryly, and also vehementlye, without voyding at the nose or mouth.
The cure according to Martin, is in this sort. Take a close earthen pot and
put therein, three pyntes of strong Uineger, and four Eggs, shelles and all
unbroken, and four Garlic heads clean pilled and broused, and set the pot
being very close covered, in some warm donghill, and there let it stand a
whole night: and the next morning with your hand take out the Eggs, which will
be so soft as sylke, and lay them by, until you have strayned the Garlycke and
Uineger through a fair cloth, then put to that lyquor, a quarterne of honey, and
half a quarterne of Sugercandye, and two ounces of Lycoras, and two ounces of
Annis seeds, beaten all into fine powder. And then the horse having fasted all
the night before, in the morning betwixt seven and eight of the clock, open
his mouth with a cord, and whorle therein one of the Eggs, so as he may
swallow it down, and then immediatelye pour in after it a horn full of the
foresaid drink, being first made luke warm, and then cast in an other Egg,
with an other horn full of drink, and so continue to do, until he has
swallowed up all the Eggs, and drunk up all the drink: and then bridle
him, and cover him with warmer clothes tha^ he had before, and bring him into
the stable, and there let him stand on the bitte, at the bare rack, well
littered up to the bellye, the space of two hours. Then vnbitte him, and if it
be in Winter, offer him a handeful of Wheaten straw, if in So^mer, give him
grass, and let him eat no hay, unless it be very well dusted, and sprinkled
with water, and give him not much thereof. And therefore you shall need to give
him the more prouender, which also must be well cleansed of all filthe, and
dust, and give him no cold water, the space of nine days. And if you perceive
that the cough does not wear away, then if it be in Winter, purge him with
these pills. Take of larde two pound laid in water two hours, then take
nothing but the cleene fat thereof, and stamp it in a mortar, and thereto
put of Lycoras, of Annis seeds, of Fenegreke, of each beaten into powder three
ounces, of Aloes in powder two ounces, of Agarice one ounce. Knede these
together like paast, make thereof six balls, as big as an Egg. Then the
horse having fasted over night, give him the next morning these pills, one
after another, anointed with honey and oil mingled together, in a Platter, and
to the intent he may swallowe them down whyther he will or not, when you have
opened his mouth, catch hold of his tongue, and hold it fast whilst you
whorle in one of the pills, that done, thrust it into his throat with a
rolling pin, and then let his tongue go until he has swalowed it down:
then give him in like manner all the rest of the pills, and let him stand on
the bit warm clothed, and littered the space of three hours at the least, and
after that give him a little wette hay, and warm water with a little ground
Maulte in it, to drink, and let him drink no other but warm water, the
space of a weke. And now and then in a fair sunnye day, it shall be good to
trotte him one hour abroad, to breath him.

Of the fretized, broken, and rotten lungs. The.lxxi. Chapter.
THis procedes as Absirtus and Theomnestus says, either of an extreme coughe,
or of vehement running, or leaping, or of over greadye drinking after great
thrist, for the lungs be enclosed in a very thin film or skin, and therefore
easy to be broken, which if it be not cured in time, does grow to
appostumation, and to corruption, oppressing all the lungs, which of the old
Authors is called Vomica, and Supputatio. But Theomnestus says, that broken
lungs, and rotten lungs, be two diverse diseases, and have diverse signs, and
diverse cures. The signs of broken lungs be these. The horse draws his wind
short, and by little at once, he will turn his head often toward the place
grieved, and groneth in his breathing, he is afraid to coughe, and yet
cougheth as though he had eaten small bones. The same Theomnestus healed a
friends horse of his, whose lungs were fretyzed or rather broken as he says,
by continual eating of salt, with this manner of cure here following. Let the
horse have quiet and rest, and then let him blood in the haunches, where the
veins appear most: and give him to drink the space of seven days, Barlye or
rather Otes, soden in Goats milk, or if you can get no milk, boil it in
water, and put therein some thick Collops of Larde, and of Deares sewet, and
let him drink that: and let his common drink in winter season, be the
decoction of wheat meal, and in Summer time, the decoction of Barley, and this
as he says will bind his lungs again together. Vegetius utterly disaloweth
letting of blood in any such disease as this is, and also all manner of sharp
medicines, for fear of provoking the coughe, by means whereof the broken
places can never heal perfectly. And therefore neither his medicines nor meat
would be harshe, but smouth, gentle, and cooling. The best medicine that may
be given him at all times is this. Take of Fengreke, and of Lynsede, of each
half a pound, of Gum dragant, of Masticke, of Mirre, of Sugar, of Fytch
flower, of each one ounce. Let all these things be beaten into fine powder, and
then infused one whole night in a sufficient quantity of warm water, and the
next day give him a quart of this luke warm, putting thereunto two or three
ounces of oil of Roses, continuing so to do many days together, and if the
disease be new, this will heal him. Yea and it will ease him very much
though the disease be old, which then is thought incurable. And in winter
season so long as he stands in the stable, let him drink no cold water, and
let his meat be cleene without dust, but in Summer season it were best to let
him run to grass. For so long as he eats grass, a man shall scantly
perceive this disease: thus much of broken lungs.

Of putryfied or rotten lungs. The.lxxii. Chapter.
THe signs to know whether a horses lungs be putrifyed or rotten, according
to Theomnestus, are these. The horse will both eat and drink more gredily than
he was wont to do, and he shall be oftener vexed with a dry cough, and in
coughing he will cast little lumps of matter out at his mouth. The cure whereof,
according to Theomnestus, is thus. Give him to drink every morning, the space
of seven days, the juice of Purslen mingled with oil of Roses, and add
thereunto a little Tragagantu^, that has been laid before in steep in Goats
milk, or else in barlye or oten milk, strayned out of the corn. When the
Apostume is broken, then a very strong and evil savor will come out at his
nosetrilles. For remedy whereof, it shall be good to give him the space of
seven days this drink here following. Take of the root called Costus two
ounces, and of Casia, or else of Cynamon three ounces, beaten into fine powder,
and a few Raysins, and give it him to drink with wine. But Vegetius would
have him to be cured in this sort, and with less cost, I assure you. Take of
Franconcense, and of Aristoloch, of each two ounces, beaten into fine powder,
and give him that with wine, or else take of unburned Brimstone two ounces, and
of Aristoloch one ounce and a half beaten into powder, and give him that with
wine. And he would have you also to draw his breast with a hot iron, to the
intent that the humors may issue forth outwardly.

Of shortness of breath. The.lxxiii. Chapter.
A Horse may have shortenesse of breath, by hastye running after drinking, or
upon a full stomach, or by the discending of humors unto his throat or lungs,
after some extreme heat dissoluing the said humors, which so long, as there is
nothing broken, may in the beginning be easilye helped. The signs be these.
The horse will continually pant, and fetch his breath short, which will come
very hot out at his nose, and in his breathing he will squese in the nose, and
his flanks will beat thick, yea and some can not fetch their breath unless
they hold their necks right out, and straigth, which disease is called of
the old writers by the Greek name Orthopnoea. The cure. Let him blood in the
neck, and give him this drink. Take of wine, and of oil, of each a pynte, of
Franconcense, half an ounce, and of the juice of Horehound half a pynte. It
is good also to pour into his throat honye, butter, and Hogs grease molten
together, and made luke warm. Tiberius says, it is good to give him whole
Eggs, shelles and al, steeped and made soft in Uineger: that is to say, the
first day three, the second day five, and the third day seven, and to pour
oil and wine into his nosetrilles. I for my part would take nothing but Annis
seeds, Lycoras and Sugercandy, beaten al into fine powder, give him that to
drink, with wine and oil, mingled together.

Of the Pursicke. The.lxxiiii. Chapter.
THis is a shortenesse of breath, and the horse that is so diseased, is called
of the Italians, Cauallo pulsino, or Bolso, which I think is derived of the
Laten word Vulsus, by changing V. into B. and I think differs not much
from him that has broken lungs, called of Vegetius and other old writers
Vulsus, for such shortenesse of breath commes either of the same causes, or
else much like, as of abundaunce of gross humors cleaving hard to the
hollow places of the lungs, and stopping the wind pipes. And the wind being
kept in, does resort downward as Russius says, into the horses guts, and
so causes his flanks to beat continually without order, that is to say, more
swiftlye, and hyer up to the back, than the flanks of any horse that is
sound of wind. And if this disease be old it is seldom or never cured, and
though I find many medicines prescribed by diverse Authors, few or none do
content me, unless it be that of Vegetius, recyted before in the chapter of
broken lungs. And if that prevails not, the^ I think it were not amiss
according to Russius to pourge him with this drink here following. Take of
maiden hair, of Ireos, of Ash, of Lycoras, of Fe^greke, of Raysins, of each
half an ounce, of Cardamum, of Pepper, of bitter Almonds, of Baurach, of each
two ounces, of Nettle seed, and of Aristoloche, of each two ounces, boil them
all together in a sufficient quantity of water, and in that decoction
dissolve half an ounce of Agaricke, and two ounces of Coloquintida, together
with two pound of honey, and give him of this a pint or a quart at diverse
times, and if it be to thick, make it thinner, by putting thereunto water,
wherein Lycoras has been sodde^, and if need be, you may also draw both his
flanks crossewyse with a hot Iron, to restrain the beating of them, and also
slytte his nosetrilles, to give him more air. And if it be in Summer, turn
him to grass, if in Winter, let him be kept warm, and give him now and then
a little sodden wheat. Russius would have it to be given him three days
together, and also new sweet wine to drink, or else other good wine, mingled
with Licoras water.

Of a Consumption. The.lxxv. Chapter.
A Consumption is none other thing but an exulceration of the lungs, proceeding
of some fretting or gnawing humor, discending out of the head into the lungs.
And I take it to be that disease which the old writers are wont to call the
dry malady. Which perhaps some would rather interpret to be the mourning
of the Chyne, with whom I intend not to strive. But thus much I must needs
say, that every horse having the mourning of the Chyne, does continually cast
at the nose, but in the dry maladye it is clean contrary. For all the Authors
that write thereof affirm, that the horse auoydeth nothing at the nose. And the
signs to know the dry maladye according to their doctrine, be these. His
flesh does cleene consume away, his bellye is gaunt, and the skin thereof so
hard stretched, or rather shronk up, as if you strike on it with your hand it
will sound like a Tabor, and he will be hollow backed, and forsake his meat,
and though he eats it, (as Absirtus says) yet he does not digest it, nor
prospers not withal, he would coughe and can not but hickingly, as though
he had eaten small bones. And this disease is judged of all the Authors to be
incureable. Notwithstanding, they say all, that it is good to purge his head
with such perfumes as have been showed you before, in the Chapter of the
Glaunders, and also to give him always Coleworts, small chopped with his
prouender. Some would have him to drink the warm blood of sucking Pigges
new slain, and some the juice of Leekes, together with oil and wine myngled
together. Others praise wine and Franconcense, some oil and Rhew, some would
have his body to be purged, and sent to grass.

Of the Consumption of the flesh, and how to make a lean horse fat.
The.lxxvi. Chapter.
MArtin says that if a horse take a great cold after a heat: it will cause
his flesh to waste, and his skin to wax hard and dry, and to cleave fast to
his sides, and he shall have no appetite unto his meat, and the fillettes of
his back will fall away, and all the flesh of his buttockes, and of his
shoulders, will be consumed. The cure whereof is thus. Take two sheep heads
vnfleaed, boil them in three gallons of Ale, or fair running water, until the
flesh be consumed from the bones, that done, strain it through a fine cloth,
and then put thereunto of Sugar one pound, of Cynamon two ounces, of conserve
of Roses, of Barbaries, and of Cheries, of each two ounces, and mingle them
together, and give the horse every day in the morning, a quarte thereof luke
warm, until all be spent: and after every time he drinks, let him be walked
up and down in the stable, or else abroad if the weather be warm, and not
wyndye, and let him neither eat nor drink in two hours after, and let him
drink no cold water, but luke warm the space of fiftene days, and let him
be fed by little and little, with such meat as the horse has most appetyte
unto. But if a horse be neshe and tender, and so wax lean without any
apparent grief or disease, then the old writers would have him to be fed now
and then with partched wheat, and also to drink wine with his water, and to
eat continuallye wheat branne mingled with his prouender, until he wax
strong, and he must be often dressed and trymmed, and lay soft, without the
which things his meat will do him but little good. And his meat must be
fine and clean, and given him often, and by little at once. Russius says,
that if a horse eating his meat with a good appetite, does not for all that
prosper, but is still lean: then it is good to give him Sage, Sauyn, Bay
buryes, Earth nuttes, and Boares grease, to drink with wine: or to give him
the intrayles of a Barble or Tench, with white wine. He says also that sodden
Beans mingled with bran and salt, will make a lean horse fat in very
short space.

Of grief in the breast. The.lxxvii. Chapter.
LAurentius Russius writes of a disease called in Italian Granezza di petto,
which has not been in experience amongst our Ferrers, that I can learn. It
commes as Russius says, of the superfluity of blood, or other humors dissolved
by some extreme heat, and resorting down to the breast, payning the horse so
as he can not well go. The cure whereof according to Russius is thus. Let him
blood on both sides of the breast, in ye accustemed veins, and rowel them
under the breast, and twice a day turn the rowelles with your hand, to move
the humors that they may issue forth, and let him go so rowelled the space
of.xv. days.

Of the pain at the heart called Anticor, that is to say contrary to the
heart. The.lxxviii. Chapter.
THis procedes of abundaunce of rank blood bredde with good feeding and over
much rest. Which blood resorting to the inward parts, does suffocate the
heart, and many times causes swellings to appear before the breast, which will
grow upward to the neck, and then it kills the horse. The signs. The horse
will hang down his head in the maunger, for saking his meat, and is not able
to lift up his head. The cure according to Martin, is thus. Let him blood on
both sides abundantlye in the plat veins, and then give him this drink. Take
a quarte of Malmesy, and put thereunto half a quarterne of Sugar, and two
ounces of Cynamo^, and give it him luke warm. Then keep him warm in the
stable, stuffing him well about the stomach, that the wind offend him no
manner of way, and give him warm water with malt always to drink, and give
him such meat as he will eat. And if the swelling do appear, then besides
letting him blood, strike the swelling in diverse places with your fleame, that
the corruption may go forth: and annoint the place with warm Hogs grease,
and that will either make it to wear away, or else to grow to a head, if it
be covered and kept warm.

Of tyered horses. The.lxxix. Chapter.
Because we are in hand here with the vital parts, and that when horses be
tyered with over much labor, their vital sprightes wax feeble, I think it
best to speak of them even here, not with such long discoursing as Vegetius
uses, but brieflye to show you how to refresh the poor horse, having need
thereof, which is done chieflye by giving him rest, warmth, and good feeding,
as with warm mashes and plentye of prouender. And to quicken his sprightes, it
shall be good to pour a little oil and Uineger into his nosetrilles, and to
give him the drink of shepes heads, recyted before in the Chapter of the
consumption of the flesh, yea and also to bath his legs with this bath. Take of
Mallows, of Sage, of each two or three handful, and a rose Cake. Boil these
things together, and being boiled, then put unto it a good quantity of butter,
or of Sallet oil. Or else make him this charge. Take of bole Armonye, and of
wheat flower, of each half a pound, and a little Rosen beaten into powder,
and a quart of strong vinegar: and mingle them together, and cover all his
legs therewith, and if it be in Summer turn him to grass.

Of the diseased parts under the mydriffe, and first of the stomach.
The.lxxx. Chapter.
THe old Authors make mention of many diseases incidente to a horses
stomach, as lothing of meat, spuyng up his drink, surfeiting of proue^der,
the hungry evil, and such like, which few of our Ferrers have observed: and
therefore I will briefly speak, of as many as I think necessary to be known,
and first of the lothing of meat.

Of the lothing of meat. The.lxxxi. Chapter.
A Horse may loathe his meat through the intemperature of his stomach, as for
that, it is to hot or to cold. If his stomach be to hot, then most
commonly it will either inflame his mouth, and make it to break out in
blisters, yea and perhaps cause some canker to breed there. The cure of all
which things have been taught before. But if he forsake his meat only for
very heat, which you shall perceive by the hotenesse of his breath and
mouth, then cool his stomach by giving him cold water mingled with a little
vinegar and oil to drink, or else give him this drink. Take of milk, and of
wine, of each one pynte, and put thereunto three ounces of Mel Rosatum, and
wash all his mouth with Uineger and salt. If his stomach be to cold, chen
his hair will stare and stand right up, which Absirtus and others were wont
to cure, by giving the horse good wine and oil to drink, and some would
sees in the wine, Rhew, or Sage, some would add thereunto, white Pepper and
Myrre, some would give him Onyons and Roket seed to drink with wine, some
the blood of a young Sow with wine. Absirtus would have the horse to eat the
green blades of wheat, if the time of the year will serve for it. Columella
says, that if a horse or any other beast do loath his meat, it is good to give
him wine, and the seed of Gith, or else wine and stamped Garlic.

Of casting out his drink. The.lxxxii. Chapter.
VEgetius says that the Horse may have such a Pawlsy proceeding of cold in
his stomach, as he is not able to keep his drink, but many times do cast it
out again at his mouth. The remedy whereof is to let him blood in the neck,
and to give him cordial drinks, that is to say, made of hot and comfortable
spyces, and also to annoynte all his breast and under his shoulders with hot
oils, and to purge his head, by blowyng up into his nosetrils, powders that
provoke nesing, such as have been taught you before.

Of surfeiting with glut of Prouender. The.lxxxiii. Chapter.
THe Glut of Prouender or other meat not digested, does cause a Horse to have
great pain in his body, so as he is not able to stand on his fete, but lies
down, and waltereth, as though he had the Bottes. The cure whereof according
to Martins experience is in this sort. Let him blood in the neck, then
trotte him up and down for the space of an hour, and if he can not stale,
draw out his yard, and wash it with a little white Wine luke warm, and
thrust into his yard either a broosed Cloue of Garlic, or else a little oil
of Camamill, with a wax Candle. If he can not doung, then rake his fundament,
and give him this glistre. Take of Mallows two or three handful, and boil
them in a pottell of fair running water, and when the Mallows be soden, then
strain it, and put thereunto a quarte of fresh Butter, and half a pint of
oil Olive, and having received this glister, lead him up and down, until he
has emptyed his bellye. Then set him up and keep him hu^gry, the space of
three or four days, and the Hay that he eats, let it be sprinckeled with
water, and let him drink warm water, wherein would be put a little bran, and
when he has drunk, give him the bran to eat, and give him little or no
prouender at all, for the space of eight or ten days.

Of an other kind of surfeiting with meat or drink, called of us foundering
in the body. The.lxxxiiij. Chapter.
THis disease is called of the old writers in Greek Crithiasis, in Latin
Hordiatio, it comes as they say by eating of much Prouender, suddenly after
labor whylest the Horse is hot and panting, whereby his meat not being
digested, bredeth evil humors, which by little and little do spread through
his members, and at length do oppress all his body, and do clean take away
his strength, and make him in such case as he can neither go, nor bow his
joints, nor being laid is able to rise again, neither can he stale but with
great pain. It may come also as they say, of drinking to much in traveling by
the way when the horse is hot, but then it is not so dangerous, as when it
comes of eating to much. But how so ever it comes, they say all, that the
humors will immediatelye resort down into the horses legs, and feet, and will
make him to cast his houes: and therefore I must needs iudgeit to be no other
thing but a plain fou^dering, which word fou^dering is borrowed as I take it of
ye French word Fundu, yt is to say molte^. For fou^dering is a melting or
dissolutio^ of humors, which the Italians call infusione. Martin makes diverse
kinds of foundering, as foundering in the body, which the French men call most
commonly morfundu, and foundering in the legs, and feet, also foundering
before, and foundering behind, which some Autours do deny, as Magister Maurus,
and Laurentius Russius, affirming that there are fewer humors behind than
before, and that they can not easelye be dissolved or molten, being so far
distante from the heart, and the other vital parts. Whereunto a man might
answer, that the natural heat of the heart does not cause dissolution of
humors, but some unnatural and accidental heat, spread throughout all the
members, which is daily proved by good experience. For we see horses to be
foundered not only before or behind, but also of all four legs at once,
which most commonly chances, either, by taking cold suddenly after a great
heat, as by standing still upon some cold pauemente, or abroad in the cold
wind, or else for that perhaps the horse traueling by the way, and being in a
sweat, was suffered to stand in some showld water whilst he did drink,
which was worse than his drinking, for in the mean time the cold entering at
his fete, ascended upward, and congealed the humors which the heat before had
dissolved, and thereby when he comes once to rest, he waxes stiff and lame
of all his legs. But leaving to speak of foundering in the legs, as well
before as behind, until we come to the griefs in the legs and feet, we
intend to talk here only of foundering in the body according to Martins
experience. The signs to know if a horse be foundered in his body be these.
His hair will stare, and he will be chill and shrugge for cold, and forsake
his meat hanging down the head, and quiver after cold water, and after two
or three days he will begin to coughe. The cure according to Martin is thus.
First scour his bellye with the glistre last mentioned, and then give him a
comfortable drink made in this sort. Take of Malmesey a quarte, of Sugar
half a quartern, of honey half a quartern, of Cynamom half an ounce, of
Lyckoras and Annis seeds of each two sponeful, beaten into fine powder, which
being put into the Malmesey, warm them together at the fire so as the honey may
be molten, and then give it him luke warm. That done walk him up and down in
the warm stable the space of half an hour, and then let him stand on the
bitte two or three hours without meat, but let him be warm covered and well
littered, and give him hay sprinckeled with a little water, and clean sifted
prouender by little at once, and let his water be warmed with a little ground
Malt therein. And if you se him somewhat chered, then let him blood in the
neck, and also perfume him once a day, with a little Frankencense, and use to
walk him abroad when the weather is fair and not windye, or else in the house
if the weather be foul, and by thus using him you shall quickly recover him.

Of the hungry evil. The.lxxxv. Chapter.
THis is a gredy desire to eat following some great emptiness, or lack of
meat, and is called of the old authors by the Greek name. Bulimos, which is
as much to say, as a great hunger proceeding as the Physicians say at the
first of some extreme outward cold, taken by long traueling in cold barren
places, and specially where snow abounds, which outward cold causes the
stomach to be cold, and the inward powers to be feeble. The cure according
to Absirtus and Hierocles, is in the beginning to comfort the horses stomach,
by giving him bread sopte in wine, and if you be in a place of rest, to give
him wheat flower, and wine to drink, or to make him Cakes or Bailes of flower
and wine kneded together, and to feed him with that, or with wine and Nuttes
of pyne trees. Hierocles says, if any such thing chance by the way whereas
no flower is to be had, than it shall be best to give him wine and earth
wrought together, either to drink or else to eat in Balls.

Of the diseases in the Liver. The.lxxxvi. Chapter.
ALL the old Authors speak much of the pain in the Liver, but none of them
do declare whereof it comes, or by what menes, saving that Hipocrates says,
that some horses do get it by violent running upon some stony or hard ground.
I for my part think that the Liver of a Horse is subject to as many diseases,
as the Liver of a man, and therefore may be payned dyuerslye. As sometime by
the intemperatenesse of the same, as for that it is perhaps to hot or to
cold, to moist or to dry: sometime by means of evil humors, as Cholor, or
Phlegm, abounding in the same, according as the Liver is either hot or cold:
for heat breeds Cholor, and cold Phlegm. By means of which intemperature
proceeds all the weakness of the Liver. It may be payned also sometime by
obstruction and stopping, and sometime by hard knobbes, inflammation,
appostume, or ulcer bredde therein, sometime by consumption of the substance
thereof. The signs of heat and hot humors be these, lothing of meat, great
thirst and losenesse of belly, voyding dong of strong scent, and leanenesse of
body. The signs of cold, and cold humors be these: appetite to meat without
thirst, belly neither continually loose, nor stipticke, but between times, no
strong scent of dong, nor leanenesse of body, by which kind of signs, both
first and last mentioned and such like, the weakness of the Liver is also to
be learned and sought out. Obstruction or stopping most commonly chances by
traveling or laboring upon a full stomach, whereby the meat not being
perfectlye digested, breeds gross and tough humors, which humors by
vehemence of the labor, are also driven violently into the small veins whereby
the Liver should receive good nutriment, and so breeds obstructio^ and
stopping. The signs whereof in man's body is heaviness, and distentio^, or
swelling, with some grief in the right side, under the short ribs, and
specially when he labourech immediately after meat, which signs I believe if
it were diligently observed, were easy inoughe to find in a horse by his
heavy going at his setting forth, and often turning his head to the side
grieved. Of an old obstruction, and specially if he humors be Choloricke,
breeds many times a hard knob on the Liver, called of the Physicians
Scirrhus, which in man's body may be felt, if the body be not over fat, and it
is more casye for him to lie on the right side, than on the left, because
that lying on the left side, the weight of the knob would oppress the
stomach, and vital parts very sore, by which signs me thinks, a diligent
ferrer may learn, whither a horse has any such disease or not. The
inflammation of the Liver comes by means that the blood either through the
abundance, thinness, boiling heat, or sharpness thereof, or else through
the violence of some outward cause, breaks out of the veins, and flows
into the body of the Liver, and there being out of his proper vessels, does
immediatelye putrifye, and is inflamed, and therewith corrupts so much
flesshye substance of the Liver as is imbrued withal, and therefore for the
most part the hollow side of the Liver is consumed, yea and sometime the full
side. This hot bloudye matter then, is properlye called an inflammation, which
by natural heat, is afterward turned into a plain corruption, and the^ it
is called an impostume, which if it break out and ru^, the^ it is called an
ulcer, or filthy sore. Thus you se, yt of one evil fountain may spring diverse
griefs, requyring diverse cures. And though none of mine Authors, nor any
other Ferrer that I know, have waded thus far, yet I thought good by writing
thus much, to give such Ferrers as be wise, discrete, and diligent, occasion to
seek for more knowledge and understanding than is taught them, and me thinks
that it is a great shame, that the Ferrers of this age should not know much
more, than the Ferrers of old time, since that besides that, the old men's
knowledge is not hidden from them, they have also their own experience, and
time also brings every day new things to light. But now to proceed in
discoursing of the Liver according to the Physicians doctrine as I have begone,
I say then of an inflammation in the hollow side of the Liver. The signs be
these. Lothing of meat, great thirste, losenes of belly, easy lying on the
right side, and painful lying on the left. But if the inflammation be on the
full side or swelling side of the Liver, then the Patient is troubled with
difficultye of breathing, with a dry Coughe, and grievous pain, pulling and
twitching the wind Pipe, and to lie on the right side is more painful than
on the left, and the swelling also may be felt with a man's hand. But you must
understand by the way, yt all these things last mentioned, be the signs of
some great inflamatio^ for small inflammations have no such signs but are to be
judged only by grief under the short ribs, and long featching of the breath.
The signs of Appostumation is painful, and great heat. The signs of
Ulceration is decrease of the heat, with feablenesse and fainting. For the
filthy matter flowing abroad with evil vapors, corrupts the heart and many
times causes death. The signs of the consumption of the Liver, shall be
declared in the next Chapter, and as for the curing of all the other diseases
before mentioned, experience must first teach it ere I can write it.
Notwithstanding I can not think, but that such things as are good to heal
the like diseases in man's body, are also good for a horse, for his Liver is
like in substance and shape to a man's Liver, differing in nothing but only in
greatness. And therefore I would wish you to learn at the Physicians hands,
which I am sure first as touching the weakness of the Liver proceeding of the
vntemperatenesse thereof, will bid you to heal every such vntemperatenesse by
his contrary, that is to say, heat by cold, and dryness by moisture, and so
contrary. And therefore it shall be very necessary for you to learn the
qualities, natures, and virtues of herbs, drugs, and all other simples, and
how to apply them in time. And for to heal the obstruction of the Liver,
they will council you perhaps to make to the horse, drinks of such simples, as
these be, Agrimony, Fumitory, Camamill, Wormewoode, Lycoras, Annis seeds,
Smallage, Perslye, Spicknard, Gentian, Succory, Endive, Sperage, Lupius, the
virtues whereof you shall learn in the Herbals: but amongst all simples, there
is none more praised than the Liver of a Wolf beaten into powder, and mingled
in any medicine that is made for any disease in the Liver. The cure of an
inflammation consists in letting blood, and in bathing, or fomenting the sore
place with such herbs and oils, as may mollify and disperse humors abroad,
wherewith some simples that be astringent, would be always mingled, yea and in
all other medicines that be applied to the Liver, for any manner of disease.
Simples that mollify and disperse be these. Linesede, Fengreke, Camamill, Annis
seeds, Melilot and such like things. Simples astringent be these. Red Rose
leaves, Brimble leaves, Wormewode, Plantayne, Myrrh, Masticke, Styrax, and
such like. Appostumes are to be ryped and voyded. Ulcers must be cleansed, and
scowred downewarde, either by the belly, or by urine, and therefore the use of
such simples as provoke urine in such cases is necessary. The old writers of
Horseleach craft do say, that when a horse is grieved in his liver, he will
forsake his meat, and his body will wast, his mouth will be dry, his tongue
rough and harshe, yea and it will swell, and he will refuse to lie on that side
where his grief is. The cure whereof according to Absirtus is in this sort.
Let him drink stamped Ireos with wine allayed with water. He prayseth also an
herb much like unto Calamynt called of Pliny Polimonia, or let him drink
Sauery with wine and oil, I think that Agrimony or Liver wort is as good as
the best of them. Absirtus would have his body to be chaufed with wine and
oil mixte together, and to be well littered that he may lie soft, and his
prouender that should be given him, to be styped first in warm water, and now
and then some Nytrum to be put in his drink.

Of the consumption of the Liver. The.lxxxvij. Chapter.
I Believe that no inward member of a Horse does suffer so much, as the Lungs
and Liver, and that not so much by continual, as by inordinate, and untimely
travel, labor and exercise, whereby either the Horses Lungs or his Liver do
most commonly perish, and is consumed, yea and sometime both. Of the
consumption of the Lungs, we have talked sufficientlye before. Therefore let us
show you here the causes whereof the consumption of the Liver proceeds. The
Physicians say, that it may come of any humor, but chiefly and most commonly
of Choloricke matter, shead thorowout the substance of the Liver, which
putrefying by little and little, and laysurely does at length corrupt, and
perish all the substance of the Liver, which thing in man's body does first
proceed as the Physicians say, either by eating corrupt meats, or else by
continual drinking of sweet wynes. But me thinks that the consumption of a
horses Liver should come by some extreme heat, inflaming the blood, which
afterward being putrifyed, does corrupt and exulcerate the substance of the
Liver. For after inflammation, as I said before comes appostumation, and then
exulceration which is very hard to cure, because the substance of the Liver is
spongious like unto the Lungs, and whylest the Liver is so corrupted, there can
be no good digestion, for lack whereof the body receives no good nutriment,
and therefore must needs also languish and consume. The signs according to
Martin be these. The horse will forsake his meat, and will stand stretching
him self in length, and never covet to lie down, and his breath will be so
strong as no man can abide it, and he will continually cast yealowishe matter
at the one nosetrill, or else at both, according as one or both sides of the
Liver is corrputed, and on that side that he casts he will have under his
iawe, even about the midst thereof a knob or kirnell as much as a Walnut,
which when Martin finds, he commits his carcass to the Crows, taking him
to be past cure. But if he were let blood in time and had such drinks given
him, as are good to comfort and strengthen the Liver, he thinks that the
horse might be recovered. I never red any medicine for the wasting of the Liver
as I remember, but this only diet, which I found in an old English book.
Let him drink for the space of three days no other thing but warm wort, and
let him eat no other meat but Otes baked in an Oven, and let him stand
meatelesse the first night before you give him the wort. But I think it were
not amiss to put into the worte that he drinks, every morning some good
confection or powder made of Agrimony, red Rose leaves, Saccharu^ Rosaceum,
Diarchadon, Abbatis, Diasantalon, Lycoras, and of the Liver of a Woulfe, and
such other simples as do comfort and strengthen the Liver or else to give him
ye same things with Goats milk luke warm.

Of the diseases in the Gall. The.lxxxviij. Chapter.
IN my opinion the Gall of a Horse is subject to diverse diseases as well as the
Gall of a man, as to obstruction whereof comes fullness and emptynesse of the
Bladder thereof, and also the stone in the Gal. But obstruction may chance two
manner of ways. First, when the way whereby the Cholor should proceed, from the
Liver unto the Bladder of the Gall, as unto his proper receptacle, is stopped,
and thereby the Bladder remains empty, whereof may spring diverse evil
accidents, as vomiting, the laxe or bloody Flyx. Secondlye when the way whereby
such Cholor should issu forth of the Bladder of the Gall, down into the
Guts, is shut up, whereby the Bladder is over full, and abounds with to
much Cholor, which causes heaviness, suffocatio^, belking, heat, thirst,
and disposition to angrynesse. The signs of both kinds of obstruction in the
Gall is costluenesse, and yealowishnesse of the skin infected with the
yeallow Iaundis. The stone in the gal which is somewhat blackishe, proceeds
of the obstruction of the cunduyts of the Bladder, whereby the Cholor being
long kept in, waxes dry, and turns at length to hard gravel, or stones,
whereof because there is neither signs, nor any grievous accident known to
the Physicians, I leave to talk any further thereof, and the rather for that
none of my Authors do make any mention of the Gall at all. Notwithstanding to
give some light unto the unlearned Ferrers, and that they may the better
understand the inward parts of a horse, I thought good to write thus much,
thinking it no time lost while I may profit them any way.

Of the diseases in the Spleen. The.lxxxix. Chapter.
THe spleen as I said before in the kepers office, is the receptacle of
Mela^choly and of the dregs of the blood, and is subject to the like
diseases that the Liver is, that is to say to swelling obstruction, hard knob,
and inflammation, for the substance of the spleen is spongious, and therefore
apt to suck in all filth, and to delate it self, wherefore being full, it
must needs swell, which will appear in the left side under the short rybbes,
and such swelling causes also shortness of breath, and specially when the
body does labor or travail. It is painful also to lie on the right side,
because the splen being so swollen oppresses the midriffe, and specially when
the stomach is full of meat, and the Pacient has worse digestion than
appetyte, and is troubled with much wind, both upward and downewarde.
Moreover the vapor of the humor does offend the heart making it faint, and
causes all the body to be heavy and dull, and if such swelling be suffered to
go uncured, then if it be a Mela^choly humor and abounding ouermuche, it waxes
every day thicker and thicker, causing obstruction not only in the veins, and
artires, which is to be perceived by heaviness and grief on the left side,
but also in the splen it self, whereas by virtue of the heat it is hardened
every day more and more, and so by little and little waxes to a hard knob,
which does not only occupye all the substance of the splen, but also many
times all the left side of the womb, and thereby makes all the evil
accydentes or griefs before recited, much worse than they were. Now as
touching the inflamatio^ of the splen whith chances very seldom, for so much
as every inflammation proceeds of pure blood, which seldom enters into the
splen: I shall not need to make many words, but refer you over to the Chapter
of the Liver, for in such case they differ not, but proceeding of like cause
have also like signs, and do require like cure. The old writers say, that
horses be often grieved with grief in the splen, and specially in Summer
season with gredy eating of sweet green meats, and they call those horses
Lienosos, that is to say splenticke. The signs whereof (say they) are these,
hard swelling on the left side, short breath, often groaning, and gredy appetite
to meat. The remedy whereof according to Absirtus, is to make the horse to
sweat once a day during a certain time, by ryding him or otherwise traueling
him, and to pour into his left nosetrill every day the juice of Mirabolaus
mingled with wine, and water, amounting in all, to the quantitye of a pynte.
But me thinks it would do him more good if he drank it as Hierocles would
have him to do. Eumelius prayseth this drink. Take of Cumyn seed, and of
honey, of each six ounces, and of Lacerpitium as much as a bean, of Uineger a
pint, and put al these into three quartes of water, and let it stand so all
night, and the next morning give the horse to drink thereof, being kept
ouernight fasting. Theomnestus prayseth the decoction of Capers, specially if
the bark of the root thereof may be gotten sode^ in water to a Syrop, or else
make him a drink of Garlycke, Nytrum, Horehounde, and wormewode soden in
harshe wine, and he would have the left side to be bathed with warm water,
and to be hard rubbed. And if all this will not help, then to give him the
fire, which Absirtus does not allow, saying that the splen lies so, as it can
not be easly fyered, to do him any good. But for so much as the Liver and
splen are members much occupied in the inge^dring and seperating of humors,
many evil accydents and griefs do take their first beginning of them, as the
Iau^dis called in a horse, the yealows, dryness of body, and consumption of
the flesh, with out any apparaunt cause why, which the Physicians call
Atrophia, also evil habit of the body called of them Cachexia, and the Dropsy.
But first we will speak of the Iaundis or yealows.

Of the yealows. The.xc. Chapter.
THe Physicians in man's body do make two kinds of Iaundis, that is to say, the
yeallow proceeding of Cholor, dispersed through out the whole body, and dying
the skin yeallow, and the black proceeding of Melancholy dispersed like wise
thorowout the whole body, and making all the skin black. And as the yeallow
Iaundis comes for the most part either by obstruction or stopping of the
conduits, belonging to the bladder of the Gall, which (as I said before) is
the receptacle of Cholour, or by some inflammation of the Liver whereby the
blood is converted into Cholour, and so spreads thorowout the body: even so
the black Iaundis comes by means of some obstruction in the Liver vain,
that goes to the spleen, not suffering ye spleen to do his office, in
receiving the dregs of the blood from the Liver wherein they abound to
much, or else for that the splen is already to full of such dregs, and so
sheadeth them back agaime into the veins. But as for the black Iaundis they
have not been observed to be in horses as in men, by any of our Ferrers in
these days that I can learn. And yet the old writers of horseleach craft,
do seem to make two kinds of Iaundis called of them Cholera, that is to say
the dry Cholor, and also moist Cholor. The signs of the dry Cholor as Absirtus
says is great heat in the body, and costiuenesse of the belly, whereof it is
said to be dry. Moreover the horse will not covet to lie down, because he is
so payned in his body, and his mouth will be hot and dry. It comes as he
says by obstruction of ye conduit, whereby the Cholor should resort into the
bladder of the Gall, and by obstruction also of the urine vessels, so as he can
not stale. The cure according to his experience is to give him a glister made
of Oil, water and Nytrum, and to give him no prouender before that you have
raked his fundament, and to pour, the decoction of Mallows mingled with
sweet wine into his nosetrels, and let his meat be grass, or else sweet hay
sprinkled with Nytre and water, and he must rest from labor and be often
rubbed. Hierocles would have him to drink the decoction of wild Coleworts
sodden in wine. Again of the moist Cholor or Iaundis, these are the signs.
The horses eyes will look yeallow, and his nosetrilles will open wide, his
ears and his flanks will sweat, and his stale will be yeallow and Choloricke,
and he will groan when he lies down, which disease the said Absirtus was
wont to heal as he says, by giving the horse a drink made of Time and Comin
of each like quantity stamped together, and mingled with wine, honey and water,
and also by letting him blood in the pastornes. This last disease seems to
differ nothing at all from that which our Ferrers call the yeallows. The signs
whereof according to Martin be these. The horse will be faint, and sweat as he
stands in the stable, and forsake his meat, and his eyes, and the inside of
his lips and all his mouth within will be yeallow. The cure whereof according
to him, is in this sort. Let him blood in the neck vain, a good quantity,
and the^ give him this drink. Take of white wine, or of Ale, a quart, and put
thereunto of Saffron, of Turmerike, of each half an ounce, and the juice yt is
wrong out of a great handefull of Selondine, and being luke warm give it the
horse to drink, and keep him warm the space of three or four days, giving
him warm water with a little branne in it.

Of the evil habit of the body and of the Dropsy. The.xci. Chapter.
AS touching the dryness and consumption of the flesh without any apparent
cause why, called of the Physicians as I said before Atrophia, I know not what
to say more than I have done already before in the Chapter of Consumption of
the flesh, and therefore resort thither, and as for the evil habitte of the
body which is to be evil colored, heavy, dull, and of no force, strength, nor
lyuelinesse, comes not for lack of nutryment, but for lack of good
nutriment, for that the blood is corrupted with Phlegm, Cholor or Melancholy,
proceeding either from the spleen, or else through weakness of the stomach,
or Liver, causing evil digestion, or it may come by foul feding, yea and also
for lack of moderate exercise. The evil habit of the body is next cosyn to
the Dropsye, whereof though our Ferrers have had no experience, yet because mine
old Authors writing of horse leache craft do speak much thereof: I think it
good here briefly to show you their experience therein, that is to say, how
to know it, and also how to cure it. But since none of them do show the cause
whereof it procedes, I think it mete first therefore to declare unto you the
causes thereof, according to the doctrine of the learned Physicians, which in
man's body do make three kinds of Dropsyes, calling the first Anasarca, the
second Ascites, and the third Timpanias. Anasarca is an universal swelling of
the body through the abundance of water, lying betwixt the skin and the
flesh, and differs not from the disease last mentioned called Cachexia, that
is to say evil habit of the body, saving that the body is more swollen in
this than in the Cachexia, albeit they proceed both of like causes, as of
coldenesse and weakness of the Liver, or by means that the heart, splen,
stomach, and other members serving to digestio^, be grieved or diseased.
Ascites is a swelling in the covering of the belly called of the Physicians
Abdomen, co^prehending both the skin, the fat, eight Muscles, and the fylme or
panicle called Peretoneum, through the abundance of some wayish humor entered
into the same, which be sides the causes before alleged, proceeds most
chieflye by means that some of the vessels within be broken or rather cracked,
out of the which though the blood being somewhat gross can not issue forth, yet
the wayish humor being subtle may run out into the belly, like water
distilling through a cracked pot. Timpanias called of us most commonly the
Timpany, is a swelling of the foresaid covering of the belly, through the
abundance of wind entered into the same, which wind is engendered of crudity
and evil digestion, and whylest it abounds in the stomach, or other
intrayles, finding no issue out, it breaks in violently through the small
conduits amongst the pannicles of the said covering, not without great pain to
the pacient, and so by tossing to and fro, windeth at length into the space of
the covering it self. But surely such wind can not be altogether void of
moisture. Notwithstanding, the body swells not so much with this kind of
Dropsye, as in the other kind called Ascites. The signs of the Dropsye is
shortness of breath, swelling of the body, evil Color, lothing of meat, and
great desire to drink, and specially in the Dropsye called Ascites, in which
also the belly will sound like a Bottle half full of water, but in the
Timpany, it will sound like a Tabor. But now though mine Authors make not so
many kinds of Dropsyes, yet they say all generally that a horse is much
subject to the Dropsye. The signs according to Absirtus and Hierocles be
these. His belly legs and stones, will be swollen, but his back, buttockes,
and flanks, will be dried and shronke up to the very bones. Moreover the
veins of his face and temples, and also the veins under his tongue will be so
hidden, as you can not see them, and if you thrust your finger hard against
his body, you shall leave the printe thereof behind, for the flesh lacking
natural heat, will not return again to his place, and when the horse lies
down he spreads him self abroad not being able to lie round together on
his belly, and the hair of his back by rubbing will fall away. Pelagonius in
showing the signs of the Dropsye, not much differing from the signs of the
Physicians first recited, seems to make two kinds thereof, calling the one
the Timpany which for difference sake may be called in English the wind
Dropsye, and the other the water Dropsye. Notwithstanding both have one cure so
far as I can perceive, which is in this sort. Let him be warm covered and
walked a good while together in the sun to provoke sweat, and let all his
body be well and often rubbed along the hair, and let him feed often on
Colewortes, Smallage, and Elming bows, and of all other things, that may
loosen the belly, or provoke urine, and let his common meat be grass if it
may be gotten, if not, then hay sprinkled with water and Nitrum. It is good
also to give him a kind of pulse called Cyche, steeped a day and a night in
water, and then taken out, and laid so as the water may drop away from it.
Pelagonius would have him to drink Parslye stampte with wine, or the root of
the herb called in Latin Panax, with wine. But if the swelling of the belly
will not decrease for all this, then slitte a little hole under his belly a
handful behind the Nauill, and put into that hole a hollow Reed or some other
Pype, that the water or wind may go out, not all at once, but by little and
little, and at diverse times, and beware that you make not ye hole ouerwide,
least the Caul of the belly fall down thereunto, and when all the water is
clean run out, then heal up the wound as you do all other wounds, and
let the Horse drink as little as is possible.

Of the diseases in the guts of a Horse, and first of the Cholycke. The.xcij.
Chapter.
THe Guts of a horse may be diseased with diverse griefs, as with the Cholicke,
with Costiuenesse, with the Laxe, with the bloody Flixe, and worms. The
Cholick is a grievous pain in the great Gutte, called of the Physicians Colon,
whereof this disease takes his name, which gut because it is very large, and
ample, and full of corners it is apt to receive diverse matters, and so becomes
subject to diverse griefs. For sometime it is tormented with the abundance of
gross humors, gotten betwixt the panycle of the said Gutte, and sometime with
wind having no issue out, sometime with inflammation, and sometime with sharp
fretting humors. But so far as I can learn, a horse is most commonly
troubled with the Cholick, that comes of wind, and thereof our ferrers do
term it the wind Cholyck. The signs whereof be these. The horse will forsake
his meat, and lie down and wallow, and walter upon the ground, and standing
on his fete he will stamp for very pain with his forefete, and strike at his
belly with his hinder foot, and look often toward his belly, which also
toward the flanks will swell, and seem greater to the eye, than it is wont
to be. The cure whereof according to Martin is in this sort. Take a quart of
Malmesye, of Cloves, Pepper, Cynamom, of each half an ounce, of Sugar half a
quarter, and give it the horse luke warm, and annoint his flanks with oil of
Bay, and then bridle him, and trotte him immediately up and down, the space
of an hour until he dong, and if he will not dong, then rake him, and if need
be, provoke him to dong, by putting into his fundament an Onyon pilled and
iagged with a knife, crossewise, so as the juice thereof may tickle his
fundament, and for the space of three or four days let him drink no cold
water, and let him be kept warm. Russius was wont to use this kind of cure.
Take a good bygge Reed a spanne long or more, and being anointed with Oil,
thrust it into the horses fundament, fastening the outward end thereof, unto
his tail, so as it can not slip out, and then having first anointed and
chaufed all ye horses belly, with some hot oil, cause him to be ridden
somewhat hastily, up and down some hilly ground, and that will make him to
void the wind out of his belly, through the Read, which done, let him be kept
warm, and fed with good prouender and warm mashes made of wheat meal, and
Fenell sede, and let him drink no cold water, until he be whole. Absirtus
would have you to give him a glister made of wild Coucumber, or or else of
hens dong, Nytrum, and strong wine.

Of Costiuenesse, or belly bound. The.xciij. Chapter.
COstiuenesse is when a horse is bound in the belly and cannot dong, which may
come by glut of prouender, or over much feeding and rest, whereof we have talked
sufficiently before, also by wind, gross humors, or cold causyng
obstruction, and stopping in the Guts. The cure whereof according to Martin is
in this sort. Take of the decoction of Mallows a quarte, and put thereunto
half a pint of oil, or instead thereof, half a pint of fresh Butter, and
one ounce of Benedicte laxatuae, and pour that into his fundamente with a
little horn mete for the purpose, that done clap his tail to his fundament,
holding it so still with your hand, whylest an other does lead him in his
hand, and trotte him up and down, that the medicine may work the better,
and having voyded all that in his belly, bring him into the Stable, and there
let him stand a while on the bitte well covered, and warm littered, and then
give him a little hay, and let his drink be warmed, it shall not be amiss also
to give him that night a warm mashe.

Of the Laxe. The.xciiij. Chapter.
THe Italians call this disease Ragiatura, and the horse that has this disease
Cauallo arragiato, or Sforato. It may come through the abu^daunce of Choloricke
humors discending from the Liver, or Gall, down to the Guts. But Russius
says, that it comes most commonly, by drinking over much cold water
immediatelye after prouender, or by sudden traueling upon a full stomach,
before his meat be digested, or by hasty running, or gallopping immediately
after water. If this disease continue long it will make the horse very weak,
and feeble, so as he shall not be able to stand on his legs. Notwithstanding
since nature feling her self oppressed, endeavors thus to ease her self by
expelling those humors that grieve her, I would not wish you sodaynely to stop
it, least some worse inconvenience grow thereof. But if you see that the horse
loses his flesh, and waxes more dull and feeble than he was wont to be, then
give him this drink often experimented by Martin, and that shall stop him.
Take of Been flower, and of bole Armeny or each a quarterne, mingle these
things together in a quart of red wine, and give it him luke warm, and let the
horse rest and be kept warm, and let him drink no cold drink but luke warm,
and put therein a little Bean flower, and let him not drink but once a day,
and then not over much for the space of three or four days.

Of the bloody Flixe. The.xcv. Chapter.
IT seems by the old writers that a horse is also subject to the bloody
Flixe. For Absirtus, Hierocles, and Democritus say al with one voice, that the
Guts of a horse may be so exulcerated that he will void bloody matter at his
fundament, yea and that his fundament therewith will fall out, which disease
they call Disenteria, which is as much to say, as a painful exulceration of
the Guts, under the which the old men, as it seems by the words of
Hierocles and Absirtus, would comprehend the disease called of the Physicians
Tenesmus, that is to say a desire to dong often, and can do but little, and
that with great pain: And also an other disease called Procidentia any, that
is to say the falling out of the fundament, which the Physicians do accoumpt as
several diseases. Notwithstanding for so much as Disenteria and Tenasmus does
spring both of like causes, yea and also for that the falling out of the
fundament has some affinity with them, I will follow mine Authors, in joining
them all together in this one Chapter. The Physicians make diverse kinds of
bloody flix. For sometime ye fat of the slimy filthe which is voyded, is
sprinkled with a little blood, sometime the matter tha voydeth is mixte with
the scrapings of the guts, and sometime it is waterishe blood, like water
wherein bloody flesh has been washed, and sometime blood myxt with
Melancholy, and sometime pure blood, and by the mixture of the matter you shall
know in man's body whether the vlceratio^ be in the inner small guts, or in
the thick outward guts, for if it be in the inner guts, then the matter
and blood will be perfectly mixed together. But if it be in the outward
guts, then they be not mingled together, but come out severally, the blood
most commonly following the matter. Of this kind is that disease called before
Tenasmus, for yt is an ulcer in the right gutte serving the fundament, and does
proceed even as the Flix, does of some sharp humors which being violently
driven, and having to pass through many crooked and narrow ways, do cleave to
the guts, and with their sharpness frette them, causing exulceration and
grievous pain. The Flyxe may come also of some extreme cold, heat, or
moystnesse, or by mean of receiving some violent purgation, having therein over
much Scamonie, or such like vyolent simple, or through weakness of the Liver,
or other members serving to digestion. Now as touching the falling out of the
fundament, the Physicians say, that it comes through the resolution, or
weakness of the Muskles serving to draw up the fundament which resolution
may come partly by over much straining, and partly they may be losened, by over
much moisture, for which cause, children being full of moisture are more
subject to this disease than men. And for the self same cause I think that
horses having very moist bodies be subject thereunto. Thus having showed you
the causes of the diseases before recited, I will show you the cure prescribed
by the old writers. Absirtus would have the fundament on the out side to be
cut round about, but so as the inward ring thereof be not touched, for that
were dangerous and would kill the horse, for so much, as his fundament would
never abide within his body, and that done he would have you to give him to
drink the powder of unripe Pomgranet shelles, called in Latin Malicorium,
together with wine and water, which in deed because it is astringent is not to
be mislyked, but as for cutting of the fundament I assure you I can not judge
what he should mean thereby, unless it be to wyden the fundament, by giving
it long slittes or cuttes on the out side, but well I know that it may cause
more pain, and greater inflammation. And therefore me thinks it were better in
this case to follow the Physicians precepts, which is first to consider
whither the fundame^t being fallen out, be inflamed or not, for if it be not
inflamed, then it shall be good to anoint it first with oil of Roses
somewhat warmed, or else to wash it with warm red wine. But if it be
inflamed, then to bath it well, first with a sponge dipped in the decoction of
Mallows, Camamil, Linescede, and Fengreke, and also to anoint it well with
oil of Camomill and Dill, mingled together, to assuage the swelling, and then
to thrust it in again fair and softly, with a soft linen cloth. That done,
it shall be good to bath all the place about with red wine, wherein has been
sodden Acatiu^, Galls, Accorne cups, parings of Quinces, and such like
simples as be astringent, and then to throw on some astringent powder made of
bole Armenye, Frankencense, Sanguis Draconis, Myrrh, Acatium, and such like.
Yea and also to give the horse this drink much praised of all the old writers.
Take of Saffran one ounce, of Myrrh two ounces, of the herb called in Latin
Abrotanum, named in some of our English Herbals Sothernwod, three ounces, of
Parslie one ounce, of Garden Rhew otherwise called herb grace, three ounces, of
Pirethum, otherwise called of some spittlewort, and of Isop, of each two
ounces, of Cassia which is like Cinamom, one ounce. Let all these things be
beaten into fine powder, and then mingled with Chaulk, and strong Uineger
wrought into a paste, of which paste make little Cakes, and dry them in the
shadow, and being dried, dissolve some of the^ in a sufficient quantity of
Barley milk, or juice, called of the old writers, and also of the Physicians
Cremor Ptisanae, and give the horse to drink thereof with a horn: for this
medicine, as the Authors write does not only heal the bloody Flix* and the
other two diseases before recited, but also if it be given with a quarte of
warm water, it will heal all grief and pain in the belly, and also of the
Bladder, that comes for lack of staling. And being given with sweet wine,
it will heal the biting of any Serpent or mad dog.

Of the Worms. The.xcvi. Chapter.
IN a Horses guts do breed three kinds of Worms, even as there does in man's
body, though they be not altogether like in shape. The first are long and
round, even like to those that children do most commonly void, and are called
by the general name worms. The second are little worms having great heads,
and small long tails like an Edle, and be called Bottes. The third be short
and thick like the end of a man's little finger, and therefore be called
Troncheons: And though they have diverse shapes, according to the diversity of
the place perhaps where they bread, or else according to the figure of the
putrifyed matter whereof they bread, yet no doubt they proceed all of one
cause, that is to say of a raw gross and flegmatike matter apt to
putrification, engendered most commonly by foul feeding, and as they proceed
of one self cause, so also have they like signs, and like cure. The signs be
these. The horse will forsake his meat, for the Tronchons and the Boltes will
covet always to the Maw and pain him sore. He will also lie down and wallow,
and standing he will stamp and strike at his belly with his hinder foot, and
look often toward his belly. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take of
sweet milk a quarte, of honey a quarterne, and give it him luke warm, and
walk him up and down for the space of an hour, and so let him rest for
that day, with as little meat or drink as may be, and suffer him not to lie
down. Then the next day give him this drink. Take of herb grace a handefull,
of Sauine as much, and being well stamped, put thereunto a little Brimstone,
and a little soote of a Chimney beaten into fine powder, and put all these
things together in a quarte of worte or new Ale, and there let them lie in
steep the space of an hour or two, then strain it well through a fair
cloth, and give it the horse to drink luke warm, then bridle him, and walk
him up and down the space of an hour, that done bring him into the Stable,
and let him stand on the bitte two or three hours, and then give him a little
hay. Laurentius Russius says, that it is good to give the horse the warm
guts of a young Hen, with a little salt three days together in the
morning, and not to let him drink until it be Noone. Some say that it is good
to ride him having his byt first anointed with dong, coming hot from the
man. Some again use to give him a quantity of Brimstone, and half as much
Rosen beaten into powder and mingled together with his prouender, which he must
eat a good while before he drinks.

Of the pain in the kidneyes. The.xcvij. Chapter.
ME thinks that the kidneys of a horse should be subject to as many griefs
as the kydneys of a man, as to inflammation, obstructio^, Appostumes, and
Ulcers, and specially to obstruction, that comes by means of some stone or
grauel gathered together in the kidneys, whereby the horse cannot stale but with
pain, for I have seen diverse horses my self that have voyded much gravel in
their stale, which without doubt did come from the kidneys, but my Authors do
refer such griefs to the bladder, and urine, and write of no disease but
only of the inflammation of the kidneys, which is called of them Nephritis,
and so is it also called of the Physicians. It comes as they say by some
great strain in leaping over some ditch, or else by bearing some great
burden. The signs whereof be these. The horse will go rolling behind and
staggering, his stones will shrink up, and his stale will be blackishe and
thick. I think this disease differs not from that which we called before
the swaing of the back, when we talked of the griefs in the back and loins,
and therefore resort thither. The cure of this disease according to the best of
the old writers is in this sort. Bath his back and loins, with wine, oil,
and Nytrum, warmed together, and after that you have so bathed him, let him be
covered with warm clothes, and stand littered up to the belly with straw, so
as he may lie soft, and give him such drinks as may provoke urine, as those
that be made with Dil, Fenell, Annis, Smallage, Perslie, Spicknard, Myrrh, and
Cassia. Some say it is good to give him a kind of pulse called Cyche, with
wine. Some again do praise Ewes milk, or else Oil and Deres sewet molten
together to be given him to drink, or the root of the herb called Asphodelus
englyshed by some Daffadill sodden in wine.

Of the diseases belonging to the Bladder and urine of a horse. The.xcviij.
Chapter.
HIerocles says that a horse is subject to three kinds of diseases incident
to the bladder or urine, the first is called Stranguria, the second Disuria,
the third Ischuria. Stranguria otherwise called in Latin Stillicidium, and of
our old Ferrers according to the French name Chovvdepis, is when the horse is
provoked to stale often, and voydeth nothing but a few drops, which comes
as the Physicians say either through the sharpnes of the urine, or by some
exulceration of the bladder, or else by means of some Appostume in the Liver
or kidneys, which Appostume being broken, the matter resorteth down into the
bladder, and with the sharpness thereof causes a continual provocation of
pissing. Disuria is when the horse can not piss but with great labor and
pain, which for difference sake I will call from henceforth the paynepisse. It
may come some time through the weakness of the bladder, and cold
intemperature thereof, and sometime through the abundaunce of Flegmaticke, and
gross humors, stopping the neck of the bladder. Ischuria is when the horse
can not piss at all, and therefore may be called the pissupprest, or
suppression of urine whether you will: me thinks always the shorter a proper
name be, the better, and more easy to pronounce. It may come as the Physicians
say, by weakness of the bladder, or for that the water co^duit is stopte with
gross humors, or with matter discending from the Liver or kidneys, or with the
stone, yea and sometimes by means of some inflammation, or hard knob growing at
the mouth of the Conduit, or for that the sinews of the bladder is nummed, so
as the bladder is without feeling: or it may come by retention, and long
holding of the water, most of which causes Hierocles also recites, adding
thereunto, that it may chance to a Horse through over much rest and Idleness,
and also by means of some extreme cold, and specially in winter season, for
the which the warmth of fire is a present remedy. But now mine Authors do not
show for every one of these three kinds of diseases several signs, but only
say that when a horse can not stale, he will stand as though he would stale,
and thrust out his yard a little, and also for very pain stand beating his
tail betwixt his thighs. Neither do they seem to appoint several cures, but
do make a hochepot mingling them al together, some of them praising one thing,
and some an other, for some say it is good to mingle the juice of Leekes with
sweet smelling wine and oil together, and to pour that into his right
nosetryll, and then to walk him up and down upon it, and that will make him
to stale. Some say it is good to give him smallage sede, or else the root of
wild Fenell, sodden with wine to drink, or to put five sharp Onyons, clean
pilled, and somewhat broused into his fundament, and to chaufe him immediatelye
upon it, either by ryding him or other wise, and that shall cause him to stale
presently. It is good also to bath al his back and Loins with warm water.
The scrapinges of the inward parts of his own houes beaten into powder, and
mingled with wine, and poured into his right nosetryll will make him to stale
if you chaufe him upon it, and the rather as Hierocles says, if you carry him
to some shepes coat, or other place where sheep are wont to stand, the smell
of whose dong and piss, without any other medicine as he says, will provoke
him to stale. Some will give the horse white dogs dong dried and mingled with
salt, wine, and Amoniacum to drink, some Hogs dong only with wine, and some
the dregs of horsepisse with wine, and many other medicines which I leave to
rehearse for fear of being to tedious, and specially, since Martins experience
follows here at hand, agreing in all points with Laurentius Russius cure
which is in this sort. First draw out his yard and wash it well in white
wine, and scour it well, because it will be many times stopped with dirt, and
other baggage together, and hardened like a stone, and then put a little oil of
Camomill into the Cunduit with a wax Candle and a broused cloue of Garlic,
and that will provoke him to stale. And if that will not help, then give him
this drink. Take of Persly two handefull, of Coriandre one handful, stamp
them and strain them with a quarte of white wine, and dissolve therein one
ounce of cake soap, and give it luke warm unto the horse to drink, and keep
him as warm as may be, and let him drink no cold water for the space of five
or six days, and when you would have him to stale, let it be either upon
plentye of straw, or upon some grene plotte, or else in a sheps coat, the
savor whereof will greatly provoke him to stale as has been aforesaid.

Of pissing blood. The.xcix. Chapter.
PElagonius says, that if a horse be over much labored, or over charged with
heavy burden, or over fat, he will many times piss blood, and the rather as
I think, for that some vain is broken within the horses body, and then clear
blood will come forth many times, as the Physicians say, without any piss at
all. But if the blood be perfectly mingled together with his stale, then it is
a sign that it comes from the kidneys, having some stone therein, which
through vehement labor, does fret the kydneys and veins thereof, and so
causes them to blede, through which whylest the urine passes must needs be
infected, and dyed with the blood. It may come also by some strype, or from the
muscle that incloseth the neck of the bladder. The cure according to
Pelagonius, Absirtus, Hierocles, and the rest, is thus. Let the horse blood in
ye Palate of the mouth, to convert the blood ye contrary way. Then take of
Tragaga^t that have been steeped in wine, half an ounce, and of Popy seed one
dram and one scruple, and of Styrax as much, and.xij. Pyneaple kyrnels. Let
all these things be beaten and mingled well together, and give the horse thereof
every morning the space of seven days, the quantity of a Hasell nut
distempered in a quart of wine, me thinks that the quantitye of a Walnut were
to little for so much wine. Some write that it is good to make him a drink
with the root of the herb Asphodelus, which some call Daffadyll mingled with
wheat flower, and Sumach sodden long in water, and so to be given the horse
with some wine added thereunto, or make him a drink of Goats milk and Oil,
strayning thereunto a little Fromenty. Anatolius says, that it is good to give
the Horse three days together, sodden Beans clean pilled, whereunto would be
added some Deres sewet and a little wine.

Of the Colt evil. The.C. Chapter.
THis name Colt evil in my judgment, does properly sygnifye that disease
which the Physicians call Priapismus, which is a continual standing together,
with an unnatural swelling of the yard proceeding of some wind, filling the
artiers, and hollow synewe or pype of the yard, or else through the abundance
of sede, which do chance often times to man, and I think sometime to stoned
horses. Notwithstanding Martin says, that the Colt evil is a swelling of the
sheathe of the yard, and the part of the belly there about, caused of corrupt
seed, coming out of the yard, and remaining within the sheath where it
putrifyeth. And Geldings most commonly are subject to this disease, not being
able for lack of natural heat, to expel their seed any further. For horses
as Martin says, are seldom troubled with this disease because of their heat,
unless it be when they have been over trauayled, or otherwise weakened. The
cure according to him is thus. Wash the sheath clean within with luke warm
Uineger, then draw out his yard, and wash that also. That done, ride him
into some running stream up to the belly, tossing him therein to and fro to
allay the heat of the members, and use him thus two or three days and he
shall be whole.

Of the mattering of the yard. The.Ci. Chapter.
IT commethe at covering time when the Horse and Mare both are over hot, and
so perhaps burn them selves. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take a pint
of white wine, and boil therein a a quarterne of roche Alome, and squirt
thereof into his yearde three or four squirtfull, one after an other, and
thrust the squyrt so far in as the lyquor may perce to the bottom to scour
away the bloody matter, continuing thus to do once a day until he be whole.

Of the sheading of seed. The.Cij. Chapter.
THis disease is called of the Physicians Gonorrhea, which may come some time
through abundaunce and rancknesse of seed, and sometime by the weakness of
the stones, and seed vessels not able to retain the seed, until it be
digested, and thickened. Vegetius says that this disease will make the horse
very faint and weak, and specially in summer season for cure whereof the said
Vegetius would have the horse to be ridden into some cold water, even up to
the belly, so as his stones may be covered with water, and then his fundament
being first bathed with warm water or oil, he would have you to thruste in
your hand and arm even to the very bladder, and softly to rub and clawe ye
same, and the parts there aboutes which be the seed Uessels. That done to
cover him warm that he take no cold, and every day he would have you to give
the horse Hogs dong to drink with red wine, until he be whole. I for my
part, if I thought that it came of weakness as is before said, which I would
judge by the waterishnesse of the seed, and vnlustinesse of the horse, would
give him red wine to drink, and put therein a little Acatium, the juice of
Plantain, and a little Mastick, and bath his back with red wine, and oil of
Roses mingled together.

Of the falling of the Yard. The.Ciij. Chapter.
IT comes as I take it through the weakness of the member, by means of some
resolution in the muscles and synewes serving the same, caused at the first
(perhaps) by some great strain or strype on the back. It may come also by
weariness and tyering. For remedy whereof Absirtus was wont to wash the
yard with salt water from the Sea if it might be gotten, if not, with water
and salt, and if that prevailed not, he would all to prick the outmost skin
of the yard with a sharp nedle, but not deep, and then wash all the pricks
with strong Uineger, and that did make the horse as he says to draw up his
yard again immediately, yea and this also will remedy the falling out of the
fundament. Pelagonius would have you to put into the pype of his yard, honey
and salt boiled together and made lyquid, or else a quick Fly, or a grain
of Franconsence, or else a cloue of Garlic clean pilled, and somewhat
broused, and also to pour on his back Oil, Wine, and Nytre, made warm and
mingled together. But Martins experience is in this sort. First wash the yard
with warm white wine, and then annoint it with oil of Roses, and honey mingled
together, and put it up into the sheath, and make him a Codpiece of Canuas to
keep it still up, and dress him thus every day once, until he be whole. And
in any case let his back be kept warm, either with a double cloth, or else
with a charge made of bole Armeny, Eggs, wheat flower, Sanguis Draconis,
Turpentyne, and Uineger, or else lay on a wet sack, which being covered with an
other dry cloth will keep his back very warm.

Of the swelling of the Codde and stones. The.Ciiij. Chapter.
ABsirtus says that the inflamatio^ and swelling of the Cod and stones,
comes by means of some wound, or by the stinging of some Serpent, or by
fighting one horse with an other. For remedy whereof, he was wont to bath the
Cod with water, wherein had been sodden the roots of wild Coucumber and
salt, and then to annoint it with an oyntmente made of Cerusa, oil, Goats
grease, and the white of an Egg. Some again would have the Cod to be bathed
in warm water, Nytrum, and Uineger mingled together, and also to be anointed
with an ointment made of Chaulke, or of potters earth, Ox dong, Cumyn, water
and vinegar, mingled together, or else to be anointed with the juice of the
herb Solanum, called of some night shade, or with the juice of humblocke
growing on dong hills, yea and also to be let blood in the flanks. But
Martin says, that ye swelling of the Coddes comes for the most part, after
some sickness, or surfeyting with cold, and then it is a sign of amendment.
The cure according to his experience is in this sort. First let him blood on
both sides the flank veins. Then take of oil of Roses, of Uineger, of each
half a pint, and half a quarterne of bole Armonie, beaten into powder.
Mingle them together in a Cruse, and being luke warm, annoint the Coddes
therewith with two or three feathers bound together, and the next day ride him
into the water, so as his Coddes may be within the water, giving him two or
three turns therein, and so return fair and softely to the stable, and when
he is dry annoint him again as before, continuing thus to do every day once
until he be whole. The said Martin says also that the Coddes may be swollen
by means of some hurt or evil humors resorting unto the Codde, and then he
would have you to cover the Coddes, with a charge made of bole Armeny and
vinegar wrought together, renewing it every day once until the swelling go
away, or that it break of it self, and if it break, then taint it with Mel
Rosatum, and make him a breche of Canuas to keep it in, renewing ye taint every
day once until it be whole.

Of incording or brusting. The.Cv. Chapter.
THis term incording is borrowed of the Italion word Incordato, which in
plain English is as much to say as brusten, and might be more rightly termed
of us incodded. For when a horse is bursten, his Gutte falls down into the
Codde making it to swell. The Italians as I take it did call it Incordato
because the gutte follows the string of the stone called of them Il cordone,
or Lachorda, whereof incordato semes to be deryued with some reason. According
to which reason we should call it rather instringed than incorded.
Notwithstanding sith that incording is already received in the stable. I for my
part am very well content therewith, minding not to contend against it. But now
you have to note, that either man or beast may be bursten dyuerslye, and
according to the names of the parts grieved. The Physicians do give it diverse
names, for you shall understand, that next unto the thick outward skin of the
belly, there is also an other inward thin skin covering all the Muskles, the
Caul, and the guts of the belly, called of the Anotomists, Peritoneum, which
skin comes from both sides of the back, and is fastened to the midryffe
above, and also to the bottom of the belly beneath, to keep in all the
contents of the nether belly. And therefore if this skin be broken, or over
sore strayned or stretched, then either some part of the Caul or Guts
slippeth down, sometime into the Codde, sometime not so far. If the gut
slip down into the Cod, then it is called of the Physicians by the Greek
name Enterocele, that is to say Gutte bursten. But if the Caul fall down into
the Codde, then it is called of the Physicians Epiplocele, that is to say Caul
bursten. But either of these diseases is most properly incident to the male
kind, for the Femall kind has no Cod. Notwithstanding, they may be so
bursten, as either Gut or Caul may fall down into their natures, hanging
there like a bag. But if it fall not down so low, but remains above nygh
unto the privy members or flanks, which place is called of the Latins Inguen,
then of that place the bursting is called of the Physicians Bubonocele,
whereunto I know not what English name to give, unless I should call it
flank bursten. Moreover the Codde or flank may be sometime swollen, by means
of some waterish humor, gathered together in the same, which is called of the
Physicians Hydrocele, that is to say water bursten, and sometime the Cod may be
swollen, by means of some hard piece of flesh cleaving to the thin skins or
panicles of the stones, and then it is called of the Physicians Sarcocele, that
is to say flesh bursten. But for as much as none of mine Authors, Martin, nor
any other Ferrer in these days that I know, have intermedled with any kind of
bursting, but only with that wherein the gutte falls down into the Cod:
leaving all the rest aparte, I will only talk of this. And that according to
Martins experience which I assure you differs not much from the precepts of
the old writers. But first you shall understand, that the gut bursten, and
flank bursten, does proceed both of one cause, that is to say, by means that
the skin called before Peritoneum, is either sore strayned, or else broken,
either of which things do most commonly chance to horses, either by some
strype of an other horse, or else by some strain in leaping over a hedge,
ditch, or pale, or otherwise, yea and many times in passing a caryer, through
the vndiscretenesse of the Ryder, stopping the horse suddenly without giving him
any warning, whereby the horse is forced to cast his hinder legs abroad, and
so strayneth or bursteth the skin aforesaid, by means whereof the gutte
falls down into his Codde. The signs be these. The horse will forsake his
meat, and stand shoring and leaning always on that side that he is hurt, and
on that side if you search with your hand, betwixt the stone and the thyghe
upward to the body, and somewhat above the stone, you shall find the gutte it
self big and hard in the feeling, whereas on the other side you shall find
no such thing. The cure according to Martin is thus. Bring the horse into some
house or place that has over head a strong bawk, or beam going ouertwhart,
and strew that place thick with straw. Then put on four pastornes with four
rings on his feet, and fastening the one end of a long rope to one of those
rings, threde all the other rings with the lose end of the rope, and so draw
all his forefete together, and cast him on the straw. That done, cast the rope
over the bawlke, and hoyse the horse so as he may lie flat on his back, with
his legs upward without struggling. Then bath his stones well with warm water
and butter molten together, and the stones being somewhat warm, and well
molified, raise them up from the body with both your hands being closed by the
fingers fast together, and holding the stones in your hands in such manner,
work down the gut into the body of the horse, by stryking it downewarde
continuallye with your two thombs, one laboring immediatelye after an other,
until you perceive that side of the stone to be so small as the other, and
having so discorded, that is to say returned the gutte into his right place.
Take a list of two fingers broad thoroughly anointed with fresh butter, and tie
his stones both together with the same so nighe the body as may be, not over
hard, but so as you may put your finger betwixt. That done, take the horse
quietlye down, and lead him fair and softly into the stable, whereas he must
stand warm, and not be sturred for the space of three weeks. But forget not
the next day after his discording to vnlosen the list, and to take it away,
and as well at that time, as every day once or twice after, to cast a dishe or
two of cold water up into his Coddes, and that will make him to shrink up
his stones, and thereby restrain the gut from falling down, and at the three
wekes end to be sure: it were not amiss to gelde the stone on that side away,
so shall he never be incorded again on that side. But let him not eat much,
nor drink much, and let his drink be always warm.

Of the botch in the graynes of a horse. The.Cvi. Chapter.
IF a horse be full of humors, and then suddenly labored, the humors will
resort into the weakest parts, and their gather together, and bread a botch,
and specially in the hinder parts, betwixt the thighs not far from the
Coddes. The signs be these, The hinder legs will be all swollen, and
specially from the houghes upward, and if you feel with your hand, you shall
find a great knob or swelling, and if it be round and hard, it will gather to a
head. The cure according to Martin is thus. First ripe it with this plaster.
Take of wheat flower, of Turpentine, and of honey, of each like quantity,
styrring it together to make a stiff plaster, and with a cloth lay it unto ye
sore, renewing it every day once, until it break or wax soft, and then lance
it so as the matter may run downewarde. Then taint it with Turpentyne, and
Hogs grease molten together, renewing it every day once until it be whole.

Of the diseases incident to the womb of a Mare, and specially of barrenness.
The.Cvij. Chapter.
IT seems by some writers that the womb of a Mare is subject to certain
diseases, though not so many as the womb of a woman, as to ascent, descent,
falling out, convulsion, barre^nesse, aborsement, yea Aristotle and others do
not let to write, that menstruall blood does naturallye void from the Mare,
as from the woman, though it be so little in quantity, as it can not be well
perceived. But since none of mine Authors have written thereof to any purpose,
nor any Ferrer of this time that I know, have had any experience in such
matters, I will pass them al over with silence, saving barre^nesse whereof I
promised in the breders office to declare unto you ye causes, and such kind of
cure for ye same, as ye old writers have taught. A Mare the^ may be barren
through the vntemperatnesse of the womb or matrix, as for yt it is to hot and
fyery, or else to cold and moist, or to dry, or else to short, or to narrow,
or having ye neck thereof turned awry, or by means of some obstruction or
stopping in the matrix, or for that the Mare is to fat, or to lean, and many
times Mares go barren, for that they be not well horsed. Well, the cure of
barrenness that comes through the fault of the Matrix or womb, according
to the old writers is thus. Take a good handeful of Leekes, stamp them in a
mortar, with half a Glass full of wine. Then put thereunto.xij. flies called
of the Appoticaries, Cantharides, of diverse colors if they may be gotten,
then strain al together, with a sufficient quantity of water to serve the
Mare therewith two days together, by pouring the same into her nature with a
horn or glister pype made of purpose, and at the end of three days next
following, offer the horse unto her that should cover her, and immediately
after that she is covered, wash her nature twice together with cold water.

An other receyte for the same purpose.
TAke of Nytrum, of sparrows dong, and of Turpentyne, of each like quantity,
well wrought together and made like a suppository, and put that into her
nature, and it will cause her to desire the horse, and also to conceive.
Hipocrates says, that it is good also to put a Nettle into the horses mouth
that should cover her.

Of the Itche, Scabbe, and Maunginesse in the tail, and falling of the tail.
The.Cviij. Chapter.
IN spring time horses be many times troubled with the tronchons in their
fundament, and then they will rub their tail, and break the hair thereof,
and yet in his tail perhaps, shall be neither ytche, scurffe, nor scabbe,
wherefore if you rake the horse well with your hand, anointed with Soap, and
search for those tronchons, and pull them clean out, you shall cause him to
leave rubbing: and if you see that the hair do fall away of it self, then it
is a sign, yt it is either eaten with worms, or that there is some scurffe or
scabbe fretting the hair, and causing such an ytche in his tail, as the horse
is always rubbing the same. As touching the worms, scurffe, or scabbe, it
shall be good to annoint all the tail with soap, and then to wash it clean
even to the ground with strong lie, and that will kill the worms, and make the
hair to grow again. And if much of the tail be worn away, if shall be
needful to keep the tail continually wette, with a sponge dipte in fair
water, and that will make the hair to grow very fast. But if the horses tail
be maungy, then heal that like as you do the maungynesse of the Main before
rehearsed. Again if there breed any Canker in the tail, (which will consume
both the flesh and bone, and as Laurentius Russius says, make the joints to
fall away one by one.) It shall be good as Martin says to wash all his tail
with Aqua fortis or strong water, made in this sort. Take of grene Corporas, of
Atom, of each one pound, of white Corporas a quartern. Boil all these things
together in three quarts of running water, in a very strong earthen pot, until
the one half be consumed, and then with a little of this water being made luke
warm, wash his tail with a little clout, or Flax bound to the end of a
stick, continuing so to do every day once, until it be whole.

How to know when a horse halteth before, in what part his grief is. The.Cix.
Chapter.
BEing now come to talk of the griefs in the shoulders, legs, hips,
houghes, joints, and houes, causing the horse most commonly to halte: I
think it good first to show you ye way how to find in what part of his
legs, the horse is grieved when he halteth either before or behind. And
first you have to consider that if a horse halteth before, it must be either
in his shoulders, in his legs, or in his feet. If it be in his shoulders,
and new hurt, the horse will not lift that leg, but traile it nighe the
ground. If it be old hurt, he will cast that leg further from him in his
going, than the other, and if he be turned on the sore side, then he will halte
so much the more. If a horse halteth in the leg, it is either in the knee, in
the shanke, or in the pastorne joint, if it be either in the knee, or pastorne
joint, he will not bow that in his going like the other, but go very stiffly
upon it. If he halteth in the shanke, then it is by means of some splent,
wingall, or such apparent grief, apt to be seen, or felt. If he halt in the
foot, it is either in the cronet, hele, in the toe, in the quarters, or sole
of the foot. If it be in the cronet, the grief will be apparent, the skin
being broken or swollen some manner of way: If in the hele, as by over reach or
otherwise, then he will tread most on the toe: if upon any of the quarters,
the^ going on the edge of a bank or hilly ground, he will halt more, than on ye
plain ground, and by the horses coming toward you, and going from you upon
such edge or bank, you shall easily perceive whether his grief be in the
inward quarter or outward quarter. The quarter is to be understand, from the
mid houe to the hele. If he halte in the toe which is not commonly seen, then
he will tread more upon the hele. If his grief be in the sole of the foot,
then he will halte all after one sort upon any ground, unless it be upon the
stones. And to be sure in what part of the foot the grief is, it shall be
good first to make him go upon the plain ground, and then upon a hard and
stony ground, yea and also banky ground. Thus having declared unto you in
general, how to know in what part a horse is grieved when he halteth
before: I think it mete first to show you orderly all the particular griefs
and sorances, whereunto the fore parts of a horse are subject, together with
the causes, signs and cure thereof. That done, I will speak of halting
behind, and show you first generally where the grief is, and then
perticulerly declare unto you every grief incident to the hinder parts of a
horse. And lastely I will speak of such griefs and sorances as are common to
both parts, that is to say, as well to the forelegges, and forefete, as to the
hinder legs and hinder fete.

Of the grief and pinching in the shoulder. The.Cx. Chapter.
THis comes either by laboring and strayning the horse to young, or else by
some great burden. You shall perceive it by the narrowness of the breast, and
by consuming of the flesh of the shoulders, in so much as the fore part of the
shoulder bone will stick out, and be a great deal higher then the flesh. And
if it be of long continuance, he will be very hollow upon the brisket toward
the armeholes, and he will go wyder beneath at the feet, then above at the
knees. The cure according to Martin is thus. Give him a slit of an inch long
with a sharp knife or Rasor upon both sides an ynche under the shoulder bones.
Then with a Swannes quill put into the slitte, blow up first the one
shoulder, and then the other, as big as you can possibly, even up to the
wythers, and with your hand stryke the wind equally into every place of the
shoulders. And when they be both full, then beat all the windy places with a
good hasell wand over all the shoulder. Then with a flat sclise of iron,
loosen the skin within from the flesh. That done rowell the two slits or
cuttes with two round rowels made of the upper leather of an old shoe with a
hole in the midst, that the matter may issu forth, and let such rowels be
three inches broad, and so put in as they may lie plain and flat within the
cut. Then make a charge to lay upon the same in this sort. Take of Pytch, of
Rosen, of each one pound, of Tar half a pint, boil these things all
together in a pot, and when it is somewhat cooled, take a stick with a woollen
clout bound fast to the one end thereof, and dippe it into this charge, and
cover or daube all the shoulders therewith. That done, clappe thereunto a
pound of Floxe of such color as the horse is, or as nighe unto ye same as may
be, and every other day cleanse both the wounds and rowels, and put them in
again, continuing thus to do, the space of.xv. days. Then take them out and
heal up the wounds with two taynts of Flax dipped in Turpentine, and Hogs grease
molten together, renewing the same every day once, until the wounds be whole.
But let the charge lie still, until it fall away of it self, and let the
horse run to grass until he has had a frost or two.

Of wrinching the shoulder. The.Cxi. Chapter.
THis comes sometime by a fall. and sometime by turning to suddenly in some
uneven ground, or by to rash running out at some door, or by some strype of an
other horse, or by some sudden stop in passing a Carrier. You shall perceive
it in his going, by trayling his leg upon the ground, so close unto him
self as he can possible. The cure according to Martin is thus. Let him blood,
the quantity of three pintes on the breast in the plat vain, receiving the blood
in a pot, and thereunto put first a quart of strong Uineger, and half a dosen
broken eggs, shelles and al, and so much wheat flower as will thicken all
that lyquor. That done, put thereunto of bole Armeny beaten into fine powder one
pound, of Sanguis Draconis two ounces, and mingle them all together, so as the
flower may not be perceived, and if it be to stiff, you may make it more
lyquid or soft, with a little Uineger. Then with your hand daube all the
shoulder from the main downewarde, and betwixt the forebowels, all against the
hair, and let not the horse depart out of that place, until the charge be
surely fastened unto the skin. That done, carry him into the stable, and tie
him up to the rack, and suffer him not to lie down all that day, and give him
a little meat, dyeting him moderately the space of.xv. days, during which
time, he may not stir out of his place, but only to lie down, and every day
once refresh the shoulder point with this charge, laying still new upon the old,
and at the.xv. days end, lead him abroad to see how he goes, and if he be
somewhat amended, then let him rest without trauayling, the space of one month,
and that shall bring his shoulder to perfection. But if he be never the better
for all this that is done: then it shall be needful, to rowel him with a
leather rowell upon the shoulder point, and to keep him rowelled the space
of.xv. days, renning the rowell, and clensing the wound every other day, and
then walk him up and down fair and softly, and turn him always on the
contrary side to the sore, and when he goes upright, pull out the rowell, and
heal the wound with a taynt of Flax dipped in Turpe^tyne, and Hogs grease
molten together. And if all this will not serve, then it shall be needful to
draw him chequorwise with a hot iron over all the shoulder point and also to
make him to draw in a plough every day two hours at the least, to settle his
joints for the space of three weeks or a month, and if any thing will help
him these two last remedies will help him, and make him to go right up again.

Of splayting of the shoulder. The.Cxij. Chapter.
THis comes by some dangerous slyding or slipping, whereby the shoulder
parts from the breast, and so leaves an open rift not in the skin, but in the
flesh and filme next under the skin, and so he halteth, and is not able to
go, you shall perceive it by trayling his leg after him in his going. The
cure according to Martin is thus. First put a pair of strait pastornes on his
forefete, keeping him still in the stable, without disquieting him. The^ take of
Dialthea one pound, of Sallet Oil one pynte, of Oil de Bays half a pound,
of fresh butter half a pound. Melte all these things together in a Pipkin,
and annoint the grieved place therewith, and also round about the insyde of the
shoulder, and within two or three days after, both that place and all the
shoulder besides will swell. Then either prick him with a launcet, or fleame,
in all the swelling places, or else with a little sharp hot iron made in this
sort, the head whereof would be an ynch long, to the intent that the
corruption may run out, and use to annoint it still with the ointment
aforesaid. But if you see that it will not go away, but swell still, and
gather to a head, then lance it where ye swelling does gather most, and is
soft under the finger and then taint it with flax dipped in this ointment. Take
of Turpentine, and of Hogs grease, of each two ounces, and melt them together,
renewing the taynt twyce a day until it be whole.

Of the shoulder pight. The.Cxiij. Chapter.
THat is when the shoulder point or pitch of the shoulder is displaced, which
grief is called of the Italians Spallato, and it comes by reason of some
great fall forward, rush, or strain. The signs be these. That shoulder point
will stick out further then his fellow, and the horse will halte right down.
The cure according to Martin is thus. First make him to swime in a deep water,
up and and down a dosen turns, and that shall make the joint to return to
his place. Then make two tough pinnes of Asshen wood, as much as your little
finger, sharp at the points, each one five inches long. That done, slitte the
skin, an ynch above the point, and an inche beneath the point of the shoulder,
and thrust in one of the pinnes from above downward, so as both ends may
equallye stick without the skin. And if the pin of wood will not easily pass
through, you may make it way, first with an iron pin. That done, make other
two holes cross to the first holes, so as the other pin may cross ye first
pyn, right in the midst, with a right cross, and the first pyn would be
somewhat flat in the midst, to the intent that the other being round, may
pass the better without stop, and close the iuster together. Then take a
piece of a little line somewhat bigger then a whipcorde, and at one end make a
loope, which being put over one of the pins ends, wind the reast of the Line
good and strait about the pinnes ends, so as it may lie betwixt the pins ends
and the skin, and fasten the last end with a pack nedle, and a pack
threede, unto the rest of the cord, so as it may not slip, and to do well,
both the pricks and the cord would be first anointed with a little Hogs
grease. Then bring him into the stable, and let him rest the space of nine
days, but let him lie down as little as may be, and put on a pastorne on
the sore leg, so as it may be bound with a cord, unto the foot of the
maunger, to keep that leg always whilst he stands in the stable more
forward then the other. And at the.ix* days end, take out the pricks, and
anoint the sore places with a little Dialthea, or with Hogs grease, and then
turn him to grass.

Of the swelling of the forelegs after great labor. The.Cxiiij. Chapter.
GReat labor and heat causes humors to resort down into the legs, making them
to swel. The cure whereof according to Martin is thus. Bathe them with buttered
beer, or else with this bath here following. Take of mallows three handeful, a
Rose Cake, of Sage one handefull. Boil them together in a sufficient quantity
of water, and when the Mallows be soft put in half a pound of butter, and
half a pint of Sallet oil, and then being somewhat warm, wash the swelling
therewith every day once, the space of three or four days. And if the swelling
will not go away with this, then take wine lies, and Cumin, and boil them
together, and put thereunto a little wheat flower, and charge all the swelling
therewith, and walk him often, and if all will not serve, then take up the
great vain above the knee on the insyde, suffering him not to bleed from
above, but al from beneath.

Of foundering in the forelegges. The.Cxv. Chapter.
THe cause of this grief is declared before in the chapter of fou^dering in
the body whereas I showed you that if a horse be foundered in the body, the
humors will immediately resort down into his legs. Martin says within the
space of.xxiiij. hours, and then the horse will go crowching al upon the
hinder legs, his forelegges being so stiff, as he is not able to bow the^.
The cure whereof according to Martin is in this sort. Garter each leg
immediately one handefull above the knee, with a list good and hard, and then
walk him to chafe him, and to put him in a heat, and being somewhat warmed,
let him blood in both the breast veins, reserving the blood to make a charge
withal in this manner. Take of that blood two quartes and of wheat flower
half a Pecke, and six eggs, shelles and al, of bole Armeny half a pound, of
Sanguis Draconis half a quartern, and a quarte of strong Uineger. Mingle them
all together, and charge al his shoulders, breast, back, loins, and forelegges
therewith, and walk him upon some hard ground suffering him not to stand
still, and when the charge is dry refreshe it again. And having walked him
three or four hours together, lead him into the stable, and give him a
little warm water with ground malt in it, and then a litte hay and prouender,
and then walk him again either in the house, or else abroad, and continue
thus to do the space of four days, and when all the charge is spent, cover
him well with a housing cloth, and let him both stand and lie warm, and eat
but little meat during the four days. But if you see yt at the four days
end he mendeth not a whit, then it is a sign that the humors lie in the foot,
for the which you must search with your butter, paryng all the soles of the
fore feet so thin, as you shall see the water issue through the sole. That
done, with your butter let him blood at both the toes, and let him blede well.
Then stop the vain with a little hogs grease, and Turpentyne molten
together, and laid upon a little Flax, and then tack on the shoes, and cram
the place where you did let him blood hard with toawe, to the intent it may
be surely stopped. Then fill both his feet with Hogs grease and bran fried
together in a stopping pan, so hot as is possible. And upon that stopping clap
a piece of leather, or else two splents to keep in the stopping. And immediately
after this, Take two Eggs, beat them in a dishe, and put thereunto as much
bole Armeny and Bean flower as will thicken the same, and mingle them well
together, and make thereof two playsters, such as may close each foot round
about, somewhat above the cronette, and bind it fast with a list, or rowler,
that it may not fall away nor be removed for the space of two days, but let
the sole be cleansed, and new stopped every day once, and the cronets to be
removed every two days, continuing so to do until he be whole. During which
time, let him reast vnwalked, for fear of losening his houes. But if you see
that he begin to amend, you may walk him fair and softly once a day upon
some soft ground, to exercise his legs and fete, and let him not eat much, nor
drink cold water. But if this foundering break out above the houe, which you
shall perceive by the losenesse of the coffin, above by the cronette, the^ when
you pare ye soole, you must take all the fore part of ye sole clean away,
leaving the heels hole, to the intent the humors may have the freer passage
downewarde, and then stop him, and dress him about the cronet, as is before
said.

Of the splent as well in the insyde or outside of the knee, as other where in
the leg. The.Cxvi. Chapter.
THis soraunce to any man's feeling is a very gristle, sometime as big as a
walnut, and sometime no more than a Hasell nut, which is called of the Italians
Spinella, and it comes as Laurentius Russius says, by traueyling the horse
to young, or by oppressing him with heavy burden, offending his tender synews,
and so causes him to halt. It is easy to know because it is apparent to the
eye, and if you pinche it with your thombe and finger, the horse will shrink up
his leg. The cure whereof according to Martin is in this sort. Wash it well
with warm water, and shave of the hair, and lightlye scarifye all the sore
place with the point of a Rasor, so as the blood may issue forth. Then take of
Cantharides half a sponefull, and of Euforbium, as much beaten into fine
powder, and mingle them together with a spone full of oil de Bay, and then
melte them in a little pan, stirring them well together, so as they may not
boil over, and being so boiling hot, take two or three feathers, and anoint
all the sore place therewith. That done, let not the horse stir from the
place where you so dress him for one hour after, to the intent he shake not
of the ointment. Then carry him fair and softly into the stable, and tie him so
as he may not reach with his head beneath the manger, for otherwise he will
covet to byte away the smarting and pricking medicine, which if it should
touch his lips, would quickly fetch of the skin. And also let him stand
without lytter all that day and night. The next day annoint the sore place
with fresh butter, continuing so to do every day once for the space of nine
days, for this shall allay the heat of the medicine, and cause both that, and
the crust to fall away of it self, and therewith either clean take away the
splent, or at the least remove it out of the knee into the leg, and so much
dyminishe it, as the horse shall go right up, and halte no more through
occasion thereof. Laurentius Russius would have the splent to be cured by
fyering it longst wise and ouertwhart. Some again do make it soft by beating
it with a Hasell stick, and then do suck it out with a piece of new leather
and a hot iron which many times diminishes the splent, and increases the
halting. For if a splent be not very well dressed, the horse will halte half a
year after, yea and perhaps all his life long.

Of a Malander. The.Cxvij. Chapter.
A Malander is a kind of scabbe growing in the form of lines, or strekes,
overthwart the bent of the knee, and has long hayres with stubborn roots,
like the brystles of a Boar, which corrupts and cankereth the flesh, like
the roots of a childs scabbed head, and if it be great, it will make the
horse to go stiff at the setting forth and also to halt. This disease
procedes sometime of a corrupt blood, but most commonly, for lack of clean
keeping, and good rubbing. The cure according to Martin is thus. First wash it
well with warm water, then shave both hair and scabbe clean away, leaving
nothing but the bare flesh, whereunto lay this plaster. Take a spone full of
Soap, and as much Lyme. Mingle them together, that it may be like Paast, and
spread as much on a clowt as will cover the sore, and bind it fast on with a
list, renewing it every day once ye space of two or three days, and at the
three days end, take away the plaster, and annoint the sore with Oil of
Roses made luke warm, and that shall fetch away the crust or scurfe, bredde by
means of the plaster, which scurfe being taken away, wash the sore place
well every day once with his own stale, or else with man's urine, and then
immediately strowe upon it the powder of burnt Oyster shelles, continuing thus
to do every day once until it be whole.

Of an upper attaynt or over reach upon the back synewe of the shanke somewhat
above the joint. The.Cxviij. Chapter.
THe Italians call this sorance Attincto, which is a paynefull swelling of the
master synewe, by means that the horse does sometime ouerreach, and strike
that synewe, with the toe of his hinder foot, which causes him to halte. The
signs be apparent by the swelling of the place, and by the horses halting. The
cure according to Martin is thus. Wash the place with warm water, and shave
of all the hair so far as the swelling goes, and scarify every part of the
sore place lightly with the point of a Rasor, that the blood may issue sorth.
Then take of Cantharides, and of Euforbium, of each half an ounce, mingle them
together with half a quarterne of Soap, and with a sclice spread some of this
ointment over all the sore, suffering him to rest there as you dress him, for
one half hour after, and then you may carry him into the stable, and there let
him stand without litter and tied as has been said before in the Chapter of
the splent, and the next day dress him with the same ointment once again,
even as you did before. And the third day annoint the place with fresh butter,
continuing so to do the space of.ix. days, and at the.ix. days, end make him
this bathe. Take of Mallows three handful, a Rose Cake, of Sage a handefull.
Boil the^ together, in a sufficient quantity of water. And when the Mallows be
soft, put in half a pound of butter and half a pint of Sallet Oil, and then
being somewhat warm, wash the sore place therewith every day once, the space
of three or four days.

Of a nether taynt. The.Cxix. Chapter.
THis is a little bladder full of Ielly much like unto a windgal, not apparent
to the eye, but to the feling, growing in the midst of the pastorne, somewhat
above the frushe. It comes by a strain, or else by some wrinch, or by an over
reach, and makes the horse to halte. The signs be these. The nether joint
toward the fewterlock will be hot in the feeling, and somewhat swollen. The
cure according to Martin is in this sort. Tie him above the joint with a list
somewhat hard, and that will cause the bladder to appear to the eye. Then
lance it with a sharp poynted knife, and thruste out all the Ielly. That
done, lay unto it the white of an Egg, and a little Salt beaten together, and
laid upon flax or toawe, and bind it fast unto the sore, renewing it once a
day the space of four or five days, during which time let him rest, and then
you may boldly labor him.

Of an over reach upon the heel. The.Cxx. Chapter.
This is a cut so as the skin hangs down at the heel, made with the toe of
the hinder foot, and is apparent to the eye, and it will cause the horse
somewhat to halte. The cure whereof according to Martin is thus. Cut away the
skin that hangs down, and bind unto it a little flax dipte in the white of
an Egg, mingled with a little bole Armeny, renewing it every day once, the
space of three or four days, and that will heal it.

Of false quarters. The.Cxxi. Chapter.
THis is a rifte sometime in the outsyde, but most commonly in the insyde of
the houe, because the insyde is ever the weaker part, which sides are commonly
called quarters, and thereof this sorance takes his name, and is called a false
quarter, that is to say a crased or vnsou^d quarter, which name in deed is
borrowed of the Italians, calling it in their tongue Falso quarto. It comes by
evil shooing, and partly by evil paring. The signs be these. The horse will
for the most part halt, and the rifte will bleed, and is apparent to the eye.
The cure according to Martin is thus. If the horse halte, then pull of the
shoe, and cut so much away on that side of the shoe where ye grief is, as the
shoe being immediately put on again, the rift may be uncovered. Then open the
rift with a rosenette or drawer, and fill all the rift with a roll of toawe,
dipte in Turpentyne, Wax, and sheep sewet molten together, renewing it every
day once until it be whole. And the rifte being closed in the top, draw him
betwixt the hair and the houe with a hot Iron overthwart that place, to the
intent that the houe may shote al whole downward, and when the horse goes
vprighte, ride him with no other shoe, until his houe be thoroughly hardened
again. But as touching shoes for false quarters, you shall have the order of
making of them declared unto you hereafter in the end of this book.

Of halting behind, and where the grief is. The.Cxxij. Chapter.
IF a horse halte behind the grief must either be in the hyppe, in the
stiffle, in the houghe, in the hamme, in the leg, in the nether joint,
pastorne, or foot, if he halte in the hip of a new hurt, the horse will go
sydeling, and not follow so well with that leg as with the other. But if it
be old hurt, the sore hippe will shrink and be lower then the other, and is
best seen when he goes up a hill, or upon the edge of some bank so as the
worste leg may go on the higher side, for then he will halt so much the
more, because it is paynefull unto him to go so unevenly wrinching his leg.
If the grief be in the stiffle, then the horse in his going will cast the
stiffle joint outward, and the bone on the inside will be far bigger than
the other. If the grief be in the hough, then it is by means of some spauen,
or some other hurt apparent to the eye. And the like may be said of the hamme,
wherein may be seen the selandre, or such like apparent sorance, causing the
horse to halte. If the grief be either in the leg, pastorne, or foot, then
you shall find it by such signs as have been taught you before. And therefore
let us now speak of those sorances, that are properly incident to the hinder
legs.

Of a horse that is hipped, or hurt in the hippes. The.Cxxiij. Chapter.
THe horse is said to be hipte, when the hip bone is removed out of his right
place, which grief is called of the Italians Mal del aucha It comes most
commonly by some great stripe or strain, slypping, slyding, or falling. The
signs be these. The horse will halte, and in his going he will go sydeling,
and the sore hyp will fall lower than the other, and the flesh in process of
time will consume clean away. And if it be suffered to run so long, it will
never be restored unto his pristine estate. The best way as Martin says, to
make him go upright: is, to charge his hip and back with pitch and rosen molte^
together, and laid on warm, and then some flocks of his own color to be
clapped upon the same, and so to let him run to grass until he go upright.
But the sore hip will never rise again so high as the other. If the horse be
not hipped but only hurt in the hip, and that newly. Then first take of oil de
Bay, of Dialthea, of Nerual, of swines grease, of each half a pound, melt them
all together stirring the^ continually, until they be thoroughly mingled
together, and annoint the sore place against the hair, with this ointment,
every day once, the space of a fortenight, and make the ointment to synke well
into the flesh, by holding a hot broad bar of iron over the place anointed,
weauing your hand to and fro, until the ointment be entered into ye skin. And
if at the fortenightes end, you see that the horse amendeth no whitte for
this, then slyt a hole downewarde in his skin, an ynch beneath ye hyp bone,
making the hole so wide, as you may easily thrust in a rowel with your finger,
and then with a little broad sclice of iron, losen the skin from ye flesh above
the bone, and round about ye same, so broad as the rowel may lie flat and
plain betwixt the skin and the flesh, which rowell would be made of soft
calves leather, with a hole in ye midst like a ring, having a threde tied unto
it, to pull it out when you would cleanse the hole, in this sort, and if the
rowell be rolled about with flax fast tied on, and anointed with the
oyntmente under written, it will draw so much the more. And thruste in the
rowell first double, and then spread it abroad with your finger. That done,
taynt it with a good long taint of flax or toawe dipped in a little Turpentine
and hogs grease molte^ together, and made warm, and cleanse the hole and the
rowel every day once, and also renew the taynt for the space of a fortenight.
And before you dress him, cause him every day to be led up and down a foot
pace a quarter of an hour, to make the humors come down, and at the
fortenights end pull out the rowell, and heal up the wound with the same
salve, making ye taint every day lesser and lesser, until it be whole. And so
sone as it is whole, draw with a hot iron cross lines of eight or nine inches
long right over the hyppe bone, so as the rowelled place may be in the very
mydst thereof, and burn him no deeper, but so as the skin may look yeallow,
and then charge all that place, and over all his buttocke with this charge.
Take of pytch one pound, of Rosen half a pound, of Tar half a pynte. Boil
them together, and then being good and warm, spread it on with a clout tied in
a riuen stick. And then clappe on a few flocks of the horses color, and if
it be in Summer, let the horse run to grass a while, for the more he
trauayleth at his own will, the better it is for him.

Of stiffling and hurtes in the stiffle. The.Cxxiiij. Chapter.
THe Horse is said to be styffled, when the styffling bone is remoned from his
right place. But if it be not removed nor losened, and yet the Horse halteth by
means of some grief there, then we say that the horse is hurt in the stiffle,
and not styffled. The styffle comes by means of some side blow* or some
great strain flypping or slyding. The signs be these. If he be stiffled the
one bone will stick out further than the other, and is apparent to the eye.
Martin would have you to cure the styffle in all points like unto the shoulder
pight saving that the pinnes need not to be so long because the stifling place
is not so broad as the shoulder, and standing in the stable, let him have a
pastorne with a ring upon his sore leg, and thereunto fasten a cord, which
cord must go about his neck, and let it be so much strayned, as it may bring
his sore leg more forward than the other, to keep the bone from starting out.
But if the Horse be but hurt in the styffle with some strype, or strain, then
the bone will not stand out, but perhaps the place may be swollen. The cure
according to Martin is thus. First annoint the place with the ointment
mentioned in the last Chapter before, every day once the space of a
fortenight, and if the Horse amend not with this* then rowel him with a hearen
rowell, or else with a quyll, and let the nether hole be somewhat beneath
the sore place, and cleanse the hole every day, by turning the rowell,
continuing still to annoint the place with the oyntmente aforesaid, and that
shall make him whole.

Of foundering behind. The.Cxxv. Chapter.
This haps most commonly when a horse is very fat, and has his grease molten
wtin him, which is sone done with every little heat. You shall perceive it by
his going, for he will be afraid to set his hinder feet to the ground, and
he will be so weak behind, as he will stand quiuering and shaking, and covet
always to lie down. The cure according to Martin is thus. First garter him
above the houghes, and then force him to go a while to put him in a heat, and
being somewhat warm, let him blood in the thigh veins, reserving of that
blood a pottle, to make him a charge in this sort. Put unto that blood, of
wheat flower and of bean flower, of each a quarter of a pecke, of Bole
Armenie one pound, of Sanguis Draconis two ounces, six eggs, shelles and
all, of Turpentine half a pound, of Uinegre a quarte. Mingle all these things
together, and therewith charge both his hinder legs, raynes, and flanks, al
against the hair. And if the horse can not dung, let him be raked, and give
him this glister. Take of Mallows three handfuls, boil them well in fair
water from a pottle to a quarte. Then strain it, and put thereunto half a
pound of butter, and of Sallet oil a quarter of a pint, and having emptied
his belly, give him also this drink to comfort him. Take of Malmesy a quarte,
and put thereunto a little Synamom, Mace, and Pepper, beaten into fine
powder, and of oil a quarter of a pint, and give the horse to drink of that
luke warm with a horn. That done, let him be walked up and down a good while
together, if he be able to go: if not, then tie him up to the rack, and let
him be hanged with canuas and ropes, so as he may stand upon the ground with
his feet. For the less he lie, the better, and pare his hinder feet thin,
until the deawe come out, and tacking on the shoes again stop the houes
with branne and hogs grease boiled together, and let both his feet having
this gear in it, be wrapped up in a cloth even to his pastornes, and there
tie the cloute fast. Let his diet be thin, and let him drink no cold water,
and give him in winter wet hay, and in so^mer grass.

Of the dry Spauen. The.Cxxvi. Chapter.
THe dry spauen called of the Italians Spauano, or Sparauagno, is a great
hard knobbe, as bygge as a Walnut, growing in the insyde of the hough, hard
under the ioynte, nighe unto the master vain, and causes the horse to halte,
which sorance comes sometime by kind, because the horses parents perhaps had
the like disease at the time of his generation, and sometime by extreme labor,
and heat dissoluing humors, which do descend through ye master vain,
continually feding that place with evil nutrime^t, and causes yt place to
swell. Which swelling in continuance of time, becomes so hard as a bone, and
therefore is called of some ye bone Spaue^. It needs no signs to know it,
because it is apparent to the eye, and most Ferrers do take it to be incurable.
Notwithstanding Martin says, that it may be made less with these remedies
here following. Wash it with warm water, and shave of the hair so far as the
swelling extends, and scarifie the place, so as it may blede. Then take of
Cantharides one dosen, and of Euforbium half a sponefull, break them in
powder, and boil them together with a little oil de Bay, and with two or
three feathers bound together, put it boiling hot upon the sore, and let his
tail be tide up for wyping away the medicine: and then within half an hour
after, set him up in the stable, and tie him so as he may not lie down all
that night, for fear of rubbing of the medicine, and the next day annoint it
with fresh butter, continuing thus to do every day once the space of five or
syx days, and when the hair is grown again, draw the sore place with a
hot iron, in this sort. Then take another hot sharp iron like a bodkyn,
somewhat bowing at the point, and thrust yt in at the nether end of the
middle line, and so upward betwixt the skin and the flesh an ynch and a
half. And then taynte it with a little Turpentine and hogs grease molten
together and made warm, renewing it every day once, the space of nine days.
But remember first immediately after his burning to take up the master vain,
suffering him to bleed a little from above, and tie up the upper end of the
vain, and leave the nether end open, to the intent that he may bleed from
beneath, until it cease of it self, and that shall diminish the Spauen, or
else nothing will do it.

Of the wette Spauen, or through Spauen: The.Cxxvij. Chapter.
THis is a soft swelling growing on both sides of the hough, and seems to go
clean through the hough, and therefore may be well called a through Spauen.
But for the most part the swelling on the in side because it is continually fed
of the master vain, is greater than the swelling on the outsyde. The Italians
call this sorance La ierda, or gierdone, which seems to come of a more
fluxible humor, and not so viscouse or slimy as the other Spauen does, and
therefore this waxes not so hard, nor grows to the nature of a bone, as the
other does, and this is more curable than the other. It need no signs,
because it is apparent to the eye, and easy to know, by the description thereof
before made. The cure according to Martin is thus. First wash, shave, and
scarifie the place, as before. The^ take of Cantharides, half an ounce, of
Euforbium one ounce broken to powder, and of oil de Bay one ounce. Myngle them
well together cold, without boiling them, and dress the sore therewyth two
days together, and every day after until the hair be grown again, annoint
it with fresh butter. Then fire him both without and within, as before,
without taynting him, and immediately take up the master vain as before. And
then for the space of nine days, annoynte him every day once with butter,
until the fyered place begin to skale, and then wash it with this bath. Take
of Mallows three handfuls, of Sage one handful, and as much of read nettels,
boil them in water, until they be soft, and put thereunto a little fresh
butter, and bath the place every day once, for the space of three or four
days, and until the burning be whole, let the horse come in no wette.

Of the Selander. The.Cxxviij. Chapter.
THis is a kind of Scabbe breeding in the ham, which is the bente of the
hough, and is like in all points to the Malandre, proceeding of like causes,
and requires like cure, and therefore resort to the Chapter of the Malander.

Of the Hough bonny. The.Cxxix. Chapter.
THis is a round swelling bonny, like a Paris ball, growing upon the very typpe
or elbowe of the Hough, and therefore I thought good to call it the Hough bonny.
This sorance comes of some strype or bruise, and as Martin says, is cured
thus. Take a round iron somewhat sharp at the end like a good bygge bodkyn,
and let it be somewhat bending at the point. Then holding ye sore with your
left hand, pulling it somewhat from the synnewes, pearce it with the iron,
being first made red hot, thrusting it beneath in the bottom, and so upward
into the ielly, to the intent that the same ielly may issue downewarde out at
the hole, and having thrust out all the ielly, taynte the hole with a taynt of
flax dypt in Turpentine, and hogs grease molten together, and also annoint
the outsyde with hogs grease made warm, renewing it every day once, until the
hole be ready to shut up, making the taint every day lesser and lesser, to
the intent it may heal up.

Of the Curb. The.Cxxx. Chapter.
THis is a long swelling beneath the elbow of the hough, in the great synewe
behind, and causes the horse to halte after that he has been a while
labored, and thereby somewhat heated. For the more the synew is strayned, the
greater grief which again by rest is eased. This comes by bearing some
great wayght when the horse is young, or else by some strain or wrinch, whereby
the tender synewes are grieved, or rather bowed (as Russius says) whereof it
is called in Italian Curba a Curuando, that is to say of bowing, for anguish
whereof it does swel, and such swelling is apparent to the eye, and makes that
leg to show bygger than the other. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take
of wine lees a pint, and a porringer full of wheat flower, of Comin half an
ounce and stir them well together, and being made warm, charge the sore place
therewith, renewing it every day once the space of three or four days, and
when the swelling is almost gone, then draw it with a hot iron in this sort,
and cover the burning with Pytch and Rosen molten together, and laid on good
and warm, and clappe thereon some flocks of his own color, or so nigh as may
be gotten, and remove them not, until they fall away of themselves. And for the
space of nine days let the horse rest and come in no wette.

Of the Pains. The.Cxxxi. Chapter.
THis is a kind of Scab called in Italian Grappe, which is full of fretting
matterish water, and it breeds in the pastornes for lack of clean keeping
and good rubbing after the horse has been iourneyed, by means whereof the
sand and dirte remaining in the hair, fretteth the skin and flesh, and so
breeds to a scab. And therefore those horses that have long hair, and are
rough about the feet, are sonest troubled with this disease, if they be not
the cleanlier kept. The signs be these. His legs will be swollen and hot,
and water will issue out of the Scab, which water is so hot and fretting, as
it will scalde of the hair and breed Scabbes, so far as it goes. The cure
according to Martin is thus. First wash well all the pastornes with beer and
butter warmed together, and his legs being somewhat dried with a cloth: clyp
away all the hair, saving the fewterlockes. Then take of Turpentine, of hogs
grease, of honey, of each like quantity, mingle them together in a pot, and put
thereunto a little Bole Armenie, the yelkes of two eggs, and as much wheat
flower as will thicken the things aforesaid, and make it plaster like, and
for that cause, it had need to be very well wrought and stirred together. Then
with a slyce strike some of the plaster upon such a piece of linen cloth as
will serve to go round about the pastorne, and bind it fast on with a
rowler, renewing it once a day until it be whole, and let not the horse be
trauayled nor stand wet.

Of Mules, or Kybed heels, called of the Italians Mule. The.Cxxxij. Chapter.
THis is a kind of Scabbe breeding behind, somewhat above the nether ioynte,
growing ouertwhart the fewterlocke, which comes most commonly for being
bredde in cold ground, or else for lack of good dressing, after that he has
been labored in foul mire, and dirty ways, which dirt lying still in his
legs, fretteth ye skin, and makes scabbie riftes which are sone bredde, but
not so sone gotten away. The anguish whereof makes the legs sometime to swell,
and specially in winter, and springtime, and then the Horse goes very
styffely, and with great pain. This sorance is apparent to the eye, and is
cured according to Martin in this sort. Take a piece of lynnen cloth, and with
the salve recyted in the last chapter make such a plaster as may cover all ye
sore place, and bind it fast on, that it fall not of, renewing it every day once
until the sore leave running, and begins to wax dry, then wash it every
day once with strong water, until it be clean dried up, but if this sorance
be but in breeding, and that there is no raw flesh, then it shall suffice to
annoint it with Soap two or three days, and at the three days end to wash
them with a little beef broth or dish water.

Of sorances or griefs that be commen to all four feet. The.Cxxxiij. Chapter.
Hitherto we have declared unto you the causes, signs, and cure of all such
griefs as are porperlye incident, either to the forelegges, or hinder legs,
now therefore we will speak of those griefs that be common to them both, and
first of windegalles.

Of windgalles. The.Cxxxiiij. Chapter.
THe Windegall called of the Italians Galla, is a bladder full of corruptielly,
whereof some be great and some be small, and do grow on each side of the joint,
and is so paynful, and specially in Summer season when the weather is hot, and
the ways hard, as the horse is not able to travel, but halteth right down.
They come for the most part through extreme labor and heat, whereby the
humors being dissolved, do flow and resort into the hollow places about the
nether joints, and their be congeled, and covered with a thin skin like a
bladder. They be apparent to the eye, and therefore need no other signs to
know them. The cure whereof according to Martin is thus. Wash them with warm
water, and shave of the hair, and scarify them with the point of a Rasor, and
dress them with Cantharides in ye self same manner, as the splent in the knee
was taught before, and anoint them afterward with butter, until the skin be
whole. And if this will not heal it, then draw them with a hot iron in this
manner. That done slitte the middle line, which passes right down, through
the windegall with a sharp knyfe, beginning beneath, and so upward the length
of half an ynche, to the intent you may thrust the ielly out at that hole, and
then lay unto it a little pitch, and Rosen molten together, and made luke warm,
and put a few floxe on it, and that will heal him.

Of wrinching the nether joint. The.Cxxxv. Chapter.
THis comes many times by treading awry in some Cart root or otherwise. The
signs be these. The joint will be swollen and sore, and the horse will halt.
The cure whereof according to Martin is thus. Take of Dialthea half a pound,
and as much of Neruall. Mingle them together, and anoint the sore place
therewith, chafing it well with both your hands, that the ointment may enter,
continuing so to do every day once, until the ointment be all spent, and let
the horse rest. But if this will not prevail, then wash it well with warm
water, and shave away all the hair saving the fewterlocke. Scarifye it, and
lay unto it Cantharides, and heal it as you do the splent in the knee.

Of enterfering. The.Cxxxvi. Chapter.
Because interfering is to be helped by shooyng, we purpose not to speak of
it, until we come to talk of the order of paring and shooing all manner of
houes, and therefore resort thither.

Of the shakell gall. The.Cxxxvij. Chapter.
IF a Horse be galled in the pastornes, with shakell, lock, pastorne, or
halter annoint the sore place, with a little honey and verdegrease boiled
together, until it look read, which is a good ointment for all gallings on
the wythers, and immediately strowe upon the ointment, being first laid upon
the leg, a little chopped flax, or toawe, and that will stick fast,
continuing so to do every day once, until it be whole.

Of hurtes in the legs, that comes by casting in the Halter, or Collar.
The.Cxxxviij. Chapter.
IT chances many times that a horse having some ytche under his ears, is
desirous to scratch the same with his hinder foot, which whilst he reaches
to and fro, does fasten in the Collar or halter, wherewith the more that he
stryueth, the more he galleth his legs, and many times it chau^ceth for that
he is tied so long, by means whereof, he being laid, and the halter slack
about his feet, in his rising perpaps or turning he snarleth him self, so as
he is not able to get up, but hangs either by the neck, or legs, which
sometimes are galled even to the hard bone. Russius calls such kind of
galling Capistratura, which he was wont to heal with this ointment here
following, praising it to be excellent good, for the Cratches or any scabbe,
broose, or wound. Take of oil Olive one ounce, of Turpe^tine two or three
ounces, melte them together over the fire, and then put thereunto a little wax,
and work them well together, and anoint the sore place therewith. Martin says
it is good to annoint the sore place with the white of an egg, and Sallet oil
beaten together, and when it comes to a scabbe, annoint it with butter being
molten until it look brown.

Of the Cratches or Rattes tails called of the Italians Crepaccie. The.Cxxxix.
Chapter.
THis is a kind of long scabby riftes growing right up and down in the hinder
part from the fewterlocke up to the Curb, and comes for lack of clean
keeping, and is easly seen if you take up the horses foot, and lift up the
hear. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take of Turpentine half a pound
of Honey half a pynt of Hogs grease a quarterne, and three yolks of eggs,
and of bole armeny a quartern beatyn into powder, of Bean flower half a pynt.
Myngle all these well together, and make a salve thereof, and with your finger
anoint all the sore places, sheading the hair as you go, to the intent you
may the easlyer find them, and also to make the salve enter into the skin,
and let the horse come in no wet, until he be whole.

Of the Ring bone. The.Cxl. Chapter.
THis is a hard grystle growyng upon the cronette, and sometime goes round
about the cronet, and is called in Italyan Soprosso. Laurentius Russius says,
that it may grow in any other place of the leg, but then we call it not a
Ringbone, but a knot or knob. It comes at the first either by some blow of an
other horse, or by stryking his own foot against some stub, or stone, or such
like casualtye. The pain whereof bredeth a viscouse and slymye humor, which
resorting to the bones, that are of their own nature, cold and dry, waxes
hard, and cleaves to some bone, and in process of time becomes a bone. The
signs be these. The horse will halt, and the hard swelling is apparent to the
eye, being higher then any place of the crownet. The cure according to Martin
is thus. First wash it well with warm water, and shave away all the hair, so
as the sore place may be all discovered. Then scarify it lightly with the
point of a Rasor, so as the blood may issue forth. Then if the sore be broad,
take of Euforbium one ounce, of Cantharides half an ounce, broken both into
fine powder, and of Oil de Bay one ounce, and if the sore be but little, the
one half of this may serve. Boil these things together, styrring them
continually least it run over, and with two or three feathers, lay it boiling
hot unto the sore, and let not the horse stir from that place for half an
hour after. Then carry him into the stable, and both use him and cure him for
the space of nine days, in such order as has been said before in the Chapter
of the splent. But when the hair begins to grow again, then fire the sore
place with right lines from the pastorne down to the coffin of the houe in
this manner, and let the edge of the drawing iron be as thick, as the back of
a meat knyfe, and burn him so deep as the skin may look yeallowe, that
done, cover the burning with Pitche, and Rosen molten together, and clappe
thereon floxe of the horses own color, or somewhat nighe the same, and about
three days after, lay again some of the last mentioned plaster, or
ointment, and also new flox upon the old, and there let them remain until
they fall away of them selves. But if these ringbones, or knobbes bread in any
other place than in the cronette, you shall cure them as is before said
without fyering them.

Of the Crown scabbe. The.Cxli. Chapter.
THis is a kind of filthy and stinking scabbe, breeding round about the feet
upon the cronettes, and is an eluyshe and painful disease, called in Italian
Grisaria. It seems to come by means that the horse has been bredde in some
cold wet soil, stryking corrupt humors up to his feet, and therefore the
horse that has this grief is worse troubled in winter, than in summer. The
signs be these. The hair of the cronettes will be thin, and staryng like
bristles, and the cronets will be always mattering, and run on a water. The
cure according to Martin is thus. Take of Soap, of Hogs grease, of each half
a pound, of bole Armeny a little, of Turpentyne a quarterne, and mingle them
well together, and make a plaster, and bind it fast on, renewing it every day
once, until it leave running, and then wash it with strong vinegar being luke
warm every day once, until the sore be clean dried up, and let him come in
no wette until he be whole.

Of hurtes upon the cronet by crossing one foot over an other, which the
Italians call Supraposte. The.Cxlij. Chapter.
MArtin. Wash it well with white wine, or with a little stale, and then lay
unto it the white of an egg mingled with a little Chimney soote and salt, and
that will dry it up in three or four days, if it be renewed every day once.

Of the quitterbone. The.Cxliij. Chapter.
THis is a hard round swelling upon the cronette, betwixt the heel and the
quarter, and grows most commonly on the insyde of the foot, and is called of
the Italians Setula, or Seta. It comes by means of gravel gathered
underneath ye shoe, which fretteth the heel, or else by the cloying or
pricking of some nail evil driven, the anguishe whereof loseneth the gristle,
and so breeds evil humors, whereof the quitterbone springs. The signs be
these. The horse will halte, and the swelling is apparent to the eye, which in
four or five days comes to a head, will break out with matter at a little
deep hole like a fistula. The cure according to Martin is thus. First burn
about the quitterbone with a hot iron, in manner of a half circle, and then
with the same iron draw an other right strike through the midst thereof in this
sort. Then take of Arsenicke the quantitye of a Bean beaten into fine powder,
and put it into the hole thrusting it down to the bottom with a quill, and
stop the mouth of the hole with a little toawe, and bind it so fast with a
cloth, and cord, as the horse may not come at it with his mouth, and so let it
rest for that day. And the next day, if you see that ye sore looks black
within, then it is a sign that the Arsenicke has wrought well, and done his
part. Then to allay the burning thereof, taynt the hole with flax dipte in
Hogs grease, and Turpentyne, molten and mingled together, and cover the taynt
with a bolster of toawe dipped also in the ointment aforesaid, continuing so to
do every day once until you have gotten out the core. Then shall you see
whether the lose gristle in the bottom be uncovered or not, and if it be not
uncovered, then feel with your finger, or with a quill, whither you be nighe
it or not. And if you be, then raise the gristle with a little crooked
instrument, and pull it clean out with a pair of small Nyppers meet for the
purpose. That done, taynt it again with a full taynte dipte in the foresaid
Ointment, to assuage the anguishe of the last dressing, and stop it hard, to
the intent that the hole may not shrink together or close up, and the next
day take out that taint, and taynt it a new with the salve or oyntement taught
in the Chapter of the shakell gall, renewing it every day once until it be
hole, keeping always the mouth of the sore as open as you may, to the intent
that it heal not up to fast, and let not the horse come in any wet, nor
travel, until he be perfectly whole.

Of the Graueling. The.Cxliiij. Chapter.
THis is a fretting under the foot, most commonly in the insyde, and sometime
in the outsyde, and sometime in both sides together of the heel. It comes by
means of little gravel stones getting betwixt the houe, and calkin, or sponge
of the shoe, which by continual labor and treading of the horse, does eat into
the quick, and the rather, if his heel be soft and weak, or that the shoe
lie to flat to his foot, so as the gravel being once gotten in, can not get
out again. The signs be these. The horse will halte, and covet to tread all
upon the toe, to favor his heel. The cure according to Martin is thus. First
pare the houe, and get out the gravel with a cornette or drawer, leaving none
behind, for if you do, it will bread to a quitterbone. That done, stop him
with Turpentyne and Hogs grease molten together, and laid on with a little
toawe or flax, and then clappe on the shoe to keep in the stopping, renewing
it every day once until it be whole. And suffer the Horse to come in no wette,
until he be throughlye hole. If a grauelling be not well stopped to keep down
the flesh, it will rise higher then the houe, and not only require more
business in bolstering it, but also put the horse to more pain.

Of Surbating. The.Cxlv. Chapter.
THis is a beating of the houe against the ground, called of the Italians
Sobatitura, it comes sometime by means of evil shooing lying to flat to his
foot, or by going long barefote, and sometime by the hardenesse of the ground,
and high lifting of the horse. And those horses that be flat footed, the
coffins whereof are tender and weak, be most commonly subject to this sorance.
The signs be these. The horse will halte on both his fore legs, and go
stiffly, and creeping as though he were half foundered. The cure according to
Martin is thus. Take off his shoes, pare him as little as may be, and if the
shoes be not easy, that is to say, long, large, and hollow enough, then make
them so, and tack them on again with four or five nails. That done, stop
his feet with bran, and Hogs grease boiled together, so hot as may be, and
also cover all the coffin round about with the same, binding all in together
with a cloth, and a list fastened about the joint, renewing it every day once,
until it be whole, and give the horse during that while warm water, and let
him stand dry and warm, and not be trauayled until he be whole.

Of a prick in the sole of the foot, either by treading on a nail, or any
other sharp thing that does enter into the foot. The.Cxlvi. Chapter.
THe signs be these. If a man be on his back when he treads on any such
thing, he shall feel that the horse will lift up his foot, and covet to
stand still to have help. And if it chance at any other time, the halting of
ye horse, and the hurt it self will show. The cure according to Martin is
thus. Pull of the shoe, and pare the foot, and with a drawer uncover the hole,
making the mouth so broad as a two penny piece, then tack on the shoe again.
That done, stop it, by pouring into the hole Turpentine and hogs grease
molten together, and lay some flax, or toawe upon it, and then stop all the
horses foot with horsdong, or rather with Cow dong, if you can get it, and
splent it either with sticks, or else with an old shoe sole, so as the
stopping may abide in, renewing it every day once until it be whole, and let
the horse come in no wette. If this be not well cured, or looked to in time, it
will cause the houe to break above, and to loosen round about, and perhaps
to fall clean away. But it you see that it begin to break above, then make a
greater issue beneath, by opening the hole wyder, and taking more of the sole
away, that the flesh may have the more liberty. Then take of bole Armeny half
a quarterne, and of Bean flower, and two eggs. Beat them, and mingle them
well together, and make a plaster thereof upon toaw, and lay it round about the
cronet, bind it fast on, and so let it remain the space of two days, and
then renew it again, not failing so to do every two days, until you see it wax
hard and firm above. For this plaster being restrictiue, will force the
humors to resort all downward, which must be drawn out with Turpe^tyne and
Hogs grease as before, until it leave mattering, and then dry it up with
burnt Allom, beaten in powder, and strowed upon it, with a little flax laid
again upon that, continuing so to do every day once until it be hardened, and
let not the horse come in any wet until he be whole.

Of the Figg. The.Cxlvij. Chapter.
IF a horse having received any hurt, as before is said by canel, nail, bone,
splent, or stone, or otherwise in the sole of his foot, and be not well dressed
and perfectly cured: there will grow in that place a certain superfluous
piece of flesh, like a Fig, yea and it will have little graynes in it like a
Fig, and therefore is rightly called of the Italians Vnfico, that is to say, a
Fig. The cure whereof according to Martin is thus. Cut it clean away with a
hot iron, and keep the flesh down with Turpentine, Hogs grease, and a
little Wax laid on with tow or flax, and stop the hole hard, that the flesh
rise not, renewing it once a day until it be whole.

Of a Retreat. The.Cxlviij. Chapter.
THis is the pricking of a nail, not well driven in the shooing, and therefore
pulled out again by ye smith, and is called of the Italians Tratta messa. The
cause of the pricking may be partly, the rash dryuing of the Smith, and
partly the weakness of the nail, or the hollownesse of the nail in the
shanke. For if it be to weak, the point many times bends awrye into the
quick, when it should go right forth, again, if the shanke be hollow, it
slattereth and shiuereth in the driving, into two parts, whereof, one part
raceth the quick in pulling out, or else perhaps breaks clean a sunder, and
so remains still behind, and this kind of pricking is worse then a cloying,
because it will rancle worse, by reason of the flaw, remaining in the flesh.
The signs be these. If the Smith that dryueth such a nail be so leude, as he
will not look unto it, before the horse depart, then there is no way to know
it, but by the halting of the horse, and searching the houe first with a
hammer by knocking upon every clinging. For when you knock upon that nail,
where the grief is, the horse will shrink up his foot. And if that will not
serve, then grope the houe with a pair of Pinsons round about, until you have
found the place grieved. The cure according to Martin is thus. First, pull of
the shoe, and then open the place grieved with a butter, or drawer, so as you
may perceive by feeling or seeing, whether there be any piece of nail or not,
if there be, to pull it clean out, and to stop the hole with Turpentyne,
Wax, and sheep suet molten together, and so poured hot into the hole, and
then lay a little tow upon it, and clappe on the shoe again, renewing it thus
every day until it be whole, during which time, let not the horse come in any
wette, and it must be so stopped, though it be but pricked without any piece of
nail remaining. And if for lack of looking to in time, this Retreat causes
the houe to break above, then cure it with the plaster restryctiue in such
order as is mentioned in the last chapter, saving one before this.

Of Cloying. The.Cxlix.
CLoying is the pricking of a whole nail called of ye Italians Inchiodatura,
passing through the quick and remaining still in the same, and is clenchid as
other nails be, and so causes the horse to halte. The grieved place is
known, by searching with the hammer and Pinsons as is before said. If the
horse halte immediately, then pull of his shoe, and open the hole, until it
begin to bleed, and stop it with the ointment aforesaid in the chapter of
the Retreat, and clap on the shoe again, and the houe may be so good, and
the harm so little, as you may travail him immediately upon it. But if it be
rancled, then renew the stopping every day once, and let him come in no wette
until it be whole.

Of lousening the houe. The.Cl. Chapter.
THis is a parting of the houe from the cronet, called of the Italians,
Dissolatura del vnghia, which if it be round about, it comes by means of
foundering, if in part, then by the anguish, caused by ye pricking of some
canel nail pearching the soale of the foot, or by some quitterbone, retreat
graueling, or cloying, or such like thing. The signs be these. When it is
lousened by foundering then it will break first in the fore part of the
cronet, right against the Toes, because the humor does covet always to descend
toward the toe. Again, when the pricking of a canell nail or such like
cankered thing is the cause, then the houe will losen round about, equally even
at the first. But when it procedes of any of the other hurtes last mentioned,
the^ the houe will break right above the place that is offended, and most
commonly will proceed no further. The cure according to Martin is thus. First,
of which soever of these causes it proceeds, be sure to open the houe in the
soale of the foot, so as the humor may have free passage downewarde, and then
restrain it above with the plaster restrictiue before mentioned, and in such
order as is there written, and also heal up the wound, as is before taught in
the chapter of a prick in the soale of the foot.

Of casting the houe. The.Cli. Chapter.
THis is when the coffin falls clean away from the foot, which comes by
such causes as were last rehearsed, and is so apparaunt to the eye, as it
needs no signs to know it. The cure according to Martin is thus. Take of
Turpentine one pound, of Tar, half a pynt of unwrought Wax, half a pound
of sheep suet, half a pound, of salet Oil half a pynt. Boil al these
things together, and stir them continually until they be thoroughly mingled,
and compact together. The^ make a boot of leather with a good strong sole
meet for the horses foot, to be laced or buckled about the pastorne, and
dress his foot with the salve aforesaid laid upon flax or toaw, and
bolster or stuff his foot with soft flax, so as the boot may grieve him no
manner of way, renewing it every day once until it be whole, and then put him
to grass.

Of the houe bound. The.Clij. Chapter.
THis is a shrinking of all the whole houe. It comes by drought, for that the
houes perhaps are kept to dry, when the horse stands in the stable, and
sometime by means of heat, or of over straight shooing. The Italians call the
horse thus grieved Incastellado. The signs be these. The horse will halte, and
the houes will be hot, and if you knock on them with a hammer, they will
sound hollow like an empty bottell, and if both the feet be not houe bound,
the sore foot will be lesser then the other, in deed, and appear so to the
eye. The cure according to Martin is thus. Pull of his shoes, and shoe him with
half Moan shoes, called Lunette, the order and shape, whereof you shall find
hereafter among the other shoes, and raze both the quarters of the houe with a
drawer, from the corownet unto the sole of the foot, so deep as you shall see
the dew come forth. And if you make two rases on each side, it shall be so
much the better, and enlarge the houe the more. That done, annoint all the
houe above, next unto the corownet round about, with the ointment prescribed
before, in the Chapter of casting the houe, continuing so to do every day
once until he begin to amend, and let him be ridden upon some soft wette
ground an hour or two, every day once, for the space of a Month, and if he
goes not well at the Months end, than take off the half shoes, and pare
all the soles, frusshes and all, so thin as you may see the dew come forth,
and tacke on a whole shoe and stop all the foot within with Hogs grease, and
bran boiled together, and laid hot to the foot, renewing it every day once,
the space of.ix. days, to the intent the sole may rise. But if this will do no
good. Then take away the sole clean, and clapp one a whole shoe, and stop
the foot with nettles, and Salt brayed together, renewing it once a day, but
not over hard, to the intent the sole may have liberty to rise, and being
grown again, let him be shodde with the lunettes, and so sent to grass.

Of the running Frushe. The.Cliij. Chapter.
THe Frushe is the tenderest part of the houe toward the heel, called of the
Ilians Fettone, and because it is fashyoned like a forked head, the French men
call it Furchette, which word our ferrers, either, for not knowing rightly how
to pronounce it, or else perhaps for easiness sake of pronuntiatio^ do make it
a monasillable, and do shortly pronounce it the frushe, in which frush
breeds many times a rottenness or corruption proceeding of humors that
comes out of the leg, whereby the leg is kept clean from wynegalles, and
all other tumors and swellings, by means that the humors have passage that
way. Notwithstanding the discomoditie of this soraunce is greater then the
commodytie, because it makes the horses foot so weak and tender, as he is
not able to tread upon any hard ground. The signs be these. The horse will
halt, and specially when the passage of the humor is stopped with any grauel
gathered into the Frushe, and not being stopped, it will continually run, the
sauoure whereof will be so strong as a man is not able to abide it, and in some
places it will look raw. The cure according to Martin is thus. First take off
the shoe, and pare away all the corrupt places, and make them raw, so as you
may see the water issue out of the raw places. Then tack on the shoe again,
being first made wide, and large enough. That done, take of soote one
handefull, of salt as much. Broose them well together in a dishe and put
thereunto the white of three eggs, and temper them altogether, and with a
little toaw dipped therein, stop all the foot, and specially the frushe, and
splent it so, as it may not fall out, renewing it once a day, the space of
seven days, and then he will be whole. During which time, let the horse reast,
and come in no wette, at the.vij. days end, leave stopping him, and ride him
abroad, and always when he comes in, let his sore foot be clean washed,
that no grauel remain therein, without doing any more unto him.

Of diseases or griefs indifferently incident to any part of the body, but
first of the Leprosy or universal maunginesse called of the old writers
Elephantia. The.Cliiij. Chapter.
THis is a cankred maunginesse spreding over all the body, which comes of
abundance of Melancholye, corrupt, and filthy blood. The signs be these. The
horse will be all maungye, and scuruye full of scabbes, and raw plots about
the neck, and evil favored to look on, and always rubbing and scratching.
The cure according to Martin is thus. Let him blood ye first day in the one
side of the neck, and within two days after on ye other side of the neck, and
wtin two days after that, in the flank veins, and last of al in ye vain under
ye tail. Then wash all the sore places with salt brine, and rubbing them hard,
with a wispe of straw hard twysted, so as they may blede well, and be all raw.
That done, annoint the places with this oyntme^t. Take of quick silver one
ounce, of Hogs grease one pound, of brimstone beaten into powder a
quarterne, of Rape oil a pint. Mingle these things well together until the
quick silver be throughlye incorporated with the rest, and having anointed
all the raw places with this ointment, make it to sink into the flesh, by
holding and weauing up and down over it, a hot broad bar of iron, and then
touch him no more again, the space of two or three days, during which time, if
you se that he rubbeth still in any place, then rub that place again with an
old horsecombe, to make it raw, and anoint it with fresh ointment. But if
all this will not help, then with a hot iron round and blunt at the point,
so big as a man's little finger. Burn all the mau^gye places, making round
holes passing only through the skin, and no further. For which intent it
shall be needful, to pull the skin first from the flesh, with your left
hand, holding it still until you have thrust the hot iron through it, and let
every hole be a span one from an other, and if need be, you may annoint those
holes with a little Soap, and let the horse be thin dyeted, during this
curing time.

Of the Farcyn, called in Italian of some, il verme, and of some Farcina.
The.Clv. Chapter.
THis is a kind of creping ulcer growing in knots following along some vain,
and it proceeds of corrupt blood engendered in the body, or else of some
outward hurt, as of spurgallyng, or of the biting of some other horse, or of
the biting of tickes, or of Hogs lice, or such like casualtyes. Or if it be
in the leg, it may come by enterfering. It is easily known, partly by the
former description, and also it is apparent to the eye. The cure according to
Martin is thus. Let him blood in that vain where it comes, as nigh the
sore place as may be, and let him bleed well. Then fire every knot one by one,
taking the knot in your left hand, and pulling it so hard as you can from his
body, to the intent you may the better pearce the knot, with a round, blunt,
hot iron, of the bigness of a man's fore finger, without doing the body any
hurt, and let the matter out, leaving none unburned, be it little or much. That
done, annoint every knot so burned with Hogs grease warmed every day once,
until the cores be ready to fall away, and in the mean time prepare a good
quantity of old urine, and when you see that the cores are ready to fall: boil
the urine, and put therein a little Corporas, and salt, and a few strong
Nettles, and with that water, being warm, wash out all the cores, and all the
corruption. That done, fill every hole immediately with the powder of sleict
Lyme, continuing thus to do, every day once, until the holes be closed up, and
if any be more ranker then others, fill those with Uerdygrease, and during this
cure, let the horse be thinlye dyeted, that is to say, with straw and water
only: unless it be now and then to give him a lofe of bread. For the lower he
be kept the sooner he will be whole. And in any wise let his neck be yoked in
an old bottomless payle, or else with short staves to keep him from licking
the sores, and the less rest he has, the better.

Of the Canker called of the Italians il Cancro. The.Clvi. Chapter.
A Canker is a filthy creping Ulcer, fretting and gnawing the flesh in great
breadth. In the beginning it is knotty, much like a Farcyne, and spredeth it
self into diverse places, and being exulcerated, gathers together at length
into one wound or sore. This proceeds of a Melancholy and filthy blood
engendered in the body, which if it be mixte with sharp and salt humors, it
causes the more painful and grievous exulceration, and sometime it comes
of some filthy wound, that is not clenly kept, the corrupt matter whereof
cankreth other clean parts of the body. It is easy to be known by the
description before written. The cure whereof according to Martin is thus. First
let him blood in those veins that be next unto the sore, and take enough
of him. Then take of Alom, half a pound, of grene Corporas as much, of white
Corporas one quarterne, and a good handefull of salt. Boil all these things
together, in fair running water from a pottell to a quart, and this water
being warm, wash the sore therewith, with a clout, and then sprincle thereon
the powder of sleyked Lyme, continuing so to do every day once, the space
of.xv. days, and if you see that the Lyme do not mortify the rank flesh, and
keep it from spreading any further, then take of Soap half a pound, of quick
silver half an ounce, and beat them together in a pot, until the quick silver
be so well mingled with the Soap, as you can perceive none of the quick silver
in it. And with an iron sclyce, after that you have washed the sore with the
strong water aforesaid, cover the wound with this ointment, continuing thus to
do every day once, until the canker leave spreading abroad. And if it leave
spreading, and that you see the rank flesh is mortifyed, and that the edges
begin to gather a skin. Then after the washing, dress it with the Lyme as
before, continuing so to do until he be whole. And in the dressing suffer no
filthe that comes out of the sore, to remain upon any whole place about, but
wype it clean away, or else wash it away with warm water. And let the Horse
during this cure, be as thinly dieted as may be, and thoroughly exercised.

Of the Fistula, called of the Italians Fistula. The.Clvij. Chapter.
A Fistula is a deep hollow crooking Ulcer, and for the most part springs of
malign humors, engendered in some wound, sore, or canker, not thoroughly healed.
It is easy to know by the discriptio^ before made. The cure according to Martin
is thus. First search ye depth of it with a quil, or with some other instrument
of Lead, that may be bowed every way, meet for the purpose. For unless you
find the bottom of it, it will be very hard to cure. And having found the
bottom, if it be in such place as you may boldly cut, and make the way open
with a Launcet, or Rasor, then make a slit right against the bottom, so wide as
you may thruste in your finger, to feel whether there be any bone or gristle
perished, or spongye, or loose flesh, which must be gotten out, and then taynt
it with a taint of flax, dipped in this ointment. Take of honey a quarterne, and
of Uerdigrease one ounce beaten in powder. Boil them together until it
looke-redde, sturring it continually, least it run over, and being luke
warm, dress the taynt therewith, and bolster the taynt with a bolster of
flax. And if it be in such a place, as the taynt can not conveniently be kept
in with a band, then fasten on each side of the hole, two ends of a
shoemakers threde right over the bolster, to keep in the taynte, which ends
may hang there as two laces to tie, and untie at your pleasure, renewing the
taynt every day once, until the sore leave mattering. And then make the taynt
every day lesser and lesser, until it be whole. And close it up, in the end,
by sprincling thereon a little sleict Lyme. But if the Fistula be in such a
place, as a man can neither cut right against the bottom, nor nyghe the same:
then there is no remedy but to pour in some strong water, through some quil,
or such like thing, so as it may go to the bottom, and dry up the filthy
matter, dressing him so twice a day, until the horse be whole.

Of an Anburye. The.Clviij. Chapter.
THis is a great spongy were full of blood, called of the Italians Moro, or
Selso, which may grow in any place of the body, and it has a root like a
Cocks stone. The cure according to Martin is thus. Tie it about with a threde,
so hard as you can pull it, and the threde will eat in, by little and little,
in such sort as within seven or eight days, it will fall away by it self.
And if it be so flat as you can bind nothing about it, then take it away with
a sharp hot iron, cutting it round about, and so deep as you leave none of the
root behind, and dry it up with Uerdygrease. Russius says, that if it grow
in a place full of sinews, so as it can not be conveniently cut away with a
hot iron, then it is good to eat out the core with the powder of Resalgar,
and then to stop the hole with flax dipped in the white of an egg, for a day
or two, and lastly, to dry it up with the powder of vnsleict Lyme, and honye as
before is taught.

Of wounds. The.Clix. Chapter.
WOunds comes by means of some strype or prick, and they are properly
called wounds, when some whole part is cut, or broken. For a wound
according to the Physicians is defyned to be a solution, dyuision, or parting
of the hole. For if there be no such solution or parting, then me thinks, it
ought rather to be called a brouse, then a wound. And therefore wounds are most
commonly made, with sharp, or pearcing weapons, and brouses, with blount
weapons. Notwithstanding, if by such blount weapons, any part of the hole be
evidently broken, then it ought to be called a wound as well as the other. Of
wounds some be shallow, and some be deep, and hollow. Again, some chance in
the fleshye parts, and some in the bonye, and sinewe places. And those that
chance in the fleshy parts, though they be very deep, yet they be not so
dangerous, as the others, and therefore we will speak first of the most
dangerous. If a horse have a wound newely made, either in his head or in any
other place, that is full of sinews, bones, or gristles. First Martin would
have you to wash the wound well with white wine warmed. That done, to search
the bottom of the wound with some instrument, meet for the purpose,
suffering it to take as little wynd in the mean while as may be. The^ having
found the depth, stop the hole close with a clout, until your saluebe ready.
Then take of Turpe^tine, of Mel Rosatum, of Oil of Roses, of each a quarterne
and a little unwrought wax, and melt them together, stirring them continually
that they may be well mingled together, and if it be a cut, make a handesome
roll of clean picked toaw, so long, and so big as may fill the bottom of
the wound, which for the most part is not so wide, as the mouth of the
wound, then make an other roll greater then that, to fill up the reast of
the wound, even to the hard mouth, and let both these roules be anointed
with the ointment aforesaid luke warm. But if the hurt be like a hole made
with some prick. Then make a stiffe-taynt, such a one as may reach the
bottom, anointed with the foresaid ointment, and bolster the same with a
little toaw. And if the mouth be not wide enough, so as the matter may easily
run forth, if it be in such place, as you may do it without hurting any
sinew, then give it a pretye slitte, from the mouth downewarde, that the matter
may have the freer passage. And in any wise have a special regard, that the
taynt may be continually kept in, by one means or other, as by binding or
staying the same, with the ends of a shoemakers threede, as is aforesaid. And
if the hole be deep, and in such place, as you may not cut it, then make
your taynt of a sponge, and so long as it may reach the bottom, and the taynt
being made some what full, with continual turning and wrying of it, you shall
easily get it down, and then dress the wound with this, twice a day,
clensyng the wound every time with a little white Wine luke warm. For this
sponge anointed with the ointment aforesaid will both draw, and suck up all
the filthy matter, and make it so fair within as is possible, and as it
begins to heal, so make your taynt every day lesser and lesser, until it
be ready to close up, and never leave taynting it, so long as it will receive a
taynt, be it never so short. For hasty healing of wounds bredeth fistulas,
which properly be old wounds, and therefore must be cured like Fystulas.

Of wounds in the fleshy parts. The.Clx. Chapter.
Use the same oyntmente, and manner of proceeding as before, and if the wound
be very large, then to keep in the taynt or roules, you shall be feign to put
two or three shoemakers ends on each side of the sore, leaving them so long as
you may tie them together, and lousen them when you will, like laces.

Of a Hurt with an arrowe. The.Clxi. Chapter.
IF the horse be hurt with an arrowe, taynt the hole with Hogs grease, and
Turpentine molten together, renewing it every day once until it be whole.

Of pulling out shyuers or thorns. The.Clxij. Chapter.
MArtin says, that if it be not very deep, Soap being laid unto it all
night, will make it to appear, so as you may pull it out with a pair of
nippers. But if it be very deep, then you must open the place with a knife or
Launcet, and get it out, and afterward heal up the wound, as have been
taught you before. Russius says, ye the roots of reed being stamped and
mingled with honny will draw out any thorn, or sheuer, and so will snayles. as
he says being stamped and wrought with fresh butter, and if the place be
swollen, he says it is good to mollyfie it, with a plaster made of wormwood,
Paretory, Bears foot, Hogs grease, and Honny, which will assuage any new
swelling, that comes by stripe, or otherwise.

Of Brusings or swellings. The.Clxiij. Chapter.
MArtin. First prick it with a fleame. Then take of wine Lees a pynt, as much
wheat flower as will thicken it, and an ounce of Common. Boil them together,
and lay this somewhat warm unto it, renewing it every day once until the
swelling either depart, or else come to a head. And if it do, then lance
it, and heal it up, as a wound.

Of sinews cut, pricked, or broosed. The.Clxiiij. Chapter.
TAke of Tar and bean flower, and a little Oil of Roses, and lay it hot
unto the place, and if this do no good, then take worms and sallet Oil fried
together, or else the ointment of Worms, which you shall have at the
Poticaries, and one of these will knit it again, if it be not clean a sunder.

How to cure a wound made with Hargabush shot. The.Clxv. Chapter.
MArtin. First seek with an instrument whether ye pellet remain within or
not, and if it do, you must get it out with an instrument meet for the purpose.
Then to kill the fire. Take a little vernishe, and thrust it into the wound
with a feather, annoynting it well within with the feather, and after that,
stop the mouth fair and softly with a little soft flax, to keep the wind
out, and on the outside charge all the swelling with this charge. Take of bole
Armenie a quarterne, of Lyneseede beaten into powder, half a pound, of bean
flower as much, and three or four eggs, shelles and al, and of Turpentine a
quarterne, and a quart of Uineger, and mingle them well together over the fire,
and being somewhat warm charge all the sore place with part thereof, and
immediately clap a cloth or a piece of leather upon it, to keep the wound from
the cold air, continuing both to annoint the hole within with vernish, and
also to charge the swelling without, the space of four or five days, and at
the five days end, leave annoynting of it, and taynt it with a taynt reaching
to the bottom of the wound, and dipped in Turpentyne and Hogs grease molten
together, renewing it every day twice, until the fire be thoroughly killed,
which you shall perceive by the mattering of the wound, and by falling of the
swelling, for so long as the fire has the upper hand, no thick matter will
issue out, but only a thin yellowishe water, neither will the swelling
assuage. And then take of Turpentine, washed in nine several waters, half a
pound, and put thereunto three yolks of eggs, and a little saffron, and taynt
it with this ointment, renewing it every day once, until the wound be whole.

Of burning with Lyme, or any other fyrie thing. The.Clxvi. Chapter.
MArtin. First wash away the Lyme if there be any with warm water. Then kill
the fire, with oil and water beaten together, dressing him so every day until
it be all raw, and then annoint it with Hogs grease, and strowe thereupon
the powder of sleykid lyme dressing him so every day once, until it be whole.

Of the biting of a mad dog. The.Clxvij. Chapter.
IF a horse be bitten with a mad dog, the venim of his teeth will not only
pain him extremely, but also infect all his blood, and make him to dye mad.
The cure according to the old writers is thus. Take of Goats dong, of flesh
that has laid long in salt, and of the herb Ebulus, called of some Danewort,
of each half a pound, and.xl. Walnuts. Stamp all these things together, and
lay some thereof unto the sore, and this will suck out the venim, and heal the
wound. It is good also to give the Horse Treacle, and wine to drink, yea, and
some would have the sore place to be fyered with a hot iron.

Of hurtes by the Tuskes of a Boar. The.Clxviij. Chapter.
IF a horse be hurt with the tuske of a Boar, lay Vitriol and Corporas
thereunto, and the powder of a Dogs head, being burned, but let the tongue be
first pulled out and cast away.

To heal the biting or stinging of Serpents. The.Clxix. Chapter.
LAurentius Russius. Take a good quantity of the herb called Sanicula, stamp
it, and distemper it with the milk of a Cow, that is all of one color, and
give him that to drink, and that will heal him.

An other medicine for the same purpose.

MAke a plaster of Onions, Honey, and salt, stamped, and mingled together, and
lay that to the sore place, and give the horse wine, and Treacle to drink.
Absirtus would have you to give him white Pepper, Rhewe, and Time, to drink
with wine.

Of drinking of Horse leaches. The.Clxx. Chapter.
IF a horse chance to drink Horse leaches, they will continually suck his
blood, and kill him. The remedy according to Absirtus, is to pour Oil into
the horses mouth, which will make them to fall away and kill them.

Of swalowing down hens dong. The.Clxxi. Chapter.
IF a horse swallow down hens dong in his hay, it will fret his guts, and
make him to void filthy matter at the fundament. For remedy whereof, Absirtus
would have you to give him a drink made of Smalladge seed, wine, and honey,
and to walk him thoroughly upon it, that he may empty his belly.

Of Lyce, how to kill them. The.Clxxij. Chapter.
THey be like Geese Lice, but somewhat bigger, they will bread most about the
ears, neck, and tail, and over all the body. They come of poverty, and the
horse will be always rubbing, and scratching, and will eat his meat, and not
prosper withal, and with rubbing he will break all his Main, and tail. The
cure according to Martin is thus. Annoint the place with Soap and quick silver,
well mingled together, and to a pound of Soap, put half an ounce of quick
silver.

How to save horses, from the stinging of Flies in Summer. The.Clxxiij. Chapter.
Annoint the horses coat with Oil, and Bay buryes, mingled together, or tie
to the headestall of his collor a sponge dipped in strong Uineger, or sprinkle
the stable with water, wherein herb grace has been laid in stepe. Or perfume
the stable with Iuye, or with Calaminte, or with Gith, burned in a pan of
coals.

Of bones being broken or out of joint. The.Clxxiiij. Chapter.
Few or none of our Ferrers do intermeddle with any such griefs, but do
refer it over unto the bone setter, whose practiced hand, I must needs
confess, to be nedeful in such business. Notwithstanding, for that it
belongs to the Ferrers art, and also for that the old writers do make some
mention thereof, I thought good not to pass it over altogether with silence.
Albeit, they speak only of fractures, in the legs beneathe the knee. For
they make little mention or none, of bones above the knee, taking them to be
incurable, unless it be a rybbe or such like. If any bone then be broken in
the leg, it is easy to perceive, by feeling the roughness and inequality of
the place grieved, one part being higher then an other. The cure whereof,
according to Absirtus, and Hierocles, is in this sort. First, put the bone
again into his right place. That done, wrappe it about with unwashed woll,
binding it fast to the leg with a smoth linen rowler, soked before in oil
and Uineger mingled together. And let that rowler be laid on, as even as is
possible, and upon that, lay again more woll, dipte in oil and Uineger, and
then splent it with three splents, binding them fast at both ends with a thong,
and let the horses leg be kept straight, and right out, the space of.xl.
days, and let not the bonds be lousened above three times in.xx. days,
unless it shrink, and so require to be new dressed, and bound again. But
fail not every day once, to pour on the sore place, through the splents,
oil and Uineger, mingled together, and at the.xl. days end, if you perceive
that the broken place be sowdered together, again with some hard knobbe or
gristle: Then lousen the bonds, so as the Horse may go fair and softly,
using from that time forth to annoint the place with some soft grease or
ointment.

Of bones out of joint. The.Clxxv. Chapter.
IF a Horses knee, or shoulder be clean out of joint, and no bone broken.
Martin says the readyest way is, to bind all the four legs together, in such
sort as have been taught before, in the Chapter of Incording, and then to
hoyse the horse somewhat from the ground, with his heels upward, so shall the
wayght and payse of his body, cause the joint to shoot in again, into his
right place, for by this means, he pleasured not long since a friend, and
neighbor of his, who going with his Carte from Saint Albons, toward his
house, his Thyller fell, and put his shoulder clean out of joint, so as he
was neither able to rise, nor being helped up, could stand on his legs. To
which mischaunce, Martin being called, made no more a do, but taking his
friends Carte rope, bound the horses legs all four together, and with a
leauer thruste betwixt his legs and body, and the one end of the leauer
being stayed upon the Carte whele, they puttyng their shoulders to the other
end, hoysed up the horse clean from the ground, the payse of whose body,
made the bone to return into his right place, with such a loud knack, as it
might be hard a great way of, and the Horse immediatelye had the use of of
his leg, so as he drew in the Carte, and went safe home, without complaining
thereof ever after.

Certain receytes of playsters, very good for broken bones, taken out of the
old Authors, writing of horse leache craft. The.Clxxvi. Chapter.
TAke of Spuma argenti, of Uineger, of each one pound, of Sallet oil, half a
pound, of Amoniacum, and of Turpentine, of each three ounces, of wax, of
Rosen, of each two ounces, of Bitumen, of Pitch, and of Uerdygrease, of each
half a pound. Boil the vinegar, oil, and Spuma argenti together, until it
wax thick, then put thereunto the pytche, which being molten, take the pot
from the fire, and put in the Bitumen, without sturring it at all, and that
being also molten, put in then all the rest, and set the pot again to the
fire, and let them boil all together, until they be al united in one. That
done, strain it, and make it in plaster form, and this is called Hierocles
plaster.

A another receyte for broken bones, The.Clxxvij. Chapter.
TAke of liquid Pitch one pound, of wax two ounces, of the purest and fineh
part of Frankencense one ounce, of Amoniacum four ounces, of dry Rosen, and of
Galuanum of each one ounce, of Uineger two pyntes. Boil first the Uineger and
pitch together, then put in the Amoniacum, dissolved first in vinegar, and
after yt all the reast of the foresaid drugs, and after they have boiled all
together, and be united in one, strain it, and make it plaster wise, and this
is called Emplastru^ slauu^, that is to say, ye yealow plaster*

An ointment for broken bones. The.Clxxviij. Chapter.
TAke of old sallet oil a quart, and put thereunto of Hogs grease, of Spuma
nitri, of each one pound, and let them boil together, until it begin to
bubble above, and let this oyntement be very warm, when you use it.

HItherto of all the diseases belonging to a horse. Now therefore my promise
made unto you, in the beginning of this book, to speak of those things wherein
the cure of all diseases do consist, that is to say, in letting blood, in
taking up of veins, in purging, and in giving the fire, yea, and also order
it self binds me to treat of the said things presently, and first of
letting blood.

In how many veins a Horse may be let blood in, and to what end.
The.Clxxix. Chapter.
AS touching the order, time of the year, Moon and day and other
circumstaunces belonging to letting of blood, we have sufficiently spoken
already in the kepers office, in the xxij. Chapter. It rests therefore here to
show you what veins should be opened when the horse is sick of any disease,
according to Vegetius opinion. But first, I will rehearse unto you once again,
in how many veins a horse may be let blood in, and the rather for that in
following Vegetius, I left out in the.vij. Chapter of the kepers office, the
two temple veins, which be the two first and principal veins of the head. A
horse then may be let blood in the two temple veins. Item, in the two eye
veins, which are easy to find in the face of the horse, somewhat beneath the
eyes. Item, in the two pallat veins, of the mouth. Item, in the two neck
veins. Item, in the two platte veins which be in the breast. Item, in the two
forthyghe veins. Item, in the four shakle veins before. Item, in the two toe
veins before. Item, in the two side veins, which may be otherwise called
flanck veins. Item, in the tail vayn. Item, in the two haunch veins. Item,
in ye two hough veins. Item, in the four shakle veins behind. Item, in the
two toe veins behind, so that by this account a horse may be let blood
in.xxxi. veins. Al which veins are easy enough to know, because that every
one lies in a little gutter, which by feeling softly with your finger, you
shall find immediately. And Vegetius says, that if a horse be payned with any
grief in his head, ache, heaviness, frenzy, falling evil, or such like,
then it is good to let him blood in the temple veins with a fleame. If his
eyes be waterishe, blood shotten, or grieved, with pin, web, or hawe, then
it is good to strike the eye vain with a fleame. If he have any heaviness or
weariness of body, or be diseased in the throat with the stranguillon,
quynzy, or swelling of the arters, either within or without, then it is good to
let him blood in the mouth, in the palate veins with a cornette. If he be
vexed with an ague, or with any other disease, universally hurting his body,
then let him blood in the neck veins. If his grief be in the lungs, liver,
or in any other inward member, then let him blood in the breast veins,
which we called before the platte veins. If he be grieved in the shoulder,
then let him blood in the forethighe veins, above the knee with a launcet, and
that very warely, because that place is full of sinews, and if he be grieved in
his ioints, the^ let him blood in the shakle veins, and that warely, because
that place is also full of sinews. And if he be foiled on his forefeete by
foundering or otherwise, then let him blood in the toe veins, making way
first with your drawer, or ronet in the houe to come to the vain. If he be
diseased in the kydneys, raynes, back, or belly, then let him blood in the
flank veins, and in his tail, if he has any grief in his hippes, or
houghes, then let him blood in the hippe, or houghe veins, and if his hinder
legs, joints, or feet, be grieved, then let him blood in the shakle veins,
and toe veins, as is before said.

The order of taking up veins, and wherefore it is good. The.Clxxx. Chapter.
THe order observed by Martin is in this sort. First, if the horse be very
cursed and shrewd, then cast him upon a dounghill, or some straw, then having
found the vain, yt you would take up, mark well that part of the skin
which covers the vain, and pull that somewhat aside from the vain, with
your leaft them be, to the intent you may slitte it with a rasor, without
touching the vain. And cut no deeper then only through the skin, and that
longstwise, as the vain goes, and not above an ynche long. That done, take
away your thombe, and the skin will return again into his place, right over
the vain, as it was before. Then with a cornet uncover the vain and make it
bare, and being bare thrust the cornet underneath it, and raise it up, so as
you may put a shoemakers threede underneath, somewhat higher then the coronet,
to knitte the vain when time is, and if your cornet had a hole in the small
end thereof to put in the threade, it should be the easelier done. Then the
cornet standing so still, slitte the vain longstwayes that it may bleed, and
having bled somewhat from above, then knitte it up with a sure knot, somewhat
above the slitte suffering it to bleed only from beneath, and having bled
sufficiently, then knitte up the vain also beneath the slitte with a sure
knot, and fill the hole of the vain, with salt, and then heal up the wound
of the skin with Turpentine, and Hogs grease molten together, and laid on
with a little flax. The taking up of veins is very necessary, and does ease
many griefs in the legs, for the taking up of the forethighe veins eases
Farcyns, and swellings of the legs, the taking up of the shakel veins
before, eases the quitterbone, and swelling of the joints, scabbes, and
cratches. The taking up of the hinder veins, helps the farcyn, swellings,
and both the spauens. The taking up of the shakle veins behind, helps
swelling of the ioints, the pains, and kibed heels and such like diseases.

Of purging with purgation or Glyster. The.Clxxxiij. Chapter.
PUrgation is defyned by the Phisians to be the emptying or voyding of
superfluous humors annoying the body with their evil quality. For such
humors breed evil juice and nutrime^t called of the Physicians Cachochimia,
which, when it will not be corrected or helped with good diet, alteration, nor
by the benefit of nature and kindly heat, then it must needs be taken away by
purgation, vomit, or glister. But for so much, as horses are not wont to be
purged by vomit as me^ be, I will speak here only of glisters, and purgatio^s.
And first because a horse is grieved with many diseases in his guts, and
that nothing can purge the guts so well as a glister, and specially the
thick guts, I wish that our ferrers would learn to know, the diversity
of glisters, to what end they serve, and with what drugges or simples they
should be made, for as the disease requires, so must the glister be made,
some to ease griefs, and to alley the sharpness of humors, some to bind,
some to lousen, some to purge evil humors, some to cleanse ulcers, but our
ferrers do use glisters, only to lousen the belly, and for no other purpose,
yea few or none do that, unless it be Martin, and such as he has taught, who
is not ignorant that a glister is the beginning of purgatio^, for a glister by
clensing the guts, refreshes the vital parts, and prepares the way
before. And therefore, whenever a horse is surfeted, and full of evil humors
needing to be purged, and specially being painted in the guts, I would wyshe
you to begin first with a glister, lest by purging him with medicine upon the
sudden, you stir up a multitude of evil humors, which finding no passage
downward, because the guts be stopte, with wind and dregs, do strike
vpwardes, and so perhaps put the horse in great danger. But now you shall
understand that glisters be made of four things, that is to say, of
decoctions, of drugges, of oils, or such like unctuous matters, as butter or
soft grease, and fourthly, of diverse kinds of salt to provoke the virtue
expulsive. A decoction is as much to say, as the broth of certain herbs or
simples boiled together in water, until the third part be consumed, and
sometime in steed of such decoction, it shall be needful perhaps to use
some fat broth, as the broth of Beef, or of a sheep head, or milk, or
whay, or some other such like lyquor, and that perhaps mingled with honey and
sugar, according as the disease shall require, the glister to be either
lenitiue, that is to say, easing pain, or glutinatiue, that is joining
together, or else abstersive, that is to say, clensyng, or wyping away filthy
matter, of which decoction or broth being strayned, you shall need to take three
pintes, or a quart at the least. And then into that, you may put such drugs, as
shall be needful, to the wayght of three or four ounces, according as the
simples shall be more or less vyolent. Of oil at the least half a pint, and
of salt two or three Dragmes, and then to be ministered luke warm with a
horn, or pipe made of purpose, when the horse is not altogether full paunched,
but rather emptye, be it in the fore noone or after noone. And as touching the
time of keeping glisters in the body, you shall understand, that to glisters
abstersyue, half an hour or less may suffice, to glisters lenitiue a longer
time, if it may be, and to glisters glutinatyue, the longest time of all is
most needful.

Of Purgations. The.Clxxxiiij. Chapter.
PUrgations for men may be made in diverse sorts and forms, but horses are
wont to be purged only with pills, or else with purging powders, put into
Ale, wine, or some other lyquor. But the simples whereof such pills or powders
be made, would be chosen with judgment, and aptly applied, so as you may purge
away the hurteful humors, and not the good. Learn first therefore to know with
what humor or humors the Horse is grieved, be it Cholor, Fleame, or melancholy,
and in what part of the body, such humors do abound, then what simples are best
to purge such humors, and with what propertye, qualitye, and temperament they
be endued. For some be vyolent, and next cosins to poison, as Scamony, or
Coloquintida. Some again are gentle, and rather meat than medicines, as
Manna, Cassia, Whay, Prunes, and such like. And some again be neither to
vyolent, nor to gentle, but in a mean, as Rhewbarb, Agaricke, seen Aloes. The
old men did use much to purge Horses with the pulpe of Coloquintida, sometime
with the roots of wild Coucumbre, and sometime with the broth of a sodden
whelpe mingled with Nitrum, and diverse other things, whereof I am sure I have
made mention before in the curing of horses diseases. Notwithstanding, I would
not wyshe you to be to rash in purging a horse, after the old men's example.
For as their simples many times be very violent, so the quantityes thereof by
them prescribed are very much, and dangerous for any horse to take in these
days, in the which neither man nor beast as it seems, is of such force or
strength, as they have been in times past. And therefore whenever you would
purge a horse of any value, I would council you to purge him with such
kinds of purgations as Martin uses, whereof you have had examples before in
diverse places. And whenever you lift for knowledge sake, to deal with other
simples, to prove them first upon such Iades, as may be well spared. For who so
minds to purge a horse well, that is to do him good, and no hurt, had need
to consider many things, as the nature of the horses disease, and the horses
strength. Also the nature, strength, and quantity of the medicine, that he
ministers, the Region, or Country time of the disease, the time of the year,
and the day. For as the diseases, and evil humors causing such diseases be
diverse, so do they require to be purged with diverse medicines, diversely
compounded, wherein consists a point of art to be learned at the Physicians
hands, and not at mine. Again, weak, delicate, and tender horses, may not be
purged in such sort, as those that be of a strong sturdye nature. And therefore
in such cases, the quality, and quantity of the simples is not a little to be
considered, neither is the hotenesse, or coldenesse of the Region to be
neglected, nor the time of the disease. For some require to be purged in the
very beginning, some not until the matter be thoroughly digested. And though the
disease proceed perhaps of cold, and cold humors, yet a man may not minister
such hot things in So^mer, as he would do in Winter, nor in ye contrary case,
such cold things in Winter, as he would do in Summer. And therefore the time
and season of the year is also to be observed, yea, and the day, and time of
the day. For the more temperate the day be, the better, not an extreme hot
day, for making the horse to faint, nor yet when the wind blows cold in the
North, for that will stop and hinder the working of the medicine, but rather in
a te^perate moist day, when the wind is in the South, if it may be, for that
will further and help the working of the medicine, and make the body louse,
and soluble. Again, for a horse whither you purge him with pills or drink, it
is best for him as Martin says, to take them in the Morning, after that he
has fasted from meat and drink all the night before. And having received
his medicine, let him be walked up and down, one hour at the least, and then
set up, and suffered to stand on the bit, two or three hours without any
meat, but in the mean time see that he be well littered, and warm covered,
and at the three hours end, offer him a little of a warm mash made with wheat
meal, or with bran, or else with ground malt. Give him little meat or none,
until he be purged, al which things have been showed you before in diverse
places, and therefore I think it not good to be tedious unto you with often
recital thereof.

Of Cauterization, or gyuing the fire as well actual as potentiall. The.Clxxxv.
Chapter.
FOr so much as the fire is judged of all the old writers to be the chiefest
remedy, and as it were the last refuge in all diseases almost whereunto a horse
is subject. I thought good therefore, to talk of it in this place, and the
rather for that few or none of our Ferrers, unless it be Martin or such as
he has taught, do know how to give the fire or to what end it serves. But
first you shall understand, that according to the learned Chirurgians, yea
also according to my old Authors there be two kinds of Cautery, the one
actual and the other potential. The Cautery actual is that which is done
only by fyering of the grieved place with a hot iron. The potential Cautery
is done by applying unto ye grieved place, some medicin corosiue, putrifactiue
or caustique. But we will speak first of the actual cautery showing you
wherefore it is good then of what metal and fashion your instruments should be
made, and finally, how, and when to use them. Auicen says, that an actual
Cautery moderatly used, is a noble remedy to stop corruption of members, to
rectify the complexion of the same, and also to staunch blood. How be it you
must beware (says he) that you touch not the sinews chordes, or lygamentes,
least the member be weakened, or that the cramp ensues. Vegetius also writing
of horseleach craft prayseth the actual cautery very much, speaking in this
sort. The actual cautery (says he) byndeth together parts loosened. It does
attenuate parts blown, and puffed up, it dries up superfluous moisture, it
looseneth, disperseth and deuideth evil matter gathered together into knots,
it asswageth old griefs. It rectifyeth those parts of the body that are
corrupted by any manner of way reducing them to their pristine estate, and
suffers no superfluity to grow or increase, for the skin being opened with
a hot iron, al kind of corruption by virtue of the fire is first digested, and
rypened, and then dissolved so as the matter does issue out at the holes,
whereby the member or part before offended, is now healed, and eased of all
pain and grief. Yea, the holes being once closed, and clean shut up, that
place is stronger and better knitte together, and covered with a tougher skin
then ever it was before. Now as touching the instruments whereof, and of what
fashion they should be made. You shall understand, that Vegetius and the other
old writers would have them to be made of Copper, praising that metal to be
far better to burn with then iron. The Chirurgians for man's body do
praise Gold and Silver, but as for the fashion of the yrons, it is to be
referred to the kind of sore, and place grieved, wherewith you have to deal,
according to the diversity whereof, the instruments are to be made of diverse
fashions, as some like searing yrons with sharp edges, and some with blount
and broad edges, some like right, and some like crooked bodkyns, some like
hooks or sicles, and some with a great button, and some with a small button at
the one end, in making whereof the ferrers judgment is most needful, who
ought to be so skillful, as he may be able to make all manner of yrons that he
should occupy, and to alter them according as need shall require. And therefore
I thought good only here to set forth the shape of the common drawing iron,
and of the button iron, like in form to those that Martin uses, referring all
the rest to your own judgment and specially, since you have been fully
instructed before, of what sort they should be made meet to serve your turn
in any disease. Now as touching the use of the instruments two things are
specially to be considered, that is, the heating of the iron, and the bearing
of the hand. For the back of the iron may not be read hot, but only the
edge, for fear of yielding to much heat, And therefore though it be made
read hot at the first, yet it shall be good before you do occupy it, to
cool the back of the instrument in water, and as touching the bearing of the
hand, the more euenly and lightly it be done, the better, and that according as
the fynenesse or thickness of the skin shall require, which is to be judged by
the hair. For if the hair be short and fine, then it is a sign of a fine
skin, if long and rough, then it betokens a thick skin. The fine skin
requires the lyghter hand, and not to be burned so deep as the thick skin,
yet both must be burned until they look yellow. But the fine skin will look
yellow with lesser burning than the thick skin. For the thick skin with his
long hair does choke the fire, and therefore requires a more heavy hand,
yea, and more often heating of the instrument than the thin skin does, and
be sure to draw always with the hair, and not against the hair, in what
form, and with what manner of lines has been taught you before, for those must
be made either long, short, deep, shalow, right, crooked, or ouertwhart,
according as the disease does require. You have learned also how to allay the
heat of the fire, after such drawing. And therefore I have no more to say
here, but only to admonish you according to Vegetius precepts, not to fire
any sinewe place, nor bone, that is broken, or out of joint, for fear of
weakening ye whole member, nor to bear so heavy or uneven hand, as you should
thereby deforme, or misfashion any part of the horse, nor to be to hasty in
giving the fire, but to attempt first all other conuenyent remedies, and when
nothing else will help, to make the fire your last refuge, and yet not so
much to neglect it, and abhor it, like ye ignorant sort, as you will not
use it when need requires, for lack whereof, many horses go lame, and
uncured of diverse dyseases. Practyse your selves therefore in giving the fire
at nedeful times with judgment and discreatyon, so shall you do it to the
Horses benefit, and to your own great praise and profit.

Of Cauteris Potentiall. The.Clxxxvi. Chapter.
CAuteris Potentiall as Johannes vigo says, are medicines corosyue,
putrefactiue, and causticke. This word corosyue, is deryued of the latten word
Corrodo, which is as much to say, as to gnawe and frette, and of such
coresyues, some be simple and some compound. The simple as Vigo says, be such
as these, Roch alom. as well burnt as not burnte, sponge of the sea somewhat
burnt, Lyme, red Coral, powder of Mercury. Compound Corosyues be these
Vnguentum apostolorum, Vnguentiu^ aegiptiacum, Vnguentum Ceraceu^. Medicines
putrefactiue, called of the learned sort Septica, according to Auicen, be those
that have strength to corrupt the complexio^ of the member, and to enduce an
escharr like dead flesh, causing great pain, yea and fevers, and therefore
ought not to be ministered, but to strong bodies and in strong diseases, as in
Carbuncles, cancrous, ulcers, and such like, and they be these. Arsnike
sublimat, resalgar, and other medicines compound therewith. Siluius also adds
thereunto Sandaracha chrysocolla, and Aconitum, but he does not agree with
Auicen in the description of the putrefactiue medicynes. For he says that they
cause little pain or none, neither be they so hot and dry, as those that are
called Escharotica, yt is to say Crustiue, which be hot in the fourth degree,
and do bread a crust and scar and cause great pain, as vnslect lime and the
burned dregs of wine: wherefore it seems that Auicens description belongs
rather to the crustiue, than to the putryfactyue medicines. Not withstanding I
must needs say that our Chirurgia^s, and also ferrers, do find both Arsenik,
and Resalgar, to be so sharp, hot, and burning things, as when they mynister
the same to any part of the body, they are forced to allay the sharpness
thereof, the Chirurgians with the juice of Plantan, or Daffadyll, or else of
Houseleeke, the ferrers with hogs grease.

Medycynes Caustike that is to say burning, are those whose operation is most
strong, and inclyneth to the nature of fire, and yet more easily allayed as
Vigo writes, than the medicines putrifactyue, and therefore may be more safely
used. They be made as he says of strong lie, called Capitellum, or Magistra,
of Vitriol Roman, Sal vitre, Aqua fortis, of this sort be all those which Vigo
calls the blistring medicines, as Apium, Cantharides, Ciclamine, Onions,
strong Garlic, Melanacardinum, the stones or grains of vitis Alba, otherwise
called Brionye. Moreover Vigo makes every one of these Cauteris potentiall, to
excel one an other, as it were by certain degrees, saying that Corosiues be
weaker than Putrifactiues, and Putrifactiues weaker than Caustic, and therefore
Corosiues work in the upper part, and in soft flesh. Putrifactiues in hard
flesh and deep. But Caustickes have power to break the skin in hard flesh,
and do enter most deeply. The use of the most part of which things, has
been taught you before, in sundry places according to Martins experience. And
therefore I leave to trouble you any further, wishing you that are desirous to
know any more of these matters, to read Taugantius writing, De piroticis
the.xi. Chapter, in his first book of Surgery. And Siluius de medicament. comp.
ratione. And John Vigo writing of Surgery englyshed but few years since. But
the old writers so far as I can judge by the words of Absirtus, Pelagonius,
and others that write of Horseleach craft, do apply this word Causticke, to
such medicines as are astrictiue and bynding, called of Martin and other
Ferrers in these days, bynding charges, as may well appear by the composition
and use thereof here following, recyted by Vegetius in this sort.

The receyte of a Causticke used by Chiron to dry up superfluous moisture, and
to bind parts loosned, and to strengthen parts weakened. The.Clxxxvij. Chapter.
TAke of Bitume^ Iudaicu^, two pound of Bitumen Apolonii two pound, of the
purest part of Frankence^se six ounces, of Bdelliu^ Arabitu^ ij. ounces, of
deares suet ij. pound, of Propuleu^ two ounces, of Galbanu^ two ounces, of the
drops of Storax two ounces, of common wax two pound, of Resin Cabial one pound,
of Viscus Italicus three ounces, of Apoxima two ounces, of the juice of Hysop
two ounces, of the drops of Armoniacke two ounces, of Pytch one pound.

A another Caustic used by Pelagonius, to dry up swellings, bladders, wingals,
and splents, in the legs and joints. The.Clxxxviij. Chapter.
TAke of virgin wax one pound, of Rosen two pound and a half, of Galbanum
three ounces, of Asphaltum Iudaicu^ two pound, of Myrrh secundary two pound,
of Bitumen one pound, of Armoniacke six ounces, of Costus six ounces. Boil
all these things together in an earthen pot, saving the Asphaltum, Armoniack,
and Costu^, which being first ground like fine flower, must be added unto the
other things, after that they have been boiled and cooled, and then boiled
altogether again, and well sturred, so as they may be incorporated together,
and made all one substance. These kinds of emplaysters or oyntmentes, ought in
my judgment, to be called as I said before, rather binding charges, then
Causticke medicines, because there be no such extreme corosiue or burning
symples in these, as are before recyted. Notwithstanding, I refer my
judgment to those that be better learned, and so end, for fear of being over
tedious. For if I would, I could take very good occasion here to speak of
diverse other medicines whereof some are called Anodiua, that is, easing pain
and grief. Martin calls them Lynoges, which are made of Lynseede, Camomile,
soft grease, and such like things, as are hot in the first degree. Some
again are called Narcotica, that is to say, astonying or bringing to sleep, as
those that are made of Opiu^, Mandragora, Popye, and such like cold and
gross things. And some are called Sarcotica, that is breeding flesh, as Barlye
flower, and Frankencense. And many other kinds of emplaisters, ointme^ts,
waters, and salues, which would occupye a Book of no small volume, to be
written hereafter by some other perhaps, if not by my self. And in the mean
time, let this that I have already written suffice.

Here ends the order of curing of Horses diseases, and here follovveth the
true Art of paring, and shoing all manner of houes.
The true Art of Paring, and shooyng all manner of Houes together, with the
shapes and fygures of diverse shoes, very necessary for diverse Houes.
In what points the Art of shooyng does consist. The first Chapter.
THe Art of shoyng consists in these points, that is to say, in paryng the
houe well, in making the shoe of good stuff, in well fashioning the web
thereof, and well pearring the same, in fitting the shoe unto the horses
foot, in making nails of good stuff, and well fashioning of the same, and
finally, in well dryuing of the said nails, and clenching of the same. But
since neither paring nor shooing is no absolute thing of it self, but has
respect unto the foot, or houe, (for the shoe is to be fitted to the foot,
and not the foot to the shoe) and that there be diverse kinds of houes both
good and badde, requiring great diversity as well of paring, as shooing: It is
meet therefore that we talk first of the diversity of houes, and then show
you how they ought to be pared and shodde.

Of Houes, and diverse kinds thereof. The second Chapter.
OF Houes some be perfect, and some imperfect. The perfect Houe is that which
is round, smoth, tough, and short, so as the horse may tread more on the toe
than on the heel, and also right, and somewhat hollow within, but not over
hollow, having a narrow frush, and broad heels. The imperfect houe, is that
which lacks any of these propertyes beforesayde, belonging to a perfect
houe. Broad Houes.
For as touching the first point. If the Houe be not round but broad, and
spreading out of the sides or quarters, that horse for the most part has
narrow heels, and in continuance of time will be flat footed, which is a
weak foot, and will not carry a shoe long nor travel far, but sone surbate,
and by treading more on his heels, than on his toes, will go low on his
pastornes, and such feet through their weakness be much subject to false
quarters, and to grauelling, which is most commonly seen in Flaunders horses,
and such as are bredde in moist ground.

Brittle and rugged houes.
Secondly, if the houe be not smoth, but rugged, and full of circles, like
Rams horns, then it is not only unseemly to the eye, but also it is a sign
that the foot is in no good temper, but to hot and dry, and thereby perhaps
makes the houe to be brittle, which defect is often seen in our English
Horses.

Thirdely if it be long, Long houes*
then it will cause the horse to tread all upon the heels, and to go low on
his pastornes, and thereby to breed windgalles, whereunto the Iennettes of
Spain be much subject, by reason of their long Houes.

Fourthlye, Crooked Houes.
if the Houe be not right, but crooked, that is to say, broad without, and
narrow within, whereby the Horse is splay footed, then it will cause the Horse
to tread more inward, than outward, and to go so close with his joints
together, as he can not well travel without enterfering, or perhaps stryketh one
leg so hard against an other, as he becomes lame. But if he be broad
within, and narrow without, that is not so hurtful. Notwithstanding, it will
cause him to gravel sooner on the outsyde than on the insyde.

Fifthly if the Houe be flat and not hollow within, Flat houes.
which is most commonly seen in Frezous and Flaunders horses, then it
bredeth, such inconveniences, as are before declared in the first imperfect
houe. And again if it be over hollow, then it will dry the faster, Over holow
houes.
and cause the horse to be houebound. For ye over hollow houe is a straight
narrow houe, and grows vpryght, whereby though the horse treads upright,
and not on his heels, yet such kind of houes will dry over fast, unless
they be continually stopped, and cause the horse to be houe bound, which lameth
them, making them to halte, whereunto the Iennets and Barbarye horses are much
subject.

Syxtly, Broad frushes.
if the frush be broad, then the heels be weak, and so soft as you may
almost bend them together, and then the horse will never tread boldlye on the
stones, or hard ground.

Narowe heels.
Seventhly and lastly* if the heels be narrow, they be tender, and the horse
will grow to be houe bound, to which defect the Iennets are most commonly
subject.

Of paring the perfect Houe and fore foot. The third Chapter.
FIrst pare the seat of the shoe, so even and plain as may be, to the intent
that the shoe may sytte close, and not bear in one place more then in an
other, and take more of the toe then of the heel, to the intent that the
heels be higher then the toe, because all the weight of ye horses forebody
lies upon the quarters and heels of the forefeete. And therefore those parts
should be most maintained, and taken off with the butter as little as may be.
For the paryng of the heels, being naturally thinner, and more tender than the
toe, does greatly weaken them: but the toe being naturally thick and hard,
would be pared so thin almost as the edge of a knife. But in paring the
hinder feet, clean contrary order is to be observed, as shall be said
hereafter in his proper place, whereof the French Ferrers have a proverb,
which says Deuant dariar, dariar deuant, in English, before behind, behind
before, that is to say, spare the fore foot behind, and the hinder foot
before, as well in paring, as in pearcing the shoe.

Of shooing the perfect houe and forefeete, and how the shoe, pearcing, and
nail, should be made. The fourth Chapter.
MAke your shoe of spruse or spanishe iron, with a broad web, fitting it to the
foot, and let the sponges be thicker, and more substantial then any other
part of shoe, yea, and also somewhat broad, so as the quarters on both sides
may disbord, that is to say, appear without the houe a strawes breadth, to guard
the coffin, which is the strength of the houe, and only bears the shoe, and
when you come to the pearcing thereof, spare not to pearce it from the quarter
to the hard toe, but not backwardes toward the heel, and pearce it so, as
the holes may be wider on the outside then on the inside, and that the cyrcle
of the pearcing may be more dystant from the edge of the toe, then from the
edge of the quarter, whereas it begins, because the houe is thicker foreward
then backward, and therefore more hold to be taken. And as touching the nails
make them also of the same iron beforesayde, the heads whereof would be
souare and not fully so broad beneath as is above, but answerable to ye
pearcing holes, so as the head of the nails may enter in and fill the same,
appearing above the shoe no more than ye breadth of the back of a knife, so
shall they stand sure without shogging, and endure longer, and to that end the
stamp that first makes the holes, and the preschell that pearceth them, and
also the necks of the nails, would be of one square fashion and bigness,
that is to say, great above and small beneath* which our common Smithes do
little regard* for when they pearce a shoe, they make the holes as wide on the
inside, as on the outsyde, and their nails with so great a showldering by
dryuing them over hard upon the nail tool, as the heads or rather necks of
the said nails, can not enter into the holes, for to say the truth, a good
nail would have no shouldering at all, but be made with a plain and square
neck, so as it may iusty fytte and fill the pearcing hole of the shoe. For
otherwise the head of ye nail standing high, and the neck thereof being
weak, either it breaks off, or else bends upon every light occasion, so as
the shoe thereby stands loose from the houe and is quickly lost. Moreover ye
shankes of the nails would be somewhat flat, and the points sharp without
hollownesse or flawe, and stiffer toward the head above, than beneath. And
when you drive, drive at the first with soft strokes, and with a light hammer,
until the nail be somewhat entered, and in shooing fine delycate horses, it
shall not be amiss to grease the points of the nails with a little soft
grease, that the nails may enter the more easily, and drive the two talon
nails first. Then look whether the shoe stands right or not, which you
shall perceive in beholding the frush, for if the sponges on both sides, be
equally distaunt from the frush, then it stands right, if not, then amend it
and set the shoe right, and standing right, drive in another nail, that done,
let the horse set down his foot again, and look round about it, to see
whether it fitteth the horses foot in all places, and whether the horse
treads eue^ and just on it or not. And if you see that the shoe does not
furnish every part equally, but perhaps appears more of one side than of
an other. Then make the horses other foot to be lifted up, to the intent he may
stand the more stedely upon that foot, and so standing strike him on the houe
with your hammer on that side that the shoe is scant, and that shall make the
shoe to come that way. The shoe the^ standing straight and just, drive in the
rest of all the nails to the number of eight, that is to say four on one side
and four on another, so as the points of the nails may seem to stand in the
outsyde of the houe eue^ and just one by an other, as it were in a cyrculer
line, and not out of order like the teethe of a saw whereof one is bent one
way and an other an other way. That done, cut them off and clinch them so as
the clinches may be hidden in the houe, which by cutting the houe with the
point of a knife, a little beneath ye appearing of the nail you may easily
do. That done with a rape, pare the houe round, so as the edge of the shoe may
be seen round about.

Of paring the imperfect houes every one according to their kinds, and first
of the broad houe. The fifte Chapter.
Abroad houe not being as yet grown to be flat, may be greatly helped and
kept from being flat, by the skill and dyligence of the ferrer, in well paring
and shooing it. And therefore to pare it well, let him take as much off the toe
with his butter, as he can possibly, keeping it always under, but let him not
touch the quarters nor the heels at al, unless it be to make the seat of the
shoe plain, and let that be done so superficially or ouerly as may be, so
shall the houes remain always strong.

Of shooing the broad houe. The.vi. Chapter.
MAke a good strong shoe with a broad web, and broad sponges, and pierced as
is aforesaid, fitting it to the foot, being first pared as is above said,
and from the talon nail toward the heel, let the shoe appear a strawes
breadth without the houe, and set it on in such order and with such nails as
apperteyneth to the perfect houe, saving that you shall set five nails on the
outside of this houe, and four on the inside, because he wears more without
than within.

Of paring the rough and brittle houe. The.vij. Chapter.
This kind of houe is most commonly weaker without than within, and because
it is for ye most part hotter than the other houes be, the heels thereof may
be somewhat more opened than the other, to the intent it may be more easily
stopped with cow dong, or other ointment to keep it moist, and also the
raggedness on the outside of the coffin would be fyled away with a rape, and
made smoth, and also more often anointed than other houes with the houe
ointme^t hereafter discrybed in the end of this treatise, and as for the rest
of the houe, it must be pared as the perfect houe.

Of shooing the rough and brittell houe. The.viij. Chapter.
MAke his shoe neither to light, but so as it may well bear the horse, nor
yet to heavy, for then the houe being weak will sone cast it, and pearce this
shoe to be set on with nine nails, five without and four within.

Of paring the long houe. The.ix. Chapter.
THe long houe may be helped by cutting away the toe with his butter, for the
shorter foot a weak and slender leg has, the better. And to say the
truth, it is the short foot that makes the strong leg, and ye long foot
makes the weak leg, being forced thereby, to tread al upon the heel, and
on the pastorne, and let the rest of the houe be pared like the perfect houe.

Of shooing a long houe. The.x. Chapter.
MAke this shoe as round as you can at the toe, that the breadth may take away
the evil sight of the length, and if the foot be very narrow, then let the
shoe disborde with out the houe, and pearce the shoe the deeper, and set the
shoe backwarde enough, because such kind of feet do tread most on the
heels, and set the shoe on with eight nails like the perfect houe.

Of paring the crooked houe. The.xi. Chapter.
FIrst look on what side the houe is highest and least worn, then pare all
that away and make it equal with the lower side which is most worn, without
touching the worn side at all, unless it be to make the seat of the shoe
plain, and as for the rest, pare it like the perfect houe.

Of shooing the crooked houe. The.xij. Chapter.
MAke an indifferent strong shoe with a broad web, fitting it to the foot, and
pearce it not until you have laid the shoe unto the foot, to the intent you
may pearce it to the horses most commodity, which shall be done if you
pearce the scante side (which most commonly is the insyde) more toward the
toe, than the fuller or stronger side. And where as the houe is weakest, there
always make the shoe strongest, and set on this shoe with nine nails, that is
to say, five on the stronger side, and four on the weaker side.

Of paring the flat houe, otherwise called the pomised houe. The.xiij. Chapter.
MAke the seat of the shoe plain, and take somewhat off the toe, but touch
not the heel nor the ball of the foot, but leave both them so strong as you
can.

Of shooing the flat houe, or pomised houe. The.xiiij. Chapter.
MAke this shoe with a very broad web, for the more it cover the weak sole,
the better, and let the midde part of the web that couers the ball of the
foot be much thicker, than the outsydes where the pearcings be, and let it be
so hollow as it touch no part of the ball of the foot, and let it be large and
long enough in all places, so as the horse may go at ease, and let it be
pierced round about the toe, to favor the heels, and make ten holes for ten
nails, that is to say, five on each side.

Of paring the over hollow houe. The.xv. Chapter.
PAre this houe round about, and specially the seat of the shoe, that is to
say round about by the edges, to the intent that the concauite or hollownesse
of the houe within may not be so deep, but more shallow than it was before,
and let it be always kept moist with stopping it, for fear of houe binding,
observing in your paring so even a hand as may be, in all points like unto the
perfect houe.

Of shooing the over hollow houe. The.xvi. Chapter.
MAke a light shoe in such order and form as was said before to serve the
perfect houe.

Of paring a houe that has a broad frush. The.xvij. Chapter.
Broad Frushes do cause weak heels, and therefore had need of little or no
paring at all, and for that cause pare only the toe, and also the seat of the
shoe, so much as shall be needful to the even standing of the shoe, leaving
the heels so strong as may be.

Of shooing the Houe that has a broad frushe. The.xviij. Chapter.
MAke this shoe stronger toward the heel tha^ toward the toe, and also let
the web be somewhat broad toward the heels to save them from the ground, and
set on this shoe with nine nails, because most commonly it is a great foot,
and in all other points make it like the shoe for the perfect Houe.

Of paring the houe that has narrow heels. The.xix. Chapter.
PAre the toe short, and make the seat of the shoe fair and plain, and open
only so much, as there may be some little space betwixt the frushe and the
heel. For the less you take off the heel, the better.

Of shooing the houe that has narrow heels. The.xx. Chapter.
MAke a trim light shoe, with a broad web, and let the sponges be so broad
as they may almost mete together, to defend the heel from the ground, and
pearce it all toward the toe, sparing the heel so much as you can, and let
the shoe be long inoughe toward the heels, and set it on with eight nails,
like the shoe that fytteth the perfect houe.

Of paring and shooing the hinder feet. The.xxi. Chapter.
Hitherto we have spoken of the paring and shoing of the forefeete, now
therefore, let us speak somewhat of paring and shooing the hinder feet. For
the paring of the hinder feet is clean contrary unto the forefeete, for the
weakest part of the hinder foot is the toe, and therefore in paring the
hinder foot, the toe must be always more spared tha^ the heels, but in all
other points, observe the order of paring, according to the perfection or
imperfection of the houes before declared.

Of shooing the hinder feet. The.xxij. Chapter.
MAke the shoe fit for the houe in such sort as is before said, saving that
it would be always strongest toward the toe, and it must be pierced nigher
the heel than the toe, because as I have said before, that the toe is always
the weakest part of the hinder foot. Also let the outsyde of the hinder shoe
be made with a Calkyn, not over high, but let the other sponge be agreeable unto
the Calkin, that is to say as high in a manner as the Calkin, which Calkin is
to keep the horse from slyding. But then it may not be sharp poynted, but
rather flat and handsomlye turned upward, as is presented in the figure of
hinder shoes hereafter following, which kind of Calkin is named by Caesar
Fiaschi in his book of Ryding, Rampone alla Ragonesa, who utterly rejects al
other kinds of Calkins as things hurtefull and unprofitable, as we shall show
you hereafter when we come to speak of shoes with Calkins, rings, and such
like engines.

Of shooing the houe that has a false quarter. The.xxiij. Chapter.
IF the horse halt, then make him a shoe fitted to his foot, lacking one
quarter on that side that his false quarter is, in such form as you shall see
in the end of this book. If he do not halte, then make him a shoe with a
button, or shouldering on the inside of the shoe, and next to the sole of the
foot, somewhat distant from the false quarter toward the toe, in such form
as you shall have in the end of this book, and that shall defend the sore
place, so as the shoe shall not touch it. And let it be pierced like unto the
figure hereafter expressed, and with this kind of shoe, you may boldly
travel your horse where you will.

Of paring and shooing for enterfering. The.xxiiij. Chapter.
THose Houes that enterfere, are most commonly higher on the outsyde, than on
the insyde, and therefore the outsyde would be the more taken off with the
butter, to the intent that the insyde may be somewhat higher (if it will be)
than the outsyde, and then make him a shoe fit for his foot, which would be
thicker on the insyde than on the outsyde, and let that shoe never have any
Calkin, for that will make the Horse to tread awry, and the sooner to
enterfere, and let it be pierced in such sort, as you see the figure
hereafter expressed. But to be sure. First cause the horse to be ridden before
you, and mark well where he touches most, and there remedy the shoe, by
making it the straighter in that place.

Of paring and shooing the foot that is houebound. The.xxv. Chapter.
FIrst pare his toe so short as may be, and pare the sole somewhat thin, and
open the heels well, and make him a half shoe like a half Moan, fashioning
and pearcing it like unto the figure hereafter expressed.

Of making the planch shoe, or pauncelet. The.xxvi. Chapter.
THe planch makes a good foot, and evil leg, because it makes the foot to
grow beyond the measure of the leg. Notwithstanding for a weak heel, it is
marvelous good, and it will last longer than any shoe, and it is borrowed from
the Moyle, that has weak heels and frushes, to keep the foot from stones
and gravel. Notwithstanding, woe be unto that horse that has need of such a
shoe. The figure of this shoe is also in the end of this book.

Of shoes with Calkins, rings, welts, and turning vices, and of the Paten shoe.
The.xxvij. Chapter.
Besides all these kinds of shoes before recyted, there be diverse others,
whereof some are made with hye Calkins, some with Ringes, some with welts or
borders about, and some with vices. Some with the toes turned upward, some
with the heels turned upward, and of many other fashions, which though they be
not so needful, yet I thought good to speak somewhat of them, and also to set
forth some of their shapes. And first, as touching shoes with Calkins, Caesar
Fiaschi says, that though such Calkins be made to keep the horse from
slyding. Yet they do the horse more harm than good, in that the horse by
means thereof can not tread euenly upon the ground, whereby he many times
wryncheth his foot, or strayneth some synew, and specially when he trauelleth
in stonye places, and on the mountains, whereas the hardness of the stones
perhaps not suffering the Calkins to catch sure hold, the foot slippeth with
the more violent stresse, and so takes harm, and specially the heel if it be
weak. And therefore to travel on the Mountains he prayseth much the Turkye
manner of shooing, which for that purpose make their horses shoes with the
heels turned upward, in such sort as you see the plaunche made, setting them
on with nails having heads like little buttons, but not standing, so high
above the shoe as our froste nails commonly do, whereby the Horse treads
euenlye and surely, so shall he not do having Calkins, which besides the
discommodityes before alleged, be very dangerous at any time that you would
manage your horse. For by crossing in his turning, one foot perhaps may
hurt an other with the Calkin, so as it may make the horse to halte, yea, and
perhaps lame him for ever* And besides that, the Calkins being high behind, the
houe can not be pared so much before at the toe, as it ought to be, whereby the
horse treads lower on his heels, than he should do, being well pared and
shod without Calkins, and so becomes weak heeled. Notwithstanding, some
never think their horses to be well shod, unless all the shoes be made with
Calkins, either syngle or double. Yet of two evils double is the less. For the
Horse shall tread euener with double, than with single Calkins. But then such
Calkins would not be over long, or sharp poynted, but rather short and
flat, as has been before taught, and is expressed in the figure of hinder
shoes hereafter following, which as I said before Caesar Fiaschi calls Ramponi
alla Ragonesa. Thus much of shoes with Calkins.

Of shoes with Ryngs. The.xxviij. Chapter
SHoes with Rings were first invented, to make a horse lift his feet high,
but Caesar Fiaschi says, that such shoes be more paynefull than helpefull to
the horse, and in wearing such shoes he lifts more for pain and grief, and
specially being trotted upon a hard ground, than for any pleasure or good
that they do him, which thing is incident to many horses, yt have not sound
Houes. For though they be well shodde, and have no rings at all, yet being
trotted upon a hard ground, they will lift higher than upon a soft ground, for
having tender houes, they be afeard to touch ye hard ground, even like a man
that has some grief in the sole of his foot, which will rather twitch up his
leg, than offend the sore place, by setting it to the ground. And if that man
should also wear a strait shoe, it would grieve him the worse. Eue^ so it
fares with ye horse, which perhaps having naturally tender heles, some for
lack of discretion do add thereunto also hye Calkins, or else rings, and
thereby cause him to have weaker heels, than he had before. Wherefore leaving
aside such unprofitable devises, I would wish you make all your shoes, and
specially your foreshoes with sponges, in such order as has been before
taught. And as for making the Horse to lift his feet, that is to be helped
chiefly by the Art and skill of the Ryder. And whylest the horse is in
scooling, I think it were not amiss, to let him wear continually very heavy
shoes, to the intent that being afterward shod with lighter shoes, when he
should be maneged to the shoawe, or otherwise traveled, he may feel his
feet to be lighter, and thereby he shall lift the higher, and move his legs
and shoulders with the more pleasure and better grace.

Of shoes with swelling welts, or borders about, The.xxix. Chapter.
IN Germany and high Almany, the Smythes do make their shoes with a swelling
wealt round about the shoe, which being as hye as the heads of the nails or
rather higher, do save the nails from wearing, which kind of shoe for
lasting, I must needs praise. For I my self have traveled, my horse being
shodde with those shoes, in those Countries above five hundredth miles right
out, upon very stony ground, yea, and upon the mountains, without removing
shoe, or dryuing nail. For the shoe being made of well tempered stuff, wears
equallye in all parts, and the horse also treads euenlye upon them, and
specially his feet being before well pared. Caesar Fiaschi prayseth also this
shoe very much, to be used when a horse should run for a wager, to keep him
from slyding. But then he would have the welt to be inde^ted* having sharp
poynted teeth like a Saw, and that the sponges behind be as thick as the
welt. And that the welt be of a tough hard temper, for fear of wearing over
fast. And if you list to hollow the said shoe in the midst, yet let not the
imbossed side rise so high as the welt, but lie somewhat lower. With these
kind of shoes they use in Italy to shoe such Barbary horses, Iennets, and
Turks, as are appointed to run for the best game at some public triumph,
or for any other private wager. And therefore sith this kind of shoe is so
good to keep a horse from slyding, Caesar Fiaschi thinks it best to be used to
that end, utterly disalowing both Calkins, frost nails, crests, spurs and
all such like deuyses, as are often used by the ignorant sort, to keep their
horses from slyding, not considering the great discommoditye and hurt, that may
redound thereof to the horse, by means that he can not tread even upon the
ground. Or instead of this shoe, they may use the Turkye shoe, and button
nails before mentioned, and that shall keep their horses from slyding better
than any of the other deuyses, and with less harm to the horse.

Of shoes with turning vices, and also of joint shoes. The.xxx. Chapter.
SOme that use to pass the mountains where smythes are not redely to be
found, to shoe a horse if need be, do carry about with them certain shoes
made with vices, wherewith they make the shoe fast to the horses foot without
help of hammer or nail, the shape whereof is hereafter expressed.
Notwithstanding such shoes, are more for the show than for any good use or
commodity. For though it save the horses foot from stones, yet it so pincheth
his houe, as he goes with pain, and perhaps does his houe more hurt than the
stones would do. And therefore it were better in such needful times to use
the joint shoe, which is made of two pieces, with a flat ryuet nail joining
them together in the toe, so as you may make it both wide and narrow, as you
will your self, to serve any foot, but this shoe must be set on with nails,
and therefore it is nedeful that the ryder learn to drive a nail if need be,
whereof he must have always store about him together with Hammer, Pynsons, and
Butter, handsomelye made, and mete for caryage, without the which the horsemen
of Almany do never travail, neither is there any gentleman that loves his
horse, but can use those instruments for that purpose, as well as any Smith.
Caesar Fiaschi calls these kinds of shoes Disferre praising them very much to
be used to such purpose as is before said, and so does Martin. And therefore I
thought good to set out the shape thereof amongst the rest of the fygures of
shoes.

Of the Paten shoe. The.xxxi. Chapter.
Because every Smyth knows the use of this shoe, and how to make it, I shall
not need to use many words, but only show you that it is a necessary shoe for
a horse that is hurt in the hip, or stiffle, to be put on upon the contrary
foot, to the intent that the sore leg may hang, and not touch the ground.

How to keep the houes of a horse moist in the stable. The.xxxij. Chapter.
AS horses houes do many times take harm through the negligence or
unskillfulness of the Ferrer, in evil paring or shoing the same, even so they
take no less harm many times through the negligence of the keeper for lack of
stopping, and keeping the forefeete moist, for the hinder feet most commonly
are kept to moist, by means that the dong and stale is suffered to lie
continually at their heels. But the forefeete stand continually dry, whereby
the horse becomes brittle houed, yea, and many times houebounde, which a good
keeper will not suffer, but be mindful to stop them often, either with horse
dong or Cow dong, yea, and also to wash them clean without with water, and
then to annoint them with some good suppling ointment as this here following
prescribed by Martin, which will not only supple the houes, and make them
tough, but also cause them to shine and glistre, which is counted a beautiful
thing amongst the Spaniards, Italians, and such as love to have their horses
finelye kept.

The receyte of the ointment. The.xxxiij. Chapter.
TAke of Turpentyne, of sheep suet, of each half a pound, of unwrought wax
half a quarterne, and of Sallet oil half a pynt. Boil al these things
together in a pot, sturring them continually until they be thoroughly mingled
together. Then take it from the fire and let it cool, and being cold,
preserve it in the same pot, or else in some other, to the intent that you
may have it ready every second day, to annoint all the coffins of the horses
Houes round about, but first wash their houes fair and clean, and suffer no
dirt to remain upon them, then being dried with a cloth anoint them.

Thus ends the treatise of Paring and shooing all manner of Houes.
Diverse shapes of Shoes.




Imprinted at London, by Wylliam Seres, dwelling at the Weast end of Poules,
at the sign of the Hedgehogge, and are to be sold at his shop.


