Theatrum Mundi, The Theator or rule of the world, wherein may be seen the
running race and course of every man's life, as touching misery and felicity,
wherein is contained wonderful examples, learned devises, to the overthrow of
vice, and exalting of virtue. whereunto is added a learned, and marvelous
work of the excellency of mankind. Written in the French and Latin tongues
by Peter Boaystuau, and translated into English by John Alday.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by H. D. for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Key.

In praise of the Book.
LO here the branches fresh and green.
Lo here dear Friend the race
Lo here, the path is to be seen
through which mankind does trace.
The final scope, the total end,
the wandering steps wherein
Humanum genus seems to tend*
his pagent to begin.
Most like a Theater, a game
or gameplace if ye will,
which royally does bear the fame
approude by learned skill.
Through bliss, through joy, through smiling fate
commixt with care and woe,
Now plaste aloft in Princely state,
and straight brought down as low.
By hap, mishap, or hapless happes,
compared to a shade,
Or flower of the field, which clappes,
or heat does cause to fade.
For as the youthful wightes assay
their parts on stage a while,
And lavish tongues from day to day
with time does them beguile,
So that at last their pomp and pride
their filed speech has end,
None otherwise away to slide
our crooked limbs do bend.
The chiefest Lamp or glistring Star
whereof described plain,
Surmounting others all full far,
herein thou may attain.
And thus with Tullies work I fine,
placing this learned Book
Condecorate with Muses nine
a Glass whereon to look.
To the Right Worshipful Sir William Chester Knight, Alderman of the City of
London, and Merchant of the Staple, John Alday wishes health to the pleasure
of God, with most happy and prosperous success in all your affairs.
AMONG all the Learned and worthy writers of our age, (worshipful Sir) there is
none to my judgment more worthy of perpetual praise than those which have most
learnedly philosophied on the misery of man (those I say which contemplating
and beholding the calamities of these days with the corruption of man kind,
have not feared to set forth the lives and livings of al estates (to this end)
that in reading and hearing their miserable life and wicked conversation, they
be the sooner moved to detest and abhor the same, and cry out with the
Prophet David saying, I have sinned Lord, and therevppon amend their wicked
ways. Among the which the Author hereof named Peter Boaystuau, has most
worthilye set forth this present work, not only in the French tongue to the
profit of his Country, but first of all in the Latin tongue to his perpetual
and due praise, and to the profit of all Christian Countries and Nations.
Wherein he has most learnedly set forth the corruption of all estates, so
that those that read this present book, can no otherwise do but be ashamed of
their unjust dealings. Moreover least that man should despair of his salvation
in reading this pitiful Metamorphose or Tragedy (knowing themselves culpable)
he has most worthily set forth the dignity and excellency of man, showing
him how much more in excellency he does excel all other creatures who^ GOD
has created and made. So that this is in su^me (Right Worshipful Sir) the
effect of this rude translation, the which I thought good to direct unto your
worship, and so much the rather because of your ripe judgment and perfect
knowledge in the French tongue, the which as it is well known to be
incomparable, so are the rest of your most godly virtues, wherewith nature has
endued you as a worthy and grave counselor to this honorable City of London.
Receive therefore I beseech you this my rude translation, and it accepting in
good part excuse my rash enterpise, esteeming it as a zeal of my good will,
the which most worthilye unto your worship I have directed.

Your daily Orator John Alday.

To the Right Excellent and Reverend Lord and Prelate, my Lord James of
Betoun, Archbishop of Glasco, and Ambassador of Scotland, Peter Boaystuau
wishes health, and perpetual obedience.
MY good Lord, certain ancient Philosophers have made marvelous complaints
against the ingratitude and misknowledge of man, for that he never enters into
his own conscience, and considers not his own proper nature, although that
his industry and providence be so great, that it spreads all abroad. In such
sort, that neither the compass and largeness of the Earth, the violence nor
deepenesse of the Seas, neither the amplitude and spreading of the Air,
neither the burning heat nor distance of the Sun, neither yet the course or
reuolutio^ as well of ye Clouds, as of the Firmament, can retain or hinder the
celerity of his Spirit, but that he will seek and know the nature and resort
of al y^ is contained in the universal world. The fury and rage of y^ wild
beasts he tameth and maistereth, and he only remains without bridell or
snaffle, by his diligence and promptness of wit, he has described the
properties of herbs and plants, the secret virtues of stones, with the
calcionating of mettels. And notwithstanding man is so masked and disguised,
that he knows not himself. He is the Heraulde, beginner and foreshewer of
things contained in the circute of this world, and yet he is blind and dumb
in his own doings. He foreseeth and discovers the nature and property of
the Elements, he reformeth, ordeyneth, compasses and weyeth that which is
seen under the concauits of the Skies. And nevertheless, man in himself is
as one confounded and overcome. In consideration whereof (my good Lord) I have
unto him addressed this Rule, by the which he may contemplate and advise,
without being drawn beside him self, his infirmity and misery, (to the
end) that making an anotamie or foreshewing of all the parts of his life, he
be the sooner moved to detest and abhor his vile and corrupt living. And if
we would be equitable Judges of human actions, what is this world, any
other than a Rule, circle or compass, where as some play the handicraftes men,
and of base condition, others represent Kings, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses,
Knights, Barons and others constituted in dignities, and notwithstanding,
as soon as they have laid down their maskings and disguisings, and that death
comes, which makes an end of this bloody Tragedy, then they know
themselves to be all men, and wretched sinners, and then the Lord God which is
in heaven, laugheth at their foolish enterprises, and vanities, as witnesses
ye Prophet David, yea with such a dreadful laughter, that he makes us quake
for fear, and the earth to shake. Man then (in my judgment) is subject to an
infinite number of miseries and calamities, in the which he is wrapped in from
his birth even to his grave (wherefore) seeing this pitiful Metamorphose, and
also his excellent degree of honor, which through his perfectness and
insolent life he shall obtain, he is constrained to wish and desire heaven, yea
to sigh and cry out for it, as the place of his first original and birth.
Which is in sum (my good Lord) that which at this present I do offer,
consecrate and dedicate unto your Lordship. Although that I must needs
confess, as the verity is, that in consideration of your virtues, integrity
of life, sincerity of manners, to the knowledge that your Lordship has in all
good disciplines, as well divine as humain, to the rigorous assaults of
fortune, the which you have vanquished and overcome by your merits as well in
the public weal of Scotland, as in our Realm of France: the memory whereof
is so great, that it spreads all over Europia. It should therefore be more
decent and comlie to honor your Lordeship with a Rule of triumph and honor with
the which the ancient Romans were accustomed to celebrate and eliuate the
memory of those that had profited their native country than to present you a
Rule of miseries, such as I have here entitled, with the which your Lordship I
trust will be contented, hoping for some other work of mine better labored and
pollished. Which I pretend by the help of God, to treat on in another tongue,
and that shortly shall come to light under the protection and favor of your
divine virtues.

Peter Boaystuau to the Reader health.
GEntle Reader, suddenly after that I had made offer to the traduction of
Chelidonius, and with other fair treaties of mine invention, being advertised
how willingly thou have received my works. Therefore I thought good to gratify
thee with a greater thing (being pricked forward by) I know not what needle of
virtue to fly more higher, and to set forth some certain work of more weight
and labor. So that after an infinite number of diverse and sundry things meet
and necessary. The Author does intraduct the City of GOD in our language.
There was none to my judgment more worthy for a Christian weal, than this
chief or head work of Saint Augustine in his City of God, wherein he has
reared such a furious combat or fight against the Ethnickes, that with their
own armors he has vanquished and overcome them. In consideration thereof, I
have boldened my self to lay this fardell on my weak shoulders, hoping by the
grace of God to set it forth and bring it to light in our vulgar tongue, with
such a facility that it shall serve for a buckeler, against the incursions of
an infinite number of sects, that are spread this day throughout the world.
Now therefore I leave thee to judge how many Authors I have turned over,
Greeks and Latins for to bring this my enterprise to his desired effect, y^
reading of which Authors has not ben staked nor let. For besides the great
comfort that I have had in the^, for to open the meaning of my Author (which of
it self is very dark and obscure) I have drawn out an other fruit and
particular profit, for of all their best sentences I have founded (this Rule of
the world) which now I do present to thee (gentle and loving Reader) assuring
thee (to ye end I will not defraud none of his glory) that I have left no
Author sacred or profane, Greek, Latin, or in our vulgar tongue, but that I
have bereft him of a leg or a wing, for the more sou^der decking and furniture
of my work. In such sort that if thou will impose this work a rapsodie,
collation or gathering together of diverse authorities, thou shall do it no
wrong. The which I have enterprised so much the more boulder than such matters
(which are almost anotamies and foreshewings of vices.) It should the rather
treat by grave sentences and examples of our Magistrates, than by any other
style. As touching the reast I am assured that certain dainty or delicate
worldlings, will avouch, that there is in this work, I know not what worthy
to be read, but that among these sweet Roses, there are many other things,
sour, severe and bitter: but such gald horses that fear to be touched, and
that are so tickelish in their affections, that they would feign have liberty
for their wickedness, and that defense were made that none should correct or
admonish them of their ill doings. I beseech them before passing further that
they will behold with what authority and rigor the ancient Fathers, as S.
Ambrose, Saint Jerome, Saint John, Chrisostom, Saint Augustine, Origin,
Tertulian, Eusebius and Lactantius, have reproved the vices that reigned in
their time, and with what boldness S. Bernarde writ to Pope Eugenius, and how
he withstoode the wicked Prelates in the sermon which he made at the Synod of
Pastors, and in the.xxxi^j. sermon of Canticles, when as he showed them their
vices, co^playning of their pompes, and superfluous deliciousness, and in the
mean time the poor sheep and flock of Jesus Christ remained desert. What
thorns were these if they had heard the malediction of S. Peter upon Ananias
and Saphira, the which tempting the holy ghost the spirit of God, died
suddenly for fear. Let them remember how Saint Paul spoke unto the hie
Priest calling him filthye Sepulcher. Saint John unto the Publicans and
sinners, calling them a generation of Vipers. Let them consider how
Epimenideus the Greek spoke to the Candians, calling them cruel and
abominable beasts, brainelesse liers. Let them also consider with what sharp
and poynted words Helias and Esaie did reprove the Babilonians, though they
were two sage and grave Prophets.

But what just occasion should the holy Fathers have had, ancient
Philosophers, Prophets and Apostles, if they had had such a world as ours,
which is so depraved and broken in all kind of vices and abominations, that
it seems to be a place that has received all the filthiness and purgings of
all other worlds and ages. But as for me I will not make the office of censur
or reformer of vices, knowing my self to be a man as others, although that
sometimes I call them by their name: but with such modesty, that I only rebuke
the vices and not the persons. And I do not only discover the abuse of the
world, to ye end yt the simple and ignorant should beware, but incontinently I
show the use and remedy for things. And by this means, those that cannot
support liberty, and compass of writing. Let them hereafter learn so well to
reform them selves, and lead the estate of their life that they be not a
jesting stock to others, and to themselves for ever a reproach, knowing that
the time is come, that being in this world, as in a field of liberty, we can
not so well cloak and dissemble our vices, but the smoke and smell thereof will
break out. Receive therefore (loving Reader) this present treatise, the which
I thought good to set forth in two languages, Latin and French, for to make
thee understand that I will not lead the rest of my life, but that it shall
bring forth some public profit.

Farevvell.
The rule of the World, wherein is contained an ample discourse of the miseries
of man, likewise of many vices that rai^gne at this day in all the estates of
the world.
Many Ancient Philosophers, Greeks, Latins, and Heathen, after that they
had diligently discerned all sort of beasts, and curiously sought out their
manner of living, and conferred their condition and nature with ours, have
written, that among all those that have breath, that go and crepe upon ye
earth, there is none more miserable than man. Some more rigorous censurs of the
works of nature, have begone to blaspheme against her calling her cruel
stepmother, in the stead of gracious mother. Others have bewailed their long
days, their life, the human calamities, and have followed their steps with
tears, persuading with them selves (as an Heraclite) that no other thing than
a very rule of misery, worthy of continual plaintes and perpetual
compassion. Other by an unmeasurable laughter (like a Democrite) have pursued
the vices that reign on the earth: Who, if he were alive at this present, and
that he saw the disorder and confusion, that is in our christian weal, should
have just occasion to double his laughter, and to mock with open throat. There
has been an other kind, but naturally more strange: which not contenting
themselves to murmr against nature, or to complain of her effects, but with
a particular hatred, have cleaued to man their like, thinking it a booty or
gain, against the which she would loose all the arrows of her wrath and
maledictio^. Among the which, Timon a Philosopher of Athens, has been the most
effectioned Patriarch of his sect, the which declared himself open and chief
enemy to men, and witnessed the same in the presence of all, and also
confirmed it by effect: for he would not be conversant or communicate with
men, but remained al his life alone in a wilderness with the beasts, far from
neighbors, for fear to be seen or visited of any, and being in this
solicitude, would speak to no man, saving sometimes to a valiant Captain of
Athens named Alcybiades, and yet he spoke not to him for any good will he did
bear him, but for that he did foresee that he should be a scourge and
tormenter of me^: and specially because that his neighbors the Athenians had
much harm to suffer by him. And not suffised to have me^ only in horror and
detestation, and to fly their company, as the company of a fierce or cruel
beast, but in forsaking them, he sought their ruin, and invented all the means
he could to deface human kind. In consideration whereof, he caused many
Gibets to be reared in his garden, to the end that ye dispaired, and those that
are weary of their lives, should come thither to hang them selves: So yt on a
certain time when he thought to amplify and to enlarge his place, he was
constrained for to pull down those Gibets, for the easier framing and
furniture of his work. And without great deliberation he went to Athens,
whereas dispitefully he did congregate the people like a Heraulde that would
declare some new thing, and when they understood the barbarous, a strange
voice of this fearful and vglye monster, and knowing of a long time his humor,
they ran suddenly for to hear him, as though it had been some sodeine
miracle: then he cried out saying: Citizens of Athens if any of you have any
devotion to go hang him self, let him make have to come quicklye, for I will
cut down my Gibets, for certain necessity that I have: so that having used
this charity toward them, he returned to his place without speaking of any
other thing, whereas he lived many years, without changing his opinion, and
ceased not to philosophy the rest of his life upon the misery of man, till
such time as the pangues of death began to oppress him, then detesting our
humanity, even until the last gasp, ordained expressiuely, that his body
should not be buried in the earth, which is the common eliment and burial for
all, for fear that men should see his bones and ashes, but he straightly
commanded that he might be buried upon the sea bank, to the end that the
furor of the waves might let the creatures to come near: and then he willed
that this Epitaphe recited by Plutarch, should be graued on his Tomb.

After my miserable life
I am buried under this ground:
To know my name make no strife
O Reader, whom God confound.
Behold how this poor Philosopher, after that he had long plunged himself in
the contemplation of human miseries, had will never to have been borne, or
else to have been transformed into the shape of some brute beast, for the great
disdain he had in men's vices.

Leave we this Philosopher Thimon, making his complaints, and let us harken a
little to this great Emperor of Rome Marcus Aurelius, no less cunning in
Philosophy, than in governing of the Empire: Who considering profoundlye, the
frailty and misery in the which our poor life is continually besieged,
said: The battle of this world is so perilous, the issue so terrible and
fearful, that I am assured if an ancient man should come forth of his grave,
and make a faith full discourse and show of his life, from the hour of his
birth until the hour of his death, and that the body should show all the
dolours and griefs that it has suffered, and the heart discover all the
assaults of fortune, men would be amassed of the body which has so much
sustained, and of the heart that has so languished, the which I have proved in
my self, and will liberally confess it, though it be to my infamy, but it
may be profitable to others in time to come. In fiftye years that I have
lived, I thought to approve all the vices of this life, for to see if man's
malice might be satisfied in any thing: And after that I had all seen, I
found that ye more I eat, the more I did hunger, the more I did drink, ye
more I thirsted: the more I slept, the more I would sleep: the more I rested,
the more I break: the more I had, the more I did covet: ye more I sought, the
less I found: and finallye, I never had thing in my possession, but that
therein I found my self let, and incontinentlye after, I have wished for
another. The which things Saint John Chrysostom having in admiration, after
that he had bewailed by great compassion the calamities of men, and the
darkness wherein they were wrapped, cries out saying: I desire to have an
eye so clear, that with the same I might see all men, and such a voice, that
it might be heard in all the corners of the earth, that all human creatures
might hear, to the end, to declare with the Prophet David this cry: Children
of men, how long shall your hearts be hardened? And not without a cause, for
he that would consider with a sound judgment, the estate of the world, such
as it is at this present, so many disceytes, frauds, blasphemies, adulteries,
rapines, wars, effusion of blood, violences, ambition, covetousness, haired,
rancor, and vengeance, with the which the earth is even drunken. He may well
say that we approach nere to the season, of the which speaks the Prophet
Esaias with so great abomination, in the ninth Chapter, wherein he says, your
iniquities have made a deuisio^ between you and your God, your sins have hid
his face from you, to the end that he hear you not: for your hands are full
of blood, your fingers with iniquity, your lips have spoken lies, and your
tongue blasphemy. No man does call upon justice, there is not one that
judges according to right, they conceive in their minds Fellonie, and bring
forth iniquity. They are enclosed with the edges of adders, and have weaued
spiders threads, they that eat of their eggs shall die, and if ye break them,
there shall come forth a Basiliske, their feet run to do evil, and they
make haste to shed innocent blood, their thoughts are wicked thoughts. Truth
is thrown in the streets, and equity can not enter in, our iniquities Are
multiplied, and our sins bear witness against us. Saint Bernard in a
certain lamentation that he makes upon the misery of our life, does teach
man to know his infirmity, without drawing him from himself, to this end,
that by the contemplation of himself, he be the sooner moved to detest his
vile life, when that he says: O man blind and naked, that art made of
human flesh, and of a reasonable soul, remember thy miserable estate and
condition, wherefore go thou out of thy own paths, and do muse in
externe things, and sluggest in the vanities of this world: and do plunge
in the wicked delicateness thereof? Do thou not consider that the nerer thou
drawest thereto, the farther thou art from God, the more thou think to gain
outwardly, the more thou losest inwardlye of that which is precious, the more
curious thou art in temporal things, the more bigger thou art in spiritual
things? Thou ordaynest so well al things, and despisest thy self, there is no
wild beast but thou tamest, and thou thy self art without bit and bridle:
thou art waking in every place, but in thine own affairs thou art a sleep: ye
desire of earthlye things boil in thy heart, and in the mean time heavenly
things are clean defaced from thee, the nerer thou drawest to death, the
farther art thou from thy salvation, thou take great pain to deck and
nourishe this body, which is nothing but a very vessel of filth, and a
sepulcher for worms, and thou leauest thy poor soul which is the image of
God, famished and void. These are the complaints that this holy man made, in
his desert against the ingratitude of this world: All the which things by us
being brought in, as well of him as of others, tend to no other end, but to
provoke man to the contemplation of himself, and to show him how vile and
abject he is, to the end that he should consider every minute in the day,
that he is in the hand of God, as the chafe, and as the earthen vessel is in
the hand of the potter, the which he may make, unmake, form, break, crase,
and repair, as to him seems best, without doing it any wrong or injury.
For, what is man else but a similitude or statute in this world, which is a
very shop of the works of God, who with one pushe will fall, and
notwithstanding in what misery so ever he be wrapped in, yet he knows not
himself, neither yet will bow under the yoke of God.

(Now therefore) having well considered the universal state of man, it is
requisite to make a most ample discourse of this matter, and to contemplate
man more near, to the end that he learn to humble himself under the hand
of his God. And therefore, that among all the Heathen, Pliny, as me seems,
has most worthily philosophied of our nature: We will bring him for witness,
to ye end that Christians to their great confusion and infamy may receive
instruction of a Painim, which lived without the knowledge of God, without law,
without knowledge of the heavenly and Evangelical light. Let us consider a
little (says he) how it behooves man to cover his body, at the dispensation
of beasts, who being favorable of their natural liberty, bring even from the
bellye of their dams, some feathers, others hear, skin, skayles, and others
wool. The like also in trees which are provided with bark, for to serve the^
against the cold, and against the extreme heat. And therefore for the better
knowledge in what contemnation nature has man, she has brought him forth
alone, naked upon the earth disdainefully, as a fruit out of time or season,
and at the first hour of his death has assigned him tears for his heritage,
which are as forerunners and messengers of his calamities to come. Behold here
the chief and head of the work of nature, and for who^ all other things are
created, which is so weak of himself, that if he be left without the help
and succor of others, he should be devoured of wild beasts, behold when
that he comes out of his mothers womb, how that he must be wrapped,
swaddeled, and kept warm: his lyms and joints stretched out, he is borne in
pride, and has his beginning in sin: but at what time can he stand? when
has he the use of speech? when can he go, to how many diseases is he
subject? The other beasts can of nature help themselves, but man knows
nothing if he be not taught, but of his own proper nature wepeth. Man only
among the beasts is subject to pain, passion, pleasure, ambition, avarice, an
unmeasurable appetite to live, borne only to superstition, only in worldly
cares, that follow him: to be short, he is subject to wrath and enimitie. The
beasts live in peace and amity with those of their kind, but man alone is
enemy to man. And yet for the more favoring and gratifiyng of beasts, nature
has provided them caves and holes, to keep them from the rage of the tempests,
thunders and lightnings, as for ye great ones, they have dens and caves in
the ground: and the little ones, as Whelks, Snayles, Torterels, and such like,
nature has so provided, that they bear with the^ their houses easily on their
backs.

Not only the seeds and corn, but that she has covered with ears, the
plants with skin, nuttes with shell, peele and rind, and al for the
conservation of their kinds. But man has nothing, unless he seek it with
labor, and with the sweat of his brows. Furthermore if we do confer the health
and valor of beasts, with ours, we shall find that they have a great
advantage over us, for nature has endued us with a complectio^ so wavering
and unsteadfast, and subject to so many kinds of sicknesses and diseases, that
seldom we are in perfect health: besides this, she has charged man with such
an insatiable appetite, that he cease not continuallye to seek for new and
strange kind of meats, and having found to his appetite, with great pain
he can abstain himself, but that he will take more than needful: after the
which comes Surfets, Rheumes, Cancars, and other infinite kinds of
sickenesses. But as touching beasts, they content themselves with that, that
nature has prepared, without changing or forcing their nature, for to please
their appetite. Moreover nature has given them a complexion so well ruled and
governed, that they never take more tha^ is requisite for their nourishment,
neither in drink, nor in meat. But as for man, all the fruits of ye earth,
those of the trees, the fishes of the sea, and the Fowls of the air, do not
suffice him, but in all points turning his nature, he does disguise puff up,
and change the substance into excess, and the nature into art, to the end
that by such insatiableness, nature be angered, and almost forced to take more
than is needful: so then, when that nature is ouercharged, and that the
stomach is well filled: all the brains are troubled in such sort, that there
is neither of them that can execute their office. And I am ashamed that I must
needs tell it, that the unmeasurable delicateness that reigns among
Christians this day, is the cause that there are many, that are not ashamed to
give their bodies, and their members to al kind of vice and villainy, and to
all kinds of wickedness, how execrable so ever they be, even in committing
many fornications, theftes, fellonies. And I do marvel that the bellies of
many insatiable gluttons do not rot and bruste out by their great excess,
and in the mean time the poor Lazarus stands at the gate ready to die for
hunger, and can not have so much as the crommes that fall from their table.

And therefore such Godbellies or Bellygods, are called by the Prophets, fat
Calves, who by good reason may be compared to brute beasts: for their soul
which is the chiefest part they have (being in the body so perfumed with meats
and drinks) is captive as in a dark prison or dungeon, where as it is almost
stifled and smuthered, and the wits which are the instruments, with the which
she ought to be served, are buried therein as within the bowels of a beast: and
against such gluttons as make their belly their God, the Prophet Esaias cries
out saying, Woe be to you that rise early to follow drunkenness, and to sit
drinking till the Evening, to the end that the wine heat you: The which vice
at this present day is so familiar among men, that there is not almost, neither
Nation or province, but that is infected, and that glories in their great
drinking. The Tartarians, the Persians, and the Greeks have celebrated
dru^kennesse among their chiefest triumphs, and constrained them that were at
their bankets to drink or to go their ways. The Macedonians were instructed
of their Emperor Alexander to drink without measure. Drunke^nesse of
Alexander. Pliny.
But above all Nations, Italy has got the price: in the which (as Pliny does
write) drunkenness in his time did so reign, that they did not only drink
themselves out of al measure, but also they constrained their Mares and Horses
to do the like. Paulus Diacrus in his History of Lumbardes, does rehearse a
thing almost monstrous, of the vice of drunke^nesse, of four old me^ that made
a banquet, in the which they drunk the years of one another, after the manner
as follows: they ordained to drink two to two, and counted their age of
years that they had, and he that drunk to his companion, should drink so
many times as he had lived years, and the youngest of these four, was.lviij.
years old: the second, sixtye three: the third, lxxxvij. and the fourth,
lxxxxij. So that it was not known what they did eat at this banquet either
more or less, but we know that he that drunk least, did drink lviij. tasters
of wine, and the others so many as they had lived years, in such sort that
one of them did drink.lxxxxij. times. It is not therefore without a cause that
this great Philosopher Plato knowing the harm that wine brings to man,
said, that partly the Gods had sent wine for the punishment of man, and to
take vengeance of their sins, causing them when that they are drunk, to kill
and murder one another, the which considered of Cyneas Ambassador of King
Pyrrhus, on a time when that he arrived in Egypt, and that he had seen the
excess height of the vineyards in that country, did say that by good right
that mother was hanged so high, seeing she brought forth so dangerous a child
as the wine. For this cause Androcides did admonish that great Monarch
Alexander, that wine was the blood of the earth: and therefore he should take
heed how to receive it. The which not being well observed by him, in his
intemperancie killed Clytus, burned the City of Percepolis, and committed
many other foul and detestable crimes. It is not therefore in this our age
that these wicked vices of gluttonye and drunkenness have made their last
end upon the earth, but it seems that they have now made almost their
coming in with man. The transgression of our first parents Adam and Eua was
the cause that the gate of Paradise was shut against us.

Esau sold his birth right. The great Prophet S. John Baptist was cruellye
slain and murdered after that the cruel tyrant King Herod had banke^ed. The
wicked rich man was damned, for it is expressiuely said in the Text, that he
fared deliciously, and therefore was he buried in hell. Noe being overcome with
wine slept with his privy parts uncovered, and was mocked of his children.
Loath being overcome with wine, did deflowre his own daughters.

Now therefore we see how much more ^auor nature has showed unto beasts, than
unto us, in that they do so moderate their appetites, that they take no more
than is necessary for the preservation of their health, in such sort that they
are not vexed with an infinite number of diseases as we are. And if it happen
that they are afflicted with any harms, nature has instructed them proper
remedies without having refuge to Physic or Phisicions, which under the
color of receive, change R. into D. and make deceive, so that sometimes we buy
full dear the travel of them which many times cause our death, for the most
part of their laxatiue medicines, are no other than very hammers to beat down
men. But if it happen that the beasts or fowls are sick, nature does show
them remedies. As the wood Doves, Aristo. Pliny.
Iayes, Merlings, and Partriches, the which purge their superfluities with Bay
leaves. The Pigeons, Turtels, and Hens, with the herb Helxine. The Torterels
will heal their biting with Cegue. The Dogs and Cats when their bellies are too
full, will purge them in eating dewed herbs or grass. When the Dear are
hurt, they have recourse to Dictamum. When the Wesell does pretend to fight
against the Rattes, she prepares and is furnished with Rewe called Herbegrace,
to the end to be the more stronger and better disposed. The wild Boares do
medicine themselves with Cedria. The Bears with Mandragoras. Aristo.
The Egles knowing that they are bound, and that they make their eggs with
great difficulty, they seek a stone named Aetites, otherwise called stone
Aquilin, the which they bring to their nestes to loose themselves, and to make
them lay more easy. The which at this day is used among many Dames of Italy
for to shorte^ their trauelings. Also there are certain beasts that serve us
for medicines, Loriot. Arist. 22. ca^ the. 9. book, tr^ting of beasts.
as the Lorriot named by Aristotell, Corios, of who^ it is spoken, that if a
man having the Iaunders does behold him, the Bird dies, and the man receives
health. When the Swallows perceive that the eyes of their young ones are
endomaged by smoke proceeding from Chimneyes, where as they make their nestes,
they do heal them with Celendine.

The Adders and other Serpents in the Spring time, to the end to cast their
skin more easy, and perceiving their eye sight to fail them, eat Fenell to
solage their infirmity. The Pelican does let himself blood, and draws the
very blood from his body, for to heal his young ones being hurt with serpents.
Polidorus of the in^ention of things.
The Storkes (as all naturals confess) has taught Potecaries the use of
Glisters.

Plutarch almost ravished in admiration with the favors that nature has
bestowed upon beasts, more than on men, durst assure that the brute beasts
know the three kinds of Physic. For after that he has proved that they
know the virtue and property of many herbs, as I have before showed, adds
more that they observe y^ second part, that we call Diet: for when they feel
themselves too full, they moderate their pasture, and make abstinence: as the
Lions and Wolfes do abstain themselves, and remain couched till they have
digested all. And as for the third part, which is Chirurgerie, some hold
opinion that Eliphants do know it, and understand it, for they will pull out the
darts and arrows of those that are stricken without any danger. The which
being liuelye considered by an ancient Greek Philosopher named Hirophilus,
did complain on the miserable condition of man, who although he were elected
above all other creatures, yet he is in many things disciple to beasts.
Industry of Svvallovves.
This is true says he, the Swallows taught him to build and edify. But how
is their manner when they would coue? First they put stiff and strong sticks
to make the foundation of their nestes, and then the safte ones above, then
when that they can get no dirt, ye which they use instead of mortar in their
buildings, they fly to some water or River, and there bath themselves till
that they be wette, then they take dust, which they temper with the water, and
then daube the sticks, and so make their nestes round compass and even, not
squared, knowing it better for to defend their young ones from the lurkings of
beasts. But what is the slight or cunning in little beasts? is it not a
wonderful thing of nature, even the working of Spinners or Spiders, unto whom,
women and maidens are disciples, and have learned of them how to spinne, and to
Fishers to make their nets, but they have a much better grace, and more greater
advantage in their industries, for there is no knots in their workings, nor
wast, for all proceeds from their little bodies, and they part their labor
gentlye: But women and maids, they spinne and make threads for linen and also
woollen cloth, and the husband seeks his and their living otherwise, and is
watching and following the beasts for to catch them and entrap them in his
nets. But the Spider although his body be little greater than a Pease,
notwithstanding, he has such industry and liuelynesse, that sometime he
takes great flies and little Lezardes in his nets, and also observes so well
the time to chase, that he seems to be an Astrologian. He is contrary to us
that tarry for fair weather, but he chaseth when the time is dark and cloudie,
which is unto us a foreshewing of rain, Aristo. Pliny.
as Aristotle writes in his history of beasts. But who maruelleth not at the
miraculous adventure of a Crow, Aelian of the crovv.
the which Plutarch writes to have seen in Asia, oppressed with thirst, and
seeking for water, did perceive a bucket in a Well, the which he filled with
stones to make the water to rise up to the brimme, that he might come by it.

In like case a dog being in a ship, being oppressed with thirst, Plutarch.
in the absence of the Mariners did put stones in a pot wherein was oil, for
to come by it more easelye. But who had taught this beast this secret
philosophy, that the lightest things will rise up when the weightiest things
are under? If we will consider and weigh the wisdom and prudencie of humaines,
we shall find that little beasts that we dailye tread under our feet, in
such matters, do surpass men, and it seems that each of them has some
natural virtue in their affections, in wisdom, strength, cowardice,
clemency, rigor, discipline and erudition, for they know one another, they
discern among them selves, they provide for things necessary, fly evil, and
eschew danger, they do many times deceive men, and hourdeth up that they live
by, the which being attentively considered by many ancient Philosophers, have
not been ashamed to dispute, and to stand in doubt whether brute beasts be
partakers of reason.

Leave we Physic, Diet, Surgery, and other Melancholic disciplines, by
the which we have proved, that beasts have knowledge, also in some points
they have instructed men. Music in beasts.
And let us seek things more pleasant, as is Music, for to satisfy those
which will not read the works of others, if that there be not somewhat that
does flatter their senses, and revive their spirits, to the noise of vanity.
But what man is there, be he never so blockish or dull spirited, that does not
marvel, and that is not ravished with an unspeakable delectation, hearing ye
melody that proceeds from the Nightingale, and ^owe such a shrill and
harmonicall voice may issue out of so little a trunk? Furthermore he does
persevere so obstinately in his song, that his life shall sooner fail than his
voice, by such sort that it seems that he has been instructed of some
master Musition to sing in music: P. Belan in his History of Birds.
for he counterfeiteth now the Mean, incontinent the Base, then the Treble,
and then the Countertenor, and after being weary with tuning, he counterfeiteth
his voice and notes, and seems but another bird that sings a plain song,
then suddenly he rowleth it out with such an infinite of melodious passages,
that it rauisheth the spirits even to the heavens, not only of men, but also
of other small birds, the which he charmeth and staieth by his voice, and
causes them by his sweet voice to harken to him, and to assaye to
counterfeite him, and to get part of his melody. And furthermore, the
Nightingale will enstruct his young ones, provoking them to the like harmony,
teaching them to observe the like tunes, ^o conduct them with the like breath,
some ^n length, other short, then to courbe the notes whole, suddenly to
change them (...) faintings, to transform his voice in (...) many sorts,
that there is no humai^^ creature that can counterfeite him, ^^though
Aristophanes a Greek Autho^ in his Comedy of the songs of birds, ha^^
employed all the might of his spirit, th^^king to imitate him in certain
pointe^ the which being marvelled at by Dem^critus, after that he had been many
ye^res auditor to the Nightingale, and to^ther birds, confesses publicly
that (...) Swannes and the Nightingale ha^ learned Music to men, and that all
(...) passages and tunes in Music, are b^^ certain notes that men have taken
from birds. For this cause it is that the wy^^ Solomon knowing how much
beasts (...) pass us in many things, has sent us (...) their schools and
universities, when that (...) says in his Proverbs: Prouer. 13.
There are fou^ little things in the earth, notwithsta^din^ they are wiser tha^
ye wise. The Ant wh^^^ is a little kind, and yet provides food (...) Summer
against Winter. The Cunni^^ which is a kind not great, make the^^ ^ouses in
the earth. The Grasshoppers which have no king, and notwithstanding they go by
bands. The Spider or Fly, whom you may take with your hands, and yet
remains in Kings places. It is a thing almost incredible in these little
Antes, Arist. lib. 2. cap. 30. and Pliny.
to carry so weighty a burden, with such an extreme diligence, and to
observe such an order among them, to part a corn in the midst, for to
carry it more easily into their caves, and if the corn be wet with the rain,
then they dry it on a sunnie day in the sun. But with what industry do
they make their little holes, of the which the coming in is not straight, for
fear that other beasts come not in, but is crooked with many turnings, and
many dark paths, which render into three places: the one, whereas they keep
their Parliament, and assemble in counsel, the other, whereas they put their
provision for all the year, and the third (as writes Plutarch) is ye place
where as they bury the dead, for it is certain, as the learned have written,
that they keep ye right use of Funerals. Therefore this Philosophy of King
Salomo^ is not unprofitable. By the which, vnd^^ the similitude and show of
these little be^^stes, he would have us to fly ydleness^ the mother and
nourisher of all other v^ces. The which has always been obserue^ in the
Primative Church: Where it wa^ ordained, that every one should live (...)
their own labor, for fear the fowls (...) the air, and beasts should
consume vn^^^ profitably the goods of ye earth. The which also the ancient
Romans kept straightlye, as writes Cicero in his book (...) Laws, wherein
he affirms, yt in time^ past, no Roman durst go by the streets if that he
bare not a show whereon he d^^ live, to the end that it might be known that
he lived of his own labor, and not b^ the sweat of others. In consideration
thereof the Consul did carry a Battle a^^ before him: the Priests a hat, in ye
manner of a coyfe: the Tribunes a Mace: the Cu^^lers a sword: the Taylers a
pair (...) sheeres: the Smithes a hammer: the O^rators a book, not permitting
that thos^ that were masters of sciences should b^ scholars of vices. In such
sort that Marcus Aurelius in making mention of the ancient diligence of the
Romans, A marvelous diligence of the Romans.
writes that they did also employ and with such a zeal their labors and
travails, that in Rome could not be found an idle person, to carry a letter
ij. or.iij. days journey. The which may make us blushe for shame, that
profess Christ, for if all the vagabondes and idle persons were chased and
driven out of towns and Cities, we should not have so many as we now have. If
we our selves would exactly consider all the things that God has created, we
shall find that man only rests in idleness. For so much more as things are
created more excellent and perfect, so has GOD given them more greater
travail. Behold the Sun, which moves continually: and how that the Moon
is never stayde. The Sky and the Planets are ever moving: the fire can not be
without making some work. The Clouds never cease removing, the waters,
floudes and fountains travel continuallye, the earth is never in rest, she
brings forth naturally, herbs, plant^ and other fruits, for to nourishe as
well men as beasts. Therefore if we will consider all things, we shall find that
nature never cease traueling. Therefore to conclude, there is nothing more
pestilent in a common weal, than idleness, for she always inuenteth some
mischief for the corruption of our humanity, in such sor^ that we may esteem
these idle person^ more miserable than brute beasts: of the which, some of them
as the Oxen, give their hydes to make shoes, their flesh to eat, and their
strength to labor the ground and the innocent sheep gives his fleec^ to make
cloth, his flesh for to nourish us* his skin profitable for to make many
things, but man is idle, and profits nothing, saving only to offend God,
slander the innocent, and eat the bread of others labor. We may then know
by th^se things before written, what liberality nature has used toward
beasts who^ she has so much favored, yt men are constrained to follow their
manners, and conditions and offices, so well ruled and ordained. But who is that
murderer that is so much enemy of nature, or so gredy of humain blood, that
will not moderate his ardent desire (in stealing or killing) when that he
considers that there is no beast how brutish soever he be, that will kill or
murder any of his kind? Where is that child so ungrateful toward his
Parents, but that may be moved with pity, when that he sees that the young
Storkes nourish their parents in their age, and minister unto them their
necessities, considering that good that they have received of them in their
youth, and that they are the Authors of their being? And yet Aelian adds
things more stranger to read, but much more harder to believe: that the young
ones bear such a zealous love toward their old parents, that if so be that
they have no food ready for to sustain them with, they will vomit that
which they have eaten the day before, to give unto them, for fear they
should die, and sustain them therewith, till that they have sought food. But
where is that father or mother so cruel, that dare cast of their fruit, or
entreat them cruelly, considering that ye Dolphin is such a zealous protector
of her young ones, that if it chance any of them to be taken of fishermen, they
will not forsake them, but follows the^ so extremely, that they will let
themselves ye rather to be taken, than to forsake their fruit: which is not
only peculiar in the Dolphin, but also in another fish named Glaucus, which
are about Marcelis, the which although she be not so sociable and privy to man
as the other, yet she has her young ones in such favor, yt when she sees men
or any other to effray the^, she swalloweth them down into her belly alive, and
when she perceyueth y^ danger to be past, she does vomit the^ again whole and
sound in ye water, without doing the^ any harm, ye which is a thing almost
incredible y^ this fish should so love her young ones y^ she had rather suffer
harm, tha^ that they should be hurt. Who is it therefore that would not
patiently endure poverty, if she chance or happen to come, if he will
co^template ye nature of the fish called Polypus, which is a dry kind,
feeling her self oppressed with hunger, and seeing that nourishment fails, will
eat ye brawn of her arms, being assured The Polipus will eat hirself if she
want fode.
yt they will grow again. What man is he so fearful, that will not be comforted
when he sees ye pangs of death, although it be terrible, if he diligently
consider how the Swannes sing, when they feel the last end, although they
have no hope of another life to come. There is no father so unnatural to his
child, that he will defraude him of his right enheritance to advantage a
stranger, if he take regard to the order that the Swallowe keeps in the
nourishing of her young ones, who as writes Aelian in his Greek History,
Aelian.
treating of beasts, observes and keeps a just order in the distribution of
their food, and for that she cannot bring all at a time, she goes oftentimes
to seek food, and violateth in no point the right of the first borne, for he
that is first borne, is the first served, the second borne, is second served,
and so following in order, without defrauding any of them of their right. Which
is the occasion that an Indian Philosoper named Diphileus, after that he had
weighed uprightly the manner and facion of this little foul, in giving meat to
her young ones, cries out saying: yt this great work, maistres dame nature had
graued certain laws and orders in beasts, which ought to be examples to
men, how to conduct the estate of their life. In like manner, there is no man,
but that may receive some doctrine of the prudencie of the Cuckowe, Prudency
of the Cuckoo.
the which is reputed wise among all others (although that we do abuse and hate
them) who by a certain natural prudencie that they have, know their
infirmity, that by their excessive cold nature they can not coue their eggs,
neither yet they make them any nest, but they have the industry to epsy where
other Birds make their nestes, and there layth her eggs, and leaves them
secretlye (knowing) for that they be like others, they shall be hatched and
brought up: the which is a very Myrror or glass, says Fulgentius, for
fathers being men of small faculties, and have many children, that they
should provide for them masters, to this end, that for default not to have
been maintained in their youth, be feign to beg and to labor in their age,
when as they should rest. Moreover, what servant is he, The excellency and
nobleness of the horse.
be he never so sturdie or stout, that is not moved, considering the
gentillitie and nobleness of the horse, whose heart is so highly set, that for
to die he will not leave his master in danger, but has such fierceness,
which prodigally nature has given him, by the which we may see him like a
thunder break the prease of the men of war, murder and kill those that let
him in his way: and finally never to cease traveling, till the victory be
had. And if men may take example in the fidelity of a horse, yet that is
nothing in regard to that which we daily see in our dogs (who knowing their
masters) will flatter them, cherish and be ielous of the^, following them
through the world, knowing above all others him that nourishes them, and they
are such faithful kepers of their masters goods, that for to die they will
not let it be stolen. In confirmation whereof I will bring forth an example
recited by Plutarch, and many other Greek and Latin Authors worthy of
credence, which shall be sufficient to give fear to murderers, bloudshedders,
and others which make such good cheap of human blood: whose doings, our
Lord God does so abhor, that he permits brute beasts to execute his
justice, as it is most evidently manifested by this History following.

The Elders that have written of the nature of beasts, make mention of a King
named Pyrrhus, the which marching on a day with his army, A story vvorthie
of memory, of a dog.
came by a dog which stood by his masters dead body in a hie way, and
after that he had beheld a while this pitiful spectacle, he was advertised by
certain country men, that that was the third day, that this poor beast had
kept the dead body, without any meat. For the which occasion, the King
commanded the dead body to be buried, and that the dog for his faythfulnesse
should be nourished and entertained in his Court, and certain days after, he
made inquisition of the murder, but he could know nothing thereof. It chanced
not long after, that his men of war made their mus^er before him, that he
might see their order. The dog of whom was made mention, was always with the
King, and remained very sad and heavy, till those passed by that had stain
his master: then with a marvelous fury he ran against them, and would have
bitten them, howling most pitifully, turning him to King Pyrrhus, and beholding
him most attentiuelye, seeming as though he would have asked justice: which
was the occasion that the King and all the assistants did suspect the murder
to be committed by those, in such sort that by these conjectures, they were
examined, convinced, and punished according to their deserts. A thing
miraculous, wherein God does show himself a just and righteous Judge in his
judgments, and that he has murderers in so great detestation that shed
human blood, that he permits brute beasts to accuse them and show them
their vices. I might here bring an infinite number of examples as well
Ecclesiastical as profane, by the which it is evidently showed, that in the
contemplation of beasts, there may be found an harmonious Philosophy, as
well moral as natural. For considering their manners and actions, so well
ordained according to the use of nature, their justice, temperature, fortitude
and behavior, in the administration of their small public weals, their
continency to the works of nature, with certain other parts of virtue that
they exercise: by the diligent consideration of which, man may enter into his
own conscience and advise, as being overcome of those in many things, and
considering his misery and pitiful Metamorphose, and how he does degenerate
from his excellency and dignity, he is moved to abhor his life, finding
himself inferior to those whom he ought to excel, as much as he passes the^
in honor and dignity. For this cause our Savior Christ calls the Scribes
and Phariseys, in Saint Mathewe, the children of wrath. And that Esaye
reproving ye children of Israel of their ingratitude toward God, shows
them by example, that the Ox and the Ass know their masters Crib, but Israel
knows not his Lord God. Also we are admonished by the history of the herd
of Swine (which by the permission of God were vexed of the Devil) that those
that consume their life in deliciousness, Against the Epicurians.
as a great many Belligods that reign this day in the world, and lead a
corrupt life, shall one day be made a pray for Devils. For seeing they will not
be the temple and house of God, and habitation of the holy ghost, they must
needs be the mansion of Devils. Such Hogs are those that make their
Paradise in this world, and that dissemble their vices, the which they see
with their eyes, and touch with their fingers, for fear that they have to
leese the earthly richesse, their offices, benefices, prebendaries and
dignities, for fear to be deprived from their carnal lusts. Such Swine are
flatterers, that all the time of their lives do no other thing but keep
Princes in their error, and that have for the first article of their faith,
that there is no God but their bellye, for all their religion is converted to
carnal liberty. As touching the law of Jesus Christ, it is too thornishe,
they will none of it, they will not drink of his cup, the drink seems to
them too bitter: they must have a Jesus Christ arraied in velvet, more sweet,
more soft, more amiable, and more delicate. They can not away with the
sharpness of S. John Baptist, they seek for the Courts of Kings, and the
pompes of the world, and they have no other pleasures in this world, but to
think how they may live easily. They may well for a while cloak and disguise
their iniquity, but one day it shall be discovered, before the face and throne
of God, Psalm. 139.
as David does well understand, when he says, whither shall I go then from
thy spirit, or whither shall I go the^ from thy presence, if I climb up to
heaven, thou art there, if I go down to hell, thou art there also, if I take
the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, even
there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say
peradventure the darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be turned to
day, yea the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear
as the day, he that made the Ear, shall not he hear? he that made the eye,
shall not he see and consider? Therefore to conclude, it is great horror and
abomination, that man which is but a miserable worm of the earth, that may
scant creep, without the hope of eternal life, and is the most miserable of
all creatures, how that he dare repugne against the order of nature, and his
own office, in which al other creatures remain, and also how he dare rise
against God, which in a moment may consume him. But who is it that does not
marvel at the forgetfulness of man, that alone dare resist the Lord God, unto
whom all other creatures, heaven, earth, sea, stars, planets, all Elements,
beasts, fowls, fishes, angels and devils do obey.

Thus ends the first book.
The second book.
WE have here in this first book conferred man with the beasts, and showed
that he need not magnify and exalte him self above them, considering that he
is inferior to the^ in many things. The Author begins to discover more
profou^dly the human miseries.
Having therefore this light foundation, and figured certain things of the
miseries of man, there rests following, our discourse, to penetrate more
further, and to continue this pitiful tragedy of the life of man, beginning
at his generation and production, then discovering throughout all ages, and
particulars of his life, till we have brought him to his sepulcher, which is
the end of all things. But first, let us see of what seed he is engendered,
only of corruption and infection. What is the place of his birth, but only a
foul and filthy dungeon? Hippo. in his book of infantments.
How long is he in the womb of his mother, before he be like any thing than a
vile lump of flesh, in such sort that when the womb has retained and taken
both seeds, and heated by the natural heat, it creates a little thin skin,
almost like to that which is next to the shell of an egg, that it is like
nothing but an egg, laid out of time, then certain days after, the spirits
and the blood mingled together, begin to boil in such sort, that there rises
three bladders like to bowels that flote in a river, which are the places
wherein is formed the three most noble parts of this superbious beast, the
Liver, the Heart, and the brains, Praise of the brains Hippoc.
which is the most excellentest part of this work, the seidge of all the
functions, the true fountain of feeling, the moving of the most mightiest
palace of intelligence and memory, the right arche of reason. If we consider
likewise by their order, the creation of all other parts, and how they be
formed, and how the child being in the mothers womb, N. Deha^pas in the
contemplation of nature.
begins to make water by the conduct of the Navel, and how the water is
received in a little skin or bladder, separated from the child, ordained of
nature to that office, and how he has no purgings by the fundement, for that
he receives no sustenance by the mouth, and that the bowels and stomach
does not yet his office, by the which means nothing is transported into the
lower parts. And how that the six first days he is as milk, the nine days
following, blood, the other twelve days after, flesh, and the eightene days
that follow, the soul is enclosed. I know not therefore so Diamond a heart
which is not moved and ravished with great admiration to conte^plate things so
pitiful and stran^ge. And yet this that we have spoken, is very littel, if we
will consider more near the things that follow, who is it that will not marvel,
considering in what manner he is nourished, and with what guiding, without
having the use of the mouth, until he be borne into the world, then how much
his nature is tender, frail and weak, in such sort, that if the mother be
never so little hurt or smitten, if she smell ye smoke of a candell snuff, it
is enough to kill the fruit in her womb. The which has caused Pliny to be
wail our human calamities, saying, I am ashamed to consider how frail the
beginning is of him that tameth all beasts, seeing that oftentimes the smell of
a snuff of candell overcomes the mother. But whilst he is in the womb of
his mother, with what food is he nourished, what preseruations has nature
prepared for him? If that his creation has seemed unto us strange, no doubt
his sustentation will ravish us in more great admiration, seeing that he is a
substance of blood, and instrument of his mother. The which is so detestable
and unclean, that I can not without great horror rehearse that which the
Philosophers and Phisicions have written, that have treated of the secrets of
nature. Those therefore that are curious of such things, let them read Pliny,
which has written thereof in his natural history. 7. book.
And after that he has been long substance of this venim, and that he is
formed and becomes in quantity sufficient, seeking therefore for more greater
nourishment, and that he cannot receive by the Navel so much as is needful,
by great pain he does assay to seek sustenaunce, The violence that a chile
does to nature when his nine months are accomplished.
which is the occasion that he moves and breaks the panicles and
sustainements, that he has always had till that time, then the womb feeling
it self pained, will keep him no longer in, but seeks means to bring him
forth, and therefore it opens, and by the said opening, the child feeling
the atre, follows to come forth, and straineth more and more to draw into the
world, and to enter into the light thereof, not without great violent dolors and
offense of his tender and delicate body. But during the nine months how
great pain and torment does the poor mother suffer and bear? Without
puttyng in coumpt some that during the time that they be great, leese their
appetite, and covet to eat human flesh, in such sort that we read in some
histories Diverse appetites of vvome^ with child.
that the poor husbands have been constrained to depart and absent
themselves, others have desired to eat ashes, hot burning coals, and other
like things according as the humors broken and depraved, abound in their
bodies. Furthermore what anguishe and pain the poor mothers suffer in their
childings, The misery of pore mothers in their childings.
and what danger they are in, it is manifest, sometimes there are children that
come forth their arms first, and others their fete first, others their knees
first, and others overthwart. But that which is more cruel, and that we cannot
apprehend without horror, is, that sometimes it is force to call Chirurgians,
Mediciners and Barbars, instead of wise Matrons and Midwiues, to dismember the
children and pull them out by pieces, and sometime it behooves to open the
poor innocent mother alive, and put iron tools in her body, yea to murder
her for to have her fruit: some children are borne so monster like and
deformed, that they are not like men, but abominable monsters: some are borne
with.ij. heads, and four legs, as one which was seen in the City of
Paris, whilst this book was a making, others cleping together, as has been
seen in France, and in other places. Two women children were borne joined
together by the shoulders, after the one had lived a certain time, died and
infected the other. Polydorus writes, Monstrous childings.
that before that Hannibal had chased Marcellus, that a woman brought forth a
child, having the head like an Eliphant, another having four feet like a
beast. The sage historians do write, that a Courtisan of Rome, in the year of
grace, five hundredth and eightene, bare a child half a beast and half a man.
Those that have written the Indian histories, do testify for a surety, that
there are at this present, children half beasts, by the occasion of certain
brutish men that are there. Some there are that are borne blind, others deaf,
others dumb, and others there are born lame of their limbs, for who^ their
parents are sorrowful. In such sort that if we consider attentively all the
misery of our nativity, we shall find the old Proverb true, which says,
that we are conceived in filth and uncleanness, borne in sin and care, and
nourished with pain and labor. Here therefore you may see the first action of
the tragedy of the life of humaines. Here you may see his life and
government, whilst he is enclosed in his mothers womb. Well, this prisoner
being once come forth of this his maternall prison, let us consider what he is,
being upon the earth. What? is he any other thing than the similitude of a
poor worm that comes out of the earth, with what clothing is he covered,
making his most glorious entry into the palace of this world? only with
blood, in the which he is bathed and covered, which is nothing else but the
image and figure of sin, which by the blood is signified in Scripture. O
grievous necessity, O cruel and miserable condition, that before this
creature has sinned, he is bond and servant of sin. This is the bitter grape,
of ye which speaks the Prophet Jeremy, that our fathers did eat, and their
children had yet their teeth set on edge, by the which is presented the
original sin. What is the first song that man sings, coming into this
world, only wepings, tears, and bewaylings, which are as messengers and
foreshewers of his calamities to come, the which because he ca^ not show by
words, he witnesses by tears and cries. And notwithstanding, here is ye
beginning of Monarchs, Kings, Princes, Emperors and others, that rise in
dignities in this world. The worm be he never so little, as soon as nature
has brought it out of the earth, begins to craule and creep, and to seek
pasture. The little Chicke as soon as he is out of the shell, is found clean,
and needs not to be washed as man, he runs after the Hen, and knows when
he is called he pecketh and eats, he fears the Kite, without proving before
her malice, he flies the danger, only guided by nature. But consider man,
as soon as he is in the world, is a little fearful monster, and lump of
flesh, which will let himself be eaten of other beasts, if he be not seen too,
or die for hunger before he can gripe his mothers breast, and will as soon eat
poison as any good meat, before he can discern the good from the evil: if he
be left in his cradell, he will be stiffeled in his own doung or filth, and is
so unable, that he cannot cast out his own doung, and yet the little birds
of the air, and beasts can do it. Behold here the perfumes and sweet
sauors, with the which nature has embalmed man, and decked him that makes so
great brag of Hercules, and that names himself chief head of al other
creatures. The misery of man that is nourished by another than his mother.
This miserable creature being once plunged in the gulf of miseries, it
behooves him to have nourishment and clothing, for to comfort the infirmity
of his nature. This office is appointed for mothers, in consideration whereof,
nature has given them breasts, which are like little bottels, very proper to
that effect. Misery of man in his nouriture.
But how many mothers are there at this present, or for to speak the truth,
cruel stepmothers, unto whom it suffices only, to bring the children into
this world, and for that they will not take a little pains to nourish them,
they send them to sorrowful villages, for to be nourished of strange and
unknown nurses, which often times do change them, and bring home others. Also
they will be less ashamed to hold a little dog in their arms, than the fruit
that they have engendered. The which practice is not in beasts, be they never
so brutish, for they never put their young ones, in the keeping of others,
though nature give them never so many, but they nourish them themselves, and
are such zealous protectors of their young ones, that they keep them always in
their arms, til such time as they can avoid danger. And that which is more
to be marvelled at, there rises a certain gelousie between the male and the
female, who shall be the keeper, and for that intent they quarrel together, and
fight one with another. The which may be seen not only in the Apes and
others, but also in Bears, The Apes
which of their nature are fierce and cruel, and yet they have so great
affection to their young ones, that they are not only content to nourishe them
with their milk, but so soon as they are brought forth, having almost no
form nor facion, An example for fathers and mothers.
they lick them and pullyshe them to make them more perfect. Likewise the
little Birds, who although they have five or six under their wings, and having
neither milk, grain, nor other seed for their sustenance, notwithstanding
they spare neither Art nor diligence, wherewyth nature has endued them for
their nourishment. It is therefore a true witness of human misery, sooing
that man begins so soon to be deprived of that which to him is due, by just
right of nature, being forced to suck the milk of a strange woman, yea, and
many times of such a one, as may be found best cheap, what corruption or
deformity so ever she have. The which many times is so contagious unto the
children, that it were better for them to be nourished of some brute beast in
the wilderness, than to be put into the mercy of such nurses, for not only
the body remains infected and marred, as by antiquity, the experience has
been in Titus, son to Vespasian, and many others, the which as writes
Lampridus, was all the days of his life subject to infirmities and sicknesses,
for that he was noursed of one subject to sickness. But that worse is, when
that there remains some spot or crime in the souls of this vicious noursing,
as Dion ye greek writes, in the second book of Cesars, when he makes
mention of Caligula, the fourth Emperor of Rome, the cruelties and infamies of
whom, was not imputed to father or mother, but to the nurse that gave him
suck, the which being cruel or barbarous of her self, rubbed the ends of
her breasts with blood, causing the child, to whom she gave milk, to suck
them. The which thing was afterward so well practiced of him, that he did not
only commit an infinite number of murders, The incredible cruelty of Caligula.
but he lycked his sword and his dagger with his tongue, being bathed and
stained with blood, and wished that all the world had but one head, to the end
that with one blow he might beheads them and reign alone upon the earth. Seeing
then that the child has not felt or suffered sorrow enough in his mothers
womb, as soon as he is borne, there is prepared for him new sorrow, by the
ingratitude of mothers, which are so delicate and tender themselves, that they
will not nourish them, but cause them to suck the milk of those that
oftentimes change their fruit, or else feed them with milk vicious and
depraved, by the which means in process of time there rises a number of
diseases, as the Pox, the Leprosy, and other like, as many Phisitio^s have
declared, to the great hurt of poor children, and continual infamy of their
mothers, for this is of a truth, that if the nurse be froward, or subject to
drunkenness, or otherwise of manners depraved, the child shall be froward,
not by the receiving of the milk, but with often looking upon them, if she be
a drunkerd, she will cause the child to be the like, as it is read in the life
of the Emperor Tiberius, who was a great drunkerd, for that the nurse that gave
him suck, did not only drink vnmeasurably, but also she gave the child
soppes tempered in wine. Cardan in his book De subtilitate.
Here you may see, that the nurses have so much power, as to reform the
manners and body of ye child. So that if she be sickly, she renders the
child sicklye, if she be wicked, she causes the child also to be wicked.
Leave we him therefore in the protection and keeping of his nurse. In how
many dangers is he wrapped, whilst that he is a nursing, what pain and
displeasure have they, which in the mean time have the charge of them, some
will cry all the night long, so that their nurses can take no rest, some when
they can scant go, will fall and break their faces, and their lims, so that
many times there is seen many wounds and sores about them, without putting
in coumpt many diseases, which they take of the corruption of their parents.
But who is not astonished, to see the fantastical workings of this little child,
the which for ye most part cease not to dabble in the water, like a little
frog, makes little houses of earth, counterfeiteth the horsman in riding on a
little stick, runs after dogs and cats, will be angry with some, and pleased
with others, who would think that such a miserable creature so vile and
abject, being covered with so many maledictions, by succession of time would
be come so proud and lofty. The which being profoundly considered by the
tragical Poet Euripides writes after this sort.

The birth of children we may lament and weep,
For to be borne in misery so deep.
Which being dead, they must be laid in grave,
With sobs and tears, this does our nature crave,
Wherefore serves life always possessed with pain
Or light to them, whom nature does disdain?
But much more worthily, Roland Peter in the traduction of books of the nature
of man.
and with an other zeal, the great celestial Prophet Job made the like
complaint, when he had his rigorous combats or reasonings with God, saying:

Remember Lord how thou have made me weak,
Even as a Potter has made an earthen pot,
The which he may transform and also break,
And turned me to cruds like Cheese I wot,
Thou have also turned me like to milk,
Clade eke with skin, with members compassed,
With bones and sinews, and flesh as soft as silk,
Replenished with life, and wit established,
So that I live under thy godly scope,
where thou do norish me to a more better hope.
If then the great Prophet Jeremy has bewailed by great compassion the common
weal, being captive in Babylon, and if Anchises has lamented the destruction
of Troie, the Consul Marcellus the city of Siracusa when he saw it on fire,
and Salust the corruption of Rome: We may well with so many men of fame bewail
the miserable entry that man makes into this world, his advancement, and
perilous conversation, and his sorrowful and strong departure, which being
profoundly considered by the Prophet Esaye does bewail his birth, Esaias. ix.
and murmureth against his knees that held him up, and also the breasts that
gave him suck. Likewise, Iere. xx.
the Prophet Jeremy being pricked with the like spirit, and considering that
man is made of the moulde of the earth, conceived in sin, borne in pain, and
at the last made a pray for worms, does wish that his mothers womb had
served for his tomb. But let us take a little heed at the most excellent
anotamie that the holy Prophet Ioh makes, when he says: Job. xiii.
Man that is born of a woman has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery, he comes up and is cut down like a flower, he flies as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one state. Now let us gather somewhat out of
these words, and lay the weight and authority to each one of his sentences,
and we shall find that all the heathenish Philosophy is but dreams and smoke,
to the regard of that of the spirit of God, when that he will enstruct man to
humble and know himself, as appears, when that he calls him (man born of
a woman) has he said that without a cause? no, for among all the creatures
whom God has created, there is not one more subject to miseries and
infirmities than a woman, especially those that are fruitful, for they have
scant a months rest in a whole year, but that they are continually overcome
with sorrow and fear. Then he says (having a short time to live) what is more
shorter than the life of man, unto whom in stopping his nose and his mouth, the
life is gone, for his life is nothing but a little blaste of wind enclosed
therein. The which being considered by Theophrastus, A complaint of
Theophrastus, for that the life of beasts is longer than the life of man.
and many others, murmured against nature, which had given the benefit of
long life to Hearts, Ravens, and other fowls, and beasts, unto who^ the life
brought no profit, and unto man, King of all things upon earth, has given so
short life, although he knows how to employe his time, and yet the little
time that he has, is shortened by sleeps, dreams, angers, cares, and other
indignations, in such sort that if we should reckon al, there rests
nothing less than life. Then the Prophet compares man to a shadow, what is
this shadow? any other thing than an outward show, that deceives the sight
of man, a phancie, a false figure, without substance, the which sometimes
seems to be great, and incontinently little. Even so it is with man, the
which sometimes seems to be somewhat, and nevertheless, of himself is
nothing. For when that he is elected most highest, and when that he is in the
highest degree of honor, then suddenly he perishes, so that no man knows
where he is become, no more than a shadow when the night is come, and to him
it chances as the Prophet David says: I have seen the wicked, mighty and
flourishing as the green Bay, and I have passed by, and he was gone. I have
sought him, but he was not to be found.

We have here showed as much as is possible, by how many perilous dangers
man has his first coming forth into this world. Now therefore let us
consider a little, what he is when he is spro^g up, let us see whether that
there is any end of his miseries. But if we be equitable Judges, we shall find
that rather he does increase his miseries, for it is the season wherein nature
does rear against him a more furious combat, his blood begins to rise, the
flesh provoke him to his own pleasure, the sensuality does lead him, the
malicious world espieth him, the devil tempts him, so that it is
impossible, but that he which is assailed with so many vices, and succored of
none, in the end is discomfited and overcome, for in the body in youth, riot,
liberty, richesse, and deliciousness, abounds all the vices in the world,
says Marcus Aurelius, and there plant their siege. It suffices not only this
miserable creature, Man, to be norished with strange milk, but also he must
be constrained to receive instructions of others than of his parents. A
complaint of fathers that commit their children to ignorant and vicious tutors.
For there are few Catoes that will take the pains to instruct their children,
they are forced to prove the severity of masters, for to teach them the
beginning of Arts and sciences, seeing that there is no ground be it never so
fruitful and luckye, but will be unfruitful, if it be not diligently labored,
and the more fruitful and fatter it is, the more weeds and Darnell it will
bring forth: Also the more that the child is wakened, the more peril there is,
least he straye, it behooves when the trees are young to uphold them, and to
cut the ouerweightie branches, if that afterward ye pretend to gather any
fruit. Likewise it is necessary to reform and correct the vices that reign in
youth, least that afterward it return to the parents ignominy and reproach.
But there are at this day many fathers and mothers, which for defaulte not to
have well instructed their children in their youth, in stead of rest and
consolation, and eat their bread in their age, with sorrow. Moreover there
are many mothers, which in stead of giving them good and godly instructions
in their youth, intertaine and nourishe them in volupteousnesse and
deliciousness, but though they are nourishers of their bodies, yet are they
destroyers of their souls. And if Heli was grievously punished with his
children, An ill example of fathers toward their children.
for that he did not chastise them so sharply as their offenses did requier:
what shall become of those fathers and mothers, which in stead of correctors of
their children, are their corruptors? and these kind of parents are compared
to Apes, which kill their young ones by too much straining them between their
arms, and keeping them so dear, and this is the cause that so many fall into
the hands of the hang man, which are to them reformers and correctors. The
ancient Romans had those parents in so great detestation which did not
correct their children, that they did ordein and stablish a law which was
called Fatidia. By the which it was ordained, that for the first attempt the
said Law should be showed the child, for the second time he should be
corrected, and the third time hanged, and the father to be banished, as for
default of giving chasticement to their children, they were partakers of their
evil. But I would gladly demand what those ancient Romans would do, if
they saw the pitiful estate of many of our commonweals, with what Irons,
with what bonds or torments would they beat down the fathers and mothers?
who in the stead of giving good exhortations to their family, and to show
the^ selves the first examples of virtue to their children, before that they
send the^ to be instructed, they them selves do break and deprave the^ by
their naughty and wicked examples. For the first precept that they give them
how to live well, Many mothers make the ropes vvherevvith their children are
hanged.
is to blaspheme, cry, exercise gluttony and drunkenness, to despise the
substance of their innocence, to be a fornicator? and to kiss women and
maidens in their presence. And many mothers there are this day in the world,
which do as Herodias did, that learn their daughters to dance, Rethoricke
terms, to haunt companies, scoff and flout, to paint and plaster their
faces, to deck their fingers with rings, and their necks with Iuels, as though
they were Iuell sellers pretending to keep a shop. But in the end it will
chance to them as it chanced to the Prophet David, whose sin was punished
by his children, which were so wicked, that one of them named Aman did deflowre
his own sister Thamar: and the other called Absalon did kill his brother Aman.
Afterward he sought the death of his own father, and chased him out of his
kingdom. The rule of the ancient Philosophers has always been found true,
that many commit many grievous crimes in this world, y^ punishing whereof,
God keeps in the other world, except the sin that man commits in the
bringing up of his children, for the which customablye he bears the pain
and punishment in this world. For the father can give to the child but frail
and mortal flesh, by the corruption whereof, the life takes end, but by good
learning and knowledge, the eternal praise and memory redoundeth. Therefore
to conclude, if that the children have hene in great peril and misery, being
nourished with spotted milk, for the most part of strange nurses, yet the
peril doubleth to those that should cause them to be instructed, for that the
food of the body is more vile than the food of the soul. But for because
that we have not yet spoken of Plato who has more deuinelye philosophied upon
human calamities, than all the rest of the heathen, the which he has so
well gathered together and set forth, that many reading his book of the
immortality of the soul, did cast them selves from the hie rocks and
mountains into the floods and raging waves, to the end, that ending the
threede of their spiteful life, they might have the fruitio^ and joy of the
second life, which is the true and assured place of rest.

This great Philosopher Plato, in a Dialogue that he has made of death, and
discourse of this wicked world, writes to a certain Philosopher named
Socrates, and shows by a marvelous eloquence, the miseries of our life, as
follows. Know thou not (says he) that this humayne life is as a
pilgrimage, the which the good and wise men perform in joy, singing with
gladness, when that of necessity they draw to their last end. Do thou not
know that man consists of the soul, the which is shut up within, as in a
tabernacle, with the which nature has enclosed us, not without great troubles
and vexations: and yet in the mean time, if she destribute unto us any part of
her goods, they are hidden from us, and are of a short time, joined with
sorrow and bitterness, at the occasion whereof, the soul feeling dolor and
grief, desires the celestial habitation, and wishes for the benefits
thereof. Consider that the departure out of this world, is no other thing than
a changing from evil to good. But harken, says he, from thy nativity unto
thy grave what kind of mystery is there but that thou have tasted, either
penury, cold, heat, stripes. etc. yea, before that man can show his
cogitations and thoughts. What other messenger or more certain token can he
have of his miseries, than his weepings, wailings and complaints, after that
he has tasted so many evils, and that he is come to the seventh year of his
age: then it behooves him to have tutors and scholemaisters for to instruct him
in good learning: growing further in years, and coming into his adolescency,
it behooves him to have more rigorous reformers for to tame his wild youth,
and to break him to labor. This being done, his beard begins to grow, and
then he becomes man, and yet notwithstanding, it is then the time that he
enters into deeper cogitations and travail in the spirit: it is requisite
then that he frequent public places, that he haunt the company of those that
are as touchstones for to know the good from the evil. If he be come of a
great and noble stock, he must make many enterprises of war, to put
himself in infinite perils, hazard his life, to shed his blood for to die in
the bed of honor, or else he shall be reputed a dastardlye coward, and despised
of all men. If he be of base estate, and that he be called to the knowledge of
Arts, for all that he leaves not to run into a thousand dangers,
travails, pains, and lettings, as well of the body as of the soul. He
trauaileth day and night, and sweateth water and blood, for to get again
that which shall maintain his estate during his life, and oftentimes it is
seen what pain so ever man does take for his living, he can scant get to
serve his necessity. It is not therefore without a cause that Marcus Aurelius
the A notable sentence of Marcus Aurelius upon humain miseries.
. xvij. Emperor of Rome, considering the miserable condition of our
humanity, was wont to say, I have thought in my self whether there might be
found any estate, any age, any kingdom or any world, wherein might be found
any one man, that dare vaunt not to have tasted in his life time adversity,
and if there might be found one, it should be such a fearful monster on the
earth, that both the dead and the living would be amassed to behold him, then
he concludes after this sort, saying: And in the end I found mine own
account true, that he that was yesterdaye rich, was to day poor, he that was
yesterday in health, was to day sick, he that laughed yesterday, to day did
weep, he that was yesterday in prosperity, was to day in adversity, he that
was yesterday alive, was to day dead. Let us now return to our former words,
and deduct the great things by the less. Who is he among the humaines, that
has given himself to any science, or otherwise to live, whose science has
not in the end accused him, and with the which he has not been displeased,
combered and werie? and for the better trial thereof, let us consider
particularly the principal estates. The misery of those that sail on the sea.
Let us begin with those that occupy the water, and sail on the seas, in
how many dangers are they in day and night? what is their habitation? any
other than a foul and filthy prison, as also their manner of living? what is
their raiment but only a very smell of the wether? they are always
vagabondes, and continually in exile, without any rest, beaten with winds,
rain, hail, snow, in fear of Pirates and Rouers, rocks and tempests, and
in hazard to be buried in the bellies of fishes. For this cause it is that
Bias ye wise Philosopher Greek knew not whether he should reckon these kind
of people among the terrestrial or aquitall sort, and doubted whether ye he
should number them among the living or among the dead. And another named
Anacharsis, said that they were no further from death than the breadth of.iij.
or ij. fingers, even so much as the wood contained in thicknes, in the which
they sailed. And if that their life seems unto us cruel, A praise of
husba^drie for the better shevving of the miseries that follovv.
what greater sweetness think we to find in husbandry, and in the labor of
the rusticall sort, the which at the first seems unto us sweet, lucky,
peaceable, simple and innocent, also that many Patriarchs and Prophets, have
chosen this kind of living, as that in which there is least guile and deceit,
and also that many Romain Emperors have in times past left their Palaces,
Capitols, Arkes, triumphs, glorious and fair buildings, and Empires, with all
the rest of their worldly majesty, for to remain in the fields, to til and
labor the earth, trees and gardens, as we read of Dioclesian, Attallus, Cirus,
Constantinus Caesar, and others, but those that will consider these things more
nearer, they will say that among these Roses, there are a great many thorns.
This being true, that God having driven man out of Paradise, sent him into the
earth, as to a place of exile, and said unto him, the earth shall be cursed for
thy sake, thou shall eat thereof in travel and pain all the days of thy life.
For she shall bring forth thorns, weeds, and thistels, and thou shall eat
the herbs of the field, in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread
till thou be turned again to earth, out of the which thou wast taken. But alas
who has more experimented or tasted this which God has spoken, than the poor
laborers or husbandmen, who many times after that they have labored, sowed,
and tilled the ground, traveled all the day long, endured extreme heat of
the sun, the rigor of the cold, sometimes bitings or stingings of venomous
serpents or worms, sweated blood and water, all the year long, for to
dress the earth their nurse, hoping to gather the fruits, and suddenly behold
a hail, a frost, a tempest, a thunder or lightning, that will suddenly defraud
the^ of all their hope. To one, his sheep and Oxen die: to another, whilst
that he is laboring in the fields, the men of war and soldiers come and
ravish that which he has, in such sort that when he returns to his house,
in stead of receiving consolation and finding rest, his wife bewaileth, his
children cries out, al his family lamenteth and cries out for hunger, to be
short, it is no other thing than a grief and a wound, having a continual
cause of dolor, which suddenly complains of one thing, incontinently of
another, now of the rain, Plato.
then of ye great drith, also of the winds and tempests, but above all, the men
of war, with a company of other griefs, figured in form of a complaint by a (
Da pacem) the which a friend o^ mine made me this other day: the tennor whereof
hereafter follows.

A complaint of the pore husbandmen in Meeter, made upon, Da pacem Domine in
diebus nostris. etc.
O God whom no man can gain say,
thou know if that I lie,
That neither horse nor mare is left
to whom then shall I cry?
Da Give

But unto thee O Lord and King,
which do bring things to pass,
The vengeance therefore that I crave
is to give us and them alas,
pacem peace

The peace which is so necessary
give us, this I think best,
Yet if thou will punish mankind
thou have good cause and may.
Domine, O Lord,

Our fathers that before have been
though in the world they were,
The like wickedness have never seen
as we which now are here.
in diebus nostris, in our days,

In labor and in travel great
with face arrayed with sweat.
This three days have I labored,
yet I and mine want meat.
quia non est because there is no

I have planted, sowed, and cut my vines,
I have hedged and dungde my land,
For to give food unto my babes,
but who ca^ their furious foes westa^d?
alius other

Not one alone does me molest,
but I am assailed-day by day:
As well of thieves as men of war
my goods to them are made a pray.
qui that

Our sheep and lambs they do destroy,
our calves they kill each one,
Such men they are that us annoy,
help thou O God alone.
pugnet fights

Alas it is a woeful case
among us men of husbandrye
When soldiers that go to the wars,
rob us as they go by.
pro nobis, for us,

O my Creator, when I do think
on thy bounty, comfort I crave,
Knowing that of the wrong that I do bear
of them no recompense I have.
nisi tu but only thou

In worldlings for to put my trust,
no, there is no relief,
In them there is no help at all,
but in thee my hope most chief,
Deus O God.

When pilferie shall cease
when reason and good policy
In justice shall take place,
then the good time shall be.
Leave we these poor husbandmen with their miseries and travels, Misery of
merchantes, with a plain discourse of their frauds and deceites.
and penitrate more forward. Let us see what is done in the trade of
merchandise, if we do consider it externely or outwardly, it seems void
from miseries, and a promise of rest, for the richesse in which it abounds,
also for that Pliny says, it was invented for the necessity of life, and
that many wise men, as one Thalus, one Solon, and Hippocratus have exercised
it, and also that it is an occasion to keep Princes in peace and unity,
transporting from one city to another, that which abounds in the one, and
lacks in the other, but we cannot so well cloak it, but that ye eye may well
see, how much the life of Merchaunts is unquiet, and to how many dangers they
are subject continually as well by land as by sea, without putting in account,
that for the most part of their time they are as Fugitives and Vagabondes from
their towns and countries, and they seem little to differ from banished,
saving that their banishment is willingly, for that they fly, run and burn
by sea and by land, by fires and flames, for a covetous heat of an
unmeasurable gain, and they are contented to be deprived of rest and ease that
they ought to receive of their own wines and children, lands, and possessions,
and to be at al times in hazard of their lives by a thousand means and ways,
that are for them prepared of Pirates and others, and al for an insatiable
avarice, that does daily torment them, not forgetting how they do periure
themselves, beguile and deceive their neighbor, in such sort, that with great
pain any using ye trade can be made rich, but by beguiling of others,
Corruption of the estate of Merchants.
and have in their common proverb, y^ they need but turn their back a while to
God, and enlarge a little the entry of their conscience, for to be rich, and
surmount fortune, to the which we may add many other evils and maledictions,
that depend thereon, when that they bring unprofitable mercha^dise out of
strange countries, which are not necessary for our human life, but only to
entertain women and children in pride, pomp, and vain glory, as though our
nature were not enough subject to wantonness and delicateness of it self,
without pricking or provoking it any more, and in the mean time there is no
Realm nor Province, but that they beggar of monye with their new knacks, and
that worse is, having learned the manners and orders of strange countries, they
use it in the sale of their merchandise, and therewith deceive and beguile us.
They make their assemblies, counsels and assizes, and have Burses, whereas the
Merchants and Brokers sell unto the Retailers, yt which is naught, and the
Retailers utter it to us, and therewith beguile and deceive us. Also sometimes
the danger is great, for under the color of their trade and traffic, they
have intelligence with strange and foreign Princes, and utter to them our
secrets, lend them money, and in the end they betraye and sell their native
country and commonweals, the which we in France have known and tasted,
within these few years, to the loss and detriment of many people. I leave to
speak of a thousand other frauds and deceytes, when that they mingle and
change their drugs, on the which many times the life of men does depend.
Notwithstanding, such is the order of their science, and also they instruct
their servants and factors, in their youth to do the like, and those that have
the most subtillest and sharpest wit, they increase their wages, to those
specially, yt can best forswear themselves, tell a fair tale with their
tongue, or counterfeit y^ Genoway, the Italian, the Florentine, or ye Venetian,
and things are brought into so pitiful estate, that one dare not go out of a
shop, after that he has offered a certain price, but when he retourneth,
incontinently he shall find the ware changed, by these young thieves which have
no conscience but gage their soul to the devil, for to enrich their masters.
There is yet another kind of Merchantes, of whom as yet we have not spoken
of, the which deck their shops with other men's goods, and under the color to
make some great trade of merchandise, borowe here of one, and there of another,
beguiling their creditors, and after that by such means they have gotten and
robbed from other men a great sum or value, then become they bankroutes, and
get the^ to some other land or country, whereas they live at their ease, of that
which they have gotten by fraud and disceite of others, so that sometimes
they leave their creditors in such poverty, that there has been some that
have hanged themselves with their own hands, seeing themselves frustrate of
that which they thought to have been as sure of, as if it had been in their
purses. The which things being deepelye considered by the Athenians, would not
permit nor suffer that Merchants should dwell among other Citizens, but
ordained them certain places, separated from the Cities, whereas they did use
and occupye their trade. Also there has been many ancient commonweals,
whereas Merchantes have not been elected into dignities and offices, nor
admitted into the counsel of the Citizens, and other members of the City, as
in like case the Ecclesiastical fathers have oftentimes condemned them in many
places of their writings, as S. John Chrysostom, and S. Augustine that say
that it is hard for the^ to please God, or to be penitent for their sins.

Let us consider a little the tragical life and servitude of those that
frequent the wars, The misery of men of war.
the which is so cruel and strange, that brute beasts do abhor it, for
they rest the night time in their caves and dens made in the earth, but the
soldiers waketh for the most part, and endures rain, hayle, snow, hunger,
cold and heat, and when that he hears the sorrowful sign of battle, I
have treated of this more at large in a treatise the last year, of peace and
war.
he must prepare him self either suddenlye death, or else to kill and murder
his neighbor, so that for a Months wages, he makes his body a fence or
bulwark against the shot of a gunne, in such sort that among all the miseries
in the world there is none equal or like to the soldiers. But will thou know
how pitiful the spectacle of the war is? haste thou at any time seen the
conflict of the Lio^ and of the Bear, or of any other furious beasts
together? What a cruelty it is to see them rent and tear one another, but how
much more abominable is it to see man against man, furious and wood, raging
like a brute beast, for to exercise his rage against his neighbor, without
put in account an infinite number of harms that hang thereon, it is the poor
people that has edefied and builded so many fair Cities, it is they that
have ministered unto them by the sweat of their labor, and by their diligence
has enriched, fortified and maintained the^. But behold, even in their
presence they are spoiled and overthrown, their cattle taken away, their
corn cut down out of time, the poor laborers killed and murdered, towns
and villages burned, all is in fear and continual torment, there is no
household, but weepeth and lamenteth, their husbandry decays and waxes cold,
the poor people that are disherited are constrained to fast and to die for
hunger, or else have their refuge to Arts unlawful, and defended for to
sustain their poor life, virgins are defloured, the chaste matrons remain
barren in their houses, good laws decay, humanity is defaced, equity is
suppressed, the Region is left waste, holy places are profaned, the poor old
men remain captives, and oftentimes they see their children slain before
their faces, there is found an infinite number of widows, as many orphelins:
Kings, Princes and Monarchs are envied for the great subsidies and taxes, that
they level on their subjects, nothing but murmurings and hatreds, the
stranger must be entertained to get his good will and favor, there must be
made great dispensations, for those that prepare the^ selves to the war, be
it by sea or by land, bulwarks must be fortified, rampires made, dressing of
tents, halling to the camp, gunnes, armor, and charets, filling of diches,
keeping of watch and ward, with other like exercises of war. Alas was it not
enough, that nature had created man so miserable and abject, and subject to so
many evils, but that she must add unto him the war, The harms that come by
war.
which of it self is an evil so strange and pernicious, that it
comprehends in it self, and surmounteth all other kind of evils, and also of
it self is so pestilent and contagious, that it afflicts not only the
wicked, but also, yea and most of all, the poor and innocent? But if that our
rage and cruelty were extended upon the Heathen, and those that know not God,
then might the victory be a co^tentation to the victor. But good God, shall we
show wherein the glories and triumphs of wars among Christian Princes does
consist? Their health and conservation is the decay and ruin of their
neighbor: their richesse is the spoylings of the poor and others, their ioys
is the mournings and bewaylings of others, and yet many times their victory
can not be so happy, but that both the vanquisher and the ouercommed, may
weep and lamente. For there was never battle so luckie, but that the
vanquisher at the last does repent, if he be touched with any spark of
humanity. The which the Heathen have acknowledged and confessed by their own
proper witnessing, as also the great Emperor Marcus Aurelius, the which after
many glorious victories obtained against his enemies, as he received his
triumph at Rome, feeling in his heart the worng that he had don to his
neighbor, began to cry out when that he was conducted to his chair of
triumph, saying: what more greater folly or vanity may an Emperor of Rome
have, for because he has conquered many towns, stirred those that were at
rest, destroyed Cities, rased strong houlds, robbed the poor, enriched
tyrants, made an infinite number of orphelines and widows, and in recompense
of al these harms, he is received with triumph and magnificence, many are
dead, and many have traveled and taken pains, but one alone bears the
glory. Then he adds these words: by the immortal Gods, when I was brought
to Rome in such a triumph, and saw the poor captives in iron bands and
chains, I powered out the widows lamentations, I saw an infinite number of
treasure ill gotten, then I remembered them dead, I rejoiced outwardlye, but
inwardlye I wept tears of blood, and began to cry against Rome after this
sort, come hither Rome why reioycest thou at the wrongs of others? art thou of
more antiquity than Babylon, more fairer than Helena, more richer tha^
Carthage, more stronger tha^ Troie, better peopled than Thebes, better
compassed with ships than Corinth, more delicious than Tire, more happier than
Numantia, The christian philosophy of a heathen.
all the which are perished, clad with so many virtues, and kepers of so many
virtuous, yet thou hopest to remain for ever, stuffed up with so many vices,
and people so vilde and vicious. A notable discourse.
Believe one thing of a surety, that the glory that is at this hour of thee,
has first been of those, and the destruction that has come upon them shall
likewise come upon thee. O what philosophy, what holiness, what oracles, and
what prophecy is found in a Heathen man, which had no knowledge of the
Evangelical light? May not we be ashamed that have been nourished at a better
schole, and illuminated with the grace of the holy ghost, that this Pagan shall
rise at the day of judgment, and condemn us, that make such hauock of
human blood? seeing that the war has already for many years past disquieted
ye Christian weal, so that with great pain can be found at this day, any
Region in Europe, but that is staind with humain blood, neither sea nor river,
but y^ has been changed red. The cruelty of soldiers. Gaudentius Meruleus
murdered in the Church.
Helericus King of the Goths, having in time paste destroyed Rome (as Paulus
Oroseus shows, that flourished in his time) caused to be proclaimed with the
sound of a trumpet, that they should not molest nor hurre those that were
fled into the temple of S. Peter and S. Paul. But things are come to such
desolation in our age, that there is no sanctuary nor sauegard in temples nor
holy places, but y^ poor maide^s and wives have been violated, and the poor
sheep of Jesus Christ have been stain and murdered, so mad are men without
sparing aged kind or dignity, but they sacrifice all, so that it seems that
they will fight to overthrow nature it self, so that in the end it will come
to pass (if that God provide not remedy) that the public weals shall be
peopled with wild beasts or trees, for by littel and littel the world waxes
desert. But what is the cause that we are so prompt and inclined to loose and
decay those, for the preservation of which, our savior Christ was willing to
die: but why are we so desirous of their life and blood, A comparison of the
war of men, and the war of beasts.
seeing Jesus Christ has shed his for to preserve and save us all. But at the
least, why have not we so much compassion one of another, as the brute beasts
have, the which show not their rage and cruelty one against another, or if by
fortune they fight sometimes, it is when that they are oppressed with hunger,
or for the defense of their young ones, and yet they help themselves with those
armours that nature has appointed them, without adding to them other kind of
weapons invented by the devil, for there is no earthly things, but that may be
overcome with ye force of gu^nes, so that weying well this invention, it is not
only more dangerous, than all the cutting weapons of the world, but also it
is more pernicious and pestilent, than any other venim or poison, yea worse
than the thundrings and lightnings that come from the air, ye which for that
it is composed of four strange elementaries, being in the most part of his
greatest drith, casting the fire in the midst of the smoke, multiplieth of
the air and of the fire, and mingleth with the moisture, in such sort that the
nature of every element fighting with the other, conuerteth in humor and in
great thundering, because that the heat with the moisture cannot agree, nor
endure together, but straineth to come forth, the air addresseth to the air,
and the fire draws of his nature traveling to mount hie, being an action
superior, and exceeding in power all the rest, the which he turns into his
nature before coming out, by the which means grows such a hurling noise,
that it is necessary that the thing wherein this poulder is, be put in pieces,
or that the most weakest, give place to the stro^gest. And then of all this
stuff, comes Canons, double Canons, Serpentines, Culuerines, Sakers,
Faucons, Fauconnets, and such like. In the naming whereof, the cunning
masters have greatly failed, in imposing to them the names of birds, the
which serve to give and show us melody and pleasure, they should rather
appropriate to them the names of the infernal diuelles, for as those engines
serve to rent and dismember the bodies of men, so in like case do the diuelles
beat and pame the souls in hell.

We have here showed what is done in the wars, and the recompense of those that
frequent it. Now let us see what is done in the palaces of Princes, and what
is ye felicity of ye Courtiers, which make a show of their delicateness:
seems there any greater felicity in the world, than to have the Princes
favor at al times, to be cherished, to distribute largely to others, to take
the best spoils, to use courtly manners, embracings, kissinges, co^ueyings, and
other offices of humanity, with an infinite number of such kind of dregs?
There are of this sort crafty and wily, that do as the fisher man, who as soon
as he has any thing in his net, draws it up, and so goes away withal:
othersome there are that play all out: and others that remain until they are
as full as spunges, and in the end they are made to restore all: others also
that do nothing but invent subsidies, and seek means to enlarge or multiply
the treasures of kings, and so become rich, with spoiling of the poor people.
And Princes do by the^ many times as we do by our hogs: we let them fatten, to
the end to eat and devour them afterward, so are they suffered many times to
enriche themselves, for to be despoyled after when that they are so fat, and
one that is new come shall manytimes be preferred in their places, here you may
see how yt these poor courtiers sell their liberty for to become rich: they
must obey al commandments be they just or unjust: they must frame the^ selves
to laugh when ye Prince laugheth, to weep when he weepeth, approve y^ which
he approves, and condemn that which he condemns: they must obey to al,
alter and change wholly his nature, to be severe with those that are severe,
sorrowful with those that are sorrowful, and in a manner transform themselves
into the nature of him who^ they will please, or else to get nothing. If the
Prince be impudent, they must be the like, if he be cruel, they must delight
in bloodshed. To be short, they must frame themselves to all ordinances and
manners of the Prince, or whom they will please, and yet many times one little
offense stayneth all the service that one has done in his life time. The which
those that assisted y^ Emperor Adrian did feel, who when they were elected by
him into hie estates and dignities, by the report of diverse flatterers, they
had not only taken from them that which before he had given them, but also they
were declared to be his chief enemies. The which Plato liuelye considering,
and foreseeing in the Court of the Atheniensis, did pro^ptly quit their
deliciousness, and yet he could not so well take heed to himself but that
he returned to Dennis a tyrant of Sicilie, who in the end sold him to Pirates
of the sea. But what happened to Xenon that old, sage, and grave Philosopher,
whom Phalaris in satisfaction of his service, caused most cruelly to be put to
death, as also did the King of Cyprus Anacreo^ to the noble philosopher
Anaxagoras: and Nero his tutor Seneca, and Alexander, Calistenus, for that he
wo^^ not worship him, caused his feet to be cut of, his ears and his hands,
also his eyes to be put out, and so left in the mercy of a straight prison or
dungeon, wherein he finished most miserably his days. Such has been many
times the end of a great number of learned men, who because they would not
obey to the fearful affections of Monarchs, lost their lives, Execrable vices
of the Court
in recompense of their good service, and wholesome counsels: without putting
in account the vices that frequent those that follow the Court, whereas the
most part of humain things are abolished. Many in ye Court put of their cappes
to thee, that would be glad to see thy head from thy shoulders, such bow their
knee to do thee reverence, which would that they had broken their leg to carry
thee to thy grave. Many have the name of Lord that meriteth ye name of a
hangman, there is always I know not what, nor how, or one, I understand not
who is the cause,) that incessantlye one complayneth, alters, or else
despises. In the Court if thou will be an adulterer, thou shall find of thy
accomplices, if thou will quarrel, thou shall find to whom, if thou will lie,
thou shall find those that will approve thy lies, if thou will steal, thou
shalt find them that will show thee a thousand ways how, if thou will be
a carder or a dicer, thou shall find them that will cog and play with thee,
if thou will swear and bear false witness, thou shalt find there thy like:
to be short, if thou will give thy self to all kind of wickedness and
vices, thou shall find there the very example giuers. Here may you see the life
of my masters the Courtiers, which is no life, but a continual death. Here
you may see wherein their youth is employed, which is not youth, but a
transitory death. When y^ they come to age, know thou what they bring from
thence? their gray heads, their legs full of gouts, their mouth having a
naughty smell, their back full of pain, their hearts full of sorrow and
thought, and their soul filled with sin: to be short, in the Court there is
very little to write, but much to murmr at, of the which things, if thou
desire a more ample knowledge, read the work that Dom Anthony Guenera,
bishop of Mondouent, and the Crowner of the Emperor: and Eneas Siluius,
otherwise called Pope Pius, which have compassed two most excellent and
particular treatises of this matter, wherein they have painted my masters the
Courtiers so in their coulors, that they have stayed the hope of adding to
those, that will discover after them. Let us leave speaking of ye Courtiers
with their life so unquiet and miserable, and let us contemplate a little the
estate of Kings, Princes, Monarchs and Emperors, for whom only it seems
that felicity is created, for if we consider all that may render the life of
man in tranquillity, happy and content, we shall find that fortune among all
other mortal creatures, has provided for them prodigally. What makes man
more wonderful in this world, but goods, richesse, dignities, Empire, license
to do good or evil without correction, power to exercise liberality, all kind
of volupteousnesse as well of the spirit as of the body. All that may be
wished for, for the contentation of man, be it in apparel, in meats or
drinks, Princes seem to be void of miseries.
variety in meats, in magnificence, in services, in vestures, that which may
tickle the memory, and flatter the concupiscence of the flesh, is prepared
for them, even from their cradell, for to conduct ye estate of their life in
more hap and felicity. The discourse of which if we will consider outwardlye,
there is not one but will confess that they alone triumph oner that, that
others languish in. But if that we will consider things more nearer, and
examine and way them in a true balance, we shall find that the self same
things, that we think degrees for to attain to felicity, and to cause them
to be happy, are the very instruments of vice, that cause them to have more
greater sorrows, and that does render the^ most unfortunate: but wherefore
serves their costlye ornaments and honorable services, or delicate meats?
when that they are in continual fear to be poisoned, seduced and beguiled by
their seruitors, have not we had the experience thereof in our time? does not
Platina write of a certain Pope that was poisoned by the siege, with a paper
that his servant did present him? others with the smoke of torches and flames.
But this thing is most to be marvelled at, yea, and most horrible to hear, A
cruel and an abominable act.
that the human malice should be so great, that there has been some that
have mingled poison with the water or singing cake, and by this means has
caused to die Henry, the seventh Emperor, as I have red in Fluschius, in his
first composition of medcinable things. We may read in Histories, that
certain Emperors durst not lie down to rest in the night, before y^ they had
caused their beds to be visited and lien on, and all the places of their
chambers to be searched, for fear that they had to be murthred or strangled in
their sleep, others would not permit Barbers nor Chirurgions to touch their
face, for fear that in trimming of their head or bearde, they would take from
them their life. And yet at this present day they are in such fear, that they
dare not put their meat into their mouths, before that one have tasted
thereof. Were it not better (said Julius Caesar) to die once, than to live always
in such fear and dread? But what felicity can a king or a prince have, that
has under his government so many thousands of men, he must watch for all,
hear the plaintes and cries of every one, The true office of a Prince.
procure every man's safeguard, provoke some by liberal gifts to do well, the
others by terror and fear, he must be no less circumspect to nourish peace
among his people, than to defend his Realm, against the invasion of the
stranger: without putting in count many other calamities that are under the
scepter. They command all, and and many times one or two does govern them.
Pege the Florentine has made a particular discourse of the infelicitie of
Princes, he means of y^ wicked, where he says, that for the most part,
three kinds of people are to them most agreeable and familiar: flatterers keep
the first rank, which are the chief enemies of verity, and that empoison
their souls with a poison so pestiferous and dangerous, that it is co^tagious
to all ye world: their folly and temeritie, they call it prudencie, their
cruelty is justice, Three plages, from the which a Prince ought to bevvare of.
their luxurious life, desolutions and fornications, are pleasures and
pastimes, they are covetous, which they they call good husbandry, if they be
prodigal, they call it liberal, in such sort that there is no vice in a
Prince, but that they cloak it and hide it under ye protexetie of some virtue.
The second sort are these, inuentors of new subsidies: they rest no night
but that in the Morning they bring some invention or new practice to the
Prince, to draw monye from the poor people: they cause new statutes to be
erected: they break, form, reform, diminishe and add: they demand
confiscations and proscriptio^s, in such sort that all their study is to make
themselves rich on the calamities and miseries of the poor people. There is
yet another sort, that under the shadow of honesty counterfeiting good men,
have always the eye on other men's livings, and make the office of reformer of
vices: they accuse and epsy out other men's lives: they invent wicked and false
devises, yea, and not content to get other men's goods, but also seek their
death, The Elders made most dreadful prayers for wicked Princes.
and by their means they cause many a one to be put to death, whose life
before God are innocent. For this cause it is that the Elders (as Herodianus
writes) if their Kings or Princes had behaved them selves wickedlye in the
administration of the public affair, they condemned them for devils after
their death, and assembled in the temples with the Priests, praying openly to
the Gods, not to receive them, but recommended them to the infernal powers, to
the end that they might be grieuouslye tormented. The which has not been
only observed of the Elders before us, but also of certain in our time, as
witnesses Anthonius Geuara, Crowner to the Emperor, in a certain Epistle
wherein he says that to the Viceroy of Sicilia, for vengeance of the
tyrannies that he had exercised against his subjects, after his death, they
made this Epitaphe on his tomb that follows.

Qui propter nos homines, and propter nostram salutem descendit ad inferos.

Here you may see the miseries wherein Princes are subject. Here are the thorns
that they receive in recompense of their brightness and royal dignity,
which ought to be like a Lamp, that gives light to all the world. But when
that it is darkened with any vice, it is more reprochable than in any other
private person. For they alone sin not (as Plato writes) by the fault that
they commit, but by the evil example that they give: if it be hard to be good
(as Hesiodeus writes) yet with more greater difficulty Kings depraved by
deliciousness.
can Kings and Princes be, for the abundance of honors and deliciousness the
which they see that they enjoy, serves them as a bayte to enduce them to
evil, and they are the very lanternes of vices. What was Saul before that he
was made King? his goodness is showed in holy scripture, who^ God only did
elect, but nevertheless he made a sudden Eclipse or changing. How
wonderful was the beginning of the reign of king Solomon, the which being
plunged in royal delices, gave himself incontinently a pray to women. Of.xxij.
Kings of Judah, there is found but five or six that have continued in their
virtue and bounty. As touching the Kings of Israel, if thou will consider
their lives from Jeroboam the son of Nabath, even to the last, which were in
number.xix. they have all in general, ill governed the affairs of the
kingdom. If thou do consider the estate of the Assirians, Persians, Grecians,
and Egyptians, thou shall find more wicked than good. Let us consider what the
Roman Emperors were, which have been esteemed the most flourishing commonwealth in the world, thou shall find them so ouercomed with vices and all kind
of cruelties, that I do almost adhorre to read in Histories their livings so
corrupt and defiled. What was the estate of their common wealth before that
Silla and Marius did change it, before that Catallina and Catulla did perturbe
it, before that Julius Caesar and Pompeius did slander it, before that Augustus
and Marcus Antonius did destroy it, Marcus Aurelius.
before that Tiberius and Caligula did defame it, before that Domitia^ and Nero
did deprave it. For although that they had made it rich with many kingdoms
and Lordships, notwithstanding the vices that they brought with them, are more
greater than the kingdoms that they have gained, for the goods and richesse
are lost, but the vices remain unto this day. But what memory remains now
of Romulus that founded it, of Neuma Pompillius that erected the Capitol so
hie, of Ancus Martius that compassed it with walls, of Brutius that delivered
it from tyrants, of Camillius that drove out the French men. Did not they show
by their doings what felicity is in the principal, the which is more subject
to the assaults of fortune, than any other earthly things, for many times the
threde of life breaks when that they think least of death, an^ then the
infamy of those that are wicked, is written in histories for a perpetual
memory thereof. The which thing Kings, Princes, Emperors, and others constituted
in dignities, ought more to fear a thousand fold, than the tongue that
speaks evil, the which can but shame the living, but books slander and
defame the dead. All the which things being lively considered by Dioclesian,
and many other Emperors, they forsook their Scepters and Empires, and
withdrew them into the fields, loving much better to remain the rest of their
life in some desert place, and to be content with a little, that to enjoy the
crooked honors of this world.

Let us leave speaking of Kings, and come we to the Ecclesiastical sort, The
misery of Popes.
begin we with the heads, which are Popes, and Pontificals, are not they
happy and fortunate in this world? their dignity is the most greatest, and
supreme of al other. It is obtained without pain and labor, without war or
effusion of blood, it is kept without peril, they command all, Emperors and
Kings do the^ reverence and honor, they are rich, and of great power, and all
given to honors and dignities, although those that they represent, were the
true example giuers of poverty. But if thou do well consider the end of the
Tragedy, thou will not count them happy, but abhor their doings, and also
complain and bewail their state, Pope Florentine in his books of the
infelicitie of Princes.
for if they will follow ye steps of S. Peter aright, according to Gods
commandments, they must be as one that will give his life for the
preservation of his neighbor, they alone should wake, when that other sleep,
they should watch for all the world, they should have no rest, but all the
minutes of their life should be bestowed for the health of the public weal,
for fear that Satan seduct not their flock. For if it be so, as S. John
Chrysostom writes upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, that he that is the
rector or governor of one only Church or congregation, may with great
difficulty be saved, so great is his charge. In what peril then are the
Popes, that are gardes, tutors, protectors and heads of all Christian
Churches. The which things the Pope Adrian, a man learned and of a good life,
having many times waied and considered, was accustomed to say with tears to
his most priuiest friends, that among all the estates of the world, there was
none that seemed to him more miserable, and more perilous of condition, than
the estate of Popes and Pontificalles. For although the throne and seidge
wherein he did sit, was richly decked with diverse pompes, yet was it filled
with many sharp thorns, and the precious cloak with y^ which they were
covered, A notable sentence of Pope Adrian on the misery of Popes.
was full of sharp pointed nedels, and so heavy to bear, that his shoulders
therewith was pained, and as for the Miter that covered their heads, it is a
very flame that burned even from the bottom of the soul: and if we will
consider the notable Philosophy of Pope Adrian, on the Popish ornaments, we
shall find it not unprofitable: for although many have gaped for that
dignity, yet if ye read Platina and others that have written their lives, you
shall find them so wicked, that ye will say that there are many Wolves among
these pastors. In consideration thereof S. Bernard lamenteth the condition of
Pope Eugenius, when that Rome was less depraved than it is at this day: but
what just occasion should he have to complain, if he had seen the disorder and
confusion that has reigned since his time. Well let us leave the heads, and
come to the members, and seek the matter more further, The misery of the
Ecclesiastical estate.
for that they are sick with the same disease that others are. Let us consider
what were the Heathen Priests and the Gentiles, and confer them with ours,
to the end that those that are illuminated with the Evangelical light, that
have been instructed at a better schole, blushe for shame, and learn of them
to reform their life. It is of a truth, that the Priests of the Heathen and
Gentiles, were chosen among the others, Clicthoreus.
of a more singular doctrine and manners less depraved, as the Priests of
Egypt, The estate of the heathen Priests.
which being nourished of the public, had no other science nor occupation,
after that they had finished their ceremonies, but to philosophy and
contemplate diligent lie the secrets and miracles of nature. And of such honest
occupations came so great profit, that they were (as Aristotel writes)
inuentors of Mathematickes, and their life's were so well ruled, and their
discipline had in so great admiration, that Ligurges, Pythagoras, Plato,
Democrites, and the most part of the renoumed Philosophers of Greece did
forsake their countries and Provinces to become disciples to the Priests of
Egypt. The Babilonia^s have used the like in ye choosing of their priests,
which they called Chaldeys, who as writes Deodorus the Sicilia^, after that
they had said their prayers and divine service, ceased not all the rest of their
life to philosophy, and contemplate the secrets of the firmament, in such
sort, that we are detter to them for many secrets of Astrology, A comparison
of heathen Priests with ours.
the which by their labor and diligence have been discovered. The Persians in
like case to their Priests, that have been called Mages, which is as much to
say as sage and wise, who as well for their excellency of learning, as their
solitary life, they have so reverenced, that in their most urgent affairs,
they made their refuge to them as to their Gods. The Indians in like manner to
their Priests, who^ they call Gymnosophistes, being so prompt in doctrine, and
so well ruled in good manners, that they alone above other men by their eloquence
confuted the great tyrant Alexander, which was minded to spoil and waste
their country, but he was so well appeased, after ye he had heard them (as
Plutarchus writes, that he did not only leave them without harm, but having
their prudencie in admiration, left them in liberties and fredomes, and
honored them with an infinite number of treasures and magnificall presents.
Also the ancient Gauls or Frenchmen, the which at that time had no knowledge
of the Gospel, had (as writes Caesar in his Commentaries) their Priests,
whom they called Druids, who were so straight of living, and of so great
doctrine in so great admiration, that they wondered at them, as if they had been
Gods: who after that they had bestowed a certain time in their ceremonies and
sacrifices, instructed youth, disputed of the immortality of the soul, of the
mouings of the firmament, of the greatness of ye world, and of the nature of
things, and so lead the estate of their life in virtuous occupations and works,
not letting one minute of the time to slip without bearing some profit to the
common weal. Here is the state, here is the life, here is the manners and
occupatio^s of Priests that had no knowledge of God, without law, without
faith, without hope of a second life, and without fear of Gods punishments.
Let us confer the doctrine of the most part of our Priests, their life,
manners and conversation, and we shall find that these one day shall rise
against them, even at the day of judgment, and shall be the accusers of their
wicked life: it is unto the wicked to whom I speak, it is unto the vices, and
not unto the persons. I know well that there are a great number of good and
learned pastors in many Christian Regions and Provinces, which are vigilant
and careful for the flock, to whom they preach most worthily the word of
God. I know also that there are many excellent Doctors in this university, and
in other places, by whose good erudition and doctrine all Europe is at this
day illuminated. But to the contrary, how many Priests are there in the
world, that are drowned in such ignorance, that with great pain they can say
a Mass, but must mumble it between their teeth, for fear that their faults
be discovered, so dull are they, without knowledge and understanding of the
dignity, power and strength of the sacraments which they minister. There are
many pastors at this day that have better skill in Courtly facions, or else in
some other vanity, than in desoluing the doubts of Predestination, of
liberal arbitrament, and others that are found in the holy scripture. They
are those of whom cries the Prophet Ezechiel that they serve for no thing but
to feed themselves, Ezechiel Cap. 3. Micheas Cap. 34. Esa. ca. 56.
and in stead of feding their flock, they take y^ flece, draw the milk, kill ye
fattest, eat the flesh, break the bones, they are dumb dogs, blind and a
sleep, that know nothing, dare not bark, but are very curious to have
horskepers for their Palfreys, Fauconers for their Hawks, Cooks for their
paunches, and they fear not to ordeyne and appointe pastors for ye poor flock
of Jesus Christ, they which will one day cause them to render a count for the
poor sheep that are perished by their default, the which will be required at
their hands: to be short, they are the very blood suckers, that serve for
nothing else, but to draw the blood and substance from poor sheep, and bestow
the goods of the Church in delicious pomps and excess, instead of maintaining
the poor and intertaining youth in liberal Arts, and other divine and human
disciplines. But our God which is just in his judgments, will cause them
one day to give a count of his goods so ill bestowed. For this is of a
surety, that there are pastors that have this twentye years received the
fruits of their benefices, that have not three times visited their flock, but
they commit them to poor ignorant Chaplens, and many times to those that will
serve best cheap, who as they serve God by credit, and by procurement, if that
the Lord God have not pity of them, they shall be damned for ever. The which
being considered by the good Doctor S. Bernard sermon. 33 of ca^ticles
S. Bernard, toward the end of the.33. sermon of Canticles, is very sore
offended with them, complaining of their pompes and superduities, whereas he
painteth them out in their liuelye coulors, as follows: there is (says he)
a spot and plague corrupted, that reigns in the whole body of the Church,
the Ministers of Jesus Christ serve Antichrist, they stand and go in great
honor and pomp with ye Lords benefits, and nevertheless, they give no honor to
his name, and it is the ornament of a harlot, whom thou see daily proceed
from thence, so is the gold that they carry, their saddels, bridels and
spurs, the ornament of their feet is more superbious and full of pomp than
the temple of God: their spurs are better gilded than their altars, from
thence proceed their sumpteous table so well garnished with delicate meats,
their goodly gilded cups and goblets, from thence proceed their gredinesse and
drunkenness, from thence their Musticall harmony, their Harps, Lutes,
uirginalles, Regals and such like, the delicate wine that the pre^^ors power
out, and the money that they have in their purses, comes from thence, (then
he concludes) and for to enjoy and cloak this their deliciousness, S.
Bernardes words against the Ecclesiasticals at the counsel of Reimes.
they ordeine Prelates of Churches, Deacons, Archdeacons, Bishops,
Archbishoppes: moreover being kindled with a marvelous zeal in the sermon that
he made at the Synod of Pastors, he does not dally with the^, but cries out
with open voice, it is not the way to deck the spouse of Jesus Christ, but to
spoil her, it is not to keep her, but to loose her, it is not to defend her,
but to let her be a pray, it is not to institute, but to prostitute, it is not
to instruct, but to profane her, it is not feeding of the flock of Christ,
but spoiling and de^^uring of them. These are the remonstrances and
exhortations that this holy man made to the Prelates and other members of the
Church, when that it was less corrupted tha^ it is at this present. But what
would S. Peter and S. John say, that had not one penny to give to the poor
lame man that sat begging at the temple gate, if they should see these
Pontifical Courtiers, that vaunt to be their successors (but not followers)
treading on silk, with their perfumes, embaumentes, mounted like S. George,
lodged in the suberbious and magnificall palaces of Kings, but ye others were
many times lodged in Charters and prisons of tyrants, but the Lord God will
one day come with a whip, and whip these Merchants and choppers of benefices
out of his temple.

If we will curiously seek out what is done in the Civil life, The misery of
those that administer justice.
and ministering of the public affairs, to how many miseries it is subject,
although that it be at this day a degree so noble and necessary for our
humanity: we shall find that it has his part in the Cake as well as others,
and if that there be any delectation or pleasure, for the honor that hangs
thereon, it is transitory and unconstant, and comes to them as an
inflammation that comes to the human body, knowing that it is necessary
that all their actions pass before the eyes of the common people, the which
although they cannot perfectly render the reason of things, yet
notwithstanding, they have a certain smell and savor of good and evil,
wherefore those that are Judges are subject, as in a play to be hissed at, and
chased away with shame and confusion. For the people being astonished. Plato
calls them a monster with many heads, and mutable, uncertain, deceitful,
ready to wrath, ready to praise or dispraise without providence or
discretion, variable in their talk, unlearned, obstinate, and therefore it
behooves that ye life of a Judge be conformable to their will, for as he
judges openly, so shall he be judged of the^ secretly, not only in matters of
weight and importance, but in those of small conseque^cie. For always the
people will find some fault, as Plutarchus writes in his policies. The
Atheniensies murmured at their Simonidus for yt he spoke too hie: ye Thebia^s
accused Paniculus, for that he would spit oftentimes: the Lacedaemonians noted
their Ligurges, for that he went always holding down of his head: the Romans
found a great vice in Scipion, for that in sleeping he snorted too loud: the
Vticences defamed the good Cato in his eating: they found Pompeius uncivil,
for that he would scratch with one finger only: the Carthagians blamed
Hannibal, for that he was always unlaced and open before his stomach: others
murmured at Julius Caesar, for that he carried the girdell of evil grace. And yet
this is but little in comparison of other good men, that this people or common
sort have persecuted, banished, and in the end put to death in satisfaction of
their good services that they had done in the commonwealth. If that great
Orator Demosthenes were alive, he could say somewhat, who after that he had
been so just and faithful a protector of his common wealth of Athens, was in
the end unjustly banished, as though he had committed some notable crime.
Socrates was also poisoned. Hannibal was so ill treated of his that he was
constrained to wander miserably in the world. The Romans did the like to
Camilus: the Greeks to Ligurges and Solon: the one of them was stoned, and the
other having ye eye pulled out, was banished like a murderer. Moses and many
other holy men have so many times tasted the fury of the people, that if they
were this day living they would pour out marvelous complaints against them.
And as we have showed and set forth the defauts and miseries that proceed of
the peoples part, so must we in like case put into the balance, the errors and
corruptions that is found in wicked Judges, of the which sort, Against Judges
that are corrupted
some (to be short) are corrupted by fear, for the fear that they have to
displease a Prince or a great Lord, they violate justice, and are as Pilate
that condemned Christ to death, for fear that he had to displease the Emperor
Tiberius Caesar: other magistrates are corrupted by love, as was Herod the
Tetrarch, who for to please by foolish love the Damsel that daunced,
condemned to death S. John Baptist, although that he knew he was just and
innocent. Some are many times corrupted by hatred, as was the chief Priest,
who of malice condemned S. Paul to be smitten and stoned, though he deserved
it not. Sometimes the Magistrates are corrupted by gold and silver, and other
gifts and presents, as were the children of the Prophet and great Priest
Samuel, and this disease is so contagious, that at this day it is common among
many. They all love (says the Prophet) presents, they all seek for gifts,
they do not right to the orphelin, and the widows complaint comes not
before them, and in another place, woe be to you that are corrupted by money,
and by prayers, by hatred or love, and that judges the good to be evil, and
the evil to be good, making of light darkness, and of darkness light, woe
be to you that have not respect to the merits of things, but to the merits of
men, that regards not equity, but gifts that are given, that regards not
justice, bnt monye, which regard not that which reason ordeineth, but only to
the affection whereas your desiers does guide you: you are diligent in rich
men's causes, but you defer the cause of the poor, you are to them cruel and
rigorous, but to the rich, loving and tractable. The^ Wisdom following the
like matter, says, the poor cries and no man gives ear, but one will ask
what he is, the rich man speaks, and all the world pleads his cause, and
lifts up his words with admiration eue^ to ye sky, yet this is not enough,
for when that they are in the degree of honor, they have another worm that
gnaweth them, they do with their children as the mother of Zebede said, Math.
20.
Lord grant that my children may sit, the one on thy right hand, the other on
thy left hand in thy kingdom, after them they advance their children in
their dignities, being sometimes ignorant and foolish. Then the Prophet Jeremy
says, Jeremy.
they are magnified and become rich, they are become fat, they have left the
orphelin, and have not done justice for the poor, shall not I therefore
punish such things (says the Lord God) and and my soul take vengeance on
such manner of people? Hear also the sentence that saint James pronounces
against them at the day of judgment: S. James Cap. 5. ^.
you have condemned and killed the just, you have lived in wantonness in this
world taken your ease, you have satisfied your hearts: now therefore (says
the Lord of hosts) weep and howl in your wretchedness that shall come upon
you, your garments are Moth eaten, your gold and your silver is cankred, and
the ruste thereof shall be a witness against you, and you shall eat your flesh
as it were fire, for the complainte of widows is ascended up to my throne.
These are the complaints that the Prophets and the Apostles made against
worldly Judges, here are the Censures that our good God has thundered against
them.

There rests now nothing more but to know what is done in Matrimony, seeing
that we have sought out in general the miseries of all the estates of the
world. There is nothing more certain, if we will weye in our minds the
original of Matrimony, excellent, and well accomplished on both parts, A
praise of marriage, to show the miseries that follovv.
as Plato did his Common weal, Cicero his Orator, and S. Augustine in his
City of God. There is nothing in the world, which may compare in pleasures
to marriage* be it true, the fortune as well prosperous as adverse is common, and
that more is, there is so great Communaltie of body and vnxion of spirits,
that they seem two, transformed into one. And if the pleasures seem to us
great, to confer our affairs and secrets with our friends and neighbors, how
much is the delectation more greater that we receive, to discover our thoughts
to her, that is joined to us by such a place of charity, that we put our
trust in her, as in our selves, making her wholly treasurer or faithful
keeper of many inward secrets and cogitations of our soul. But what may be
more greater witness of fervent love, than to forsake Father, Mother, Sisters
and Brothers, and generally all the Consanguinitie till they become enemy of
themselves, for to follow a husband that does honor and reverence her, and
having all other things in disdain, she only cleaves to him, if he be rich,
she keeps his goods, if he be poor, she employeth all the Art that nature
has given her for to compare with him in his poverty, if he be in
prosperity, his felicity is redoubled in her, she seeing her self partaker
of his benefits, if he be in adversity, she bears but the one half of the
grief, and furthermore counterfeiteth him, assisteth and serves him. If a man
will remain solitary in his house, his wife keeps him company, does
cherishe and comfort him, and causes him more easilye to digest the
inco^modity of his solicitude, if he will go to the fields, she co^ducteth him
with eye, so far as she can see him, she desires and honoreth him, being
absent, she co^plaineth and sigheth as if he were always by her, being come
home, he is well received, cherished and favored, with the best shows and
tokens of love that nature has showed, in such sort, that for to speak the
truth, it seems that a wife is a gift from heaven granted to man, as well
for the contentation of youth, as for the rest and solace of age, nature can
give us but one father and one mother, but marriage represents many in our
children, the which do reverence and honor us, who are more dear than our own
proper bowels, being young and little they play, laugh and show us many Apysh
toys, they prepare us an infinite number of pleasures, in such sort, that by
their toys and pastimes that nature has given us for to deceive and pass
away part of our miserable life (if we be besieged with age, a thing common to
all) they solace the discommoditie of our age, close our eyes, bring us to the
earth from whence we came: they are our bones, our flesh and blood, seeing
them, we see our selves, in such sort that the father seeing his children, may
be assured that he sees his liuelye youth renewed in the face of his children,
in whom we are regenerate and borne again, in such sort, that the age (being
a heavy burden) is not grievous unto us, beholding the mirrors or similitudes
of our selves that eliuate the memory of us, and make us almost immortal, in
procreating and ingendring others after us, as the Joint or slip being taken
from a tree, of the which grows many others: the which I have treated more at
large in a book that I brought to light the last year, of the dignity of
Marriage, in the which I think I did omit nothing of that that pertayneth to
the whole ornament and decking of the conjunction of Matrimony: therefore, for
fear to be accused of inconstancy, or counted a turn tippet, I will not now
dispraise that which I have so much exalted. But for that my subject (that
treats of the miseries of all estates in our days) requires that I give no
more pardon of this, than I did to the others, I will in few words show that
which I have read in many Authors, the which confess with me, that there is
much sweet and pleasant things in marriage. But if we do well consider and
weye in a just balla^ce the great and unsupportable deeds, we shall find
among these Roses, many thorns, and among these sweet shoures of rain, we
shall find that there falls always much hail, Laws for to reco^cile the
man and the wife.
be it true, the Athenians being a people much commended for their prudencie
and wisdom, seeing that the husbands and wives could not agree, because of an
infinite number of dissentions and prouocations that chau^sed ordinarrly
between them, were constrained to ordeyne in their common weal certain
magistrates, whom they called reconcilers of married ones, the office of whom is
to reduce, reconcile, and set accord by all means. The Spartins in their
common weal had in like case established certain Magistrates named Armosins,
who had the charge to correct the insolency of women, to reprove their
arrogancy and audacitie toward their husbands. The Romans would not ordeyne
Magistrates, persuading with themselves that men were not sufficient to bridle
the raging temeritie of women that they did pour out, but they had their
refuge to the Gods, and dedicated a temple to the Goddess Vitiplaca, where in
the end they accorded of their domestical quarrels. But who can (say they)
patiently bear the charges of Marriage, the insolency and arrogancye of women,
Miseries and thorns in marriage.
the yoke of a kind imperfect? Who may accomplish their carnal appetite, as
also their insatiable pompes? Does not the old Greek Proverb say that women
and ships, are never so well accomplished, but that always they want repairing?
If thou take her poor she shall be despised, and thy self less esteemed, if
thou take her rich, thou make thy self a bond slave, for thinking to marie
one equal to thee, thou mariest thy unsupportable maistres, if you take her
foul, thou can not love her, if thou take her fair, it is a image at thy
gate for to bring thee company, it is a tower that is assailed of all the
world, and therefore that is very hard to keep that every one seeks to have
the key, behold the hazard wherein thou art (says William de la Perriere) that
thy round head become not forked, which were a fearful sight if it were
visible and appare^t, Beauty makes a woman suspected, deformity hated, and
riches proud.
this is the conclusion, riches causes a woman to be proud, beauty makes her
suspected, and deformity or foulness causes her to be hated. Therefore
Diponares having tased the martirdomes of marriage, said that there were but
two good days in all the life of marriage, the one was the wedding day, and
the other the day that the woman dies, for that on the day of marriage, there
is made good cheer, the Bride is fresh and new, and all new things are
pleasant, and of all pleasures the first is most delectable. The other day
that he says is good, is the day wherein the woman dies, for that the beast
being dead, dead is the poison, and that by the death of the woman the
husband is out of bondage. In confirmation whereof, there is recited a pretty
history of a noble Roman, who the day after his marriage, after that he had
lien the first night with his wife, was very pensive and sorrowful, and being
demanded of certain of his familiar friends, what was the occasion of his
sorrow, seeing that his wife was so fair, rich, and come of a noble progeny:
showing them his foot, he stretches out his leg, saying, my friends, my
shoe is new, fair and well made, but you know not where about it does hurt
and grieve me. Also is alleged the saying of Philemon, that said that the
woman was to the man a necessary evil, seeing that there is nothing more
harder to find in this woride, than a good woman, following the ancient
Proverb, that says that a good woman, a good Mule, and a good Goat, and three
dangerous beasts. Also is recited the saying of Plutarchus, the which
demau^deth if there be any thing more lighter than a woman's tongue unbridled,
more pricking than her words, more to be feared than her boldness, more
execrable than her malice, more dangerous tha^ her fury, or more dissembling
than her tears, not putting in account many other things that he recites of
the disco^modities of their work, for that many times men are constrained to
nourishe other men's children, or if by chance they are the husbands, he is in
hazard to be the father of wicked children. The which many times are the
desolution and dishonor of their fathers house, and a reproach and shame to all
their kindred. The which thing yt Emperor Augustus fearing, wished that his wife
might never have child, A notable sentence of Marcus Aurelius.
and oftentimes he called his wife and his Niece two worms that did eat and
destroy him with extreme dolor. Marcus Aurelius one of the worthiest Emperors
that ever bare scepter, knowing what was done in marriage, as he was daily
called on by certain of his Lords, that he should marry his daughter, said
unto them: vex me no more, for if all the counsel of the wise were founded in
one Furnace, they would not be sufficient for to give good counsel in making
of a marriage, and will ye that I give her alone and so lightly. It is now six
years since that Anthonius Pius elected me for his son in law, Anthonius Pius.
and gave me the Empire in marriage, and yet have we been both deceived, he in
taking me for his son in law, and I for taking his daughter to wife. He was
called Pius, for that he was very pitiful to each one saving to me, to whom he
was cruel, for in a little flesh he has given me many bones, which is in
some the bitter gal that is mingled among the sweet delicatenes of Matrimony,
the which for to speak the truth, we cannot so well cloak nor disguise by
words, but y^ at the last we are constrained to confess it, so that if we do
weye vprightlye the Eclipses and miseries, with the pleasures and pastimes, we
shall find that y^ one surpasses not the other.

An end of the second book.
The third book.
Leave we now each estate, making their trafick, and spreading their nets, and
let us take our way to human miseries, and treat of the other scourges,
wherewith nature does torment this poor vessel of earth, for to make him
stoop, and bring him to the knowledge of his God. The misery of man for the
diversity of Religion.
It was not sufficient that there is a corruption in all estates, and in the
lump of man, which is but a filthy and foul carcass, but that he must
areare battle against God, in dividing his Religion. S. Jerome and S.
Augustine do declare that in their time, the word of God was had in such
reverence, that it was spread in all the corners of the earth, even in the
wilderness, but now (unthankful wretches that we are) the Lord God has so
taken away the light of his Gospel from us for our sins, that it shines
but in a little end and corner of Europe. And yet that which ought to give us
most fear, are the diversity of opinions that are among us, and the errors
wherein we are wrapped, for that which one says is white, another says is
black, that which some call day, others call night, that which is light to
one, is darkness to another, that which some find sweet, others judge it
bitter, that which is Jesus Christ's verity and heaven to one, is Antichrists
dreams and hell to another. In the mean time what should the Ignorant
think, in what trouble, perplexity and despair ought their poor consciences
to be in, when they see that denied of one, which the other approves, seeing
that this is certain, that there is but one verity among so much variety of
opinions. We may now well say that the sheepesolde is open by the negligence
of Pastors, Iere. 12. Ezech. 34.
the Wolves are entered, and the sheep are dispersed and gone forth, some of
them forsaken of their sheepheards, and guided by others that care not for
their loss. Those that are in the true flock are continually in danger to be
seduced and drawn out of the right path. If it were possible to behold with
our corporal eyes, the danger wherein all Christendom has been, or if it
were possible to count or number the poor souls that by the dissentions of
diverse opinions perish daily, there is none but would quake for fear. But is
there any kind of wrath or vengeance that we have not tasted in our age, I
will not here reckon the wars and effusion of blood that we have tasted
within this forty or fifty years. In a treatise of peace and war.
I have written of this more at large in other places, but the memory thereof
is so new that the wounds bleed as yet upon ye poor people, that we see
dailye stray about from town to town, with the poor mothers that bear their
young children in their arms, saved from the midst of the fire, from the
bloody glaiues, fleing the unmercifulness of the enemy, finding no place of
refuge for to solace their calamity, can witness yt same. But what hard and
stony hearts have those that see the streets and places covered with these
strange people, what countenance may those then have, that stir up so many
tragedies on the earth, when that they shall hear their cries and
lamentatio^s, knowing that the day will come wherein they shall render a count
of all the innocent blood that they have shed, from the time of Abell that was
first slain, until the last man, as the spirit of God does teach us in the
holy scripture. We have been afflicted with ye war which is one of the
forerunners and scourges of Gods wrath. Have not we had plagues in our time?
behold ye afflictions, how they succeed by degrees. I have red marvelous
contagions that have been before our time, The misery of man by contagion, as
well in times past as in our age.
the which we will confer with ours, to the end that we may know, that then
when the wrath of God is poured against us, that the^ all living souls do
feel it. Many Authors worthy of credence, write that those of Constantinople
have been persecuted with a plague so horrible, that those that were not sick,
thought themselnes to be killed of other men, and being in this trouble and
fear, they furiouslye thought that they had been killed. In the time of
Heraclius there chau^sed such a contagious plague or pestilence in Romainie, yt
in a short time there died many thousands of men, and the violence of the
sickness was so grievous, that many impatient in their pain, drowned them
selves in Tyber, to staunch and quench the extreme heat that burned their
bodies within, like a Cathar. Thucydides a Greek Author, Thucydides in his
second book of the wars of the Peloponiensis.
writes that in his time there was such corruption of the air in Greece, that
there died an infinite number of people, without finding or inuenting remedy
that might ease their pain, and yet he adds a thing more wonderful, that
those that were healed of this poison, had lost their memory and knowledge, in
so much that one knew not the other, no not the father the son. Marcus
Aurelius.
Marcus Aurelius an Author worthy of credence, assures that in his time, the
mortality was so great in Italy, that the Writers that would have written
thereof, had less pain to discover and put in count the little number of
those that remained alive, than the infinite number of those that died. The
soldiers of Auidius Cassius that was Lieutenant to Marcus Anthonius the
Emperor, being in Selucia a town of Babilonia, entered into the great Temple of
Apollo, whereas they found a Coffer, The air corrupted that proceeded out of a
coffer perished the third part of human kind.
the which they opened, thinking that there had been some great treasure, but
the air that proceeded out thereof, was so infectious, that it first infected
all the Region of Babilonia, and then proceeded into Grecia, and from Greece to
Rome, whereas it moved so many pestile^ces, that it caused to perish almost the
third part of human kind. Let us leave the ancient histories, and treat of
those that have passed under our age, to the end that we (being Christians) may
learn by the great miseries and afflictions, that God has sent us, the great
fragilitie and misery of our human condition. For when that his wrath is
kindled against our sins, he makes us to feel the darts of his rigorous
Justice, there is no kind of pain nor torment, but that therewith he
afflicts and persecuteth his creatures, what experience had we in the year a
thousand five hundredth, twenty eight? when that the plague was so grievous in
the French Camp, A plage in the French camp at Naples.
whilst the siege was at Naples, whereas the violence of the pain was so
prompt and sudden, that they were sooner dead tha^ they did think to die. And
this wicked and unlucky disease did not only afflict the vulgar sort, which
were almost al consumed, but also the great Lords felt it, the Lord of
Lautr^^, of Vaudemont de la Vall, de Moleac, the Chastynery grand Mont, and
other notable personages, the memory thereof can not be renewed without tears.
The like chanced to English men in Bullen, A plage in Bullen.
whereas the plage was so great, that there was not ground enough in the
town to bury the dead, so that the King of England could not find men in
England that would go thither, till that they were forced of violence to go,
for the more there went thither, the more there died, in such sort, that the
four corners of the town were putrified and corrupted with the smell and vapor
that proceeded from the dead bodies. The year before that the deceased King
Frauncis of good memory, espoused the Queen Elinor, Almaine was assailed with
a new kind of sickness, A contagion in Almaine.
with the which the parties that were taken, died within. xxiiij. hours with a
sweat, and this sickness having taken his original in the Occean, spread in a
moment all over Almaine, as an embracing that consumes al, for before that a
remedy was found, there died so many thousands of men, that many Provinces
remained desert and forsaken, because of the putrefaction of the air, that
consumed all that it touched, also there where the air was so infected, the
dwellers remained marked with a red cross. Ioachim Scilerus writes, that when
the pestilence tormented so furiously (and by so long space of time) England,
A marvelous contagion in England.
the power of the venim was so great, that the reasonable creatures did not
only die, but that the birds left their nests, eggs, and young ones, the
beasts left their caves and dens, the serpents and mowles appeared above
ground, by heaps, and left their places, for fear of the venomous vapor that
was under the earth, in such sort that there were found dead under the trees,
and in the fields, with pushes and botches on their poor members. The year.
1546. the last day of May, there did rise a plage that lasted nine Months,
so great and dreadful at Aix, Contagio^ in Aix.
a City in Prouincia, whereas the people of all ages died in eating and
drinking, in such sort, that the Churchyardes were so full of dead bodies,
that there was found no more place to bury them, and the most part of the
diseased, fell into a fransie the second day, and would cast themselves into
Wells, others fell out of their windows into ye streets. Some other were
vexed with a bloody Flir by the nose, the which did run day and night
violently, and with the loss of their blood they lost their lives, and it
came to such extremity and desolation, that women with child brought forth
the fruit of their womb out of time, they and their fruit dying, the which
afterward were changed to a violet or bluish color, as if the blood had been
spread al over their bodies. And to be short, the desolation was so great, that
the father kept no count of his child, nor the husband of his wife, yea with
money in their hands, oftentimes they died for default of a glass of water,
or if by fortune they had for to eat, the sickness was so cruel and short
that they died many times with meat in their mouths, and the fury of this
contagion was so inflamed, and all the town so infected, that with their look
that they would cast upon some, they would infect them, and their wind and
breath was so venomous, that there would rise botches and sores on the parties
that therewith were attainted. It is a fearful and pitiful thing in nature, the
which a Physician left us in writing, the which was ordained of the chief of
the City, to visit the sick, that the evil was so cruel, that no remedy
might be found, so that they that were taken therewith, had no hope of health,
but by the assault of death. And they were so acquainted therewith, that when
they felt them selves taken, they themselves would take a sheet, and lie
down alive thereon, looking for no other thing than the violent departing that
the soul has, A marvelous act.
for to depart from the body, his mortal habitacle: the which he says to
have seen in many, and specially in a woman whom he called by a window, for
to ordeine her some remedy and ease of her pain, whom also he perceived by
the window, how she lay down hirselfe in her winding sheet, so y^ they that
buried y^ infected, being entered into her house, shortly after found her dead
and lien in the midst of her house, with her sheet half sowed. The misery of
man by famine
There rests now nothing but to treat of famine, which is one of the
scourges of Gods justice, as he himself has witnessed to us by his Prophets
and Apostles, Leui. 26.
sometimes threatening sinners to give them a heaven of brass, and a earth of
fire, that is to say, barren, that shall not bring forth fruit, and for this
cause our Lord God declaring to his disciples, the plagues that should come,
showing before that Nation shall rise against Nation, and kingdom against
kingdom, he adds even after that as though one did depend on an other.
Math. 24.
And there shall be pestilence and hunger in certain quarters of the earth. For
war, pestilence and famine are the iij. darts that he is wont to shoot against
the earth, when that he is angry with his creatures. Let us now see whether
that we have not ben grieved with this dart, as well as with the others. I will
not here show the common famines that have reigned diverse times in Asia,
Europa, and Africa, but I will only make mention of them of most memory,
as well Prophanes, as of those in holy scripture, to the end that those that
live in this world as in a palace of volupteousnesse without having tasted the
miseries and calamities to the which we are subject, when that it pleases the
Lord God to pour down upon his creatures the arrows of his wrath and
malediction, be provoked to acknowledge the sovereign and mighty power of
their Creator, and the pitiful estate of human kind, subject to so many
miseries. We will therefore begin with those of the Romans. After the great
ruin of Italy, and that Tottilleus the chief enemy of human kind, had
besieged Rome, they fell into such scarcity of food and sustenance, that they
were feign to eat all kind of filthy beasts and vermin, as horses, dogs,
cattes, rattes, mise, and snch like, yea, and in the end they did eat one
another, a thing most fearful to hear of, that when Gods justice does
oppress us, we are brought to such necessity, that we spare not our like,
yea, the mothers their children. The mothers eat their children.
The like befell in the destruction of Jerusalem, as Eusebius shows in his
Ecclesiastical history. It is a strange thing to hear, but more abominable
and monstrous to see, that when the great Scipio besieged the great City of
Numantia, and that he had taken away all the means for them to get vittailes,
A famine almost incredible.
they being pressed with the extreme rage of hunger, came forth every day to
chase after the Romans, in such sort, that when they took any one they eat
them without shame, and drank their blood, with as good a stomach, and so well
disgested, as if they had had either Veale or Murton, A butcherie where ma^s
flesh was sold.
and being in this rage, they took none to mercy, for so soon as he was
taken, he was killed, fleyed, cut in pieces, and sold in the Butcherie, so
that a Roman was more worth among them dead than live, or raunsomed. There is
made mention in the fourth book of the Kings, the sixth Chapter, of a famine
that chaunsed in Samaria, 4. Regu^. 6.
in the time of Helis^us, which passes this before in desolation and pity,
for the hunger was so great, that the head of an Ass was sold for four score
pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a measure of Pigeons dung, five pieces
of silver, and yet that which is furthest from our humanity, after that all
the vittailes were consumed, the mothers did eat their own children, in such
sort that a poor wife of the City made her complaint to the King of Israel,
(seeing him upon the wall) for that her neighbor would not keep and perform
the covenant that was made between them, which was, that they should eat her
child, and when that was eaten, the other womans child should be in like case
slain, the which I have (said she to the King) done and accomplished, for we
have sodden and eaten my child, and now she has hidden hirs, for that it
should not sustain me. And when the King had heard that which the woman had
said, his heart was vexed and troubled with sorrow, and rent his garments and
put on sackcloth, saying, God do so and so unto me, and so forth in the text.
Josephus, the seventh book and third Chapter of the wars of the Jews,
tells a History almost conformable to this before rehearsed, but executed
after a more stranger and detestable manner. He says that there was a woman
noble and rich, Joseph. the. 7. book. 3. chapter, of the vvarres of the Jews.
when that Jerusalem was besieged by Titus, Vespasians son, the which had
gathered together part of her goods, that she had had in times past, and lived
solitarilye of that little that she had, but the soldiers and men of war did
take all away from her, in such sort that when that she had made ready a
morsel of meat for her own eating, they would take it away by force, so that
she had nothing remaining. So that afterward she hirself was oppressed with
very great hunger, so that she wished hirselfe out of the world, but her
hour was not yet come. Wherefore that she might slake her hunger, and sustain
her life, she armed hirself against the laws of nature, and took upon her an
horrible cruelty, for when she heard her child cry, the which she held in
her arms, she said unto him, what shall I do my son, for the wrath of God
has environed this City, A history of Josephus.
in every corner thereof, famine ragineth, without the City the sword kills
up all, within we stand in fear of the sedicious, our enemies prevail
without, in the town are fires, burnings and ruins of houses, famines,
pestilence, spoiling and destroying, so that I cannot feed thee my son. Now
therefore my son, if I should die for hunger, to whom should I leave thee,
being yet a child, if I should save thy life, thou should be in perpetual
servitude and bondage to the Romans, come therefore my son and be meat to
thy mother, a terror and shame to the men of war that have left me nothing, and
thy lot be in the Garden of Eden, and Paradise. And after that she had spoken
these words, she killed him, cut his body in pieces, and roasted some, and
some she sod, and when she had eaten part, she laid up the rest to keep: and
after that she had plaide this pitiful Tragedy, the soldiers came again,
and they smelling the smell of the roasted child, began to threaten her even to
die, if that she brought not forth the meat. But she being as it were in a
rage, seeking means to follow her sons steps, being nothing abashed, said
unto them, be content my friends, I have done you no wrong, behold I have
kept you your parts: so ending her words, she brought forth the rest of her
child, and set it on the table, wherewith the soldiers being amassed and
confounded, felt themselves so smitten to the heart, that they remained dumb
and overcome, but she to the contrary, with a fearful look, and steadfast
countenance, said unto them, what my friends, be merry, it is my fruit, it is
my child, it is my deed, why do you not eat thereof? I have satisfied my
self first therewith, be you more captious therein than the mother that bare
him? think you scorn of my meat, of the which I have eaten before you? But
they which could not suffer or abide to see so pitiful a spectacle, went their
ways, and left her alone with yt rest of her child, the which was in su^me, ye
rest that was left her of al her goods. Here have I recited ye saying of
Josephus. But for y^ there are some that are nothing moved in reading
histories, monuments, or the examples of ancient writers, unless that they
have known the like in their age, or seen with their eyes, or as it were
touched with their finger, therefore I will show here how that God does spare
us no more, than he has done our Elders before us, when that he is angry for
our sins, as it shall be plainly showed by this History that follows, the
which Willyam Paradin has written, The misery of our age.
a man learned and well seen in the knowledge of Histories or memorial things
done in our time, where as he says, that the year a thousand, five hundredth,
twenty eight, the world was given to so many vices, and was so full of sin
and iniquity, that it was not humbled and amended, because of the furious
assaults and great effusion of blood of the former wars, The meruellous
contagion of our time.
but to the contrary, it was become worse and wholly depraved, by the means
whereof the bond of Gods wrath was sprede out in this poor Realm of
France, after such a sort, that it was thought that all was brought to an
end. For there happened so great calamity, poverty and misery, that there
was never the like known by memorial of time, of the like affliction, as well
in human bodies, as in fruties and revenues of the earth, for during the
space of five whole years, A famine, the year 1528.
which began the year. 1528. the time came into such a disorder, that the
four seasons left their natural course, and showed themselves changed and
altered among themselves: the Spring time being Harvest, and the Harvest the
Spring time, the Summer in Winter, and the Winter in Summer, but above all, the
Summer had such power, y^ it occupied the reign and domination of the others,
and specially against his nature contrary, so that in the deepest cold of
Winter, that is to wit, December, January and February, in y^ which times they
ought to rest, die, leave the ground, and give it over to frostes, snowes and
cold, it was so extreme whote, and the earth was so heated and burned, that it
was a fearful sight to see. For in five years there fell little frost that
remained above one day or twain, so that by this unaccustomed great heat,
maintained and nourished the vermin of the earth, as Todes, Frogs,
Grasshoppers, Caterpillars, and such like, in such quantity, that the young and
tender corn was no sooner come forth, and out of his blade, but that it was
eaten and devoured, which was the cause that the corn that ought to multiply,
and have many ears and stalks of one root, brought forth but one or two, and
yet very barren, being full of Darnell and blastings, in such sort, that when
it was gathered, the most part came not above the quantity of the sowed
seed, and many times less. And this famine lasted five years without
ceasing, a thing so pitiful and miserable, that it is not possible for man to
ymagine the like without seeing, which was the cause that a quarter of Wheat
was sold at Lyonnois, Forests, Auergny, Bauionlois, Burgonny, Sauoye,
Dolphinye, and many other places, for the sum of.xiiij.xvi.xviii. pounds
turnoys. And the poor people were so afflicted, with such dearth and
scarcity so long a time, that a number of mischiefs and maledictions did
follow. For ye poor people that lived well inoughe of their rents and
revenues, were constrained to forsake all and ask their bread for Gods sake,
and the number of poor beggars did so increase, that it was a pitiful sight
to see them in flocks hard to overcome, and more dangerous to endure, for
beside the great fear that men had to be robbed of them, the which extreme
necessity did constrain, there proceeded a great stinking and infectious smell
out of their bodies, for that they filled their bellies with all kinds of
herbs, good, naught, helthfull and venomous, so that there was no herbs left
in Gardens, that they might come by, not so much as the stalks and roots of
Coleworts (of the which) they found not the one half to sustain them. And
when that there was no more to be had in Gardens, they had their refuge to
wild herbs, not used, so that the most part of them, would sees great
kettels with Mallows and other herbs, and so satisfied themselves as do
hogs. But it was a greater wonder to see bread made of chafe, ackornes, and of
hay seed, the which the poor were forced to eat, by impacience and rage of
hunger, and also remembering themselves, how that hogs do delight to feed on
Fearne roots, they made bread thereof, deceiving or beguiling the hogs of
their food and sustena^ce. The which is enough to make us know how much our
Lord Gods wrath was against y^ filth of our sin, seeing that he permitted
that me^ should be brought to such necessity, as to eat with the hogs, by
the which means followed a number diseases, and the world fell into a great
fear, seeing a great band or company of men and women, young and old, go
shaking or trembling in the streets, the others having the skin swollen like
drums, others lying half dead on the ground, drawing their last breath, and
of such kind of people were stables and barnes filled, others were so
languishing, that of great pain, they could tell their necessity, nor yet
scant draw their breath, but quiuered and shaked with their legs, rather
seeming like to fancies and dreams, than men. Besides all this the great
compassion was to see a great company of poor mothers, bare, lean, and
disfigured, compassed and charged with many young children, the which by great
distress of famine, cried out unto their mothers for food, the which beheld
them so pitifullye and dolefully, that it seemed to me the greatest pity of
al, hearing the anguishe and distress of heart that they showed, by shedding
abundance of tears, and pitiful look. The said Paradin writes, to have
seen at a place called Louhans in Burgonie, a poor woman, the which by great
means and importunity had found the means to get a piece of bread, the which
was suddenly snatched out of her hand, by a little child of hirs, the which she
gave suck to, and held in her arms, the which was scant a year old, the
mother had never seen it eat bread before, for y^ which she marvelled
greatly, beholding her little child, how it did eat this same brown bread
that was hard and dry, with so great an appetite, that it was a strange and
marvelous thing to behold, for ye mother would have gathered together the
crumbs that fell from his mouth, but the child began to cry out, as though it
had sustained some great wrong, for anger that he saw his mother gather
together the crumbs, as though he had been afraied not to have had enough. O
eternal and almighty God, what image? what spectacle? might there be found
any heart so void of humanity, that might not be moved thereby with compassion
and pity? The said Author recites yet, that in an other village (not far
distant from the before said) were found two women, the which not finding
wherewithal to sustain or slake their hunger, did eat and fill themselves
with a venomous herb named Scyla, being like Onyons, or wild Lettise, and not
knowing the virtue nor property of the said herb, poisoned themselves, in
such sort and manner that their feet and hands became green like Lezardes
skins, and the poison came forth under their nails of their fingers, so that
there was no remedy but that they died soon after. Finallye, this misery and
calamity being of a long and an intolerable time, the good husbandmen of the
countries having land, heritages and possessions, were constrained to have
their refuge to rich Merchantes, whereof some had hourded up whole barnes full
of corn, for to bye first of them, whilst that their money lasted, and then
afterward was lands, and heritages laid to gage, and sold wholly and at a
small price, of the which such was worth a hundredth pounds, for the which they
had not ten, so great was the mischief, and ill luck of this cursed avarice
and usury, and yet it was not enough that men were afflicted and scourged with
the vehement ire and scourge of Gods wrath, by coniuration of all the elements,
and almost of all the creatures, but that men also (their like) did afflict and
persecute them. For these covetous rich men, seeing the time to succeed, as
they did wish and desire, for to fill their chests and coffers, did not fail
to their occasion, they had Factors for their purpose, for to put to sale y^
poor men's goods at their price, and at the word of those that had corn, for
the bying whereof the good people would leave nothing unsold, even to lay to gage
their clothing, for to have food, and that which was worse, the most part saw
not that measured that they bought, and notwithstanding they were constrained
to take it, such as pleased the seller, and to bye (as the proverb goth) a pig
in a poke. And I must here tell, y^ there has been such a usurer that has had
a piece of ground for less than the writings have cost at a Notaries hands.
Those that have made such rapines, know well that I speak truth. And after al
these mischiefs, you should see nothing but good people driven out of their
houses and goods, they, their wives and children, and then they died in
Hospitals, of the which, these false sellers are the murderers, as if they had
cut their throtes, and they shall render and give account before him, unto who^
nothing is hidden. We have here made a long declaration of three scourges, with
the which our God is wonted to waken his creatures, when that he feels them
obstinate and wallowing in their sins, but this before is little, to the regard
of other cruel diseases, with the which our life is threatened, and besieged all
our days. The diversity of diseases, vvherevvith man is afflicted.
Pliny and many other Phistions, Greeks and Arabians, have written, that
since two thousand year, they have discovered more than three hundredth kind
of sicknesses, to the which the human bodies are subject, without reckning
those that daily increase. Among the which they make mention of some so
cruel, that I cannot refer them without shame. I will leave here to speak of
the vulgar and common sort of diseases, where as it behooves sometimes to burn
the members with hot burning catares, saw a sunder bones, take out the pain
in the head, pull bowels out of their bodies, as though there should be made
some Inuentarie and Anotamy. Others that have been made to keep diets so
straight, because of the fury of their disease (as Cornelius Celsus shows)
that they have been constrained to drink their own urine to quench their
thirst, eat their plasters, for to moderate their hunger. Others being
persuaded that they have swallowed down serpents, to the which there was no
means of help, until that there has been live serpents put into the Basen
wherein they vomited, making them believe that they were come out of their
bodies, as Alexander Tralianus shows, of the damsel that he healed by this
means, y^ which thought that she had swallowed down a serpent in her sleep.
Others, of the which their sickness is so horrible and strange, that they
thought they were transformed into brute beasts, as he whom Gallian makes
mention of, that thought verilye that he had been transformed into a Cock, and
that he was among the Cocks daily, and when that he did hear them crow, he
would counterfeit the like, and as they flap their wings when that they begin
to sing, so would he do with his arms. Others that thought themselves to be
turned into Wolves, and ceased not in the nights to run by hills, Though
that abusedly the common state thinks that this proceeds of of some other
thing
dales, deserts places and fields, and counterfeited their howlings, with
other Woluish iestes, and are tormented with this malady, until that the sun
has spread his beams on the earth. The Greeks call this kind of malady
Lycantropeia, the which thing I think should not seem strange or fabellous
to those that have red in holy scripture the pitiful Metamorphosie of
Nabuchodonosor, who was transformed into an Ox, the space of seven years,
for to bring him to the knowledge of his God. And others, says Galian, in the
place before alleged, yt thought themselves to be turned into earthen vessels,
and went not out of the fields, and if that they saw a tree or a wall, they
ran away, fearing lest that they should strike against it, and so to be
broken in pieces. Others that have been three years together without sleep or
closing their eyes, as it happened to the good Mecenas. Others that are so
oppressed with pain, that they beat their head against the walls, as it has
happened to a cunning man in our time named Angel Pollitian. Others that are
constrained to eat serpents in their sickness, as the Leprous. Others, as it
happened to the Philosopher Pherecides, out of whose body proceeded a great
quantity of Serpents. Others in whose bodies there enge^dreth a great quantity
of lice, by y^ which they are in the end devoured, without finding or inue^ting
remedy therefore, the which the Medicines call, A lousie sicknes^e.
y^ lousie sickness. I could rehearse among all these evils, other miseries
that man has invented of himself for to shorten his life and the life of his
neighbor, as though those that nature has prepared for him, were not
sufficient, such are the venims and poisons the which he prepares at this
day, so dexterlye, that there is no more order of safety, but to fly and
forsake the company of human creatures, Diverse inventions of venims and
poyso^s.
and to go into the wilderness among the brute beasts, in whose company it
is more sure than in the company of him that is yllwilling. Certain ancient
Authors as Orpheus, Orus, Medesius, Heliodorus and Aratus, have showed the
composition of five hundredth sorts of venims and poisons, and certain others
since their time have increased the number: but if they were living at this
day, they would be counted foolish Asses, so much is our human malice burst
out, The poisons and venims invented by men.
during the old time, they did help themselves with certain Drugs, which are
of their nature venomous, as Ptholomeus writes, of that which he calls
Marmacica, the which is so contagious that the weight of a wheat corn makes
a man die suddenly, and it is sold a hundredth crowns the ounce, and so much
tribute paid he that bought it, and yet they had this consideration, to make
them swear that they should not use thereof in their Province, nor against
their friends, but only against strangers. But good God, the Devil has so
entered into men at this day, and has made them so cunning, and apt in evil
and mischief, that by the smell thereof men are poisoned as the experience was
at Sienne. Another Florentine knight, after that he had pulled of his helmet
for to take air, Jerome Cardan in his book of subtilitate
and to refresh him, an enemy of his rubbed him with a certain poison, which
was the occasion that he died suddenly. Also in flames of torches, they can so
well corrupt them, that their smell and smoke shall poison men, in such sort,
that many dare not light torches a nights for to conduct the^, if yt they stand
in fear of their enemy. As concerning meats and drinks empoysoned,
Exclamation against the poisoners
that is a common practice, and as they say, the revenge of kitchen maids,
but I am ashamed for that I needs must tell that which I have red in a famous
Author, that they have found the means in our age, to empoyson the saddels of
horses, boots and spurs, also that which cannot be pronounced without grief,
for in touching the hands one of another yea, A subtle invention of poisoning.
even in letters and writings that are sent, the which being unclosed, there is
a little subtle vapor that rises hie, and asce^deth by little into a man's
brains. They know the practice whereof Theophrastus speaks, that the poison
is sometimes prepared after such a sort, that it kills not but at the
murderers intention, for if he will, the party shall live iij. months.vi.
months, a year, in such sort, that death comes at the time of y^ collectio^
and gathering of the medicine or poison prepared. Furthermore, as I have
understood of men worthy of faith and credence, that they have the subtlety
to make it after such a sort, that it shall not hurt but one member, one arm,
or one leg. The experience thereof has been seen in a fountain empoysoned
beside Rhine, near to the sea, the water of the said, caused the teeth to
fall out of all those that drunk thereof in the camp of Germany. Also things
are come to such desolation, that they have found the means to mingle poison
with the Wafer or Communion bread, An Emperor empoysoned with a vvafer cake.
as I have written in other places. Is not this a marvelous thing that Ierom
Cardan writes of a certain invention of Gray Friars that has been found in
our years, of a Collar or Carcan which if the Creditor put it on the Debtors
neck, it can not be taken away, but of him that put it on, and by such
mischief, one Zafarnus citizen of Millaine, being overcome by his Creditor,
died, as Cardan witnesses. There rests now to show how that man is
afflicted by the four elements, which are as witnesses and ministers of the
vengeance and wrath of God against our sins. What is there more necessary
for the life of man than water? for there is neither man nor beast that can
live without the use thereof, there is neither herb nor plant that can bring
forth either seed or fruit without water, without putting in account the
profit and commodity that it brings in this world, seeing also that it is
the most auncie^test and mightiest element of all, as Pliny and Isidorus
writes, Man afflicted by water.
it ouerwhelmeth and decaieth mountains, she governs the earth, quenches the
fire, and converting into vapors, surpasses the Region of the air, and
afterward descends for to engender and bring forth al things that are hid
in the earth. And yet notwithstanding, what chasticements has the antiquity
or former age tasted of the rigor of this element, when the great fall of
waters was, The deluge. Genesis. 7.
that covered all ye earth, when that the vames of heaven were opened, and that
the water did surpass or overwhelmed the most highest mountains, the height of
fiftene fadome, as Moses witnesses in Genesis. How oftentimes has Egypt been
overflowed when that Nille derived from his chanel how many thousands of men
have lost their lives, and have been devoured of fishes. Greek land has
felt the fury of the waters, and can witness the same, when the great flood
or deluge of waters did ouerrun the most part of Thessalie, the people being
afraid all to be drowned. What loss and harm received the Romans, in the
year a thousand, five hundredth, The four elements executors of Gods wrath.
thirty? by the swelling and ouerflowing of the flood of Tiber, the which did
rise after such a sort, that it overwhelmed houses, and hie toures in their
city, and beside the loss of Bridges that were broken, the loss of goods,
gold, silver, wine, corn, cloth of silk, oils, woolles, and other mouables,
to the value of three Msllions of gold: there died more than three hundredth
men, beside women and children, which were drowned by violence of the waters of
the said flood, as the Elders do write. Iespar Contarenus in his boks of the
four elements writes, that in our time, Vallencia a City in Spain, with all
the Citizens, were almost drowned by a violent and an unknown water, after such
sort, that if the Citizens had not sodainlye given succor in rampairing and
fencing, there had been no other hope of safeguard. Without making mention of an
infinite of other harms and domages, that we have received, since this five or
six thousand years that the world was created, of raynes, hayles, frostes,
snowes, and other like injuries, that depend of the rigor of this element.

What is there more wonderful in nature than fire, Man afflicted by fire.
by the benefit whereof all our meats are seasoned, the life of many things
is, Mettalles are mingled and made flexible: iron is daunted, made pliable and
ouerco^med: the lime stones, that we use for ye plastring and trimming of our
houses and edifices, are burned and softened in the belly or midst of the
earth, by his aid and help. And notwithstanding, Genesis ca. 9.
how many famous Cities have been fiered, burned and brought to ashes by the
virtue of this element, the most auncientest witness is in the holy
scripture, of Sodom and Gomor, on the which our Lord God poured or rained
down fire and brimstone, and the last scourge and destruction of the
universal world shall be executed by the fury of this element, as it is written
by by the Prophets and Apostles. If that I would set out at large and by order,
the proud Cities and Provinces that have been burned in diverse places of the
world, by the incursio^ and insurrection of the war, but only in our time,
the Tragedy would be excessive. But those that are curious of such things, let
them read Strabo in his twelfth book, and Ruffinus treating of Eusebius
works, and Amianus Marcelinus, where they shall find also that the flames of
fire proceading from the tops of hills or mountains, and other bowels of the
earth, have burned many towns with their inhabitants. In the time of Lucius
Marcus, and Sextus Julius the Consuls, there proceeded so great flame from two
hills Pliny.
or mountains, that all the towns and mountains about them were burned, and
many inhabitants burned and consumed by the violence of the flames that came
forth by great violence. The misery of man by thunders lightninges and
tempests.
I can in like case make mention of thunders and lightnings, and how many noble
personages have been consumed and killed by this kind of sudden death, as
Zorastus, King of the Bactrians, Captain in the war of Thebes, Ajax after
the destruction of Troie, Anastatius the Emperor, when he had reigned.xxvij.
years, Carius also and many other Kings and Emperors that have taken their end
by this kind of death. The air is so requisite, for the preservation of our
humanity, that there is no living beast that can have life without the use
thereof. And yet notwithstanding, it is so pernicious to human kind when it
putrifieth Men afflicted by the air.
and corrupts, that the most part of pestilences before mentioned, take their
original and beginning, as from their very Author. The earth that is the most
gentillest and tractablest of all the elements, which is our common mother of
all, receiving us when that we are borne, that nourishes us and sustaineth us,
and in the end receives us into her bowels as into a bed, and keeps us until
the day that it pleases God to call us to Man afflicted by the earth.
appear and come forth to his judgment, and notwithstanding, it brings
forth all the venims and poisons, with the which our life is daily assaulted.
And sometimes by these earthquakes and internal agitations, many towns have
been weakened, and many thousands of men swallowed up in these openings and
earthquakes. In the time that Mithridates reigned, the earth began to move,
and to shake with such a rigor and fury, that there was not only many towns
rased, but also there was above a hundredth thousand men swallowed and
overwhelmed. In the time or reign of Constantine, son to ye Emperor
Constantine, there were such a number of towns overthrown, Man afflicted by
earthquakes.
and swallowed up with their inhabitants in Asia by earthquakes, that the
Historiographes had much to do to number the^. In the time of Isocratus and
Plato, the concauits and bottoms of the earth, did open in Europe, by such
vehemency, that two great Cities with their inhabitants were swallowed up in a
moment. There is not read to our memory, nor to the memory of man a more
dreadful earthquake, than that which happened in the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
by the which, in the space of one night twelve Cities were swallowed up with
their goods and inhabitants, among the which Apolonia, Ephesia, Cesaria,
Philadelphia, and many others numbered. The little beasts war upon man and
increases his miseries.
And yet it is a thing more to be marvelled at, and that turns to more
confusion the pride and loftiness of men, that the earth brings forth
certain littel beasts, that oppress and make war upon him, yea, chase,
excile and banishe him, from his habitation and dwelling, the which may be
thought untrue and fabellous, if it were not for the great number of Historians
and Writers y^ which show just and true witness thereof. Elian writes, yt
there increased or multiplied such a number of Rates in certain places of
Italy, that for the destruction that they made to roots of trees and herbs
(for the which there was no remedy) cansed such a famine to be, that the
inhabitants were constrained to forsake their country. Marcus Varonus, one of
the worthiest writers that ever writ in Latin, says, that in Spain there was
a great Borough, situated on a sandy ground, that was so undermined with
Cunnies that in the end the inhabitants did forsake it, for fear to have
sunk into the holes or dens of these littel beasts, by whose mean it was
at the last overthrown. The same Author writes, that there was a town in
France that was left uninhabited, because of ye multitude of frogs. In Africa
the like chance happened by Grasshoppers. Theophrastus makes mention of a
certain Province that they caused the people to dishabit. Pliny recites that
there is a Province on the limits of Ethiopia, whereas the Antes and Scorpions
with other vermin exiled the men that there did inhabit. The Flies caused the
Megarensians to depart out of their Country. The Aspes chased the Ethiopia^s.
Athenor writes that honey Bees and other flies chased out of a town all the
inhabitants thereof, and made their hiues in their houses. What witness of
our human infirmity is here declared in all these things? O what discipline
or school is this, for to teach man to know himself? what a marvel of the
power of God is this toward his creatures? of whom the judgments are so
terrible and fearful, that as soon as man thinks to spread out his horns,
or to rise against his god, he can so well at the first bridle and pull down
his boldness and proud looks, and so tame him, that not only he does send
Heralds and foreru^ners of his wrath, war, famine and pestilence, but in
abunding, there is neither element, nor other brutish creature, but that
seeks his decay, even to the little beasts, which are as ministers and
executors of his divine justice, ye which is manifest, not only by the
witnessing of ye Heathen, but also by holy Scripture, when that the Frogs and
Grasshoppers did forsake their places, Exodus 8. and 9. Cap.
for to ascend and come up to the chambers, and even to the bed of the
obstinate Pharao. We have here before showed a strange philosophy of the
misery of man. For if man were of iron, or as hard as a Diamond, it is marvel
how he can endure the one half of his life, without being bruised and broken,
seeing the pains, anguishes, travels and passions, that it behooves him at all
times to sustain. Notwithstanding, what misfortune so ever happen him, what
charge or burden y^ nature does lay upon him, yet he can not, nor will not
humble himself under y^ mighty hand of God for to carry his yoke, nor yet to
know himself to be as he is. Therefore by good right does the Lord God
reprove him by his Prophet, that he has the forehead of brass, Esaias. 4.
and the neck of iron, the which things being ill understood of Plato and of
Pliny, seeing the great gulf of miseries wherein man is plunged in, even from
his birth, to his grave, has called nature cruel and a vsuresse, the which
causes so many interests to be paid to man, of his excellency and dignity,
that they have esteemed ye brute beasts more happier than man, but both the
one and the other under this name of nature have challenged or complained on God
of injustice and cruelty. But to prove the contrary, all the evils and this
sea of misery, wherewith man is charged, comes not of the hatred of God, but
of the malice and corruption of man who is the very Author of all his
afflictions and calamities, for thinking to be equal with his God, he has
begone to fall from his nobleness, and to efface the image of God graven in
him, and to change it to the likeness of a Devil, and therefore is happened
to him that which the Prophet David says, Psalm. 49.
God has called man to honor, yet he does not consider it, and therefore is
compared to the beasts that perish. Here you may see that his proudnesse,
arrogancy and boldness, has been the cause of all the sores and
maledictions of human kind. For if it had not been for the ambition and
desire to be great (of the first man) we had been as the Angels in heaven,
such as we shall be at the resurrection, and crowned with honor and glory. And
yet this is little, as touching the pains and afflictions before mentioned,
which are as a leaning stock to our bodies, but the diseases of the spirit is
much worse, the which are much more perilous than the afflictions of the
body. For those of the body, says Plutarchus, do manifest and show out of
themselves, either by the ill color of the face, or by the moving of the
thumb, or else by some other means or grief, and being known, the remedies
are incontine^t sought for. Man afflicted by the maladies of the spirit.
But as touching the maladies of the spirit, he that is sick, cannot judge by
signs or otherwise his grief, for it is in the spirit, who can then give
judgment? and therefore the pacient not knowing his disease, seeks not also
for remedy. Furthermore there is a greater abuse, for those that have their
bodies afflicted, we call them by the name of sick, the which does torment
them, as if they were persecuted with a fransie, we name them frantic: if
they be pained in their joints, we say they have the Gout: if they shake, we
say they have the Palsy. But O immortal God we do the contrary to the
afflicted spirits, for those that are wrathful, burn in their passion: those
that wound one and kill another, we call them hardy and strong, and we say
that they esteem much honor and commendation: they that violate women and
virgins, we call that bearing of love: those that are proud, and that seek by
all unlawful means to climb up to high dignities, we name them grave,
honorable, men of good demeanor and ripe judgment: those that are covetous,
and that become rich in short times, and that beguile their neighbor by many
subtilties and inue^tions, we call this good husbandry, and so forth even of
all the rest. Here you may see how that we cloak all these things. Here you may
see that this shadowing or cloking of vice under ye mantell of virtue, is cause
of so many evils and mischiefs, as continually happen and fall upon us, making
by the only name, worthy of honor, the things that merit blame and dishonor,
of the which the most part of human spirits at this day are tormented and
vexed, as we have done those of the body: what eloquence or dignity of word
might satisfice? what majesty of sentences might comprehend them? for seeing
that the world wherein we are, is at this day drowned in so many kinds of
vices, that it seems to be properly, the sink whereas all the wickedness of
the former age has been emptied and poured. Begin we of covetousness, who
is it that ever saw it deeper rooted in all estates of the world, tha^ at this
present? but what other thing are these Cities, Common welths, Provinces and
kingdoms of this world, (if we will well consider it) but very shoppes and
storehouses of avarice and covetousness? Esaias. 2.
This is the season that the Prophet Esaias speaks of, Against covetousness.
their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their
treasure. This is the world that ye Prophet did foreshew, they join house to
house, Esaias. 5.
and land to land, as though they themselves would alone dwell upon the
earth. And of this pestilent root of couetousuesse proceeds as from their
lively Welspring, an infinite number of evils that are poured out on the earth,
and spread through all the parts of the world. Of the original of the most
part of wars, of the great effusion of blood, with the which the earth is
overflowed, of the murders, treasons, sacriledges, thefts, pilfreys, vsuries,
frauds, forswearings, the corruption of witnesses, perverting of judgments,
from thence the subtilties and practices proceed, in corrupting one and
poisoning another, from thence the immoralitie and lingering of process do
proceed: to be short, from thence comes all kind of corruption and evil,
and nevertheless, the vice and sin of men are so familiar, that there can
scant be found any estate, but that therewith is polluted. Also the
Ecclesiastical sort, Judas, and Simon Magus sowed the first seed thereof, the
which has so fructified since, that many others have tasted and felt thereof.
At such time as the Church was poor, needye, persecuted and scattered by the
Tyrants and Infidels, and that it was governed by poor fishermen, they
nourished these poor, and suffered not that any one should want. But now
that it is at the highest degree of riches, and that it is governed by the
great Prelates, she has no more care for the members of Jesus Christ, by such
sort, that now we may see the streets full of poor beggars, bare, naked, all
clad with poverty, with an infinite number of banished women, and driven out
of their countries, by the insurrection of wars, bearing their children in
their arms. And in the mean time these Prelates keep close the benefit of
him that was crucified for them, and are intertayned in their pomp and
deliciousness, the other sort do keep it, and hourde it up with such
curiosity, that they make it their God, and will rather let a poor body die
at their gates, than to refreshe him with a cup of water, in such sort that I
am ashamed to show or declare a history almost monstrous, of the covetousness
of an Italian Prelate, The monstrous covetousness of a Prelate.
named Angelot, which was a Cardinal, for he was so empoisoned with this
cursed poison of avarice, that when the horskepers had given toward the night
Otes to his horses, he would come into the stable by a privy way alone, and
without light to steal or take away the Otes and Prouander from his own
horses, and so continued many nights, till the horsekeper perceiving his
horses wax lean did hyde himself in the stable, and taking my Lord with the
manner, did give him so many strokes with ye Hay forke, that he was feign to
bear him into his Chamber, for condign or just recompense of his wicked and
burning covetousness. The which should seem to be a fable and ridiculous, but
that Philelpheus and Iouian Pontanus in his book of Liberality, and many other
sage writers make mention. Behold the fruits, behold the rewards of this
cursed riches, the which is gathered together with many sharp and bitter
cares, and is kept with continual fear, and then is left with many sighs and
tears: of the which the ancient Romans should be good and manifest
witnesses, if we would bring in their Authors, the which when that their
Common weal was governed by poor rulers, it has always prospered, but since
that she was swelled and puffed up by the victories of her Predecessors, as of
the destruction of Corinth, of Achaia, of Antioche, of France, of Greece, of
Italy, of Egypt and of Spain, their Empire began to declyne: for their
victories, prays and spoils, were the corrupting of good manners, and of their
ancient institution and discipline, the occasion and original of cruel wars,
for that that could not be ouercommed by violence and force of Arms, was
vanquished by lechery and superfluity, in such sort that their riches are
revenged against themselves, and to them is happened as to a clothe that
engenders his Moth, and to the corn that engenders worms that devour it.
The which the great King Solomon having well considered in himself, when that
he had heaped and gathered together so much treasure, that his riches exceeded
the glory of all other Kings of the Earth, and that he had proved the benefits
that proceed of the goods of this world, he left us his judgment and advise
by writing, as follows: Eccle.
I (says he) made gorgeous, fair works, and builded me houses, and planted
Vineyardes, I made me Orchardes and Gardens of pleasure, and planted trees in
the^ of all manner fruits, I made Pooles of water to water the green and
fruitful trees withal, I bought servants and Maidens and had a great
household, as for cattle and sheep I have more substance of them than all they
that were before me in Jerusalem, I gathered silver and gold together, even a
treasure of Kings and Lands, I provided me singers and women which could play
of Instruments to make me^ mirth and pastime, I gat me Psalteries and songs of
Music, and I was greater and in more worship than all my predecessors in
Jerusalem, this my heart rejoiced in all that I did, and this was the portion of
all my travel. And when I considered all the works that my hand had wrought,
and all the labor that I had taken therein, lo all was but vanity and
variation of mind, and nothing of any value under the Sun. Harken now what
the Prophet Baruch says, whom we shall find to be a more sharper Surgion
against those that are so affectioned in their pompes and riches: Where are
(says he) the Princes of the Heathen become, Baruch. 3.
and such as ruled the beasts on earth, they that had their pastime with the
Fowls of the air, they that hoorded up silver and gold (wherein men trust so
much) and made no end of their gathering, what is become of them that coined
silver and were so careful, and could not bring their works to pass, they
be rooted out and gone down to hell, and other men are come up in their
steades. Leave we therefore these old covetous me^, ydolaters of their
treasures, with the Patrocleus of Aristophanus, the Pigmalion of Virgil, the
Polymnestor of Properceus, the Galeran of Martial, with the covetous rich man
me^cioned in holy Scripture: knowing that the spirits of men which of nature
are divine and celestial, has no porcio^ with gold and silver, which is no
other thing but the very mucke of the earth.

Let us speak now of another vice which is called Envy, the which as
Aristippus does affirm, is next parent to the former, Envy a malady of the
spirit.
as the mother and the daughter, for the one engenders the other. How many
afflicted souls are there with this malady. The season is now come, that all
y^ world is no other thing, than a very place of envious, it is the most
auncientest and eldest of all, and notwithstanding it is the most practice of
our age, and seems to return to his first infancy, the experience of the
first age was in Adam and the Serpent, in Abel and Caine, in Jacob and Esau,
in Joseph and his brethren, in Saul and David, in Achitophell and Thusi, in
Aman and Mardocheus, the which pursued not one another for the riches that
they had, but for the envy yt the one bare to the other, but that was little to
that which daily is put in ure among the christians for our world is so far
out of square, that if there might be found one man amongst us, that had the
beauty of Absalon, the strength of Sampson, the wisdom of Solomon, the
agilitie of Azacl, the riches of Cressus, the liberality of Alexander, the
vigor and dexterity of Hector, the eloquence of Homer, the fortune of
Augustus, the justice of Traianus, the zeal of Cicero, he might be assured
that he should not be orned with so many graces, as pursued of a number of
envious. And this wicked vice cleaves not only to those that enjoy fortune
measurably, but unto the highest, and those that are in the highest degree, for
when they are at the most highest degree of Fortunes wheel, and when they
think to be in peaceable possession of the favor of Kings and of Princes, in
the mean time the enemy shall conspire their death, and cause them to be
disdayued: and therefore the wise Emperor Marcus Aurelius said that Envy was
a Serpent so enuenimed, that there was never mortal among the mortals, but
that of her teeth have been bitten, of her claws have been scratched, trodden
under her feet: and empoisoned with her poyso^, I have red (says he) many
books, Greeks, Latins, Hebrews and Chaldeys, I have conferred with many wise
men for to find a remedy against the envious man, and for all this, I have
found no other means for to avoid Envy, but to avoid fortune being
prosperous, the reason is, for that we are the children of Envy, being born in
Envy, and he that leaves most goods, leaves most Envy, and for this cause
the Elders cou^selled the rich y^ they should not keep them near the poor,
and the poor that they should not dwell near the rich, for of the riches of
y^ rich grows up the seed of Envy of the poor. I might here also make a^
long narration of the ambition and pride that reigns this day amongst us,
Ambition a malady of the spirit.
for who ever saw the excessive pompes in all estates, as we see at this
present, so that we may well name our world, a world of Satin, of Velvet, of
Purple, and of Silk, of the which we take so much pain to deck this carin
carcass so curiously, and in the mean time we care not nor keep no count if
our poor Soul remain foul and full of sores and wounds, and rent by a great
many of enormious and heinous sins, with ye which it is compassed, but let us
beware after all these things that that happen not to us which the Prophet did
write against the women of Jerusalem, who after he had reproned their pride,
their hie looks unshamefast, the moving or rolling of their eyes, their rier
of their heads, the measure of their goings, footings or trippings, their
chayns, Iuels, bracelets, girdels, ear rings and other facio^s of their attier
by too much vain glory. It shall happen to you, says the Lord of hosts, that
in stead of perfumes and sweet smell, you shall have stink, in stead of a
girdle, a rope, in stead of curled hair, baldness, and the fairest young men
among you shall pass through ye edge of the sword, and the strongest and
hardiest shall be slain and die in the wars.

We may also add another affliction of the spirit to the former which is
named Love, Love is counted among the most grievous maladies of the spirit.
but so contagious that all the estates of the world do feel it, an evil so
pestilent and venomous, that it plungeth and intermedleth among all ages
indifferently, as all the devils do among all the Elements without excepting
persons or quality of old or young, foolish or discrete, of feeble or strong.
And the greatest pain in this malady is that they become mad and out of their
wits, if they be not well treated and medicined at the first. And therefore it
is that Paulus Aeginetaus in his third book ordained to al those that are
persecuted of this furor of evil, a rule how to live. The which Ompercleus
following the counsel of Plato, ordained also who made two kinds of furies, of
the which he called one in Greek Exotikon, which signifies in Latin
Amatorium, and in English Love. I have seen those opened, that have died of
this malady, that had their bowels shronke, their poor heart all burned,
their Liver and Lights all vades and consumed, their Brains endomaged, and I
think that their poor soul was burned by the vehement and excessive heat
that they did endure, when that the rage of Love had ouercomme them, and even
as the cure of this malady is incurable, also the original is very doubtful
to those that have written. The Physicians say, that this rage of Love that
presses so sore, and that is spread through the world, proceeds of the
correspondent quality of blood, and that the complectio^ engenders the same
mutual love: the Astrologians in like manner say that Love proceadeth when
that two metting have one mind, or that they be changed in some other
constellation, for they be constrained to love together. Other Philosophers
have said, that when we cast our sight upon that which we desire, suddenly
certain spirits that are engendered of the most perfectest part of blood,
proceeding from the heart of the party which we do love, and promptly ascends
even up to the eyes, and afterward conuerteth into vapors invisible, and
enters into our eyes, which are bent to receive them, even so as in looking
in a glass there remains therein some spotte by breathing, and so from the
eyes it penetrateth to the heart, and so by littell and little it spreads all
about, and therefore the miserable Lover being drawn to, by the new spirits,
the which desire always to join and draw near, with their principal and
natural habitation, is constreyned to mourn and lament his lost liberty.
Others after that they had studied all that ever they could therein, and not
finding the spring and original of this so furious an evil, have said that
Love was one, I know not what, that came I know not how, and burned I know not
how, a thing very certain and true, for he that does consider, the iestes,
facions of doing, countenances, furies and Eclipses of these poor passioned,
he would confess, that he never saw a more stranger Metamorphosie, or
spectacle more ridiculous, suddenly you shall see them drowned in tears,
making the air to sound with their cries, sighs, plaints, murmurings and
imprecations, another time you shall see them cold, frozen, and in a trance,
their faces pale and changed, other times, if y^ they have had any good luck,
or other gentle entertainment of the thing that they love, Gestes and
countenances ridiculous of Lovers.
you shall see the^ gay, cheerful and pleasant, so that you would judge that
they were changed into some other form, sometimes they love to be solitary and
seek secret places, to speak and reason with themselves, and sometimes ye
shall see them pass five or six times a day through a streat, for to spy
whether that they may have any look of the eye of her whom they love, and in
the mean time the poor Pages and Verlets have their legs bruised with running,
their arms broken with rubbing, spunging, brushing, trimming and making clean
the Gentleman. And if that he chance to have any spark of ielosie, then they
begin to rage and the pacientes are in extreme peril, the force and violence
of the malady strives against the nature, it is a Catharre that burns the^,
there is no live nor sensible part within them but that is grieved, and then if
they be fearful, they become frantic and hardy, there is neither Art,
inue^tion, craft or conspiracy, but that comes out: they be come Lycantropes
and go all the night like raging wolves. And although the malady of it self
is fantastical enough, yet according to the humor that she meets, she
works marvelous effects, for if the Lover be poor, there is no office of
humanity, but that he shows it, even to sacrifice, and to put him self in
peril, if need shall require. If he be rich, his purse (as the Greeks term
it) is tied with a Leeke blade, though he be covetous, he becomes then
prodigal, there is no bag that he will spare to emptye, so great is the power
of this poison, the which has moved Plautus to say, that Love was the first
inuenter of beggerie. If the Lover be learned, and that his spirits be any
thing weakened you shall see him faigne a sea of tears, a Lake of miseries, to
double his plaintes, accuse the heaven, make an Anotomie of his heart, friese
the So^mer, burn the Winter, worship, play the Idolater, wonder, to faigne
Paradise, to forge Hell, Sisiphus that turned his rochet, Tantalus that died for
thirst near the waters, Titius, of whom the famished Raven devoured his
heart.
counterfeit Sisiphus, play Ta^talus, feign Titius, with a thousand other
toies. And if they be minded to exalt ye which they love, then what is there
here but a bewtye, her brows, arches, her eyes After gemells, her looks,
lightnings, her mouth, Coral, her teeth, pearls of Orient, her breath, balm,
amber, and musk, her throat of snow, her neck of milk, the mountanes or
dugs that she has on her breast, balls or apples of Aliblaster. And generally
all the rest of the body is no other but a prodigality and treasure of heaven
and of nature, which she has reserved to please or agree in all perfection to
the thing that they love. Here you may see how this cruel malady of Love
tormenteth those that are attained of this mortal poison, and notwithstanding,
there are so many people, Nations and Provinces, so charged with these furious
assaults, that if there were an army made of al y^ Lovers that are in y^
world, there is no Emperor nor Monarch, but would be afraid to see such a
number of fools in a company. And nevertheless this pestilent evil, by
custom it has got so much on human kind, that there can no remedy be
found although that many medicines, They that have written the remedies of
Love could not help themselves.
Greeks and Arabians have employed all their wit and policy for to remedy
this passion. Samocraceus, Nigideus, and Ovid have written many great volumes
of the remedy of Love, by the which they show the remedies for others, but
they can find no remedy for themselves, An example of a furious Love.
for that all three died, pursued and destroyed, not for the harms that they
did at Rome, but for the Loves that they invented. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius
knowing that Faustine his wife loved a Ruffian, The furious love of Faustine,
wife to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, the child had the like qualities.
so that she was impatient, and was in peril of death for ye furious desire
that she had to have him in her possession, assembled a great many people
learned, and of al faculties and sciences, for to give him counsel to quench
the burning heat that consumed her by little and little. But after many
resolutions, certain of his Nobles counseled him to kill him whom his wife
loved, and that one should give her secretly of his blood to drink, the which
was promptlye executed. This remedy was great, for her affection was quenched.
And yet it was not of so great efficacy as Julius Capitolin writes, but that
Comodus whom they engendered afterward, was bloody and cruel, and was more
like in conditions to the Ruffian, Entropeus in the life of Comodus.
than to the father, and also was daily conversant with the Ruffia^s, and
delighted more in their company than in the company of others, so that it
seemed that the Mothers passion was transported to the child. But this is
little to that which I have read in many Histories, that things are come to
such desolation, that when this foolish frenzy does take hold of us, it
renders us brutish and mad, as it has been manifestly and evidently showed
and seen in a young Lad being of the highest kindred in Athens, and well known
of all the Citizens of the City, the which having many times beheld a fair
statute of Marble very excellentlye wrought, which was in a public place of
Athens, The power of Love.
he was so stricken with the love of it, that he would never leese the sight of
it, and always remained by it, embracing and kissing it, as if it had been a
living soul. And when that he was out of her sight, he wept and lamented so
pitifully, that it would have moved the most constantest to pity, and in the
end this passion got so much power on him, and was brought to such extremity,
that he desired the Senators to sell it him at what price they would, to the
end y^ he might have it to bear about with him, the which thing they would
not grant, for that it was a public work, and that their power or auctority
extended not so far: wherefore the young, man caused to be made a rich crown of
gold with other sumpteous ornaments, and went to the Image, set the crown on
her head, and decked her with precious vestimentes, and then began to call
upon her and worship her with such obstenation and partenacitie, that the
common sort were ashamed of his foolish and ridiculous love, so that they
defended him to approach or resort to the Image any more, so that the yongling
seeing himself to be deprived and kept back from that which was more dear to
him than his life, killed himself. For the virtue of this passion is such,
that after it has entered into the heart of men, it walks incurable by the
most liueliest and sensible parts of the body, and being in full possession of
us, she causes an infinite number of tears and sighs to be powered out, so
that oftentimes it takes away our life. The which the great philosopher
Apolonus Thianeus confirmed to the King of Babylon, There is no martyrdom that
may compare to Love as Apolonus Thianeus witnesses
who most earnestly prayed him to show him the most grievous and cruellest
torment that he might invent by all the secrets of philosophy, for to punish
and chastise a young Gentleman whom he had found a bed with one of his damsels
which he favored. The most greatest torment, says the Philosopher that I
can show thee, and invent for to punish him, is that thou save his life, for
thou shall see by little and little, the burning heat of love to get so much
on him as it has already begone, that the torment that he shall endure will be
so great that he shall not imagine nor find remedy therefore, and he shall find
himself so stirred and provoked with diverse cogitations and thoughts, that he
shall burn and consume in this flame as ye Butterfly does in a candel, in
such sort that his life shall be no more life, but a very death, more crueller
than if he passed through the hands of all the tyrants and tormenters of the
world. Love the corruption of youth in our time.
Here is in some the cause why I have treated at large on this passion of Love,
which is the whole decay of the most part of youth in our age, for have they
never so little set their foot or minds on y^ pleasures of this world, they
prepare themselves to love, then youth, liberty, and riches, are the worst
things in this world, and in those wicked occupations they lead without fruit
the best part of their life. The^ after this great sea of miseries with the
which man is as it were overwhelmed eue^ from his Discourse of the misery of
the aged.
birth, age comes on, and then when we ought to rest, the sores and dolors
are renewed, we must pay the rigorous vsuries and cruel interestes of all the
faults and excess that we have made in our life, for the heart is afflicted,
the brain is troubled, ye spirit languisheth, the breath stinketh, the face is
withered, the body is crooked, the nose dropping, the sight is troubled, the
hairs fall, the teeth are rotten, Great mutations in age.
to be short there is always some loose nail, and this body is a similitude
of death, without putting in count many diseases of the spirit that age is
subject to. They are prompte to wrath, hard to appease, light of belief,
forget oftentimes, praise their Elders, and dispraise the wise, they are sad,
melancholic, covetous, suspicious, and difficile: to be short, it is the
retraite whereas are emptied and purged all the vices and uncleanness of our
age. The which being well considered by the Emperor Augustus said, that when
men had lived fifty years, they ought to die or desire to be killed, because
that till that time was the pleasure of man's felicity, and that which is more
or above that age passes in sorrow and grievous sickness unsupportable, death
of children, loss of goods, to bury his friends, sustain process, pay
debtes, and in other infinite travels, so that it were better to have the eyes
closed waiting for their grave, than to behold these things with their eyes in
this crooked age, the which thing the Prophet foreseeing, cried out to God,
saying, Lord withdraw not thy hand from me when I am old, or when that I am
assailed of age. We have now to my judgment sufficientlye showed the
maledictions and miseries wherein man is wrapped whilst he plays his Tragedy
in the circle of this world, but if his entry be marvelous, miserable,
difficill, and perilous, no doubt his issue and departing is not less, and
whereas we have showed many strange childings and dreadful: so is there also
strange sorts of death much more horrible and wonderful. The miseries of
death.
This therefore is the last seal and last confirmation of all the acts and
deeds of the infelicitie of our life: after that man has sighed and sorrowed
all his life under the unsupportable deeds and heavy burdens of all his
euilles, he is forced to live always in fear, waiting for death, and
oftentimes by incredible torments. At the which the great Doctor Saint
Augustine maruelling, August. Soli loquicrum the first book, cha. 2.
sets forth his complaint to God after this sort, O Lord after we have
sustained so many miseries and afflictions, the intolerable stroke of death
comes, that rauisheth thy creatures by infinite ways and means, some he
overcomes with Fevers or Agues, others by some extreme dolor, an other by
hunger, an other by thirst, other by fire, others by water, others by iron,
others by poison, others by fear, others are smothered, others are choked,
others are torn of wild beasts, others devoured of fowls of the air, others
are made meat for fishes, and others for worms, and for all this man knows
not his end, and when he thinks himself most at rest, he falls and
perissheth. It is therefore the most dreadfullest of all dreadful, ye most
terriblest of all terrible when that the body separateth from the soul: but
what spectacle is it to see in a bed him that is oppressed with the pangs of
death, what shaking, A strange spectacle to see man at the point of death.
what fear, what alteration and changing in all the bands of nature, the
feet become cold, y^ face pale, the eyes bollow, the lips and the mouth to
retire, the thombe to deminishe, the tongue waxes black, the teeth do close,
the breath fails, the sweat cold appears by violence of the sickness,
which is a certain token that nature is overcome. Then when it comes to the
last gasp, or at the sorrowful departure that the soul makes from his
habitacle, all the vessels and bands of nature are broken, without putting in
count the furious assaults that the diuelles and wicked spirits rear against
us when y^ they are assured of our end, Violent temptations in death.
for there is no invention, craft, co^spiracy or practice but that is then
wrought for to bring us into a presumption to have lived well, and that our
might be fixed upon that false opinion, and not on the mercy of Jesus Christ,
or else laying before us an infinite number of grievous and enormeous sins that
we have committed in our life time, to the end to bring us in mistrust or
despair of Gods mercy, it is the hour, the moment and the point whereas
Satan does his power to strive against God, for to let or hinder the
salvation of mankind: and he is more busier in these latter days for that he
knows that his time is but short, and that the end of his kingdom is at hand,
and therefore he is the more enflamed, so that he does practice that which he
did when he knew that our Savior Jesus Christ drue near to the possessed of
devils, for he never rages and tormenteth those more cruelly, who^ he does
possess, than when he knows that he must depart. For this cause it was, 2.
Kings. 28. cha.
that the Prophet David did lament for his son Absalon so bitterlye, saying,
I would that I had died for thee my child, knowing that he was wrapped with
an infinite number of grievous and enormious vices and sins. Now when that
they have passed that path, and disgested this pear of anguishe, where is
become their glory, where are their pomps and triumphs, where are now their
volupteousnes and wantonness, where are their majesty's, their excellencies
and holiness: they are vanished as the shadow, says the Psalm. It is chanced
to them as to the garment that the worms have eaten, and as the wool that the
Moth has devoured, says the Prophet Esaye: they are become a pray for worms
and serpents. But let us behold man when he is in his grave, who ever saw a
monster more hideous, what is there more horribe and vile tha^ the dead
creature, behold the holiness, excellency, majesty and dignitiy, covered
with a lump of earth, here is him that was cherished, reverenced and honored,
even to kiss his feet and hands, yet notwithstanding by a sudden mutation he
is become so abominable, that all the fair and bewtifull Tombs of Marble and
Aliblaster, all the fair statutes or Images, Epitaphes and other funeral
pompes, can not so well cloak nor hide them, but that it is well known that it
is no other thing but a vile and stinking carin carcass, and to them it
happens as Solomon writes in his Wisdom, what has it profited them, says
he, the pride and great abundance of riches, all these things are passed as a
shadow, or as the Arrowe that is shot to the white, or as the smoke that is
dispersed with the wind, or as the remembrance of an host that passes by that
is lodged for one day. Let us leave therefore this body sleeping and resting in
the earth as in a bed for a season, this is, the most doubtfullest and
perilloust act of all the human tragedy. It is that which David feared so
much, that he prayed God not to enter into judgment with his servant. The
misery of human cretures wh that God shall appe in judgment.
It behooves that this creature appear before the judgment seat of God with
such a terror to those that consider it well, that there is no member but
shakes, it is the day that the Prophet Esaye speaks of, that the Lord will
come like a tempest, every ones heart shall fail them, Esaias. 13.
and all the world astonished, and then the pains shall be like the pain of a
woman that trauelleth, this is the day of the Lord, he shall come as one full
of wrath and indignation for to make the earth desert, and root out from
thence the sinners, the Sun shall be darkened, and the Planets shall bring
forth no more light, I will trouble (says he) the firmament, and the earth
shall move out of his place because of the wroth and indignation of the Lord
God. Hear also ye words of our savior Jesus Christ in Saint Matthew, even as
the lightning that rises in the East and extends to the West, so shall the
coming of the son of man be, the tribulation then shall be so great, as the
like has not been since the beginning of the world until now, nor never shall
be the like, the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall give no more
light, the stars shall fall from Heaven, and the waves of the sea shall rage,
and men shall be amassed with fear, and y^ powers of Heaven shall move. Woe shall
be in those days to them that are with child, and to them that give suck, but
as the time of Noe was, so shall the coming of the son of man be, for as in
the days before the flood, they did eat and drink, marry and were married,
even unto the day that Noe entered into the Arc, and knew nothing till the
flood came and took them all away, so shall the coming of the son of man
be, and then shall al kindreds of the earth mourn, and shall hide themselves
in dens and caves in the mountains, and shall say unto them, fall upon us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne.

Blow out the trumpet (says the Prophet Ioell) Joel. 2. cha
that all such as dwell in the land may tremble at it, for the day of the
Lord comes, and is hard at hand, a dark day, a glouming day, a cloudie day,
yea and a stormy day, before him shall be a consuming fire, and behind him a
burning flame. His throne (says Dauiell) was like the fiery flame, Dan. 7. cha
and his wheels as the burning fire, there drew forth a fiery stream and
went out from him, and then after this divine execution of the wrath and
indignation of God, the dead that are in their graves, sepulchers, tombs and
monuments, understanding his voice, ^phraim and his ^rayers.
shall rise and come forth, the bones and other parts shall find out their
ioints, for to join again together with the body that the earth has
putrified and corrupted. All those that the beasts and other birds of the
air have devoured, all those that the sea has swallowed up, all those that
are inuapored in the air, all those that the fire has consumed shall be reduced
and brought to their former state. All the blood that the thieves, pirates,
murderers, tyrants and false Judges have unjustly shed, shall then appear
before the majesty of God, so that there shall not one drop of blood be lost
from the time of Abell that was the first murdered of men, until the last of
all, so that there shall not one hair perish. And if that were a cruel
spectacle or sight, to see the beasts forsake the earth, which is their proper
element, flying the wrath and displeasure of God, and to enter into the Arche
of Noe. How much more fearful and dreadful ought it to be to miserable
sinners, to appear before the divine Judge, where the books shall be opened,
that is to say the enormious sins and offenses of our poor consciences
shall be then manifested and put in evidence. The terror of Gods judgment, the
which S. Jerome feared so much, that he thought always to understand this
voice, arise ye dead and come to your judgment.
If that the vale of the temple did break, the earth quake, the sun darken
and change his Eclipse, for the wrong and injury that was done to Jesus
Christ being on the cross, although in nothing he did offend, what
countenance may poor sinners hold that have offended him, blasphemed, and
provoked him diverse and innumerable times. If the only sight of an Angel did
so effray, that we could not suffer him as Saint John does witness, who
because he could not endure his brightness, fell down as dead. And Esaias was
constreined to say, after the Angel had appeared to him that all the bands of
his body was loosed with fear. Apoc. 1.
Also the children of Israel had such great fear that they were constreyned
to say to Moses, speak thou to us, and we will hear thee, for we cannot abide
this voice that comes from Heaven, Exodus. 20.
the which makes us almost die for fear, (and yet the Angel spoke unto them
graciously.) How shall then we poor sinners endure or abide the voice and
shining of Gods Majesty, being in his throne of glory, Esaias. 1. cha.
when he shall say that which Esaias speaks. Ah, I must ease me of my enemies,
and avenge me on my adversaries, my wrath shall be accomplished, and my fury
shall cease. They shall know that I which am the Lord have spoken in my zeal,
Ezech. 5.
and have ceased my fury. I will come upon them as a she Bear that is robbed
of all her whelps, Osee. 13.
and I will break the stubborn heart of theirs. I have held my peace long
and kept silence. But behold I will cry out as a woman that trauelleth, I
will wast and strial, The praise of man by the wise men of Egypt.
serve and obey. Of the which, certain wise men of Egypt have presumed to call
man God in earth, divine and celestial messenger of the Gods, Lord of things
inferior, familier of superior, and finally miracle of nature, and that more
is, for the better showing of the nobleness of man, sometimes his God
descends into him doing miracles which of himself he could not do: as we
have red in histories of Clazonmeus and of Aristeus, the which oftentimes
departed out of their bodies and went here and there, and being returned, they
showed things incredible, the which afterward by experience was found true.
As one Cornelius a priest sacred being at Padoua, during y^ war between Caesar
and Pompel, was so ravished that he counted all the order of ye battle better
than those that were present. Likewise Apolonius being in Ephesus saw and
showed that which happened to Nero in Rome: Socrates was found ravished
talking with his spirit, not seeing nor knowing that which was done hard by
him. In like manner Plato was every day in a trance certain hours, in the
which at the last he died. The Poets in their fury did write and show of
things more divine and heavenly, than humain and earthly, and after that this
fury had left them, and that their spirit was forsaken of this deuinitie,
they understood not what they had written, nor the others also. A praise of
Homer.
The which may be manifested in Homer, the great Greek Poet, that shall serve
an example for all, who although that from his infancy was blind, yet
notwithstanding he has described and showed of things so profounde and
wonderful, that some have boldly written of him, that if all the wisdom of
Poets were laid together, it would no equal nor compare with that that
shines in his works, nor he himself if he were alive could make again that
which he has made. The which gives us to understand that man is the very
chief work of God, who if we do well consider, we shall find that he is
painted or drawn out with another than a human pensil. The which thing the
most part of ye ancient Philosophers though they were never so subtle have
not known, or else have been found so variable in that that concerns his
creation, that there is no hold to be taken of their writings. But laying them
a side as they that do but flote and waver in their sayings, and as they that
feed us with an infinite number of dreams and illusio^s under the pretexitie
of their deceitful words and colored language. Who notwithstanding are
constrained to wonder and marvel at the wisdom of the workmaister, if they
will be equitable Judges, and cast their sight on the wonderful composition of
our humain body. An error of the Philosophers in that that concerns the
creation of man.
For what is he be he never so ignorant, that feels not shine some mark or
beam of deuinitie in a man's head, what excellency and beauty is there in
the head of this beast, the which is the tower and rampire of reason and of
sapience, of the which as of a fountain proceadeth diverse operations of the
memory, the which brings forth so many and diverse commodities. But who does
not marvel of the memory? the which as Plato writes, is the attorney that
alwais remains within the tower, the which keeps and retayneth the things
that suddenly pass, Description of the beauty of man's head.
the office of whom is to co^serue in his treasures, and receive innumerable
things, yea that differ, without confounding them, but confirming them in their
purity, for to serve afterward, when that by a remembrance that which of long
time it has conceived and gathered together, and then is perceived a knowledge
of infinite things all disagreeing, the which are brought forth in such an
order, that they give no let nor mutual trouble. But what miracle is there in
the inexplicable subtlety of our eyes, A praise of the excellency of the eyes.
ye which are placed in the most highest part of the tower for to be beholders
of things celestial. The rou^dnesse of which represe^teth two precious stones,
to the end that with a profound memory it should penetrate the Images of
things set before shining as a glass, and they are moveable, to the end that
they might turn here and there, being not constrained to behold that which
might displease them, and they are orned and decked with couers or liddes which
are as bulwarks for to defend them from evil or noyance, above the which are
the brows made like arches, A praise of the brows
for to stop and let the sweat and other superfluities that they should not
offend nor hurt them. But what spectacle worthy of admiration do we find in
the nose, A praise of the nose.
is it not a little wall reared for the defense of the eyes, and though it be
little it has three offices appointed: one is to retire and loose the wind
and breath: Lactantius Firmian in his book of the praise of God.
the other to smell: the other to the end that by the holes and openings the
superfluities of the brain be cleansed and pourged, and void as a channel or
sink does the filth and water. But by what marvelous ordinance are ye lips
placed, the which seem to be joined and knit one to another, within the which
the tongue is enclosed, the which by his mouings co^uerteth ye voice into
words, interprets and shows the intention of the spirit. But who is it that
maruelleth not at this little morsel of flesh that is not above three fingars
broad, A praise of the tongue.
and that is almost the least member of man, yet notwithstanding it prayseth
God, and shows and manifests the beauties and perfections of that which God
has created, it disputes of the heaven and of the earth, and of that which is
contained in the four elements, notwithstanding, it can not alone fulfill the
office of speaking, Praise and usage of the teeth.
if it have no help of the teeth, the which is manifest to us by yo^g
children, the which begin not to speak before they have teeth, and old men
after they have lost them, stammer and can not bring forth their words, in such
sort, that it seems that they are returned to their infancy, for they become
childish. Furthermore (as Lactantius says) he has created the chin, and set
it out after so honest a form, Praise of the chin and of the bearde.
and has enriched it with a bearde, for to cause us to know the fruitfulness
and maturitie of the body, the difference of the kind, and ornament of the
virilitie and strength. As touching the ears, Praise of the ears.
they are not idell, they are placed in a place hie and eminent for to receive
the sound that naturally is borne hie, they are open and not stopped, to the
end that the voice be carried by the secret trunkes retained and staid. Also he
has caused therein ordures and uncleanness, that the little beasts or flies
that will offend the hearing, might be therein snared and taken as in Birdlime.
And yet the marvelous work of all these parts is nothing to that which
follows, if we will consider in general all the proportion of the face, of
the which depends two maruels: the first that among all the men the which are
almost infinite, all of them do so differ in the face that among so many
thousand millions of men there can not be found two like, but that they are
blemished by some marks and notes: the second that nature has made to humain
creatures in so littel a part as the face, a beautis so great, A praise of
beauty as well of men as of women.
that sometimes we desire to die of our good wills, and gladly sacrifice our
selves for the beauty of some persons, and we are so stirred even to become
out of our wits, by the prickings and prouocations of this fair and beautiful
face. In witness whereof I could bring forth an infinite number of worthy
personages, as well ancient as modern, which seemed to have spoiled the
firmament of his most richest treasures, for to paint out all the corners of
the earth, and to exalt the memory of them and their writings, under the only
invocation of this beauty, as though thereon their whole glory and honor did
depend. For the beams that proceadeth of this resplendishing beauty,
penitrateth eue^ to the most liueliest part of the soul, and makes there
force to be felt excessiuely to those that behold it, the which is the cause
why the poor passioned has brought their own desiers in servitude, and
renders their poor soul martyrred, obedient and handmaide, Beauty has
moved many to write.
and almost tra^sformeth the^ (if it were possible) in the same beauty that
they admit and love. Moreover, there is another miracle in the face, the which
although it be not above the greatness of half a foot, notwithstanding in the
least mutation or changing thereof appears the difference of men, joyful
and sorrowful, of the hardy and the fearful, of the angry and of the pitiful,
of the lover and of him that hates, of him that lives in hope, and he that is
without hope, Ier. Cardan.
of the hole and of the sick, of the living and of the dead, with other
infinite affections as well of the body as of the soul. For this cause it is
that this great Philosopher Trimigisteus, after that he had profoundlye plunged
in the contemplation of human work, cried out saying: where is the painter
so well sorting his colors that could paint these fair eyes that are the
windows of all the body, Most learnedly translated by Monsieur du Prean my
friend, of whom I follovv the traduction as faithful.
and glasses of the soul. Who has formed the lips and the mouth, and knit
together sinews? Who has mingled the veins like water brooks, divided all
over the body, by the which, the humor and the blood running into diverse parts
deweth all the members with his iuces and liquors? Who has made the bones, who
has knit and joined them together? the which as gardes and stays do retain
the thought. Who has covered the flesh with so tender a skin, separated the
fingars and their joints one from another? Who has spread the largeness of
our feet, which serves for foundation to all the body? Who has opened ye
pipes and condits? Who has placed the stomach, and imprinted in the heart
this pearlesse figure? who has wouen together the threedes and roots of ye
Lights, and ingraued the Liver? Who has given to ye belly so large a compass?
Who is it that has made y^ most honorablest members to sight, and the foul
and filthy ones hid and placed out of sight. Behold (says he) how many divine
works are showed in one only matter, what beauty there is in every one of
them, how they are equally compassed, and differing the one from the other in
their offices and actions. Who^ think thou has so formed and made them? who
is the father and the mother, only God invisible. It seems now that we have
sufficientlye treated of human nature, there rests now for the perfection
of man's honor to show that there is no Art nor science but that men have
excelled each one in their degree, more or less according to the influe^ces
and favors that has been given them from heaven. I will leave to speak here
of liberal Arts and generally of all disciplines, for to euitate prolixitie,
the original and invention of which is due to man, The Author prayseth man by
force of arms.
as to his sovereign Author. I will therefore show certain particular things.
In every one of which I will express what the dignity and subtillitie of man
is. How wonderful should seem to us the magnamitie and noble heart of
Alexander, the which in his young and tender years lamented and wept bitterly,
knowing that his father Philip had obtained victory of diverse and sundry
battles, and after that he was demanded of his governors from whence proceaded
those tears, with ye which his face was dewed and covered: for fear (said
he) that I have, that my father having ouercomed so many people and nations,
there is nothing left for me wherein I might The noble heart of Alexander in
his youth
exercise this excessive desire that I have to fight and become partaker of his
glory. O what Oracle of generositie and manly courage was there in this
child, to whom afterward fortune succeeded according to his desire, for
before he was come to the age of thirty years he had subdued so many Nations,
that he found no more that did resist him in the world, so that he was
constreyned to go or travel to the furthermost parts of Africa by the
deserts to try his strength against wild and brute beasts, for to overcome
them as well as men: the Historiographes write of him, that he seeing himself
Monarche of all the world, remembering with himself that he had Alexander
caused the earth to be dug to war against the Antipodes
heard say of a Philosopher named Democrites, that there was many worlds, for
the which cause he caused many Pioners and Artificers to dig and undermine the
ground, to the end that if there were any other people found, they might be
brought under his obedience. Likewise of Julius Caesar and Pompei one of the
which beside the victories of civil wars, A praise o Caesar and Pompei.
faught fifty times in battle ranged and flew aleuen hundredth four score and
twelve thousand men: the other besides nine hundredth and forty ships that he
had taken on the sea, conquered and had victory of eight hundredth seventy six
towns from the Alps to the furthermost part of Spain. A praise Sergius al
most vnc^ dible.
Let us not leave out the glory of Marcus Sergius, who after he had lost his
right hand, and received.xxiij. wounds at diverse times, fought afterward
four sundry times with his left hand, and after he could not help himself
therewith, he made him an hand of Iron, with the which he fought at the stege
before Cremona, defended Playsance, and took twelve places in Gaul. Let us
leave speaking of arms, and come to Arts and sciences, that seem to us more
vile and abject, as painting, caruing, grauing, and such like. The excelencie
of man in ^ainting.
Xeuxis a most excellent Painter counterfetted by his Art a vine full of
Grapes, so subtillye wrought that the Birds that did fly in the air, would
strike against it thinking there to find food. And Appelles for the space of
ten years employed al his wit and policy, to paint an Image of Venus, the
which was endewed with so excellent beauty that the young men that stood
beholding of it became amorous, as though it had been some live Image, and
therefore by public edict he was charged to keep it secret, for fear to
allure the youth to corruption. Who is it that does not marvel of that which
Pausanias a Greek Historiographe writes to have been formed and made in
Heraclia a Province of Peloponensia by a certain artificer, The marvelous
cunning of a man in facioning a brazen horse.
the which composed a brazen Horse, having the tail cut and deformed, and all
the other parts of the body perfect, to ye which notwithstanding the other
horses sought to join and couple with such an ardent desire and affection,
that they brake oftentimes their houes with their often riding and horsing of
him, and for all that they were beaten and driven a way, yet would they not
from thence, but they would rage as if they had found a proud Mare. But what
secret thing, what charm or what hid virtue was there therein, which could
constrain and force the brutish beasts to obey and love a trunk of mettell
void of feeling or understanding. Plutarch exalting the excellency of man,
writes that Archimedes did draw with one hand and with one cord or rope
overthwart the market place of Siracusa, a great ship fraighted with
merchandise, as if it had been a horse that had been led by the neck, and all
by the science of Methmaticke, the which Baptist Leon one of the expertest men
in our time, assured to done, if any great Lord would furnish the thing.
What miracle in nature may be found more greater than this devise of glass
that Sabot King of the Persians caused to be made? the which was so great, that
he was set in a corner of the same as in the sphere or compass of the earth,
seeing under his feet the clouds and stars that did rise and lie down, in
such sort that though he was mortal, he seemed to be above the height and
expectation of immortality. What thing more greater and deuiner may be more
marvelous, specially in a King that ruled all the world, Cardanus.
who after the possession of the earth and the Sea, he seemed to possess the
clouds, the heaven and the habitatio^ of God. A vvonderfull Image.
But what Deity or celestial spirit might be hid in the statute or Image of
Memon, the which every time and nevertheless man was the Author or Inuenter
as Strabo, and Cornelius Tacitus shows. Who is it that would not be ravished
in admiration, if at any time he have read that which the Histories make
mention of a Dove of wood, Deuinitie of the spirit of certain men.
composed by Architas, being made by certain figures and proportions of
Mathmaticke, did fly in the air as other birds: at the admiration of which,
Albert forged a brazen head, the which could speak plainly as if it had
been a living soul enclosed therein. As in like case Galen an Author worthy
of crede^ce writes, that Archimedes forged a glass that burned in the Sea the
ships of his enemies, the which thing should not seem to us strange nor
incredible to those that have seen a Spanyarde which was in our time, so
cunning in the composition of glasses, that he made some representing two
Strange glasses.
phisnomies or faces, the one alive, the other dead together, a thing so
strange to contemplate, that many sage Philosophers not finding nor knowing y^
reason could no otherwise choose but wonder at the work and at the
workemaister. There has been others as Ptolomeus makes mention that have made
such strange glasses that in looking therein there would appear so many
faces as there be hours in a day. Besides an infinite number of other things
of man's invention, the which for prolixitie I leave out. We have sufficiently
showed (to my judgment) y^ things most notable, that the antiquity has had
in great admiration in noble and cunning personages, the which by their doings
have showed with what deuinitie and excellency of spirit man is endued. Now
there rests in few words to show and make mention of things of our time and
of late years, to the end that not leaving their glory buried in the
darkness of oblivion, we give not all the advantage and pre-eminence to
others. Among all the works and doyngs of our Elders and Auncesters, I can
find nothing that may equal or compare to the wonderful Invention, A praise
of the invention of men of our time.
Utility and Dignity of Printing, the which surmounteth all that the
Antiquity may conceive or imagine of excellent, knowing that it conserueth
and keeps all the conceptions of our souls, it is the treasurer that
immortaliseth the monuments of our spirits, and eterniseth world without end,
and also brings to light the fruits of our labors, and although somewhat
may be added to all other Arts and human inventions, yet this alone has
entered with such good hap and perfection into this world, that there cannot be
added nor deminished any thing that does not render it defectious and deformed:
these effects, are so marvelous, and executed with such celeritie and
diligence, that one man alone in one day will Print more letters, than the most
promptest Scribe or Scriuiner may write with pen in the space of one Month,
who is it therefore that does not marvel at the barbarousnesse and misery of
the Elders, the which as Strabo de situ orbis writes, first did write in
ashes, the^ afterward in barks of trees, after that in stones, the^ afterwad in
leaves of Laurel, the^ in lead, consequently in Parchment, and finally in
Paper. And as they were variable in their manner of writing, so used they diverse
instruments: for upon stones they did write with Iron, on leaves with pincers,
on ashes with their fingar, on barks with knives, on parchme^t with canes, on
paper with quilles. And first their ynke was liquor of a certain fish,
afterward with y^ juice of Mulberies, after that with Chimney sout, and the^
with Gauls, Gum and Coporas, the which I thought good to set forth to manifest
and show unto you y^ barbarous doings in the former age. Of the which Polydorus
makes mention, who in ye year. 1453 found out the right use of Printing. I
could in like case give the second degree of praise to those that have
invented the use of Gunnes and Munitions for war, were it not that I have
showed in my second book of the miseries of man, that it brings more harm
and detriment, then decoration and ornament to our human kind. And yet this
is more miraculous, which Brasauolus has written, that an Artillery man has
found in our time the muentio^ to make Gunpouder that makes no noise in going
out of the Gunnes mouth. Leave we therefore these thunders and rorings of Jupiter
invented by the Devil for to spoil human kind, to the cunning and
liuelynesse of spirit, of men of our time, in the number of which we may put
an Artificer of Italy that presented to the Prince of Vrbin a King for to put
on his fingar, in the which was set a precious stone, wherein there was a
Dial, the which beside the line that showed the hours, gave warning with a
stroke unto him that did wear it of every hour. Who is it that does not
marvel of that that Ierom Cardan, Cardan.
a man worthy of credence, being brought up in all crudition and learning,
witnesses to have seen whilst be wrote his books, Man vvasheth his face
with melted mettell.
that a man publicly at Millan washed his face and his hands with molten
Lead, having first washed them with a certain other water: what miracle is
this, that man should expose his flesh, which is so tender and delicate
against ye fury of a metal so hot. Now therefore there rests no more in man
but to make himself immortal, seeing y^ he has found the means to expose his
naked members to the violence of fire. And if this seem to us wonderful how
he might resist the heat, yet this is not less strange of that which
Alexander, Alexander ab Alexandro.
and more than fifty other Historiographes writes that in their time in
Cicilie there was a man that every one named the fish Colas, the which from his
infancy frequented and dwelled in the Sea, and there remained with such
obstination that he became aquitall, Man aquitall.
and departed not from thence the most part of h^ life, and sometimes he was
the space of five or six hours hid between two ^^ters, without that any might
see or perceive him, even like a fish, and would remain eight or ten days on
the water, and not come out, and would enter into the vessels that he found on
the sea, and would live and eat with the Manners, and then cast himself
again into the sea, and sometimes he would come a shore, and he lived very
old leading this aquitall life, and confessed himself that when he was out of
the water, he felt a great pain in the stomach. Pontanus has also written
it. There rests now nothing to man but to penetrate y^ air and the
firmament to be come familier with them. The Art of flying like the Birds
invented by man.
And yet there was one Leonard Vincius the which has sought out the Art of
flying, and had almost luckely achieved his effect, without putting in count
the Histrians that we have seen in our time fly on a rope in ye air with
such dexterity and peril, that the very eyes of Princes and great Lords
that beheld them were amassed, and could not abide to see them. It is not
therefore with out a cause that Mercurius Trimigisteus describing the dignity
of man, and of the divine celeritie of spirit with the which he is endued,
said unto his son Tatius, what doste thou think thou art, what treasure
think thou that thy members contain and keep, command thy soul to pass
the Ocean sea, and it shall be as much as thou have commanded, without passing
out of his place, command it to fly to heaven, and it shall fly incontinently
without the help of any wings, and also there shall be nothing that shall let
or hinder his course, neither the burning heat of the sun, neither the
amplitude or spreading of the air, neither the course nor revolution of the
heavens, nor of all the other clouds, but that it shall penetrate and pass
forth. Furthermore if thou art minded to surpass al ye globes of the
firmament, and see what is there contained, it shall be likewise lawful for thee:
see then how great is the sodenrie of ye soul, esteem thy self immortal, and
that thou may comprehend all Arts and sciences, exalt thy self above all,
and descend more deeper than the deepest, gather together all the meaning of
thy deeds, likewise of fire, of water, dryness and moisture, be thou over all
the parts of the world, in heaven, in earth, and in the Sea, dwell or inhabit
out of the vessel of this body. Man therefore is a great miracle of nature,
who although he be composed and made of a mortal nature: nevertheless the
other is celestial, and remembers the gifts of grace, it despises
terrestrial things, and wissheth for heavenly things, for because that the
better part feels to have from thence his proper affinity, and natural
aliaunce. But if the soul or the reason which is a faculty and power of ye
same, which can no more forsake it than the light or brightness does ye sun,
The marvelous beauty of the soul if it might be seen openly
might be seen openly and visibly, what miracle or strange spectacle might we
see of her marvelous effects, but she is let by ye body, and by the
memory, the which Mercurius names tyrants and murderers of the same, the
which do so let and hinder that she can not show her divine excellency,
unless that by contemplation we separate our selves and sequestrate from them
And the^ when that she is separated from this burden of the body, and almost
putrified, it receives heavenly gifts, flies up to heaven, talks with the
Angels, and penitrateth even before the throne of Gods majesty, and being
enflamed with a divine feruency, it brings forth things miraculous and almost
incredible. As we read of Moses after y^ he was separated from men, and was
certain time in the desert of Ethiopia, his face did so shine that the children
of Israel could not behold him. S. Paul was ravished to the third heaven. In
like case Socrates sometimes as transfigured did diligently and steadfastly
behold the sun for the space of an hour. Alexander in his anger seemed to
be all on fire, (...)
Alexander the great, being on a time in extreme peril of his life in a
certain battle that he had in the Indies being without help or succor, he was
in such an agony that he swet pure blood from his face and his body, so that
it seemed to the Indians that he was all on a fiery flame, the which caused
among (...) such fear that they were fai^ to (...) him and let him go. By this
you may see then, that sometimes the soul has so much power over the body,
the which is but the sepulcher wherein it is buried, that it is at liberty, and
surmounteth our capacity, and seeks to see again his first home, which is
heaven, in such sort, that the body remains void of feeling or moving. As S.
Augustine reherseth of a Priest, the which so often as he would be in
contemplation or prayer, he would fall down as dead or in a trance without
breathing or any feeling in him, so that what pain so ever was showed him, he
felt no harm at all, and after he was returned to himself, he would tell
such strange things that the assistantes would marvel to hear him, Herodotus
writes the like of a great Philosopher that was named Atheus, of whom he
shows for a truth the soul many times to forsake his body, and after it
has peregrinated or wandered through diverse countries and Regions, it showed
by order that which it had seen, the which was approved to be as true as
though it had been present. The death of Julian the Emperor was forshewed him
by a child, who after he had looked in a glass showed him of his destruction,
and how his enemies were coming, and those that should kill him, without
having any knowledge or hearing any speak thereof. A certain Philosopher did
the like to Pompei, ye which showed him in a glass the order of his enemies
ready to march in battle. These are the effects and power of the soul, the
which sometimes being unbound from earthly bands, is ravished in the
contemplation of heavenly secrets, and does incredible, miraculous, monstrous
and marvelous things, and that seem almost to fight with the nature, which is
the cause that for the most part y^ vulgar sort refers many things to the
invention of wicked spirits, ye which they ought to attribute to man, as his
own and proper heritage. It is of a truth that Leonard Pistoriensis did so well
diet himself that by little and little he abstayned from eating, The
marvelous die of man.
but once a week. And yet this is but little to that which other writers do
write of a man that was in the time of Bochas in base Almayne, that for y^
space of.xxx. years took no repast nor refectio^ by the mouth, Rondelet in his
history of fishes and many Elders.
the which thing should seem unto us incredible, without the confirmation that
we have of an infinite number of witnesses, of ye which some of them have
written, and others have seen with their eyes. Brother Nicolas of Saxony a
Swecian of Nation, the which remained or dwelled.xxij. years in the
wilderness, and continued in his abstinencie during his life, An incredible
abstinencie.
without giving or ministering any food or sustenance to his body. The which
Damascenus proves by many reasons may be possible and according to nature,
seeing that many beasts and worms are in the bowels of the earth, and
remain hid many Months and years without food. And at this day it is said
that the Scithians will continue twelve days without meat being comforted with
the virtue of a certain herb that they keep enclosed in their mouth. Now
what shall we seek more in this creature of God that is wonderful reserved
deuinitie, for if we should rehearse and declare all the singularities and
excellencies that are manifested and showed in him, of the which many writers
make mention, I should occupy a large volume. Some by a hid, secret and divine
mystery could not by no means be offended or grieved with any kind of
poison or venim, as a king named Mithridates who after that he was vanquished
and overcome by Pompei, lithrida^s could ^^t die by ^^yson.
chused rather to die, than to fall into the hands of his enemy, and for to
rid his life took diverse venims and poisons, but after that he had tried and
tasted al, he could find none of sufficient strength to overcome him, for his
own proper nature did keep and preserve him against their power. So that
seeing that by this means he could not dispatch his life, he was constreyned
at the last to kill him self with a dagger. Galen the Prince of Medicines
writes that a Maid (named Napellus) A marvel of man that resisted poison.
was nourished with poison in her young years to the which she was so well
accustomed that y^ poison did turn to her nourishment, and did her no harm,
and yet those that lay with her being only infected with her breath, received
sudden death. Auicen writes that in his time he did see a man from whom all
venomous beasts would fly, and if by chance any one had bitten him or touched
him they should straight ways die. Some whom the Greeks have named
Ophirgenes, who with only touching healed the stinging of serpents, and laying
the hand on a body would draw out the venim. As also do the Psiles and
Marciens a people of Africa the Ambassador of which named Exagon, The Psiles
and Marcians did vaunt that they could not be hurt with Serpents, the which
the Romans caused to be tried in an Ambassador of theirs.
being come to anunciate and show some thing to the Romans, was put naked in
a tun full of Serpents, Vipers, Adders and other venomous beasts, for to
try whether that their sayings were true. But so soon as he was put therein,
in stead of offe^ding or hurting him, they did lick and cherishe him, to be
short, there are found things so fantastical and strange in man, that many
elders after they had considered the meaning of all things, and finding nothing
equal or to compare with the marvelous providence and industry of man,
would be called Gods and worshipped and honored as a Deity. Some have been so
constant that they did never laugh, as Marcus Crassus, for this cause he was
named Agelaste for that he was never seen laugh. Some have never snorted nor
routed as Pomponius. Some have never spit, as Antonius the second. Some have
never felt dolor nor pain in their body, as Pontanus writes of himself, who
sometimes would let him self fall, and yet felt no harm. Some have had such a
clear sight, that they could see well fifty or three score Leagues of, as
Solin and Pliny writes, of one that was named Strabon the which in the time
of open war saw from a Promontorie of Cicill the ships to sail from the Port
of Carthage in Africa, although it was above a hundredth thousand distance.
Tiberius y^ Emperor waking a certain hour in the night, A marvel of the
sight of an Emperor.
did see al things as well as by day. There are certain men as Pliny
witnesses in the country of Cardulius that will run as swift as Dogs, and go
so fast a pace that it is impossible to take them, but only by sickness and
age. Quintus Curtius and many others write that Alexander the great, was
composed of such harmony and temperance of humors that his breath smelled
naturally like Balm, also his sweat was so sweet that when his Pipes were
open, they thought that he was all perfumed with perfumes, and that which is
more strange and hard to believe, his body cast such a savor being dead,
that one would have judged it full of Aromatical drugs or perfumes. Caius
Caesar was so good on horseback that he caused his hands to be bound behind
him, and it was a monstrous thing to see and incredible to hear, that holding
his knees close to the horse, without bridell and saddell he would stay and
turn a horse so lightly or nimblye as though he had been bridled, the which
was in the time when he favored Marius against Sylla. M. Paulus a Venetian
recites that the Tartarians have so much power over spirits, and are so
excellent in seeking the secrets of nature that they cause darkness to come
when they will, and that he being once compassed with thieves by this Art, with
great pain escaped. Haitonus a man of singular doctrine and of great
authority, is witness of this in his History of Sarmates, that the army of
the Tartarians almost overcome or destroyed, was again restored by the
enchauntment of a Standarde bearer, that caused darkness to come upon the
camp of his enemies. I have red in many ancient Histories that the Ethiopians
by the virtues and properties of certain herbs gathered in season, do dry the
floudes and Rivers, and do open all things that are shut What shall we say
more of the excellency of man, there has been found some so wonderful in
Music, that they changed the affections of those that did hear them, their
jests and mouings, caused them to be joyful, sorrowful and bold, according as
they would adulciate or harden their noise. Terpander and Metimeus,
Empedocleus, Orpheus, and Emphion, have been so excellent in this Art, that
they healed in their time many that were frantic, mad, and possessed with
spirits, Pithagoras by the perfection of this Art so ravished the memory of a
young man within few days that he made him chaste, and caused him to forget the
loving passions that tormented him continually. All the Greek and Latin
writers that have treated of the iestes of Alexander, make mention of his
Harper Thimotheus, who when he was at a banquet, played an Alarm or assault,
causing the King to forsake the banquet, and take his armor, so that his
spirits remaining vanquished or overcome, was constrained to obey to the
harmony that proceaded from the instrument. Agamemnon going to war against the
Trojans not being very sure of the chastity of his wife Clitemnestra, left
her in the guard and keeping of an excellent Harper, who when that he saw her
in her amorous toys, mitigated her burning heat by the sweetness of his
instrument. In such sort that Aegisthus could not obtain his desire before
that he had slain the said Musition, which by his Art and Harmony was so
faithful a keeper and Protector. Among these we may recite the great King
David, who by the virtue of his Hary did mollify and appease the fury of King
Saul when that the wicked spirit did torment him, as it is most plainly
showed in the second book of the Kings. To be short, and to set the last seal
to the dignity and excellencye of man, there is no part of him, but that there
may be some fruit gathered to the use of Physic, as Galen and many others
write. A man's fasting spittle serves against the biting of venomous beasts,
There is no part of man, but that there is some fruit drawn out to the use
of physic.
and also kills them, it helps the Ophthalmistes: the filth of a man's ear
called earewaxe being appliquated to our nostrels serve in stead of
dormitories, and provoke sleep: Man's urine or water is good against the
dropsy, and for many other uses of Physic. The sweat of a man is excellent
for to mitigate the Gout: the blood of a man being drunk hot heals the
passion of Love, Edoardus.
as Authors do write of Faustine wife to Marcus Auresius. The flesh embalmed
is very sovereign in many vsages of Physic. Many ancient Physicians of
Graecia and Arabia have used the marrow of our bones, the brains of men, and
their bowels, yea even the duste and ashes of men's bones, for to drink them
and cause the^ to serve with marvelous effects to the usage of Physic.
Orpheus and Orchilaus healed the quinancie with human blood, yea the filth of
our nails, Pliny.
as Pliny witnesses for to heal the Fever, so that there is no member of a
man's body, but that it is profitable, not so much as the sweat of a man, but
that has been proved, as Galen writes, also the breath of a man well
tempered, comfort greatly the Leprousy as in like case the exerements of
man (the which can not be pronounced without shame) the which as Xenocrates
says, was used to the use of ancient Physic, finding so many helthful and
excellent remedies in man, that the antiquity pardoned no member, though it
were never so abject and vile for to draw out profit. Seeing then that man is
so worthy and so excellent, so wonderful and celestial. Let us therefore leave
hereafter to compare him to brute beasts. The which although God has provided
for the^ all that for the^ is needful for the preservation of their life,
giving to some, skin, others hair, as well for to sustain and endure the
violence of the cold as other inclinencies of the air, and to others
munimentes and defenses for to repulse the dexterior euilles, to other
lightness and swiftness to run and fly, to others subtilty to hide
themselves in dens and caves of the earth, to others feathers and wings that
they may hang in the air, to the end to euitate the fury and rage of man,
all the which things notwithstanding are of little value to the regard of man.
For although he be created naked, and covered with so tender a skin, that
quickly he is hurt and receives harm, yet nevertheless that was not done
without great providence. An aunsvvere to the objections of human miseries.
For knowing that he had to exercise his fancy and other interior senses much
more diligently than the brute beasts to serve afterward to the Intelecke, it
was therefore necessary that he singularly should have his Organs and
instruments, Baptist Gelo traducted by Pare.
by the which he does such operations of matter more delicate and light, and
likewise the blood more subtle and hot, knowing that the spirit follows in
his complections the temperature of the body. And if he had been composed of
rude and thick skin, so should he have had the understanding blunt and
brutishe, but man is created of a subtle and liuelye flesh, because that the
spirit which is lively and subtle, for the better and more perfecter opening
and knowing of things. The workmaister therefore is wonderful which has not
attributed to man certain commodities as he has done to beasts, knowing that
his sapience and wisdom might render that which the condition of nature had
denied him. For although he comes forth naked on the earth, and without
armor or defense, (the which chances not to beasts that have horns,
claws, hair and shelles) it is for his great profit and advantage, being
armed with knowledge, and endued with reason, not outward but inwardly he has
put his munition and defense, not in the body but in the spirit, in such sort
that there is neither the greatness nor strength of wild beasts, neither
their defense in their horns, neither yet the great lump of flesh nor bones
with the which they are composed and made, may let that they be not tamed and
made subject under ye power and authority of man, for there is no beast be he
never so fierce, hardy or stout, but that trembles suddenly when he sees man
although they had never seen him before. And such grace succeeds them by the
virtue of the signacle and mark of God which is ingraued in them, the which
the ancient Cabalists named Pahat in ye Hebrew tongue, with the which Adam our
first father fortified lived being conversant with the beasts, to whom he gave
the names, so y^ he had got such authority and empire over the^ that they knew
him as their lord and souereign master, but after that he tra^sgressed, the
divine mark was effaced and abolished, not altogether, but for y^ most part.
Of the traces and footesteps thereof we see yet certain sparks and beams shine
in some virtuous men, who although they be in the wilderness and that they
lodge and lie in the dens and caves of brute beasts, they fear the^ nothing,
but live without fear with the^, as we read in the holy scripture of
Sampson, David, Daniell among the Lions. Heliseus with the Bears, and S. Paul
with the Vipers. There rests now in few words to answer to the
allegations that we have made in our book of human miseries, as well of the
vileness of the nature (of the which man was created) as of the condition that
is so tender and frail, that in many things beasts do excel him. The cause
of human miseries.
Should we therefore be so mad, or dare we confess that God has showed more
favor to other beasts than to man: no truly: for although he has created him
vile and abject, as of a lump of earth, yet this in nothing does derogate his
glory. For it is manifest that he has not created man corruptible for default
of a better, for by the creation of y^ Sun, the Moon and the stars, he
has showed how he might have created man of a thing more excellent, but he
has created him of the earth for to beat down his pride and arrogance, the
which has been the cause of the ruin and destruction of al his posterity,
and that he must not only study on earthly things as the brute beasts do
that look for no other selicitie but in this miserable world, but he must lift
up his eyes to Heaven, knowing that there is his Father, his house and
habitation, his place of rest, his heritage and eternal felicity. Now as
touching the miseries with the which he is charged and subject, God in the
beginning created him not subject to such miseries, for God exalted him to the
most highest degree of all the dignities of the earth, and if he have so many
miseries as we have before showed, they are chanced to him since that he knew
not himself, and since the time that he has strayde from the obedience and
vocation to the which he was called, and if that he could have kept and
retained this excelent treasure, Theodoret bishop of Siria, in his ^ookes of
^^e nature of man.
his God would have preserved him in perpetual felicity. Nevertheless though
God has made him subject to many miseries, it is not for any hatred that he
bare unto him, for he has not pardoned his only son, for ye great love he
bare unto man, but it is for his great profit that he has created him such,
willing thereby to admonish him of his sin, and to pluck out from his heart
that pestilent root of pride the which the Devil has planted for to humble
and keep him under his fear. Therefore this is the cause that man is subject
to so many miseries, and is become mortal and corruptible. And if man therefore
seeing himself so wicked and miserable, be so proud and hie minded, what would
he be if he were immortal and incorruptible. And therefore God has here
showed his wisdom and sapience in y^ he has made him subject to corruption.
Notwithstanding in this corruptible and mortal vessel of earth he has kept
so goodly a harmony and countenance, that it is not possible to imagine or
conceive one more fairer. Conclusion
To the end therefore that in few words we will make a general conclusion of
our work, if we will consider man in the first estate that God created him, it
is ye chief and principal of Gods work, to y^ end that in him he might be
glorified as in the most noblest and excelle^test of all his creatures. But if
we consider him in the estate of the general corruption spread all over the
posterity of Adam, we shall see him nooseled in sin, monstrous, fearful,
deformed, subject to a thousand incommodities, void of beatitude, unable,
ignorant, variable, and hypocrite. To be short, in stead of being Lord of all
creatures, is become slave to sin in the which he is borne and conceived. But
if we will consider afterward as being made all new by the immortal seed of
Gods word, ye shall see him restored not only in all his first honors and goods,
but much more greater, for there where as sin is poured out for to let and
hinder him, the grace of God is more abunda^tly poured out for to succor him,
making him a new creature, as Saint Ambrose says in the book of the vocation
and calling of the Gentiles, the. 3. chap. And S. Augustine in his book of
corruption and of grace. cap. 10. And as concerning us, let us do as Plato
knowing the goodness that God has done to us, let us give him thanks in that
we are borne men, not beasts, and if that we find any thorns in this
crooked life that with ease we cannot digest, and if we feel any fight in
our soul, the which is hid in this body as in a grave, let us endeavor our
selves to go into the holy City of Jerusalem, whereas we shall be exempt of
hunger, cold, heat and thirst, and generally from all infirmities and tears,
to the which this poor body, the which is but the Chariot whereunto the Soul
is


