THE MOST Pleasant Historye of Blanchardine, Son to the King of Friz; and
the fair Lady Eglantine Queen of Tormaday, (surnamed) The proud Lady in LOVE.



LONDON Printed for William Blackewall, and are to be sold at his Shop, over
against Guild* Hall Gate. 1595.

The Epistle
of my duty to your woorshipfull house. But having imagined many ways to
present you with the testimony of my humble love, and finding none either
more agreeing to mine estat, or fitting for your worship then this new
translation of this pleasant history out of Latin, which I have at idle times
under taken: whose style, although it may seem rude and barberous and
unfitting your Worship, yet I do not mistrust but the matter being both
pithie and plesaunt will incite you to read it at your leasures and censure it
(not according to the vvorth) but according to the dutiful desire of the giver.

And though I the vnskilfullest of many do seem as it were to pluck Hercules
clubbe out of his hands in undertaking this translation, which might beseem a
far deeper scholar then my self: yet having not in my pore oppinion impaired
the credit nor wronged my Author in my translation forcing him to speak rude
English (which flows with eloquence in latin) yet because my leisure served
and my duty bad me be thankful, I rather chose this more then any other,
which with all dutiful affection I commend to your learned view. Thus craving
your accepta^ce of this pore widows mite, undertaking the patronage of the
same I wish you all health and happiness.

Your Woorships at command. P. T. G.

Chap. 1.
The first Chapter entreats of the birth of Blanchardine, his nurssing and
his bringing up.

AMongst many ancient Chronicles importing the haughty exploites of sundry
nations, Lords and Princes: this story of the valorous Blanchardine deserves
greatest commendation of true and perfect magnanimity.

At the time when a general peace concluded throughout the most part of
Christendom, when gentlemen and Noble Peers made their return from arms and
applied them selves to domestical and cuntrie pastimes:

There reigned a King in the Realm of Frize redoubted for manhood and prowes,
abounding in goods and possessions, reverenced and beloved both of his
subiect^ and equals, and most happy in all his attempts [sauing in ye want of
issue] to succeed him in his king do^e, whereof, both he and the Queen his
wife were most pensive and discontented: and by mutual complaints greatly
bewailed this misfortune. But the Queen desirous to frustrate the scandal that
might arise by reason of her ba^e^nes: day by day, (in most devout and humble
manner) solicited the Gods to send her a son, whose daily and devout prayers
penetrating the heavens, by the permision and favor of the Gods she conceived
and bare a son, whom at the christning they named Blanchardine. This
unexpected joy bred such a contentment to the King and Queen, and a comfort to
all the Realm^, that after humble thanks given to the Gods: feasts, banquets
and all triumphs were proclaimed throughout the Realm of Friz And least the
Child (should by absence from the Parents through negligence of the Nursse)
miscarie: the Queen her self undertook his nurssing and bringing up.

The Child grew in beauty, proportion, wit and manners, beyond the
expectation of all men. And when he was arrived to the age of discretion, he
was committed to the tuition of a grave and learned Tutor to be instructed in
Philosophy, by whose industry and painful labor he soon attained to
perfection: his exercises and disportes at idle times were hawking, hunting,
and playing at Chesse, and in such pastimes he spent some part of his youth til
his maturitie and riper age, made him desirous to follow arms and feats of
chivalry, as hereafter you shall here.

Chap. 2.
How Blanchardine walking in his Fathers Palace accompaned with his Tutor, he
perused in the hangings of Tapestrie and Arras, the sack and destruction of the
famous City of Troy.

IT happened on a day that Blanchardine and his Tutor walking within the Palace
of the King his father, and steadfastly pervsing the abstracts and devises in
the hangings, demanded of him what warlike seidge and slaughter of men, that
might be which he saw figured in the same: and hearing his Master so to blazon
ye wars of the Greeks in this ten years seidge against Troy gave more
d^ilgent attendance especially when he b^held the valiancie of Hector, Troylus,
Paris, Diophoebus, A^ax, and withal, the ingenious capacity of grave Ulysses:
the large circuit of the City, and princely buildings of the same: so that
from that time forth he conceived small delight in any thing, but only in
recording the magnanimity, haughty courages and the great commendations
atcheiued by that victory. Then questioned he with his Master of the blazonry
of arms, and ye quartering of these coats, which were portraied in the said
tapistry: wherein being by him most perfectly resolved, his mind was more and
more instigated and pricked forward to atchiue the honor which others in that
map had (as he learned) acquired: so that (all other pleasures and delights
laid apart) continually practiced both in action and in reading, the imitation
of those valorous wars, neither thought he any time so well bestowed as either
in reciting, reading or conferring of those wars.

Chap. 3.
The devices of Blanchardine after he had left his conference with his Master
and of his departure from his Fathers Court without the priuitie of any.

BLanchardine being come into his Chamber, pensive and sad that he had not
atchiued any enterprise neither as yet had learned to bear arms by reason of
the tender care his Parents had over him, concluded with himself the means of
his departure, and covertly practiced with himself some secret way for his
escape, least that the priuitie thereof being once discovered he should be
prevented of his purpose.

In these perplexities and solitarye devices he spent great part of his time,
sur-cha^nged with exceeding anguishe of mind for his adue^terous flight: and
fearing least poverty might breed danger, he purueyed him self of a most rich
and trustry sword belonging to the King his father, which when he had fastened
to his side, he took more courage then before: then pricked forward with the
spur of honor and arms, he forthwith left his Parents and people surprised
with sound sleep, and about the hour of one of the clock in the morning came
to ye stable where stood many gallant and serviceable horses: but amongst all
other, he chose the courser his father took greatest pleasure in, whom
incontinently he sadled and furnished with a most sumptious caparizon: whom
when he had made ready, (as he imagined) he led softly out of the stable, the
Grooms by reason of their heavy sleep hearing no noyes at all.

Thus finding him self free and unseen of any, he incontinently mounted his
horse, and being mounted on his back, he posted away with all celeritie: But
leaving Blanchardine on his journey that way which fortune led him, I will make
mention what pitiful complaints were made in the Court, after his departure
for his absence.

Chap. 4.
The pitiful complantes made in the Court for the absence of Blanchardine.

AFter the silent night had taken her pitchie Car to run to our Antipodes,
Phoebus being mounted on his glorious coatch entered the Horizon: the Grooms
(according to custom) coming into the stable and missing the Kings Courser,
ran here and there making most pitiful acclamations: which being suddenly
brought to the ears of the King, the whole Court grew in an v^rore what might
betide of him, till being farther enfourmed that his son Blanchardine was no
where to be found, present scoutes and posts were sundry ways dispatched, to
make inquiry after him but all in vain: for Blanchardine being well mounted,
rode so fast, that before day he had gone abooue twenty miles from his Fathers
Court: The Messengers desperate of his inquest, in all places of their return
gave straight charge to the inhabitants that diligent search should forthwith
be made throughout the Realm of Frize for Blanchardine, and he that could
bring first tidings of him to the Court should be most amply rewarded for his
pains: But when a month was past and no tidings brought to the King of his
son: Oh the pity full outcries and continual laments that both the King,
the Queen and all the Court made, was far e^ceeding my capacity to conceive
and much more my pen to write: But the Queen (whose tender care of her only
son was greater then the rest, upon the pr^sent return of the posts)
sounded with grief, and remaining in this exta^e the ^ace of an hour, at
length coming to her self began her exclaimes in ^his (...).

Oh ungentle heavens by whose mighty (...) all terrestiall things are
governed, what disasters do you continually ^ap upon our heads? oh accursed
nature that thus unnaturally thou should b^reaue me of the joy of my
soul, when my only s^lace rested in the happy sight of my (...): and thou
accursed earth, why have thou given him leave to walk on thee from the sight
of his Parents, whose solace is turned to sadness, whose mirth to mourning, whose
bliss to bale, whose happiness to heaviness, whose life to dismal death? But ah
fond Woman, what boot these bootelesse tears, these uncouth passions, and
tragical complaints, when there rests no hope of (...)?

In these and such like extremes, the King, the Queen and all the Court did
spend great part of their time: and in these agon^es I will leave them to
recount wh^t the adventure of (...) was.

Chap. 5.
How Blanchardine having rode all night, ^ound an armed Knight sore wounded
lying on the ground etc.

BLanchardine having rode all the night, and finding both him self and his
horse begin to be weary, and not any adventure worthy recounting: (...) tho
rough a large forest by many bye paths (for fear of espialls) chanced at
last to find a man armed, lying groueling on the g^ound all (...) in his own
gore, being by a knight most (...) encountered: who not only had be mangled his
limbs, but also bereft him of his love and Mistress which he had carried
away perforce: when Blanchardine beheld this most heavy spectacle, alighting
from his horse comforting the dismayed knight, help to bind up his bleeding
wounds and withal inquiring of him ye cause of his mishap and the man that so
inhumain like had left him in this distress: he answered, brave young Lord, I
traveling along these plains tending my (...) ^o my house, distant from hence
not past two leagues, was on the sudden encountered by a vilain who not only
has left me mangled and wounded as you see, but also has carried by force from
me my wife, whose absence will be the present cause of my death, and whose
danger brings greater sorrow to my heart then all these wounds, which I
endure.

Why quoth Blanchardine how long since departed he hence and left you thus
distressed? the wounded Knight replied, scarce half an hour ago, he took his
way toward yonder wood and carried my love with him: then replied Blanchardine
I never yet until this day have undertaken arms, but let me request you to
honor me with the order of knighthood and I will pawn my life to dye or to
recover again your love. Then said the wounded man I will not only make you
knight, but withal (if you please) arm you with this my armor and lance,
that shall add more strength to your courage: and besides, I will ^rorate the
Gods, to send you all happiness, not only in this, but in all other your
honorable attemptes.

Sir quoth Blanchardine, I think me sufficiently honored, by this your offer,
therefore disarme your self speedily, that he may not be past recovery,
before I overtake him. So the wounded Knight armed him, and invested him with
the order of Knighthood: when Blanchardine saw himself thus arraied, his
youthly courage pricked him on, who taking his horse, mounted the Saddle, where
bravely managing him upon the plain, to prove how well he could rule his
Lance, found himself (as he thought) fit for this enterprise. And so with
valiant c^rage, and cheerful countenance, he took his leave of the (...)
Knight, and posted after the other, that had carried away his wife.

He had not ridden long, but he perceived the tracktes, and footsteps of a
horse, that had lately gone that way* and following those steps, with a speedy
pace, he heard the pitiful complaint, that a Lady made to appease the raging
lust of a villain who sought perforce to ravish her, whom presently he found
hid under the shadow of a leafye tree, beating ye poor distressed Lady, the
wife of the wounded knight: to whom making speedy approach, vassail (quoth he)
desist from this cruel and damnable enterprise, for I swear by heaven, I will
make thee repent this absurd vilany.

The Knight seeing Blanchardine to be young, and greatly grieved for his
sudden approach, made semblance of much wrath, but Blanchardine with austere
countenance, and Princely voice, commanded him presently to free the Lady,
whom most wrongfully he had carried away from her husband, whom he left almost
ready to yield up the ghost.

The knight disdaining to be so vpbraid by so young a knight, bestirred himself
presently, and made him ready to the fight. But (withal) commanded
Blanchardine to desist from his enterprise, and leave him to his pleasure (or
if not) it should cost him his life.

Blanchardine not able to endure these cruel menaces, willed him to address
him to the combat quickly, or he would send him body and soul to hell:
whereupon he furnished himself to the fight.

The combat between Blanchardine and the Knight.
THese brave caualiers being mounted, encountered each other, with such agility
that their spears shiuered in the air, and each of them admiring the valor
of his foe: and finding their lances broken, they betook them selves to their
swords: long remained the fight doubtful, till Blanchardine remembering the
equity of his quarrel, and the honor he should atchiue by this conquest, with
all the agillity and strength he could, (mounting himself on his stirrops) so
feircely assailed his foe, that vnnayling his armor and unlacing his helmet, he
sent him to carry news of Blanchardines valor, to the infernal ghosts. which
when the Lady saw so bravely accomplished, she forthwith gave thanks to God
and him for this delivery. Then Blanchardine, seuering the head of the slain
traitorous Knight from his body, hung it at the pombell of his Saddle, and set
the Lady on the Knights horse, and posted toward the wounded knight: ^ut on
the way, she demanded of Blanchardine in what state he had left her knight?
to whom he replied, that though he were greatly wounded, yet was he living:
alas (quoth she) let us post to comfort him with as great speed as we may: But
approaching the place where they found him dead, which sight so amazed and
discomforted the sorrowful Lady, that calling to heaven for vengeance on the
soul of her adversary, she presently yielded up the Ghost: which strange
event, so amazed Blanchardine to s^e such perfect ami^ie to rest in two
conjoined hearts, that leaving them and disarming him self of his armor (being
to heavy for his carriage) he took again his mantle which before he had left
with the knights and posted away: but remembering this integrity of affection
between them, he felt the sting of love to penetrate the intralls of his
tender heart.

Chap 6.
How Blanchardine came to a river which he could not pas^e, and the knight of
the Ferry sent him aboate to pas^e him over.

LOng rid Blanchardine through the forest, till at length he came to a high
hill, at the foot whereof there ran a river most deep and perrillous, whether
when Blanchardine was come, he traversing up and down to find a passage, was
espied by the knight of the ferry and by him advised not to venture over (in any
case) because there was no landing on the other side. Blanchardine alighting,
thanked the knight much, and requested the boat to ship him over, which the
knight of the Ferry presently dispatched away. Blanchardine entering the boat
was by the industry of two Mariners conducted to the further short: at whose
arrival the knight of the Ferry attended to receive him, with such kind and
courteous salutations, that much increased Blanchardines love toward him, and
the knight precisely veiwing the singular beauty of Blanchardine mixed with a
kind of majesty and courage, requested to know the place of his abode, and
the cause of his coming thither: to whom Blanchardine with princely grace and
eloquent speech related at large the Country where he was born, and the
adventure that moved him to travel, which was by reason that all parts about
the Realm of Frize, were settled in tranquillity and quiet: and heerupon he
undertook this inquest to acquire honor and fame by his Chivalry.

The knight of the Ferry much delighted with this brave resolution, and highly
commending the valor of Blanchardine (being so young and yet of so haughty
courage) requested him h^me to his house, where both him self and his horse
did rest and refreshed themselves for a day or two: Then Blanchardine (loath to
linger or make longer stay) craved leave of his gentle host, ye knight of the
Ferry to depart: who accompaning him a little way, discoursed at large the
state of that Country unto him and many other nouels which hereafter shall be
showen.

Chap. 7.
How the Knight of the Ferry discoursed at large to Blanchardine the state of
the Country, and the beauty of the Princess thereof.

AFter this freendl^ repast which Blanchardine had received with the Knight of
the Ferry, Blanchardine riding s^ftly on the river side with the knight in his
comp^nie, requested him to ens^rine him of this Cuntry, and the state thereof,
under whose government it then was: The Knight most desirous to satisfy
Blanchardines request, began in this sort to unsold the circumstance*

This Country (quoth he) is called Dalm^cia whereof Tormayd^ is the principal
and chief City governed by the most beautiful, chaste and princely Lady
Eglantine, who is now regent and Queen thereof: and by reason that diverse
Kings, Lords and Princes have solicited her in marriage (allured through her
magnificencie and surpassing beauty which all the world admyreth) yet her
chaste life beautified with virginity controles and countermaunds love and all
his laws: And heeruppon she is surnamed Eglantin^ the fair, Queen of (...):
yet the proud Lady in love. But not far hence there is a proud Panim King
called Alimodes of (...), that would have enforced our Princess to mary him,
after the refusal of many christian kings: and by reason of her denial, he
is now preparing to invade her dominions, and that which he cannot win by
love and promises, he will attempt by fire and swoorde: for her beauty has
carried such praise and commendation throughout the world, that all the
neighboring Princes have prosecuted her love, and every one has given over
his suit saving Alimodes, he (I say) whom no answers will satisfy,
endeuoreth to compel her to wed him by force. Now (if it shall please God)
that you by your haughty prowes and manly courage, shall defend her from
Alimodes, I doubt not but that in time, (considering your excellency of person
and princely behavior) she may consent to be your wife: alas Sir, (quoth
Blanchardine) can you imagine any possibility in me to obtain her whom so
many Princes of high estates have undertaken, and have their intents and
purp^ses annihilated? no, no, Sir I neither can or will presume so high: but
all the service that my ability is able to perform, shall rest at her
employment and command.

Well sir answered the knight of the ferry, nothing is imposible in love, and
although she have been hitherto most obstinate and perverse in liking: yet love
may chance to make seizure upon her tender heart, when she least suspecteth.

And by reason of the entire affection I bear you, (seeing you so resolute, to
perform any thing for our Countries good) If it shall please you to be ruled
by my advice, I will undertake that our Queen shall be your wife, and thus it is.

The King Alimodes (as I told you) intendes war to ^ur Princess, where upon
seeing the infinite companies of hi^ soldiers, and the audatious bouldnes of
himself, making provision to beseige the City of Tormaday (Whether my Lady is
going) both for the strength of the place, and the fidelity of the subjects,
from a castle of hers not far hence: and the rather to augment the courages of
her knights and inhabitants there, against the aforesaid king Alimodes. It were
convenient that you should present your self unto her, to aid her in these
wars: which I know she will accept so tha^kfully, that nothing can bring her
(at this time) more content: you shall (I say) therefore go, and in your
iourny I know you shall over take her, accompained with a most gallant and
redoubted troop of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, and Knights: But her age, and
custom is, to ride very softly and behind all the troop, only accompained,
with an aged Lady, whom she calls her nurse: and for her grauetie, has the
greatest credit and pre-eminence with the Queen: now sir if you can by all the
possible means devise to fasten a kiss upon her lips, I Will pawn my life, you
shall be the happiest man alive, and the only possessor of her love: fail not
therefore to do as I have Councelled you, but as secret as you can: and so I
commit you to the mercy of God, and the favor of the Queen.

Blanchardine comforted with these good news, after a gentle conioy taken of
the knight, he bethought himself how he might obtain a kiss of the Queen.
And meditating upon this only thing, at last he espied the gallant troop of
Lords, according to the tale and report, of his host the knight of the ferry.
But approaching something nearer, he espied the Queen accordingly, hindmost in
the same train: only accompained with an old Lady: then Blanchardine (pricked
forward by the instinct of love, and the knights warrantize) determined with
him self to effect his purpose, although he should leese his life therefore:
and in this thoughthe called upon God to aid him in his enterprise.

Chap 8.
How Blanchardine ouertooke the proud Lady in love, and kissed her.

AS soon as Blanchardine came in sight of the Queen thrust sorth by hope, yet
recald by fear, but most desirous to accomplish and effect his determination,
seeing the Lady rid a great way behind her company: and finding the place
convenient, spurred his horse and ran so hastily that the Queen wundering who
that might be that posted so fast after, turning her head to look back, their
lips met with sweet conjunction.

Then Blanchardine (having performed as much as he desired) gallopped swiftly
away, saluting the nobles of the train with such a debonayre and amiable
countenance, that they were all astonished, what princely caualier he might be
that posted so far before the company: and withal, carrying a singular and great
c^mmendation with all the beholders, and specialy with the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, every one imagining him to be descended from some high parentage:
yet wondering the cause, why he posted so fast without company.

Thus Let him ride on till he come to the City, and leave to speak of him
now, and turn to the Lady Eglantine Queen of Tormaday most discontented for
the kiss Blanchardine had given her.

Chap. 9.
The most pitiful complaint of the Queen for the kiss of Blanchardine.

AFter that the Queen had bethought her of the kiss she received from
Blanchardine, she incontinently (as a woman disstraught of her senses) fell
into a sound: which her Nurse perceiving, and fearing least she should take
hurt by falling from her nagge, alighted to rescue her. But the Queen (some
what recalling her senses, and coming again to her self) began in this sort
to complain, with abundance of tears that trickled down her cheeks. Ah
heavenly Dia^ sacred Queen of holy nymphs: O thou Celestial Goddess, whom
from my Infancy I have adored, revenge chaste Hecoetae this outrage which is
offered to me, by that accursed stranger: I that have hitherto preserved my
body, from the raging heat of lawless lust, am now unwittingly surprised, when
least I suspected: O had I called unto my train at yt very instant, to have
murdered the villain in his flight, rather then so dasterdly a lad should
triumph in my spoil: But hear I vow, that no day, time or hour, shall pass,
wherein I will not seek revenge of that cruel and accursed traitor, who thus
arogantly has distained both my vow and honor. Ah nurse, what shall I do,
shall I send these Lords post after him, to slay him before he entered the City?
or if he be entered before they come, shall I by my express commandment,
charge my servants and loving subjects, that he never see more days then
this? The nurse seeing her in these extremes, sought by all means to assuage,
and pacify her tears, and began to persuade her in these terms.

What madame, make you such an Idol of your self, that for a kiss you will
seek to shead the blood of so noble and brave a gentleman as he is, whose
kindness to you meriteth no such hate? If you punish such sclender faults with
like rigor as you mean to inflict on this gentleman, what will you do to him
that entreats you in more dishonorably sort? Be pacified (for shame madam)
and let not the world wonder at that, which none but I and you are acquainted
withal: leap madame upon your palfrey, and dry up these womanish tears, least
being by your own folly bewraied, it breed a scandal to your name, and no
benefit to your self.

By these, or the like persuasions, the nursse appeased the queens passions,
who mounted on her palfrey, rode to the City of Tormada, intending yet
nevertheless, (if she could hear any news of Blanchardine) to punish him by
one mean or other: in which opinion let her rest, and return we again to
Blanchardine.

Chap. 10.
How Blanchardine entered the City of Tormaday and was lodged at the Provosts
house.

PResently as Blanchardine was entered the City of Tormaday, perusing with
diligent circumspection, the Cituation of the town, the stately Buildings of
Abbeis, Churches, Monestaries, and sumptuous houses, besides the great, and
manyfolde commodities, which the sea by his neighborhood, did enrich the City
withal, he grew into great admiration with himself what and how happy a man
he might be, if he could so effect his desired purpose as to wed the Queen and
be sole King and commander of so royal an Empire: and in these meditations,
approaching to the chief market place of the city, he made inquisition for
lodging for himself and his horse: unto whom reply was made, that by reason
of the multitude of the train which came with her majesty, the town had
scarce place to furnish those that were coming in their aid, against King
Aimodes. But if it pleased him to go to the house of the Provost, there no
doubt but he might find entertainment and be lodged: Blanchardine requested
him to direct him the way to the Prouosts house, which he willingly consented
to do. So he approaching near the Prouosts gate, espied him sitting there: of
whom Blanchardine in most kind and civil manner, demanded lodging, but the
Provost replied, know sir, that he that determines to lodge here, must
perform the contents written in this marble stone over the gate. The^
Blanchardine fixing his eyes on the stone and this inscription, which did no
whit at all discontent him.

He that will enter here,
must try it by shield and spear:
Against all those that be herein,
or else his cheer shall be but thin.
When Blanchardine had read this Inscription, he smiled to himself, thinking
by this mean, not only to be lodged in the Prouosts house, the principal of
the City: but also (if he could conquer and subdue him) to purchase great
commendation of the inhabitants, so that at the length, his valor might be
certified and made known to the Queen, in whose excellent beauty his
thoughts were harbored. The Provost perceiving that he had read the
inscription, and withal to smile at the news, made inquiry if he meant to
lodge in his house that night or no? Blanchardine replied, that if he might be
furnished with armor, shield and lance accordingly, he would perform as much
as the writing did importe.

The Provost wondering at the audacitie of Blanchardine commanded forthwith
his men to arm him: whom when the Provost and all the people beheld armed,
they with one consent adjudged him a man of most excellent prowes and person:
Blanchardine mounting presentlye his horse, called to the Provost to hasten to
the fight: it was not long, before the Provost was seated in his sadd^e, when
the Trumpets giving the charge, they encountered the one the other with such
dexterity, that all the people stood astonished to behold their surpassing
prowes and strength: the Provost shiuered his spear upon Blanchardine, but
Blanchardine pierced the Prouosts sheeld through, and by the violence of his
careir forced ye Provost out of his sadle to the ground: Then Blanchardine
alighting to unlace his helmet, thinking either to constrain him to yield, or
to dis-furnish him of his head, was prevented of his intended purpose: For the
Provost having two Daughters of passing beauty (who beheld the issue of the
fight) seeing their Father in peril of his life, prostrated themselves at the
feet of Blanchardine, humbly requiring life for their father: Blanchardine
noting their excellent features, presently condiscended to their petitions. And
by this time, the Provost [dazeled by the fury of Blanchardines stroke] came to
his senses: and perceiving that he was vanquished, besought him to remit his
forepassed fault, and withal taking his swoorde from his side delivered it to
Blanchardine in acknowledging him self subdued: which Blanchardine no sooner
received, but redeliuered it again with all kindness, [saying] that the
exceeding perfections of his daughters beauties had freed him from danger, so
that he should not be farther endomaged: Then the Provost humbly requested
him to enter his house, and both he and all his would rest the vassailes of
his command.

Now Blanchardine being brought within the Prouosts house, was by his two
daughters led into a most sumptuous Chamber, furnished with all things to his
estate appertaining, and by those two Virgins disarmed, and presented with a
most fair gown furred with Martines to put on.

Now in the mean, the Queen being entered within the City, presently repaired
to her lodging, and in haste sent for her Nursse to confer about Blanchardine
whom she deadly hated: But (saving her Nurse and the Captain of Tormayday)
durst none be so bold as to approach to her presence that night: The Captain
after he had done his reverence unto her Majesty, informed her Highness of the
ariuall of a strange Knight, who lately entering the City had combated the
Provost and overcome him: which (when he had delivered) Then the proud Pusell
in A^, knew by the Captains relation of Blanchardines horse and apparel, ye
it was he that had kissed her the same day, but as then she made no show or
semblance thereof: yet she commanded him to see diligent watch and ward
throughout the City for fear of Allimades, and with this answer bad him
good night.

So soon as the Captain was gone, she called her Nursse unto her saying:
this traitor is entered the town and has vanquished the Provost and lodges
in his house, and for this night I am content to suffer him, but so soon as
day appears, I will give strict command that he dye an evil death, [as I am
Queen of Tormaydar] and if the Provost shall deny or refuse to deliver him, I
will utterly confound him and all his: In this sort the Queens spent all the
night without comfort, still exclaiming against Blanchardine.

Chap. 11.
The vnceassant complaints that the Queen made to her Nurse of the outrage
offered her by Blanchardine, for the kiss he gave her, and the gentle reply
and persuasions of the Nursse.

THe Queen in this manner [as you have heard] much displesaunt for the kiss
of Blanchardine, now being in the company of her Nursse, when the calm
silence of the night procured sleep to all creatures: she could not rest, but
devising what revenge she might take on Blanchardine, begun in this manner: Oh
sweet Nursse, advise me I heartily pray thee what death I may cause him die,
that thus against all human nature and the estate of a Prince has violently
offened me with this dishonor? I mean in the morning either to cause him
presently to be hanged, drowned, burnt, his head to be smitten off or his body
to be quartered, and peecemeale dragged through the City: and still she
seemed so obstinate in this her resolute determination, that neither any
persuasions that her Nursse could imagine nor any remorce in her self could
once calm this her inc^ssant rage: till at last the Nursse seeing the folly of
the Queen, and fearing the damage that might heerby arise unto her, brake out
in these terms.

Madame, this Impatience beseems not a Princess, neither can it any way
redound to your honor thus to revenge this simple wrong offered by the knight,
whose love to you above all other of your train, made him adventure the
purchasing of your displeasure. And if in regard of this secret stolen kiss,
which nothing at al does deminish the commendation of your beauty, neither ye
dignity of your estate, you will so tiranize over the poor (yet valiant)
Gentleman: I think that either you are led by some enchanted fury, or else have
given over the true tipe of honor, to embrace pusillanimitie and folly: May not
the most credible report of the Captain of the invincible valor of the
Knight dissolve your combust melancholy, and reuengefull humor, in which [I
say] there is neither wit, magnanimity nor honor: Leave Madame leave, [and the
rather at my request] these cruel minaces which now you doom upon this brave
knight whose merit deserves no such meede.

When the Nursse had ended this perswasiue speech, and that the Lady was
somewhat reclaimed and recalmed from her intended rage: she began to meditate
with her self, of the brave perfections which both she had seen and also had
heard by the report of the Captain to be in Blanchardine: and even then [I
say] began the winged Boy Cupid to make seizure of her tender heart, which
before that time never could take the impression of love, being so adamanted
by nature and folly: and began thus secretly to confer with her self.

What, am I led by fury or frenzy, or do I wake or sleep, that have thus far
ouershot my self, to condemn so brave a knight for a kiss? doubtless I cannot
but imagine that mere love pricked him forward to attempt to kiss me, or else
seeing the brave and warlike troop which did at that instant attend me, and
withal, the majesty of my carriage: he would not have (as then) adventured to
have done it, for he might well have assured himself that if I should have made
but the least complaint to my Lords at that time, he could never have escaped
with life: well, I will mitigate this my angry mood and pardon this fault, for
the val^ancy I perceive to be in him, besides his beauty and stately proportion
of body, which makes me to conjecture, that he cannot be discendded of base and
mean parentage, but issued from most princely race of Kings: And therefore I
mean to choose him to my general in these my wars against this most pertured
infidel King Alimodes: and I doubt not but that all my subjects will give an
applauditie to this my resolution: but my displeasure which was so sorely bent
against him, I will grace him with honor and kindness. Yet by the way, I vow,
not to love him, nor any man living, (in regard of carnal lust or marriage)
whose issue is mere repentance and folly.

Chap. 12.
The Ariuall of Alimodes the Panim King at the City of Tormaday with his huge
host of fourscore thousand Sarizens and the seidge laid thereunto.

AFter the Queen had passed the night in these passions (as you have heard)
early in ye morning news was brought, that the Panim King Alimodes, was on the
Sea, bending his course toward Tormaday, and that it would not be long before
his ariuall: The Queen sent presently to all her nobles and subjects to arm
themselves, for the defense of the city, and withal, caused great and
abundant provision of victual to be brought within the walls. But not long
after, she with her nurse mounting up into a high turret and looking toward
the maine, they might discry a far off, the huge and mighty Navy, which by
the appendants, Streamers, Flages and other signs, she well perceived to be
the King. Alimodes fleet: whereupon incontinently she caused her Nobles and
Vassailes to be advertised that speedy preparation might be made, to hinder and
forbid their landing: But before they could make provision, the King and his
company were come a shore, to the great admiration of the beholders, for the
innumerable troop of soldiers and retinue: and being landed, they forthwith
spread themselves upon the plains before the City, er^cting their Pauilions
and Tents in all have.

In company of the King came to this seidge, Dariui his son and one of his
daughters of passing beauty and two other kings: the one of which was by
computation fifteen foot high, more terrible to behold then Goliath to David.
The king associated with his son and these two kings, came before ye gates,
sommoning the Citizens to come to a parley, who mounting on the walls,
enquired the cause of his approach in such warlike manner? unto whom ye king
replied, That unless they would deliver the Lady Queen Eglantine, that proud
Lady in love, to be his wife, he would never give over his assault and
seidge, till he had not only wasted the whole country with fire and sword, but
also razed the walls of that famous City flat to the ground, and then
perforce would he have her, which he now by entreaty desires to wed. The
townsemen replied, that neither they had any dread of his brauadoes, neither
yet would deliver their Queen into the hands of so mahematicall a miscreant
(as himself) but therein presence of the two kings, gave defiance to his face.
And upon this answer, Alimodes commanded the Cannon to be planted against the
walls, and the soldiers to give their assault: There might you hear the
Cannos roaring, the Barbed horses neighing, the glistering armor shining, the
drums striking up, the Trumpets and clarions sounding the dismal and cruel
March of the Pagans: he caused his chief standerd, to be erected in the midst
of his host, against which the ordinance of the City played such music, that
many of the Turks were sent to hell, to do homage to their God Mahomet: the
rest did so closely (by their continual industry) entrench themselves, that the
Cannon could have no power over them:

But the Citizens omitting no time that might serve for their purpose, made a
secret issue out of the Town, and so on the sudden set upon them, that at the
least two thousand of them were slain without any hurt to the townsemen
(almost at all.)

The Captain and the Provost being expert warriors, seeing the great
discomfiture of their enemies, sent presently new supply out of the town and
so pursued the enemy, that at the least they slew fourteen hundred more, at
which sudden alarm, the King himself (not hearing before of the slaughter of
his men) gave a fresh charge upon the Citizens, so as they were (by reason of
the multitude of their adversaries) compelled to recoile back, and entered the
town at a posterne gate, which they had given most especial charge to the
Citizens, to be kept for that purpose.

Now Alimodes hearing the retreat of his enemies sounded, he retired him self
again into his pauillion, greatly displeased for this his extreme loss and
slaughter of his soldiers at the beginning of his seidge: but Blanchardine all
this while standing upon the walls, and seeing the valor of the Citizens,
and the disconfiture of the infidells, mourned to him self: whom when the
Provost being returned had saluted, enquiring the cause of his heaviness: (Ah
sir quoth he) I have forsaken father, and mother, country and friends to seek
adventures in strange lands, and wishing all happiness to the most redoubted
Empress of Tormaday: yet finding my self altogether unarmed, and unfit to
enter the sight unfurnished, makes me to have this dolance and grief. The
provost greatly commending the generositie and manly courage of Blanchardine,
presently gave him the choice of all his armours, and himself fitted it on his
back, and commanded his horse presently to be brought forth, intending both
to issue together out upon the enemy.

One of the daughters of the Provost, perceiving Blanchardine to be armed,
ready to be gone with her father, brought him a white damask caparizon for his
horse. And withal a black scarf for himself to wear, which she requested
him to carry in his helmet for her sake: Blanchardine most thankfully received
these freendly presents, and employed them as you have heard. So the damsel
recommending them both to the protection of God, humbly took her leave.

Chap 13.
How Blanchardine behaved himself in the fight against Alimodes, and of the
great affection, that the Pucell in amors conceived of Blanchardine.

BLanchardine and the Provost thus bravely mounted, made have to the gate of
the City, to issue out on the enemy: whether being arrived, buckling on their
helmets, their shieldes at their backs and their lances in their hands, thus
having the conduct of three thousand men, they marched in equipage, out of the
town toward the enemy, who not unprovided, awaited their coming.
Blanchardine burning in desire of glory, put himself into the foremost rank,
and being without the Barriers of the town, they began to encounter each
other, so that the noise of their horses made the earth to sound, the clamor
was so great, as though the four eliments had met together: the sun was
darkened by reason of the dust that rose in the air: Blanchar. being foremost,
gave thassault to Corbadas nephew to king Alimode* a man mighty in body and
prowes: but upon the encounter Blanchardines lance entered through his armor,
and so he fell from his horse dead. And following on his fortunate beginning,
before he brake his lance, he slew at the least six or seven. Then betaking
himself to his sword, he made such havoc of his foes, that no man durst
approach within ye compass of his reach: the Citizens wondering at his chiualry,
the Panims amazed at his prowes: imagining him rather to be an infernal spirit,
then a living man. So that both through the camp of the enemy, and within the
walls of the City: there was no speech but of the puizaunce of Blanchadine.

Then began the lamentable complaint, and hydious outcries in the enemies
camp, which caused the Queen of Tormada^ to come with her Nurse to the
window. And espied Blanchardine he have himself so manfully and with such
derterity suppress her enemies, she demanded of her Nurse who the same might
be, for in all my life (quoth she) I have not seen a knight of more value:
Replied the Nurse, truly madame I know not who that might be, but in my
opinion he is the brauest man at arms living in the world: the Queen and her
Nurse communing thus together of the heroyicke fates of Blanchardine, A squire
chauncing to approach near them, spoke in this manner (most sacred princess)
see you yonder knight, whose horse is covered with white, and the black scar^e
in his helmet* he (I say) is the flower of chivalry, the subduer and
vanquisher of your foes: he it is, that not satisfied with their slaughters,
pursues them even to their pauillions, and where (even now) his arms and armor
were white, they are disteyned with the blood of your enemies, whom he has
most manfully slain. Know madame for a truth it is that knight that lodges in
the Prouosts house, who lately subdued and vanquished the provost.

When the proud Lady in love, understood that it was Blanchardin^, the crim^on
color flusht in her face for joy, which the wiely Nurse quickly perceived,
but the Queen made no outward semblance of any such love at all, as she
inwardly bare to Blanchardine, fearing the Iealosie of her Nurse. But the
fearful Nurse seeing the great hosts of the enemy, and the continual danger
of the citizens, persuaded the Queen so much as she could, to pacify those
braules, by the marriage of King Alimodes. But the Queen answered, desist for
shame these foolish persuasions, for while I live I vow to God above never to
marry Panim or infidel.

In this their secret parley, looking out of the window, they perceived the
knight still encountering one an other manfully: but above all, Blanchardine
bore away the prize, both for magnanimity and courage, wherefore the enemy was
most d^spleased seeking by all means, to entrappe and surprise him unawares,
but not one of them so hardy, as to approach near him: for whom soever he
encountered he slew. Now the Panims per^iuing the day to be almost spent, and
many of their men slain, others wounded, but almost all discomforted, by
reason of one especial knight (which was Blanchardine) they commanded the
retreat to be sounded, and so returned to their pauillions and ^ntes for that
time.

Blanchardine entering the City, was in all triumph conu^ied to the Prouosts
house, with the assotiation of all the nobles of Tormaday, reuerencing him, ^or
his exceeding valor that day. And in truth they all had great reason so to do,
because he rescued many from the foe, which otherwise had gone prisoners away
with Alimodes.

When he was come to the Prouosts house, the two beautiful daughters of the
Provost welcomed him with all duty: when Supper was ready, diverse nobles
accompanied him, with Ladies and Gentle women from all parts of the City, to
salute and view Blanchardine: neither wanted there any pleasure that might
procure his delight, for the Provost had caused all the finest musitions, to
attend there the supper time.

Now the proud Lady in love fair Eglantine leaning in her chamber window,
heard the great noyes and the delicate music, which at that time was in the
Prouosts house, for the entertainment of Blanchardine, which she her self did
so much affectionate. But (Iealosie the Nurse of debate, and underminer of all
happiness) creapt into the heart of the Queen, ^earing least he should be
enamored of one of the Prouosts daughters, whom she had heard commended for
surpassing beautiful. Now care, with fear, the handmaydes of love creept into
the heart of the Princess, soliciting her to desolue this affection (if any
were) between Blanchardine and the Prouosts daughter. But not long after, Cupid
entending a speedy revenge for her obstinacy against his laws, suddenly
struck her with his golden shaft, that she became so impatient of her
greifes, that day nor night she could take any rest. Then came she to her
Nurse with this complaint.

Ah sweet Nurse, now am I (unfortunate Lady,) become the most miserablest woman
living: thou see, that neither day nor night I feel content or quiet, and my
desease is almost incurable being sprung of passions coniealed in my heart.

Her Nurse perceiving that her Lady was now entered the Chapter house of love,
thinking the Idol whom she honored had been (...), made her this answer.
Madame, you are much bound to almighty God, that has procured such speedy stay
of wars and slaughter of your men: now you begin to affectionate the King
Alimodes, whose continual desire has ever been to accomplish your love.

The Queen made her no answer, but to her self she said ah love, thou in
very deed art the only Tirant, whom though I have long withstood, yet now at
the time when I least suspected thou have taken me prisoner, and unless I
possess the thing I love, I dye.

Chap. 14.
The Queen surprised with love and Iellosie, sends for the Provost to speak
with him concerning Blanchardine and the prouosts daughter.

AS soon as the Nurse perceived that love began to encamp himself in her
tender breast, she very iocond for this happy event, thinking it had been with
Alimodes (as I said before) began with the Queen in this sort: Madame this is
the most sacred and happyest day, that ever ^hone over the Realm of Dalmasia
and the famous City of Tormaday: for although the many and dangerous assaults,
that King Alimodes has made against this country and (only for the love of
you) yet since it has pleased God to convert your froward fancy, to a
comfortable course of love with the King Alimodes, it will become a most
plentiful and fruitful commonwealth, when your subjects shall live at
con^nt and quiet, and have a King to reign over them, whose mai^stie will
daunt your daring foes.

The Queen giving an attentive care to understand the effect of her tale, and
at last perceiving it to tend to the marriage of the Pagan, she forgetting her
wonted patience brake into these agonies: why how now Nurse, what is the cause
that you continually persevere in these vndiscreate and unadvised terms? have I
not ever told thee (and withal, have thou not heard me vow) that while breath
remains in my body, I will never consent to hisloue, whose devilish religion,
full of idolatry, and cursed apostata forbiddes me once to name much less to
like, yea and altogether to loath? Leave off I say these booteles intisements
since they are not available: for I tell thee, the man whom I have sworn to
love, is the true pattern, and Prince of Magnanimity, whose brave attempts,
deserve a thousand times a better woman then my self, [and but he] none shall
enjoy my love. The Nurse Nipt with this reply of the Queen, wist not what to
conjecture of her love, unless it should be with Blanchardine, whose
commendations she heard most aptly related not a little before: where fore she
thought best to be silent until she knew the certainty thereof.

Then forthwith the Queen commanded that the Provost should be sent for to
talk with her about some serious business.

The Nurse undertaking the charge, presently dispatched a messenger, to
command the Provost to attend the Queens pleasure, which he with all
diligence obeyed. And no sooner came, but the Queen conveyed him up into her
gallery where entering parley with him, she began in this sort.

Know Gentle Provost, that these wars have bred in me such heuines, that I
cannot joy: And yet I hear there is a knight that lodges in your house, whose
valiancy has won him such renown throughout all the City, that both old
and young commend his chiualry: and my self a beholder of his valor, think
that his service has done me such honor, as while I live I will acknowledge my
self thankful to him.

The Provost much contented with this freendly favor of her Majesty, and more
to hear her so blazon the perfections of his guest Blanchardine, was ravished
with exceeding joy. And not slack to augment the praises of his friend, (and
one whom duty had tied him unto) pursued his commendation in this sort.

Most Magificent Princess, since it has pleased you to extol the rare
perfections of my princely guest, know madam, that the man lives not in the
world, whose haughty courage can equalize his, whose affable and gentle nature,
deserves commendation through out the world, and by my self most gracious
Lady, well approved. The Lady, whose Itching ears, were never satisfied with
his commendation answered the Provost.

Having ever found you a most trusty and loving servant unto us in all
affairs, wherein we have had any cause to employ you, has given me occasion
to discover a thing unto you which much tormenteth me to conceile, know then,
that report has told me that one of your daughters, (more forward then
maidenly or modesty would) is fallen into an extreme desire and longing to be
wedded to the Knight your guest, whose valures do show him to be extracted, and
descended of Princely lineage. A match of disperagement, in my opinion much
disagreeing both his and her estate, and of all who are acquainted therewith
much discommended, therefore I charge you as you tender our favor: presently
break off these suspicions, if you mean to continue our Princely grace
toward you.

Madam answered the Provost, this thing is most strange unto me, for never (as
yet) could I so much as imagine any such accedent, neither has any report
bruted it in my ears: But if my daughter should happen on such a knight as is
Blanchardine, she might boldly vaunt, that no Lady in the world could wish a
more happy content. For madam (quoth he) he has this day, by his own proper
valor, subdued and taken ten knights prisoners, besides their brave coursers,
which he has bestowed upon your Lords and Nobles. And to be short, I rather
take him to be Oberon, king of the Fairies, then a mortal or human creature:
well then (quoth the Queen) being right glad to hear his praises so extolled
by the Provost, percha^ce I know the man better then you imagine, and am most
well acquainted with the daughter of a king, who for ornaments of nature, and
admirable beauty, has not her paragon, and whose ardent affection, and
continual thoughts, do daily and hourly wander upon his rare perfections,
and it may be that for love of her* he has undertaken these adventures:
therefore it were a monstrous folly and deep absurdity in your daughter, to
carry such an ouerweening of her self, as to imagine that she were a match
worthy of such a paramour: therefore (as you regard my displeasure) have
secret, yet special care, of the wanton glaunces and familiar unbracements of
your daughter with that young knight: and yet because you shall not think that
I compact this, to prejudice or hinder the preferments of your daughters, send
them speedily to my Court, to attend on my person, where for your service, and
their own sakes, I will provide them husbands, to your and their contents,
neither shall they need any cost or dowry from you.

The provost most humbly thanking her Majesty for this her princely offer, for
the preferment of his daughters, promised for ever all observance and duty to
her highness: but when he was ready to depart, the Queen commanded him that
he should bring the said Knight the next morning to her presence, where she
might first by her speech and countenance, and after by liberal rewards,
requite the honorable attempts he had undertaken in her quarrel, because
(quoth she) by his only aid and valor, our wars do sort to happy end.
In consideration whereof, if he please he shall be affianced and wedded to
that Kings daughter, which so much delights in his person: which if he shall
deny, report from me unto him, that it were most uncivil and inhumaine, to
refuse that proffer, which diverse Lords and Princes would hazard lives and
livings to attain: but (on my honor) the cause why thus I will importune him
in the behalf of this Lady, is for that she is near allied unto my self, and
with whose affection I am thoroughly acquainted, because that day and night she
does languish for his love, whose presence and yea, will be a heaven: and whose
absence and denial, a hell unto her: and her cars is as grievous unto me, as
(if it were mine own) and would confound my heart with sorrow, to see this
Lady forsaken, cast of by him, and frustrated of her hope.

Chap. 15.
How Blanchardine was informed by the Provost, of the Queens pleasure to have
him attend on her majesty the next morning, and of the speech she had with him.

AFter that the Provost was returned home to his house, he calling
Blanchardine* recounted the Queens message unto him, that on the next morning
he should attend her majesty's pleasure at the Court, to confer with the
Queen and receive a recompense for his vallourous attempts in her highness
service: and withal forgot not to explain unto him the love of the Kings
daughter, which did so entirely affectionate him, that for his love she would
hazard life and all, so she might obtain the effect of her hope, and (quoth
the Provost) if my opinion deceive me not, she her self is the Kings Daughter,
which longs to be shrined for a saint within the altar of your heart, and yet
because she has ever been at defiance with love, I cannot conjecture, but
greatly wonder, whether it should be she or no: but, if the prayers which I do
pour forth unto the Gods, might be auaylable for the consummating of your
marriage with the Queen, I would day and night entreat the heavenly powers to
sort my wish to happy effect.

When the Provost had discoursed at large, of the Queens command unto
Blanchardine, he smiling at his happy fortune, made this reply* Provost (quoth
he) it rather seems that you devise this forged tale, then deliver the
Queens message: for her majesty never in her life had any conference with me:
how then can I imagine that her affection should be such toward me, as you
speak of? but I rather conjecture her majesty does delude me, and smally
respect my service (which if I thought) I would not stay to offend her highness.
Ah good sir (quoth the Provost) take not in ill part what I have said, for
upon the faith I do owe to your self, it is most true: therefore let us in
the morning go to the Court, that her majesty may perceive that I have done
her command, which if you find contrary, never have affiance nor truth in me
again.

With these and such like speech, Blanchardine and the Provost went to the
Court, where the Queen (then in counsel with her Lords about the wars)
seeing Rlanchardine and the Provost enter the presence, arofe to welcome them:
and with attention casting her eyes on Blanchardine, commended within her
self, the rare perfection both of beauty and courage she perceived in him, yet
loath to make manifest what she intended to keep most secret, did bridle
affection for the time.

The Ladies and Gentlewomen there present, wondered at the admirable proportion
of his body, and singularity of his beauty, having heard of the dexterity of
arms, which he manfully performed in the wars before the City of Tormaday.

But Blanchardine was so entangled in the lyme bushe of the Queens beauty,
that he thought (if Paris had then lived) and that (...) should again cast
down the golden ball amid the three Goddesses upon the the top of Jda, that
if so be this Queen had but once made she we of her self, he would have
clean dismissed them all, and bestowed the ball on her.

But at length the Queen breaking silence, took Blanchardine by the hand,
requesting him to sit down by her, which he rather for manners (then
unwillingness) refused, till at the last by mere constraint, after most humble
reverence he obeyed.

Then the Queen after long deliberation, said unto him: Sir Knight, your
coming into this City, has been much to our comfort and advancement, for
which we humblye thank the Gods: but for the most valiant prowes you have
showed, in confounding our adversaries, we gratify you with all kindenes, and
will reward you most honorably.

Madame, replied Blanchardine, I find my self more honored, then either my
deserts have given cause* or my heart can desire, in that you vouchsafe to grace
me in this honorable assembly: and what I have achieved, has been through
the omnipotency of God, who sent me hither to do you service. Know most
excellent Queen, since I forsook my parents, country and friends, I never
took greater contentment, then in such services as it shall please your
Majesty to command, and for the rewards which your Majesty offers unto me,
I most humblye beseech your highness to bestow them on my Host, whose kindness
has been more toward me since my arrival here, then my abilitye (as yet) can
require: and if it may please your majesty to entertain a wandering Knight
into your princely service, I shall do my deuoire to perform the trust you
shall repose in me.

Herewith the Queen marking the debonaire countenance of Blanchardine, she
was so ravished in contemplation of his beauty, that almost distraught of her
senses, he might well perceive that love had made her his votary.

Blanchardine taking hold of occasion: emboldned himself to demand of her
Majesty, what Lady that might be of whom she had told the Provost the day
before.

Then answered the Queen, she of whom I made mention to your Host, is nearly
allied unto my self, whose welfare I tender as my own.

As Madame, quoth Blanchardine, if I might presume so far, as be inquisitiue
to know her name, your majesty should greatly pleasure me: for on my life in
all my days I never conceived liking of any Lady but one, whose princely
beauty [pardo^ me oh gracious Princesse] made me presume to steal a kiss of
her majesty, which kiss has added both such will and force to my mind and
body, that whilst I breathe this air, I Will live to serve, and dye to honor
her, and only in her remains my life or death.

Then replied the Queen, well gentle knight, because I cannot longer conceal
affection, and that I feel my heart so esprized with this sweet conference
which now I have with you (al circumstance laid aparte) I am constrained to
manifest my love: Know therefore, that whatsoever I spoke unto the Provost
concerning any Lady, my self am the same, whom neither time nor age can make
to forget your noble and courteous demea^our, and whilste I live none shall be
sovereign of my thoughts but Blanchardine, yet have I appealed to the high
heavens, and put in my plea agai ast the God of love, but my action is naught
worth.

Imagine gent. that this her confession to her ghostly father Blanchar was not
without change of color, and withal, that his reply was without fervent
zeal and devotion, in harkening to the gladsome doom of his continual weal,
proceeding from the Oracle of his desire, and withal that besides themselves,
none was privy to this conference at that time.

Chap 16.
The battle between Blanchardine, and the Giant Rubion.

AFter that the Queen and Blanchardine had thus plighted their promises each to
other, and that the Queen was about to depart, the Provost entreated him to
return home, because it was about supper time: which the Queen espying,
commanded the Provost presently to send his daughters to the Court, and upon
her crown she would richly marry them: I will not say that jealousy was the
occasion hereof, but I leave that to the censure of grauer heads then mine.

But freendly pacing Home ward, the Provost desirous to know the sequel of
Blanchardines cause, and the confereuce in secret he had with the Queen,
coniured him of all loves to unfold the circumstance, promising upon his life
both secrecy and coustancie, for my mind (quoth he) cannot be satisfied,
until I know whether you shall be King of Tormayday or no, being more then
half persuaded thereunto already.

Blanchardine reposing an assured trust in the Provost, by reason of many
favors which he had received from him, from point to point, related ye whole
proceedings, betwixt the Queen and him self, requiring his secrecy as in such
a case is needful.

No sooner were they entered the Provost house, but the Queen im^diatly sent
unto Banchardine a rich white courser, sumptuously trapped with crimson velvet
and gold, and withal a sleeue of her gown richly imbrodered with pearl,
which she mioyned him by her messenger to wear upon his (...), when he should
encounter with her enemies, that thereby she might the better perceive him from
the other Lords.

Blanchardine in all humility received this princely present* and royally
thanking her majesty for so high a favor, gave in reward unto the bringer an
ouch of gold, upon which was set a rich ruby encompassed with diamonds, who
thanking Blanchardine most humbly, departed: and being returned to the Queen,
recounted the thankful acceptance of the present by Blanchardine, and the
bountiful reward he received from him for his pains, which the Lady rejoicing
to hear, commending the honorable mind of Blanchardine, imagining that such
liberality could not issue from a base courage.

But presently a great clamor was in the streates, which put the Provost into a
sudden admiration of the cause: anon it was related unto them, that the king of
the giants called Rubion, was before the walls of the town, demanding
iustes* for his Ladies sake, daughter to king Alimodes, who had h^ sleeue in
his helmet, of violet satin, which he wore as her favor, in dispight of any
Ladies beauty within the City, and by reason of the hugenes of his body,
which was recounted to be xv. foot in length, no man durst presume to enter
combat against him.

This unexpected news much delighted Blanchardine, who requested nothing more
then to undertake this combat, in honor of his Lady, whose fleeue he bare: and
least the Giant should be gone, before he could be ready for the fight, he sent
present word that the Giant should not loose his labor, and that his request
should be fulfilled. These news seemed to revive the heart and courage of
Rubior, because he longed to show his valor, for the love of Alimodes daughter
his Lady and mistress.

Long stayed not Blanchardine, till he mounted his horse armed, and on his
Helmet he wa^e the sleeue which the Queens had sent him, thinking it a
sufficient covering or burgonet against all chances whatsoever, and pacing
toward the gates, the Ladies, Lords, and Citizens wondered at the haughty
courage of Blanchardine, much commending his generosity and brave carriage on
horseback: And all prayers were made, for his safe return.

Thus marched he out of the gates, and came to the place where the Giant stayed
his coming: whom when the Giant beheld, he sternly demanded of whence he
was, and what unadvised chance had brought him thither? Blanchardine answered,
I will not for any dread of thee (accursed miscriant) conceile my name nor
parentage: know, I am son to the King of Frize my name is Blanchardine, sent
to combat with thee, by my gracious and most fair Princess Eglantine, Queen
of Tormaday surnamed the proud Lady in love.

And (quoth the Giant) I even now was commanded from my peereles Lady and
mistress, the daughter to the king Alimodes, who gave me this her right sleeue
for my favor, that this enfigne of her favor covering my head, I may
accomplish some exploite beseenring the beauty of my love.

Then quoth Blanchardine, Panim do thy worst, I am hear to answer thee, so
much as thou shall demand.

So fetching their carreirs, they encountered the one the other with such
haughty courage, that both their lances shiuered to their hands: Then
betaking themselves to their swords, their strokes were so terrible, that the
fire flue out of their helmets, and for a while the fierce fight remained
doubtful.

Now was the Queen of Tormayday ascended her gallery window whence the might
behold the combatants, and fearing much (by reason of the hugenes of ye Giant)
ye Blanchardine would not return again safe, she becamepensiue, and very
sorrowful.

On the other side sat king Alimodes daughter, to behold her champion, but
casting her eyes upon Blanchardine, wishing in her heart that he might be
conqueror, she might have him for her paramour.

But this doubtful fight was at length finished by Blanchadine, who casting
his eyes to the window where his lovely Queen lay, his courage augmenting by
the virtue he drew from her: upon the sudden, he lent the Giant such a cuff,
that he tumbled down from his horse in a sound: which when Blanchardine
perceived, he thought to allight to finish the r^mbate, by cutting off his
head, when out of an ambosh issued three score Pagans for his rescue.

The Queen of Tormaday, seeing this treachery, charged her men presently to
post out of the town to aid Blanchardine. But before they could come*
Blanchardine was encompassed with twenty men, of the which none came within his
reach but wished he had not attempted so near him.

The Queens soldiers coming to the rescue, were encountered by fresh supplies
of the Pagans, so that that day was much bloodshed* and had been the last day
of Alimodes seidge had not Darias his son su^cored his fainting Knights, with
new supplies.

Darias being come, sounded a retreat to his men for a while, then joining
together his companies again, invaded the thickest of the Citizens, and no
doubt had done great slaughter that day, had not Blanchardine singled himforth,
who in the counterbuff, gave him such a bastinado, that made him sincke to the
ground out of his saddle, and had not present succor come, he had severed his
head from his shoulders.

Darias being thus rescued, was conveyed home to his pauillion, where by reason
of the stroke, he was constreined to keep his bed three days.

In this time Rubion the Giant, having recovered both his senses and his horse
again, did great exploites, and had almost slain the Provost, had not
Blanchardine made speedy have, calling upon the Giant: Ah thou false Panim
(quoth he) this shall be thy last day, thou which most traitorously would have
slain me, and by that means have once escaped my hands: Now will I take such
vengeance on thee, thou shall never see thy Lady again: And here withal,
aduauncing himself, gave him such a sound buffet on the helmet, that he fell
down stark dead to the earth.

The death of the Giant Rubion King of the Sarizens, once bruted, all his
soldiers being discomforted, made have to recover their pauilions and tents.
But being pursued with all celerity that might be, were cut off by the way
before they could reach thi*ther. Blanchardine followed so hard, that he came
even to the entry of Alimodes pauilion, before the which he found the kings
daughter sitting to behold the battle, whom when Blanchardine espied, he
bowing himself down, took up the Damsel, and set her before him on his
courser, and posted as fast as he could to Tormaday.

Alimodes hearing of this hard adventure, as a man desperate and half
frantic, posted after with four thousand soldiers, to recover his daughter
again: and one making more speed then auailed him, coming some what nearer
Blanchardine, was presently slain by him: but in this stay the enemy rushed
so fast upon him, that Blanchardines horse was slain under him: but he
trusting in God, so behaved himself with his shield and sword, that not the
prowdest Sarasin durst approach him.

When the King Alimodes perceived the great prowes that remained in
Blanchardine, that among so many, none durst encounter him, he cried out amain
unto his Knights. Fie on you all, untrue and faintharted Pagans, that one
Knight is able to affright so many: with these vpbraidings, the unruly rabble
of rascal Sarizens ran all at once desperately upon Blanchardine, and so
surprised him by maine force: but in his taking, he slew among many others, a
Knight that was Nephew to Alimodes* a man of great account and prowes.

In good time Beautrix the daughter of King Alimodes, having wisely perused the
excellent beauty of Blanchardine, seeing the likelyhoode of his present death,
prostrated her self upon her knees unto the king her father, humbly requesting
him to pardon the life of the young Knight.

The King beholding the pitiful demand of his daughter, whom above all
creatures in the world he loved, answered her in this wise.

My dear and well-beloved daughter, I wish it had not been your chance at
this time to have been present, or I would you had not entreated for him who
has done us all this damage, but since it is your demand, and that I cannot
deny what you request, he shall not dye here, but I will presentlye send him
away unto the Realm of Salmandry, unto the King of Giants, brother to Rubion
whom he has ssaine, and whom I tendered as my own person, who (if he had
lived) had been your espouse and husband.

But the Queen of Tormadar, understanding of the great distress wherein
Blanchardine was, commanded the Provost presently to post, and ransom him,
how soever. But the King made the more expedition and have to send him away to
Salmandry, that there with all cruelty, he might be massacred, swearing by his
Mahomet, that no ransom should set him free, but death.

The Provost hearing this absolute, and resolute answer of Alimodes, reported
to Blanchardine the desperate estate he now was in, whereof Blanchardine was
not a little sorry, but finding no remedy willed him most humbly to commend him
to the good grace of the Queen.

When the Provost was returned home, and now was entered the court, he found the
Queen out of measure sorrowful, sor the loss and absence of Blanchardine,
unto whom he made a true report according to the answer of Alimodes, which
uncomfortable message, did so daunt the heart of the Queen, that every one
expected her present death. But leaving her in her pasions, return we to
Alimodes.

Chap. 17.
Darius carries away with him Blanchardine to be conveyed into Salmandry, and
how the ship wherein Blanchardine was, perished by a tempest, and all were
drowned except Blanchardine, who approaching to the Court of the King of Spruse,
gained the place of general in his wars.

AFter the departure of the Provost, Alimodes commanded his son Darius to
return to Cassidony where he was king and to carry with him his sister
Beautrix. And in his absence, govern the land and people in quiet, whilst his
seidge lay against Tormaday: And like wise deliuerred unto his custody
Blanchardine, whom be charged to send into Salmandry to the king of Giants,
whose brother Blanchardine had lately slain, there to be tortured to death at
the discreation of the king. Darius presently at the command of his father,
rigged two ships for his passage, in the one he and his fair sister Beautrix,
in the other Blanchardine guarded by three score men was put.

When all things were in a readiness for their departure, the mariners weighing
ancor and hoysing sail, floted away. So Blanchardine, finding no remorse, like
a lamb to the slaughter, was carried toward Cassidony and as he imagined to
his death.

The Queen of Tormaday looking out of her window might discern the ship
wherein Blanchardine went, whom with millions of tears she bewailed. But the
continual skirmishes with her people had with the Pa^ms, bred her sometime
joy, sometime sadness, as the fortune of war gave cause: then remembering the
sweet kiss which Blanchardine gave her, she was ready to sound. But
recomforted by her Ladeis she began to complain in this manner.

In fortune, thou blind guidresse of this unconstant world, will thy tottering
wheel never stand still, but being at the highest turn topsey turuey? Ah most
unjust gods (if thou be a Gods) that contrary to all godliness, do pervert
al things to the wors^, could thou not have suffered me a while to enjoy my
love Blanchardine, but in the first show of happiness, to turn me to despair?
have thou none other to vomitte up thy venym but upon me, ah most unhappy of
all unhappiness. Well in thy dispight i will live, and in thy dispight i will die. The
Ladies fering least this perplexity might breed a far greater disease and
danger to her person, recomforted her with mild and sweet speeches, still
willing her not to distrust, but that her Blanchardine would safely return.

Blanchardine now on the sea sailing toward Cassidony with Darius and Beautrix
his sister, ancored even at the haven of the City, where Darius and his sister
went a shore, and gave straight charge and commandment to the sailors, to
conduct the ship which Blanchardine was in to Salmandry, there to present him
unto the king of Giants. And with all to certify him, that he was the man who
flew his brother Ru^ri before the walls of Tormaday, where his father Alimodes
continued yet his seidge. They incontinently departed from Cassidony, to sail
to Salmandry, whereof fair Beaut^ix was most displeasant: and if she could by
any possible means have stayed his course, he should not have gone to his
slaughter into Salmandry, but although her beauty were great yet her power was
little.

Thus being upon the Seas, a day or two after their departure: the winds
roarde, the lightnings flasht, and thunder cracked so teribly, that the
mariners dispairing of all safety, suffered the ship to holl with the waves
and winds, whether fortune and their fates should lead them, the tempest still
more and more increasing, at the length the maine mast rent in twain, the
rudder was smitten off, and the boorded keele splyt, so that of the threescore
men which were aboorde, none escaped but Blancha din who bestriding a piece of
the mast, was within one hour or little more, by reason of the northwest gale
that blew from Sea, driven to shore within the land of Sp^ce.

When Blanchardine, looking back into the extreme danger he had escaped,
humbly kneeling gave thanks to God, and so traueling along the unknown country
until he came within the kenning of the City of Marrienburgh: in which City,
as a Country swayne that he met, told him, there lay a mighty King who on the
next day, had appointed agreat tilting and triumph, commanding all his nobles
(able to bear arms) not to fail to be there, as that day, to try their
valures and chiualries.

Blanchardine (whose education be seemed a princes son) providing himself of
other apparel: and having good skyll in their language, demanded ye rediest
way to the court, of such passengers as he met. And hasting his pace, because
he would come in some good time, at length he approached the court. And entering
within the Hall he found the king conferring with the Barons about the next
days sportes. Blanchardine beholding his majesty and magnificent estate
prostrated himself on his knee before him. The king vewing the manlike grace
of blanchardine, demanded what he was, to whom blanchardine most reverently
made answer, that he was a far country man borne, and undertaking this
inquest, to come and serve his majesty, whose princely fame spreding through
the world, chanced to fly into Creece to my fathers court, a king in that
Country. And seeing that noe news of wars near at hand, was as then stirring:
I with threescore gentlemen and soldiers imbarqued our selves for your service.
But being at Sea, a huge tempest rising from the nore, after our travel in long
danger, our Ship struck upon a rock so yt it sylyt in twain, and all the
rest of my company were drowned saving my self, whom by the help of a piece
of our mast, fortune preserved, and was brought to shore, not far from the
castle Mocaster, within your highness Dominions, from whence I have by many
days journey traueled hither.

Fair Knight (quoth the King) your case is strange. But your ariuall here most
welcome, and since you have for our service undertaken so dangerous a vioage
and escaped so perilous adventures, and withal being the Son of a king, I
may not (unless I should blot that fame with shameful reproach (which you say)
is spread abroad of our magnanimity) but recompense your pains accordingly.

Know therefore sir knight, that at this instant, I have wars newly begun, with
one of my neighbor kings, yet that I may inuest you with the honor you
deserve, I will make you general of all my sorces there, wherein if god shall
prosper your attempts and chiualry, doubt not but I will so amplyreward your
service, that you shall not after, have cause to complain you of our
liberality. And in the mean I will take such order, that all things convenient
for your estate shall be forthwith provided.

Blanchardine much recomforted with this happy resolution o^ the king, forgot
not in all humility to thank his majesty, protesting, that (since far above
his deserts (as yet) it had pleased his highness to advance his estate) that
both in these, and all other his wars, he would be as forward as any: And with
all dexterity, labor to make some requital of his exceeding favor.

Chap. 18.
How a wounded knight arrived at the court at Marenbourgh ane certified the
King that the King of Poland with a huge host was wasling his country and
people, whereupon the King gave charge of three thousand men to Blanchardine,
and his son Sadony for the rescuing of his foes.

AS the King and Blanchardine were thus in parley together, there approached his
presence an armed knight, who by reason of his many wounds lately received,
bled exceedingly: upon his first entry he began thus to speak unto his
majesty. O Noble King where is that ancient valor and true chivalry, which
was accustomed to remain in this court. Know mighty prince, that the King of
^oland thy neighbor and enemy has entered thy Dominions on the sudden, who
with fire and sword, burns, pulls down, and distroyeth, Churches, Houses,
Buildings, and consenting to the cruel rapine of his soldiers, does ^der men,
women and children. And no doubt my leidge ere long (yea and ear three days
be determined) he means to besiedge this City of M^rienbourgh. Hasten
therefore noble King to the rescue of thy poor subjects, least delay bring too
great a danger.

These unexpected news so amazed the King, that for a while he made a pause:
but calling a Council, advised himself what were best to be done on the
sudden: whose directions were these, that the new Knight B^anchardine should
in all have address him self, with threescore thousand fighting men, to drive
back the enemy. And by reason the soldiers should ^ke the better courage, he
commanded his son Sadony, to accompany ^nchar din^ in these wars.

This princely charge of the king did so glad Blanchardine, that more happy
news he could not receive (except it were from his Lady Eglantine Queen of
Tormaday) wherefore he thanked the King most humbly, promising all forwardnes
of a knight.

Then forthwith the kings letters were directed for the mustering of men, which
by the next morning were ready appointed at the Citte Marienbourgh, to go
under the conduct of Blanchardine, against the Polanders.

Blanchardine most royally accepted his charge, and forthwith accompanied with
Sadony the Kings son, emarched forward against the enemy, whom ere long
they escryed upon the side of a hill. Blanchardine raunged his men into sundry
squadrons, and in the foremost put himself, and in the middle the Kings son
Sadony. Thus in order of battle they assailed the enemy, upon whose encounter,
the clamor grew exceeding great, the ordinances played, the muskets discharged
pelmell upon their adversaries, so that with in short time, the grownd was
covered with dead carcasses. Now Blanchardine espying the huge courage of the
king of Polandes Brother, whose valor, seemed to quail the hearts of his
men: with his lance encountered him, and upon the shock, ran him clean through
the body, so that he fell from his horse dead: upon this heavy spectacle, the
Polanders (being dis^aid) retired toward the kings standerd, and informed him
of the success of his brother: the King wroth beyond measure, swear that he
would never give over the fight, till he had revenged his brothers death, and
in this outrageous fury he thrust himself in the middle of his foes. Then
began the battle to be most fierce: for now Sadony seeing the enemy somewhat
disordered, gave a fresh charge upon them, at whose approach, the thundering
noise of the horsemen, made the grownd to echo. But Sadony and his company,
seeing the great prowes of Blanchardine, whose lance before it brake, had
slain at the least twenty of his foes, they imagined him rather a spirit,
then a humane creature.

But the king of the Pollanders, loath to incur the scandal of cowardice, ^
with all seeing his brother slain and all his soldiers reco^le back* by ye
valor of one only man (which was Blanchardine came in his proper person and
singled him out from the rest of the company, so with their lances they
charging each other with a most manfull encounter, the king shiuered his
lance. But Blanchardine, by his mighty puizance and valor, dis^ounted the
king from his horse, whom so soon as he saw unhorsed, he presently
allighted, minding to take his head in gadge for his whole body, but the king
seeing himself frustate of all hope of rescue, delivered his sword to
Blanchardine yiedling himself his prisoner: blanchardine forthwith committed
him to the custody of ten Knights, to be conveyed presently out of the camp,
and safely to be guarded till he might make a present of him to the king.

When the Polanders perceived their king taken prisoner, they began to be
discomforted, and forthwith betook themselves to fight: but being pursued by
their enemies, few or none of them escaped: blanhardine divided all the spoil
among his soldiers, whereby he won the hearts of all his soldiers.

After Blanchardine had put to flight his foes, and had established a quiet
peace in those parts, he and the prince Sadony, repaired to the King at
Marienbourgh, where with all honor, he delivered the king of Poland into the
hands of his majesty, to use according to his pleasure.

The King most gratefully accepted this present of him, and hearing the
general report of all, in the great commendation of Blanchardine, and that by
his only means his enemies were subdued: embracing him with an extraordinary
salutation spoke in this manner.

Most brave and heroicke knight, your noble attempts give manifest proof of
your high extraction, and princely parentage: and for my own part, not having
wherewith worthyly to recompense your great deserts, I do submit both my
self, my Son, and may realm to be at your command and vasselage.

Answered Blanchardine, this undeserved honor, which you of your favor assign
unto me, neither befitteth my calling, nor my nature. But (if it may please
your Majesty) to accept of me, as one among the number of these gallant
knights, to attend your highness, I shall think my self most amply honored.
Nay quoth the king, your demand is too reasonable. But I have a maiden niece
of mine, whose beauty far surpasses all the Ladies in this Land, whom (if you
please to wed) I will bestow upon you, with such a royal dowry that you shall
think, though my power be not so great as I wish to satis^ie you, yet my
willing mind shall be seen in this my freendly proffer. Therefore fair
knight, refuse not to accept, what I so willingly would have you receive: for I
swear by the heavens, the man lives not, whom I more am bound to honor and
esteem.

Blanchardine humbly thanking his majesty, answered him in this sort, most
mighty king, pardon me, although I shall make refusal of this your princely
offer, for know, that in my own country of Gre^ce I am already betrothed to a
Lady, whom long since I have determined to wed, and therefore hold my self
most honorably recompensed at your royal hands, in that it would please you
to bestow your beautiful niece upon so mean a stranger.

Now Sadony the kings Son, whose only contentment was in the company of
Blanchardine, day by day invented new sportes, and quainte devices, to
exhillerate and make him merry. But Blanchardine, calling to mind the extremity
of his most sweet Lady Eglantine, the Queen of Tormaday, by reason of the long
and dangerous seidge of King Alimodes, could not be d^lighted with any
novelties. And in this ecstasy let us leave him (but in the high favor of the
king and his Son Sadon^) and return we to tell of the King of Frize Father
to Blanchardine.

Chapt. 19.
How D^rius King Al^modes son, entending his return to his father to the
siedge of Tormaday, was by extremity of weather driven upon the coast of
Frizeland, where he took the King prisoner.

AFter that Darius king Alimodes son had long expected the return of those
which had the conduct of Blanchardine from Salmandria, and hearing no news at
all, he presently intended his voyage to his father, lying incampt before the
city Tormaday: and imagining (that by reason of their long siedge) his fathers
companies were diminished, he mustred men to carry thither with him. And
having fitted all things for his t^urney, commending the state of the Country
of Ca^ledony, to the government of his fair sister Beautrix* he departed to
sea: where having a most pleasant gale, within short time he might descrie the
coast of Tormaday. But wher^he imagined to come to anchor, he was by a
contrary gust of weather which came from the land, driven back into the
maine: where, not able to bear sail, they were feign to h^ll up and down the
space of 3. days* expecting continually present death, rather than once hoping
of an^e safety. But at the length, the windy storms beginning to slake, they
might (...) land whither presently they bended their wandering course: and being
thus brought near a little Island within the kingdom of Freeze, to ease their
s^a beaten bodies they went ashore, and perceiving the (...) of the Island, and
the fertility both of corn and cattle, and diverse other things, gave them
in^ouragement to seek farther within the land, marching still ^o strong and
warlike mann^r.

Now it ^ortuned at that very instant, the King of (...) land Father to
Blanchardine, according to his accustomed usage, twice or thrice in the year,
made his progress to the said Island both for the pleasure he found there, in
sundry pastimes fit for a Princes disport, and also at that time to take truce
with sorrow, which he had so long time warred with, for the absence of his
son Blanchardine, of whom since his departure, he never had any certain
tidings, during whose unfortunate abode in this aforesaid Island, these
miscreants Darius and his company cam^ a shore there: and having in their
march, apprehended three of the inhabitants, demanded of them to whom the
said Island might belong, and withal, what Gods they worshipped? these poor
men seeing the exceeding number of these Pagans, (compelled through fear of
their lives) discovered the whole estate of the Island, their faith in Jesus
Christ, and withal, the presence of the King of Frize at that instant, the
which report once bruted to Darias and the rest of his diuilish company, they
forthwith posted forward, in most secret manner to the Castle, where the king
then lay. And upon their approach beseidged the same, and took the king and all
his company prisoners, whom they incontinently caused to be carried aboorde
their ships.

After this, searching farther into the Island, they with fire and sword,
wasted and destroyed all the inhabitants, and houses there, and driving all the
cattle they could find toward their ships, furnished themselves with fresh
victuals to present to his father Alimodes, and his company lying in the seidge
before Tor maday, with all fearing their scarcety: Which being accomplished
according to the command of Darius, he and all his company with the king of
Frize and diverse of his Lords and Gentlemen, whom they had there unawares
surprised, bent their course to Tormaday.

But when the uncomfortable tidings of this sudden mischance came to the
hearing of the Queen of Frize what acclamations and pittyful complaints she
made, are impossible for me to write and more difficult to recount. But in
these agonyes, what with her never dying care and thought for Blanchardine her
son, and for the loss of her husband, she yielded her self to God and dyed.
Darius being come a shore within the country of Tormaday (...) having vnshipt
all his provision, which he had brought from (...) foresaid Island, presently
dispatched messengers to his father, (...) inform him of his happy ariuall,
which he no sooner heard, but in all post, he went to meet and welcome his
son.

And then began Darius to recount unto his father, his whole adventure on the
seas, since his departure from To^maday, not forgetting to certify him of his
sending of Blanchardin^, to Salmandria, but as yet he neither received answer
from the King nor news of the threescore men that went with him.

Then Darius presented to his father, the king of Frize, as his prisoner, and
the rich booty which he had taken in the Island, and brought thither for their
supply of victuals, which unexpected happy present, to cheered up the hearts
of the Soldiers, and so pleased the king his father, that his welcome to all
was more like a God then a man.

Now Darius being come to his fathers tent, he demanded of him how the Queen
of Tormaday, and all her Lords had (since his departure) behaved themselves,
and also what store of provision he thought to remain within the City, and
how often they had made Issue out to skirmish with his people?

Alimodes made answer, that he made no doubt but that shortly they would
deliver, both the Queen, the town, and themselves into his hands, by reason
of their great want of victuals.

And besides (quoth he) they have not made any issue out, but once since the
departure of the young knight, which I sent with you prisoner to Salmandri^, to
be presented from me to the King, and that issue is at the feast a month
since. So that now I have little doubt of their forces, by reason of their long
silence and extreme want.

Having finished this discourse of their adventures, the King Alimodes prepared
an exceeding great banquet for his Son, to w^lcome him, and all his retinew,
and in this incr^ment and contented disport, they passed certain days, till
(...), thinking it (...) (...) his son should (...) to Ca^dony, (...) to
(...) the (...) of his (...) there, and also to comfort his sister Beautrix,
whom he had left Vicegerent till his return.

So the time for his departure being come, the King with all his Nobles,
Captains, and chief of account, leaving their tents, accompanied Darius to
the sea side, to take their leaves on ship boo^d. In the mean time, the
Provost of Tormaday now being upon the walls of the town, and both by his own
view, and by the report of his espialls, perceiving the exceeding number of
cattle lately brought thither by Darius* and pastured not far from the
City. And hearing of the departure of All modes and all his Captains, for the
conduct of Darius to the sea. Calling the Nobles and principal Commanders of
Tormaday, discoursed at large thus much unto them: That considering the rich
booty they should obtain, and the penury which they endured by the want of
victual in the Town, he would have a general issue in the absence of the
enemy at several posternes, both to recover the cattle before the Town, and
also to surprise at unawares and unprovided the enemy, remaining within the
tents of Allimodes.

The Queen and her Lords weighing the sage advice of the manly Provost, gave
consent to effect what he had determined with all celeritie, both time and
opportunity being so agreeable to their enterprise.

Forthwith the Provost, taking with him a sufficient company of courageous
Soldiers and trusty men at Arms, marched out at the principal gate of the
city, where the Enemy might soonest esp^e and discover them: the rather to
entice the so to forsake their tents, and come against them. At certain other
Posternes privily issued out at the least six thousand horse and foot to make
seazure on the cattle, which at that instant were most (...) guarded, by reason
of the absence of the captains and keepers, which were gone with Darius to the
sea side. So that without any force at all, they within small time had driven
the cattle within the walls of Tormaday: and the rest of the citizens (having
surprised the Enemy in the tents) put most to the sword and taking such
pillage as they found, set fire on the rest, and forthwith returned safe to the
city, leading with them such prisoners of account, as fortune had reserved
from the slaughter.

Being now come within the city walls, after giving most humble thanks to God
for this happy conquest, making survey of the booty they had gotten, they
found it exceeding rich, and besides the proye of cattle was sufficient to
maintain them the space of a year: which bred a sweet content to the Queen
and her Nobles, and a general comfort to all the Inhabitaunts of Tormaday.

But when Allimodes and his company were returned from sea, and found the
sudden slaughter of his men, the burning and spoiling of his tents, rape of
his goods, and besides (which he accounted worst of all) the loss of the
cattle, he grew as a man desperate, and half beside his senses, cursing and
exclaiming upon his Gods, that so unjustly (as he thought) had deprived him of
all his happiness at once. And in these outrages let him remain a little.

But when the Pu^lin Amoures the Queen of Tormaday had some what recomforted
her passions, which she endured for the imprisonment of Blanchardine* and
minding nothing so much, as the rare perfections of his personage: she on the
sudden, commanded the Provost should be called unto her, who coming before her
Majesty, she began to enter parley in this sort.

Thy trustines (most assured loving friend and subject) having always satisfied
my expectation, does at this instaunt give me greater hope of thy fidelity.
Then know, sense by thy good mean, quaint device, and exceeding valor, we
are now safe from the cruelty of our adversaries, and furnished with
sufficient provision of victual for the space of one year or more, and that I
never had comfort in my soul, since the departure of thy friendly guest
Blanchardine: I determine presently to send thee as my Ambassador to my Uncle
the King of Norway, to certify him of the lo^, extreme and ungentle siedge of
Allimodes against this city and withal to crave his aid for the dislodging
of our (...) from hence, for if that in time we seek not succor, no dou^t but
at the length we shall be forced to yield, which will not only be our disho^r*
but also such a torturing of my soul, whose ardent affections is wholly
devoted to Blarchardine, that hell it self cannot send a greater plague.
Therefore make all possible speed you can, to rigge and furnish a ship, with
men, munition, and vittuals, for your self and your company, that withal
secretie, and without the priuitie of our foes, you may both pass and return
again: herein you shall not only discharge the duty of a trusty subject, but
also perform the part of a true friend, and for ever bind me to your
valiancie and forwardnes.

Madam replied the Provost, I most humbly thank your majesty, for this honor
wherewith you seem at this time to grace me, and here I vow upon my faith,
duty to God and allegiance to your highness, to perform (or else to dye) the
full of your command, with all the possible speed I may.

The Provost having made all requisite and necessary provision, departed early
out at a little posterne, with his companny: and long before day, embarked
himself for Norweigh. But so soon as Appillo had forsaken Thetis bed, mounted
his fyerye chariote: the spialls of Alimodes, had escryed the ship wherein the
Provost went twenty Leages off the shore, whereof he being advertised, grew
exceeding wrath: but seeing no remedy, he besought his Gods that his son
Darius might encounter him on the seas, and so stay his journey, in which hope
he somewhat recomforted himself. But Darius taking a contrary course, landed
shortly within the territories of Cassadony, where being come a shore, he
commanded that the king of Frize, and those prisoners that they had brought,
should be shut up in most loathsome obscure stinking dungions, where the aged
king spent a great part of his time, in sorrowing his distress and hard
adventure where in he did remain, till by his son Blanchardine, he was
enlarged and set sree, as hereafter you shall here.

Cap. 20.
How Blanchardine compleining the distressed chance of the Queen of Tormaday,
walking in the garden was comforted by Sadony.

REturning to Blanchardine, whom we left in the great grace and favor of the
king of Spruse, at the city Marienburgh, and Sadony the kings son, whose
only contentment rested in the company of Blanchardine, for the magnanimious
valor, and wonderful prowes, he had seen in him. Blanchardine on a time,
finding Sodony absent, about some serious business of the king his fathers,
privily repaired to a close and delicate garden near adjoining to the court,
whither being come, he began to meditate and call to mind) the rare
perfection of Eglantine (his dear and most sweet beloved lady, Queen of
Tormaday. And in this his deep and melancholic dumps, he glanced his wandering
eyes, on a beautiful rose, which grew in the walk, which he so fitly applied
to the beauty of his love, as all poets penns could not more artificially
discipher it. But when he mist the substance of his Lady, whose shadow he had
so long time imprinted in his thought, his griefs did so abound, remembering
her extremes, that he was like to overcome. But calling to mind, the honorable
bounty of the king of Spruse, who offered his niece to him in marriage, he brake
forth in these terms.

And should I live, so to violate the sacred oath made to my Gods fair
Eglantine, whose only thought, have given so many victories, or should I once
attempt any other then her self, who is the only sovereign of my soul? No
no, first let the earth gape wide and swalow me, or let the stars fall from
heaven and consume me, remaining in this ecstasy all alone: Sadony missing his
c^mpanion in the court, rested not till he had found him in the Garden: and
listening to his profound lamentations, fearing least grief should diminish
and impair his health, boldly thrust into his solitary walk, and both by his
importunity, and sweet perswasiue speeches, he enforced Blanchardine to unfold
the circumstances of his heavy plaints, promising upon his life to help to
effect his purposes whatsoever (if it remained in his power) and pardon me
sweet friend (quoth he) that I conjecture upon the cause of your melancholy,
for in my opinion, it is only love, that th^s makes you pensive and sad.

Ah gentle Sadony answered Blanchardine, your divination is most true, which if
I should I cannot possibly deny. But yet altogether remediless, being so far
from her I love, that no news can be brought to either of us of our welfares.
Yet day by day I ^ast my wat^e eyes, to the hills and dales, to the seas and
waves, but my sight returns empty, and my expectation void of that I most
desire to see.

Why quoth Sadony, is she imprisoned, either in the Tower of Babr^on, Room,
Spain, Almaine, Tartars, Turks or Moore? and if she be, doubt not, but I will
find means for her delivery.

O no said Blanchardine, the place of her abode, is not so far, for know
(dear Sadony) it is fair Eglant^e the Queen of Tormaday* called for her
chastity the proud Lady in love: it is she (my dear Sadony) whom I shrine
in my heart for my only Saint, and for whose absence I endure this conflict in
my soul. O it is she, the perfectst creature that ever Nature framed of
earthly molde, whose very eyes excel the twinkling stars in brightness,
whose hairs surmount the golden wyers, whose beauty crcelleth the lyllie and
the rose: and theresore pardon me Sadony ah pardon me sweet friend, if I live
thus distressed, being barred from her heavenly presence, and almost in doubt
and despair of ever seeing her again. Which speeches uttered with passion he
had no sooner finished, but the tears distilled down (...) from his eyne, and
for that time his sobbes forbad his tung to speak. But recalling his senses,
and perceiving the true friendship of (...). whose promise he engrafted in his
heart, made this farther discourse.

Know Sadony, that at my arrival at Tormaday, the Panim King Allimodes,
seeking perforce to win the said Queen to grant him love, which she with a
most discontented mind from time to time utterly denied. This King (I say)
full of rage and frenzy, intending to conquer that by fire and sword, which he
could not get by flattery, has laid continual siedge to the city Tormaday
where she is now resident, and voweth never to give over his assault until he
may obtain the Queen for his Empres and wife: my self in her service at that
instaunt by adverse Fortune, was suddenly surprised, and taken prisoner by
Alimodes servants: and not vouchsafing to accept of any ransom, sent me by a
strong guard of three score men to Salmandria to the King, there to be murdered,
by reason that I in those wars before Tormaday, chanced to slay his brother
Rubion. But in our journey by sea a gust of wind and tempest, drove our ship
wherein I was upon a rock, so that it split in twain, and (but my self) none
escaped, chauncing to bestride a piece of the maine mast, which brought me
ashore in this Country.

Comfort your self (quoth Sadony) and although your hard adventures, were
sufficient to discourage you of all good hope, yet shall you see, that for the
singular good will I bear you, I will imploye all the industry and pains I
have, both to release the Lady of her imprisonment, and also to yield you
contentment in your love: and because I will not let slip occasion, I will
presently go to my father, and request his aid in this your enterprise: who
(I know) will not spare any cost to effect the full of your desire.

Blanchardine perceiving that his complaint was like to find remedy by his
friend Sadony answered thus: Most brave and valorous Gentleman, know for
certainty, that Alimodes has a daughter named Beautrix, whose beauty is most
excellent, and (in my conceit) worthy the noblest man that lives: whom I
doubt not in time (if you please) to make your Lady and wife, if in these
wars we have success.

This speech of Blanchardine, did so instigate and prick forward Sadony, that
presently he went to his father the King of Marienbourgh, and led with him
Blanchardine: who prostrating themselves on their knees before the King, Sadony
began to expostulate him in this manner.

Most mighty King, since that by the valor and princely courag^ of this
Knight, your Realm is in security, and that by him you have the King of
Poland your prisoner and in safety: may it please your Majesty, to show the
magnificencie of a King, in doing a deserved favor to this young Gentleman,
whose extreme injuries, proffered to the nearest of his kin at this instant,
wanting speedy help, are like to breed an overthrow to himself, and all his
friends for ever. Therefore most royal King and father, that strangers abroad
may blazon the princely bounty of your Majesty, let us have presently men and
munition for this our enterprise, that our adventures may not only be
fortunate abroad, but our return home most honorable and victorious.

When the King had given attention to this tale of his son Sadony,
considering the great bands wherein he thought himself bound to Blanchardine,
and also loath to incur the ignominious slander of his home born subjects in
denying this petition, which tended for the good of Blanchardine* he presently
not only gave command that men should be levied, money in readiness, and ships
prepared for them: but also seemed more desirous than they, for the speedy
dispatch in those affairs. And on the third day after, fourteen thousand men
were in readiness, for to be shipped away under the conduct of Blanchardine and
Sadony, with all things appertaining to such an host.

When men and victuals were aboard, the King in person accompanied
Blanchardine and his son to the sea side, and withal brought four of his
idolatrous golden gods, gorgeously adorned with pearl and precious stones,
commending their safety to them in their journey.

After the departure of the King to his Court, they weighed anchor, and hoyst
up their sails, and by the industry of skifull Pilots, in short time came
within two days sail of the City of Tormaday. But houering a little on the
seas to escrie land, they espied a ship a kenning off, which seemed to bend
her course toward Tormaday, whom anon they hayled: and coming aboard, they
found within the vessel the good Provost of Tormaday, who was returned from the
kingdom of Norway, whether he was sent from the Queen of Tormaday, for
supply of soldiers to raise the siege of Alimodes: whom when Blanchardine
espied, glad beyond measure of such happy meeting, made him almost forget that
ever he had sorrowed before. And demanding of the Provost first of his
Country, secondly of the government, and thirdly the cause of his voyage? He
answered, that being sent by the Queen of Tormaday* to procure aid from the
King of Norway, to repulse Alimodes and his host, and that before his coming
thither, the King was dead, so that her comfort there was utterly quailed. Now
Blanchardine perceiving that the Provost knew him not by reason of the color
he had depainted himself withal, to resemble the Country men of Spruce,
questioned farther with the Provost, of the Queen and her Dominions? unto whom
the Provost replied. The Realm is called Dalmatia, and Tormaday is the
principal place and City within the Realm, both for concourse of people,
strength and traffic. Our Queen is named Eglantine the fair, and by reason
of her chastity, she is surnamed, the proud Lady in love. And know good sir,
that many and sundry Princes, Kings and Emperors have continually solicited
our Queen in marriage: but she never regarded their requests, by reason of a
young Knight, whom above all the world she loves so tenderly, as I think unless
she he are some speedy news of him, being lately taken prisoner by the King
Alimodes, and sent to Cassidony from thence, to be conueighed to Salmandry to
the King there: whose brother Rubion he slew before Tormaday, she (I say)
will never enjoy any felicity or happiness. Why quoth Blanchardine, think
you not that since that young Knight is gone, and that no tidings can be
brought to her of him, that she will accept one of us for her husband, upon
condition we deliver her, from the hands of king Alimodes.

Ah good sir, (quoth the Provost) I am so assured of her constancy, and
inviolable oath, which she has plighted to that Knight, that she will never
yield to any other though she should presently suffer death, and that her
crown, kingdom and people, should be for ever captiuated and overthrown.

Blanchardine tickled with this sugared discourse of the Provost, finding by his
tale, that none but himself had won the fort of her fancy, rounded Sadony
in the ear: and told him that this was the Lady, whose service he was bound
to prosecute.

The Provost seeing by Blanchardines courteous salutations, that he had no need
to doubt of any villainy, demanded secretly if these were or would conioin to
the rescue of his Lady and Mistress, the proud Lady in love, against her so
and cruel enemy King Alimodes?

What (quoth Blanchardine) think you us so foolish, as for to venture our
bodies, lives and goods, to succor her, who is so devoted to one, whom she is
uncertain ever to see again? Yet this I know, that women's fancies alter with
every wind, their substance is only mutabilitie, and full of inconstancy:
and therefore I marvel how you dare undertake, that she being a woman, will
remain constant to one that is either dead, or never like to return to her
again alive.

Ha ha sir said the Provost, if you were as privy to her contentment in her
love to her devoted friend as I am, you would utterly condemn in your self,
this vain iucredulitie which now you seem to hold, and imagine in women's
loves.

I pray thee (quoth blanchardine) what is the name of that young Knight, which
she does dote upon so much?

His name (quoth the Provost) is Blanchardine* son to the King of Frizeland,
a man of such generositie and valor, that through the world I think he has no
compeere: and my Ladies thoughts do so wander upon his perfections, that in
the day, she remembers nothing so much as him, and in the night scant
dreameth on any thing but him, imagining still to see him return to her
rescue: so that in my opinion, it were better to perform all the labors of
Hercules again, than to undertake the obtaining of her love, which is so
strongly and surely grounded upon the rock of his affection, that no wind
which any mouth can blow, will make her once to stagger, in her
determinations, and on my life what I have said is true.

Chap. 21.
How Blanchardine dispatched away the Provost with his letter to the Queen of
Tormaday, the contents altogether unknown to the Provost, until the Queen
had read it.

AFter this sad conference had with the Provost, Blanchardine withdrawing
himself closely into his cabben, calling for ink and paper, presently began
to indite a letter to the queen of Tormaday, which when he had finished, he
delivered to the Provost, charging him safely to deliver the same to her own
hands. After which, he calling the Provost aside, told him that all those
ships were fraught with Panims and Saracens, and that he himself was a
Saracen: but (quoth he) I know the man that you name, Blanchardine, who at
this hour lies imprisoned among the Panims in a most obscure dungeon: and the
greatest comfort he has, is, that your Lady and Queen yet lives, whom he
hops one day to visit again, because he imagines, that his absence is her
only coffeehouse.

Ah very God quoth the Provost, that his return might be speedely, for in
this time of his absence, no comfort can once make seazure on her heart, so that
she being disquieted, all the Court and City lamenteth.

After the Provost had received the letter, and in humble wise taken leave of
blanchardine, he hoysed up his sails and poasted toward Tormaday, with such
celeritie, that within two days he safely arrived there. Then he entering the
City by a little posterne, repaired to the Church of our Lady, where most
humbly he thanked God for his prosperous return: which being finished, he
presently went to the Court, where being entered the Presence, he found the
Queen sitting very melancholy: but making his dutiful obeisance to her
Majesty, he recounted unto her these news, That at his arrival at Norway he
found the King her uncle dead two days before, and all the Lords most
pensive and sorrowful for his loss: but delivering his embassage to the
Peers, they made this reply, that so soon as the obsequies and funerals of
the King were performed, they would (according to their duties) make
preparation for her service, being by descent their natural Queen and
Princess, whom above all other they were bounden to obey. When the Queen
heard of her uncles death, she grew most sorrowful: but the Provost desirous
to put her out of such dumpes, certefied her of the huge Fleet of Panims that
he met upon the seas, and that a great Commander of the rest, requested him
to deliver this letter into her Majesty's own hands, which he promised
faithfully to do, considering my duty to your Majesty, and the gentle usage
of the Panims toward me, at that time when I expected nothing but death. The
Lady receiving the letter, so soon as she had opened it, found the contents
to this effect.

Most magnificent Princess, the thread of my wearied life has ever been
lengthened, by the hope I have had to succor your distresses, whom above all
the world I honor and esteem: and after my manifold and hard adventures,
being captiuated and made prisoner to king Alimodes, by the heavenly
providence of God, I am delivered and set free. For being sent from you by the
said king, under the safekeeping of his son Darius and three score soldiers,
to be presented to the king of Salmandry, whose brother Rubion I slew before
the walls of Tormaday: being on the sea, the ship wherein I was (carried by rage
of tempest) split upon a huge rock so that of the three score men that were in
her, none escaped but my self, who (by the great providence of God) bestrid a
piece of the maine mast, and in little tune was carried a shore in the land of
Spruce, not far from the city of Marienbourgh, where by reason of war I
have been constrained to serve in the wars of a Saracen King, with whom for
my good deserts I have obtained high rewards And upon my humble petition to
his Majesty, he has delivered me fourteen thousand fighting men, with
sufficient money, jewels and provision, and withal has sent his only son
Sadony in my company, to rescue you against that false perjured miscreant
Alimodes. And what time denies me now to write, I will so soon as I shall
arrive at Tormaday, deliver by word of mouth, which shall not be long, being
within two days sail of you: and because ye shall gather the true circumstance
of my letter more perfectly, I send you it by this token, that I once received
a kiss from your sweet lips, before I was received into your service. And thus
in all humility, recommending my self and my true affection to your sacred
person, the only organ of my bliss and welfare, I take my leave, praying God,
to grant you accomplishment of all your happy desires. Written upon the sea by
the most unfortunate Knight Blanchardine.

Thus Gentlemen, have I abruptly finished this first part of Blanchardines
Adventures, with the true constant love of fair Eglantine the proud Lady in
love: which if it shall pass with your good favors, I will very shortly make
the second part ready for the press. In the mean while I wish ye well.
FINIS.
The second part, OF THE MOST Excellent and Famous Historye of Blanchardine,
Son to the King of Frize, and fair Eglantine Queen of Tormaday, surnamed
The Proud Lady in Love.

By P. T. G. Gent.



Imprinted at London for William Blackwall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
ouer-against Guildehall Gate. 1595.

To the most forward Patron of learning and brave accomplished Gentleman, M.
William Peetre son and heir to the right worshipful sir John Peetre knight.
HIpercyan the unskillful Piper, when he had sounded upon his Oaten reed his
rustic Roundelaies in presence of God Mercury, before whom, Orpheus (douting
of his cunning) was ashamed to tune his Harp: being at the first uncontrolled,
in the end began to blow louder. So I right worshipful, not unlike this rude
Piper, having presumed to tune my rustie stringes to larum forth my simple
music in the translation of the first part of Blanchardines adventures, in
presence of you, whose learned censure as far passes my capacity, as
Mercuries cunning did poor Hipercyans skill: yet having found your favorable
acceptance of the former, I am encouraged to persevere in the dedicatio^ of the
second part also, to you, his first and most worthy Patron: ^o whose
vasselage, not only many undeserved favors, but bountiful rewards have bound
me during life, in all obseruancie. And having no fitter mean to make manifest
the integrity of my zeal, wherewith I honor your worshipful house: I thought
it my best to take hold of occasion, whilst (in my conceit) she proffered her
self to be taken, which I greatly feared, if now I should negligently
ouerslip, I should scantly hereafter overtake.

This consideration (right worshipful) was the spur that pricked me forth to
offer the simple kernel which this fruitless shell incloseth, to your
favorable view, which I trust you will vouchsafe to accept, though not
according to the value, which is nothing, yet for the dutiful desire of the
giver, which is my most: For in this I protest, you may well deccrne, that my
willing mind does bewraie my good meaning. And as the brightest Sun wants
not fuel to yield increase to his glorious light: so there is not wanting in
me a sufficient will, to do you all possible duty and service (by which two,
the Scutchion of my zeal is and shall for ever be supported) Thus more then
half assured, that this my poor Book shall find shelture to fly under the
shadow of your wing, in whose good grace (if once it be armed) I force not what
backbiting Momus or his currish mates can imagine against it. And as these (my
Premities, patronized by you) shall seem pleasing: so will I always be most
ready (if any matter of more worth chance into my hands) to offer it up in
all duty at your shrine: until when I take my leave, praying God in this life
to grace you with all happiness, and in the other life withal blessedness.

Your Worships ever devoted

P. T. G.

Chap. 1.
How Blanchardine, with Sadony, his friendly companion, being on the Sea,
bending their course to Tormaday, for the rescue of the fair Eglantine the
proud Lady in love, were by a sudden gale compelled again to Sea.

IN ye former treatise, of this most famous History, of the valiant
Blanchardine whom we left upon the Seas, with a most huge Navy of Ships in
company with Sadony, Son to the King of Spruse: bending their course toward
the famous city of Tormaday, to ye rescue of ye bewtiful Queen Eglantine from
the tyrany of ye proud Panim King Allimodes, whose long and dangerous seidge
there, had bred a great dearth within the said City, to the distressed
Queen, and her dispairing company. Now the noble Provost, making his return
from her uncle the King of Noweigh, to whom he was ^ent Ambassador to crave his
aid for her delivery from this perrilous seidge, he happened to encounter upon
the Seas with Blanchardine, who (although in show an Infidel,) yet in
substance a true Christian, and vow^d friend to the Queen of Tormaday: and
hearing the large report and true recount of the Provost, concerning the
welfare of the fair^ Queen Eglant^, it bred to Blanchardine most sweet content
wh^ he understood that she was as yet at liberty, and free from the bondage of
Alimodes: and therefore to redouble her comfort and solace, he wrote the letter
before recited, which he delivered to the Provost, to be secretly with speed
conueighed to her own hands.

Now I say, the Provost being returned to Tormaday, and having delivered his
answer from the States of Norweigh to her Majesty, he forgot not withal to
give her the letter of Blanchardine, which when she had perused, and withal
precisely noted both the contents and the writing: she presently perceived it
to be the true inscription of her love Blanchardine: but brideling affection
with modesty (although this sudden and unexpected happy news might have
caused her to forget the rules of government in breaking silence, which
commonly is incident to the female sex) yet after some pause, she calling the
Provost in more secret manner a-side, began to question with him in these
terms.

Provost quoth she, although this h^auie and disaster chance augmenteth my
passions for the untimely dicease of my noble Uncle the king of Norweigh, and
that I am almost in despair of any succoure, from the nobles and states there,
who excusing themselves at this present, by the solemnizing of the funerals of
their deceased King: Yet I pray thee, tell me, know thou the man from whom
these letters were delivered to be presented to me?

Madam (quoth the Provost) if I should inform your majesty that I knew the
man, of whom I received, not only the letter, but also the greatest kindness
that I could desire, I should utterly deceive you and speak untruly of my
self. For (may it please your highness,) in my return from Norweigh: upon the
sodden, I had within ken a huge and mighty Navy of Sarrizins and infidels, of
whom standing in great doubt, yet seeing no means to escape the danger I
then thought my self in: I resolutely approached nearer them, and their
Admiral sending aboard our ship, I was brought before him, whom when I
beheld, although the fear I then was in and the majesty of his countenance
might have daunted me on the sudden, yet perceiving some generositie and
clemency to rest in his visage, I was some what recomforted: and after long
parley betwixt him and me touching my condition and your majesty (whose servant
I informed him I was) he demanded the cause of my Embassage, and to whom I
was sent: which when I had recounted at large, he seemed to pity your
distress, which made me then more bold and presumptious, to demand of him
(if in your aid) he with all this noble and valiant company, would come to
Tormaday, because I immagined that a man of such magnanimous courage (as he
seemed to be) would hazard his person, in defense of a maiden Princess, so
sore and unjustly distressed.

Why quoth the general, think thou that if I should enforce both my self,
and all this honorable company to come to succor her in this dangerous
enterprise, that she would b^nd her affection to like and love me, so far
forth as to become my wife and paramour, and to enuest me with the diadem of
Tormaday, and with all the Signories dew to the crown and dignity?

Alas sir (quoth I) our Queen and Mistress, whom all the world does admire
for singularity of beauty, has ever since her birth disdained and rejected the
love of many and mighty kings having vowed a perpetual virginity. And for the
same only cause are these wars, which King Alimodes wageth against her,
whom (in regard of marriage) although he be a mighty and most victorious
Prince, yet she accompteth of him, as of the meanest slave in this your fleet.
And for her obstinacy against these Noble Kings, in love she is sur-named
fair Eglantine the proud Lady in love.

But not long since (may it please you) she is entangled in the most rare and
divine beauty, of the brauest man at arms that ever nature framed of earthly
mould, whose courage and valia^ in the subduing of our soes, before the walls
of Tormaday, has so conquered the heart, and true affection of our Queen, that
all per^wasions in the world, may not cause her once to forget the sincerety of
love, which she unfeignedly has vowed to him. But in the harvest of these her
summers joys, cruel winter has nypt the blossom of her bliss. For not long
since, this valiant and victorious Gentleman, named Blanchardine, making issue
out upon the enemy, before the Town of Tormaday, by some accidental chance
of cruel war, was by the foe suddenly surprised and taken, who not accepting
of any Ransom, have sent him to the king of Salamandry, whose brother Rub^ he
lately flew before the walls of Tormaday, there to be torti^d to death,
against all humanity right and conscience, whose absence and hard adventure,
our Queen does so grievously deplore, that all pleasure seems to her pain,
and all gladness, (...): and shortly I doubt me, will bring her to her grave,
unless she hear some happy tidings of his speedy return.

Well (said he) I know Blanchardine whom your Queen does so highly adore, and
whom you so amply commend, and not long since I saw the man, fettered in the
Panims prisons, with huge and mighty manacles and gyues of Iron, and does never
expect delivery or freedom, but some terrible and cruel death.

Therefore, since he is not likelye to return, by reason of his hard and
straight imprisonment, and also the cruelty of the foe, under whose custody he
now remains: think thou not that she can and will forget him and his
affection, and consent to the love of me, who in her defense, will make
Alimodes and all his forces to recoile, and leave this seidge, which (as you
say) he has and does lay against her City of Tormaday for her love?

Sir (quoth I) it were casisr for a man to undertake the labors of mighty
Hercules, then attempt the conquering of her love, which is irreuocable from
that most valiant Gentleman Blanchardine.

After which speeches between us in secret ended, he withdrew himself into
his cabben, where calling for pen, ink and paper, he wrote this letter, which
I have presented to your Majesty, but what it imports, or whereof be the
contents, I am utterly ignorant.

Then quoth the proud Queen in love, know trusty Provost that the man whom
thou thus commendest, and who delivered the this letter, is the very same
gentleman Blanchardine, whom I love, and for whose sake, I have endured all
this woe. And here he writes, that having obtained the Princely favor of the
King of Spruse, whose enemy being the king of Polond: he vanquished, and
delivered prisoner into his hands, for whose trustines and in requital of
whose valor, he has delivered unto him those ships well furnished, with men,
munition and victual, and withal sent his Son and Heir apparent to the
Crown of Spruse in his assotiation and company, for our delivery and rescue,
from the tyrany of this Pagan King Alimodes. And that within these two days he
will not fail to come a land at Tormaday, with all his garrisons and companies.

When the Provost had diligently attended this pleasant discourse of the
Queen, in delivering the sweet contents of the letter of Blanchardine, being
greatly astonished at this sudden accident, calling to his remembrance the
comely proportion of him that delivered the letter, and comparing it with
Blanchardine: made her this answer.

Truly Madam, well might he seem to carry the proportion of Blanchardine in
body, but his countenance and visage, seemed more like a Tawny Moore then his
sweet semblance: and neither could I imagine by his behavior, neither gather
by his words, any notice of Blanchardins person, saving only that he told me
he knew the man, and that his imprisonment was such and so straight among the
infidels, that his return was never to be expected. And this is all (may it
please your Majesty) that I could either imagine or conjecture of him.

After these speeches ended between the Queen and the Provost, she sent for
her nurse, who assending up into a gallerie, from whence she might decerne the
sea, and sails afar off, she began to enter parley with her in this manner.

Thou art altogether unacquainted, (sweet Nurse) both of the cause of my hasty
sending for thee, and of the pleasant news, which the Provost has brought me,
yet because thy fidelity has ever been a consolation to my sorrows, I will
acquaint thee therewith.

Know that the only Iuell of my thought, and the man of greatest regard with
me in the world, having escaped many perils, and most manifest dangers, is
now at hand, not only to bring me most happy content, but with a mighty
troop of brave warriers, coming to rescue me, against this perjured king
Allimodes, and by the contents of this my letter, he will not fail to arrive
here within few hours.

Therefore let us continually watch, and cast our eyes to the maine, to see (if
it be possible) the brave troops of Sailers, and Soldiers, which do warrant our
delivery from this extreme thraldom, wherein long heretofore, and at this
present we live without any hope of succor and enlargement.

The nurse tickled with this blessed news, failed not to perform what the
queen pleased to command. And not long remaining, in this contented hope,
they might escrie from far a huge Navy of Armadoes, Carreckes, Galliasses,
Galliouns, great Galleys, and tall ships; besides: Pinnases, Friggets,
Caruells, Shallopps and such small vessels: all which, sailing before the
wind, bended their full course to the city of Tormaday, (as they immagined)
But not long after, ye wind coming to the Nort and by East; upon the sudden,
they were compelled to strike sail, let fall Anchor, hale in their maine
sheates, cut down their mastes, and thus (in utter despair of all safety,)
to commit both their ships and themselves to ye mercy of the waves, which
brought such an unexpected change and fear unto the queen, that void of all
hope, either for her own safety, or of Blanchardines (whom she so much
desired) presently she fell into a sound, but her nurse well acquainted with these
sudden passions of her Lady, presently co^ueied her to her lodging, where
after many perswasiue speeches and sweet allurements, she began somewhat to
comfort herself, hoping that as God had delivered Blanchardine from greater
dangers then this (as she thought) so nothing was impossible for his return;
where let us leave her, to tell of the aduenturs of Blanchardine and his
company.

Chap. 2.
How Blanchardine and Sadony with all their company, arrived before the city
of Cassedony, where Darius and fair Beautrix, the son and daughter of king
Alimodes, held their royal court.

THEN Blanchardine perceiving the tempest, rather to increase then any whit to
calm, unmagining with himself, that Infidels and Pagans, were utterly exempt
from the favor and mercy of God, and that this contagion of weather grew* by
his unjust conceling of his christianity, and dissembling Paganizmiei (As
Christ says) he that denies me before men, I will deny him before God.
Blanchardine pricked forward with this spur, came to Sadony in these terms.

I know (right trusty and honorable companion) that the mighty and immortal
God of heaven, being displeased with the idolatrous worshipping of stocks and
stones (then the which nothing can be more hateful in his sight) thundereth
down these huge and mighty storms and tempests now upon us, and therefore if
ever love, victory or true magnanimity, prevailed in the mind of thee (my
sweet friend Sadony) let us forthwith appease the anger wherewith God is
justly incensed against us, by becoming true and faithful believers in his
blessed son Jesus Christ: which if my perswation may effect and bring to
pass, I dare assure you shall not only mittigate the angry wrath of God, but
for ever, sort all our enterprises to happy end.

Sadony, who through the integrity of affection to Blanchardine, and with all
for fear of his and his companies utter overthrow, not only gave
Blanchardine his frank consent, to become Christian, with all his followers,
but also to send both his Idols, and their Iuels (which were most rich and of
inestimable valor) into the bottom so the Sea, the which without all delay
was by his prerogative and especial commandment persormed.

After which, the storms began by little and little to decrease, the clouds
to vanish, and the Sea to wax calm, which bred a most pleasant content to
Blanchardine, and procured a steadfastness in faith of these new become
Christians, who greatly rejoiced to find them selves free, not only from the
rage of the Sea, but also from the illusion of their false faith, wherein long
time they had erred.

But not long after, sailing with a most pleasant gale, [but in a strange and
unknown Coast] they escried a far off, a most rich and populus country,
whether with all speed they bended their wandering course: and being come
within perfect view of this Island, they found a most quiet and safe haven, both
for their ships to lie, and for them selves to land: so without delay* every
man addressed himself to go ashore, to refresh their weary Seabeaten bodies.

When Blanchardine and Sadony perceived that their whole company (saving the
Mariners) were on land, they began to muster their men, and presently to march
in order of battle to the City, which was scarce a league distant from the
haven: and their horsemen scouring the plains, having made seizure on a
country swain, brought him before the generals, who presently examined him of
the estate and government of the country, unto whom the pore captive related at
large, the some of their demand.

This Country (quoth he) is a Region scittuate near the Sea, called
Cassedony, where at this day reigns a most puisant and mighty Sarizen king,
named Alimodes, who is now with a huge host, beseidging the princely City of
Tormaday, where the most beautiful queen Eglantine, renewned through the
world for chastity, holds her royal court: for whose love, our king
Alimodes, has forsaken this our Country, and means to obtain her affection
by force, because he may not win her by kindness: and in his steed here, he
has left his valorous son Darius, and fair Beautrix his daughter, to
govern till his return, and at this instant they both are in this princely
City here at hand.

Blanchardine most glad of his happy arrival, within the teritories of king
Alimodes his detested foe, discoursed breefely to Sydony, that now by the
providence of God, and their happy fortune, they were landed in that place
where the bewtifull Beautrix ( Alimodes daughter) lay, whom Blanchardine had
long before promised to give to him in marriage. And therefore (trusty
companion quoth he) now show the valor and high magnanunitie, which I have
ever expected in you, for the subduing of these miscreants and accursed
Infidels, and for the obteining of the most beautiful Lady that your eye has
soene: so shall we [by the help of God] inuest you not only with the dyademe
of Cassidony, but also espowse you to that fair Queen, for whose sweet sake
you have adventured this long and weary journey, and herein I assure you we
shall honor our God (whom we now serve) seat you in this Regal throne with
your fair Queen, and deliver the most chaste and bewtifull Queen of Tormaday
my mistres and love, from the tyranie of the cursed monster Alimodes: Courage
therefore Noble Sadonye, and in the name of our God let us set upon them, in
whose name I doubt not but we shall presently subdue them.

When Sadonye understood by the report of Blanchardine, that the fair
Beautrix whom he so much commended, and upon whose commendations he so
entirely loved, rested within that City, he needed not to ad more fuel to
the fire: for his eager desire was such: as he rather seemd too forward, then
any whit too slack, to accomplish or attempt any thing, that he would persuade
him unto.

Now these two haughty coragious caualiers, bravely mounted, with all their
followers, some on horseback, some on foot, marched near unto the walls of
the City, whose approach being by certain espyalls discried, was forthwith
related to Daryus, who at that instant, was in his Palace, sporting with his
beautiful sister Beautrix, which sudden alarm and unexpected news, at the
first so daunted his courage, that as a man half distract of his senses, he
knew not what to determine: But calling his wits together, he presently
commanded that thirty thousand men should be in redines at the sound of a
Trumpet, to issue out upon the enemy, and that he in person would go to
understand the cause of their approach thither without his special conduct and
license.

Provision was forthwith with all posible speed made. And every man being
armed (under the conduct of Darius) issued out of Cassidony upon Blanchardine
and his company, who not unprovided for their coming, were ready to give them
their welcome: Darius presently dispatched a herrald at arms, to enquire the
cause of this outrage upon his dominions and people? unto whom Blanchardine
replied, that first the honor and service of his God, secondly the reuengement
of the manifest wrongs offered to the beautiful Queen of Tormaday by his
father, and lastly the great desire that Sadony (Son and Heir to the King of
Spruse) had to wed the beautiful Beautrix ( Alimodes daughter) were the only
and sufficient causes of this their warlike ariuall. And therefore without delay
they commanded Darius to submit himself, his Crown, and Realm, with the
fair Beautrix, into their hands. Otherwise, they would with fire and sword
consume, and confound, all that cursed brood of Miscreant Sarazins, and leave
the Country depopulated and waste. And with these or the like speeches enjoined
the herrald presently to return to Darius, to give him to understand their
resolution.

The Herrald being returned to Darius, certified him both their answers and
some of their demands, the which seemed so displeasant unto him, that without
further delay, he courageously gave the onset on the Enemy. At whose encounter
the earth trembled, and the air ecchoed with noyes of their weapons: the
clamor of the people was exceeding great, the Sarizins still with blasphemous
outcries calling upon their blockish idolatrous gods whose deaf ears could
hear no sound of their foolish petitions: but at the length, after a long and
dangerous conflict, the tounsmen fearing, through their great loss and
bloodshed, that they were like to be overcome, recoyled and retired back,
every one so fast as his speed would give leave.

But Blanchardine now thinking high time to finish what before he determined,
set spurs to his horse, and by great chance singled out Darius from the
company, whom Blanchardine so saluted with his Lance, that he sent him to
carry news to Radamant, of the valor which he found in Blanchardines arm.

Chap. 3.
How the beautiful Beautrix perceiving her people vanquished and brother
slain: submitted her to the mercy of Sadony, and rendered both her self and
City into his hands.

IT happened at that instant, that the fair Beautrix was mounted up into a
high window within her Palace, from whence she might well decerne, the valor
of the Knights and soldiers on both sides. But when she saw her brother Darius
slain, the standard overthrown, and her people to fly: she began a most
lamentable complaint. But seeing that care was booteles in a cureles cause, she
determined to yield both her self, country and people, to the victors hands,
hoping by her humble submission, to obtain a general pardon.

Now by this time Blanchardine and Sadony were met, and wintly marched without
resistance within the City, where for a while they surueighed, the sumpteous
buldings of ye Sarizins: but pacing along the streets, toward the Kings
Palace, they were encountered by the Lady Beautrix, who humbling her self on her
knees, made this petition.

Brave gentlemen and mighty conquerers, although fortune by her mut^ (...) has
resigned this kingdom, people and my self into your hands, yet as in your
countenance there is seated both majesty and mercy, let the rigor of your
murdering swords cease, and we all are ready to yield unto the full of your
princely demaundes.

Blanchardine pitying the Ladies playnts, gently lifted her up from the
ground, and withal, gave her these comfortable speeches: fair Lady, the
heavens by their divine providence, have for many causes allotted us this happy
fortune, to be conquerers of this mighty kingdom: and blame you not fortune,
but thank the fates for our success, for where as all your days, you have
honored and adored Idols and false gods, we will so open your understandings,
that you shall not only perceive your monsterous errors, but also become the
worshippers of the true and immortal God. But above all the sundry and deadly
imuries, which of long (and yet) your father Alimodes offers unto my Lady and
mistress, the chaste Queen of Tormaday, have the rather augmented my fury in
prosecuting this conquest, with fire and sword, thereby to perform a most
sacred vow and promise, which I made to this noble Gentleman Sadony Son to
the King of Spruse long since. These causes (I say) makes me most humbly thank
God for this happy arrival and victory.

Then taking the Lady by the hand, he presented her to Sadony in this sort.
Honorable friend and dear companion, now that the heavenly powers, have
enricht us with this most happy victory, and that I may cancel the obligation
(in part) of the great det, which I acknowledge my self bound unto you: take
here this most beautiful Lady, whom long since I promised you at
Marienbrough, to be your spouse and wife, and upon our loves I conjure you,
that you fail me not in the accomplishment of two things, which I shall request
at your hands, after I have invested you with the figniory and kingdom of
Cassidony, and this fair Queen: The one, that forthwith you cause both her
and all her subjects, to be baptized in the christian faith: and secondly
after you are quietlye seated here, you fail not to join with me in the
succoure of the fair Queen of Tormaday, whose disaster breeds coffeehouse
to my soul, and danger to my life.

This present was so thankfully accepted of Sadony, that nothing could bring
him more content, for when he cast his eye upon the damsel, he thought
himself elevated into the third heaven, immagining it, a thing impossible for
any mortal creature, to carry so divine a seature. The^ seeing himself also
possessed with such a mighty and populous kingdom, he seemed ravished in
conceit. But breaking of these admirations, after a million of thanks given to
God, and all kindness to Blanchardine, he began with the damsel in this sort.

Faue Lady, whose radiant eyes shine like Vestaes candels, or the twinkling
stars in the firmament, sufficient to dazell humane eyes, and to revive al
dying senses, whose amber locks, desheuiled on these shoulders, make you seem
like Cynthia in her pride, if ever happiness were incident to mortal man, now
may I boast to have reached the tipe of all soelicitie, in that Iimbrace you,
whose very looks, have so attached me on the sudden, that whereas, even now I
was a conqueror, I am by you (fair Lady) conquered, and must of force, make
your sweet person, the true prison of my heart: deny me not then (fair
Queen) whose parrentage is answerable with yours, to yield me your love,
which while I live, I vow to keep firm, and mine to you inviolable.

The beutifull Queen Beautrix, giving diligent attention to the sugared
speeches of Sadony, first weighing the miserable state of her country,
secondly the absence of her father, with the death of her brother Darius, and
lastly (which was most) the comely proportion of Sadony, as willingly gave her
consent to marriage, as he was forward in demanding thereof.

Then Sadony, right glad of this sweet consent of the fair Beautrix,
embracing her withal kindness, after many kisses, and sweet speeches passed
between them, demanded of her if she would forsake her Paganizme and
diabollitall profession, and become a christian, who by his good persuasions,
was brought quickly to condescend.

Now at the same time, there were certain Christian prisoners, which long had
endured the tortures of the Pagan Alimodes, remaining within the city in
several prisons, to the number of one hundredth, which Sadony caused presently
to be enlarged and set at liberty: and among this distressed company of
Christians, there were certain Priests, whom he commanded presently to be
brought before him, and caused them to singsollemne processions, and give
praise to God for his happy victory: after this, he commanded them to
sanctity and halow, certain waters, wherein all the Panims should be
baptized, with himself, his Queen, and followers, upon pain of death, and
presently sent out his Edict and proclamation, that all the inhabitants within
those dominions, should with all possible speed, come to Cassidony, there to
receive the holy Baptism and faith in Jesus Christ. After all which
solemnities, with great reverence performed, he took to wife the fair Queen
Beautrix, to the exceeding contentment of all the beholders. I need not here
make mention of the sumptiousnes of the feasts, the applause of the late
imprisoned Christians, the concourse of the common people, to behold this
magnificent wedding, but leave it to the reader, to imagine. But of one thing
especially, I must give you to understand, that the Bride was so adorned with
gemmes, ouches, and precious stones that day, that if all the world should
have employed their pains to obtain the like, I think they are not to be
gotten: all which, that most cruel homicide and perjured miscreant Alimodes,
had by exaction, extorted from all his neighbors Christians, by force and
villainy. But when all these tryumphes (which endured the space of three days)
were finished, Sadony reforming ye diabolical customs, which had many years
continuance within that region, in steed thereof established Iusttice, religion
and godliness, to the great comfort of the inhabitants of Cassidony, in which
long after they continued, in most prosperous, and happy estate and
tranquillity.

Chap. 4.
How Blanchardine found his father the King of Frize imprisoned within the
City of Cassidony: and delivered him from thence.

IT fortuned not long after this solemnity was finished, that Sadony, Beautrix
and Blanchardine, walking abroad for their disport, heard the most pitiful
outcry and lamentation of certain other prisoners, near the City, which were
almost famished for want of bread, which doleful noise, so penetrated the
gentle hearts of these three Princes, that Sadony demanding what voice the
same might be, a knight attendant, made this reply. Know noble King that not
long since, our quondam Lord and Prince Darius, bending his course to the
renowned City of Tormaday, to manage arms in the aid of his father, against
the fair Eglantine (surnamed the proud Lady in love) was by a sudden
tempest at sea, driven from his course, and without their compass, into a
land, which as the inhabitants called the land of Frize, where (by great hap)
within that little Island at that time, a great Lord of that Country, came with
diverse Gentlemen of great account to disport themselves, both for the holsomnes
of the air, the fertiity of the soil and the sweet recreations that place did
afford, upon our arrival we ranging the thickets and plains of the Country,
took prisoner one, who for fear, discovered the whole state of the country,
and the resedency of this Lord and gentlemen, at that time there by whose
direction we secretly marching to the Palace, on the sudden surprised the
said Lord, with all his brave troop, who at our entrance seemed to resist, but
finding their forces unable to encounter a multitude, yielded themselves to
mercy: Darius (whom pity could not pierce) utterly refusing ransom
commanded them presently, to be conueighed to this City, there to remain
during their lives, captives. And these (most mighty Princes) are the
prisoners, whose lamentation, you hear.

When Blanchardine heard him speak of Frize, ablushing red beautifying his
cheeks, he began straight to conjecture, that out of all doubt this Lord was
desended of his lineage and house, commanding presently to fetch them before
him and the other princes, which the posting messenger, speedily performed: and
having presented them to the three Princes, Blanchardine fixing a steedfast
view upon them, knew his father, (although the hard imprisonment and hungry
diet, had masserated and made him leaner then he was wont to be) whereat
Blanchardine began secretly to lament the hard distress of his aged Sire. But
incurraging himself to speak, he demanded of him, what country man he was,
and the chance that brought him into these calamities? The aged king, faint by
reason of famine: and feeble by his age, after a little pause made this reply.

Know sir, that I am a most distressed and captive King, my Country (which of
long time I governed, with happiness and quiet) is called Frize, situated near
the sea, but through the mutabilitie and chance of fortune my land has been
depopulated and laid waste, my subjects slain, and my self with diverse of
my nobles taken prisoners, by Darius the Son of Alimodes, who not pitying my
age and gray hairs, has too too long enclosed us, within a most obscure and
dark prison, full of venim and fylth: in which I and my poor company* are
ready to famish, for want of sustenance, against the law of God, manand nature:
utterly refusing all ransomes, that have been proffered for our deliueries.

But a Son I had [whose years and countenance presaging valure] made both my
self and his mother, to have too tender a care over him, fearing some worse
event the^ we had cause to dread: and for this only cause we rather took
care, to instruct him in learned sciences, then to prick him forward to bear
arms, who like a Lion unwilling to be tamed, and spend his years in
subjection and home bred toys, because I refused to inuest him with the order
of knighthood, one day very secretly, (without all our priuities) went away:
and since his departure we have not so much as received any news or tidinges
of him, which has bred in me such sorrow and grief, that I wish rather a
thousand times to die then thus to live deprived, not only of my liberty and
kingdom, but of my Son, whose towardlines (being a child) was of all
admired, and whose loss (through my fault) of all pitied. Therefore my humble
petition is (if it rest in your powers), to rid me by some kind of death, out
of this loathsome and grievous thraldoms, wherein I now live, who rather account
it a happiness to dye, than thus distressed with misery to live. After which his
pittyfull complaint, the tears distilled down his waterie eyes, upon his
aged face so thick, that made all the company to be wail his hard adventure
and mishap, but especially Blanchardine his son, within whom love and pity
made their combat.

Sir quoth Blanchardine) may it be, that if your son were here at this time,
considering his long departure from you, do you imagine that you should know
him, by his favor and countenance?

Ah (answered the king to well I know, that these my drooping eyes, which pore
still upon my grave, shall never receive such content, as once to infix them
selves on his amyable face.

Blanchardine not able any longer to conceal himself from his aged father,
said unto him, know noble King, that not long since, this noble Gentleman
Sadony and my self, not only saw your Son, but accompanied him long time. And
between us, were all things common, so that the mutual kindness and love,
which we conceived of echother, was by no mean to be disioyned, and we
accounted of one an other, as of our selves: in so much, that at his departure
from our company, he gave me this ring of gold, which here I wear, and for
his sake, will reserve during my life.

The good old King, remembering the perfect form of the ring, which his son
Blanchardine had shown him, knew presently that it was the ring, which his
granfather used to wear, and at his death vequethed the same to Blanchardine.
And being by this sight the more encoraged, he in most humble manner requested
to understand the cause of his sons departure from their honorable companies,
and the place, whether they did imagine he had bent his course, hoping at
length (if ever he obtained freedom) to visit his son Blanchardine. But when
he heard him not reply to his humble demannd, the old King suspecting, that
his departure, was rather a separation by death then a voluntary absence from
their society, after sundry and grievous sighs, was ready to sound. But
Blanchardine, who now perceived by his pitiful complaints, that unless he
should make himself known, it might he greatly prejudicial to his health,
and that delay in such a case, bred great danger: he reuoking his former
obstinacy, humbling himself, began to make himself known to the old man in
this sort.

Most redoubted Lord and dear father, behold Blanchardine your son, whose
offense to your majesty deserves no favor, in that his departure from your
Court was most secretly concealed from all (but especially from your self)
humbly submitting himself, to your doom, craves your honorable pardon, both
for his fault in departing, and also for the gallant courser, and sword which
he privily conuayed away with him with the which among many other, he has
revenged your wrongs upon your enemy Darius, and his accursed company of
miscreants.

When his aged father the King of Frize, heard the dutyfull and debonaire
submission of his son (whom till that very instant he knew not) by reason of
the obscurity, and darkness of his prison, and also his declining age: neither
can my pen recount nor my tongue relate, the happy content he received, and the
general applause to all (But especially to Sadony, and the fair Beautrix, who
all this while, were attentive beholders of this rare accident, and when they
perceived the full issue of all which had happened between them, they
congratulated this happy chance with Blanchardine and his father. And presently
caused a sumpteous bath, and most honorable and rich apparel, to be prepared
for the aged king, with all the duties belonging to his royal estate: and in
like sort, for all the Knights, and Gentlemen his attendantes.

Now when Blanchardine (somewhat recalled from his immaginations) after the
conference in public ended, between the king and the rest of the company,
having brought his father into a most sumpteous chamber, enbossed with gold,
and hanged with most rich tapestry, convenient for his estate, he demanded of
him the estate and welfare of the Queen his mother, and his country? Alas
fair son quoth the king, I have been here enclosed, in a most obscure
prison, this year and more, in which time, I never had any private conference
with any, saving a base villain, under whose cruel and hard custody, I have
long remained comfortles, so that I greatly fear me, that my captivity once
bruted to her loving ears, whose pensive thoughts for thee, had almost before
my departure consumed her, have now altogether deprived her, both of health and
life: but the case is only known to God, and not to me, that have not so much
as sent neither received any letter or token from her since my coming into
this most accursed country, which has been hitherto governed by the cruellest
miscreant that ever hell or nature hatched.

Chap. 5.
How Sadony, Blanchardine and the King of Frize enbarqued themselves to
Tormaday for the succor of fair Eglantine the proud Lady in love.

AFter that al tears were clean wiped from their eyes, and that the aged King
of Frize and his faint company, had somewhat recovered their perfect strength
and courrages, Blanchardine, (whose wandering thoughts were still occupiedin
the contemplation of the rare and divine beauty of his Mistress, the Queen of
Tormaday and on her succors against the perjured infidel, and Sarizine
Alimodes, seeing convenient time and leisure to serve, before Sadony, Beaut^ix
and his aged father* began thus to complain.

Most honorable friend and trusty companion Sadony, since by the high divine,
and most sacred providence of God, you have obtained your hearts content, and
the only Iuell which long you have desired, I mean this fair and beautiful
Princess Beautrix your wife, and that the true sincere, and christian religion
is surely planted within this your Kingdom, whereby God may be truly served
your people preserved, and your country at quiet, that now you will remember,
your sacred vow and promise, which faithfully you plighted to me, in the sight
of God and heaven, for the speedy succor of my fair Lady and mistres, the
Queen of Tormaday, against our foe Alimodes: and although these wars may be
some cause to separate you from your beautiful Queen and bride (for a while)
in whom rests the full of your content and delight, yet considering the
Christian Religion which you now profess, and by which you are coniured, and
most strickly bound, to prosecute these wars upon an infidel, in the defense
of a most virtuous Christian Queen. And also remembering, your trusty promise
made unto me before our arrival here in Cassidony. These causes (I say) duly
considered, will (I trust) be sufficient spurs to prick you on to this
inquest, wherein your service shall not only be acceptable to God, but most
kindly taken and requited by me, whose fidelity shall rest for ever, engrau^n
within the intrals of my soul inviolable.

And you fair Queen (speaking to Beautrix) although I know that you can
hardly permit this sudden departure of your Princely husband (considering
your late marriage) the sincere love you bear him, and sweet content you
receive in his presence, yet since your kingdom does remain safe and void of
danger, being guarded with so many and valiant knights, as we mean to leave
here for your defense: and for that the time will not belong before he make
his safe and sweet return, grant free leave (most fair Queen) to Sadony, to
perform this honorable enterprise, although against your father, yet being the
service of God, and therefore of greatest force, ought by all possible means
to be undertaken.

When the fair Princess, had heard Blanchardine to the full of his demand,
although two extreme evils, were at once to be determined by her consent,
first the departure of her new and most loving husband Sadony, secondly the
wars they intended, were againsther own father Alimodes: yet being allured
both by the pitiful tears that distiled down from his eyes, and the sweet
speeches that proceeded from his mouth, she srankly gave her consent.

Now Sadony although loath to forsake his new married Queen, and unwilling
to incur the scandal of perjury to his approved friend, with all willingness
commanded his ships to be made ready, both with munition and victual, and
thirty thousand soldiers, knights and gentlemen, for the speedy performance of
this service, which withal diligence, was prepared and in readiness.

When Blanchardine saw the willingnes^ the kingly consent of Sadony his
approved friend, he rendered him many and hearty thanks, vowing the perpetuity
of their freindships, for ever to remain v^cancelled.

All things according to command being in readiness, Sadony (by the good advice
of his trusty companion Blanchardine) appointed sundry garrisons of approved
knights and soldiers, to remain within the City of Cassidony, for the defense
thereof against foreign invasions, and to repulse King Allimodes if he should
in the mean, chance to return thither before them)

Then after a sollemne leave taken of the Queen, and all her hono^able
company, all things being left in good and quiet order, they betook
themselves to the Sea where having a pleasant gale, they in short space were
past the ken of land running their wished course to Tormaday, for the delivery
(as I said before) of the fair Queen Eglantine the proud Lady in lou^, where
lets a while leave them, to recount something of the miscreant Alimodes and his
accursed company, whom we left before the walls of Tormaday in great hope to
be owner, both of the Queen and Country.

We recounted at large before, how the proud Alimodes laid his daily and
continual seidge to the City of Tormaday, after the departure of his son
Darius, and the great loss of the victualles which he brought out of Prize.
But as yet neither his assaults, Canuizadoes, nor allarums, bred any danger,
though son^e fear to the Citizens within the town, yet many hardy knights and
soldiers on both sides lost their lives, in making outrodes, to terrify the
enemy. But Alimodes perceiving his victuals to waste, his men to die, some by
war, some by sickness, and no hope of any victory, he on a sudden early in
the morning, caused his Cannons to be planted against the Walls, his rams
and engines of war, to be reared up, hoping to effect the full of his desire,
the sound and noise of which, being heard within the Town, caused a trembling
fear to surprise the Citizens, but especially the Queen, who now almost
without hope of any succour^ from her uncle, the King of Norweigh (lately dead)
the loss of her knights and soldiers at home, and especially the want of her
true and trusty servant Blanchardine, (she I say) hearing this sudden
allarum, mounted up into her high Turret, from whence she might as well decerne
the Sea as the enemy before the walls: And standing there in this doubtful
trance, almost comfortles and desperate of succor, casting her eye to the
maine, she might esc^y a far off, a huge and (...) Navy, whose spreading
sails, filled with a pleasant gale, ^ended (as she thought) their running course
to Tormaday.

This sudden and unexpected sight, drew her into a dout, what she might
conjecture of this accident: sometime comforted* with hope, but straight
plunged in despair: one time intagining it to be Blanchardine, an other time
to be Darius, that came to releive and aid his father against her: Thus in
perplexities, she continued the space of one hour and more, in which time,
she might more perfectly perceive the number of vessels that with speedy
course came thither. And in these ag^nies, she ^eased not to invoke the mercy
of God, whose mighty power she ever acknowledged, to exceed al humane riches,
to send her comfort in her calamities.

Now Blanchardine through the brightness of the Sun, whose beams made a
refliction upon the rigorous walls of the City, standing on the hatches, with
the aged king of Frize his father, fixing a more perfect veiw thero^, he began
to relate unto him, the sumpteous buildings of ye City, not forgetting, both
the bounty and beauty of the fair Queen Eglantine, her Princely affection
toward him, and his humble love and duty to her, vowing if ever he might come
a shore, to encounter with Alimodes, he would make known his love by his
valor on the enemy, in her just and righteous quarrel, fully resolved that
what he should attempt in her (...) against Alimodes, was meritorious in the
sight of God (...).

With these and the like speeches, they drew so near the shore that they might
decerne at full, the Pauilions and tents of the Pagans, pitched upon the
plains, before the City.

Now the proud pucell in love, the fair Queen Eglantine, leaning in her
window, and seeing these ships ready to come ^o anchor and land their men, she
sent presently for the Provost, (her most assured and trusty servant) who came
incontinently. The Queen leading him into the top of her Turret, showed him
this huge Navy, demanding who they might be? The Provost being ingenious, and
full of corrage, answered, that they were (as he thought) Christians, both by
the show of their flags, streamers and appendants: ah God grant (quoth the
Queen) they be. The Provost replying, requested her majesty to send him, not
only to make inquiry what they were, but also to wage them, if he could, to
fight under her majesty's standerds, against Alimodes and his forces.

The Queen desirous of succor, condecended, and presently dispatched the
Provost accordingly, who without delay took a ship boat, rowed with eight tall
fellows, and by their diligence and pain; he came aboard the ship where
Blanchardine was, who desirous to understand what they might be, that posted so
fast to come aboard him, walked up and down upon the hatches until they were
assended. Then the Provost began with an audatious corrage, to deliver the
Embassage of his Queen and Mistres, in as ample manner as she had given him
in charge: Blanchardine, whose affection to the Provost was not forgotten well
perceiving the cause of his speech, to tend to the succor of his Princess and
country, enquired of him: If occasion were that no aid should come, how long he
thought the town was able todefend it self, against the force of Alimodes,
both with men, munition and necessary provision of victual. Sir answered the
Provost, our city is well fortefied, for many months, as yet, neither do we
doubt of Alimodes forces, which are not able to hurt us: but one thing seems
most displeasant unto all her subjects, that neither night nor day, her
majesty enjoys any content, tormenting her self with sighs and passions,
which we all dout will sort to some hard event, unless a speedy remedy be
found for her recomforture.

Blanchardine very desirous to understand, what disaster yt might be, which so
unkindly, bred such coffeehouse to the Queen, earuestly solicited the
Provost, to relate the cause at large.

The Provost most willingly obeying the princely command and gentle entreaty
of Blanchardine, answered in this sort

Know sir, that the extremity of grief, that our Queen has inwardly
conceived for the loss of the most brave accomplished man of the world, who in
her defense, behaved himself with such valor against her foes, that in hers,
and all our judgments and opinions, he through the world may not be
equalized for magnanimity. And not long since having by the mighty providence
of God, escaped many and imminent dangers, sailing hither with a mighty army
of brave soldiers, for our rescue, a sudden tempest arising at sea, he with
his warlike company, were enforced to commit themselves to the mercy of the
waves, which at that instant, threatened naught but death, and destruction to
them all. But thanks be to the highest heavens, not long since a pilgrim
passenger, dryue^ byte^pest upon this our coast, brought us the most happiest
tidings, that we could desire, and which bred more content to our Queen, then
all the world could afforde, (which was) that at his departure from the City
of Cassidony, the chief City of our adversary Alimodes, this brave man at
arms, named Blanchardine, and the mighty Prince Sadony son to the King of
Spruse, were not only landed there with a most puisaunt army of resolute
knights, Gentlemen and soldiers, but had vanquished and slain, our mortal
enemy Darius, sacked his City and people, and that by the procurement of
Blanchardine, the Prince Sadony had wedded the beautiful Lady Beautrix (
Alimodes daughter) by whose right heis now fully possessed with the signiory
and kingdom of Cassidony, the which he governs with all tranquillity, peace
and happiness, being (not only himself, by the honorable persuasion of
Blanchardine become christened) but also has established the true religion of
Christianity through the whole Country, to the honor of God, and the great
commendation of him, and all his adherents.

When the Provost had thus discoursed at large to Blanchardine the message and
report of the pilgrim, Blanchardine made this reply, that what the pilgrim had
said, was most true, saving in one thing, that whereas the pilgrim informed,
that Sadony is or shall be married, to the fair Beautrix Alimodes daughter,
that (quoth he) is utterly false, in mistaking the man, for it is Blanchardine
that shall espouse her, and he it is that has sent me hiher, in succor and
aid to your Queen of Tormaday.

Ah very God (quoth the Provost) and can it be, that so Noble a Gentleman as
Blanchardine is, should so much dishonor and forget himself, to be affianced
to any but our Queen, whose loyal love, has never received with any (but
him) neither spot or fellowship, and who for his sake, has utterly refused and
set at naught the royal proffers of many and mighty Kings? No, no sir, neither
can I be brought to believe that any such thought can harbor in the head of
that heroyike knight, neither would I for milions of gold, be the reporter of
this unhappy news to hermaiestie, being well assured, that upon the relation,
naught but death could end her calamities.

Therefore noble Gentleman, either dispatch me hence, with more happy news, or
never suffer me to return, with such heavy tidings. Yet since it has pleased
you to relate unto me, that your coming hither (in the behalf of our Queen)
is by the special procurement and sending of Blanchardine, let me entreat you
to know, whether he have recommended himself to my Lady by letter or no, that
therein she may perceive the full of his determination.

Friend (quoth Blanchardine) I neither received from him letter nor other
message, saving such as I have already acquainted you withal, neither can I
imagine, what better contentment he could bring her, then the sending of me, to
enfranchize and set her and her people at liberty, from the thraldom wherein
she and they have long continued, under the fear of Alimodes force.

Alas quoth the Provost may it so be that he can forget the Princely love and
beauty of our Queen, who esteeming him far above al kings, sent him her good
Courfer, and one of her sleeves at his encounter with his foes (The rather by
that means) to manifest the integrity of her true affection to him, whose only
grace, has battered the bulwark of her Addamanted breast: and whose love shall
never dissolve except death finish it?

At the^ speeches, Blanchardine tickled with a sweet conceit began to (...),
which the Provost attentively marking and remembering the letter sent by him to
the Queen, coniectured presently that he was Blanchardine, although, the
accustomed coullor, which his face was painted with, made him stand in some
dout. But after a while, le^ding a more listninge are to his talk, he
presently knew, that it was he in deed, whereof he became so joyful, that he
thought him self the happiest man on earth: and then began the Provost more
boldly to recount unto him the extremity of affection his Queen had borne
him, ever since his departure from Tormaday, and since the receipt of ^is letter
which he delivered to the Provost at sea, considering the strange accedent,
that then happened by the tempest, fearing least he had been drowned, brought
her into such a heavy plight, that she has not been seen abroad, amongst her
Lords, only delighting to be sollitary in her Chamber, brooking no pleasure,
neither taking delight in any thing whatsoever.

Then Blanchardine after some little parley, humbly reco^mending him to ye good
grace of ye Queen by him, and to deliver her Majesty a ring of gold (which
she very well knew) and further to let her understand, and since the darkning
drew on so fast, that the day would not give leave to land his men* he with his
brave company, would the next morning withal de^terity come ashore, and bid
Alimodes to such a breakfast, that instead of fresh victuals, he should feed
upon the slaughtered carcasses of his own people. And that his ordinance
should ring him such a knill, that he might imagine all the Devils of hell
were come to salute him from his Son. But for mysloyalty to her majesty, will
her not to dout, for sooner shall the Sun leave to shine, and lighten the
earth, then that my plighted troth shall falsefie his faith to her sacred self.

Chap. 6.
Of the extreme joy which the Queen had upon the delivery of the ring, and
the Prouostes message from Blanchardine.

THe diligent and trusty Provost, flying with the wings of hope, took again his
boat, longing greatly till he had reached the shore, that he might deliver
these glad tidinges to the Queen, whom he left in a most pensive case,
plunged between hope and dread. But at length by the industrious pain of the
sailers, he was safely set a shore, very nere the posterne of the town,
where he proudly entered, whose coming had been long and long expected, not
only of the Lords that were privy to his departure, but especially of the
Queen, who burned with extreme desire, to understand some happy news. Now
the Provost being entered the presence, humbling himself on his knee, the
Queen (with more then her accustomed pace) came against him, to gratulate his
welcome.

Then the Provost began to deliver his message in these terms: (Renowned Lady
and my most gracious Princess) know that I have according to your Princely
command, performed my embassage to the general of the Royal Navy, that
floteth hereby on the Sea before the City: of the which the chief conductors
and rulers be, the Noble King of Frize, Blanchardine his Son, and the brave
Sadonye, Son to the king of Spruse, besides a brave company of warlike
soldiers, whose courageous valors presage victory to your Majesty. And more,
the noble King of Frize, has sworn the utter overthrow of Alimodes, and all
his cursedra bble of miscreants, for the extreme and deadly wrong which have
been done to him by Darius his Son: And therefore Madam, this is their
request, that since the day is almost spent, so that they may not Land
conveniently, they will us with all our strength, early on the next morning, to
be ready at their arrival, where and when without further delay, they mean
presently to set upon your enemies, their corages being augmented, by the
equity of your and their quarrel. So that now (most mighty Princes) there is no
cause left us, of longer despair, but that all possible and speedy provision
be made, for the joining of our forces together against the appointed time.

Then pulling forth the ring, which gave sufficient testimony to the Queen of
Blanchardines presence, he most humbly recommended it to her majesty's hands,
as his charge was from Blanchardine.

The Queen most thankfully received this heavenly present, from Blanchardine,
humbly thanking God that in her greatest extremes he had sent not only
succor, but also the man whom under heaven she esteemed most: then giving
especial charge to the Provost and all her nobles, to see all things in a
readiness against the next morning, at the hour appointed: she calling her
Nurse, went into her bed chamber, where they two discoursed at large, of the
truth, valor and kingly prowes of Blanchardine, and all other accidents, and
succor that God had sent them, but the chief note they sung upon, was
Blanchardine whose sweet accent, vpheld the diapasan of their music.

After this she gave in charge* that the streets should be hanged with costly
clothes, and that the sweetest music should continually play, to welcome her
love Blanchardine, which was presently effected, so that the City seemed rather
an earthly paradise, then a garrison town of soldiers, by reason of the
melodious soundes of all sorts of instruments, the sweet voices of men and
women, the musical hermonies of Clarions, Simballs, Lutes, Hoboyes, Cornets
and trumpets that then were heard.

The Bells began to ring throughout the City, the Preistes to sing procession,
the boys to make bonefires, and the maids to chaunt their Roundelayes, that
al mourning laid aside, there was no cause of discomsiture to be seen.

Now the King Alimodes being at supper within his Pauilion, as though the four
Elements had encountered together. The dust began to rise so thick that it
almost dimd the brightness of the Sun, by reason whereof, they within the City
perceived not their freindes from their enemies. Then went the Noble Queen and
all the matrons of Tormaday, barefooted, to the Churches from one to an other,
exorating the powers of heaven to strengthen the paizaunce of Blanchadine* and
all his associates, and to confound the misbeleeuing infidels, Almodes and his
companies.

After these orizons finished, the Queen calling her nurse, mounted up into
her gallerie, from whence she might well perceive the assaults on both sides,
where she long beheld diverse Knights and soldiers flaine, others dismounted
from their horses, sore mangled and wounded, wallowing in their own gore,
their horses running up and down, without their guides and riders. But in this
hot skirmish, Blanchardine singled forth a Duke, a man of great account and
prowes, whom at the first meeting with his Lance, he sent dead to the ground.
And before his Lance brake, he confounded five or six. And following his happy
entrance, he so behaved himself, that his sword was too well known among the
Pagans, for he had altered the Azure cullor thereof, into a crimson red, with
the blood of the foe, so that happy was he that might rid himself from
Blanchardine: sury. And if Alimodes had not supplied the defective troops of
his slaughtered soldiers, with a band often thousand fresh, the day had on his
side been turned to night, upon which began the clamor often he soldiers to eccoe
in the sky, when giving each other the fresh onset, the battle seemed more
feirce then at the first. But Blanchardine (instigated with honor and love)
still hazarded himself among the thickest of his enemies, whom they knew too
well for their profits. And being enclosed within a ring of pagans, they
freshly assailed him on every side, either to slay him or make him their
captive, which cruelties, he (having before too well experimented) rather
determined to die, then to be taken prisoner. And in this resolution, he so
coragiously behaved himself, that none durst enter within the reach of his
weapon. And although his horse was sore wounded, and him self most
daungerously hurt in many places, not seeing any way to encounter such a
multitude without great danger, yet with maine force he retired himself back
among his company.

Now Sadony who all this while stood not idle, singled out a mighty Giaunt
named Corhorant, second brother to the King Alimodes, whom upon the shock, at
their encounter, he sent both horse and man to the ground, and accepting the
benefit of fortune and time, alighted from his horse and disseuered his head
from his body. The good king of Frize whose courage was strong (although by
reason of age) his body was weak, what by his encoragement of the soldiers,
and great experience in feats ofarmes, did great damage to Alimodes and his
soldiers: In the mean the valiant Blanchardine, feeling his horse (by reason
of his wounds to faint under him) alighted and betook himself to his sword,
with the which he so manfully behaved himself as ever did any knight, till at
the last the enemy perceiving him dismounted, pressed so fast by heaps upon
him that they took him prisoner. At which sudden applause, the whole troop
of miscreants gave a mighty shoot, but Sadony perceiving the distressed case
of his trusty friend Blanchardine, hasted so fall upon the enemy with his
company, that heaset at liberty him, that before they thought to be most sure
prisoner. When Blanchardine saw himself free, he presently mounted a fresh
horse, and took a mighty Lance. And perceiving Alimodes somewhat distant from
his company, gave the spurs to his horse, and by his agillitie and mighty
prowes bare him out of his saddell to the earth And at that instant had severed
his head from his body, had not speedy succor come. This foil bred such a
desire of revenge in Alimodes, that so soon as he was mounted again, he
wasted Blanchardine to the second encounter, which he most willingly
condecended unto, in regard of the honor he should atchiue by his conquest. And
as before, so he served him the second time for had not Alimodes been rescued
again, he had sent his soul to Carons ferry bote, to pass him over
Phlegiton, to crave his wa^dring pasport of Eacus, Minos and Radamant, to the
infernal bloody marshal fields.

Now the Queen of Tormaday (who as I said before) stood with her nurse in the
gallery window, perceiving plainly this brave combat, between Blanchardine
and the King Alimodes which bred her most sweet content: She forthwith called
unto her a young Knight, whom she commanded presently to deliver a white
dammask sleeue (which she pulled from her gown) with her kindest commendations
to Blanchardine, requesting him for her sake, not ouly to wear the same, but
also to alter the cullor, with the blood of her enemy Alimodes.

The young knight having received this embassage from the Queen, speedily
posted to deliver it to Blanchardine, unto whom being aproched, he presented
both the Queens commendations and the sleeue.

This unexpected present, was more welcome to Blanchardine, then a million of
gold, who receiving it with all humility and kindness, promised the performance
of her majesty's command, so far forth as both his life and currage should
permit, not forgetting most humbly to commend him to the good grace of the
Queen: with which freendly answer the messenger after his bountiful reward
from Blanchardine, returned.

Now Blanchardine (whom this princely favor made most forward) with eger
desire of victory, entered presently the thickest of his enemies, where he so
bravely behaved himself, that few or none durst approach his presence for fear
of death, which Sadony and the residue of his company perceiving, pressed the
more forward for his aid. And not long after, through the ingenious capasitie
and magnonimious courrage of Blanchardine, and the noble Sadony, Alimodes and
his miscreant troop being discomforted, began to betake themselves to flight,
having in that battle lost the greater part of his soldiers.

Sadony the young Prince perceiving Alimodes and his companies to be
discomforted and to fly, pursued them so fast in their flight, that on the
sudden he ouertooke a mighty man named Gallizeus, third brother to Alimodes,
whom he so saluted with his sword, that he fell dead from his horse. But when
Alimodes perceived his brother slain, and by the prowes of one only Knight,
with extreme anger he commanded all his vassailes at once to set upon him,
who long time most ma^fully defended himself: but finding his horse to faint
under him, by reason of his many wounds, was constrained to alight, and not
able long to endure the force of so many enemies, was enforced to yield, and
had at that instant been slain had not Alimodes charged upon pain of death,
that he should be taken alive, to cause him to endure a more miserable end.

Now the clamor of the Pagans began exceedingly at the taking of the Prince
Sadony, so that the noyses rung in the ears of Blanchardine, and when the
company had certified him thereof, he stayed not, but with all celeritie posted
toward the enemy to recover him, but Alimodes and his folk perceiving them
at hand, got them aboard their ships with all possible speed they might, but a
number of them were cut off before they might reach the Sea, and cruelly
murdered. But when they perceived that Alimodes was already ascended his ships,
and had Sadony aboard him, he galloping on the strond with a lofty voice,
called to Alimodes, to ransom his friend Sadony, with a hundredth thousand
crowns and six thousand of his Pagan prisoners, but Alimodes replied that he
should not return, except the fair Queen Eglantine might be his ransom,
where unto Blanchardine replied that he would upon condition that Sadony, might
come ashore. But the false Panim Alimodes, fearing the loss of his prisoner,
commanded his sails to be presently hoysed, the ships to Lance, and bend
their course to Cassidony, having a little gale ready to carry them away.

Chap. 8.
The sorrow that Blanchardine and all the company made for the loss of
Sadony, and how fraire Eglantine persuaded Blanchardine to desist and leave to
go (...) (...).

BLanchardine perceiving no recovery of his true and trusty companion Sadony,
out of the hands of the Pagan Alimodes, pinched with exceeding anguish and sor
row ofminde, with tears trickling dowen his watery eyes, he began to complain
in this manner.

Ah mutable and unconstant fortune, how do thou vomit up the venom of thy
rigor upon me, whom even now thou made the best contentedst man living, and
in a moment the accursedst wretch that breaths: thou have bereft me of the
second solace of my soul, in depriving me of the company of my Sadony whose
presence was my earthly heaven, whose absence my infernal hell. O Noble
Gentleman, sprung from the Loins of victorious kings, how may I worthily
bewail this your disaster, who for mysake, and in my quarrel, have not only
forsaken father, friends, kindred, country, lands dominions and living but
also not shunning most cruel and iminent danger (even at hand) have most
willingly adventured your lise and person. And should I (though unfortunate)
yet be so ungrateful as to let these princely favors die and be forgotten, to
live securely here, (although it be the place of my sweetest content on
earth) and suffer you to miscarrie, under the tyranie of those cursed
miscreants? O no, first shall the heavens lose their light, the Sea his waves,
the earth his fruit, before that one such thought may harbor in my heart. Alas
when I behold these (...), discomforted (...) (...) (...) soldiers, the trusty
followers of sweet Sadony, sad and sorrowsully wringing their wretched hands,
for the loss of their prince, in beholding them (I say) my passions are more
and more augmented, neither can any joy possess my soul, by reason of his
mishap.

After he had thus heavily bewailed his dear friend, he approaching near the
place where Sadonyes soldiers marched, trayling their pikes behind the^, he
began to recomfort them the best he could, commanding all the spoils of the
Pagans, to be equally distributed amongst them, and that nothing should be
wanting, to supply their necessities, and that all their ships should
presently be new rigged and victualed, intending forthwith to post after them,
to deliver their prince and his companion Sadony.

Now was the beautiful Eglantine Queen of Tormaday, come before Banchardine
to yield him humble thanks for his exceeding pains, and true valor showed in
her service, altogether ignorant of all sinister accidents touching the
captivity of Sadony: at whose approach, the virmillion red did so bepaint his
manlike face, that every one might well perceive the integrity of his
affection by his countenance: on the other side the Queen taken (as it were
with an Apoplexy) was for the time like one in a trance, not able through
exceeding love to utter a word, till Blanchardine taking her between his
arms, seizing upon her rosial lips with a sweet kiss, had a little revived
her, then coming to her self, she would feign have spoken, but yet was
tung-tide, only suffering her eyes to be the true messengers of her thought.
But Blanchardine breaking silence began in this manner.

Most bewtifull Queen and my redoubted love and mistres, as health does bring
most sollace to the sick, liberty to the prisoner, and food to the hungry,
so does your Angelical presence revive me, who (even now* the extremity of
sorrow had almost confounded. The Sunshine of my bliss, was turned to a
cloudie fogge, my mirth to moan, my sollace to sadness, and my day to night, in
loosing the man whom heaven adores, whom earth admires, and men do
reverence. O that the dismal day had bin obscured, when first this hellish
Tirant Alimodes, bent his bloody forces against this royal Town, wherein
although he has acquired small advantage, yet has subdued his Conqueror, in
surprising that most heroic Prince Sadony, whom nowhe leads prisoner to
Cassidony: but what auailes sorrow, where sadness cannot help, and though I
now enjoy your company, which is a heaven unto my soul, and a paradise unto
my mind, yet since the cause was mine, the quarrel mine, and he himself was
mine: with what honor or just excuse, can or may I suffer him to endure
imprisonment, and live my self free and out of bondage? (pardon me O gracious
Queen) and with your pardon jointly give me leave to recover him again,
without whom neither may my heart receive content, neither my soul comfort: and
the time shall not be long, until I make my speedy return to visit you, whom
alive above all wights I honor, and whom after death I vow as my cheifest
saint to adore.

When the proud Lady in love fair Eglantine, had till this instant remained
as it were in a trance, yet listened to this sad and heavy discourse of
Blanchardine, where at the first a wan and pale hew had wholly possessed her
amiable face, by reason of her inward passions: now the orient vermillion
spreading on her cheeks, strove (as it were) with the Rose and Lilly for
superiority in the perfection of color, she calling her senses together, made
this reply. Ah poor and distressed Queen, how often in my greatest mishaps
was I wont to allege against fortune, when she threatened utterly to deprive me
of honor, living, renown, yea life and all, that none of all that was mine,
claiming only a property in thy love and loyalty (O noble Knight
Blanchardine) not caring to forgo the whole world so I might enjoy thee whom
I thought that neither alteration of time, distance of place, mutation of
manners, change of estate, no nor any thing whatsoever which either hell or
fortune might procure, could once have separated and withdrawn from me,
(having now such liberty and freedom to stay:) but seeing that my expectation
fails me, and that I strive against the stream, and east stones against the
wind, in reconciling you, and opposing my self against fortune, who long
since has vowed my utter ruin: ah too true I find, that the constellation of
my stars, with the calculation of my nativity, have still allotted me, with
Ixion to be rolled on the tormenting wheel, daily to turn the stone with
Sisiphus, and for ever to fill the bottomless tubs with the daughters of
Belus: the ashes of the old Phoenix engender a new, and with me the end of one
sorrow is the beginning of another: if fortune look on me she lowreth, if she
turn her face, she threatens: if she but remember me, she is enraged: and if
she smile, she means naught but deceit and slatterye. And yet how can I so
vehemently exclaim against fortune? has she not rescued me from the Pagans
tirannies? has she not preserved my sweet Blanchardine from shipwreck,
imprisonment, and death? has she not given me the conquest and overthrow of my
enemies? Alas she has, but so soon to deprive me of thy sweet company,
augmenteth my greefes a thousand times more, then these have exhillerated me
with pleasure: yet since there is no remedy and that you needs will wend from
hence to hazard your life and people, in rescuing him (whom I think they have
already put to death) and leave me (to whom your absence will bring a
coffeehouse worse then death) go Blanchardine go, and in your absence I
will mourn, weep, and wring my hands, (but withal) never cease to entreat
the Gods for your speedy return: and yet before you go, let us congratulate
our selves as well as we may, and so short a time will permit: and after you
have put on the Princely Diadem of Tormaday, and established all things
according to your grauety and wisdom, the^ (I say) may you at your pleasure
depart, and leave me here to bewail my hard misfortune.

Thus this poor passionate Queen sometime with sighs, sometime with tears,
solicited him to stay, but his brotherly care of Sadony far exceeded the
Queens persuasions. So pacing lovingly with her into the City, which he
found most sumptuouslye adorned against his coming, he sported with his fair
Queen a day or two, till his shipping was in a readiness, and then with a
warlike company of brave Caualiers, he bent his course after the Pagan
Alimodes, and his miscreant company: but before he ascended the Ship, he in
presence of the Queen and her Lords, called unto him a man (whom as he
thought was highest in the Princes favor) but yet of base and mean parentage,
only advanced to honor by the late deceased King of Tormaday, Father to the
Queen, whose advice and council he continually used before all the Lords of his
kingdom, his name was Subbyon, whose pride and haughtye mind, procured him
much hatred among ye nobles, but by reason of his offices which he held under
the Queen, by the appointment of her father, the common and baser sort of
people, (more for fear then love) did reverence: whom Blanchardine by reason
of his short abode, chose rather by his eye then by experience, to be
vicegerent of the City and kingdom till his return: this he did (as he
thought) to please the Queen, and appointed a hundredth knights daily to
attend his person and command. When Blanchardine had disposed (as ha thought)
all things according to the Queens desire, after millions of kisses, and sweet
imbracements of the fair Eglantine, with weeping tears he departed toward
his ships.

Then the aged king of Frize, father to Blanchardine, seeing the pitiful
complaints of the Queen, recomforted her as well as he could, promising after
the obtaining of their enterprise, to bring again withal speed his son unto
her. Ah God grant (answered the Queen) that all things sort unto your wills,
for in your absence is my death, and in your presence is my joy.

Then the King of Frize and all the rest went aboard their ships, the ankers
were halled, the sails were hoised, and forth they launcht into the deep,
where after a days sail, they might escry afar off, a mighty navy of
ships, glyding on the waves, whereof news being brought to Blanchardine, he
commanded that presently the masters should post after them, thinking it to
be the fleet of Alimodes. But when the industryous Pilotts thought to reach
the other company, they were presently overtaken with a mighty tempest, which
put them without their compass, and in great peril of their lives. The
mariners perplexed with the agony and fear of death, could not execute their
charge, but encoraged by the captains of ever ship, they began to do their
labor, some turned the sail yard, others the sail cord, others struck the
topsayles, others the spritsayle, some the mysen sail, some took off the
bonnets and enlargements of the mainesayles, some knit the broken lines, and
some looked to the hinder deck tail and castle of the ship, some to the fore
deck and some to the hatches, others voyded the sea into the sea by pumping
the water out of the ships. And to be short, every man applied him so well to
his labor, that they defended the storm without loss of any. And thus let us
leave to speak of them a while and return to Subbion, whom we left governor
of Tormaday.

Chap. 9.
How in the absence of Blanchardine, Subbion, to who^ the government of
Tormaday, was committed til his return, traitorously conspired to marie the
Queen and set himself in the regal throne as King.

SVbbion being left, by the special appointment of Blanchardine, chief
commaimder of the City and people of Tormaday, assending not by steps, but on
the sudden to the tipe of all honor (as he thought) pricked forward by
ambition and pride, the handmaides of treachery, began to imagine with himself,
how he might for ever establish this his signiory and government, neither
respecting his base and rude parentage, the manifold and bountiful rewards of
the Queen, nor the assured trust reposed in him, by his sovereign
Blanchardine. Calling therefore before him such as (he thought) and whom he
might either by reward, bribe or promise of honor, allure, or by flattery
persuade, with whom he began to break in this manner.

My approved friends and faithful countrymen, you are not ignorant of the long
and teadious wars which we have for many into the presence, where the Queen
sat, attended but with a small troop of Lords and Knights, found her pensive
and sad, for the departure of Blanchardine: but Subbion imboldned by reason of
his armed friends, that companied him, leading the Queen a little a side (as
though he would impart some matter of more secrecy, then behooued the
standers by to be acquainted withal, began to parley with her in this manner.

Fair Queen and Empress of Tormaday, your subjects and Citizens are greatly
grieved, to see you dolant and sad, now you have most cause to laugh and be
merry. And so far as they, and my self both by your speeches and our own
conjectures can gather your melancholy arises, by means of the absence of
Blanchardine a man though forward in your service (in hope of Sallary) yet a
stranger, an exiled person, and a fugitive. And since you have forsaken so many
Princely offers, of Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, and great Lords, it is a
great wonder to us all, what folly or rather frenzy should lead you, to dote
so much upon this wandering Knight, whom both his own country and people do
hate, and who (in all our opinions) seeks nothing but the subuertion of you
and this our common wealth: consider (noble Queen) the honor of your Royal
house, from whence you are descended, the fertility of the Realm, wherein you
reign, and the welfare of the people, whom you govern, and suffer not your
self to be so vainly led to mary one, who like the traitor Eneas, will not
only depopulate your country, impouerish your people, but in your extremest
need, leave and forsake you, having obtained the full and effect of his desire.
Then (noble Queen) it will be too late to recall again, what prevention in
time may firmly establish. And since it is the general desire of all your
subjects, and the thing which not only shall bring content to all, but continue
peace within your dominions for ever, that you assure your love and liking to
me, who esteem thereof above all reach of human wit. Consent (O gracious
Queen) to satisfy the humble desire of all, in yielding that your love to
me, which the (...) of my affection does justly challenge, as proper to none
(...) my self. And here I vow and protest (before the sacred presence of the
imortall God) to take such continual and diligent care for the saftie of your
self, your realm and people, that through all ages Tormaday, shall bear the
name of the most blessed and happiest country under the Sun. And if you
gainesay, what all have affirmed, touching our marriage: know that what I may
not obtain by your free consent, I beth will and can effect by rigor and
force. Therefore sweet Lady resolve me presently, what your determination is
herein, that I may befully ascertiated of your meaning.

The Queen (having with extreme pain) listened to the sequel of Subbions
purpose, began now to change her countenance, and with an austere and bold
spirit, full of magnanimity and disdain, made this reply.

What do I hear (thou base disloyal villain) to proceed out of thy lips whom
duty commands to be our footestoole and slave? have the honors which we have
bestowed upon thee, made thee so far to forget thy self, that thou dare
presume to solicit such a matter, as thy installation in regal seat, and to
be fellow and copartner with me? Auaunt pesant, this thy malleport and saucy
enterprise, shall cause thee to repent thy treachery, and bring such deserved
punishment upon thee, that through all regions, thy detestable villainies shall
be bruted, and here at home thy cursed carcass most cruelly tortured.

And as she intended to call her counsel, to acquaint the^ with this
detestable treason: imediatly there stepped in, a multitude of base runagates,
which being [on set purpose] armed for his rescue, they commanded their Prince
the fair Eglantine, to consumate ye marriage, which they had already purposed
between her and Subbion, not permitting her any leisure to withdraw her self
apart, from such a rude rabbell of rascals.

The Ladies there atte^dant, perceiving ye multitude to press in so fast, made
such an outery, that all the Court and streets rung of their noise, so that
the Citizens wondering at this sudden allarum, began to flock to the gates of
the Court which were so clo^ly kept by the traytorous companies of Subbion,
that none might [as then] enter therein.

But this news being spread through the City, and coming to the ears of the
good old Earl of Castelford, the Provost of Tormaday, and the Knight of the
ferry: sitting at diner, they having understood the treasons, intended by
Subbion against the Queen, withal possible speed, assembed a mighty army of
soldiers and citizens, ^n battle array, and marched to the court gates, which
though at the first they found fast shut, yet by the engines and devices they
brought, they caused to fly open, so that within short time [and ere ever
Subbion could any whit effect his purpose] they entered the Court, where finding
the Queen, somewhat recoiled, and severed from the company of the traitors,
which now prepared to defend themselves, they presently conveyed her out of the
Court, and with all possible speed, sent her away to the old Earl of Castelford
there to remain til their return unto her.

In the mean while, Subbion and his accomplicies withdrew themselves, fearing
the multitude of the Citizens and soldiers, which came against them. But when
he understood, that the fair Lady Eglantine, was by the Provost, the Knight
of the ferry, and the good Earl of Castelford, conveyed to the strong hold
of Castelford, a place impregnable, by reason of ye deep watery trenches, and
lofty strong walls, being furnished within with great store of munition, men
and victuals, he grew half in despair, ever to obtain his purpose. But
being incoraged by his treacherous followers, to persist in his villainous
enterprise, he forthwith, with all his base retinue, marched to Castelford,
where having a long and weary seidge, without advantage, he determined still
to persevere therein, hoping in time, through want and defect of victuals, they
should be reinforced to yield. And in this assault and traitorous seidge, I
will leave him a while, to recount the adventure of Blanchardine in persuit of
the Pagan Alimodes, for the delivery of his trusty companion Sadony.

Chap. 10.
How Alimod^ landed at Cassidony and led Sadony prisoner with him But at his
coming thither, the Citizens defended the gates, forbidding his entrance, etc.

NOw was Alimodes (the cursed infidel) come safe within the haven of Cassidony
his native country and kingdom, (as he thought but having landed his men,
entending to enter the City, as King, he found the gates closed, and all
entrance was denied: then he began first to exclaim upon his false Gods, then
on his people, and most especially, on his daughter, the fair Beautrix, who
was lately affianced, to the distressed prisoner Sadony: at the same instant,
was the fair Beautrix mounted in her gallery, from whence she might discern
the huge multitude of Ships and men, which much recomforted her, hoping them to
be the company of her Lord Sadony, whose presence and safe return she had over
long expected: she forthwith commanded a great Lord to post abroad to bring
her the certainty of the news, who being returned, assured her that it was her
father Alimodes, who by chance of war, driven from his siedge had taken her
betrothed Lord Sadony prisoner, and intended the next morning to sacrifice him
to his Pagan Gods. This melancholy message bred such a terror to the fair
Beawtrix when she heard the distress of her dear Sadony, that all vital
powers forsaking her body, she fell in a sound: but being recomforted by the
diligence of her Ladies, she came to her self again, when not without millions
of tears she bewailed the hard mischaunce of Sadony, whose case she thought
remediless: Alimodes advancing himself nearer the walls, perc^ed his
daughter having her face besprent with blubbered tears, leaning at a window,
to whom with a mighty and stern voice he called, to have entrance within the
town, or else (quoth he) this caitisse Sadony who^ thou see here, who
contrary to my will, has plighted troth with thee, and caused thee and my
people to forsake the sacred laws and ordinances of our God Mahomet, shall
with the extremest torments I can devise, here openly in thy sight be
tortured to death. And besides, at my entrance within the City [which shall
be ere long] both thou and all thy false and traitorous company, shall feel
the rigor of revenging wrath. Conseder that I am thy Father that import thee, I
am he that gave thee life and dignity, I am the true and just enheritor, of
the kingdom of Cassidony, who have no other [nowe thy brother Darius is
slaine] to bestow it upon but thee: Yield [I say] yield to thy father, who
tendereth thy welfare and pittyeth thy distress, lamenting to think upon the
slaughter of his subjects, which through thy obstinacy is like to ensue: pity
thy self, pity thy people, pity thy husband, and pity thy father who
though he may command, yet does humbly entreat. And what has in my absence
been committed, both against my Crown and dignity, I vow to Mahomet clearly
to pardon, and freely to forgive, how can thou think to Reign in peace,
that have thrust thy Father from possession of the crown? how can thou
repose trust in any, that have first been false thy self? how can men think
thee to be faithful to any, that have been thus faithles to me thy father?
relent [I say relent] in time, and wipe this cloudy bail from thy dimsighted
cies see see the times which are like presently to fall upon thee and thy
people: I hear them already munnur against thee, I hear them conspiring to
betray thee, I see the^ ready to deliver thee into my hands, which [if they
shal] what pity can thou plead, that thus obstinately do deny to pity
thy self? And with these speeches, the tears distilled down his eyes, in
great abundance. The beautiful (...), listening to this perswasiue oration,
and deep protestation of (...) her Father, with bold corrage, yet with smyling
countenance, made him this answer.

Dear Father neither is it obstinacy, neglect of duty, nor malice of you,
that I have caused these gates to be shut against you: But fearing your rage
(which I know to be grievous and intolerable) if on the sudden without
deliberation you should enter, and behold the strange mutations and chaunges,
which have chanced in your abse^ce. But if it shall please you to listen a
while with patience, what I shall say, in duty I will be as ready to perform
what you request, as you willing to command my service.

The enraged King knowing himself (Sans reamedy) kept silence, to hear what
his daughter would allege, which she perceiving, began to speak in this
sort.

Noble King and my redouted father, when I bethink me of the manyfold and
grievous offenses, which you, and all we through you, have committed against
the sacred majesty of God, in honoring that detestable and cursed Idol
Mahomet, whose duty is nothing, and power less* ^ an^ driven into such a
desperate and sorrowful imagination for my soul, that every thought is far
worse then a thousand deaths unto me. But when I recall myself, and veiue
the merits and mercies of christ, the true immortal and ever living God, whom
even now, and during my life I will adore, I am much recomforted from these sad
and pensive greefes: look father, look with the eye of conscience, (...) the
damnable heresies you maintain: and with speed forsake that infernal Mahomet,
and his irreligious Altaron, and bend your devotions to Christ, in whom there
is mercy and forgiveness. And dear Father relent, and mittigate your conceived
wrath to Sadony my true Lord and husband, and join in leage and amity, with
those two vallerrous Gentlemen and Princes, Sadony and Blanchardine, So shall
you enter these gates [as Emperor] and al we during our lives will remain the
true and trusty subjects and friends of Alimodes, hereby shall your
tranquillity be established, your people pacified, and your Country continually
floorish. And if this receipt seem too hard for your disgestion, and that
under these conditions you will not tie your honor, then in dispight of thee
and thy false Mahomet, I swear by the immortal god, rather to die, and suffer
this city to perish, the^ that once thou shall find footing here. This is the
so^e of my resolution therefore advise your self, what answer you ente^d to
make.

When Alimodes had heard the imperious discourse of his daughter the fair
Beawtrix, with an impiteous grace and angry countenance, he made this reply.
Thou accursed caitife and hellish hagge, is this the duty and obeisance which
nature commands thee to do to thy father? is this the reward of all my cost
and pains, which from thy cradle I have bestowed upon thee? is this the faith
thou gave me, to reserve thy virginity to be disposed at my pleasure? thou
monster in nature, thou ungrateful feende, and periurde miscreant, neither do
I mean upon thy foolish entreaty, nor thy vain boastings, to forsake my God
Mahomet, neither to suffer this villain Sadony (whom thou call husband) to
escape the tortures which presently thou shall see prepared for him: and in
this agony he commanded the Marshall of his host to cause forthwith a lofty
Iibbet to be erected, right before the window where fair Beawtrix leand, that
she might behold the heavy spectacle, of the death of Sadony her Lord.

But when Beawtrix perceived her persuasions to take no effect, and that the
obstinate Alimodes perseuered in his devilish determinations, she began thus to
exclaim against him.

Thou false miscreant, unmerciful tyrant, and old dotard, do thou think
that this thy rigor can work thy entrance within this City? no no, thou art
deceived, and I will cause thee (if thou persist in this obstinacy) to repent
thy arriual before Cassidony, to disturb my people and quiet: pack hence I
charge thee on pain of thy life, before my anger be further incenst against
thee, and go again I say to woo that beautiful Queen of Tormaday, who
regards thee worse the^ her basest slave. Thou sottish old man, that once
were Venus Chamberlain, but now art become Cupeds Chaplain: do thou
imagine that so fair a Princess can dote on so foul a wizard? or do thou
think to obtain her love by force, who lothed to look upon thy filthy face?
those wrinckles in thy brows, those hoary hairs on thy visage, those quaking
hands which call thee to thy grave, do tell thee thy labor is in vain, and thy
cost is consumed to naught: leave, leave, silly man, these untimely and
unnatural courses of love, and repair to (...) hermitage or solitary cell,
where thou may have both time and leisure, to repent thy youthful toys,
and aged follies. And suffer my husband to escape thy murdering hands, whose
death as it can advantage thee but a little, so his life may perchance ere long
ransom thine.

These reproachful tantes of his daughter, made the old King almost mad, and
in that humor, he commanded his soldiers and Captains presently to give a
sharp assault to the Town, which forthwith was effected to the great loss of
Alimodes, and his companies.

And when he saw, that neither by command, by partey nor byforce he could
affect what he desired, he charged his men to retire themselves to their tents,
where having a thousand doutes hammering in his head, and many devices how he
might be revenged on the fair Beautrix his daughter, he willed all his
trumpets and clarions to sound, the rather (as he thought) to greiue his
daughter, by his feined show of victory. But when he found all his devices to
fail, and all his forces to effect nothing, he charged the marshall
forthwith, to lead Sadony to execution, under the guard of four thousand
soldiers.

Sadony being now brought toward the place, where (as he thought) he should
finish his heavy tragedy, began pittiously to bewail his hard misfortune. And
thinking first upon Blanchardine, and before him seeing his wife fair
Beautrix, standing in her window, to view this heavy spectacle, his passions
did more and more increase, so that through the anguish of his grief his
spirits began to fail, but being hurryed by the unruly rabbell of Pagans to
his death, he began to entreat thus. And is there neither pity nor compassion
remaining, amongst you, who thus violently draw me to death? Can neither my
innocence, nor my ransom purchase my pardon at your hands? O noble
Blanchardine, whose name I cannot forget* what disaster is this, that having
escaped so many dangers in thy company I should die thus cruelly in thy
absence: have I forsaken my father, country and friends, to accompany thee,
in conquest of thy fair love, and do thou slack to succor me in this
distress? is love forgotten, is kindness banished, is faith dissolved? O had
thy^ case bin mine neither love nor life should have stayed me from thy
delivery: and casting his eyes to the window where his Lady lay, he fetching a
porfouud sigh, as though his heart would break, spoke thus. O dismal day and
most accursed fortune, have I been preserved from so many slaughters, to
finish my days, in presence of my dear and dearest wife? Could not other
place or time bereave me of my life, but before her sacred presence? O no, my
fatal destinies have thought it fit for my offenses. And in these extremes he
languished, utterly void of any hope of succor. But the divine powers
pitying his passions, sent him speedy remedy, as in the next Chapter you
shall hear.

Chap. 11.
How the fair Beautrix rescued her husband Sadony from death, and mauger his
enemies, brought him safe within the walls of the City of Cassidony.

AS the beautiful Beautrix beheld this heavy spectacle of her love and Lord
Sadony, pacing (strongly guarded) to his death, she in all have, descended the
gallerie into the presence, where she found diverse Nobles and Gentlemen
attending her pleasure: she desirous to speak, yet wanting force (by reason of
her speed.) After a little pause, she humbling her helfe before them all,
began to entreat them to succor her distressed Sadony, who is even now [quoth
she] almost come to the dismal place* where he must finish his days, unless
your corragious valors thaughtie prowes deliver him. Reply my not lords [quoth
she] for the time will not permit, but upon your allegance and loves to me,
post a way with expedition, so shall I for ever acknowledge my self [though
your Queene] yet bound in duty unto you all,

This humility of the Queen, with tears distilling down her cheeks, was
such a spur to the forward minds of her nobles, that presently, they marched
out at a close postertie of the City through the drytrenches most secretly,
till on the sudden they were come very near the place of execution.

Now Sadony being mounted up the ladder, by reason whereof he might ouerlooke
the resedue, perceiving this ambush to be so near, seeming to eleuate his
hands to heaven for mercy, with maine force, brake the hands, where with he
was manakled. And leaping from the ladder, on the sudden, caught hold on a
holberd, which a rude rascal held, and violently wringing it out of his hands,
he so bestired his stumps, that he made the Sarizins recoyle back.

Now the Lords of Cassidony, perceiving the Sarizins disordered,, by reason of
this escape of Sadoniy. They forthwith ran upon them, with such agillety, that
the Sarizens began to fly, and in their slight, the most part were either taken
or slain, by which pollecy and present mean, Sadony was thoroughly reseued
from death, and brought within the walls of Cassidony, to the great and
exceeding joy of all the inhabitants the maine discemforture of Alimodes, and
the sweet content of the Queen.

But when the fair Beautrix was advertised of this happy news, who all this
while, was upon her knoos, (...) praying to God, for Sadonies delivery and the
good success of her Lords she posted to welcome him. At whose presence she
[through extreme ioy] sounded.

But Sadony gently listing up her, drinking the brinish tears, which ran down
her cheeks, after a while brought her to her senses again, when prostrating
himself before her, he gave her and all the rest, many thanks for his
preservation, but she lifting him up, lead him with princely honor into the
palace; where he discoursed the whole adventure of Blanchardine and himself,
since his departure spom Cassidony.

By this time and at that very instant, was the valerous Blanchardine with his
coragious company, come within the haven of Cassidony, where landing his men,
artillery, and horses, he presently commanded certain espialls to scout
abroad, to understand the estate of Cassidony, and whether Alimodes was entered
the City or no. By whose industry and diligence, they apprehe^ding a soldier of
Alimodes host, brought him with speed before Blanchardine, who upon his
examination, confessed the state of Alimodes, the rescue of Sadony, and the
exceeding joy of fair Beautrix for his escape with life, at the instant hour
expected of his death. These pleasing news, sorting to his desire, revived the
dying courage of Blanchardine, for the loss of his companyon Sadony. But now
pricked forward with love and revenge he dispatched his letters by sundry
posts, to advertise Sadony of his arrival, willing him forthwith, and or ever
the enemy were better provided, to join his forces and assault them, himself
meaning forthwith to give the onset.

These letters being come to the hands of Sadony, he presently acquainted the
Lords of Cassidony, and fair Beautrix with the contents, which they most
thankfully accepting, slacked not to perform what pleased Sadony to command.
And forthwith leuying forty thousand of expert soldiers, they secretly issued
out of the Town, to join with Blanchardine and his company. By this time was
Blanchardine ready to charge upon the enemy, which when Sadony perceived, he
tarried not long to assail them on the other side.

So began the fight to be exceeding dangerous: but the policy of
Blanchardine, and prowes of Sadony, within short time, brought these wars to
end. For Alimodes perceiving his Pagans to fly, and his whole host to be
discomforted, and finding no remedy (by reason of the multitude of his
adversaries to escape) he disarming himself, came prostrate before
Blanchardine pleading his pardon, whom Blanchardine, not according to his
deserts, but of his accustomed clemency pitying, delivered him to the sure
custody of a trusty Knight, to remain his prisoner till they might further
determine upon him.

Now was Sadony and Blanchardine met, between whom passed such sweet
salutations, and kind imbracementes as brought a singular content and pleasure
to all their followers. So loueingly arm in arm they paced to the City, where
the beautiful Beautrix even at that very entrance met them with such a pleasant
grace, as bright Phoebus yeeldes after he has banished the morning mist. Then
through the City were proclaimed feasts and triumphs, and al other kinds of
sportes, to yield a plauditie to this success, then was the day of Coronation
sounded through the land, at which time the Dukes, Lords, Earls, Barrons,
Knights and Gentlemen, from all places, assembled at Cassidony to honor the
festiualls. The whole assembly made their homage and fealty to Sadony and
Queen Beautrix: and from that time forth a quiet and freendly peace was fully
established through that region.

After that Blanchardine had reposed himself, and his weary soldiers awhile,
in the kind company of Sadony, and his fair Beautrix, he whom the entire love
of fair Eglantine did still recall to Tormaday, commanded his ships to be
made ready for his return, ignorant altogether of the treacherous conspiracies
of Subbion in his absence, which (if he had known) nothing could have stayed
him from her delivery and his revenge. But he not so much as once coniecturing
any such accident, made the less have to depart, from this new crowned king
and Queen of Cassidony.

Chap. 12.
How fair Eglantine the proud Lady in love, being beseidged by the traitor
Subbiou, within the Castle of Castelford sent the trusty Provost of Tormaday
to certify Blanchardine thereof, being at that instant at Cassidony, and how
he delivered her.

THe fair Eglartine Queen of Tormaday being beseidged within the Castle of
Castelford, by that traitorous companion Subbion: who fought by all possible
means to surprise her, thereby to inuest himself, with the diadem of Tormaday
in the absence of Blanchardin, she perceiving the traitorous crew to augment,
and her friends to decrease, bewayling her hard adventure to the old Earl,
and the good Provost. Ah (quoth she) full little knows my Lord Blanchardine,
of the extreamities which ^ endure, neither have I any mean to acquaint him
therewith, for the place of his abode is far hence, and my captivity strait
and daungereus at home, and without his speedy aid, we all are like to
sustain great peril.

The trusty Provost seeing the distress of his Queen, and how desirous she
was to be rescued by Blanchardine, (althongh she would not seem to request or
commauud him that service) yet he remembering her bounty and Blanchardines
kindness, ^he this realy, gracious Princess. As in many other your ho^le and
Princely services it has pleased your majesty to (...) me. So is it shall
like you to command me in this, I the help of God use such diligence and
fidelity, that the Blanchardine shall have the certain news of this your
restraint by Subbion ere long.

Trusty Provost (answered the Queen) whose forwardnes and faith, I have
continually approved: this friendly offer, which you so freely make, does
reuyue my dying heart and commaundes me for ever, to be thankful unto you, But
when I consider, the danger of your escape from hence, the hazard you are like
to endure, by so long a Iorny by Sea, and the peril wherein we shall live,
for want of your aid in this castle, these I say) forbid me to imploye you in
this service.

Madam quoth the Prouest, I think the services most honorable and gracious,
wherein I shall adventure my life, at your command and in your affairs,
neither will I be partial in performing them, although my body should sustain
^ thousand torments.

Gramercie (quoth the Queen) and since thy voluntary proffer has passed so
freely and that I cannot throughout my dominions, find a more sufficient
messenger, to whom I may deliver this charge, (with many thanks) I give thee
my princly promise, never to be ungrateful in recompencing thy trustiness,
prepare thy self then (my trusty friend) to undertake this message, and as
speedily as wind and Sea will permit, return again until which time we
here within will pray for thy pr^speritie.

The viligent Provost, princly issuing out of the Castle, prepared a pretty
Bark, which when he had furnished accordingly, he with a sew, betook himself
to Sea And ere many, days, reached, the shore of Cassidony, where he found
diverse mighty shipes to lie in readnesse for the transporting of Blanchardine,
and after he had perfectly learned, the estate of the country the installation
of Sadony, and the overthrow of Alimodes, he stayed not, until he entered the
City, where he was most royally received of many, but espetialy of
Blanchardine, who graced him with many welcomes. And when he had most amply
recommende his* Queen and mistres fair Eglantine to Sadony, and his (...)
Queen, ho taking Blanchardine by the hand into a more secret place, began
thus. The sorrowful news, (noble prince) which I have to relate unto you,
does almost daunt my heart before I begin to speak: know Sir for troth, that
the traitor Subbion, whom at your departure, you advanced unworthily to the
protection of the Queen and kingdom, of Tormaday, has converted your people
from alleigeances, ransackte your treasures, and put your Queen to flight,
into the strong Castle of Castelford, where the good old Earl, does with all
royalty and reverence, entarteine and protect her from the said Subbion, who
intends (if possibly he may) to marry her and enjoy the Kingdom in her
right: but your loyal Queen, disdaining both the traitor, and his ambitious
pride, whom she knows to be baselie borne, holds him and his adherents, as
disloyal to her Crown and dignity, and upon your return, purposes to
inflict such condinge punishment upon them, as their rebellious presumptions
deserves: hasten therefore mighty Prince, to deliver her from their outrages,
whose body, life and love, is wholly devoted to thee: and without speedy remedy,
very likely to be by force separated from thee.

When Blanchardine had heard the end of his short tale, (it was not needful to
bid him have, for presently he certified Sadony and the Queen of his vils
consperacie, requesting aid from them, to relieve his fair Eglantine; Sadony
more regarding the comfort of Blanchardine, then his croune and dignity,
promised nst only to aid him with men and munition, but also to accompany him
in person to Tormaday and venture his life, in his freendly quarrel. But when
fair Beautrix perceived, that Sadony meant to depart, she began pitifully to
complain herself, but seeing the necessity of the cause, which compelled
him, in regard of the many favors he had found in Blanchardine, she
condiscended thereunto: So in have they entered their Ships ( Eolus and Neptune
granting speedy passage) and in very little time they arrived before
Tormaday: as soon as they were come a shore, Blanchardine dispatched the
Provost to the City, to sound the Citizens, whether they would render the same
and submit to Blanchardine or no, whether being come, and having performed
his charge, the most and greatest part consented to Blanchardine, But a small
rabble of rascals, which were garisond in the behalf of Subbion, withstood the
rest, whereupon the greater number assembling together, got the market place,
where they set upon the rebels, and in small time were masters of the Town:
the dead carcasses of the traitors which they found, they threw over the walls
into the ditches of the City: and forthwith opening the gates, in great
humility they submitted the City and themselnes to Blanchardine. No sooner
was he entered the City* but he sent a trusty spy, to steal (if it were
possible) within the Castle, where the Queen Eglantine lay, who by his
careful industry, entered there unseen, and recounted unto the Queen the
success which Blanchardine alreaddie had, being lately come ashore.

This unexpected news recomforted the Queen and the old Earl of Castelford:
and presently they made great mirth and joy within the Castle* so yt the noyes
came to the ears of Subbion, who greatly wondering at this sudden applause,
utterly ignorant what had happned within the City, he began to doubt.

But Blanchardine and the Prince Sadony since speedy pace, having divided their
companies into sundry battles, marched by privy and obscure ways, till they
came near unto the Castle: but by chance a certain freebooter of Subbions
company, having forraged abroad for fresh vittailes, espied their secret
march, and presently related it to Subbion, at which news his color became
pale for fear, yet seeing no remedy, he encourraged his followers to show
their valors, promising mountains (if victory chanced on his part) and
threatening them with fear of death for their treacheries, (if Blanchardine
were victor)

Now bega^the two armies to join, where on the one part fear, on the other
hope, was the ensign. But by ye valor of Blanchardine and Sadony, the fight
endured not long, for they so assailed them on every side, that both the
traitors strengths and wits, were quite confounded. And at this very instant,
the old Earl of Castelford, the knight of the ferry, and the trusty Provost,
made their issue out of the Castle: So that Subbion seeing no way for his
escape, betook himself to flight, whom Blanchardine and Sadony pursued so
fast, as their horses would give leave. But Subbion being mounted upon a most
strong and swift courser (having got the start, lost them in the woods. And
in his flight he was encompast with twelve thieves, which did continually keep
their recidence in those groves, living only upon the rapines, pillages,
thestes, and murders of passengers unto whom Subbion related at large his
misfortune. And withal gave them to understand, that only two brave Gentlemen,
posted in pursuit of him, whom (if they could surprise) being thirteen to two
which was exceeding odds, he assured them, that they should obtain the
richest booty, that ever yet any had acquired. These murdering villains,
encoraged by his persuasions and desire of gain, lay preuily in ambush for
Blanchardine and Sadony. And ^re long they chanced to epsy them, wandering in
unknown paths, unto whom with gentle countenance, Blanchardine giving a kind
salutation, enquired if they had not seen a man pass this way very lately
armed. These outlawes mildely replied, that (...) such passed that way. But
since the uight drew on so fast. And that there was no place of lodging within
the space and compass of six or seven miles, and also a dangerous passage
through the forest in the dark, that if it pleased them to a light, and to
refresh themselves with such accates as their simple cottage did afford, they
should find gentle entertainment. The two princes suspecting no guyle, were
easily entreated to allight, and to accept this freendly proffer, (as they
thought but being entered within this cave, Blanchardine perceived presently,
that the place and people were dangerous; and councelled S^dony, not to
disarme himself fearing some treachery: But when Siluanus the Captain of the
twelve, entered their chamber, and found them armed, he began to persuade them
to disarme themselves, but Blanchardine made him this answer, that the custom
of their countr^yes was such, that during the first night* none might lie in
any unknown place naked or unarmed. This reply seemed unpleasant to Siluanus,
who presently recounted it to Subbion and his considerates: but Subbion
fainting with dastard fear, assured them that their forces were small and not
able to make resistaunce by reason of the long and weary fight, which they had
endured all the day before, by whose persuasions, Siluanus and his assosiates,
were resolutely bent to perform their devised stratagem. About the twelfth
hour^e of the night, these accursed Caitiues began to set upon these two noble
Princes. But they so manfully behaved themselves, that not only Subbion was
made a liar, but also the whole company Liuelesse (except Subbion) whom they
reserved to suffer condinge punishment for his offense, which was so no
torious and full of treachery, that neither in their opinions nor in the
judgment of any, he deserved favor, but the extremest torture that either man
could immagine or the law impose. So was this Traitor Subbion brought between
these two noble Princes to the Castle of Castelford: where he remained safe
till other broiles were quieted and the rage of the people appeased. Then was
he brought forth in open sight of all to receive his demerites by death, the
which all in general did both by their speeches and showtes, applaude and
ratify as hereafter shall be showen.

Chap. 13.
The last Chapter conteyneth, how the Prince Blanchardine and Queen Eglantine
were wedded and crowned The execution of Subbion, the death of the aged King of
Frize and the return of Sadony to Cassidonie to his fair Beautrix.

AFTER the battle before the Castle was finished, and that Subbion with his
accomplices were put to flight, the Queen of Tormaday (surnamed the proud
Lady in love) with the old Countess of Castelford, dissending down the
staiers, thinking to welcome her Lord Blanchardine, and the Prince Sadony, they
found the old Ear of Castelford, which (even then) was come to the Eastell
with many prisoners and rich booties of the rebels, she demanded where
Blanchardine and Sadony were? Madam answered the old Earl, it is not long
since they were both here in our company and we supposed that they had been
already entered the Castle before our coming. When the fair Queen
perceived, that no tidings could be heard of them, fearing some mischaunce, she
fell into a sound wherein she continued the space of an hour and more, but
being recovered, she began most pitteously to weep and exclaim against
fortune: the old Earl and the Countess recomforted her as well as they could,
but nothing could sort to her content: then they laid her on a sumptious bed,
hoping by sleep to make her forget sorrow, but neither sleep nor quiet could
harber in her head, fearing least Blanchardine were slain: now Blanchardine
and Sadony, having slain the murderers and ^ettred Subbion, they mounted upon
their horses and tied Subbion with cor^es fast to the back of an other horse
which they found there: and by the light of the Moon, took their way to
Castelford, which was distance thence four miles: Sadony leading the way,
Subbion in the midst, and Blanchardine the hindmost, They posted so fast,
that within short time they came before the gate of the Castle, where they
allighted from their horses: then knocking at the gates, they were presently
known, and with all speed let in, leading Subbion between them: the news
being brought to ye Queen, her melancholy was turned to mirth, her sorrow to
sollace, and her weeping to laughter: Blanchardine commanded that Subbion
should be imprisoned in the most obscure dungion within the Castle, and that
himself would become his Iaylor. After which he assended up into the Queens
chamber, whom he found new risen, raised by this happy news, at whose entrance,
her spirits began to be recomforted: and after many kisses, and sweet
imbracements, they sat down, and spent the night in discoursing of their
adventures past.

But when the day began to peep, they took their horses and rode to Tormaday,
against whom (in all kind manner) came the aged king of (...), who for a while
had rested himself there accompanied with all the noble Knights and Burgises of
Tormaday the walls were hanged with tapestry, the streets were ^ewed with
rushes, and sweet smelling roses, to gratulate their coming: the matrons
compiling garlands of sundry flowers, the Ladies dancing, the damsels singing,
the music sounding a sweet concordance to their entry. Thus in triumph they
assended the princely palace, most sumpteously adorned with rich cloth of
gold, embost with pearl and stone, where by the whole advice and general
consent of all, they were affiaunced.

The neighboring Princes which long had bent their devotions to thee sweet
Saint which kept her shrine in Tormaday (I mean the fair and chaste Lady
Eglantine surnamed the proud Lady in love) having received notice by their
espialls which kept continual residence within the City of Tormaday, to
certify the news which happened there, to their Princes and Counsels, hearing
(I say) that this Queen, whose obstinacy against Cupid was incomparable, and
peevish conceit in leave, most absurd, had now entered the chapter house of his
mother Venus, being limed in the bush of Blanchardines beauty, whose large
commendations and magnanimious courage was carried by the swift wings of flying
fame throughout many Realms and provinces, the like before was sildome or
never heard. These kings (I say) whose fancies before that time had received
the perfect impression of love in the Angellike beauty of that Princely
Queen, whose amber locks trust up in golden trammels, was a sufficient
addamant to draw all Iron hearts unto her: now seeing all hope of her recovery
past, and their desires frustrate, with frank and freendly consent, not only
came to visit and veiw Blanchardine, but also brought such honorable presents
and Kingly Iuels to welcome him to Tormaday, and to congratulate the happy
marriage between him and the fair Princess Eglantine, as their Countries and
kingdoms did afford. Some presented him with stately coursers and Iennets of
service, some with ships of huge and mighty burden, some with Pearls and
Iuels of inestimable valor. And to be short, every one though at first his foe
and utter enemy, yet in fine veiwing his maiesticall and princely courage,
became his true and faithful friends, esteeming him worthy of greater honor
then either their personages presents, or the obtaining of the beautiful
Queen of Tormaday, could afford.

And on the next morning, the beautiful Queen was royally led, to and from
the Church (where she was espoused to Blanchardine) by two Kings, Sadony and
the king of Frize: and the same day crowned King and Queen of Tormaday to the
exceeding comfort of all their subjects and friends. After their return from
the Church to the Court, they were feasted withal possible cheer, that could
be devised: and after dinner, the Trumpets sounded to the Iustes and tiltings
until supper: And after supper maskes, plays, and Princely devises, spent the
time till they went to bed.

On the morrow the feast began a fresh, and continued for the space of twenty
days. After all which arroyalties were finyshed, by the commandment of
Blanchardine, was Subyon and all his accomplices brought to execution: now the
news being carried with the swift wings of fame into Frizeland, the Lords of
Frize repaired to Tormaday, to accompany home their aged King, and to
congratulate this happy marriage of Blanchardine and his new Queen.

After the aged King of Frize Father to Blanchardine had seen the espousalls
of this beautiful Queen and his noble Son: being decrepit and stiff with
age, having lived to fourscore and upward, unto whom although his late
enlargement from captivity, and this new come joy of his dear son
Blanchardine, being now married to the beautiful Queen of Tormaday bred
delight: Yet through debillitie of nature, which was sore infeebled by his hard
imprisonment, he was surprised with an uncouth malladie and extreme contagion
of dangerous sickness, in the which he had not long remained, but in the view of
all, life began to vade, and death approach. And more to hasten on deaths
speedy pace to this sencles old man: the nobles of Frizeland having received
sure and certain inteligence from Tormaday of the life and freedom of their
King at that time there, and the princely marriage which now was fully concluded
between his successiue heir, their natural liege Blanchardine with the
renouned Lady and Queen of Tormaday, they came thither: at whose approach,
this fainting old man hoping to receive glad tidings from his aged wife the
Queen of Frize, began with cheerful countenance to lift himself up in his
bed as though no kind of deadly malladie or aged grief had attainted his
withered limbs. But when he had a while listened to the sweet harmony of
their sugared speech which presaged no kind of disaster, but all pleasure and
sollace that might be: at the length he demanded of the welfare of the aged
Queen his wife, unto whom reply being made, that long time since upon the
unfortunate report and tragical tidings of his captivity by Darius son to
the Pagan king Alimodes, she fell sick and died: he listening to this
impittious tale, fell as one distraught into a sound: But coming to himself
powered forth these speeches, the true testimonies of his faithful love: and is
she gone, the comfort (...) ^y youth, the staff of my age, the day of my night,
the son^ of my bliss, the sollace of my soul and the life of my death? Ah to
^o well I suspected (though alas I knew not the certentie) that my captivity
would bring her callamity, and my imprisonment her death. But since all humane
flesh is mortal and nothing under the Sun permanent, what auailes my
sorrowful gro^es and passions? to weak alas to recall her again, or any way
to remedy my misfortune: with these or the like exclaimes, th^s silly aged
King panting between life and death, lay still a while, till finding his heart
over charged with an other passion, he prosecuted his first complaint. O sacred
Jove searcher of al secret thoughts, whose eternal dietie reigns within the
highest heavens who from my cradle have destined me to perpetual misery, now
show thy self a righteous judge, and revenge my wrongs upon the accursed
brood of infidels, who so irreligiously profane thy blessed name, and suffer
them not to escape thy revenging power, but at thy pleasure consume and
confound the workers of this my woe: and now dissolve my days and weary life,
and lead me through the unknown passages to my dear and sweetest wife, that
though our days on earth did find small comfort, yet our souls in heaven may
find consolation. And with this orizon he yielded himself to God and died.
When the brute of this heavy tidinges came to the ears of Blanchardine and
his fair Queen, although they swinne before in the haven of happiness and
floted on the floodes of al felicity (as they thought) yet in that very
instant and moment of time, a cloudie mist began to obscure their brightest
sonshine, and a frost of cares to over run their summers bliss.

Now began Blanchardine to accuse and condemn himself, of unnatural
ingratitude and disobedience to his parents, to whom both nature and duty
bound him to be submissiue and kind: now he beg^n to malign the time, the
place and the cause of his departure and privy escape from his fathers Court.
But all in vain, for as tears, prayers, nor vows, can recall the dead: so
had I wist, and time abused and misspent, is in vain to be des^red. And yet
(quoth he) how unnatural was I to forsake them whom nature charged me to love
and obey? now I may justly accuse my self of the murder of these my loving
parents: alas I cannot excuse my self, neither can I plead ignorance that I
knew not that my departure would be the finishing of my parents joys, and
cause of their death, which now (to my open shame I find most true) And should
I, nay could I suffer my self to be led and carried away with such vain
fantasies, as leave them comfortles to whom I was the greatest comfort. Die
Blanchardine die, and the rather die that art the cause of thy parents death:
alas to kill a man is heinous murder, but to murder my parents a sin against
Sanctity: all creatures have ^are to foster those that gave them life: and I
careless in killing my father. The Storke when he sees his sire old and ready
to die with famine, takes him upon his shoulders and feeds him by his
travail: But I insteede of feeding have famisht, and in place of traveling
have traitorously overthrown my parents.

The Lords of Tormaday seeing this soddaine and unexpected chance of the
death of the aged King and the heavy plight of Blanchardine and his beautiful
Queen: humbly on their ^nees began to expostulate him in this manner. Noble
prince as the salve comes to late, where the sore is irrecuperable: as
physic is naught worth where the pacient is passing: and as fire given to the
ordinance, it is to late to recall the shot: So mighty King, booteles are these
tears which are shed for the dead: the honor of your father, has eterniz^d
his name for ever, though his body be here interred: and if fame be the mark
whereat all noble minds do shoot, then may you boast, that he cannot die,
whose fame is so far spread throughout the world. Leave therefore (brave King
to bewail him whom you have cause to joy for, and comfort our pensive Queen
and your fair spouse whose torments cannot cease, seeing you so sad. As one
newly risen from a trance, or out of a heavy slumber, so Blanchardine having
listened to this short and sweet discourse of his nobles, began to recall his
senses home, which before were wandering after the Ghost of his father, through
the Elizian feeldes, and perceiving sorrow to be both needless and bootlesse,
so well as the time and this hard occasion would permit, he began to be more
cheerful, and so pacing toward the Queen with a simpering smile, neither
presaging mirth nor mourning, he began to recomfort her. How now fair love?
what, are your melancholies such, as nothing can make you merry? sweet heart
be pacified, and snake of these vntimelye passions, and learn by me to digest
the hard and harsh pills of unhappy fortune. The cause is mine, and if sorrow
be expected in any, it is I that must be sorrowful: but I have found it both
hurtful to my body, and not available to the dead: and therefore have shaken
it of as a thing of no regard. Let us not therefore (sweet wife) be the cause
of a mournful court, but the authors of merry company, since it has pleased
God to sort our haps to our hearts contentments in our happy wedding. The
Queen whose sadness grew by reason of her husbands heaviness, seeing him to
have so quickly dismissed his heavy passions, became presentlye iecond and
merry, and so between them commanded great preparation to be forthwith made,
to perform the obsequeis of the deceased King of Freeze his Father: which
shortly with all solemnity fitting his estate, was accomplished, to the great
admiration of all the beholders, for the sumptuous magnificencie and surpassing
pomp wherewith he was interred: all costly odors and sweet senting spices were
bountifully bestowed upon him, great alms and charity were dealt and
distributed, and innumerable sollemne processions and prayers, were made for
him in honor of his person dead, and love of his Son living.

Now Sadonie who was not only a beholder, but a principal actor in all this
heavy tragedy: after these obsequies were solemnized, and that the estate of
his sworn friend Blanchardine and his fair Queen rested in perfect quiet,
void and free both offortaine and domestical enemies, bethinking himself of
his beautiful Beautrix his trusty Regent of Cassidony (he I say) whom love
had stonge to the quick by his late marriage, coming to Blanchardine began
thus. Since Noble friend and true copartner of all mishaps, that fortune has
spit her deadly spite and that now there remains no more service for me to
do in defense of your royal person, your Realm and Queen: and that my
princely Queen languisheth at home, by reason of my long absence, whose
princely person is the true Idea of my thought: let me crave favor to depart
until occasion, or your freendly letters call me hither again, where and
when, I will not fail so long as life shall rest within me, to do you all
possible favor and kindness. Blanchardine (imagining by himself) that the sting
of love was a sufficient prick to call Sadony home, and that he should greatly
injury him and his fair Beautrix, in withholding them a sunder: not only gave
his consent for his departure, but with all honor accompanied him to his ships,
with his Princely Eglantine, where not without millions of tears and many kind
imbracements they parted company.

Thus with pleasant gale and quiet tide, Neptune guiding the healme, sailed
Sadony and his warlike company toward the Realm of Cassidony, where his
princely Queen the beautiful Beautrix held her Royal court, but heavy and
mournful for the absence of her Lord and husband Sadony: for wrathful
Nemisis envying of her good hap, and willing to heap greater ^oes upon the
Queen, then before she suspected, altered her hoped bliss into a beadly
bane. For when the calm silence of the night procured quiet to all living
creatures, and that Hesperus the harbenger of Cinthia, had given charge to call
the inferior stars with twinkling light to illumine the earth: Eolus on the
sudden began to roar, and with outrageous storms and cruel blastes to
bannish again the stars from the firmament, and in their places to spread his
dusky clouds, so that instead of light, there was obscurity, with huge and
horible crakes of thunder: By force whereof, the wandering Prince Sadony, and
his amazed company, were from a sudden hope of happy arrival, driven into a
dismal fear of drowning: then began the pitiful clamor of the people,
seeing every want ready to swallow up the ship wherein they were carried, the
foggy mist, to thicken with cloudy vapors, that uneath could the saylors see to
do their labors: Sadony (whose courage no fortune was able to daunt) having
his assured hope in the God whom Blanchardine made him to know, seeing his
company to faint and in despair, began to exhort and comfort them in this sort.

Trusty companion and copartners of mishap, since it has pleased the majesty
of the eternal God, to ter^fie with his thunderclaps our ^eble hearts, and that
all hope of safety is utterly denied: let us with one consent, humble our
selves before his mercy seat: and no doubt, as in many other our c^mities, so
in this our desperate distres, he will with the eyes of pity look down upon
our penitencie, and by his omnipotency appease the rage of these troubled seas,
which threateneth imminent death and destruction Frollike dear friends and the
God of Blanchardine desend us. The company seeing Sadonie so coragious and full
of haughty valor, inciting them to call upon the God of Blanchardine, every
one casting away his dastard fear, eleuating their hearts and hands to heaven,
made their orizons thus: Imortall Iehoua guider of this glorious room,
although our di^sightedeies have been long covered we the obscure veil of
ignorance, and have abandoned our hearts from thy sacred law, yet since it has
pleased thee to make thy name and glory known among us, suffer us not to
miscarie, until we have yielded thee all conding and heavenly honor, so that
from our lips thy praese may slow, and in our hearts thy diety take root: No
sooner was this short and zealous prayer finished but horned Luna began to show
her head, the clouds to vanish, the winds to cease, and the sea to calm,
which yielded such fuel to their faith, that for ever they acknowledged the
omnipotency of Blanchardines God, and left the same to their posterities. Then
the skillful Pilots whose wandering course was past their compass, looking to
the skies, were directed a true passage by a crystal star so that within
short time they reached the shore of Cassidony, where the beautiful Beautrix
(...) (...) Lordly Peers and Princely Ladie^ awaited their landing. When
Sadony was now escaped the danger of the sea, and safely come a shore, after
humble thanks to God, he seazing upon the rofiall lips of his royal Queen in
whose countenance snow and blood made such a mixture, that in the opinion of
all, if nature should devise to frame her paragon she might fail in
perfection. But after many kind courtesies and amiable imbracentents between
Sadony and his Beautrix and the Lords and Ladies, where every one strove with
kindness to welcome home her love, they repaired to the court, where for that
night, the King and his Queen spent the time in content, and all the rest
congratulated their happy meetings. On the morrow when glorious Phoebus began
to cut the clouds, and drew the darkness from the earth, every one prepared
himself to be ready to attend the princes pleasure.

After Sadony had royally presented himself to the veiw of all, giving a
princely boniure to the Lords and nobles, be commanded that the soldiers
whose travels had been great, should repair to his presence, to receive a
recompense for their pains, which bounty did so combine the trusty minds of
all unto him, that base was he accounted, that would refuse to hazard his life
where and when it pleased Sadony to command. Then were the laws which in his
absence the Queen and Counsel had devised, presented to him to ratify, which
he we all princely magnificencie did forthwith establish, to the great
admiration and singular content of all his subjects and people. Now tatling
swift winged fame, the speedy messenger of happy news, ceased not until
these tidinges were brought to the ears of the King of Spruse at the city
Marienbourgh (then in his profound and deep meditations for his son Sadony)
and his departed companion. But when he heard of the hard adventures which his
son had escaped by sea, his delivery from death on land, and his most happy
marriage with the beautiful Beautrix, vanishing fear (whose cankering rust
had almost consumed his pleasure) he with all his nobles and people, offered
burnt sacrifices to their Mahon for this happy tidings: Yet not content nor
satisfied in mind* he rigged certain ships wherein he and diverse of his
Lords embarked themselves, longing to visit his son at Cassidomet and led by
this sweet desire, after they had sailed the space of one week, they came
ashore within those territories: But when news was brought to Sadony that
certain Pagans were arrived, and craved to be admitted his princely presence:
Ignorant altogether what or whence they should be: seating himself in his
Royal throne, accompanied with his fair Queen and chief peers, he
commanded them to be brought to his presence, upon whose approach, Sadony
knowing his father, by the majesty of his countenance, desended from his
seat, humbling himself on his knees at his fathers feet. The fair Beautrix
unwitting who he might be, to whom Sadony should show such reverence, stood
in a maze: But after she knew him to be father to Sadony, with a most gracious
and amiable cheer came to entertain him, to whom the King of Spruse rendered
millions of thanks, both for the life and marriage of his son, without whose
rescue he had bin traitorously murdered, and hanged by Alimodes. But the fair
Queen answered, that both her life, living, and people rested in the safety
of Sadony, without whom (quoth she) neither may I, nor my kingdom continue:
Now when the King of Spruse had listened to her zealous and sugared tale, fixing
a steadfast countenance on her face, he seemed as one ravished in
contemplation, admiring the beauty and bounty of the Queen. But Sadony,
thinking his father (after his ariual from sea) to be desirous to repose
himself, led him with all majesty into a most princely lodging: where after
his repast, he went to bed: the other Lords of his troop and all their
followers were so honorably entertained there, that the commendation of
Sadonies bounty, was bruted every where. Now on the next morning when
(according to custom) Sadony and his fair Queen, repaired to the Church, to
hear divine service, the King of Spruse not suspecting that his Son Sadony
had altered his religion from his Mahomet: after the Priests had begun to sing
a sollemne procession in the honor of Christ, he as a man distraught in sense,
and overcome with madding frenzy, ran up and down cursing and exclaiming
against his son, so that neither persuasions, tears, vows, nor prayers
might once appease his frantic rage: till retiring himself all sollitary into
his chamber, tormented with passions and agonies, at length he fell a sleep, to
whom a little after entered diverse of the Lords which accompanied Sadonie from
Marienbrough with Blanchardine, and persuaded the King that the idolatrous
Mahomet was a false deceauer and of no diety, which by sundry and wonderful
miracles* they had found Christ to be the true Messiah and son of God: and
therefore with all humility, jointly on their knees they entreated his
majesty, to leave his superstitious worshipping of blockish Mahomet, and with
all devotion to acknowledged Christ to be the true God: And even at that very
instant the stony heart of this Pagan King was mollified, who forsaking his
idolatry, became a christian. This happy news so delighted his son, that
under heaven nothing could work him more content: Then labored Sadony and his
fair Queen with all royalty, to welcome their father and his followers,
where their entertainme^t was exceeding measure, both for magnificencie and
cost: So past the time a month or more, of their abode in iollity, until the
King desirous to return to Marienbourgh, requested leave of Sadony, for his
departure: who seeing the tickle state of his fathers kingdom, in his absence,
wanting a governor there, was the more willing, and so all possible provision
being made with princely bounty bestowed by Sadony and his Beautrix upon the
Lords of Spruse, they accompanied the King to his ships: And after humble duty
done by Sadony to his father and kind curteste to the rest, he recommended
them to the mercy of Blanchardines God.

Thus Gentlemen, to satisfy your expectations, and perform my promise, I send
you the second part of Blanchardines adventures: whose succes (if I find as
fortunate as his first, look shortly, so soon as time and leisure will serve,
for the finishing of all his Tragidies.
FINIS.

