The Book of Demaundes of the science of Phylosophye, and Astronomye, Between
king Boctus, and the Philosopher Sydracke.



Sydracke.


King Boctus.


The King asked, how was the world made, and how holds it. Sydracke,
Answers.
GOD made Heaven and water, and when he would make man, after that the evil
Aungelles fell down from heaven in abysme. He said that the world be made, and
anon forthwith was his commandment done. And the world was fo^med upon the
water as his pleasu^^ was. And all the water that is in thayre it abides upon
the earth, for (...) can not be so deep nor so parfound^ but it must needs
abide on the ert^ and as ye shall understand that the same earth, and also this
that is dyscouered has other water under him also, that sustayneth it. For the
foundement of the earth is the water, and the foundement of the water is the
fyrmame^t, and the one and the other hangs and holds together by the
fyrmamente, and by the might and will of God. GOD of his great might made the
world to the semblaunce of an egg, as in lykenes the shell of the Egg is the
fyrmament, that enuyrons and goes all about the world, and the white of the
egg is the water that is between the fyrmament that enuyrons and goes about
the earth. The yelke of the egg ^s the earth that enuyroneth all abou^e with
water, and set upon the wa^er. In likewise as the yelke of the ^gge that is set
and enuyroned all a^oute with the white of the egg. The ^eede that is between
the yelke and he white of the egg, that be the folks that be on earth, even
as the sede is on the yelke and, thus is the form of ye world. But then it is
as round as a Bowl, that has neither head nor tail.

The King asked, mounteth the son more upward then he descends or
descends he more then he mounteth. Sydracke, Answers.
THe son by the morrow when he ryseth red and clear he mounteth always till
half the day be past, that is called mydday. And then after the half day, he
descends and comes lower, till he go down, and as red ye may se the son
at his going down, as at his rysynge, and as much he descends downwarde as
he mounteth upward.

The King asked, the son does he mount and descend as well by night as by
day. Sydracke, Answers.
WHen the Son appears to us, hear, that he goes down and fails us, he
shows to other folk in another country, that be in the other part of the
world, and he shows him in his turnynge to them, that the day aprocheth to
as he does us, when the day comes and lyghteth us. And at after mydnyght,
till it be day he goes lower to them, toward us waxes higher, for to them he
aprocheth in the night, and to us in the day, and when he fails us he
appears unto them i^ another country.

The King asked, why grows the Moon, and at sometime waxes less and less.
Sydracke, Answers.
THe Moon appears and seems to us that she grows, and other while waxes
less, and all this appears to us, for the son and the tornyng of the
fyrmament, for all the while that she is against the son, she is covered, and
appears unto us that she waxes less. And wha^ it appears to us that she is
al failed and shows nothing, than she is approached nyghe to the Son, and
leseth all her light, for the coueryng of the son. And at the same poyncte
that she fautes all her light to us, at the same poyncte the son^e passes her,
for the mouement of the tyrmamente, and then she dyscouereth on the other part
of the son, and then she is new semynge to us here, and for the feeble sight
that we have, we may not se her at that poyncte. And every.xv. days she
grows, and other.xv. days she waneth and waxes less.

The King asked, what is the reason that in some place in the world, the
Clyps of the Son and of the Moon may be seen, and in some place it may not
be seen. Sydracke Answers.
THe Son makes his Clyps, as well by day as by night, and by night as by
day, for when we have day here, other folks have in other places night, and
when it is night here with us, it is day with them for the fyrmament never
cease turnynge, and therein a bydeth the son the Moon, and the stars,
that enuyron and go about all the world, and at no time they fail not their
light, for when their light fails to us here, they show it to other folks
in other places, and when it fails other folks there, it shows to us here.
And all this is for the roundnes of the world, for the world is all round as an
balle, for when the Son draws low, he gives his light to that part yt
he draws low to, and then it is derke behind him, as and a man held a
candell light before him the vysage of him should have the shadow. And so in
likewise does the son about the fyrmament, by cause of the roundnes of the
world. This is the day and the night, for God made the night for the rest
of man, and for other creatures. And therefore when the Son is in the clyps
here with us, we have it by day and therefore we may se it, and then it is night
with other folks, and therefore they may not se it, for the shadow of the
earth Also when the son is in the clyps with other folks they have day, and we
have night, therefore they may se it, and we may not se it, for the shadow of
the earth. And likewise is the Moon as the Son in the clyps, when time and
season is, as well by day as by night. And therefore it is day with us when it
is night with other folks. How be it that the fyrmament makes always his
turn for our day and our night is all one, for where soever they turn they
have always light and resplendour and brightness that God of his grace has given
them.

The King asked, is there any poyncte in the day that is good. Sydracke
Answers.
AT that poynct that the Moon makes her turn at, the.xxxvi. poynctes after,
thou shalt have a good poyncte: and from the poyncte at.C. lvij. poynctes,
another. And from that at.CCC. lxxvij. poynctes, thou shalt have another. And
from that poyncte at.v. M. ij. poynctes you shall have another. And from the
poyncte at.vij. C. xi. poynctes thou shall have another. And from the poynct
at.CCC. xvi. poynctes thou shalt have another. That is to say, poynctes in
every Moon where the.xxiiij. hours of the day and of the night ben.

The King asked, how should a man know the evil poyncte. Sydracke,
Answers.
AT every time that the moon is new, thou shall tell by.xvij. times.xvij.
poynctes, and at every time of the.xvij. poynctes, or as many hours as the
Moon is new i^ that day that poynctes after, and the second, the third, the
fourth, and the fyft be evil, and then ye shall count yet asmany poynctes as
ye have told and counted before.v. poynctes after ben evil poynctes. And
always to count this count, the hours begin, whar the Son goes down, and
the night and the day be.xxiiij. hours. And they begin at the son going
down because the night was before the day.

The King asked, is there any other folks underneath us that se the light of
the Fyrmamente as we do. Sydracke, Answers.
FOr because of the roundnes of the world there are folks underneath us that
sees the light of the fyrmament as we do, and also their fete go against our
fete, and that is for the hyghenes and longnes of the parties of the world and
for his ros^denes, for the Eest part is much hyer where the Son ryseth, then
the west part where the Son goes down. When the son ryseth in the Eest,
then it is dawning of the day in the west. And also when the son goes low
in the west, the^ it is even night in the Eest, for the greatness and roundnes
of the world, for while the son shall make one shadow on earth of.iiij. then
shall the fyrmament have course in his tower.M. legues. It is not to be
understand that the son shows not nor comes not so low as the earth, nor
nigh to it, but a great time and a great way from the earth asmoche as the length
of the earth is from the one head to the other, and asmoch again, and is more
ferther for to go up, then for to go down.

There is a land an folks dwelling therein, that the Son abides not there
but one hour of the day, and a none it is night. There is another land where
it is dark always as it were night. And when it is in one place of world
winter, in another place it is so^mer. And when it is so^mer there, it is in
the other parts winter and all this is by the reason of the Son that takes
another way, by the volent and will of God every year.

The King asked, how long, how large, and how thycke is the world. Sydracke,
Answers.
Forsooth the world is as much of length, as of largeness, and of thyckenes
the same, for it is all as round as an apple. And who would go, from one heed
to the other right through the world, and went every day well and commonly,
from the morrow till even, and the bread of the sea that is between Eest and
west, were all ferme land and earth, and all the world were as plain as the
paume of a man's hand, no man might go from the one heed to the other, in less
^hen a.M. days, and the largeness, and thyckenes is as much.

The King asked, may any man go about the world. Sydracke, Answers.
THere is no man that may go or turn about the world, and a man might live
a.M. year and more, and all the earth were ferme and plain, and if he would go
he should find so many countres, hills, mountains, and dales. That he might
not pass them in no wise, and also he should find so much drought and dry
places, that he should not find one soap of water. And also he should find
many peryllous and diverse beasts, and fowls, that he should be slain and
devoured, and if he might pass all these perils, yet he should find so
great deserte, where there is great obscure and darkness that he should se no
syghte. And if he should pass all this, yet he should find so great and
meruaylous chynes and caves in the earth, by the which the sea that is called
the sea Betee, that passes thoroughe the land, and parts one country from
another, and by many reasons he might not go it. And if it were so that a foul
should fly, yet he might not do it, for the great thurst and hunger that he
should have, for he should find no fode, and also for the great wyldernes, and
for other fowls that would slay and devour him, and for many other reasons.

The King asked, how many lands is there. Sydracke, Answers.
THere is but one land, but for the reason of the Sea that enters throwout
it, and parts it in.iii. parties, thereof there are named.iii. Countres,
withouten Isles in the sea, but all is one land ferme, and all be upon one
foundement, and all GOD formed and made in one hour, and all at ones. And a
man were all beneth under the world, which were impossible for any man to be
there, but by the will of God he might well be, and went all about and beheld
well, he should find that all the earth and land were one as well there as the sea is not, as there as she is, for so perfounde and deep may no man be under
her, but that same earth, has yet other water under her, that sustayneth her.

The King asked, might a man sail so long in a ship, and he had wind and
wether at his will, or the sea, that he might come nyghe to the place where the
fyrmament turns about. Sydracke, Answers.
AND a man were in a ship, and the sea bare him, and the wind put him forth
always forward, and sailed.x. year on the sea or more, and that Ship parted
from the East, she should be a great while after that, or she came into the
west, and also and she departed from the west she should be as long or she
aryued in the East And also in likewise in the trauerse and overthwart the
world, and if it so were that it ware the will of God that a man were as great
and as bold and hardy as all the world, and he were nyghe unto the fyrmament,
where he turns about by. M M legues or more, the feere that he should have
when the fyrmament makes his turn, and of the tempest and noise that he
makes and of his mouynge that great and bold hardy man, as all the world
should be deed anon at that same hour, and should not live one hour, nor might
not, how be it that a man were as hardye and as great as is aforesaid, and yet
the firmament seaseth not always to turn by the will of God.

The king asked, shall all the earth be enhabyted with folks. Sydracke,
Answers.
ALL the earth shall be enhabyted, and shall be divided in.iij. parties. The first
party is named Asye Le Grande, and is as great as the other two. And this
party dureth from Septentrion by Orient till myddye. The second party is
named Ewrope and dureth from Occydent unto neptentrion. The third parti is
named Auffryke that dureth from myddy unto Occydent.

The king asked in what place is paradyse Terrestre. Sydracke Answers.
PAradyse terrestre is in the first region of Asye le grande towar Orient, and
there is none erthly man that may come there but god or his Angels led him
and guide him thy there For this Paradyse sythen that Adam was east and driven
out thereof by an Angel, anon forthwith it was environed al about with great
fire that dureth from the earth unto the sky above that no man may enter nor
come thereto. And also there is all about Paradyse great wyldernesses where
there is great multitude of many diverse and peryllous beasts.

The king asked, in what place is hell. Sydracke, Answers.
HEll is in the mids of Auffryke under the earth and is set in the mids of
earth, as a karnell of an apple is in the mids of the apple, for as much
earth is there above as beneth. And there be the souls, that be dampened in
great pain and turment without end.

The king asked, may there come any tokens or Signs, that a man may se
boldly out of heaven or hell. Sydracke, Answers.
A Man may se openly the waters that comes from Paradyse Terrestre, for there
is a well spring of the which.iij. Ryuers comes out of it. And one of
those.iij. Ryuers goes by the parties of myddy toward Orient, and falls into
the sea of Occydent, and that aryseth out of hell again yt is in the parties
of Ynde. And the other two Ryuers, aryseth again in Ewrope of an hill there,
and there pass by many cou^tres, till they mete, and then they fall into the sea, as nature requires. And also a man may se in Auffryke openly.ij. hills,
that be soupyrall of hell, and they cease not nether day nor night and be ever
brennynge with fyerse fire.

The King asked, what is the can se that the blood of a man, the brains, the
mary, and the waters grows and waxes less and more. Sydracke, Answers.
When God made the fyrmament the.vij. Planettes, and the.xij. Signs, and
stablyshed and ordained them for to light the world, tha^ he stablysshed and
ordained, as a lord that the blood, and the brains, and the mary of mankind,
and the waters also should wax and wane as the Moon does, that is more nere
the earth then any of the other planettes And also she grows and waneth in
heaven, but to us here on earth it seems and appears to us that she grows
and waneth here. And all this is by cause of the mouement of the fyrmame^t, and
for the turn that she makes, for she goes all about the world.

The king asked, is any man the worse if he be pore, or son to a poor man,
or bond to another, or not so well favored as another. Sydracke, Answers.
AS spiritually and against god a man is never the better, nor never the worse
for his riches, nor for his pouerte, nor for his evil favor, but for his
works and deeds if thou be rich and puyssaunt, and I poor, yet with all my
pouerte, God has given me form of man, as he has done to the, for as well
am I borne of a woman and gotten of a man as thou art. And also I have a
spryte as thou haste. And I have also my poor body all hole, and complet and
my arguments as thou have in thy rich body. And when thou shalt depart and
go to another world, you sh^lt go as poorly as I. And for thy riches nothing
may not be the better but only by thy good deeds and works. And though I be
bond, or son^e to a bond man, I am never the worse so that I live Godly and
truly and clenly after the course and nature of man. Such is the world, for some
be rich and some be poor, and some be fair and some foul. And at their end
they be all one of birth, of life, and of death, and of all other things of
the body. And not one better than another to God ward, but only by their good
works and deeds. And he that believes otherwise, believes folyouslye.

The king asked, which is the most delectable place in the world. Sydracke,
Answers.
THe most delectable place in the world, is there as the heart of man loves,
and has will to be, for and a man were in the fairest place of the world, and
had all that ever might be necessary and needful to him, and he loved
another place better, that fair place should like him naught, against the love
that he had into another place, how be it that it were right foul. And if a
man were in the most vylest and fowlest place that is, and he loved well that
place, yet he would think that it were the most d^lectable place in the world,
because that he loved it, and therefore we may say that the most delectable
place it the world is there as the heart loves and desires, be it fair or
foul.

The king asked, when all this word was all water, was their in ye water any
fysshe. Sydracke Answers
NAy forsooth, for when God mad other creatures he made all fyshes, for in the
water there was no creature mouable, nor other creatures nor none other things
but great Tenebres and derkenes, and in that water was the holy ghost, as a
great light. And wit yewel without doubt that no Aungel nor Archaungell nor no
creatur that ever was, nor is, nor shall be, could not from that time forward
know all the puyssaunce and the might of God our creatoure.

The king asked, whether is more the grauel of the earth, or the drops of
water of the sea. Sydracke, An.
THe Gravel of the earth is much more tha^ be the drops of the water of the sea. For one handefull of Gravel, mounteth a great quantyte of drops of
water. For the very small Sand and Gravel is much smaller then the drops
of water. And the water may not be in no part, but she be upon the earth and
upon the Gravel, and the Gravel sustayneth the water and bears it. And in
many places in the world, Gravel is right great and right hard in many parts
of the world that a man shall find no drop of water, and in the depest of the sea, it can not be so deep but that there is Grauel and earth under the most
depest. And therefore there is for one drop of water a.C. of Gravel. For all
the water in ye world rests upon earth and upon Gravel, and often times when
a man takes away the earth he fyndeth water, the hard Rock, and that Rock
stands upon Gravel. And for this reason, and for the smalnes of the Gravel,
and for the most part where there is much Gravel, there is no drop of water.
Therefore the Gravel is much more the^ the drops of water in the sea. But ye
shall understand that we speak not of the water, yt sustayneth and bears all
the earth in the world.

The king asked might a man no^bre the drops of the water of the sea or the
Gravel of the earth. Sydracke, Answers.
AND the world were greater the^ it is a.M. times, and a.M and were all ferme
earth, and that it dured a.M. times a.M. year going and were all enhabyted with
folks, the day and the night he.xxiiij. hours, and every hour is a.M. lxxx.
poynctes, and in every poyncte were borne a.M. M. times men, and as many women,
and they were all full of here, and for every here should have a.M. M. times
drops. of water of the sea. Yet the drops of the sea water. And yet the
myserycorde and the mercy of God is more then the one and the other, or all
other things yt be in yt world or were or shall be unto them that seek to have
it and deserve it.

The king asked, which of the.vij. planettes governed the world before the
time of Noes flodde. Sydracke, Answers.
BEfore the time of Noes flodde there were.ij. Planettes that governed the
world. And tho were Saturnus and Jupiter: and Mars began to govern yt world
before that flod.CC. xliiij. year, for fro the beginning of Adam to the time of
Noe it was ij. M. cc. xliiij. year. And the.ij. M. year governed Saturus and
Jupiter, eueryche of them a.M. year. And Mars began to govern the world
before the flod of Noe.CC. xliiij. year. And after Noes flod. Mars governed ty^
his.M. year were ended, yt is to wit, he governed after the fled.vii. C. lvi.
year. And now in out time Soll governs the world, and thus shall end all
the other Planettes, for eueryche of the^ shall govern the world a.M. year by
the will and commandment of God. And when these.vij. M. year be passed and
and gone, from thense forth the world shall dure at the will, pleasure and
commandment, of almighty God, for ferther I cannot say.

The king asked, of the goodness and harm that comes of wine. Sydracke,
Answers.
NOble King Alexandre, forget not to take tarte syropes in the morning
fasting when flumatyke humors abound to much. For it is profitable and
wastes them much also I marvel that any man may dye or be sick yt eats
bread of clean and good wheete, wholesome and good flesh, and drink good wine
of grapes temperatly. And if he keep him fro to much drynkyng, eating, and
travail. If syckenes overcome such a man he must be healed as a dronken man.
That is to wit he must be washed with warm water and than set over a rennyng
water betwne.ij. grene wylowes, and his stomach anointed with an ointment of
sandres, or sa^dalles, and have a fumygacion of frankensence, and other sweet
spices, and it will do him much good: and if any man will forsake holy the
drynkyng of wine ought not to leave in suddenly at ones but little and ly^^^,
and to mengle it every day with water more and more, till at last there de
nothing but clear water: and so he may keep his health and good co^plection.
Th^^^ govern thy body if thou wylt live long, and keep my doctrynes, and
consydre these things following wherein nature comforts greatly. That is to
wit goodly pastymes, sight of great richesses great reverence, victory over
enemies, fedynge on good meats, noise of mynstralsy, sight of precious
garments, often herynge of good tidings speech of wise men, to enquere of
things past and to come, and co^munycacion with fair gentylwomen.

FINIS.
Imprinted by me Robert Wyer, dwelling in the Duke of Suffolkes Rentes, beside
chatynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.


