The Fardle of facions containing the aunciente manners, customs, and Laws, of
the peoples enhabiting the two parts of the earth, called Affrike and Asie.

Printed at London, by Ihon Kingstone, and Henry Sutton.

1556

To the right honorable the Erie of Arundel, Knight of the order, and Lord
Steward of the Quienes majesty's most honorable householde.
AFtre what time the barrein traueiles of long service, had driven me to
think liberty the best reward of my simple life, right honorable Earl and
that I had determined to leave wrastlyng with fortune, and to give my self
wholly to live upon my study, and the labors of my hand: I thought it most
sitting with the duty that I owe to God and manne, to bestow my time (if I
could) as well to the profit of other, as of my self. Not coveting to make of
my floudde, another man's ebb (the Cancre of all commune wealths) but rather
to set other a flote, where I my self struck on ground. Tourning me
therefore, to the search of wisdom and virtue, for whose sake either we
toss, or ought to toss so many papers and tongues: although I found about
my self, very little of that Threasure, yet remembered I that a few years
paste, at the instaunce of a good Citezein (who might at those days, by
authority command me) I had begone to translate, a little book named in
the Latin, Omnium gentium mores, gathered long sense by one Johannes Boemus,
a man as it appears, of good judgment and diligence. But so corrupted in
the Printing, that aftre I had wrasteled a space, with sondrie Printes, I
rather determined to lose my labor of the quartre translacion, then to be
shamed with the haulf. And throwing it a side, intended no further to weary my
self therwithall, at the least until I might find a book of a bettre
impressio^. In searching whereof at this my return to my study, although I
found not at the full that, that I sought for: yet vndrestanding among the
book sellers (as one talk bringes in another) that men of good learning and
eloquence, both in the French, and Italien tongue, had not thought skorne to
bestow their time about the translacion thereof, and that the Emperors
Majesty that now is, vouchedsaulfe to receive the presentation thereof, at the
French translatours hand, as well appears in his book: it kindled me
again, upon regard of mine own profit, and other menues more, to bring that
to some good point, that erst I had begone. For (thought I) seeing the book
has in it, much pleasant barie^^e of things, and yet more profit in the
pitthe: if it fail to be otherwise rewarded, it shall it thanckefully of the
good be regarded. Wherefore setting upon it a fresshe, where the book is
divided acording to thaunciente division of the earth, into three parts,
Affrique, Asie, and Europe: having brought to an end the two first parts, I
found no person in mine opinion so fit^e as your honor, to present them
unto. For seeing the whole process ronneth upon governance and Laws, for
thadministracion of commune wealths, in peace and in war, of aunciente times
to fore our great graundfathers days: to whom might I bettre present it,
then to a Lord of very nobility and wisdom, that has been high
Mare-shalle in the field abroad, deputy of the lock and keie of this realm,
and a counsailour at home, of three worthy princes. Exercised so many ways in
the waves of a sickle Commune wealth: troubled sometime, but never
disapoincted of honorable success. To your good Lordeshippe then I yield and
commit, the first fruictes of my liberty, the first croppe of my labors,
this first day of the New year: beseching the same in as good part to
receive it, as I humbly offer it, and at your pleasure to unfold the Fardle,
and considre the stuff. Which ever the farther in, shall fieme I trust the
more pleasant and fruictefulle. And to conclude, if I shall ondresra^de, that
your honor delights in this, it shall be a cause sufficient, to make me go
in hand with Europe, that yet remains untouched. Almighty God give unto
your Lordeshippe prosperous fortune, in sound honor and health.

Your Lordshippes most humbly at commandment. William Watreman.

The Preface of the Author.
I HAVE sought out at times, as laisure has served me, Good reader, the manners
and facio^s the Laws, Customs and Rites, of all such peoples, as seemed
notable, and worthy to be put in remembrance, together with the situario^ and
descripcio^ of their habitatio^s: which the father of Stories Herodotus the
Greek, Diodorus, the Siciliane, Berosus, Strabo, Solinus, Trogus Pompeius,
Ptolomeus, Plinius, Cornelius the still, Dionysius the Afriane, Po^ponius Mela,
Caesar, Josephus, and certain of the later writers, as Vincentius, and Aeneas
Siluius (which aftreward made Pope, had to name Pius the second) Anthony
Sabellicus, Ihon Nauclerus, Ambrose Calepine, Nicholas Perotte, in his cornu
copiae, and many other famous writers each one for their part, as it ware
skatered, and by piece meal, se^ furthe to posterity. Those I say have I
sought out, gathered together, and acordyng to the order of the story and
time, digested into this little pack. Not for the hongre of gain, or the
ticklyng desire of the peoples vain brute, and vnskilfulle commendacion: but
partly moved with the opportunity of my laisure, and the wondrefull profit and
pleasure, that I conceived in this kind of study my self, and partly that
other also delightyng in stories, might with little labor, find easily when
they would, the sum of things compiled in one Book, that they ware wont
with tediousnes to sieke in many. And I have shocked them up together, as well
those of auncience time, as of later years, the lewd, as well as the virtuous
indifferently, that vsyng the^ as present examples, and paternes of life, thou
may with all thine endeavor follow the virtuous and godly, and with as much
warenes eschew the vicious and ungodly. Yea, that thou may further, my
(reader) learn to discern, how men have in these days amended the rude
simplicity of the first world, from Adam to the flood and many years after,
when men lived skateryng on the earth, without knowledge of Money, or what
coignement, or Merchauntes trade: no manner of exchau^ge, but one good turn
for another. When no man claimed aught for his seueralle, but land and water
ware as common to al, as Air and Sky. When they gaped not for honor, ne
hunted after richesse, but each man contented with a little, passed his days in
the wild field, under the open heaven, the couerte of some shadowie Tree, or
slendre houelle, with such companion or companio^s as siemed them good, their
diere babes and children about them. Sound without carcke and in restfull
quietness, eating the fruictes of the field, and the milk of the cattle, and
drinking the waters of the christalline springes. First clad with the soft
barcke of trees, or the fair broad leaves, and in process with raw fell
and hide, full vnworkemanly patched together. Not then environed with walls,
ne pente up with rampers, and diches of deapthe, but walking at free skope
among the wanderyng beasts of the field, and where the night came upon them,
there taking their lodgyng without fear of murderer or thief. Merry at the
fulle, as without knowledge of the euilles yt aftre ensued as ye world waxed
elder, through diverse desires, and contrary endeavors of men. Who in
process for the insufficientie of the fruictes of the earth, (which she tho
gave untilled) and for default of other things, ganne fall at disquiete and
debate among themselves, and to auoied the invasion of beasts, and men of
strange borders, (whom by themselves they could not repelle) gathered into
companies, with commune aid to withstand such encursions and violence of
wrong. And so ioynyng in confederacy, planted themselves together in a plotte,
assigned their bounds, framed up cotages, one by another chieque, diked in
the^ selves, chase officers and governors, and devised laws, that they also
among theimselues might live in quiet. So beginning a rough pattern of tounes
and of Cities, that aftre ware labored to more curious finesse.

AND now ware they not contented, with the commodities of the fields and
cattle alone, but by diverse inuencions of handecraftes and sciences, and by
sondrie labors of this life, they sought how to win. Now began they tattempte
the sease with many devices, to transplante their progeny, and offspring into
places vnenhabited, and to enjoy the commodities of each others country, by
mutual trafficque. Now came the Ox to the yoke, the Horse to the draught, the
Metalle to the sta^pe, the Apparel to handsomnes, the Speech to more finesse,
the Behauour of men to a more calmness, the Fare more deintie, the Buildyng
more gorgeous, then habitours over all became milder and wittier, shaking of
(even of their own accord) the bruteshe outrages and stearne dealinges, yt
shamefully might be spoken of. Now refrained they from sleayng one of
another, from eating of each others flesh, from rape and open defiling of
mother, sister, and daughter indifferently, and fro many like abhominacions to
nature and honesty. They now marieng reason, with strength: and policy, with
might: where the earth was before forgrowen with bushes, and wooddes, stuffed
with many noisome beasts, drouned with meares, and with marshe, unfit to be
enhabited, waast and unhandsome in every condition: by witty diligence, and
labor, rid it from encombraunce, planed the roughes, dug up trees by the
roots, dried away the superfluous waters, brought all into leauelle, banished
barreinesse, and uncovered the face of the earth, that it might fully be seen,
converted the champeine to tillage, the plains to pasture, the valley to
meadow, the hills they shadowed with wooddes and with Vines. Then thruste they
in cultre and share, and with wide wounds of the earth, wan wine and corn
plenteously of the ground, that before scarcely gave them Akornes and Crabbes.
Then enhabited they more thick, and spread them selves over all, and buylte
every where. Of Tounes, they made cities, and of villages, Tounes. Castles upon
the rocks, and in the valleis made they the temples of the gods. The golden
graueled springes, they encurbed with Marble, and with trees right pleasantly
shadowed them about. From them they derived into cities and Tounes, the pure
fresh waters a great distaunce of, by conduicte of pipes and troughes, and
such other conueyaunce. Where nature had hidden the waters, out of sight,
they sancke wells of great deapth, to supply their lackes. Rivers, and
maigne floudes, which before with unbridled violence, oftymes ouerflowed the
neighboured about, to the destruction of their cattle, their houses, and
themselves: they restrained with bancques, and kept them in a course. And to
the end they might not only be vadable, but passed also with dry toote, they
devised means with piles of Timbre, and arches of stone, maulgre the rage of
their violent streams, to ground bridges upon them. Yea, the rocks of the
sea which for the daungier of the access, thought themselves exempte from
the dinte of their hand, when they perceived by experience they ware noyous to
sailers, with unspeakable labor did they overthrow and break into gobettes.
Hewed out haue^s on every strond, enlarged crieques, opened rodes, and dug
out her borowes, where their ships might ride saulfe fro the storm. Finally
they so labored, beautified, and perfeighted the earth, that at this day
compared with the former naturalle forgrowen wastenesse; it might well sieme
not to be that, but rather the Paradise of pleasure, out of the which, the
first paternes of mankind (Adam and Eve) for the trangression of Gods
precept, ware driven.

MEN also invented and found many witty sciences, and arts, many wondrefull
works, which when by practice of lettres, they had committed to books, and
laid up for posterity, their successors so woundered at their wisdoms, and
so reverenced their love and endeavors (which they spied to be meant toward
them, and the wealth of those that should follow of the^) that they thought the^
not blessed enough, with the estate of men mortalle, but so advanced their
fame, and wondered at their worthiness, that they wan them the honor and
name of Gods immortal.

THO began the Prince of the world, when men so began to delight in thadournyng of
the world, to sow upon the good siede, the pestilente Dernell, that as they
multiplied in nombre, so iniquity might increase, to disturb and confound
this blessed state.

FIRST, therefore when he had with all kind of wickedness belimed ye world, he
put into their heads, a curious search of the highest knowledge, and such as
depends upon destenie of things. And so practiced his pageauntes, by obscure
and doubtfully attempred Respo^cions, and voices of spirits, that after he had
fettred the world in the trauers of his toies, and launced into their hearts a
blind supersticion, and fear: he trained it whole to a wicked worship of many
gods and Goddesses, that when he ones had wiped clean out of mind the
knowledge and honor of one God everlasting, he might practice upon manne, some
notable mischief. Then set he up pilgrimages to deuilles, foreshewers of
things, that gave aduertisemente and answer to demaundes in sondrie wise. In
the Isle of Delphos one, in Euboea another, at Nasamone a third, and among the
Dodonians, the famous oaks, whose bows by the blastes of the wind resounded
to the ear, a manner of aduertifemente of deuellishe delusion. To the which
Idolles and Images of deuelles he stirred up men to do the honor (Helas) due
only to God. As to Saturn in Italy, to Jupiter in Landie, to Juno in Samos,
to Bacchus in India, and at Thebes: to Iris, and Ostris in Egipte: in old Troie
to Vesta: about Tritona in Aphrique to Pailas, in Germany and France to
Mercury, under the name of Theuthe: to Minerua at Athenes and Nimetto, to
Apollo in Delphos, Rhodes, Chio, Patara, Troade and Tymbra. To Diane in Delos
and in Srythia, to Venus in Paphos, Ciprus, Enydon, and Cithera. To Mars in
Thracia, to Priapus in Lampsacho of Hellespontus, to Vulcane in Typara and
Le^nos, and in diverse other places to sondrie other, whose remembrance was
then most fresh in the memory of their people, for the benefaictes and
merueilous inuencions bestowed among them.

AFTERWARD, also when Jesus Christ the very son of the almighty father,
showing himself in the flesh of our mortality, was conuersaunte in the
world, pointyng to the same, as with his Engre, the way to immortality, and
endelesse blessedness, and both with word and example, exhorted and allured
them to vprightnes of life, to the glory of his father, sendyng his disciples
and scolers into the universal world, to condemn Superstition and all error
of wickedness, with the most healthsome word: to plant true Religion, and
give new precepts, and directions of the life, and had now set the matier in
such forwardness and poincte, that the Gospel being generally of all nations
received, there lacked but continuance to perfeicte felicity: The deuell
eftesones retournyng to his natural malice, desirous to repossesse that, that
constrainedly he forsook, betrappyng again the curious conceipte of man, some
he reuersed into their former abuses and errors, and some with new Heresies
he so corrupted, snarled, and blinded, that it had been much bettre for them,
never almost to have known the way of truth, then after their entrance, so
rashely and malicioussy to have forsaken it.

AT this day in Asia the less, the Armenianes, Arabians, Persians, Siria^s,
Assirians, and Meades: in Aphrique, the Egipcians, Numidians, Libiens, and
Moors. In Europe, the whole country of Grecia, Misia^, Thracia, and all
Turquie throwyng away Christ, are become the folowers and worshippers of
Mahomet and his erroneous doctrine. The people of Scithia, whom we now call
Tartares (a great people and wide spread) part of them worship the Idolle of
their Emperor Kamme, part the Son, the Moon, and other Stars, and part
according to the Apostles doctrine, one only God. The people of Inde, and
Ethiope, under the governance of Presbiter Iho^ perseauer in Christian
godliness, howbeit after a sort, much different from ours.

The sincere and true faith of Christ, wherewith in time it pleased God to
illumine the world, remains in Germany, Italy, France, Spain, England,
Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Liuon, Pruse, Pole, Hungary, and the Isles of
Rhodes, Sicilie, Corsica, Sardinia, with a few other. This bitter ennemie of
mankind having thus with his subtilties enueiled our minds, and disseuered
the christian vnio^, by diversity of manners and facions of belief, has
brought to pass thorough this damnable wyckednes of Sacrifices, and Rites,
that whilst every people (undoubtedly with religious intent) endeavor them
selves to the worship of God, and echeone takes upon him to be the true and
best worshipper of him, and whilst echone think them selves to tread the
straight pathe of euerlastying blessedness, and conte^deth with eigre mode and
bitter dispute, that all other err and be led far a wrie: and whilst
every man strugglethe and strives to spread and enlarge his own sect, and to
overthrow others, they do so hate and envy, so persecute and annoy echone an
other, that at this day a man cannot safely trauaill from one country to
another: yea, they that would adventure saufely or vnsaufely, be almost every
where holde^ out. Whereof me thinks I see it is like to come to pass, that
whilst one people scant knows the name of another, (and yet almost
neighbors) all that shall this day be written or reported of them, shall be
compted and refused as lies. And yeat this manner of knowledge and experience,
is of it self so pleasant, so profitable and so praise worthy, that sundry (as
it is well known) for the only love and desire thereof, leauyng their native
country, their father, their mother, their wives and their children, yea,
throwyng at their heles their sauftie and welfare, have with great troubles,
vexations, and turmoilynges taken upon them for experience sake, to cut
through the wallowyng seas, and many thousand miles, to estraunge theimselues
fro their home. yea, and those men not in this age alone, but even from the
first hatchyng of the world have been reputed and found, of most wisdom,
authority, and good facion, sonest chosen with all men's consent, both in
peace and war, to administre the common wealth as masters and
counsaillours, Judges and Capicaines. Such ware thancient sages of Greece and
of Italy, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Antisthenes, Aristippus Zeno, and
Pythagoras, who through their wisdoms and estimacion for travails wan them
great nombres of folowers, and brought furthe in order the sects named
Socratici, Academici, Peripateci, Cynici, Cyrenaici, Stoici, and Pythagorici,
echone chosyng name to glory in his master. Such ware the prudente
lawe-makers of famous memory, Minois and Rhadamanthus among the Cretenses,
Orpheus among the Thraciens, Draco and Solon among the Athenienses, Licurgus
among the Lacedemonia^s, Moses among the Jews, and Zamolxis among the
Scythians, and many other in other stedes Which dreamed not their knowledge in
the benchehole at home, but learned of the men in the world most wise, the
Chaldeies, the Brachmanni, the Gymnosophites and the priests of Egipte, with
who^ they had for a space been co^uersant* Like glory, by like trauaill
happened to the worthies of the world, as to Jupiter of Crete (reported five
times to have surueied the whole world) and to his two sons Dionisius
(otherwise called Bacchus) and Hercules the mighty: Likewise to Theseus and
Jason, and the rest of that voyage. To the unlucky sailer Ulysses, and to the
banished Eneas, to Cyrus, Xerxes, and Alexander the Great, to Hanniballe and
Mithridate, king of Pontus, reported able to speak fifty so^drie languages,
to Antiochus, the great and innumerable Princes of Room, both of the
Scripioes, Marij, and Lentuli. To Pompeius the great, to Julius Caesar,
Octauian, and Augustus, to the Constantines, Charles, Conrades, He^rickes, and
Frederickes. Which all by their exploictes upon strange nations, have gotten
their immortal and everlasting renoume. Wherefore, seeing there is in the
knowledge of peoples, and of their manners and facions, so great pleasure and
profit, and every man cannot, yea, few men will, go traueile the countries
themselves: me thinks gentill reader, thou ought with much thank to
receive at my hand these books of the manners and facions of peoples most
notable and famous, together with the places which they enhabite: And with no
less cherefulnes to embrase them, then if being led on my hand from
country to country, I should poynct the at eye, how every people lives, and
where they have dwelte, and at this day do. Let it not move the, let it not
withdraw the, if any cankered reprehendour of other men's doings shall say
unto the: It is a thing has been written of, many years agone, and that by a
thousand sundry men, and yet he but borowyng their words, brings it
forth for a maiden book, and names it his own. For if thou well considre
my trade, thou shall find, that I have not only brought thee other men's old
store, but opened thee also the treasury of mine own wit and books, not
every where to be found, and like a liberal feaster have set before thee much
of mine own, and many things new. Farewell and thankefully take that, that
with labor is brought thee.

The first Chapter. The true opinion of the divine, concerning the beginning
of man.
WHen God had in.V. days made perfect the heavens and the earth, and the
furniture of both: which the latins for the goodlinesse and beauty thereof,
call Mundus, and we (I know not for what reason) have named the world: the
sixth day, to the intent there might be one to enjoy, and be Lord over all,
he made the most notable creature Man. One that of all earthly creatures
alone, is endowed with a mind, and spirit from above. And he gave him to name,
Adam: according to the color of the molde he was made of. Then drowyng out of
his side the woman, whilst he slept, to the end he should not be alone, knitte
her unto him, as an inseperable compaignion, and therewith placed them in the
most pleasant plot of the earth, fostered to flourishe with the moisture of
floudes on every part. The place for the fresshe grienesse and merry show,
the Greques name Paradisos. There lived they a while a most blessed life
without bleamishe of woe, the earth of the own accord bringing forth all thing.
But when they ones had transgressed the precepte, they ware banysshed that
enhabitaunce of pleasure and driven to shift the world. And fro thenceforth the
graciousnes of the earth was also abated, and the francke fertility thereof so
withdrawn, that labor and swette, now wan less a great deal, then idle
lokyng on before time had done. Shortly crepte in sickness, and diseases, and
the broyling heat and the nipping cold began to assail their bodies. Their
first son was Layin, and the second Abell, and then many other. And as the
world grew into years, and the earth began to wax thick peopled, look as
the nombre did encreace, so vices grew on, and their living decayed ever into
woors. For giltelesse dealyng, wrong came in place, for deuoutenesse, co^tempte
of the Gods, and so far outraged their wickedness, that God skarcely fynding
one just Noha on the earth (whom he saved, with his household, to repair the
loss of mankind and replenysshe the world) sent a floude universal. which
covering all under water, killed all flesh that bare life upon earth, except
a few beasts, birds, and worms that ware preserved in the mystical arc.
In the end of five Months aftre the floude began, the Arque touched on the
mou^teines of Armenia. And within four Months aftre, Noas and all his being
restored to the earth, with Gods furtheraunce in short space repeopled the
world. And to the end the same might every wheare again be enhabited, he
dispersed his issue and kyndredes into sondrie coasts. After Berosus opynion
he sent Cham otherwise, named Cameses and Chamesenuus with his offspring, into
Egipte. Into Lybia and Cirene, Triton. And into the whole residewe of Affrike
the ancient Iapetus called Attalus Priscus. Ganges he sent into East Asia with
certain of the sons of Comerus Gallus. And into Arabia the fertile, one
Sabus, surnamed Thurifer. Over Arabia the Waaste he made Arabus governor, and
Petreius over Petrea. He gave unto Canaan, all that lies fro Damasco to the
outemost bordre of Palestine. In Europe he made Tuisco king of Sarmat^a, from
the f^oude of Tanais unto the Rhene. And there were joined unto him all the
sons of Istrus, and Mesa, with their brethren, fro the mounteyne of Adula to
Mesemberia pontica. Archadius and Emathius governed the Tirianes, Comerus
Gallus, had Italy and France, Samothes, Briteigne and Normandy, and Iubal,
Spain. That spiedie and unripe puttyng forth of the children from their
progenitors, before they had thoroughly learned and enured them selves with
their facions and manners, was the cause of all the diversity that after
ensued. For Cham, by the reason of his naughty demeanor toward his father,
being constrained to depart with his wife and his children, planted him self
in that part of Arabia, that after was called by his name. And left no trade
of religion to his posterity, because he none had learned of his father. Where
of it came to pass, that when in process of time they ware increased to to
many for that land: being sent out as it ware, swarm aftre swarm into other
habitations, and skatered at length into sundry parts of the world (for this
banyished progeny grew above measure) some fell into errors wherout they could
never vnsnarle themselves. The tongue began to altre and the knowledge of the
true God and all godly worship vanished out of mind. Inso much that some
lived so wildely (as aftre thou shall here) that it ware hard to discern a
difference betwixt them and the beasts of the field. They that flieted into
Egypt, wonderyng at the beauty and course of the Son, and the Moon, as
though there had been in them a power divine, began to worship them as Gods:
calling the less, Isis and the bigger Osiris. To Jupiter also they Sacrificed,
and did honor as to ye principal of life. To Vulcan for fire, to Pallas, as
Lady of the sky, to Ceres as gouerneresse of the arth, and to sundry other for
other sundry considerations. Neither stayed that darkness of iniquity in
Egipte alone, but where so ever the progeny of Cham stepte in from the
beginning, there fell true godliness, all out of mind and abo^dage to the
deuell entered his place. And there never was country, mother of more swarms of
people, then that part of Arabia, that he, and his, chase to be theirs. So
great a mischief did the untimely banishemente of one manne, bring to the
whole. Co^trarily the progeny of Iapheth, and Sem, brought up to full years
under their elders, and rightly enstructed: contentyng the^ selves with a little
circuit, straied not so wide as this brother had done. Whereby it chanced
that the zeal of the truth, (I mean of good living and true worship of one
only God) remained as hidden in one only people, until the time of Messiah.

The second Chapitre. The false opinion of the Philosophre concerning the
beginning of man.
But the aunciente Philosophers, which without knowledge of God, and his
truth, many years ago, wrate upon the natures of things, and thistories of
times had another opinion of the original of man. For certain of them,
believed the world ever to have been, and that ever it should be, and man
together with it to have had no beginning. Certain did hold that it had a
beginning, and an end it should have, and a time to have been, when man was
not. For say they, the begynner of things visible, wrapped up both heaven
and earth at one instant, together in one pattern, and so a distinction growyng
on betwixt these meynte bodies, the world to have begone in such order as we
see. The air by nature to be continually mouyng, and the most fiery parie of
the same, for the lightenesse thereof, most high to have climbed. So that
son and Moon, and the planetes all, participatyng of the nature of that
lighter substance: move so much the faster, in how much they are of the more
subtle part. But that which was mixed with waterie moisture, to have rested
in the place, for the heaviness thereof, and of the watery parts, the sea to
have comen: and the matier more compacte to have passed into a clamminesse
first, and so into earth. This earth then brought by ye heat of the son
into a more fastenesse. And after by the same power puffed and swollen in the
vppermoste part, there gathered many humors in sundry places, which drawing
to ripeness enclosed them selves in slymes and in filmes, as in the maresses
of Egypt, and other stondynge waters we often se happen. And seeing the heat
of thaier sokyngly warmeth the cold ground and heat meint with moisture is apt
to engendre: it came to pass by the gentle moisture of the night air, and the
comforting heat of the day son, that those humors so riped, drawyng up to
the rind of the arth, as though their time of childbirthe ware come, brake out
of their filmes, and delivered upon the earth all manner of living things.
Among which those that had in the^ most heat, became fowls into the air:
those that ware of nature more earthie, became worms and beasts of sondrie
kinds: and where water surmounted, they drew to the elemente of their kind,
and had to name fisshes. But afterward the earth being more parched by the
heat of the Son, and the drouthe of the winds, ceased to bring furthe any
mo great beasts: and those that ware already brought furthe, (say they)
maintained, and increased by mutualle engendrure, the variety, and nombre. And
they are of opinion that in the same wise, men ware engendered in the beginning.
And as nature put them forth among other beasts, so lived they at the first
an unknown life wyldely among them, upon the fruictes, and the herbs of the
fields. But the beasts aftre a while waxing noisome unto them, they ware
forced in commune for each others sauftie to draw into companies to resist
their anoyaunce, one helping another, and to sieke places to make their abiding
in. And where at the first their speech was confuse, by little and little they
said it drew to a distinctenesse, and perfeighte difference: in sort that
they ware able to give name to all things. But for that they ware diuersely
sparckled in diverse parts of the world, they hold also that their speech
was as diverse and different. And hereof to have aftreward risen the diversity
of lettres. And as they first assembled into bands, so every band to have
brought forth his nation. But these men at the first void of all help and
experience of living, ware bittrely pinched with hongre and cold, before they
could learn to reserve the superfluous plenty of the Somer, to supply the
lack of Winters barreinesse, whose bitter blastes, and ho^grie pinynges,
consumed many of them. which thing when by experience dear bought, they had
learned: they sought both for Caves to defend them fro cold, and began to
hourde fruictes. Then hap found out fire, and reason gave rule of profit,
and disprofite, and necessity took in hand to set wit to school. Who
gatheryng knowledge, and perceiuyng himself to have a help of his senses, more
skillful then he thought, set hand a work, and practiced connyng, to supply
all defaultes, which tongue and lettres did enlarge and distribute abroad.

THEY that had this opinion of the original of man, and ascribed not the
same to the providence of God, affirmed the Ethopiens to have been the first
of all men. For they coniectured that the ground of that country liyng
nierest the heates of the Son must needs first of all other wax warm. And
the earth at that time being but clammie and soft, through the attemperaunce
of that moisture and heat, man there first to have been fourmed, and there to
have gladlier enhabited (as native and natural unto him) then in any other
place, when all places ware as yet strange, and unknown, which aftre men
sought. Beginning therefore at them, after I have showed how the world is
divided into three parts (as also this treatise of mine) and have spoken a
little of Aphrique, I will show the situacion of Aethiope, and the manners of
that people, and so forth of al other regions and peoples, with such
diligence as we can.

The third Chapitre. The division and limits of the Earth.
THose that have been before our days, (as Orosius writes) are of opinion,
that the circuit of the earth, bordered about with the Occean Sea: disroundyng
him self, shoots out three corner wise, and is also divided into three several
parts, Afrike, Asie, and Europe. Afrike is parted from Asie with the floude of
Nilus, which coinyng fro the Southe, ronneth through Ethiope into Egipte.
where gently sheadyng himself over his baneques, he leaves in the country a
merueilous fertility, and passes into the middle earth sea, with seven arms.
From Europe it is separate with the middle earth sea. which beginning fro the
Occean before say deat the Istande of Gades, and the pilours of Hercules,
passes not ten miles over. But further entryngin, ^semeth to have shooued of
the maighe land on both sides, and so to have won a^^ore largeness. Asie is
divided from Europe, with Tanais the floude, which coming fro the North,
ronneth into the marshe of Meotis almost mid way, and there sincking himself,
leaves the marshe and Pontus Eurinus, for the rest of the bound. And to
return to Afrike again, the same having Nilus as I said on the East, and on
all other parts, bounded with the sea, is shorter then Europe, but broader
toward the Occean, where it rileth into mounteigne. And shoryng toward the
Weste, by little and little waxes more streighte, and comes at the end to a
narowe poincte. As Much as is enhabited thereof, is a plentuous soil, but the
great part of it lies waste, void of enhabitauntes, either to whote for
men to abide, or full of noisome and venomous vermin, and beasts, or else
so whelmed in sand and gravel, that there is nothing but more barreinesse.
The sea that lies on the Nor the part, is called Libicum, that on the Southe
Aethiopicum, and the other on the West Atlanticum.

AT the first the whole was possessed by four sondrie peoples. Of the which,
twain (as Herodotus writes) ware found there, time out of mind, and the
other twain ware alienes and incommes. The two of continuance, ware the
Poenj, and Ethiopes, which dwelte, the one at the North of the land, the
other at the South. The Alienes, the Phoenices the Greeks, the old Ethiopians,
and the Aegipcianes, if it be true that they report of themselves. At the
beginning they ware stern, and unruly, and bruteshely lived, with herbs and
with flesh of wild beasts, without law or rule, or facio^ of life, roilyng
and rowmyng upon head, heather and thither without place of abode, where night
came upon them, there laiyng their bodies to rest. Aftrewarde (as they say)
Hercules passing the seas out of Spain, into Libie (a country on the North
shore of Afrike) and bringyng an overplus of people thence with him, somewhat
bettre facioned and manered then they, trained them to much more humanity.
And of ye troughes they came over in, made themselves cotages, and began to
plant in plompes one by another. But of these things we shall speak here
afire more at large.

Afrike is not in every place a like enhabited. For toward the Southe it lies
for the most part waste, and unpeopled, for the broilyng heat of that
quartre. But the part that lies over against Europe, is very well enhabited.
The frutefulnesse of the soil is excedyng, and to much merueillous: as in
some places bringyng the siede with a hundred fold increase. It is strange to
believe, that is said of the goodness of the soil of the Moors. The stock
of their vines to be more then two men can fadome, and their clousters of
Grapes to be a cubite long. The coronettes of their Pasnepes, and Gardein
Thistles (which we call Hortichockes) as also of their Fenelle, to be twelve
Cubits compass. They have Cannes like unto those of India, which may contein
in the compass of the knot, or iointe, the measure of. ij. bushelles. There be
seen also Sparagi, of no less notable bigguenesse. Toward the mount Atlas
trees be found of a wondrefull height, smothe, and without knaggue or knotte,
up to the hard top, having leaves like the Cypres, but of all other the most
noble Citrus, whereof the Romans made great deintie. Affrike has also many
sondrie beasts, and Dragones that lie in awaite for the beasts, and when they
see time, so bewrappe and wreathe them about, that taking fro them the use of
their ioynctes, they weary them and kille them. There are Elephantes, Lions,
Bugles, Pardales, Roes, and Apes, in some places beyond nombre. There are also
Chamelopardales and Rhizes, like unto Bulls. Herodote writes, that there be
found Asses with horns, Hienas Porpe^tines, wild Rambes, a beast engendered
of the Hie^e and the Woulfe named Thoas, Pantheres, Storckes, Oistruthes, and
many kinds of serpents, as Cerastes, and Aspides, against whom nature has
matched the Ichneumon (a very little beast) as a mortal ennemie.

The.iiij. Chapitre. Of Ethiope, and the ancient manners of that nation.
Cap.iiii.
TWo countreies there ware of that name Ouerlanders, and Netherlanders. The one
pertainyng to Aphrique, the other to Asie. The one which at this day is
called Inde, has on the east the red sea, and the sea named Barbaricum, on
the north it touches upon Egypt, and upon that Libie that stands on the
utter border of Afrike toward the sea. On the west it is bounded with the other
Libie that stands more into the main land. The residue that runs toward
the south, joins upon the netherland Ethiope, which lies more southerly,
and is much greater. It is thought that these Ethiopes took name of Ethiopus
Vulcanes son, that (as Pliny says) was governor there. Or else of the
Greek words aythoo and ops, whereof the former signifies to broyle, or to
bourne up with heat, and the other, in the eye or sight. Which shows in
effect, that the countreie lyeng in the eye of the Son, it must needs be of
heat almost importable. As in diede it lies in the full course of the son,
and is in continual heat. Toward the weast it is hilly, in the mids gravel
and sand, and on the east waste and deserte. There be in it diverse peoples of
sundry phisonomy and shape, monstrous and of hugly show. They are thought (as
I said) to have been the first of all men, and those which of all other may
truelyest be called an home-borne people. Never under the bondage of any: but
ever a free nation. The first way of worshippyng God (say they) was devised
and taught emonge them: with the manners and ceremonies there to appertinent.
They had two kinds of letters, one, which ware known only to their priests
for matters of Religion, which they called mystical, and another for the use
of the people hidden from none. Yeat ware not their Letters facioned to join
together in sillables like ours, but Ziphres, and shapes of men and of beasts,
of heads, and of arms, and artificers tools, which signified in sondrie
wise echone according to his property. As by the picture of an hawk swiftenes
and spiede, by the shape of a crocodile displeasure or misfortune, by the
figure of an eye, good watch or regard, and so forth of other. Among their
priests, look whom they saw startle about as haulfe wood, him did they
judge of all other most holy, and making him their king, they fall down and
worship him, as though there ware in him a Godhead, or as though at the least
he ware by gods providence given them. This king for all that, must be
governed by the law, and is bound to all things after thordre of the contry.
He his self may neither punish or guerdon any manne. But look upon whom he
will have execucion done, he sends the minister appoincted for the purpose, to
the person with a token of death: which when he has showed, the officier
retourneth, and the person what soever he be, incontinent fordoeth him self.
So greatly ware they given to thee honor of their kings, such a feruencie
had they toward them, that if it fortuned the king through any mishap, to be
maimed or hurt in any part of his body, as many as ware toward him, namely
of householde, voluntarily would give them selves the like hurt, thincking it
an unsitting thing the king to lack an eye or the use of a leg, and his
frindes neither to halt, ne yet to lack part of their sight. They say it is
the manier also, that when the king dies, his friends should wilfully
dispatche them selves and die with him, for this compte they glorious and a
testimony of very friendship. The most part of them, for that they lie so under
the Son, go naked: covering their priuities with shiepes tails. But a feawe
of them are clad with the raw felles of beasts. Some make them brieches of
the hears of their heads up to the waeste. They are commonly brieders and
grasiers in commune together. Their sheep be of very small body, and of a hard
and rought coat. Their dogs also are never a whitte bigger, but they are
fierce and hardy. They have good store of gromel and harly, whereof they use to
make drink. All other grain and fruictes they lack, except it be dates
which also are very skante. Some of them live with herbs and the tender
roots of cannes or Riedes. Other eat flesh, milk, and these. Meroe, was in
time past the head city of the kingdom, which stondeth in an Isse of the
same name facioned like a shield, stretching it self three thousand furlong
alongest by Nilus. About that Islande do the cattle masters dwell, and are
much given to hunting, and those that be occupied with tilthe of the ground
have also mines of gold. Herodotus writes that thethiopians named Macrobij, do
more effieme lacton then they do gold which they put to nothing that they
co^pt of any price. In so much that the Ambassadors of Cambises, when they
came thither, found the prisoners in the jail fettred and tied with Chains of
gold. Some of them sow a kind of grain called Sesamus, and other the
delicate Lotho^. They have great pleaty of Hebenum, a wood much like
Guaiacum, and of Siliquastrum. They hunte Elephantes and kill them to eat.
There be Lions, Rhinocerotes, Basiliskes, Pardales, and Dragones, which I said
enwrappe the lephauntes, and suck them to death, for their blood. There be
found the precious stones called the Iacinthe, and the Prasne. There is also
cinamome gathered. They occupy bows of wood seasoned in the fire, of four
cubits long. Women be also trained to the wars, and have for the most part
a ring of lation hanging through their lip. Certain of them worship the
Son at his vprijste, and curse him most bittrely at his down gate. Diverse
of the^ throw their dead into Rivers, other cofer them up in earthen cofres,
some enclose them in glass, and keep them in their houses a year, and in the
mean season worship them devoutly, and offer unto them the first of all their
encreace. In the naming of a new king, they give there voice chiefly to him
that is most goodly of stature, most conning in brieding of cattle, and of
strength and substance passing the reast. The law has been, that the
priests of Memphis should have the authority to send the King the token
of death, and to set up another in the place of the dead, whom they thought
good. They have an opinion that there are two Gods, one immortal, by whom
all things have their beginning, and continuance under his government, and
another mortal, and he is uncertain.

Their king, and him that best deserves of the city next unto him, they honor
as Gods. This was the state of Ethiope from the beginning, and many years
sense.

BUT at this day as mine Author Sabellicus says ye he learned of those that
are enhabitantes in ye country: The king of Ethiope (whom we commonly call
Pretoianes or Presbiter Ihon) is a man of such power, that he is reported to
have under him three skore and two other kings. If the head Bysshoppes of the
Realm desire to do, or to have aughte done, al is referred unto him. Of him be
given al benefits, and spiritual promocions, which prerogative the Pope has
given, to the majesty of kings. Yet is he him self no priest, ne has any
manner of ordres. There is of Archebisshoppes (that is to say of superior and
head bisshoppes) a great nombre, which have every one under them at the least
twenty other. The Princes, Dukes, Earls, and head Bisshoppes, and such other
of like dignity, when they come abroad, have a cross, and a basine of gold
filled full of earth carried before them: that the one may put them in
remembrance that earth into earth must again be resolved, and ye other renew
the memory of Christ's suffering. Their priests to have issue, mary one wife,
but she ones being dead, it is unlawful to mary another.

The temples and churches there, are much larger, much richer, and more
gorgeous then ours, for the most part voulted from the floor to the top.
They have many ordres of devout men, much like to our ordres of Religious: as
the order of S, Anthony, Dominique, Calaguricant, Augustines, and Machareanes,
which are bound to no color but we are some such one as Tharchebysshoppe
shall allow. Next unto the supreme and sovereign GOD, and Mary the virgin
his mother, they have most in honor Thomas surnamed Didimus. This King, of
all other the worthiest, whom they call Gias (a name given him of his
mightiness and power) is of the blood of David, continued from one generation
to another (as they are persuaded) by so many years of succession. And he is
not as the most of the Ethiopians are, black, but white. Garama the chief
city, and as we term it the chamber of the king, stondeth not by building of
masonrie, and carpentrie as ours, but strieted with tents and pauilions placed
in good order, of deluet and saten, embrauded with silks and purples of many
diverse sorts. By an ancient order of the realm, the king lives ever in
presence and sight of his people, and never soiourneth within the walls above
two days. Either for that they judge it an uncomely thing, and a token of
delicate slouthfulnes, or else for that some law does forbid it. His army in
the wars is ten hundred thousand men, five hundred Elephantes, and horses,
and Cameles, a wonderful number, and this is but a mean preparacion.

There are througheout the whole nation certain houses and stocks, that are
pe^cionaries at arms, whose issue is as it ware branded with the marcke of the
cross, ye skin being pretely s^it^e. They use in the wars, Bow, Pique,
Habregeon, and helmette. Their highest d^gnitie is priest hode, ye next,
thordre of the Sages, which they call Balsamates, and Ta^quates. They attribute
much also to the giltelesse and vprighte dealing man, which virtue they
est^eme as the first staier toclimbe to ye dignity of the sages. The
nobility has the third place of dignity, and the pe^cionaries aforesaid,
the fourth. When the judges have given sentence of life, or of death, the
sencence is brought to the headborough of the City (whom we call the Mayour)
and they Licomegia: he supplieth the place of the King. Laws written they
occupy none, but judge according to reason and co^stience. If any man be
con^ict of adultery he forfeicteth the fourtieth part of his goods, but
thadulteresse is punished at home, according to the discretion of the party
offended. The men give dowry to those whom they mary withal, but not to those
ye they purchase besides. Their women's attire is of Gold, (whereof that
country has plenty) of pearl, and of Sarsenette. Both men and women are
apparelled in long garments down to the foot, slieued, and close round
about of al manner of colors, sauig only black for that in that contry is
proper for morning. They bewail their dead. xl. days space. In bancquettes of
honor, in the place of our fruicte (which the larine calls the second
boorde) they serve in raw flesh very finely minced and spiced, whereupon the
gestes fiede very licouricely. They have no manner of woollen web, but are
either cladde in sarsenettes, or in linen. One manner of speech serves not
througheout the whole contry, b^t sundry and diverse, as well in phrase as in
namig of things. They have twice in the year harvest, and twice in the year
somer. These Ethiopians or Indianes excepted, all the rest of the people of
Libia Westward, are worshippers of Mahomet, and live aftre the same sort in
manner, that ye Barbariens do in Egipte at this present, and are called Maures,
or Moors, as I think of their outleapes and wide rowming. For that people
was no less noisome to Lybie in those cursed times (when so great mutation of
things happened, when peoples ware so changed, such alteration of service,
and religion brought in, and so many new names given unto contries) then the
Sarasens ware.

The. v. Chapter. Of Aegipte, and the ancient manners of that people.
AEgipte is a Country liyng in Affrike, or as some hold opinto^, borderyng
thervpo^, so named of Aegiptus, Danaus brother, where before it was called
Aeria. This Aegipte (as Pliny records in his fiueth book) toutheth on the
East, upon the red Sea, and the land of Palestine, On the West fronteth upon
Cirene, and the residue of Afrike. On the South it stretches to Ae thiope: And
on the Nor the is ended with the sea, to whom it gives name.

The notable Cities of that Country, ware in time past, Thebes, Abydos,
Alexandrie, Babylon, and Memphis, at this day called Damiate, alias Chairus or
Alkair, and the seat of the Solda^, a city of notable largeness. In Aegipt
as Plato affirms, it was never seen rain. But Nilus suppliyng that defaulte,
yearly about saint Barnabies tide, with his ouerflowynges makes the soil
fertile. It is nombred of the most part of writers, among the Islandes: For
that Nilus so parts himself about it, that he facioneth it triangle wise.

The Aegiptians first of all other, devised the names of the twelve Gods,
builte up Altares, and Images, erected Chappelles, and Temples, and graued in
stone the similitude of many sondrie beasts. All which their doings, do
manifestly make, that they came of the Aethiopes, who (as Diodore the Sicilian
says) ware the first inuentours of all these. Their women in old time, had
all the trade of occupiyng, and brokage abroad, and reuelled at the Tavern,
and kept iustie chiere: And the men satte at home spinnyng, and woorkyng of
Lace, and such other things as women are wont. The men bare their burdeins
on the head, the women on the shulder. In the easemente of urine, the men
rowked down, the women stood vprighte. The easemente of ordure they used at
home, but commonly feasted abroad in the streets. No woman took ordres, either
of God, or Goddess. Their manner of ordres, is not to make severally for every
Goddess and God, a several priest, but al at a shuffe, in general for all.
Among the which, one is an head, whose son enheriteth his room by
succession. The men children, even of a custom of that people, did with good
will keep their fathers and mothers, but the women children (if they refused it)
ware compelled. The most part of men in solemn burialles, shave their heads
and let their beardes grow, but Thegiptians shaued their beardes and let their
heads grow. They wrought their doughe with their fiete, and their claye with
their hands. As the Greciens do believe, this people, and their offspring, are
they that used circumcision. They order their writing from their right hand
toward their left, contrary to us. It was the manner emonge them, that the
men should we are two garments at ones, the women but one, As the Aethiopes
had, so learned they of them, two manner of lettres: the one several to the
priests the other used in commune. Their priests, every third day shaued
their bodies, that there might be none occasion of filthiness when they should
ministre, or sacrifie. They did wear garments of linen, ever clean washed,
and white: and shoes of a certain kind of russhes, named Papyrus, which
aftre became stuff, to give name to our paper They neither set bean their
selves, ne eat them where soever they grew: no the priest may not look upon a
bean, for that it is judged an unclean pulls. They are washed every day in
cold water thrice, and every night twice. The heads of their sacrifices (for
that they used to curse them with many terrible words) did they not eat, but
either the priests sold them to such strangiers as had trade emonge them, or
if there ware no such ready in time, they threw them in to Nilus.

All the Egiptians offer in sacrifice, neither cow, ne cow calfe, because
they are hallowed to Isis their goddess, but bulls, and bulle calves, or
oxen, and stieres. For their meat they use, much a kind of pancake made of
rye meal. For lack of grapes they use wine made of Barley. They live also with
fisshe, either dried in the Son and so eaten raw, or else kept in pikle.
They fiede also upon birds, and fowls, first salted, and then eaten raw.
Quail, and mallard, are not but for the richer sort. At all solemn suppers,
when a number is gathered, and the tables withdrawn, some one of the company
carries about in an open case, the image of death, caruen out of wodde, or
drawn with the pencille as niere to the vine as is possible, of a cubite, or
two cubits long at the most. Who showing it about to every of the gestes,
says, look here: drink, and be merry, for aftre thy death, such shall thou
be. The younger if they miete their ancient, or bettre, upon the way, give
them place, going somewhat aside: or if the aunciente fortune to come in place
where they are sitting, they arise out of their seat. wherein they agree with
the Lacedemonie^s. When they miete in the way, they do reverence to each
other, bowing their bodies, and letting fall their hands on their knees. They
wear long garments of lynnen, hemmed about the skirtes beneth, which they
call Casiliras: over the which they throw on another white garment also.
Woollen apparelle they neither wear to the church, ne bewry any man in.

Now forasmoche as they before time that ever excelled in any kind of
learning, or durst take upon them to prescribe law, and rule of life unto
other, as Orpheus, Homere, Museus, Melampode, Dedalus, Licurgus, Solon, Plato,
Pithagoras, Samolxis, Eudoxus, Democritus, Inopides, and Moses the Hebrew, with
many other, whose names the Egiptians glory to be cronicled with them:
traueiled first to the Egiptians, to learn emo^gest them both wisdom, and
politic order (wherein at those days they passed all other) me thinks it
pleasant and necessary also, to stand somewhat upon their manners,
ceremonies and Laws, that it may be known what they, and sundry more have
borrowed of the^, and translated unto other. For (as Philip Beroalde writes in
his commentary upon Apuleius book, entitled the Golden Ass) the most part
of the devices that we use in our Christian religion, ware borrowed out of the
manner of Thegiptians. As surpluis and rochet, and such linen garments:
shaven crowns, tourninges at the altar, our mass solemn puities, our or
ganes, our knielinges, crouchinges, prayers, and other of that kind. The
kings of Egipte (says Diodore the Sicilian in his second book) lived not
at rouers as other kings do, as thonghe me lusts ware law, but both in
their money collections, and daily fare and apparel, followed the bridle of the
law. They had neither slave that was homeborne, ne slave that was foreign
bought, appointed to attend or awaite upon them. But the sons of those that
ware priests of honor, both above thage of twenty years, and also singulerly
learned. That the king having these attendant for the body both by day and by
night, restrained by the reverence of the company about him might commit
nothing that was vicious, or dishonorable. For men of power are seldom evil,
where they lack ministres for their unlawful lusts. There ware appoincted
hours, both of the day and the night, in the which the king might
lawfully do, what the Law did permit. In the morning, as soon as he was ready,
it behooved him to peruse al lettres, supplicacions, and bills: that knowing
what was to be done, he might give answer in time: that all things might
rightly, and ordrely be done. These being dispatched, when he had washed his
body among the Pieres of ye Realm, he put on some robe of estate, and
Sacrified to the gods. The manner was, that the Primate, or head of the
spiritualty (the beasts appoincted for the sacrifices being brought hard to
the altar, and the King standing by) should with a loud voice, in the hearing
of the people, wysshe to the king (that bare him self justly toward his
subjects) prosperous health, and good fortune in all. And should further
particulerly recite the virtues of the king, his deuoutnes and reverence
toward God, and clemency toward men. Commend him as chaste, just, and
upright: of noble and great courage, soth fast, liberal, and one that well
brideled al his desires Punisshing thos^endour under his deserces, and
rewarding the well doer above his mecites. Making a process of these, and such
other like: in the end with the rehersalle of the contrary vices, he cursed
the wicked and evil. Then absoluing the King of his offenses, he laid all the
fault upon the ministres, and attendauntes, yt shouls at any time move the
king to any thing unright, or unlawful. These things being done, he preached
unto the King the blessedness of the life, led according to the pleasure of the
gods, and exhorted him thereunto: as also to frame his manners and doings unto
virtue, and not to give care to that, that leude me^ should counsel him, but
to follow those things that led unto honor and virtue. In the end, when the
King had sacrificed a bulle, the priest declared certain precepts and examples
of exellente, and most worthy men: written in their holy scripture. To the end
that the King admonisshed by the example of them, might order his gouernaunte
iustlye, and godly, and not give him self to covetous cloinyng, and hourdyng
of tresure. He neither satte to judge, ne took his vacacion, ne walked abroad,
ne washed at home, ne lay with his Quiene, ne finally did any manner of thing,
but upon the prescripte of the law.

Their fare was but simple, nothing but veale, and goose, and their wine by
measure appoincted. So that the one should nether ouerlade the bealy, ne the
other the head. To conclude, their whole life so bound upon temperaunce, that
it might be thought raither to have been prescribed them by a discrete
Phisicen to preserve heithe, then by a politic Lawyer. It siemeth wondrefull
that the Egiptians might not rule their own private life, bur by the Laws.
But it seems more wonderful that their King had no liberty of him self,
either to sit in judgment, to make collections of money, or to punish any
man, upon wstfulnes, stout stomach, anger, displeasure, or any unjust
cause: But to be holden under law as a commune subject, and yet not to be
agreued therewith, but to think them selves most blessed in obeyeng and
following the law, and other in following their lusts most unhappy. As being
led by them into many daungiers, and damages.

For such oftentimes, even when they know them selves to do evil, either
overcome with malice, and hatred, or some other mischief of the mind, are not
able to witholde them selves from the euille. But they which by wisdom and
discrecion, govern their lives, offend in few things. The kings using
such an equity, and vprightnes toward their subdites, are so tendered again
of them, that not only the priests, but all the Egiptians in general, have
more ^ are for the health and the welfare of the King, then for their wives,
their childrens, or any other princes.

He that to his death continues in this goodness, him being dead, do they in
general lamente. They tear their clothes, they shut up ye church doors, they
haunte no place of wont common co^course, they omytte all solemn holy
days: and girding them selves under the pappes with broad Kibbond of Sarsenet,
two or three hundred on a company, men and women together, renew every day
twice, three skore and.xii. days together, the burial bewailing, casting dirte
on their heads, and singing in rithme the virtue of the King. They abstain
from al flesh of beasts, all meats ye touch sire, all wine and all
preparation of serusce at the table. They bathe not, they smell of no swietes,
they go to no beds, they pleasure not in women: but as folks that had
buried their best beloved child, all that co^tinuaunce of time they lamente.
During these seventy and two days (having prepared all things necessary for
the funeral pomp: the last day of all, the body keyng enbaulmed and
cofred, is set before the entry of the Toombe. There, aftre the custom, one
redeth an abridgemente of all the things done by the king in his life. And if
there be any man disposed to accuse the dead, liberty is given him. The
priests are present, and ever give praise to his well doings, as they be
recited. There stondeth also round about the Toombe a multitude of the
communes, which with their voices allow as much as is true, and cry out upon
that, that is false, with vehement gainsatenges. Whereby it has happened, that
sundry kings by the repugnynges of the people have lien vntoombed: and have
lacked the honor of bewrialle, that the good are wont to have. That fear,
has driven the kings of Aegipte, to live justly, and uprightly, less the
people aftre their deaths, might show them such dishonor, and bear them
perpetual hatred. This was the manner specially, of the ancient kings there.

The whole realm of Egipte was diaided into Shieres: and to every Shiere was
appoincted a Presidente, which had the governance of the whole Shiere. The
revenues of the realm ware divided into, iij. parts: whereof the company of
the priests had the first part, which ware in great estimacion among them,
both for the administracion of Gods Service, and also for the good learning,
wherein they brought up many. And this portion was given them, partly for the
administracion of the Sacrifices, and partly for the use and commodity of
their private life. For they neither think it mete, that any part of the
honor of the Gods should be omitted, or that they, which are Ministres of
the commune counsel and profecte, should be destitute of necessary
commodities of the life. For these men are alwate in matters of weighte,
called upon by the nobles, for their wisdom and counsaille: And to show (as
they can by their co^nyng in the Planettes, and Stars, and by the manner of
their Sacrifices) the hap of things to come. They also declare unto the^,
the stortes of men of old time, regested in their holy Scripture, to the end
that according to the^ the kings may learn what shall profighte, or
disprofighte. For the manner is not among them, as it is among the Grecians,
that one manne, or one woman, should attend upon the sacrifices and Ceremonies
alone: but they are many at ones about the honor of their Gods, and teach
the same order to their children. This sort of men is priuilged, and exempte
from all manner of charges, and has next unto the king, the second place of
dignity and honor.

The second portion comes to the king to mainte in his own state, and the
charges of the wars: and to show liberality to men of prowess according to
their worthiness. So that the Communes are neither burdoned with taxes nor
tributes.

The third part do the pencionaries of the wars receive, and such other as
upon occasions are moustered to the wars* that upon the regard of the
stipende, they may have the better good will and courage, to hasarde their
bodies in battle. Their communaltie is divided into three sorts of people.
Husband men, Brieders of cattle, and men of occupari^ The Husbandmen buyeng
for a little money a piece of ground of the Priests, the king, or the
warrior: al days of their life, even from their childhode, continually apply
that care Whereby it comes to pass, that both for the skoolyng that their
have therein at their fathers hands, and the continual practisyng fro their
youth, that they pass all other in Husbandry.

The Brieders, aftre like manner, learning the trade of their fathers, occupy
their whole life therabout. We see also that all manner of Sciences have been
much bettred, yea, brought to the top of perfection, among the Egiptians.
For the crafts men there, not medlyng with any commune matiers that might
hindre them, emploie them selves only to such sciences as the law does
permit them, or their father has taught the^. So that they neither disdain to
be taught, nor the hatred of each other, ne any thing else withdraws them
from their craft.

Their Judgments and Sentences of law, are not given there at adventure, but
upon reason: for they surely thought that all things well done, must niedes
be profitable to man's life. To punish the offenders, and to help the
oppressed, thought they the best way to avoid mischiefs. But to buy of the
punishemente for money or favor, that thought they to be the very confusion of
the commune welfare. Wherefore they chase out of the chief cities (as
Heliopole, Memphis, and Thebes) the worthiest men, to be as Lords chief
Justice, or Presidentes of Judgments, so that their Justice henche did sieme
to give place, neither to the Areopagites of the Athenienses, ne yet to the
Senate of the Lacedaemonians that many a day after them ware instituted. Aftre
what time these chief Justices ware assembled (thirty in no^bre) they chase
out one that was Chancellor of the whole: and when he failed, the city
appoincted another in his place. All these had their livings of the king: but
the Chancellor more honorably then the rest. He bare alwaie about his neck a
tablette, hangyng on a chain of gold, and set full of sundry precious
stones, which they called Verity and Truth* The court being set and
begun, and the tablet of Truth by the Chancellor laid furthe, and theight
books of their laws (for so many had they) brought forth into the mids
among them: it was the manner for the plaintiff to put into writing the whole
circumstance of his case, and the manner of the wrong done unto him, or how
much he esteemed himself to be endamaged thereby. And a time was given to the
defendant to write answer again to every poinct, and either to deny that he
did it, or else to allege that he rightfully did it, or else to abate the
estimate of the damage or wrong. Then had they another day appointed, to say
finally for the^ selves. At the which day when the parties on both sides
ware herd, and the fudges had conferred their opinions, the Chau^cellour of the
Judges gave sentence by pointyng with the tablet of Verity, toward the part
ye seemed to be true. This was ye manner of their judgments.

And for as much as we are fallen into mention of their judgments, it shall
not be vnsyttyng with mine enterprise, to write also the aunciente Laws of the
Egiptians, that it may be known how much they pass, both in order of
things, and profit.

First to be perjured was headyng: for they thought it a double offense. One in
regard of conscience not kept toward god, and another in gyuynge occasion to
destroy credit among men, which is the chiefest bond of their fellowship. If
any wayfaryng man should espy a man set upon with thieues, or otherwise to be
wronged, and did not to his power succor and aid him, he was gyltie of death.
If he ware not able to succor and to reskewe him, then was he bound to utter
the thieues, and to prosecute the matter to enditement. And he that so did not,
was punyshed with a certain nombre of stripes, and was kept three days without
meat. He that should accuse any man wrongfully, if he fortuned afterward to be
brought into judgment, he suffered the punishment ordained for false
accusers. All the Egyptians ware compelled to bring every man their names to
the chief Justices, and the faculty or science whereby they lived. In the
which behalf if any man lied, or lived with unlawful means, he fell into
penalty of death. If any man willyngly had slain any man free or bond, the
laws condemned him to die, not regarding the state of the man, but the
malicious purpose of the diede. Whereby they made men afraid to do mischief,
and death being erecuted for the death of a bondsman, the free might go in
more sauftie. For the fathers that slew their children, there was no
punyshement of death appointed, but an iniunction that they should stand three
days and three nyghtes together at the grave of the dead, accompanied with a
common ward of the people to see the thing done. Neither did it sieme them
just, that he that gave life to the child, should lose his life for the
childs death, but rather be put to continual sorrow, and to be pyned with the
repentance of the diede, that other might thereby be withdrawn from the like
wyckednes. But for the child that killed either father or mother, they devised
this kind of synguler torment. They thruste him and disfigured.

The Laws that apperteigned to the trade and occupieng of men, one with
another: ware made (as they say) by one Bocchorides. It is commanded in them,
that if money have been lent any manne without writing, upon credit of his
word: if the borower deny it, he should be put to his oath, to the which the
creditour must stand. For they so much estiemed an oath, that they thought
no man so wicked, as wilfully to abuse it. And again, because he that was noted
to swear very often, lost utterly his credit, and name: many men affirm,
that for the regard of their honesties, it happened very seldom, that any man
came to his oath. Their Law maker also, iudgyng that virtue was the enge^drer
of credit, thought it good by good ordres to accustom men to good living and
honesty, upon fear to sieme unworthy of all reputacio^. He thought it also
to be against conscience, that he that without anothe had borrowed, should not
now for his own, bebeleued with anothe. The forfect for non payment of the
lone, might not be above the double of the sum that was borrowed. And
paiement was made only of the gooddes of the borower, the body was not
arrestable. For the Lawemaker thought it conueniente, that only the gooddes
should be subdite to the debte, and the bodies (whose service was required
both in peace and in war) subject to the city. It was not thought to be
Justice, that the manne of war, which hasardeth his body for the sauftie of
his country, should for an enterest of lone, be thrown into prisone. The
which law, Solon siemeth to have translated to the Athenienses, under the
name of the law, Sisarea decreyng that the body of no citezein, should for any
manner of enterest be emprisoned.

The giptians also for thieues, had this law alone, and no people else. The
law commanded that as many as would steal, should enter their names with the
chief Priest: and what so ever was stolen, incontinente to carry the same unto
him. Likewise, he that was robbed was bound to enter with the said Chief
Priest, the day, time and hour, when he was robbed. By this means the theft
being easily found out, he that was robbed lost the fourth part and
received the residue, the which fourth was given to the thief. For the Law
maker (seeing it was impossible utterly to be without thieues) thought it much
bettre by this means that men bare the loss of a piece then to be spoiled of
the whole.

The order of Marriage among the Egiptians is not uniform, for the priest might
mary but one only wife. All other have as many as they will, acording to
their substance. There is no child among them, though it be borne of a bought
woman slave, that is compted illegitimate. For they only compte the father to
be the author of his kind, and the mother only but to give place and
nourisheme^t to the child. When their children be borne they bring them up
with so little cost, as a man would skantly believe. They fiede them with the
roots of mererusshes, and other roots, roasted in the embries, and with marshe
Caubois, and colewortes which partly they seathe, and partly they roste, and
part give them raw. They go for the most part without hosen or shoes, all
naked, the contry is so temperate. All the cost that the Parents bestow on
their children til they be of age to shift for themselves, surmounteth not the
sum of a noble.

The priests bring up the children, both in the doctrine of their holy
scriptures, and also in the other kinds of learning necessary for the commune
life, and chiefly in Geometry and Arithmetique. As for the roughe exercises of
wrasteling, ronning, daunsing, playeng at weapons, throwyng ye bar or such
like, they train not their youth in, supposyng that the daily exercise of
such, should be to roughe, and dangerous for them, and that they should be
an empeiryng of strength. Music they do not only compte unprofitable, but
also hurteful: as making men's courages altogether womanlyke. When they are
sick, they heal them selves, either with fasting or vomiting: and that either
every each other day, or every third day, or fourth. For they are of opinion
that all diseases grow of superstuite of meat, and that kind of cure
therefore to be best, that riddeth the ground of the grief. Men going to the
wars, or traueillyng the country, are healed of free cost. For the
Phisicens, and Chirurgiens, have a stipende allowed them of ordenary at the
charge of the communes.

In curing, they are bound to follow the precepts of the ancient and allowed
writers, regested in their holy scripture. If a man following the prescripte of
the scriptures can not so heal ye sick, he is not blamed for that: But if he
fortune to heal him by any other means then is in the scripture appoincted,
he dies for it. For the law giver thought that it was hard to find a
bettre way of curing, then that ye which of such antiquity was by long
practice found cute and allowed, and delivered unto them by such a
continuance. The Egiptians do worship above measure certain beasts, not
only whilst they be onliue, but also when they are dead. As the Catte, the
Icneumon the dog, the hawk, the woulfe, the Cocodrille, and many other like.
They are not only not ashamed to profess the worship of these openly, but
setting them selves out in the honoring of them to the vttermoste: they compte
it as much praise and glory to them selves, as if they bestowed the like on the
Gods. And they go about on processio^ with the propre Images of them, from
city, to city, and from place, to place: holding them up and showing them a
far of unto other, which fall on their knees, and every one worship them.
When any one of them dies, they cover it with Sarcener, and houling, and
crieng, and beating of their breasts they all to bestrawe the carckesse with
salt. And aftre they have enbalmed it with the licour of the Cedre and other
fragraunt oyntmentes, and oils, to preserve it the longer: they bewrye it in
holy sepulture. If a man have slain any of these beasts willingly: he is
condemned to death. But if he have slain a catte or a snyte, willingly or
unwillingly: the people ronneth upon him upon heaps, and without all order
of Justice or law, in most miserable wise torment him to death. Upon fear of
the which daungier who soever espieth one of those lyeng dead: standing a
far, he howleth and cries professing that he is not guilty of ye death.
These beasts with great attendannce and chardge are kept up about the
cloistres of the Temple, by men of no mean reputation: which fiede them with
flower and otemeale, and diverse deinties, sopped and stiepe^ in milk. And they
set every day before them goose, both sodde^ and roasted. And before those
that delight al in raw meat they set birds and raw fowls. Finally as I
said they kiepe them all with great diligence and cost. They lament their
death asmoche as the death of their own children, and bury them more
sumptuously then their substance does stretch. In so much that Ptolomeus Lagus
reigning in Egypt, when there chanced a cow to die in Memphis, for very age:
he that had taken charge of the keeping of her, bestowed upon the burial of her
(beside a great some of money that was given him for the keeping) fifty
talentes of silver, that he borrowed of Ptolome. Peradventure these things will
seem unto some men to wondreful: but he will wondre asmoche if he consider what
communely is done emonge every of the Egiptians in the funeralle of their dead.

When any man is departed his life, all his niere friends and kindesfolke,
throwing dirte upon their heads, go wieping and wailing round about the city
vntle the Corpse be buried. And in the mean season they neither bathe, ne
drink wine, or eat any meat, but that that is most base and vile, ne wear
any apparel that is gorgeous or fair. They have three sorts of Sepulchers,
Sumptuous, mean, and basse. In the first sort they bestow a talente of
silver. About the second, twenty Marks, and about the third little or
nothing. There be certain Pheretrers, whose faculty it is to set forth
burialles, which learn it of their fathers and teach it their children.
These when a funeral happens, make unto him that is doer for the dead, an
estimate of the exequies in writing, which the doer may at his pleasure
enlarge or make less. When they are ones fallen at appoyncte, the body is
delivered to the Pheretrer to be enterred acordyng to the rate that they
agreed upon. Then the body being laid forth, comes the Pheretrers chief
cutter, and he appoincteth his vndrecutter a place on the side haulfe of the
paunche, where to make incision, and how large. Then he with a sharp stone
(which of the country fro whence it comes, they call Ethiopicus) opens the
left side as far as the law permits. And straight with all spiede ronneth
his way from the company standing by, which curse him and revile him and
throw many stones aftre him. For they think there yet remains a certain
hatred due unto him that wou^deth the body of their frinde. Those that are the
seasoners and embalmers of the body (whom they call poulderers) they have in
great honor and estimacion, for that they have familiarity with the
priests, and enter the temples together with them. The body now commen to
their hands, one among all (the rest standing by) vnlaceth the entrails, and
draws them out at the foresaid incision, all saving the kidneis, and the
heart. These entrails are taken by another at his hand, and washed in wine
of the country Phenicea, wherein are enfused many soote odours and drugges. Then
enoincte they the whole body over, first with Cedre, and then with other
oyncteme^tes. xxx. days and above. Then do they ceare it over with Mirrhe and
Cinamome and such other things as will not only preserve it to co^tinuaunce,
but also make it soote smelling. The Corpse thus being trimmed, is delivered to
ye kindesfolke of ye dead, every part of it kept so whole (not an hear of
his brows or eye liddes being hurt) ye it raither lies like one being in
sliepe then like a dead corpse. Before ye body be enterred, ye kindesfolke of
the dead signefie to the judges, and the friends of this passed, ye day of ye
burial. Which (according to the manner then used) they term the deades
passaige over the mere. The manner whereof is this.

The judges, above, xl. in number, sittinge on the farther side of the mere, on
a compassed benche wheling haulfe round and ye people standing about them: The
body is put into a little boat made for the nones, and drawn over to the
judges by a chorde. The body then standing before the judges in the sight of
the people, before it be cofred, if there be any manne that have aught to say
against the dead, he is permitted by the law. If any be proved to have lived
evil, the judges give sentence that the body shall not be buried. And who so
is found vniuscelye to have accused, suffers great punyshemente therefore.
When no man will accuse, or he that accused is known to have slanderously
done it, the kinsfolk endyng their mournyng: turn them selves now to the
praise of ye dead, nothing aftre the manner of the Grecians, for that the
Egiptians think themselves all to be gentlemen alike. But beginning at his
childehode, in the which they rehearse his bringing up, nourtering and
scholyng, they pass to his man's age, their commending his godliness, his
justice, his temperaunce, and the residewe of his virtues. And calling upon the
under earth, gods, they beseech them to place him emonge the godly and
good. To the which words all the whole multitude cries Amen: showtyng out,
and magnifieng the glory of the dead, as though they should be with the
under earth gods, among ye blessed for ever. This done every man burieth his
dead, some in Sepulchers made for the purpose, and other that have no such
preparacion, in their strongest wall at home in their house, setting up ye
cofre there taberbernacle wise. But they that for some offense, or debte of
enterest, or such like, are denied their bewriall, are set up at home
without any cofre, vntle their successors growyng to ability can dischardge
their debtes and offeces, and honorably bewrie them.

There is a manner among them, sometime to borowe money upon their pare^tes
corpses, deliueryng the bodies to the creditours in pledge. And who so redemeth
them not, ronneth into utter infamy, and is at his death, denied his
bewriall. A man (not altogether causeles) might merueile, that they could
not be-contente to constitute laws for the framyng of the manners of those that
are onliue, but also put order for the exequies, and Hearses of the dead. But
the cause why they bent them selves so much hereunto, was for that they thought
there was no bettre way possible, to drive men to honesty of life. The Greeks,
which have set furthe so many things in fained tales, and fables of Poets
(far above credit) concerning the reward of the good, and punishment of the
evil: could not with all their devices, draw men so virtue, and withdraw
them from vices. But rather contrariwise, have with them that be leudely
disposed: brought all together in contempt and derision. But among the
Egiptians, the punishemente due unto the wicked and lewd, and the praise of
the godly and good, not heard by tales of a tubbe, but seen daiely at the eye:
puts both parts in remembrance what behooves in this life, and what fame
and opinson they shall leave of them selves, to their posterity. And hervppon
it rises, that every man gladly among the^, ensues good order of life. And to
make an end of Thegiptia^s, me siemeth those Laws are of very right to be
compted the best, which regard not so much to make the people rich, as to
advance them to honesty and wisdom, where riches of necessity must follow.

The. vi. Chapitre. Of the Poeni, and the other peoples of Aphrique.
OF the Penois there are many and sondrie nations. Adrimachidae lieng toward
Egipte, are like of manners to Thegiptia^s, but their apparel is like to the
other Penois. Their wives have upon ethe leg, a houpe of Latton. They delight
in long hear, and look what lyce it fortuneth any of them to take about
them: they bite them, and throw them away, the which propretie, they only
of all the Poeni have. As also to present their maidens that are upon marriage,
to the king, which choosyng among them the maiden that likes him best,
sieketh in her lap, that aftre can never be found. The Nasamones (a great
and a terrible nation, spoilers of such Ships as fortune to be thrown upon
the Sands in the streightes) toward Summer, leauyng their cattle upon the Sea
coaste, go down into the plain country to gather Dates, which are there
very fair, and in great plenty. They gather the boughs with the fruicte,
not yet perfectely ripe, and lay them a Sonnyng to ripe. Afterward they stiepe
them in Milk, and make soupinges and potages of them. It is the manner among
them, for every man to have many wives: and the fellowship of their wives, that
other use in secret: they use in open sight, in manner aftre the facion that
the Massagetes use. It is also the manner of the Nasamones, when any man marieth
his first wife, to send her about to every one of the ghestes, to offer him
her body. And asmany as receive her into arms, and show her the courtesy she
comes for, must give her some gift, which she has borne with her, home to
her house. Their manner of taking an oath, and foreshewyng of things to come,
is thus.

They swear by the men that ware (by report) the best and most just men
among the^, layeng their hands on their Graves, or Tumbes. But for the fore
knowledge of things, they come to the Graves of their kyndreade, and there
when they have prayed their stinte, lay them down upon them to sleep: and
look what they dream, that do they follow. Where in co^firmyng of our
promise, we use to strike hands (as we call it) they use to drink one to
another: or else if they lack liquour, to take duste fro the earth, and one
to lick part of that to another. The Garamantes shonne the fellowship and the
sight of all other peoples: and neither use any kind of weapon, or armor, ne
yet dare defend them selves against other that used them. They dwell somewhat
above the Nasamones, more up land. About the sea coaste toward the weste,
there bordereth upon them the Maces: which shave their heads in the crown,
and clyppe them round by the sides. The Gnidanes (next neighbors to the
Maces) when they give battaylle to the ostruthes, their brieding under the
ground, are armed with raw felles of beasts. Their women ware pretty wealtes
of leather, every one a great many which (as it is said) they beg of
such men as have lien with them. So that the more she has, the more she is
esteemed, as a deinty derling beloved of many. The Machlies dwelling about the
mershe of Tritonides, use to shave their foreparte of their head, and the
Anses their hindre part. The maidens of the Anses, at the yearly feasts of
Minerua, in the honor of the goddess their country woman: dividing them
selves into two companies, use to give battle, one part to another with
staves, and with stones: saying that they observe the manner of their country in
the honor of her that we call Minerua. And the maiden that departs the
battle with out wound, they hold her for no maid. But before there battle
be tought, they determine that what mayde^ so ever bears her self moosre
valeaunte in the field, all the other maidens with commune consent shall
garnishe her, and arm her, both with the armor of Grecia, and the helmei of
Corinthe. And shall set her in a chariot, and carye her round about the
mershe. The same men vsen their women as indifferently commune, as kyen to
the bulle. The children remain with the women until they be of some strength.
Ones in a quartre the men do assemble wholly together, and then look with whom
the child fantasieth most to abide, him do they compte for his father.

There is a people named Atlantes, of the mount Athlas, by the which they
dwell. These give no names one to another as other peoples do, but each man is
namel^sse. When the son passes over their heads, they curse him, and reuyle
him with all words of mischief: for that he is so brotling hot, that he
destroieth both them and there country.

They eat of no kind of beast, neither dream in their sliepe. The Aphres
(which are all brieders of catteile) live with flesh and milk, and yet
abiteine they fro cowes milk, and all cow flesh, according to the manner of
the Egiptians, and therefore keep they none up. The women of Cy^ene think it
not lawful to strike a cow, for Isis sake that is honored in Egypt, to whom
also they appoincte fasting, and feastefull days, and observe them solempuly.
But the women of Barcea abstain both from cow flesh and sow flesh. When
their children are iiii. year old they use to cauterise them on the coron
vain (and some on the temples also) with a medecin for that purpose, made of
woolle as it is plucked fro the shiepe: because they should not at any time be
troubled with rheumes or poses, and by that means they say they live in very
good health. They sacrifie after this manner. When in the name of their first
fruits they have cut of the ear of the beast, they throw it over the house.

That done, they wring the neck on the one side. Of all the gods they offer
sacrifice to no more but Son and Moan. All the Aphres burye their dead as
the Grecians do, saving the Nasamones, which bury them as though they ware
sitting: waiting well when any man lies in drawing on, to set him on his
tail, least he should give up the ghost lieng upright. Their houses are made
of wickers, and withes, wrought about trees, much like unto those that we
call fra^ckence^ce trees, and in such sort that they may turn them round
every way.

The Mary's, shave the left side of their head, and let the hear grow on
the right. They die their body in read, and vaunte that they come of the
Troianes. The women of the Zabiques (which are the next neighbors to the
Mary's) drive the carts in the wars, in the which the men fight. There are a
people called Zigantes, where beside the great plentye of honey that they gather
fro the Bies, they have also certain men that are makers of honye. They all
die them selves with red, and eat apes flesh, whereof they that dwell in the
mounteines have great plen tie. These al being of the part called Libye, live
for the mo^^ part a wild life abroad in the fields like beasts, making no
household provision of meat, ne wearing any manner of apparel but gotes
felles. The gentlemen, and men of honor among the^, have neither cities nor
towns, but Turrettes builte upon the waters side, in the which they lay up
the overplus of that that they occupy. They swear their people every year to
obey their Prince, and that they that obey in diede, should love together as
fellows and companions: but that the disobediente should be pursued like
felons and traitors. Their armor and weapon, are both acording to the nature
of the country and contrimen: for where they of them selves are very quick, and
deliure of body, and the country champaine, and plain, they neither use
swearde, dagger, ne harneis, but only carry three Iauelines in their hand, and
a nombre of piked and chosen stones, in a case of stiff leather ha^ging about
them. With these they use both to fight and to skirmishe. In his coming
toward the ennemy, he throws his stone, fetching his run, and makes
lightlye a narowe mysse, though it be a good way of: such continual
practice they have of it. They kiepe neither law ne faith.

The Troglodites (which are also named of the Grecians pastors, for their
fieding and brieding of carteille) a people of Ethiope, do live in companies,
and have their head over them, whom they call Tiraunte. But not meaning in
him so much tira^ny in diede, as sometime some of our governors under a fayrer
name do execute. None of them has any several wife, and therefore no several
children, but both those in commune, the tiraunte excepted: Who has but one
wife only. To the which if any manne do but approach or draw nighe: he is
condemned in a certain nombre of cat talle to be paid to the Tiraunte.

From ye beginning of July vntle about midde August (at ye which time they have
great plenty of rain) they nourishe them selves with milk, and blood, sodden
a little together. The pasture vplo^d being, dried away with the heat of the
Son: They sieke down to the marshe, and low grounds, for the which only
they be often at debate. When their catteil wareth old or sick, they kill
them, and eat them, and altogether live upon such. They do not give the child
the name of the father, but name him aftre a bull, a rambe or an eawe. And
those call they father (the beasts I mean of the masle kind) and the other of
the femel kind, they call mother, because there daily fode is given by them.
The people called Idiote, use for their drink the juice of a whinne named
Paliurus. But the men of worship and gentlemen use the iuce of a certain
flower they have emonge them, which makes drink much like the worste of ye
Renishe must. And because they carry great droues of catteile with them, they
change their soil often. Their bodies are all naked, saving their priuities,
which they hide with felles of beasts. All the Troglodites are circumcised
aftre the manner of the Egiptians, saving only the Claudians: which they so
term of claudication or limping. They only, dwellinge from their childehode
within the country of the Hesternes, are not touched with rasour or knife. The
Troglodites that are called Magaueres, carye for their armor and weapon, a
round buckler of a raw are hide, and a clubbe shodde with iron. Other have
bows, and Iauelines. As for graves or places of burial, they pass not. For
they bind the head, and the fiete of the dead together with witthes of
Paliurus, and then setting it up upon some hilly place, have a good sport to
all to bethwacke it with stones, vntle they lie heaped over the corpse. The lay
they a goats horn on the top and depart, biddinge sorrow go play him.
They war one with another, not as the Griekes upon rancour and Ambicon, but
only for food sake. In their skirmishes, first they go to it with stones, as
before ye have heard, vntle it fortune some nombre to be hurt. Then occupieng
the bow (wherein they are very sure handed) they kille one another upon hepes.
Those battayles are attoned by the women of most ancient age. For when they
be ones comen into the middle emonge them (as they may do without harm, for
that is compted abhominacion in any wise to hurt one of them) the battaille
suddenly cease. They that are now so fiebled with age, that they can no
longer follow the heard: winding the tail of an ox about their throat choke
up and die. But he that differreth to rid him self in ths sort: It is
laweful for another (aftre a warninge) to do it. And it is there compted a
friendly benefaicte. Men also diseased of feures, or any other incurable
malady, they do in like manner dispatche: iudginge it of all griefs the
woorste, for that manne to live, that can now nothing do, why he should
desire to live. Herodote writes, that the Troglodites mine them selves caves
in the ground, wherein to dwell. Men not troubled with any desire of riches,
but raither giving them selves to wilful pouretie. They glory in nothing but
in one little stone, wherein appear three skore sundry colors: which we therefore
call Exaconthalitus. They eat sundry kinds of venomous vermyne.

And speak any distinct word they cannot, but sieme rather to busse or
churre between the tiethe, then to speak.

There is another people dwelling in that Ethiope that lies above Egipte,
called Ryzophagi, which bestow much time in digging up of the roots of
Riedes growing niere about them, and in wasshing and clensing of the same,
which afterward they bruise betwixt stones til they become cla^mie, and so make
swiete cakes of the^, much facioned like a brick a hand broad. Those bake
they by the Son, and so eat them. And this kind of meat only, serves
them all their life time, plentifully and enough, and never waxes fulsome unto
them. They never have war one with another, but with Lions, which coming
out of the deserte there, partly for shadow, and partly for to pray upon
smaller beasts, do oftymes wourie diverse of the Aethiopes, coming out of the
Fennes. In so much that that nation had long senses been vttrely destroyed by
the Lions, except nature of purpose, had showed the^ her aid. For toward the
dog days, there come into that coaste, infinite swarms of Gnattes, without
any drifte of wind to enforce them. The men then flieng to the fennes, are not
harmed by the^. But they drive the Lions with their stingyng and terrible
huszyng, clean out of that quartre. Next upon these, bordre the Ilophagi and
Spermatophagi, the one living by such fruicte as falls from the trees, in
Summer, and the residew of the year by such herbs as they pick up in the
shadowed grounds. The other, the Ilophagi, siekynge to the plains with their
wives and their children, climb trees, and gather, eat, and carry home: the
tender croppes and buddes of the boughs. And they have by continualle
practice, such a nimblenes in climbyng, that (a wondrefull thing to be
spoken) they will leap from boughe to boughe, and tree to tree like Cattes or
Squirelles, and by reason of their slendrenes and lightenes, will mount up on
branches and twigges, without danger or hurt. For though their fiete
slip, yet hang they fast by the hands: and if they both fail them, yet
fall they so light, that they be harmless.

These folks go naked, and hold their wives and children in commune. Among
them selves they fight for their places without weapon: but against foreiners
with staves. And wheare they overcome, there challenge they Lordeshippe. They
communely dye for hongre, when their sight fails them: which was their only
instrumente to find their food. The residewe of the country there about, do
those Aethiopians hold, which are named Cynecy, not vety many in nombre, but
much differing in life from the rest. For their Country being wooddie, and
wild, fulle of thicquetres, and skan^e of watre, they are forced by night, for
fear of wild beasts, to sleep in trees: and toward the morning, all weaponed
together, to draw down to the waters, where they shroude them selves into
covert, and so abide close till the heat of the day. At the which time the
Bugles, Par dales, and other great beasts, what for the heat, and what for
thriste, fiocke toguether to the watres. As Soon as they have drunken, and have
well laden their bealies with watre, the Ethiopes startynge out upon them with
stakes, sharpened and hardened in the fire, and with stones, and with arrows,
and such like weapon, at this advantage stra them upon heaps, and divide the
carkesses by compaignies to be eaten. And sometime it happens that they them
selves are slain by some beast of force, howbeit very seldom. For they ever
by their policies and trains, do more damage to the beasts, then the
beasts can do unto them. If at any time they lack the bodies of the beasts,
then take they the raw hides of such as they lateliest before had slain, and
clensyng them clean fro the hear, they sokynglie lay them to a soft fire,
and when they be thoroughly hette, divide them among the compaignie, which very
griedely fille them selves of them.

They exercise their children whilst they be boys, to throw the darte at a
set mark, and he that hitteth not the mark receives no meat. By the
which manner of trainyng, ho^gre so works in the boys, that they become
excellent darters

The Acridophagie (a people borderyng upon the deaserte) are somewhat lower of
stature then the resid^ we, lean, and exceeding black. In the Spring time, the
Weste, and Southwest wind, brings unto them out of the Deaserte, an houge
nombre of Locustes, which are of very great body, and of wynge very
filthily colored. The Ethiopians well accustomed with their manner of flighte
and trade, gather together into a long slade betwixt two hills, a great deal
of rubbeshe and mullocke, from places nighe hand, apt for firyng, and all the
grass and wiedes there about. And laieng it ready in heaps aforehande, along
the slade, when thef seethe Locustes come with the wind like clouds in the
atre, they set al on fice, and so swelte them in the passing over, that they
be skante full out of the slade, but they fall to the ground in such
plenty, that they be to all the Acridophagi, a sufficient victuallyng. For
they poudre them with salt (whereof the country has ple^tie) and so
continually from year to year, live by none other food. For they neither have
any kind of catteille, ^e fifthe can have, being so far fro the sea. And
this manner of meat siemeth to them, very pleasaunce and fine.

Of body they are very light, swifte of foot, and short lived, as not
passing xl. years, he that lives lo^gest. Their end is not more incredible,
then it is miserable. For when they draw into age, their briedeth a kind of
winghed lice in their bodies, of diverse colors, and very horrible, and filthy
to behold: which first eat our their be alies, and the^ their breast, and so
the whole body in a little spare. He that has this disease, first as though he
had on him some tickelyng yeche, all to beskratcheth his body with such
pleasure, as is also mingled with some smart And within a little while afire,
when the lyce begin to craule, and the bodie^^^, ginneth to mattre, enraged
with the (...) trenes and grief of the disease, he teareth and mangleth his
whole body with his nails, putting forth in the mean while many a grievous
groan. Then gussheth there out of him, such abundance of lice, that a man
would think they had been barelled in his body: and that the barel now broken,
the swarm plomped out. And by this means, whether throught the enfectious
airs, or the corruption of their fieding, they make a miserable end

Upon the Southe border of Affrike, dwell there men called of the Greeks
Cynnamie, and of their neighbors Sauluages: Bearded, and that with abundance
of hear. They kiepe for the saufegarde of their lives, great compaignies of
wild Mastiues: for that from midde June, till midde Winter, there enters into
their country, an innumerable sort of Kine of Inde. Whether they fly thither
to save them selves from other beasts, or come to sieke pasture, or by some
instincte of nature unknown to manne, it is uncertain, Against these, when
the men of their own force, are not able to resist: they defend the^ selves
by the help of their dogs, and take many of them. Whereof they eat part
whilst they are fresh, and part reserve they in pouldre, for their aftre
niede. They eat also many other kinds of beasts, which they hunt with their
dogs.

The last of all the Affriens Southewarde, are the Ichthiophagi. A people
borderyng upon the Troglodites, in the Goulfe called Sinus Arabicus: which
under the shape of man, live the life of beasts. They go naked all their life
time, and make co^pte of their wives and their children in commune. They know
none other kinds of pleasure, or displeasure, but like unto beasts, such as
they fiele: neither have they any respect to virtue, or vice, or any
discernyng betwirte good or badde. They have little Cabanes not far from the
Sea, upon the clieues sides: where nature has made great carfes, diepe into
the ground, and hollow Guttres, and Criekes into the maigne land, bowtyng
and compassyng in and out, to and fro, many sondrie ways. Whose entringes
thenhabitauntes use to stop up with great heaps of calion and stones, whereby
the criekes serve them now in the stead of nets. For when the sea flows
(which happens there twice in the day, about the hours of three, and of
nine) the water swells so high, that it ouerfloweth into the maygne shore,
and fills those crieques with the sea. And the fisshe following the tide, and
dispersinge them selves abroad in ye maigne land to seek their food: at the
ebb when the water withdraws, retiring together with it always to the dieper
places, and at last remaining in these gutters and crieques, they are stopped
in with the stone heaps, and at the low water lie dry. Then come the
enhabitauntes with wife and children, take them, and lay them out upon the
rocques against the midday son, where, with ye broiling heat of the same,
they be within a while skorched and parched. Then do they remove them, and with
a little beating separate the fysshe fro the bones. Then put they the fisshe
into the hollowes of the rocques, and beat it to pomois, minglinge therewith
the siede of the whynne Paliurus. And so facion it into lumpes much like a
brick, but somewhat longer. And when they have baken them again a little by
the son, they sit them down together, and eat by the bealy.

Of this have they always in store, according to the plenty that Neptune gives
them. But when by the reason of tempest the sea ouerfloweth these places above
his natural course, and tarieth longer then his wont, so that they can not
have this benefight of fisshing, and their store is all spent: they gather a
kind of great shelle fysshe, whose shelles they grate open with stones, and
eat the fisshe raw, in taste much like to an oyster. If it fortune this
ouerflowing by the reason of the wind, to continue long, and their
shellefyshe to fail them: then have they recours to the fyshebones (which they
do of purpose reserve together in heaps) and when they have gnabeled of the
softest and gristely parts with their tiethe, of those that are newest and
best, they beat the harder with stones into pieces, and eat the^. They eat
as I have said in the wild field together abroad, reioising with a semblaunte
of merinesse, and a manner of singyng full untuned. That done they fall upon
their women, even as they come to hand without any choice: utterly void of
care, by reason they are always sure of meat in good plentye.

Thus four days ever continual, busied with this bealy bownsing chiere,
the.v. day they flock together to go drinck, al on a drove, not unlike to a
heard of kiene to the waters, shouting as they go with an yrishe whobub. And
when they have drunk till their bealies stand a strutte, so that they are
ska^t able to return: every dodie lays him down dronckar delike to rest
his water bolne bealy, and that day eats nothing. The next day again they
fall to their fysshing: And so pass they their life continually.

They seldom fall into any diseases, for that they are always of so uniform
diete Nevertheless they are shorter lived the^ we are. Their nature not
corupted by any persuasion taken of other, compreth the satisfieng of ho^gre,
the greatest pleasure in the world. As for other extraordenary pleasures, they
seek them not. This is the manner of living propre unto them that lie within the
bosom of the said Arabique sea. But the manner of them that dwell without the
bosom, is much more merueilous. For they never drink ne never are moved with
any passion of the mind. These being as it ware by fortune thrown out into
the deserts, facre from the parts miete to be enhabited, give them selves
altogether to fysshing, which they eat haulfe raw. Not for to avoid thirste
(for they desire no moist things) but raither of a nature sauluage and wild,
contented with such victualle as comes to hand. They co^pte it a principal
blessedness to be with out those things what so ever they be, that bring
sorrow or grief to their haners. They are reported to be of such patience,
that though a man strike them with a naked sweard, they will not shonne him,
or fly from him. Beat them, or do them wrong, and they only will look
upon you, neither shewinge token of wrath, nor countenance of pity. They
have no manner of speech among them: But only show by signs of the hand,
and nodding with the head, what they lack, and what they would have. These
people with a whole consent, are maynteners of peace toward all men,
stranger, and other. The which manner a^thoughe it be wondrefull, they have
kept time out of mind. Whether through long conunaunce of custom, or
driven by necessity, or else of nature: I can not say. They dwell not as the
other, Icthiophagi do, all in one manner of cabanes, but sundry in diverse. Some
have their dens, and their cabanes in them opening to the North: to the end
they might by that means be the bettre shadowed fro the son, and have the
colder air. For those that are open toward the southe, by the reason of the
great heat of the sonue, cast for the such a breathe, fornais like, that a man can not come niere them. They that open toward the north, builds them
preaty if abanes of the ribs of whales (which in those seas they plentuousty
find) compassing them about by the sides, according to their natural
bendinge, and fasteninge them together at both ^ndes with some manner of
tyenge. Those do they cover with the woose and the wiedes of the sea tempered
together. And in these they shroude them selves fro the son: nature by
necessity devising a way how to help and defend her self.

Thus have ye heard the life of the Icthiophagi, and now remains there for
Aprique only the Amazones to be spoken of, which men say in the old time
dwelte in Libye. A kind of warlike women, of great force, and hardfnesse,
nothing like in life unto our women. The manner among them was to appointe to
theirmaidens acerte in space of years to be trained, and exercysed in the
feictes of war. Those being expired, they ware joined to men for yssues
sake. The women bare all the rule of the commune wealth. The women ware
princes, lords, and officiers, Capiteines, and chiefteines of the wars. The
men had naught to do, but the drudgery at home, and as the women would
appoincte them. The children as soon as they ware borne, ware delivered to the
men to nouryshe up with milk, and such other things as their tendrenes
required. If it ware a boy, they either brake the right arm as soon as it was
borne, that it might never be fytte for the wars, or flue it, or sent it
out of the country. If a wenche, they straight ceared ye pappes, that they
might not grow to hindre them in the wars Therefore the Grecians called them
Amazones, as ye would say, pappelesse. The opinion is, that thef dwelt in the
Ilonde named Heipera, which lies in the marsshe, named (of a river that
ronneth into it) Tritonis, joining upon Ethiope, and the mount Atlas, the
greatest of all that land. This Ilonde is very large and great, having
plenty of diverse sorts of fruictes, whereby the enhabitauntes live. They have
many flocks of shiepe, and goats, and other small catteile, whose milk and
flesh they eat. They have no manner of grain. ne know what to do therewith.

The first Chapitre. Of Asie and the peoples most famous therein,
ASie, the second part of the three wherein to we have said that the whole earth
is divided: took name as some hold opinion, of the daughter of Oceanus, and
Tethis, named Asia, the wife of laphetus, and the mother of Prometheus. Or as
other affirm, of Asius, the son of Maneye the Lidian. And it stretches it
self from the South, bowtyng by the East into the North: having on the West
part the two flouddes, Nilus and Tanais, and the whole Sea Euxinum, and part
of the middle earth sea. Upon the other three quarters, it is lysted in with the
Occean, which where he comes by East Asie, is called Eous (as ye would say
toward the dawnyng) by the South, Indicus (of the country named India) and
aftre the name of the stoure Scithiane, upon the North Scythicus. The great
mounteine Taurus ronnyng East and West, and in a manner equally partyng the
land in twain: leaves one part on the North side, called by the Greeks the
outer Asie: and another on the South, named the inner Asie. This mountein in
many places is found three hundred.lxxv. miles broad: and of length equalle
with the whole country. About a five hundred three skore and three miles. From
the coast of the Rhodes, unto the farthest part of Inde, and Scithia Eastwarde.
And it is divided into many sondrie parts, in sondrie wise named, whereof some
are larger, some less. This Asie is of such a sise, as aucthours hold
opinion, that Affrike and Europe joined together: are scante able to match it
in greatness. It is of a temperate heat and a fertile soil, and therefore full
of all kinds of beast, foul, and worm, and it has in it many countries and
Seignouries.

On the other side of the red Sea, o^ter against Egipte in Affrike: lies the
tripartite region, named Arabia, whose parts are, Petrea: boundyng West and
North upon Siria: and right at front before him Eastwarde, Deserta: and
Arabia Felix by Southe. Certain writers also adioyne to Arabia: Pancheia, and
Sabea. It is judged to have the name of Arabus, the son of Appollo and
Babilone

The Arabiens being a great people, and dwelling very wide, and broad: are in
their living very diverse, and as sondrie in religion. They use to go with long
hear vnrounded and forked cappes, somewhat mitre like, all aftre one sort,
and their beardes party shaue^. They use not as we do, to learn faculties
and sciences one of another by appre^tice hode, but look what trade the father
occupied, the same does the son generally apply himself to, and continue
in. The most aunciente and eldest father that can be found in the whole
Country, is made their Lord and King. Look what possessions any one kindrede
has, the same be commune to all those of that blood: Yea one wife serves
them all. Wherefore he that comes first into the house, lays down his
faulcho^ before the door, as a token that the place is occupied. The seniour of
the stock ensoieth her alnight. Thus be they al brethren and sistren one to
another, throughout the whole people. They abstain fro the embrasinges neither
of sister ne mother, but all begrees are in that poynct as indifferent to them,
as to beasts of the fields. Yei is adultery death among them. And this is
adultery there: to abandon the body to one of another kindred. And who so is
by such an ouerthwarte begotten: is judged a ba stard, and otherwise not. They
banrquet not lightly together, under the nombre of thirty persons. Alwaie
foresene that, two of the same no ^hre at the least, be Musicens. waiters have
they none, but one kinsman to minister to another, and one to help another.
Their tounes and cities are wallesse, for they live quietly and in peace one
with another. They have no kind of oil, but that which is made of Sesama,
but for all other things, they are most blessed with plenty. They have Shiepe
greater then Rien, and very white of woulle. Horses have they none, ue none
desire, for that their Chamelles in all niedes serve the^ as well. They have
silver and gold plenty, and diverse kinds of spices, which other countries
have not, Laton, Brass, Iron, Purple, Safron, the precious rote costus, and
all coruen works, are brought into them by other. They bewrie their king in
a dongh^l^e, for other they will skante take so much labor. There is no
people that better kiepeth their promise and couenaant, then they do, and thus
they behight it

When they will make any solemn promise, couenaunte, or league, the two
parties coming together, bring with them a third. who standing in the mids
betwirte them both, draws blood of ech^ of them, in the palm of the hand,
along under the rote of the fingres, with a sharp stone: and then pluckyng
from each of their garments a little saggue, he enoyncteth with that blood
seven other stones, lieng ready betwirte them for that purpose. And whilst he
so does, he ralleth upon the name of Dionisius and Urania, whom they account
among the nombre of gods, reuengers of faithelesse faithes. This done, he
that was the sequestrer of the couenaunte, becomes surety for the parties.
And this manner of contracte, he that stands moffe at liberty, thinks miete
to be kept.

They have no firing but broken ends and chippes of Myrche, whose smoke is so
vnholsonie, that exrepte they withstode the malice thereof with the perfume of
Styrar, it would briede in them incurable difeases. The Tinamome which grows
among them, none gather but the priests. And not they neither, before they
have sacrificed unto the gods. And yet further they observe, that the
gatheryng neither begin before the Son risyng, ne continue aftre the going
down He that is lord and gourrnour among them, when the whole gather is
brought together, deuideth out unto every man his heap with a Iauelines end,
which they have ordinarily consecrate for that purpose. And amongst other,
the Son also has a heap divided out for him, which (if the deu^sion be
just) he kindeleth immediately with his own beams, and brenneth into ashes.
Some of the A rabiens that are pinched with penury, without all regard of
body, life, or health, do eat Snakes, and Addres, and such like vermin, and
therefore are called of the Greeks Ophyophagj.

The Arabiens named Nomades, occupy much Chamelles, both in war, and
burden, and all manner carriage, far and nighe. The floude that ronneth alonge
their bordes, has in it as it ware limall of gold in great plenty. Which
they nevertheless for lack of knowledge do never fine into mass.

Another people of Arabia named Deboe, are for the great part she pemasters,
and brieders. Part of the^ notwithstanding, occupy husbandry, and tilthe.
These have such ple^tie of gold, that ofterimes among the cloddes in the
fields they find little peables of gold as big as akecornes, which they use
to set finely with stones, and wear for owches about their neck and arms,
with a very good grace. They sell their gold unto their borderers for the
third part of Laton, or for the half part of silver. Partly for that they
nothing estieme it, and specially for the desire of the things that foreiners
have. Next unto them lie the Sabeis, whose riches chiefly consists in
encence, Myrche and Linamome, how be. it some hold opinion also that Baulme
grows in some places of their borders. They have also many date trees very
redolente of smelle, and the root called Calamus.

There is in that contry a kind of serpents lurking in the roots of trees,
of haulfe a foot length, whose bitinge is for the most part death. The
plenty of swiete odours, and savors in those quarters, does verily stuff ye
smelling. And to avoyde that incommoditie, they often times use the fume of a
stinking gome, and gotes hear chopped together. There is no man that has to
do to give sentence upon any case but the king. The most part of the Sabeis
apply husbandrye.

The residewe gatheringe of spices, and drugges. They sail into Ethiope for
trade of marchaundise, in barks covered with leather. The refuse of their
cinamome and Cassian they occupy for firing. Their chief city is called Saba,
and stondeth upon a hill. Their kings succeed by descent of blood, not any
one of the kindred certain, but su^he as the people have in most honor, be
he good be he badde. The king never dare be seen out of his Palace, for that
there goes an old prophecy among them of a king that should be stoned to
death of the people. And every one fears it should light on him self.
They that are about the king of the Sabeis: have plate both of silver and
gold of all sorts, curiously wrought and entallied. Tables, fourmes, trestles
of silver, and all furniture of household sumptuous above measure They have
also Galeries buylte upon great pillours, whose coronettes are of gold and of
silver. Cielinges, voultinges, doors and gates covered with silver and gold,
and set with precious stones: garnisshinges of yuorye, and other rare things
which among men are of price. And in this bounteous magnifice^ce have they
continued many years. For why the gredy compass how to atteyne honor with
the unjust rapine of other men's goods, that has tombled down headeling so
many commune wealths, never had place among them. In richesse equal unto them,
are the Garrei, whose implementes of household are all of gold and silver. and
of those and yuorie together, are their portalles, their cielinges, and rophes,
made. The Nabatheens of all other Arabiens are the best husbands, and
thriftiest sparers. Their cast is wittye in winning of substance, but greater
in kepinge it. He that appaireth the substance that was left him, is by a
commune law punished: and contrariwise he that increases it, much praised
and honored.

The Arabiens use in their wars sword, bow, lance, slinge, and battle axe.
The rabble of helhoundes (whom we call Sarasines) that pestilent murreine of
mankind, came of this people. And as it is to be thought, at this day the
great part of Arabia is degenerate into that name. But they that dwell toward
Egipte, keep yet their old name, and live by butin, like prickers of ye
bordre, wherein, the swiftenes of their camelles does them good service.

The second Chapitre. Of Panchaia, and the manners of the Panqueis.
PAnchaia (a country of Arabia) is judged of Diodore the Sicilian to be an
islonde of. xxv. miles broad. It has in it three noble cities Dalida, Hyracida,
and Oceanida. The whole contrie (except a little vain of sandy grauelle) is
fertile and plenteous: thiefely of wine and encence. Which grows there in
such abundance, that it suffices the whole world for the francke fume
offeringe. There grows also good store of Myrrh, and diverse other redolente
things, which the Panqueis gather, and selle to the merchauntes of Arabia. At
whose hand other buienge them again, transporte them into Egipte, and Sirie.
And fro thence they are spread abroad to al other peoples. The Pa^queis in their
wars use wagons aftre the manner of men in old time.

Their commune wealth is divided into three sundry degrees. The first place
have the priests, to whom are joined the artificers. The second the
houseba^d men. And the third the men of war: with whom the catteile
masters or brieders be coupled. The priests are ye heads, and chief of all
the residewe, and have authority as well in sentence of law, as to put order
in all civil affairs: the sentence of death only excepted.

The housebandemen, tille the ground, and attend upon the fruictes, and bring
all into the commune store. And they that shall be found most diligente in that
labor and occupation: are chosen by the priests (but not above the nombre of
ten at one time) to be judges over the distributio^ of the fruictes. upon
consideracion that other by their advancement might be stirred to like
diligence. The catteile masters, if there be any thing either apperteining to
the sacrifices, or commune affairs, touching nombre, or weight, do it with all
diligence.

No man among the Panchais has any thing that he can call proprely his own:
his house, and his gardein excepted. For both the customs, and revenues, and
all other profectes, are delivered into the priests hands. Who acordinge as
they find necessary and expediente, justly distribute them. But they them
selves are granted double share. Their garments by the reason of the finesse
of the wolle of their shiepe specially above other, are very soft and gentle
clothe. Both men and women use there, to set out them selves with Iuelles
of gold, as cheines, braselettes, eareringes, tablettes, owches, ringes,
Annuletes, buttons, broches, and shoes embraudred, and spangled with gold, of
diverse colors. The men of war serve only for the defense of their country.

The priests above all other, give them selves unto plesaunte life, fine,
net and sumptuous. Their garments are rochettes of fine linen, and sometime
of the deintiest woollen. Upon their heads they wear mitres embraudred, and
garnisshed with gold. They use a kind of voided shoes (which aftrewarde the
Grieques took up, and called sandalium) very finely made, and of sundry
colors. And as the women wear, so do they, all manner of Iuelles saving
earinges. Their chief occupacio^ is to attend upon gods service, settinge
forth the worthy diedes of the gods, with himpnes, and many kinds of
commendacion. If they be found without the hallowed ground, it is lawful for
any manne to slay them. They say that they came of the blood of Jupiter
Manasses, at such time as he came first into Panchaia, having the whole
world under his dominion. This country is full of gold, silver, latton,
tin, and iron, of the which it is not laweful to carry any one out of ye
realm. The gifts both of silver and gold, which in great nombre of long
time, have been offered to their gods, are kept in the temple: whose doors
are by excellent workmanship garnished with gold, silver and yuorie. The
couche of their God is. vi. cubits long, and four cubits broad, all of
gold, gorgeous of work, and goodly to behold. And by that, is there set a
table of like sort in every poincte: for sise, stuff, and gorgeousnes. They
have but one temple, all of white stone, builte upon pilours, graven, and
embossed, three hundred and. xxxviii. taylours yardes square. that is to say,
even of length and bredthe, every way so much. And somewhat acordinge to the
syse of the temple, it is set full of high images very precious: coruen and
graven. Round about the temple have the priests their habitacion. And all the
ground about them. xxv. mile compass: is hallowed to their gods. The yearly
rent of that ground is bestowed upon sacrifice.

The. iij. Chapitre. Of Assiria and Babilonia, and the manners of those peoples.
AS says saint Augustine, the country called Assiria, was so named of
Assure, the son of Sem. And at this dase, to the end that time might be
found an appairer of al things, with the loss of a sillabe is becomen Siria:
Having for his bound, on the East, the country called Inde, and part of
Media. On the West the floude Tygris, on the Southe Susiana, and on the North
the maigne mounteigne Laucasus. It is a deintie to have in Assiria a shower of
rain: and therefore are they constreined for the due moistyng of their land,
to toll in the rivers by policy of trenching and damming: wherewith they so
plentisie their ground, that they communely receive two hundred busshelles for
a busshell, and in some special vein, three hundred for one. Their blades of
their Wheat and Barlie are four fingers broad. Their Sesamum, and Milium
(Somer corns) are in grows like unto trees. All the which things Herodotus
the historien, though he knows the^ (as he writes) be to undoubtedly true,
yet would he that men took aduisemente in the reportyng of them: for that they
might steme unto such as never saw the like, incredible. They have a tree
called Palma, that bears a kind of small Dates. This fruicte they fiede
much upon, and out of the body of the tree, they draw at one time of the
year a liquour or sap, whereof they make both wine and hon^y. In their fresh
waters they use boats facioned round like a buckler. which the Armenians that
dwell above them, do make of salowe wikers wrought one within an other, and
covered with raw leather. The appareile of the Assyrians is a shirte down to
the foot, and over that a short garment of woollen, and last of al a fair
white pleicted cassaque down to the foot again. Their shoes are not fastened
on with lachettes, but like a poumpe close about the foot. Which also the The
bans did use, and but they twain, no more. They suffer their hears to grow
and cover them with pretty forked cappes somewhat my trelyke. And when they go
abroad, they besprinkle them selves with fragraunt cyles, to be sweet at the
smelle. They have every man a ring with a signet, and also a scepter finely
wrought: upon whose top they use to stick either an apple, or a rose, or a
lillye, or some like thing. For it is a dishonor to bear it bare.

Amongst all the laws of that people I note this chiefly as worthy memory.
When their maidens came to be marriage able, they ware from year to year,
brought forth into the Marquette, for such as would buy them to be their
wives. And because there ware some so hard favored, that men would not only
be loath to give money for them, but some men also for a little money to take
them: the fairest ware first sold, and with the prices of them brought into
the commune Treasourie, ware the fowler bestowed. Herodote writes thet he
heard by reaporte, that the Heneti (a people on the bordre of Italy toward
Illiria) ware wont to use this manner. Whereupon Sabellicus taking an occasion,
writes in this manner. Whether there ware such a manner used among that people
(says he) or not I have little more certainty to lay for my self then
Herodote had. But thus much am I able to say: that in Venice (a city of
famous worthiness, and whose power is well known at this day, to be great,
both by Sea and by land) such manner as I shall say, was sometime used.
There was in the Litie of Venice, a place dedicate, as ye would say to our
Lady of Piety. Before whose doors it happened a child or twain, begotten by
a skape (which either for shame or necessity could find no mother, or for
the nombre of parteners, no one propre father) to be laid. And when by the
good Litezeins such tendrenes had been showed to two, or three, as the mothers
looked for, and manhood (to say the truth) does require: the door of pity
became so fruict full a mother, that she had not now one or two in a year, but
three or four in a quarter. Which thing when the governors of the city
perceived, their took order by commune consent, that from thens forth such
women children only, as should fortune so to be offered to Piety, should be
nourisshed at the commune charge of the city, and none other. And for those
acordyngly, they ordained a place where they ware brought up, hardly kept in,
and diversely enstructed acordyng to their gifts of wit and capacity, until
they ware marriage able. At the which time, she that had beauty and good
qualities both, found those a sufficient dowry to purchase her choice of
husbands, And she that had but beauty alone, though her qualities ware not
so excelle^te, yet for her honesty that beside forth was singular in them
all, found that beauty and honesty could not be unmarried. These therefore
ware not permitted to every man's choice, but granted to such as ware
thought men worthir of such women. If there ware any that lacked the grace
of beauty, yet if she ware witty, and endewed with qualities (together with
her honesty) a small dowry purchased her a husband in good time. But if there
ware any in who^ there happened neither commendacion of beauty nor wit, but
only bare honesty: for her bestowyng was there a mean found, by way of
devotion, as we term it when we signify a respect of holiness in the diede.

Men unmarried being in daungier upon Sea or on Land, or bring sore
distressed with sickness, making a vow for the recovery of health, where
unto they hold them selves bounden in conscience (if it fortuned them at that
time to be delivered) for satisfaction of their vow in that case not uprightly
performed, used to take for their wives, such of the simplest as other had
left. So that in process they alwaie fonnde husbands, and the commune wealth
a diminishyng of charge.

Another Law of the Babilonians there was, more worthy of memory a great
deal, for that it imported more weight. And that was this. They had from their
beginning no Phisicens among them, but it was enacted by the consent of the
Realm, that who so was diseased of any malady, should common with other that
had been healed of the like before. And acordyng to their counsaille, practice
upon himself. But he that used or attempted any other way, to be punished for
it. Other write that the sick ware brought out into the Marquet place, where
such as had been delivered of the like grief before: ware bound by the law,
to go fro person to person, and show them by what means they had been
remedied.

They bewrie their dead in Honey, and observe the same manner of mournyng that
the Egiptians do. If any man have meddled with his wife in the night, neither
of them both touches any thing the next morning, before they be washed:

There was in Babylon a Temple dedicate to Venus, and it has been the manner in
time paste, that when their came any stranger to visit this Temple, all the
women of Babylon should come unto him or them, with great solempnitie and
freshely appareile^, every one having a garlande on her head, with some
seueralle knowledge of distinction one from another, and offer their service to
the straungter. And look whom he liked, he must lay down in her lap, such
so^me of money as pleased him. That done thef both withdrew themselves fro the
temple a great distaunce, and lay together. That money was conserrate to
Venus.

There ware cerrein kindredes among them, that lived with none other thing but
fisshe dried against the Son, and bruised in a Mortare, and so laid up till
niede ware. And then did they mingle it, and kneade it with water into a manner
of paashe, and so baked it, and eat it. There ware three sorts of men that
bare rule and office among them. The king, the nobles with the Seniours, and
those that had serueo in the wars and ware now exempte. They had also men
skillful in the secrets of nature, which they call Magj, and Chaldej, such
as ware the priests of Egipte, institute to attend upon the service of their
Gods. These men all their life days, lived in the love of wisdom, and ware
connyng in the course of the Sterres. And sometime by foretokenyng of birds
Right, and sometime by power of holy verses and nombres, turned awaise the
euilles fro menny, and benefited the^ with things that ware good. They could
expound Dreams, and diclare the significations of uncouth wondres. So that
men ware certain of such success, as they had foreshewed. They went not into
strange schools to learn their knowledge, as the Grecians do, but learned
the science of these things at their fathers hands, as heiritage from one
generation to another, even from their childhode at home in their houses.
Whereby it came to pass that being sokingly learned, it was both the more
groundedly learned, and also without tediousnes. They had one uniform and
constaunt way of teaching, and one constantnes of doctrine, not waueryng and
almost contrary to it self, as the doctrine of the Greeks: where each
Philosopher almost had his way, and judgment, of the principles and causes
of things. But these men agree al in one, that the world is eternal and
everlasting, with out beginning and without end. And that the order of the
whole, was disposed by the providence of the highest. The bodies above to have
their course, not at all adventures and without rule, but by an inviolable law
of God, acordyng to his ordenaunce and will most certain. They have learned by
long markyng and notyng of things time out of mind, one aftre another: how by
the course of the Stars, to prognostique, that is to foreshe we unto men,
many things to come They hold that of all other Sterres, the planetes are
strongest of Influence, namely Saturnus. To the son they attribute brightness
and virtue of life. Mars Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus, they observe most (for
that they have a course propre by them selves) as interpretours of the minds
of the gods to foresignifie things unto men. Which opinion is so grounded in
them, that they have called all those four planetes, by the one name of
Mercurius. as ye would say commune currours or messengers. They also do warn
men of many things, both hurtefull and availeable: by the marking, and
knowledge of wind and weather, of rain and droughte, of blasing sterres, of
the eclipses of the Son and Moan, of earthquakes, and many such like.

Furthermore they ymagine in the firmament other sterres, subject in influence
unto these former. whereof some are in the haulfe heaven continually in our
sight, and some in the other haulfe continually out of our sight. And as the
Egiptiens have feigned them selves. xii. gods, so likewise have they. To
every of the which they refer one month. and one sign of the Zodiaque.
They have prophesied unto kings, many adventures. As unto Alexandre victory,
when he made his exploicte toward Dartus.

Likewise to Hirchanour and Seleucus, and other the successors of Alexandre,
prophesied they many things: As also to the Romans, which had most sure
success. They make compte also of. xxiiij. other stars: without, and beside
the way of the zodiaque, xii. toward the north, and the residew toward the
southe. Of the which, so many as appiere in sight, they judge to apperteigne
to the quick, and the other to the dead. These troublesome mases have they
brought into the world more then enoughe, beside the account that they make
of their obseruacions, and deuinacio^s from their beginning to Alexandres
time: nombringe them three thousand and forty years (a shameful lie) except
they will entreprete their years by the Moon, as the Egiptians do, comptinge
every monethe for a year.

The. iiii. Chapter. Of Iewry, and of the life, manners, and Laws of the Jews.
PAlestina, which also is named Judea, being a seueralle province of Siria,
lies betwirte Arabia Petrea, and the country Coelosiria. So bordering upon
the Egiptian sea on the west, and upon the floude Jordan on the East, that the
one with his waves wassheth his clieues, and the other sometime with his
stream ouerfloweth his banckes.

The Bible, and Josephus by ensample thereof, calls this land Cananea: a
country renoumed for manifold substance. Fertile of soil, well watered with
rivers, and springes, and rich with precious balm. Tienge in the nauelle of
the world, that it neither might be broyled with heat, ne frosen with cold.
By the reason of the which mildenes of aier, it was judged by the Israelites or
Hebrews, (and rightlye so judged) to be the country that God promised unto
Abraham Isaac, and Jacob, flowinge in abundance of milk and honey. Upon the
hope of enioyenge of this land, followed they Moses out of Egipte fortye years
wandering in Lamp. And before they ware brought into Cananea by Joshua, his
substitute, overcame with strong hand, one and thirty kings.

This is the people that only of all other may challenge the honor of
auncientie. This is the people alone yt might have glorified in the wisdom,
and vnmedled purity of Language, as being of all other the first. This is
the people that was mother of lettres, and sciences. Among these remained the
knowledge of the only and euerliuinge God, and the certeintie of the religion
that was pleasant in his eyes. Among these was the knowledge, and
foreknowledge of al, sauinge that Helas, they knew not the visitour of their
wealth, and the end of their woe, Jesus the savior of all that would know
him, and sieke life in his death. But him whom they knew not, when by reason
they should: him shall they yet ones know in time when the father would.

The Israelites, the Hebrews or the Jews (for all in effect sounds one
people) live aftre the rule of the laws, which Moses their worthy duke, and
divine chiefteine, declared unto them. Without the which also or any other
written, they lived holily, hundred of years before: atteininge to the truths
hidden from other, by a singular gift above other. That Philosophre of
Philosophers, and divine of deuines, Moses the merueilous, waienge in his
insight, yt no multitude assembled, could be governed to continuance without
ordres of equity, and laws: when with rewards to the good, and revenge upon
the evil, he had sufficiently exhorted, and trained his people to the desire
of virtue, and ye hate of the contrary: at the last beside the two tables
received in the mount Sinah, added ordres of discipline, and civil
governance, full of all goodlines and equity. Which Josephus, the Jew, (a man of great knowledge, and eloquence, as well in the Hebrewe, his natural
tongue, as in the Grieke, among whom he liuen in notable fame not a few
years) has gathered, and framed into one several treatise. Out of the which,
because I rather fancy, if I may with like commodity, to follow the
founteines of the first Authors, then the brokes of abredgers, which often
bring with them much puddle: I have here translated, and annexed to the end of
this book, those ordres of the Jews commune welthe, se^ding the for the rest
to the Bible. And yet notwithstanding, look what I found in this Abredger,
neither mentioned in the bible, nor in that treatise, the same thus ordrely
follows.

The heathen writers, and the Christianes, do much diffre concerning the
Jews, and Moses their chiefteine. For Cornelius the stylle, in his first
book of his yearly exploi^tes, called in Latin Annals, does not ascribe
their departure out of Egipte to the power and commandment of God: but unto
necessity, and co^strainte, with these words:

A great skuruines, and an ytche says he, being risen through out Egipte,
Borchoris, the king sekinge remedy in the Temple of Jupiter Haminon, was
willed by responcion to cleanse his kingdom: And to send away that kind of
people whom the gods hated (he means the Jews) into some other country.
The which when he had done, and they (as the poompe of al skuruines, not
knowing where to become) lay cowring under hedges, and busshes, in places
desert, and many of them dropped away for sorrow and disease: Moses (which
also was one of the outecastes says he) counseiled them not to sit there,
awaytinge aftre the help of God or of man, which they ware not like to have:
but to follow him as their captain, and lodesman, and commit them selves
unto his governance. And that hereunto they all agreinge, at wild adventures,
with out knowing what they did, took their journey. In the which they ware
sore troubled, and hard bestadde, for lack of water. In this distress, when
their ware now ready to lie them down; and die for thirst, Moses espienge a
great heard of wild Chamelles coming fro their fiedinge, and going into
woddie place there beside, followed them. And iudginge the place not to be
without watre, for that he saw it fresshe and grene, dug and found plenty
of watre. Wherewith when they had releued the^ selves, they passed on. of. days
journey: and so exployted that the seventh day they had bearen our all the
enhabitauntes of the contry, where they builte their City, and their temple.
Moses then to the intent he might satle the peoples hearts toward him for
ever: devised them new ordres, and ceremonies clean contrary to all other
nations. For (says Cornelius) Look what so ever is holy among us, the same
is among them the contrary. And what so ever to us is vnlawfulle, that same is
compted lawefull among them. The image of the beast that showed them the
way to the waters, and the end of their wanderinge: did they set up in their
chambres, and offer unto it a rambe, in the despite of Jupiter Hammo^. whom we
worship in the form of a Rambe. And because the Egiptians worship their
goddess Apis in the form of a cow, therefore they use to slay also in
sacrifice a cow.

Swines flesh they eat none, for that they hold opinion that this kind of
beast, of it self being disposed to be skoruie, might be occasion again to
enfette them of new. The seventh day they make holy day. That is to say
spend away in ydlenes and rest: for that on the seventh day, they found
rest of their wandering, and misery. And when they had caughte a savor in
this holy day loytering: it came to pass in process of time, that they made
a long holydaye also of the whole seuenthyere. But other hold opinion that
they do observe such manner of holy days, in the honor of Saturn the god of
fasting and famine: with whose whippe they are loathe again to be punisshed.
Their bread is unleavened. These ceremonies and devises, by what means so
ever they ware brought in among them, they do stiffely defend. As they are
naturally given, to be stiff in belief, and deep in love with their own
although toward al other they be most hateful enemies. So that they neither
will eat ne drink with them: no nor lie in the chamber that a stranger of a
another nation lies in. A people altogether given unto leachery, and yet
absteining from the enbrasinges of the stranger. Emonge them selves they judge
nothing unlawful. They devised to round of the foreskinne of their yard
(which we call circumcision) because they would have a notable knowledge
between the^, and other nations. And the first lesson they teach unto their
children, is to despise the gods. The souls of those ye die in torments, or
in war, they judge to be immortal. A continual fear have they, and a
regard of heaven and hell. And where the Egiptians honor many similitudes and
Images of beasts, and other creatures, which they make them selves: the Jews
only do honor with their spirit and mind, and conceive in their
vndrestandyng, but one only Godheade. Judging all other that worship the
Images of creatures, or of man: to be ungodly and wicked. These and many
other things does Cornelius write, and Trogus also in his. xxxvi. book.

There ware among the Jews three seueralle sects, differyng in life from the
reast of the people. The Pharise^s, the Sadduceis, and the Esse is. The
Phariseis used a certain rough solempnesse of appareille, and a very skante
fare: determinyng the Tradicions of Moses, by certain ord^naunces and decrees,
which they them selves set up. They carried upon their foreheades, and on
their left arms, pretty billettes of Paper, facioned for the place, wherein
ware written the ten precepts of ye two Tables. And this did they for that
the lord says: And these shall thou have (meaning the commandments) as a
remembrance ha^ging before thine eyes, and alwaie ready at thine hand. These
ware called their Philacteries, of these two words Phylexi and Thorat, whereof
the former signifies to Kiepe, and the other, the Law. These men also
having upon their skirtes much brother gardes then other, stacke them full of
Thorns, which beatyng and prickyng them on the hieles as they went, might
put them in remembrance of the commandments of God. They attributed all
things unto God, and destenie, which they call Emarmeni. Nevertheless they
granted, that it lay much in the free choice of man: either to do, or not
to do the things that are just and godly. but yet destenie to help in all
cases. Which destenie they thought to depend of the influence of the bodies
above. Look what their superiors and Elders had said, or answered to any
demand they never would contrary it. They believed that GOD should come to
Judge the world, and that all souls ware everlasting. And as for the souls
of the good, they held opinion, that they passed from one body to another,
until the day of the general resurrection. But the souls of the wicked, to
be plonged in to everlasting prison and do^ geo^. The name of Pharisei was
given unto them for that they ware disguised fro ye common manner of other, as
ye would say, Sequestered.

The Saddeiects denied that there was any destenie, but that God was the
beholder of all, and that it lay in the choice of man, to do well or evil.
And as for joy or sorrow that the soul should suffer aftre this life, they
denied. Neither believed they any resurrection: because they thought the soul
died with the body. They would not believe that there ware any spirits, good
or bad. Neither would they receive more of the Bible, then the five books of
Moses. They ware stern men, and vncompaignable: not so much as ones keeping
fellowship one with another. For the which sternesse, they named them selves
Sadduceis, that is to say, ^uste men.

The Esse is ware in all poinctes very like unto our cloisterers, abhorryng
marriage and the company of women. Not for that they condemned Marriage, or the
procreacion of issue, but for that they judged a man ought to be ware of the
intemperauncie of women. And that no woman kept her self true to her husband
Oh shameful opinion, and much better to be reported by the dead, then to be
credited of the quick, be it never so true. They possesed all things in
commune. As for checkes or reuilinges, was to the^ musk and Honey, and
slouenly vndaftinesse, a great comeliness. So that they ware alwaie in a
white surcote, all was well. They had no certain abiding in any one city: but
Celles over all, where so ever they became. Before the risyng of the Son,
they spoke nothing that touched any worldly affair: but prated the son to
rise. Aftre whose vprijste they labored until eleven of the clock. And then,
washyng first their whole body in water: they satte down together to meat,
in solemn silence every manne. Swearing they compted for swearyng. They
admitted no man to their sect, under a year of probacion. And aftre what
time they had received him: yet had they two years more to prove his manners and
conditions. Such as they took with a fault, they drove fro their co^paignie.
Enjoined by the way of penance, to go a grasing like a beast, until his
dieng day. When ten ware set in a company together, no one of them spoke
without the conse^te of the other nine. They would not spitte within the
precinct of the compaignie among them, ne yeat on their right side. They
kept the Sabbath with such a preciseness, that they would not that day, ease
nature of the belie burden. And when upon other days, nature forced them to
that easemente, they carried with them a little spade of woodde, wherewith in
place most secreate, they used to dig a little pit, to lay their bealie in.
And in the time of doing, they also used a very great circumspection, that
their clothes lay close to the ground round about them, for offendyng
(said they) of the Majesty of God. Upon which respect, they also conered
and bewrted it, as soon as they had bone that nature required. They ware of
very long life, by the reason of the vnifourme diete that they used, alwaie
aftre one rate of fare: which was only the fruicte of their country Palm.
They occupied no money. If any manne suffered for well doing, or as wrongfully
condemned, that thought they the best kind of death. They held opinion
that all souls ware made in the beginning, and put in to bodies from time to
time, as bodies did niede them. And for the good souls being rid of their
bodies again, they said there was a place appoincted beyond the weast Occean,
where they take repose. But for the evil, they appoincted places toward the
East, as more stormy cold, and vnpleasante. There ware among them that
prophesied things. Some of them gave themselves to wedlock: least if they
should be of the oppinion that men ought to abstain vttrely from women,
mankind should fade, and in process be extincte * yeat used they the
compaignie of their wives nothing at rioce.

The land of Siria (whereof we have named Iewrie a part) is at this day
enhabited of the Greeks, called Griphones, of the Iacobites, Nestorians,
Sarracenes, and of two christian nations, the Sirians and Marouines. The
Siria^s use to say Mass, aftre the manner of the Greeks: and for a space ware
subject to the church of Rome.

The Marouines agree in opinion with the Iacobites, Their lettres and congue are
al one with the Arabique. These christianes dwell at the Mount Libanus. The
Sarracenes, which dwell about Jerusalem (a people valeau^t in war)
delighte much in housbandrie and tilthe. But contrary wise, they that enhabite
Siria, in that poincte are nothing worth The Marouines are feawe in nombre, but
of all other they are the hardieste.

The. v. Chapitre. Of Media, and the manners of the Medes.
MEdia (a country of Asia) as Solinus writes, took the name of one Medus, the
son of Medea and Egeus, king of Athenes. Of who^ the people ware also called
Medes.

But Josephus affirms that it was so named of Medius, the son of Iapheth.
This country as it is seen in Ptolomie, has on the North, the sea named
Hircanum, on the West Armenia, and Ass^ria, on the Southe Persie, and on the
aft Hircama and Parthia. Saving that betwixt Parthia and it, there ronneth a
mounteigne, that seperateth their frontiers. The feactes that they most
exerci^e, are shootyng and ridyng. Wherein they be right expert, and almost
(for those quartres) without match or fellow. It has been there a long
continued and aunciente custom, to honor their kings like gods. The round
cappe, whithe they call Tiara: and their long sliued garments, passed from them
to the Persians together with the Empire. It was a peculier manner used of the
Kings of the Medes, to have many wives. Which thing was aftrewarde also taken
up of the communes: so that at length it was thought vnmiete to have feawer
wives then seven. It was also a goodly thing for a woman to have many
husbands: and to be without five at ones, was compted amiserable state. The
Medes enter leagues and conenauntes, both aftre the manner of the Greeks, and
also with drawing blood upon some part of the arm about the shouldre, one of
another, which they use to lick each of of others body. All that part of the
country that lies toward the North, is barrein and vnfruictefulle.
Wherefore they use to make store of their fruicte, and to dry them, and so to
work them into a mass or lump for their food. Of roasted Almondes they make
their bread: and their wine of the roots of certain herbs. They eat great
plenty of the flesh of wild beasts.

The. vj. Chapitre. Of Parthia, and the manner of the Parthians.
ACerteine nombre of Outlawes and Banisshed men, called Parthie, gave name to
this Country: Aftre such time as by train, and stealth they had gotten it. On
the Southe it has Carmania, on the North Hircanum, on the Weast the Meades,
and on the east the country of Arabia. The country is hilly, and full of
woddes, and of a barreine soil. And a people which in the time of the
Assiriens, and Medes, ware scante known, and little estiemed. In so much that
when ye high governance of the whole (which the Greeks call the Monarchy)
was yielded into the hands of the persians: they ware made a butin, as a nombre
of raskalles without name. Last of all they ware slaves to the Macedonies. But
afterward in process of time, such was the valeau^tenes of this people, and
such success had they: that they became lords, not over their neighbors
only round about them, but also held the Romans (the conquerours of the
world) such tacke, that in sondrie wars they gave them great overthrows,
and notablye endamaged their power. Pliny reherseth. xiiii kingdoms of the
parthians. Trogus calls them Emperors of the east part of the world.
Although they, and the Romans holding the weste, had divided the whole
betwixt them.

Aftre the decay of the Monarchy of the Macedonians, this people was ruled by
kings. Whom generally by the name of the first king, they termed Arsaces.
Next unto the kings majesty, the communaltie bare the swaye. Dute of whom
they chase both their Capteignes for the wars, and their governors for the
peace time. Their language is a speech mixte of the Scithians, and Medes.
Their appareil at the first, was aftre their facion unlike to all other. But
when they grew unto power, louse and large, and so thin: that a man might
see thoroughe it, aftre the facion of the Medes. Their manner of weapon, and
armor, was the same that the Scithians used.

But their armies ware altogether almost of slaves and bondemen, contrary to
the manner of other peoples. And for that no man has authority among them
to give fredome unto any of this bond offspring: The nombre of them by
continuauce, came unto a great multitude. These do they bring up, and make of
as deerly, as they do of their own children: teachinge them to ride, to shote,
to throw the darte, and such like feats, with great diligence, and
handsomenes. Each communerther, acording to his substance finds a great
nombre of these to serve the king on horseback, in all wars. So that at
what time Anthony the Roman made war upon the parthians, where they met
him with fyftie thousand horsemen: there ware of the whole nombre but eyghte
hundred fre borne. They are not skylfull to fight it out at hand stripes, ne
yeat in the manner of besieging or assaulting: but all together aftre the manner
of skirmisshe, as they spy their advantage. They use no trompet for their
warninges or onsettes but a dromme: neither are they able to endure long in
their fight. For if they ware so good in continuance, as they be violente at
a brunte: there ware no multitude able to sustain their force. For the most
part they break of, when the skirmiche is even at the whottest. And within a
while aftre they feign a flight, where with they begin again a new onsette.
So when thou thinckest thy self most sure of the honor of the field, the^
art thou at the poinct of the hardest hasarde. Their horsemen use armor of
mayle entrelaced with feathers: both for their own defense, and the defense
also of their horses. In times passed they occupied no gold ne silver, but
only in their armor. Upon regard of change in their lust, they mary echeone
many wives. and yet punish they none offense so grievously as adultery. For the
avoiding whereof, they do not only forbid their women by general restrainte
from all feasts, and banckettinges of men: but also from the sight of them.
Some nevertheless do wrighte, among the which Strabo is one, that they use
to give their wives sometime to their friends, as in ye way of marriage, that
they may so have issue. They eat none other flesh but such as they kylle at
the chase. They be ever on horseback, whether they go to the field or the
banquet, to bye, to selle, to common of aughte with their friend, or to do any
thing that is to be done. Yea they dispatche al commune and private affairs,
sittinge on horseback. And this is to be vnderstonden of the fre borne: for
the slaves are always on foot. Their burial for all men (sauinge the
king) is the dogs bealy, and the kytes. But when they or such like have
eaten of, the flesh, the^ cover they the bare bones with earth. They have
great regard unto their gods, and the worship due unto them. They are men of
a proud nature, busy medlers, and sedicious, crafty, deceiptfull, malaparte,
and vnshamefaced: for they hold opinion that it becomes the man as well to be
stern, as the woman to be mylde. They be ever in some stir, either with
their neighbors, or else among them selves. Men of few words, and readier
to do, then to say. And therefore whether it go with them or against the^t
they lap it up in scilence. They obey not their superiors for any reverence,
bu, for fear. Altogether given to lechery, and yet skante in fiedinge. No
farther true of word or promise, then seems them expediente for their own
behoue.

The. vii. Chapter. Of Persia, and the manners and ordinances of the Persians.
PErsia (a country of the east) was so called of Perstus the Son of Jupiter
and Danae. Of whom the chief city of the kingedome also, was named
Persepolis, which in English sou^deth Persehoroughe (or as we corruptly term
it) Perseburie, and the whole nacio^ Persiens. This country as Ptolomie
writes in his fiueth book, has on the north, Media: on the West, Susiana:
on the east, the two Carmaniaes: and on the southe, an inshot of the Sea,
called the Bosom of Parthia. The famous cities thereof, ware Axiama Persepolis
and Diospolis. By the name of Jupiter they understood the whole heaven. They
chiefly honor the Son, whom they call Mitra. They worship also the Moon,
the planet Venus, the fire, the earth, the water, and the winds. They neither
have anltare nor temple, nor image, but celebrate their divine service under
the open heaven upon some high place for that purpose appoincted. In doing
sacrifice they have no farther respect, but to take away the life from the
beast. As having opinion, that forasmuch as the gods be spirits, they
delighte in nothing but the spiritual part, the soul. Before they slay it,
they set it aparte by them, with a corone upon the head, and heap upon it
many bittre banninges and curses.

Some of the nation notwithstanding, when they have slain the beast: use to
lay part of the offalle in the fire.

When they sacrifie unto the fire, they timbre up dry sticks together, clean
without pille or barcke. And after what time they have powered on neates
tallowe, and oil, they kindle it. Not blowing with blaste of blowesse or
mouth: but making wind as it ware with a ventile, or trenchour, or such
like thing. For if any manne either blow into it, or cast in any dead
thing, or any durte, or puddle, it is death to the doer. The Persians bear
such reverence to their floudes, that they neither wasshe, pysse, nor throw
dead carcass into them. No not so much as spitte into the^: But very
reuerentlye honor their water after this manner. Coming to lake, mere,
floude, ponde, or spring: they trenche out a little diche, and there cut they
the throat of the sacryfice. Being well ware, that no drop of blood sprinckle
into the water by. As though all water ware polluted and unhallowed over all:
if that should happen. That done their Magi (that is to say men skylfull in ye
secrets of nature) layeng the flesh upon a heap of Myrtus, or Laurelle, and
tymbryng small wandes about, set fire thereon and brenne yt. And pronouncyng
certain curses, they myngle oil, milk, and honey together, and sprinkle into
the fire. But these cursinges make they not against the fire ne water. But
against the earth, a great while toguether: holding in their hand a bou^dle
of small myrte wandes. Their kings reign by succession of one kindred or
stock. To whom who so obeys not, has his head and arms stricken of: and so
without burial is throwe^ out for karreine. Policritus shows that every king
of the Persians, buyldeth his house upon a great hille: and there hourdeth up
all the threasure, tribute, and tax that he receives of the people: to be a
record after his death how good a husbonde he has been for ye common
wealth. Such of the subjects as dwell upon the sea coast, are taxed to pay
money. But those that enhabite toward the mydde land: such commodities as the
quartre beats or has where they dwell. As apothecary druggues, woolle,
colors, and such like and cateille accordingly. He is not permitted (...)
any one cause, to put any man to death. Neither is it lawful for any other
of the Persians to execute any thing against any of his house or stock, that
may sieme in any wise cruelle. Every one of them marie many wives: and hold
many co^cubines also beside, for the increase of issue.

The king Proclaims reward unto him, that within one year begets most
children. Five year aftre they are begotten, they come not in the fathers
sight, by a certain ordenaunce used among them: but are brought up
continually among the women. To the end that if the child fortune to dye in
the time of his infancy, their fathers grief may be the less. They use not
to marie but in one time of the year: toward midde March. The bridegroom
eats to his supper, an apple of that country, or a little of the maribone of
a Chamel: and so without any farther banquettyng goes to bed. From five
years old, to twenty and four, they learn to ride, to throw the Dart^, to
shoot, and chiefly to have atongue void of all untruth. For their
nourituryng and trainyng in good manners, they have appoincted them Masters of
great sobrenes and virtue, that teach them dieties, and pretty songs,
conteinyng either the praises of their Gods, or of some worthy Princes.
Which sometime they sing, and sometime recite without note: that so they
might learn to confourme their lives unto theirs, whose praises they sieme
them selves to allow. To this lesson assemble they alwaie together, at the
call of a Trompette And as they grow into years, an account is required of
the^ how well they have borne away the lessons of their childhode. They use to
run the race, and to course, both on horseback and on foot: at the leadyng
of some noble man's son, chosen for the nones. The field for the race, is at
least three mile and three quarters long. And to the end that heat or cold
should the less trouble them, they use to wade over brooks, and swim over
rivers, and so to rowme and to hunte the fields, and to eat and drink in
their armor, and wette clothes. The fruyes that they eat are akecornes, wild
Pears, and the fruicte of the Terebinthine tree. But their daiely food aftre
their ronnyng, and other exercises of the body: is hard Bisquette, or a like
crustie bread, Hortechocques, Gromelle sede, a little roste flesh or sodden,
whether they lust: and fair water their drink. Their manner of Huntyng, is
with the bow, or the Darte on horseback. They are good also in the slynge. In
the forenoone they plant and graffe, dig up settes, stubbe up roots, make
their own armor, or fisshe and foul, with the Angle or net. Their children
are decked with garnishynges of gold. And their chief iuelle is the precious
stone Piropus, which they have in such price, that it may come upon no
dead corpse. And that honor give they also to the fire, for the reverence they
bear there unto. From twenty, till fiuetie: they follow the wars. As for
byeng and sellyng, or any kind of Law prattle, they use not. They carry in
their wars, a kind of shieldes facioned like a losenge, a quiure with
shaftes, and a curtilace. On their heads a copintancke, enibatled about like
a turrette, and a brestplate emboussed, of skaled work. The princes and men
of honor did wear a treble Anaxirides, facioned much like a coat armor,
and a long coat down to the knees, with hangyng slieues acordyng. The outside
colors, but the lining white. In Somer they wear purple, and in Wintre
Medleis. The abillementes of their heads, are much like the frontlettes that
their Magj do wear. The common people are double coated down to the midde
Leggue, and have abouttheir head a great roll of Sendalle. Their beds and
their drinking vessel, are garnished with gold. When they have matier of most
importance to common of, they debate and conclude in the mids of their
cups: thinkyng it much surer that is so determined, then aftre any other
sobrer sort. Acqueintaunce mieting of equal degree, griete one another with a
kiss. But the inferior mietyng with his bettre, enclineth his body foreward
with low reverence. They bewrte their corpses in the ground, cearyng them all
over with wax. Their Magicens they leave vnbewried, for the fowls to
disspetche. The children there, by an ordenaunce no where else used: do
carnally know their mothers. Thus have ye heard what the manners of the
Persians ware sometime.

Herodotus reherseth certain other, their facions not vttrely vnworthe the
telling. That they compted it vilanie to laughe, or to spitte before the king.
They thought it fondness in the Greeks, worthy to be laughed at, to imagine
gods to be sprung up of men. What so ever was dishoneste to be done, that
thought they not honest to be spoken. To be in debt was much dishonor, but
of all things most vile for to lie. They use not to bewrie their dead
bodies, until they have been torn with dogs, or with fowls. And the
parents brought to niedinesse, use there to make cheuisaunce of their
daughters bodies, which among no nation else was ever allowed. Howbeit some
hold opinion, that it was also the propretie of the Babilonians. The Persians
at this day, being subdued of the Saracenes, and bewitched with Mahometes
brainsicke wickedness, are clean out of memory. a people in those days,
which through their great hardiness and force, ware of long time Lords of
the East part of the world. But now tombled clean from their auncience
renown, and bewried in dishonor.

The. viij. Chapitre. Of Ynde, and the uncouth tredes and manners of life of
the people therein.
YNde, a Country also of the East, and the closyng up of Asia toward that
quartre: is said to be of such a maigne syse, that it may be compared with
the third part of the whole earth Pomponius wrireth, that alo^ge the shore,
it is fowrtie days sailyng the night also comprised therein.

It took the name of the floude called Indus, which closes up the land on
the Weste side. Beginning at the Southe sea, it stretches to ye Son risynge:
And Northward to the mount Caucasus. There are in it many great peoples: and
Tounes and Cities so thick, that some have reported them in nombre five
thousand. And to say truth, it ought not to sieme greatly strange unto
folks, though the rou^trie be reported to have such a nombre of Tounes, or to
be so populous: considering that of all other, the Yndiens alone, never
discharged them selves of any overplus of issue, as other have done: but
alwaie kept their own offpryng at home in their own country. Their
principal floudes are Ganges, Indus, and Hypanis. But Ganges far passes in
greatness the other twain. This land by the benefit of the battling breathe
of the gentle Weast wind, reapeth corn twice in the year. And other Wintre
has it none, but the bittre blastes of Theasterly winds called Etesiae. They
lark wine, and yet some men report, that in the quartre called Musica, there
grows a good wine grape. In the Southe part thereof, grows Nardus,
Cinnamome, Peper and Calamus aromaticus: as does in Arabia and Aethiope. The
woodde Ebenum (which some suppose to be our Guayacum) grows there, and not
else where Likewise of the Popiniaye and the Unicorn. As for precious stones,
Beralle Prasnes, Diamantes, fiery Carbuncles and Pearls of all sorts, be
found there in great plenty. They have two Summers, soft pimpelyng winds,
a mild aier, a rank soil, and abundaunce of watre. Diverse of them
therefore live ar^ hundred and thirty years. Namely among the Musicanes. And
among the Serites* yet somewhat longer.

All the Yndians generally, wear long hear: died either aftre a bright asshe
color, or else an Orange tawnie. Their chief iuelles, are of Pearl and
precious stones. Their appareille is very diverse: and in few, one like
another. Some go in Mantles of Woollen, some of Linen some naked, some only
brieched to couuer the priuities, and some wrapped about with pills, and
lithe barckes of trees. They are all by nature black of hew: eue^ so died in
their mothers womb acordyng to the dispocisio^ of the fathers nature, whose
siede also is black: as like wise in the Aethiopians. Talle men and strongly
made. They are very spare fieders, namely when they are in Camp. Neither
delighte they in much preasse. They are as I said, great deckers and
trimmers of them selves, haters of theft. They live by law, but not written.
They have no knowledge of lettres, but administer altogether without book. And
for yt they are void of guile, and of very sobre diete: all thing prospers
well with the^. They drink no wine, but when they Sacrifie to their gods.
But their drink is a bruage that they make sometime of Rize, sometime of
Barlie. Their meat for the most part is soupynges made also of Rize.

In their laws, bargains, and couenauntes, their simplicity and true meaning
well appears: for that they never are much contencious about the^. They
have no Laws concerning pledges or things committed to another man's
kiepyng. No witnessynges, no handwritynges, no sealynges, ne such like tokens
of treachery and untrust: but without all these, they trust and be trusted,
they believe and are believed, yea, they oftentimes leave their houses wide
open without keeper. Which truly are all great signs of a just and vprighte
dealyng among them. But this peradventure can not seatle well with every man's
fantasy: that they should live each manne aparte by himself, and every body to
dine and to suppe when he lust, and not all at anhowre determined. For in deed
for the fellowship and civility, the contrary is more allowable. They
comme^de and occupy much as a commune exercise, to rub their bodies:
specially with skrapers made for the nones. Aftre which, they smothe them
selves again with Ebenum, whereof I spoke before.

In their Toumbes, and Bewrialles, very plain and nothing costly: But in
trimming and arraieng of their bodies, to, to, gaude glorious. For there about
they neither spare gold, ne precious stone ne any kind of silk that they
have. They delighte much in garments of white Sarcenet. And for that they
set much by beauty, they carry about with them phanelles to defend them
from the son, and leave nothing undone, that makes for the bettre grace of
their faces. They set as much by truth alone, as by all other virtues
together.

Age has there no prerogative, except they win it with their wisdom, and
knowledge. They have many wives, whithe they use to buy of their parents for
a yoke of Oxen. Some to serve them as their vndrelynges, and some for pleasure,
and issue. Which may nevertheless use buttoke banquetyng abroad (for any
law or custom there is to restreine them) except their housebandes by fine
force, can compelle them to keep close.

No one among the Yndians either sacrifieth coroned, ne offreth odours, ne
liquours. They wound not their Sacrifice in no manner of wise: but smore him by
stopping the breath. Least they should offer any mangled thing unto God, but
that that ware in every part whole. He that is conuicte of false witnessyng,
has his fingres cut of by the top ioinctes. He that has taken a limme
from any manne, suffers not only the like loss, but loses also his hand.
But if any man have taken from an artificer, his hand, or his eye, it lies
him upon his head.

The king has a guard of bought women: who take chardge of his body, and have
the trimmyng and orderyng thereof, the residue of the army, remainyng without
the gates. If the King fortune to be droncken, it is not only lawful for any
one of these women to slay him: but she shall also as in the way of reward,
be coupled in marriage to the next king. Which (as is said) is one of his
sons, that before enioied the Croune. It is not lawful for the king to sleep
by day time: and yet in the night time to avoid treachery, he is forced every
hour to change his chamber. When he is not in camp, he often times comes
abroad: both to give sentence, and to hear matiers dependyng in question.
And if it be time of day to trim his body: he both hears the pleaes, and
is rubbed in the mean season with the skrapers before mentioned, by three of his
women. He comes furthe also to Sacrifices, and to hunting: Where he is
accompaignied with a rabble of women, in as good order as ours ware wont to be
upon Hocke mondaie. His way is ranged with ropes, and his guard of men
abides without. But if it fortune any to steal in, to the women (which is
contrary to their order and duty) he loses his head for it. There go before
him Tabours and Belles. When he hunteth in places fensed about, two or three
armed women stand priest, for his aid, and defense. But when he hunteth in
open place, he is carried upon an Eliphante: and even so sittyng on his back
shoots, or throws the darte at his game. Some of his women ride upon
Horses, some upon Elephantes. As likewise in the wars, where they fight with
all kind of weapons skilfully.

Such men also as have gathered things into writings, record: that the
Yndians worship as their gods the father of rain Jupiter: Ganges their
floude, and the familiar spirits of their country. And when their king
wash^th his head, they make solemn feast, and send his highness great
gifts, each man enuyenge other, who may show him self most rich, and
magnificent.

The commune wealth of the Yndians, was sometime divided into seven states or
degrees. The Sages (which other call Philosophers) ware of the first order,
or state: the which although they ware in nombre feawer then any of the rest:
yet ware they in honor and dignity about the king, far above all other.
These men (privileged from all business) neither be troubled with office, ne
be at any man's commandment: But receive of the communes such things as
serve for the Sacrifices of their gods, and are requisite for bewrialles. As
though they ware both well acqueinted, and beloved in heaven, and knew much
of the trade in hell. For this cause have they both gifts and honor largely
given the^. And in very diede they do much good among the people. For in the
beginning of ye year, assemblyng together, they foreshewe of rain, of drouthe,
of wind and of sickness: and of such like things as may to profeight be
foreknowen For as well the king as the people, ones vndresta^dyng their
foresawes, and knowing the certeintie of their judgments by former
experience: shone the euilles, and are priest to attend upon that, that is
good. But if any of their said Sages shall fortune to err in his foresight:
other punishment has he none, then for ever aftre to hold his peace.

The second order is of housebande men, which being more in nombre then any
of the other states, and exempte fro the wars, and all other labor: bestow
their time only in housebandrie. No enemy spoileth the^, none troubles them:
but refraineth fro doing them any hurt or hinderaunce, upon respect of the
profighte that redoundeth to the whole, through their trauailles. So that
they, having liberty without all fear to follow their business, are
instruments and means of a blessed plenteousnesse. They with their wives and
children, dwell alwaie in the country, without resortyng to the tounes or
city. Their pay rent to the King (for all the whole Country is subject to
their king) neither is it lawefull for any of the commones to occupy and
possess any ground, without paieynge rent. And the housebande men beside
this rent, yield unto the Kings majesty, a fiueth of their fruictes yearly.

The third order stands all by brieders and fieders, of all sorts, which
like wise neither enhabite town ne village: but with tents, in the wild
fields. And these with huntyng and foulyng in sondrie wise, so kiepe under the
beasts and hurtefull fowls: that whear other wise the housebande men should
in fiede time, and toward harueste, be much acloyed and hyndered by the
fowls, and theim^selues alwaie by the beasts, the country is quiet from al
such annoya^ce.

In the fowrthe order are Artific ers, and handitraftesmen. Which are divided,
some into Smithes, some into Armourers, some for one purpose, some for another,
as is expediente. These do not only live rence free, but also have a certain
of grain allowed them at the kings allowaunce.

In the fiueth order are the men of war, a great uombre daiely exercised
in arms, both on Horseback, on Elephantes, and on foot. And all their
Elephantes, and horses miete for their wars, are found of the kings
allowaunce.

The sixteth order is of Surueiours or Masters of report, which have the
onersighte of all things that are done in the realm, and the charge to bring
reaporte unto the king.

In the seventh place, are they that be Preside^tes, and heads of the commune
cou^sailles, very few in nombre, but worthy me^ for their nobility and
wisdom. Out of these are chosen counsailours for the kings Courts, and
officers to administrethe commune wealth, and to determine controversies: yea,
capitaines for the wars, and Princes of the realm.

The whole state of Ynde being divided into these ordres or degrees: it is also
ordained, that a man shall not marie out of the order, wherein his calling
lies, ne change his trade. For neither may the soldier occupy
housebandrie thought he would: ne the artificers entremedle with the doctrine
of the Sages.

There are also among the Yndians, persons of honor appointed to be as it
ware Tutours of straungiers, to see that no wrong be done them, to put order
for their keeping, and Physic, if any fall sick. As also (if it fortune any
of the^ to die) for the bewrieng of them, and to deliver their goods, and
money to their next friends.

All causes are brought before the judges, who hear the parties, and punysshe
the offenders diligently. There is no slanery among them. Yea, they have a
certain ordinance, that none shall be slave or bond among them, but all fre,
and of equalle authority and honor. For they hold opinion that who so
accustometh his self neither to be Lord over other, ne to wrong any body:
ye man has prepared him self sauftie and ease what so ever shall happen him
by any adventure. And a fond thing ware it to make the laws indifferente for
all, and not to make the states of the men indifferente

But because there are in Indemanye sondrie contries, diverse both in people
and tongue (as in so large a thing must needs happen) ye shall understand
that they do not all alike use such trade as I have described, but in some
plares somewhat worse.

Of those that lie toward the East, some occupy brieding, and some do not.
Other dwellinge in the mershe, and fennes upon the rivers side: occupy
fisshing, and live by the same all raw. And the bettre to work their feate,
they make them selves boats* of such canes as grow there, of a wonderful
biggenes.

So, that so much of the cane as is betwixt ioyncte and ioyncte, is a just
proporcion of timbre for one of their boats.

These of all the other Indians, are appareilled in matte, made of a certayn^
soft kind of mere rushes. Which when they have gathered out of the fioude,
and sliced out in manner of lace: they braude together much like our fig
frail^e, or such like kind of mattinge, and make them selves ierkins thereof.

Those that be yet by East of them, are brieders of cataille: and live
altogether with raw flesh, and have to name Padians. Whose conditions are
said to be such.

As often as it fortuneth any of their citezeins to be sick, if it be manne:
his nierest friends, and those that are most about him, kylle him by and by.
least (say they) his flesh should wax worse. Yea, though he would
dissemble the matier, and deny him self to be sick, it boteth not. For
without pardon, they kille him, and make a feast with him. If it be a woman,
look how the men did by the manne, so do the women by a woman. Like wise do
they with both sorts, when they wax crooked for age, or become impotente:
where through, what by the one means and the other, none of them die for age.

There is another sort of the Indians that kille no living thing, ne plant
nor sow, nor build house: but live with herbs, and a certain sede which
grows there of the own accord, much like unto gromelle. which they gather
with the cup or shelle that it grows in, and so sees it, and eat it. If
any of these fall sick, he wandereth forth into some deserte place, and there
lays him down: no man taking head either to his lieng or to his dienge.

All these Yndians that I now have spoken of, in quenching of natures heat,
use their women as secretly as beasts do their females.

These Yndians have a kind of sages, that the Griekes call. Gimnosophistae,
which as the word Sophista sounds now, might merrily be interpreted
briechelesse bablers. But as Sophista did signefie then, naked Sages: or to
give one Grieke word for a another, naked Philosophres. These (as Petrarche
writes) haunte the outemoste borders, and shadowie parts of that country,
wadering naked acordinge to their name, up and down, heather and theather,
studienge, and searching the natures of things, the course of the heavens, and
the secrets of knowledge. They continued sometime all the whole day from the
son rising, till his down goinge: beholdinge the same with steadfast eye,
never tourning away the head (although it be there most fervently hot)
searching and spienge aftre certain secrets in the body thereof.

At another time they pass the day likewise, standing one while on one leg,
another while on another in ye brotlinge. sand of that contrie. Froste nor
snow, nor fiery heat grieved not them.

Among these, is there a people called Brachmanes, which (as Didimus their
king wrate unto Alerandre when he went about to subdue them) live a pure and
simple life, led with no likerous lusts of other men's vanities. This people
lo^geth for no more then nature requires naturallye. They are content with
such food as comes to hand, desiryng no such as other men turn the
world almost vpside down to have, leaving no eleme^t vnransaked to get a
gowbin for their glotenous gorge: but such as the earth vnploughed, or
vndolue^, yeldeth of her self. And because they acqueinte not their table with
surfeit, in deed they know not so many kinds of sickenesses, ne so many names
of diseases as we do: but they bettre know what sound health means, and
stayed continaunce of the same, then ever we are like.

They have no niede to crave one another help and relief, where no man
makes claim by (thine) and by (mine) but every manne takes what he lusts
and lusts no more then he niedeth. Envy cannot dwell there, ne none of her
impes, where all be equalle, and none above other. and all alike poor, makes
all alike rich. They hane no officers of Justice among them, because they do
nothing that ought to be punisshed. There ran no law appiere, because none
offense appears.

The whole people has one only law, to do nothing against law that nature
prescribes. To cherishe labor, to bar out ydlenes, and banishe colle
couetyse. That lechery lick not away the vigor of their spirits, and
strength: nor lack throw men into desperate doompes. That every manne has
enoughe, where no man couettes more. That never content, is of all other the
most cruel restles plague. For whom she catches, she throws a foot
beneth beggary, whilst they can find none end of their scrattinge, but the
more they have, the fellier gnaweth their longing.

They warm by the Son, the deawe is their moisture, ye river is their
drink, the fair ground their bed. Lare breaks not their sleep,
Compassing of vanities wearieth not their mind. Pride has no stroke over
them, among whom there is no diversity. Neither is their any kind of bond
known among them: but the bondage of the body to the mind which they only
allow to be just.

For the building of their houses, they send not over sea for stone, they
burn no Calion to make lime to tempre their mortre, they bake no brickes, nor
diggs no sand. But either make them caves in the earth, or take such as they
find ready made in the sides of the mounteines and hills. There dwell they with
out fear of rage or ruin, of weather or of wind. He thineketh him self
sanflter fenced from showers with his cave, then with a few tiles: and yet
has by it a double commodity. A house while he lives, and a grave ready made
when he dies. There is no glittering apparel, no rattelinge in sulkes, no
rusteling in veluettes, but a litie brieche of brawded russhes, or rather a
covering of honest shamefacednesse.

The women are not set out to aliure, ne pinched in to please, ne garnisshed
togase at. No hear died, no locks outelated, no face painted, no skin
slicked, no countrefeicte countenance, nor mynsing of pass. No poticary
practice, no ynckehorne terms, nor pithlessepratlig. Finally no colors of
hypocrisy, no means to set out more beauty then nature has given them.
They join not in enge^drure for likerous lust, but for the love of yssewe and
succession. They keep no wars, but maintain peace: not with force, but with
peaceable behauour and manners. The father and the mother follow not the child
to ye bewrialle. They build no toumbes for the dead: more like unto chirches
then graves. They be wry not up their ashes in pottes da^hed full of pearl
and precious stone. For why they estieme in these, neither the honor of the
quick, ne the pleasure of the dead: but raither the trouble and pain of
both. Pestilence or other diseases (as I have said) the Abrahmanes are not
annoyed with, for they enfecte not the air with any filthye doings. But
nature always with them, keapeth accord with the season: and every elemente
his turn, with out stop or bar. Their Phisicque is abstinence, which is
able not only to cure the malady already crepte in: but also to hold out
such as otherwise might enter. They couette no sightes, nor shows of
misrule: no disguisinges nor entreludes. But when they be disposed to have the
pleasure of the stage, they enter into the regestre of their stories, and what
they find there most fit to be laughed at, that do they lamence and bewail.
They delighte not as many do, to hear old wives tales, and fantasies of Robin
hoode: but in studious consideracion of the wondreful workmanship of the
world, and the perfect disposinge of things in such order of course and
degree. They cross no sease for merchaundise, ne learn no colors of
Rethoricque. They have one kind of plain eloquence commune to them all:
tongue, and heart agreinge in truth. They have neither moote halles, ne
universities, whose disagreable doctrine more leaning to apisshe art, then
natural reason and experience, never brings any stay, or certeintie of
things. One part of this people judges man's perfeteste blessedness to stand
in honesty. And another in pleasure. Not in the tickelinges of the tail, or
painperinges of the bealy, more hittre then pleasau^te as thou may use them:
but to lack nothing that perfect nature desires, ne nothing to do that
perfect nature misliketh. They think it no honor to God, to slay for him an
innoce^te beast: yea they say he accepts not the sacrifice of men polluted
with blood* but rather loves a worship void of all bloodsheade. That is to
say the humble entreatie of word, because that proprety only (to be
entreated with words) is commune to God and to manne. With this therefore
say they he is pleased, because we somewhat resemble him self therein. And this
was the life of ye unchristened Brahmanes, where with we christianes are so
far out of love, that we are afraied least any man should believe it to be
true.

The Yndians called Catheis, have each man many wives. And as soon as anyone
husband fortuneth to die, his whole number of wives assemble before the
chiefest judges of the city, and there each for her self, shows and
alleges her well deseruinges toward her housebande: how derely she loved
him, how much she tendered and honored him. And she that is by them judged
to have borne her self best in that behaulfe, and to have been dierest to her
husbonde: she in the best manner and most gorgeous that she can devise,
triumphing and reioyfinge, gets her up upon the funeralle pyle, where her
housebandes corpse lies ready to be burnt, and there kissinge and enbrasinge
the dead body, is burned together with her houseba^de. So glad is she to
have the victory in the contencion of wiuely chastity, and honest behautour
toward her husband. And the other that live, think them selves dishonored:
and escape not without spotte of reproach as long as they live. Their children
in their infancy, are not nourisshed up at the liberty and will of the
parents: but certeinether are appointed to view the children: which if they
spy untowardness in the infant, deformity, or lack of lymmes, command it
to be slain.

They join not marriages for nobility of birthe, or abundance of substance,
but for beaultie* and rather upon regard of fruit, then of lust.

Certain also among the Yndians have this custom, that if they be of such
poverty that they be not able to marye out their daughters: even in the
flower of her age they bring her, or them, furthe into the marcate with
trompet and dro^me, or such other their noyses of war: And their, aftre the
multitude is comen together, the maiden first uncovers her self wholly up to
the hard shoulders, on the back haulfe, to be seen stark naked, and aftre
that likewise on the bealy. If the multitude find no fault, but allow her as
worthy to please for her body, then marieth she to some one there, whom she
best likes.

Megasthenes writes that upon diverse mounteines in Ynde, are people with
dogs heads, and long claws, cladde in hydes of beasts, speakinge with us
voice like unto manne, but barking only, much like unto dogs, with mouths
roughe like a grater.

They that dwell about the head of Ganges, have no need of any kind of
meat: for their live by the savor of their fruits. And if they fortune to
journey, so that they think to fail of the savor when they would have it,
they carry with them to smell to, at times as they fainte. But if it fortune
those to smelle any horrible stincke, it is as present death unto them, as
poison to us. It is recorded in writing, that certain of those ware in
Alexandres camp.

We read also that there are in Inde me^ with one eye and no mo. And certain so
notably eared that they hang down to their hieles, with such a largeness
that they may lie in either of them as upon a pallet: and so hard, that they
may rende up trees with them. Some other also having but one leg, but upon
the same such a foot, that when the son is hot, and he lacks shadow,
lyenge down upon his back, and holdinge up his foot, he largely shadoweth his
whole body.

It is read that in Clesia certain women have but ones child in all their
life time: and the children as soon as they are borne, immediately to become
horeheded. Again, that there is another nation, much longer lived then we are,
which in their youth are horeheared: and in their age, their hear waxes
black. They affirm also that there is another sort of women that conceive at
five years old, and live not above the age of. viii. years. There are also that
lack necks, and have their eyes in their shoulders. There are also beside
these, certain saluages with dogs heads, and shacke heared on their bodies,
that make a very terrible charringe with their mouths.

But in these and such like tales of the Indians, and their country: for that
a man had need of a ready belief that should take them for truths, one had
not niede to be to large: considering specially that men now a days, will
skante believe the report of other men's writings, in the things that almost
lie under their noses.

There is a place betwixt Gedrosia and the floude Yndus which is called
Cathainus of the Cathaiens that enhabyte it.

This people ware an offpring of ye Scithia^s, much altered from their
natural conditions, and wonted manners, if that that Altone the Arminiane
writes of them in his story, be true.

They pass (says he) all other men in quick smelling. And they say of them
selves, that though all other men have two instruments of sight, yet do none
se with both two in deed, but they: all other men in comparison either to have
no sight, or else as it ware but with one eye.

Their wittiness is great, but their boastinge greater. The whole nation of
the^ is persuaded, that they much pass all other men in knowledge, and the
subtilties of sciences. They are all of color shining white, small eyed,
beardelesse by nature. Their lettres are aftre the facio^ of the Roman, all
in squares. They are diuerselyledde with fond supersticions, some aftre one
sort, and some aftre another. But they are all void of the true knowledge
which is in Jesus Christ. Some worship the son, some ye moon. Other, images
of yoten metalle, many of them an ore. And thus to sundry such other
monsters, has this people in sundry wise divided it self in supersticion.
They have no manner of written laws, nor know not what we mean when we speak
of faithfulness or trustiness. And where (as I said before) they have in all
ha^di worckes a passing subtlety of wit, yet in the knowledge of heavenly
things, they are altogether to learn: that is to say, they are utterly
ignorant. A cowardly people and very fearful of death. Yet exercise they a
manner of war, but that they handle rather by wit, and policy, then by
strength and hardiness. In their fight they use a kind of shaftes, and
certain other weapons of flight, unknown to other countries.

Their money is a piece of square paper, with their Kings Image upon it. And
because it cannot be durable: order is taken, that when it is soiled or dusked
much, with passing from man to man, they shall bring it to the coignyng house,
and make exchange for new. All their vtensiles and necessaries of house, are
of gold, silver, and other metalles. Oil is so deintie among them, that the
king only uses it, as it ware for a precious ointement. Thus have we treated
of the Yndians, and now to their borderers, the Scithians.

The.ix. Chapitre. Of Scithia and their stern manners.
SCithia (a country lieng by North) is said of Herodotus, to take the name of
Scitha Hercules son. Or as Berosus Judges, of an other Scitha, borne ofoure
great graundame Araxe, Noahes wife, that dwelt first in that country. This
people in the beginning, pente within narowe bounds, so in process by little
and little, through their valeauntnes and force enlarged their limits: that
they became lords of many countries about, and grew into a great governance
and renoume. They nestled first upon the floude Araxis so few in nombre and so
base: that no man thought them worthy the troublyng or talkyng of. But
gettyng unto them a certain king, hardy, of great courage, and notable
experience in the wars: they enlarged their land so, that they made it
stretche on the one part (which is altogether Hille, and Mounteigne) unto
Caucasus, and over all the plain unto the Occean, and unto the great marshe of
Meotis, and Tanais the floude. From whence the country of Scithia now
stretches all along toward the East. And because the mounteigne Imaus, ronnyng
along as the country coasteth, deuides it in the mids into two haulues: the
one haulfe is called Scithia within Imaus, and the other without (as ye would
say) on this side the Mount, and beyond. There never meddled any power with
them, that was able to conquer them: or much to endamage them. They forced
Darius, the King of the Persians, with great dishonor to fly their country.
Theissue Cirus with all his army. They made an end of Alexandre with all his
power. The Romans sent them threats they would war with them, but they
proved in fine but words. They are a people not tameable with any toil bittre
warriors, and of great strength of body. At the first very raw, and with
out any ordinary trade of life: neither knowing what tillage meant, ne yet
having any houses or cotages to dwell in. But wandryng up and boune the wild
fields and driuyng their catteille before them, their wives and their children
ridyng in wagons by them. They obserned justice, without constraint of law.
They compted none offense more heinous, then thefce. As folk that had nothing
under lock nor keye, bar, nor bolte: but altogether in the open field. They
nether occupied gold ne silver. Their chief food was milk and Honey. Against
cold and other storms, they wrapped their bodies in felles, and hides of
beasts, and Mice skins. They knew not what Woollen meante, ne* any facion of
garmente.

This manner of life was in many of the Scithians, but not in all. A great
nombre of them, as they much differed in distaunce of place from other, so
differed they also from other in manners: and used a certain trade of living
among them selves, whereof we aftreward will entreat, when we have said
somewhat more of their facions in general.

Many of the Scithians delight in man slaughter. And the first man that he
takes in fight, his blood drincketh he: and offreth unto his King the heads
of all those yt he there sleaeth. For when he has so done, he is admitted to be
partaker of the butine what so ever it be, whereof he should be otherwise
partles. He cutteth of the head aftre this sort. First, with his knife he
makes in it a gashe round about like a circle, under the ears: then takes
he it by the hear of the croune, and strikes it of. That done, he fleaeth it,
and taweth the skin betwixt his hands, until it become very souple and
soft and kiepeth it for a hand kercher. This will he hang upon the reine of
his horse, and glories not a little in it. And he that has most of such
ha^dkerchers, is compted the valeauntest manne. There are many also that sow
together these skins of men, as other do the skins of beasts, and wear
them for their clothyng. Some of them flea the right hand of their enemies
being slain, so that the nails also remain upon the fingres, and make couers
of them for their quiuers.

Many of the^ flea the whole body, and stretche out the skin upon certain
sticks fitted for the nones, and so sprede the^ upon their Horse. Of the
Skulles of the heads thus slain, they make masures to drink in: coueryng
them on the outside with raw Neates leather, and gilding them on the inside,
if he be of ability. And when any gheste of estimacion comes round about,
all to begasshe his foreheade and his nose, and shoot him through the lift
hand, in three or four places. Then lay they the corpse in a Carte, and carry
it to the Gerrites, where the Sepulchers of all their Kings are. And they
dwell upon the floude Boristhenes, about the place where it becomes first
saileable. This people when they have received it, trenche out a square plotte
in the ground very wide and large. And then rippe the healy of the corpse, and
bowelle it clean: clensyng it and drieng it from all filthe, and fille it up
with Siler Montanum, Franckencense, Smallache siede, and Anise siede, beaten
together in a Mortre. And when they have sowed it up again close, they ceare
the whole body, and conueighe the same in a Carte, to the next people under
the governance of the Scithia^s, which with honor receive it, and conueigh
it unto the next of their dominion: and so from one to another, vntle it have
passed round about, to as many peoples, as are of their dominion, and be
comen again to the place of bewriall among the Gerrites. whether it is
accompainied with a certain of all the peoples, to whom it has comen, as they
gathered encreace from place to place. They, aftre what time they have laid
the corpse, cophine and all, upon a bed of state, amid the square before
mentioned: stick down their iauelines and spears about him, and with
sticks laid over from one to another, frame as it ware a Cielyng, which they
cover with a funeralle palle. Then in the rest of the void space, that yet
remains in the Cophine made for the nones: they bewrie one of his dierest
lemmans, a waityng manne, a Cook, a Horsekeper, a Lacquie, a Butler, and a
Horse. Which they al first strangle, and thruste in, together with a portion
of all sorts of plate, and of every such thing as apperteined to his
household, or body. And when the year comes about, then do they thus. They take
of those that ware nerest about the King (now there are none about the king,
but they be Scithians free borne, and such as his self does command: for he
may be served with no bought slave) of those take they fiuetie and as many of
his best horses. And when they have strangeled both the men and the horses,
they bowell the Horses, stuff their bealies again with Chafe, and sow them
up close, and set the men upon their backs. Then make they a voulte over
round about the bordre of the great square, and so dispose these Horse men
enuiron the same, that they sieme a far of, a troop of living horsemen
gardyng the king.

The communes have also a manner of bewrialle aftre a like sort. When one of
them dies, his next neighbors and kindsfolke lay him in a Carte, and carry
him about to every of his frindes: which at the receipte of him make a
feast, as well to the kindsmen, as to all the residewe that accompaignie the
corpse. And when they have thus carried him about by the space of fowretene
days, he is bewried. All the brain of his head being first piked out, and
the skulle rinsed with water clean. About the body they set up three
sparres of woodde slopyng, and restyng one upon another at the coppes. Round
about these sparres, they strain cappyng woollen, patkyng them as close as
they can. And within betwixt the spar^es, as it ware in the midst over the
dead, they set a traie or shallowe trough, where in to they cast a kind of
stones, that glistereth by fire light.

The men among the Scithians, do not use to wash the^ selves. But the women
use to power water upon their own bodies, and to rub themselves against some
roughe stone: and then with a piece of a Cipresse, Ceadre, or Encence tree, to
grate their whole body, until it be some what bollen or swollen. And then
enoint they both that and their face, with certain medicines for the nones:
whereby they become the next day a of very good smell, and (when the medicine
is washed away) stick and smothe.

Their commune oath, and the oath of charge in maciers of controversy, or
judgment, is by the kings clothe of estate: by the which if a man shall be
tried to have forsworn himself (as their enchauntours have a manner to try
with sa low rods whether they have or not) by and by without respighte, he
loses his head, and all his goods. which turn to the use of them that
have proved him pertured.

The Massagetes, a people of Scithia in Asie, beyond the sea called Caspiu^
mare in appareille and living, much like to the Scithians, and therefore of
some so called: use to sight both on horse back and on foce, with such
actiuitie and force, that they are almost invincible in both. Their weapons
are bow and arrows, Lances and Armynge swords. Their beltes about their
waste, the ornament of their heads, and their pollerone, are garnished with
gold. Their Horses are barbed on the breast, with barbes of gold. Their reins,
bridles, and trappour are all of gold. The heads of their Lances are of
Brass, and their Quiures armed with Brass. As for Silver and Iron they
occupy none. Each manne marieth one wife, and yet are the wives of them all,
commune one to another, which thing is not used among any of the other
Scithians. When so ever any man lusts for the compaignie of his woman, he
hangs up his quiver upon the carry wherein his wife is carried by him, and
there openly without shame coupleth.

When any one of this people wareth very aged, his friends, acquaintance, and
kindesfolke assembled together, make a bealie Sacrifice of him: sleayng as many
shiepe besides, as will serve for the fullness of the nombre. And when they
have dressed them, eat part and part like, the one with the other. And this
kind of departing is compted among them, of all other most blessed. If any
fortune to pine away of sickness, him eat they not: but put in a hole, and
throw earth upon him. Sorry for the loss, that he came not to the feast.

They neither sow nor mow, but live by flesh of such beasts as they have,
and such fish as Araxe the floude does ple^teously minister unto them: and
with drinckynge of Milk, whereof they make no spare. They know no gods but
the Son: In whose honor they offer up Horses in Sacrifice, as being in
swiftenesse most like unto the Son.

The Seretines are a debonaire people, and such lovers of quiernesse, that
they sho^ne to entremedle with any other people. Merchau^tes pass their
outmost floude toward them, but they may come no nigher. Along the banques
there, they set out such things, as they are disposed to selle. Not the
Merchauntes, but the indwellers of the Country. For they selle to other, and
buie of none. And they set them in order as they judge them in price. The
buyer comes, and as he judges them by his eye to be worth, without further
trade or feloweshippe betwixt them, so lays he down. And if they receive
it, he departs with ye ware. Among them is there neither whore nor thief,
nor adulteress brought to judgment. Neither was it ever heard, that there
was a man slain among them. For the fear of their Laws woorketh more
strongly with them, then the influences of the Stars. They dwell as it ware
in the beginning, or entryng of the world. And for that they live aftre a
chaste sort: they are neither skourged with Blastynges, ne Hail, ne Pestilence,
ne such other euilles. No man touches a woman there, aftre she has
conceived, ne yet in the time of her flowers. They eat none unclean beasts,
ne know what Sacrifisyng means. Every man there is his own Judge, acordyng
to Justice. Therefore are they not chastised with such corrections as happen
unto other for sin, but both continue long in life, and die wighout grief.

The Tauroschithia^s (so called for that they dwell about the mounteigne
Taurus) offer as many as fortune to make Shipwreck upon their shore:) to the
virgin, whose name ye shall aftre hear. And if it fortune any Greek or
Greeks, to be driven thither, him do they Sacrifice after this manner.

Afire what time they have made prayer after their manner, they strike of his
head with an hachet. And (as some say) tomble down the carkesse into the
Sea, (for this Virgin has a Chapelle upon the top of a high clieue, hangyng
over the Sea, where this feate is done) and nail up the head upon a Giber.
In this poincte of nailyng up the head, all the writers agree, but in tomblyng
down the body, not so* for some affirm that the body is bewried. The Virgin
Deuille, to whom they Sacrifice: is laid to be Iphigenia Agame^nons daughter.
Their ennemies as many as they take, thus they handle. Every manne cutteth of
his prisoners head, and carries it home: and fasteneth it upon the end of a
long pole, and sets it up: some upon their house top some upon their
chimneis as high as they can. And no merueile though they set the^ so that they
might well see round about them: for they say: they are the wardens and
kepers of al their whole house. They live by spoil, and by war.

The Agathirsians are men very near and fine, and great wearers of gold
in their appareill. They occupy their women in commune, so that they seem all
of one kindred, and one householde: never striuyng nor grudgyng one with
another, much like in body unto the Thracians.

The Neuriens use the manners of the Sithians. This people the somer before that
Darius set furthe, ware constrained for the great multitude of Serpents yt
ware bredde in their quartres, to change their dwelling place. They verily do
believe, and will swear it: that every year ones for a certain days, they
become Woulues, and return again into their former shape and state.

The Antropophagites (so called for that they live by man's flesh) of all
men, are the worste co^dicioned, without law, or officer, appareilled like
the Scithiens: but in language like unto no body but them selves.

The Melanchleni do all wear black, as their name does signify. And of
these also are eaters of man's flesh: so many as follow the trade of the
Scithians.

The Budines are a great nation, and a populous, graye eyed, and read headed
al. Their head city is Gelone, whereof they are also called Gelonites. They
keep every third year a reuelle in the honor of Bacchus: whereat they make
reuelle in deed, yea, revel route. They ware sometime Griekes, which put of
fro their country, seatled them selves there. And by process, losing the
propriety of their own tongue, became in language haulfe Greeks, and haulfe
Scithians. Yet are the Gelonites both in language and living, different from
the Budines. For the Budines being native of the place, are brieders of
Catteile: The Gelonites, occupienge tilthe: live by corn, and have their fruit
yardes. Neither like in color ne countenance to the other. All their quartres
are very full, and thick of trees. It has also many meres and great. In
and about the which they take Ottres, and Beauers, and many other beasts: of
whose skins they make them pilches, and Ierkins.

The Lirceis live by woodmanshippe, and huntinge, and aftre this manner. Their
country being also very thick of trees, they use to climb such as siemeth
them best: and there awaite their game. At the foot of every man's tree
lies a dog, and a horse well taught to couche flat on the bealy, as low
as can be. When the beast comes within daungier, he shoteth. And if he
hitte, he streighte comes down, takes his horse back, and follows with
his hou^de.

The Argippians dwell under the foot of the high mountains. Men which fro
their birthe are balde, both the males and the females. Their noses turn up
like a shoinge horn, and their chinnes be great out of measure. The sound of
their voice unlike to all other: there apparel aftre the sort of the
Scithians. They have small regard to brieding: by the reason whereof they have
small store of cattaile. They lie under trees, which in the wintre they cover
over with a white kind of felt, and in the somer take the same away, and lie
under the open tree. There is no man that will harm them for that they are
compted holy hallowed: neither have they any kind of armor, or weapon of
warxe. These men have the arbitrament of their neigbours controversies round
about And as they determine so are they ended. Who so flies unto them, is
saufe as in sanctuary.

The Issedonnes have this propretie. When so ever any man's father there,
dies: all his kinsfolk bring every man one beast or other to the house of ye
son that keeps the funeral. Which when they have killed and minsed: they
minse also the body of the dead. And both the flesshes being mingled
together, they fall to the banquet. Then take they the dead man's head, and
pike the brain out clean, and all other moistures and rags, and when they
have guilte it, they use it for a representacio^ of the party departed.
Solempnisinge every year furthe, the memorial, with new ceremonies, and mo.
This both the son for the father, and the father for the son, as the
Greeks keep their birthe days.

These are also said to be very just dealers, and their wives to be as
valeaunte and hardy as the husbands. Such have the manners of the Scithians
been. But afterward being subdued by the Tartares, and wearing by process
into their manners and ordinances: they now live all after one sort, and
under one name.

The.x. Chapter. Of Tartarie, and the manners and power of the Tartarians.
TArtaria, otherwise called Mongal: As Vincentuis writes, is in that part of
the earth where the East and the north join together. It had upon the
east, the land of the Katheorines and Solangores, on the South, the
Saracenes: on the weste the Naymaniens, and on the north is enclosed with the
occean. It has the name of the floude Tartar that ronneth by it. A country
very hilly, and full of mountains. And where it is champe in, myngled with
sa^de and grauelle. Barreine, except it be in places where it is moysted with
floudes, which are very few. And therefore it is much waaste, and thinly
enhabited. There is not in it one City, ne one village beside Cracuris. And
wood in the most part of the country so skante, that the enhabitau^tes are
feign to make their fire, and dress their meat with the dry donge of neat
and horses. The air intemperate and wonderfulle. Thondre, and lightening in
somer so terrible, that sundry do presently die for very fear.

Now is it broiling hot, and by and by bittre cold, and plenty of snow.
Such strong winds sometime, that it staieth horse and man, and blows of
the rider: teareth up trees by the roots, and does much harm. In wintre it
never raineth there, and in Somer very often. But so slendrely, that the earth
is skante wette with all. And yet is there great store of Cattaile: as Camelles,
neat. etc. And horses and mares, in such plenty, as I believe no part of the
earth has again. It was first enhabited of four peoples. Of the Ieccha
mongalles that is to say, the great mongalles. The Sumongalles, that is to
say the watre mongalles, which called them selves Tartares, of the floude
Tartar whose neighbors they are.

The third people ware called Merchates, and the fourth Metrites. There was
no difference betwixt them either in body or language, but al aftre one sort
and facion. Their behauour was in the beginning very brute, and far out of
order, without law or discipline, or any good facion. They lived among the
Scithians, and kept herdes of cattalle in very base state and condition: and
ware tributaries to all their neighbors.

But within a while aftre, they divided them selves as it ware into wards, to
every of the which was appointed a captain: in whose devises and consentes
co^sisted thordre of the whole. Yet ware they tributaries to the Naima^nes
(their next neighbors) until Canguista by a certain prophecy was chosen
their king. He as soon as he had received the governance, abolished all
worship of deuilles, and commanded by commune decree that all the whole
nation should honor the high godeuerlasting: by whose providence he would
seem to have received the kingdom. It was further detreed that as many as
ware of age to bear armor, should be priest, and ready with the king at a
certain day.

The multitude that served for their wars, was thus distributed. Their
capitaines over ten (which by a term borrowed of the French, we call
Diseners, are at the commandment of the Centurians. And the Ce^turiane
obeyed the Millenarie, that had charge of a thousand. And he again was
subject to the grande Coronelle that had charge over ten thou sand: above the
which nombre they mounted no degree of captains.

This done, to prove the obedience of his subjects, he commanded seven sons
of the Princes or Dukes which before had governed the people: to be slain by
the hands of their own fathers, and mothers. Which thing although it ware
much against their hearts, and an horrible diede, yet did they it. Partly
upon the fear of the residew of the people: and partly upon conscience of
their obedience. For why, the people thought when they saw him begin aftre
this sort: they had had a god amongst them. So that in disobeynge of his
commandment, they thought they should not have disobeied a king but God him
self.

Canguista taking stomach with this power, first subdued those Scithians that
bordred upon him, and made them tributaries. And where other before had been
tributaries also unto thein: now received he in that one peoples right,
tribute of many. Then settinge upon those that ware further of, he had such
prosperous success that from Scithia to the son risinge, and fro thence to
the middle earth sea, and beyond: he brought all together under his
subjection. So that he moughte now worthily write him self high Governor,
and Emperor of the East.

The Tartares are very deformed, little of body for the most part, having
great stiepe eyes: and yet so heary on the eye liddes, that there shows but
little in open sight. Platter faced and beardlesse, saving upon the upper lip,
and a little about the poincte of the chinne they have a feawe hears as it ware
priched in with Bodkins. They be communely all, slendre in the waste. They
shave the hindre haulfe of the head, round about by the croune, from one
ear to another: compassyng toward the nape of the neck after such a facion,
that the polle behind shows much like the face of a bearded manne. On the
other part, they suffer their hear to grow at length like our women: which
they divide into two tresses, or braudes, and bring about to fasten behind
their ears. And this manner of shauyng, do they use also that dwell among
them, of what nation so ever they be. They them selves are very light and
nimble: good on Horse, but naught on foot. All from the most to the least,
as well the women as the men: do ride either upon Geldynges, or Rien, where
so ever they become. For stoned Horses they occupy none, ne yet Gelding that
is a striker, and light of his heles. Their bridelles are trimmed with much
gold, silver, and precious stones. And it is compted a ioly thing among them:
to have a great sort of silver sounded belles, gynglyng about their horse
necks. Their speech is very chourlishe and loud.

Their singyng is like the bawlynge of Woulues. When they drink, they shake
the head: and drink they do very often even unto dro^ckennesse, wherein they
glory much. Their dwelling is neither in tounes ne Bouroughes. But in the
fields abroad, aftre the manner of thauncie^t Scithians in tents. And the
ratherso, for that they are all most generally catteill mastres. In the wintre
time they are wo^t to draw to the plains, and in the Somer season, to the
mounteignes and hilly places for the better pasture. They make them Tents,
or else round cotages of wickres, or of Felt vndersette with smothe poles.
In the mids they make a round window that gives the^ light, and lets
out the smoke. In the mids of the Te^t, is their fire, about the which
their wife and their children do sit. The men delight much in dartyng,
shootyng, and wrastelyng. They are merueilous good hunters, to the which they
go armed at all pieces. And as soon as they epsy the beast, they come costing
together round about and enclose her. And when every manne has thrown his
darte, or shot his arrowe: whilst the beast is troubled and amassed with the
stripes, they step in to her, and slay her. They neither use bread ne
bakyng: table clothe ne napkin.

They believe that there is one GOD that made all things, bodily and ghostly,
seen or unseen, and him they honor: but not with any manner of Sacrifice or
ceremony. They make them selves little pupettes of silk or of felt, or of
thrumme, like unto men: which they set up upon each side of their Tents,
and do the^ much reverence, beseching them to take heed to their catteille. To
these they offer the first milk of all their milche catteill, of what kind so
ever they be. And before they begin either to eat or drink aught, they fette
a portion thereof before them. Look what beast they kille to be eaten, they
reserve the heart all night in some covered cup, and the next morning
seath it and eat it.

They worship also and Sacrifice to to the Son, Moon, and elements four.
To Cham also their Lord and King, they do very devout honor and Sacrifice:
supposyng him to be the son of god, and to have no piere in the whole world:
neither can they abide to hear any other manne name him.

This people so despises al other men, and think them selves so far to
surmount them in wisdom and goodness: that they abhor to speak to them, or
to compaignie with them. They call the Pope and all christen men, Doggues
and Idolatres: beeause they honor stones and blocques. And they them selves
(being given to deuelishe supersticions) are markers of dreams, and have
dream readers among them: as well to enterpreate their sweuens, as to ask
knoweledge of Idolles. In whom they are persuaded that God speaks: and
therefore acordyng to their answers, frame them selves to do. They mark many
seasons, and specially have regard to the chaunges of the Moon. Yet make they
for no season, ne change, any singular holidaie or obseruaunce: but ilike for
them all indifferently. They are of so gredie a coueitousenesse, and desire,
that if any of them se aughte, that he coueiteth to have, and cannot obtein
with the good will of the owner: if it apperteigne to no Tartarre, he will
have it by force. And they think (through a certain ordenaunce that their
King made) they offend not therein. For such a commandment had they of
Canguista, and Cham, their first Kings: That if it fortune any Tartarre, or
Tartarres sernaunt, to find in his way, horse, man, or woman, without the
kings ^ettres or his saulfco^duite: he should take it, him, her, or them as
his own for ever.

To such as lack money they lend, but for shameful gains: that is to say,
two shillynges of the pound for every Monethe. And if it fortune ye to fail
to make paiemente at the day: ye shall also be forced to pay the enterest,
acording to the rate of the Usury. That is to say, of every tenth penie, one.

They do so polle and oppress their tributaries, with subsidies, taxes and
tallages, as never did people but they, that ever manne read of. It is beyond
belief to say. They ever coueite, and as Lords of all, do rape, and rende
from other, and never recompense aught. No, the beggar that lives on almose,
gets not an aguelette of him. Yet have they this one praise worthy
propretie, that if he fortune to find them at meat: they neither shut the
door against him, ne thruste him out, if he be disposed to eat. but
charitably bid them, and part with them such as they have. But they fiede
the vnclenliest in the world, as I have said, without table clothe, napkinne,
or towell to cover the horde, or to wipe at meat, or aftre. For they neither
wash hand, face, ne body, ne any garme^te that they wear, They nether eat
bread, nor make bread, nor sallottes nor potage, nor any kind of Pultz. But no
manner of flesh comes to them amiss. Dogs, Cattes, Horses and rattes* Yea,
sometime to show their cruelty, and to satissie their vengeance, the bodies
of such their enemies, as they have taken, they use to roste by a great fire:
and when they be assembled a good nombre together, they tear them of the
spittes like Woulues, with their tieche, and devour the^. And aftreward
drink up the blood, which they reserve before hand for the nones. Otherwise
they use to drink Milk. They have no wine of the country it self, but such
as is brought into the^ they drink very gredilie. They use to Lowse one
another head; and ever as they take a Lowce to eat her, saying: thus will I
do to our enemies. It is compted a great offense among them to suffer
drink, or a piece of meat to be lost. They never therefore give the bone to
the Dog, till they have eaten out the marrowe. They never eat beast (such
vile niggardes they are) as long as the same is sou^de and in good likyng: but
when it fortuneth to be hurt, sick, or febled by age, then bewrie they it in
their bealies. They are great sparers, and content with small change, and
little food. They drink in the morning, a goblet full of Milk or twain,
which serves them sometime for their whole days food.

The men and the women most communely are appareilled ylike. The men wear
upon their heads shallowe copin tackes, coming out behind with a tail of a
handefull and a haulfe long, and as much in breadth: which they fasten under
their chinnes, for falling or blowing of, with a couple of strings of ribbande
lace, as we do our night cappes. Their married Women wear on their heads,
fine wickre Basquettes of a foot and a haulf long: round, and flat on the
top like a barrelle. Which are either garnished with chau^geable silks, or
the gaiest part of the Pecockes feathers, and set with gold and stones of
sondrie sorts. As for the residue of their body, they wea^ acording to their
ability, both men and women, Skarlet or Velvet, or other silks. They wear
coats of a strange facion, open on the left side, which they put on
acordingly, and fasten with four or five Buttons. Their Somer wiedes are all
co^munely black: and those that they wear in Wintre and foul weather, white:
and never lower then the knee. Wearing furs (wherein they much delight) they
wear not the furre inward, as we communely do: but contrariwise the hear
outward, that they may eni^ie the pleasure of the show.

It is hard to discern by the appareile the maid, fro the wife, or the woman
fro the manne: so like araied do the men and the women go. They wear
brieches, the one and the other. When they shall go to the skirmishe, or to
battaille, some cover their arms (which at all other times are naked) with
plates of iron, buckeled together alonge, in many pietes, that they may the
easelier stir their arms. Some do the same with many foldes of Lcather:
wherewith they also arm their head. They cannot handle a target: nor but few
of them a lance or a long sweard. They have curtilasses of iij. quarters
long: not double edged but backed. They fight all with a quarter blow, and
neither right down, ne foyning. They be very ready on horseback, and very
skilful archers. He is compted most valeau^te, that best observes the
commandment and the obedience dew to his captain. They have no wages for
their souldie, yet are they pressed, and ready in all affairs, and all
commandments. In battle, and otherwise where ought is to be done, very
politic and expert. The princes and capitaines enter not the battle, but
standing aloof, cry unto their men, and harten them on: lookinge diligently
about on every side what is needful to be done. Sometime to make the army
sieme the greater, and the more terrible to the ennemy: they set up on
horseback their wives and their children, yea and men made of cloutes. It is
no vilany among them to fly: if any thing may either be saved or won by
it. When they will shoot, they unarm their right arm, and then let they
fly with such violence, that it pearceth all kind of armor. They give the
onset flockinge in plumpes, and likewise in plompes they fly. And in the
flighte they so shoot back ward behind them, that they slay many of their
ennemies pursuinge the chase. And when they perceive their ennemies dispersed
by pursuinge the chase, or not to fight any thing wholly together: soudeinly
retourninge, they begin a new onset with a hayle of shot, neither sparing
horse ne man. So that oftetimes they overcome when they are thought to be
va^quisshed. when they come to enuade any quartre or country, they divide
their army, and set upon it on every part: so that the enhabitours can
neither have laisure to assemble and resist, ne way to escape. Thus are they
always sure of the victory, which they knytte up with most proud cruelty.
Neither sparinge manne woman ne child, old ne young saving the artificer
only, whom they reserve for their own uses. And this slaughter make they
aftre this manner. When they have all taken them, they distribute them to their
Centurians: who commit them again to the slaves: to every one fewer or more
acordinge to the multitude. And when the slaves have all slain them as
bouchers kylle hogs: then for a terror to al other there about: of every
thousa^de of ye dead they take one, and hang him up by the hieles upon a
stake, amydde these dead bodies: and so order his head as though it appiered
by his facion or manner of hanginge, that he yet both harkened the complainte
of his fellows, and lessoned them again. Many of the Tartarres when the bodies
lie fresshe bliedinge on the ground, lay them down alonge, and suck of ye
blood a full gloute.

They keep faith to no man, how depely so ever they bind them selves
thereunto. They deal yet wou^se with those that they overcome with force. The
maidens and young women they deflowre, and defile as they come to hand,
neither do they judge it any dishonestie. The beautifuller sort they lead
away with the^: and in ertreame misery, constrain them to be their slaves all
their life long.

Of all other they are most unbridled in leachery. For although they marye
as many wives as they lust, and are able to keep: no degree prohibited, but
mother, daughter, and sister: yet are they as ra^cke bouguers with mankind,
and with beasts, as the Saracenes are, and no punishmente for it among them.
The woman that they marie, they never take as wife, ne receive any dowry with
her, until she have borne a child. So that if she be barren he may cast her
up, and mary another.

This is a notable marvel, that though among them many women have but one
manne: yet they never lightely fall out, ne brawle one with another for him.
And yet are the men parcialle in their love: showing much more favor to one
then another, and going fro the bed of the one, streighte to the bed of an
other. The women have their several te^tes and householdes: And yet live very
chastely, and true to their housebandes. For both the manne and the woman
taken in adultery, suffer death by the law.

Those that are not occupied for ye wars, drive the catteile a field, and
there keep them. They hunte, and exercise them selves in wrastlinge, other
thing do they not. The care of provision for meat and drink, appareille and
householde, they betake to the women. This people has many supersticious
toys. It is a heinous matier with them, to touch ye fire, or take flesh out
of a pot with a knife. They hew or choppe no manner of thing by the fire,
leasse by any manner of means, they might fortune to hurt the thing which
always they have in reverence, and judge to be the clenser, and purifier of al
things. To lay them down to rest upon the whippe that they stir their
horse with (for spurs they use none) or to touch their shaftes therewith, in
no wise they will not. They neither kille young birds, ne take them in the
neste or otherways. They beat not the horse with the bridle. They break not
one bone with another. They are ware, not to spill any spone meat, or drink,
specially milk. No man pisseth within the compass of their soiourning
place. And if any one of self willed stubbornness should do it, he ware sure
without all mercy to die for it. But if necessity constrain the^ to do it
(as it often happens) then the tente of him that did it, with all that is in
it, must be cleansed and purified aftre this manner. They make two fires, three
strides one from another. And by ethe fire they pitche down a Iaueline. Upon
them is tied a line stretching fro the one to the other, and covered over with
butkerame. Between these. ii. Iauelins, as through a gate, must all things
pass that are to be purified. Two women (to whom this office belongs)
stand, on either side one, sprinckelinge on watre, and mumblinge certain
verses. No strau^gier, of what dignity so ever he be, or of how great
importance so ever the cause of his coming be: is admitred to the kings
sight before he be purified He that treads upon the thressholde of the
tente wherein their king, or any of his chiefteines lies, dies for it in the
place. If any manne bite a gobet, greater then he is able to swallowe, so that
he be constrained to put it out of his mouth again: they by and by make a hole
under the tent, and there draw him out, and cruelly slay him. Many other
things there are which they compte for faults be yonde all forgiveness. But
to sl^a a man, to enuade a another man's country, contrary to all right and
reason, to bereue them of their goods and possessions, to break the precepts
of God, they estieme as nothing. They have a belief that aftre this life they
shall live for ever in another world (but what manner of world they cannot
tell) and there receive reward for their well doings. When any of the^
falls sick, and lies at the point of death, they stick up a Iaueline with
a piece of black clothe at the door of the te^te where he lies, that none come
in as they pass by. For no man when he sees this, dare enter thither
uncalled.

Aftre what time the sick is dead, his whole house gather together, and
privily conueighe the cor^s into some place without the tente, chosen for ye
purpose. There cut they out a tr^^^he, broad and diepe enoughe to set up
another little tent in: so that the top of the tent may be well within the
ground. In that they prepare a table with a banquet: at the which they set
the dead body in his best appareille. And so together, as it ware with one
hand, cover all with earth again. They bewry with him also some beast of
bourden, and a horse ready sadled and appointed to ride. The gentlemen by their
life time, appointe out a slave (whom they mark with their brande) to be
specially bewried with him when he dies. And this do they upon persuasion of a
life in another world, where they would be loath to lack these necessaries.
Then do the deades friends take another horse, and slay him. And when they
have eaten the flesh, they stuff the hide full of hay, and sow it again
together and set it up over the grave upon four poles, in remembrance of
the dead. The bones do the two ordenarie women burn, for the cleansing and
purifienge of the soul. But the gentlemen, and they of higher degree, handle
the hide aftre another manner. They cut it out into very fine thonges, to
as much length as they can, and measure out as much ground about the
Sepulcher as the thonge will stretche unto. for so much ground think they
shall the dead have in another world. At the thirtieth day they end their
mourning.

Certain of the Tartarres, professing the name of Christ, yet far from his
righteousness: when their parents wax aged, to ha^^e their death, ^rame the^
with gobins of far. When they die they burn them to ^ouldre, which they
reserve as (...) precious Iewelle, to straw upon their meat every day. But
to declare with what solempnitie and ^oifulnes they set up their new Ring,
aftre the death of tholde: because it ware to long a thing, both for the
reader and writer to set out as length, I will show you in brief theffects

Abroad in the fields, in a fair plain ordenary for the purpose: all the
Dukes, Earls, Barons, Lords, and the rest of the nobility, together with the
people of the whole kingdom, do assemble. Then take they him, to who^ the
croune is due, either by succession, or by election. And when they have set him
up in a throne of Gold: they all fall down on their knees, and together with
one voice cry out a loud, aftre this manner. We require the, yea, we will and
command the, to take the rule and governance of us. He answers, if ye will
have me do so, then must ye of necessity be ready to do whatsoever I command
ye. To come when I call ye, to go whether so ever I send ye, to slay whom so
ever I commau^de ye, without sraieng or srackering. and to put the whole
kingdom and rule in my hands, when they have answered, we are content:
Says he again, from hencefurthe then the speech of my mouth, shall be my
swearde. To this the people yealde with great shoutes, and reioisynges. In the
mean while the princes and the nobles, taking the king our of his throne,
spread abroad on the ground a piece of felt: upon the which, they cause him
in simple sort to sit down, and thus say to him. Look up, and remember
GOD above the. And now look down also, and behold this felt under the. If
thou govern well, thou shalt have all even as thou would wisshe it. But
if contrary wise, thou shall so be brought down again, and so nighe be
bereued of all: that thou shalt not have so much, as this poor felt left
the, whereupon thou sit. This ones said, they set in to him, of all his
wives the dierest derlyng. And liftyng up the felt alofte, hail him by the
name of Emperor, and her by the name of Empress. Then come there prese^tes
straight from al countries, and peoples of his dominion: and all the
Threasoures that the king, his predecessor left, are brought him. Of the
which he gives gifts to all the princes and high estates: commaundyng the
rest to be kept for himself, and so dissolueth the Parliament as it ware.

In his hand and power is then altogether, no man can: or though he can, he
dare not say this is mine, or this is his. No man may dwell in any part of
the land, but in that whereunto he is appoincted. The Emperor himself
appoincteth the Dukes: the Dukes, the Millenaries: the Millenaries, the
Centurianes: and they the Disniers: and the Disniers the residewe. The seal
that he uses has this superscripcion. GOD in heaven, and Chutchuth Cham in
earth, the force of God, and Emperor of all men. He has five armies of
great multitude and force: and five chiefteines, by whom he subdueth all that
stand against him. He himself never speaks to any foreine ambassadors, nor
admits the^ to his presence, as is above said: except both they and their
gifts (without the which specially they may not come) be purified by the
ordenarie women. The King answers by another man's mouth. And the person
by whom he answers, be he never so honorable, for the time that he
becomes the kings mouth, kneleth on his knees and gives so diligent care,
that he swarueth not from the King in one word. For it is not lawefull for
any manne, to change the kings words: ne for any man in any wise, to reply
against such sentence as he gives. He never drincketh in open presence, but
some body first sing to him, or play upon some instrumente of Musicque.

The gentlemen and men of honor when they ride, have a phannell borne before
them, on a Iauelines end, to kiepe away the Son. And as it is said, the
women likewise. These ware the manners and facions of the Tartarres, for a two
hundred years paste.

The Georgia^s, whom the Tartarres about the same time did subdue: ware
christians, aftre the form of the Greek Church. They ware neighbors to the
Persians. Their dominions stretched out a great length, from Palestine in
Iewrie to the mounteignes called Caspij. They had eightene Bishopries: and one
Catholicque: that is to say, one general bishop, which was to them, as our
Metropolitan to us. At the first they ware subject to the Patriarche of
Antioche* Men of great courage and hardiness. They all shaued their
crounes: the Laietie square, the Clercques round. Their women (certain of
them) had the order of Knighthode, and ware trained to the wars. The
Georgianes when they ware set, ordered, and raunged in the field, and ware
at poinct to join the batteill: used to drink of a gourdfull of strong wine,
about the bigguenes of a man's fiste. And to set upon their ennemies: much
amended in courage.

Their Clercques, which we call the Spirituality, might use both Simonie
and usury at their will. There was continual hatred betwixt Tharmenians and
them. For the Armenians ware also christians, before the Tartarres had subdued
the Georgianes and the^. But they differed in many things, from the belief and
facions of the true Church. They knew no Christemas day, no vigilles, nor
the four quartre fastes, which we call Embryng days. They fasted not on
Easter eue^, because (say they) that Christ rose that day about even tide.
Upon every Saturdaie, betwixt Easter and Whitsontide, they did eat flesh.
They ware great fasters, and began their Le^te three wekes before us: and so
straightly fasted it, that upon the Wedensdaie and Fridaie, they neither eat
any kind of fisshe, ne aughte wherein was wine, or oil. Believing that he that
drancke wine on these two days: sinned more then if he had been at the stews
with a whore. On the Monedaie they absteined from all manner of meat. On
Tewsdaie and Thursdaie, they did eat but one meal. Wedensdaie and Fridaie,
nothing at al. Saturdaie and Sondaie, they eat flesh and made lusty chiere.
Through their whole Lent, no man said Mass but on Saturdaies and Sondaies.
Nor yet on the Fridaies throughout the whole year: for they thought then, that
they brake their fast. They admitted to the houseale, as well children of two
months old, as all other indifferently. When they went to Mass, they used
to put no watre in the wine. They absteined from Hares flesh Beaws flesh,
Crows, and such other as the Greeks did, and Jews do. Their Chalices ware of
Glass, and of Tree. Some said Mass without either albe or vestement, or any
manner such orname^t. Some only with thorname^tes of Deacon or Subdeacon. They
ware all busy usurers, and Simonites: both spiritual and Te^porall, as the
Georgianes ware. Their priests studied Sothesaieng and Nigromancie. Their
Spirituality used Iunckettyng oftener then the Laietie.

They married, but aftre the death of the wife, it was not lawefull for the
housebande to marie again, nor for the wife, aftre the death of the
housebande. If the wife ware a whore, the Bisshoppe gave him leave to put her
away, and marie another. As for the fire of Purgatory they knew nothing of
it. They denied also very stiffly, that there ware two natures in Christ. The
Georgianes said that they swarued from the truth of Christ's Religion, in
thirty poinctes or articles.

The.xi. Chapitre. Of Turcquie, and of the manners* Laws, and Ordenaunces of
the Turcques.
THE land, which now is called Turcquie: has on Theaste Armenia the more,
and ronneth endelong to the Sea of the Cilicians: having on the North, the Sea
named Euxinus. There are in it many countries contained. As Lichaonia, whose
head city is Iconium. Cappadocia with her head city, named Cesarea.
Isauria, which has for the chief city Seleucia. Licia, which now is called
Briquia. Ionia: now called Quisquoun, in the which stands Ephesus.
Paphlagonia, and in it Germanopolis. And Leuech: that has for the head City
Trapezus. All this country that now is called Turcquie, is not enhabited by
one several nation, but there be in it Turcques, Greeks, Armenians, Saracenes,
Iacobites, Nestorians, Jews and christians. Which live for the most part,
acording to the Tradicions and Ordenaunces, that Mahomet the countrefeict
Prophet, gave unto the Saracenes (a people of Arabie) the year of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.vi. hundred and.xxix. A man whom I can not tell
whether I may call an Arabiane or a Persia^. For there be aucthorities of
writers on either behaulfe. His father was an idolastre after the manner of the
heathen. His mother an Ismalite leaning to the law of the Jews. And whilst
in his childehode, his mother taught him aftre one sort, and his father aftre
another: they printed in him such a doubtful belief, yt when he came to age
he cleaued to neither. But as a man of subtyle and guilefull wit, aftre
what time he had been long conuersaunte amongst men of the Christian
religion: he drove a drifte, devised out of both laws (the old and the new)
how he might notably enfecte the world.

He said the Jews did wickedly to deny Christ to be borne of the virgin
Mary, saying the prophets (me^ of great holiness, and enspired with the holy
ghost) had foreshewed the same, and warned me^ of many years passed to look
for him. Contrariwyse he said to the Christians they ware very fond to believe
that Jesus, so dierly beloved of God, and borne of a virgin, would suffer
those vilanies and torments of the Jews.

Martinus Segonius nouomo^tanus, in his book of the Sepulcher of Christ our
king, writes that the Turks, and Saracenes by an ancient opinion received
from Machomet: do laughe Christian men to skorne, that seek thither with so
great reverence. Saying that Christ ye prophet of all prophets endewed with
the spirit of God, and void of all earthly corruption: had there no sepulcher
in very diede, for that he being a spiritual body conceived by the breathe of
ye holy ghost could not suffer, but should come again to be judge of the
Gentiles. This says Segonius, and many other things sounding to like
effect: which the Mahometeines are wo^te to throw out against the
christians, both foolisshely and wickedly. When this countrefeicte prophet had
saused his sect with these wicked opinions: he gave them his law, and sort
of religion. Against the which less any man of right judgment should
aftrewarde write or dispute (as against a pestilent and filthy persuasion) he
wrote a law in his Alcorane that it should be death to as many as should
reason or dispute upon it. Whereby he evidently declared, that there was
nothing godly or goodly therein. For why should he else have so raked it up in
the ashes, and for bidden it to be examined: so that the people could never
come to knowledge what manner of thing it is that they believe in. In the giving
of his law, he used much the counselle and help of the mo^che Sergius: of
the wicked sect of the Nestorianes. And to the end it might please the more
universally: he patched it up together with pieces of all manner of sects. He
thought it good to set out Christ with the best, affirminge that he was a man excelling in all holiness and verrue. yea he extolled him to a more
height then was appliable to the nature of man, calling him the word, the
spirit, the soul of GOD, borne out of a virgins womb, whom he also with
many wondrefull praises magnified. He confirmed with his consent, the
miracles, and story of the gospel, as far as it varieth not from his Alcorane.

The Godspelles said he ware corrupt by the disciples of the Apostles. And
therefore it behooved his Alcorane to be made, for to correct and amend them.
Thus fauning into favor with the christians, he would have been christened of
Sergius. Then to procure, and move other also to fauouor his procedinges: he
denied with the Sabellians the Trinity. With ye Manicheis he made two gods.
with Eunomius, he denied that the father and the son ware equal. With
Macedonius he said that the holy ghost was a creature, or substance created.
With the Nicholaites he allowed the having of many wives at ones. He allowed
also the old testament. Although said he, it ware in certain places faulty.
And these fondenesses did he beswiete with a wondrefull lure of the things
that men in this life most desire. Lettinge louse to as many as held of
him, the bridle of al lechery and lust. And for that cause does this
contagious evil sprede it self so wide into innumerable contries. So ye if a
man at this day compare the nombre of them that are by him seduced, with the
other that remain in the doctrine of faith: he shall easeli perceive the great
odds, ware it but herin. That where Europe alone, (and not all that by a great
deal) stands in the belief of Christ: almost all Asie, and Aphrique, yea
and a great piece of Europe stands in the Turkisshe belief of Mahomete.

The Saracenes that first received the brainesicke wickedness of this
countrefeicte prophet, dwelte in that part of Arabia, that is called Petrea:
where it entrecommuneth with Iewry on the one side, and with Egypt on the other.
So named of Sarracum, a place nere unto the Nabatheis, or rather as they would
have it them selves, of Sara, Abraham's wife.

Whereupon they yet stick fast in this opinion, yt they only of al me^ are
the lawful heirs of gods beheste. They gave them selves to tilthe, and
cattle, and to the wars. But the greater part to the wars. And therefore at
what time they ware hired of Heraclius in the wars against the persians:
when he had gotten the victory, and they perceived them selves to be defrauded
by him: kindled with the anger of the villanye they had had done unto them, by
the counsel and persuasion of Mahomet (who took upon him to be their
captain) they forsook Heraclius. And going into Siria, enuaded Damasco. Where
when they had increased them selves both in nombre, and purueiaunce necessary
for them, they entered into Egipte. And subdued first that: then Persis, then
Antioche, and then Jerusalem. Thus their power and fame daily so encreaced, and
grew: that men much feared, that any thing afterward should be able to
resist them. In the mean season, the Turks: a fer^e and a truell people, of
the nation of the Scithiens, driven out by their neighbors fro the mountains
called Caspij, came down by the passage of the mou^te Cancasus, first into
Asia the less, then into Armenia, Media, and Per^is. And by strong hand
wanne all as they came. Against these the Saracenes went forth as to defend
the bordres of their governance. But forasmuch as this newecome power was to
hard for them, the Saracenes within a while felleinto such despair of their
state: that upon condition that the other would receive Mahometes belief: they
ware content they ^hold reign felowlike together with them, in Persis. Whereto
when they had agreed, it was hard to save whether of the peoples had received
the greater damage. The Saracenes, in yelding to them the haulf right of their
kingdom: or the other, which for coueteousnes thereof yielded them selves to so
rank, and wicked a poison of all virtue and godlynes.

One bond of belief then so coupled and joined them: that for a space it made
to them no matier whether ye called them all by one name, Saracenes, or Turks.
But now as ye se, the name of the Turks has gotten the bettre hand, and the
other is out of remembrance. This people uses more kinds of horseme the^ one.
They have Thimarceni, that is to say Pencioners, about a four skore
thousand. These have given unto them by the king, houses, villages, and
Castles every one as he deserves, in the stead of his wages or pencion. And
they attend upon the Sensacho, or captain of that quarter, where their
possessions lie. At this day the Turks are deu^ded into two armies: the one
for Asie, and the other for Europe. And either has a chief teine, at whose
leading they are. These cheifteimes in their tongue be called Bassay. There are
also another sort much like to our adventurers, that serve without wages,
called Aconizie. And these ever are spoiling before when the camp is yet
behind. The fiueth part of their butine is due unto ye king. And these are
about a forty thousand. Their third sort of horsemen is divided into
Charippos Spahiglauos, and Soluphtaros. The best, and worthiest of these, are
ye Charippie: of an honorable order of knight hode, as it ware for the kings
body.

And those be ever about him, to the nombre of eyghte hundred, all Scithians
and Persians, and else of none other kind of men. These, when need is,
being in the sight of the king: fight notably, and do wondrefull feats on
horseback.

Spahy, and Soluphtary be those which have been at the kings bringing up from
their childehode, to serve his filthy abomination. And when they are come to
man's state, they marye at the kings pleasure: And be enriched both with the
dowery of their wife, and a stipende.

These for the most part serve for ambassadors, deputies, lieutenauntes and
such other dignities, and are nerte unto the king on both sides of him, when
he goes any whether as a guard. They are in nombre a thousand and three
hundred.

Among the footmen are three sorts, Ianizarie, these be chosen all the Empire
over, of. xij. years of age, or there about, by certain that have Commission
for the purpose: And are for a space enstructed in the feactes of war, in
commune schools. And then aftrewarde are they chosen into souldie, and have
given them a shorter garmente, and a white cappe, with a tarfe turned upward.
Their weapon is a Targette, a Curtilase, and a Bow. Their office is to
fortify the Camp, and to assault cities. They are in nombre about twenty
thousand.

The second sort are called Asappi, and are all footmen of light harnnesse,
weaponed with swearde, target, and a kind of long Iauelines, wherewith they
^^ea the horses of their enemies, in the skirmishe and battle. These, to be
known fro the Ianizaries, wear read cappes. These are appoincted in nombre,
according as the case shall require. But they are ever at the least fouretie
thousand. When the wars are finished, for the which they ware hired: these
are no longer in wages. Tharmie roialle has about two hundred thousand armed
men, beside a great rabble offootemen adventurers, that take no wages, and
such other as be called out of Garrisons. And among these, Pioners and
Cooks, Carpenters Armourers, and such other as they must niedes have to make
the way, where the place is combresome: to dress victualles, to amend
harness, to make bredges over floudes, to trenche about their enne mies, to
plant battries, make Ladders, and such other things necessary for the
siege. There follows the army also, sondrye sorts of money Masters: some for
lone, some for exchange, some to buy things. And sondrie sorts of occupiers,
such as be thought nedeful in such cases.

But there is nothing in all that nation more to be merueiled at, then their
spiedinesse in doeyng of things: their constantnes in perilles, and their
obedience and precise obseruinge of all commaun-deme^tes. For the least fault,
of goes the head. They pass over raginge floudes, mounteignes and rocks:
roughes and plains, thick and thin, if they be commanded. Not having
resperte to their life, but to their rulers. No men may away with more
watch, no men with more hongre. Among them is no mutinyng, no vproures, no
sturres. In their fight they use no cries, nor shoutes, but a certain
fiercenes of brayeng. They keep such precise scile^ce in the night, through
out their camp: that they will rather suffer such as they have taken prisoners,
to run their way, then to make any stir. Of all the peoples at this day,
they only do war, acording to the order of at mes. So that no man niedeth
to mernayle how it comes that no people this two hundred year and above,
have had like success unto them. Yea, it may truly be said, that except it
be by some plague or murreyn, or discord among them selves, they can not be
subdued. The apparail that the soldiers do use, is most comely and honest.
In their sadles and bridles, there is neither curiosity, ne yet superfluity.
No man among them wears his Armor, but when niede is to fight. They carry
their harness behind them, at their backs. They use neither banner,
standerde, ne flaggue: but certain Iauelins that have streamynge out fro the
top, diverse colored thriedes, by the which every hand knows his
capiteine. They use a dro^me and a fiphe, to assemble their Bands, and to
stir them to the batteile. When the batteile is done, all the army is
presented to the Regestour (which is some one of the nobles) both that it
may be known who is slain, and what nombre: and that new may be entered in
their places. In all assemblies and mietinges, feast, or other: they pray for
their soldiers, and men of war. But specially above all other, for those
that have suffered death for the commune quarelle of their country: calling
them happy, fortunate, and blessed, that they yielded not up their lives at
home, amidde the lamentacions and bewailings, of their wives and children, but
lost them abroad, among the shoutes of their enemies, and the rattling of the
Harneis, and Lances. The victories of their forefathers and eldres, they put
into Balade, and sing them with great honor and praises: for that they
think the courages of the soldiers and men of war, be much quickened,
and kindled thereby.

Their dwelling houses are communely of timbre and claie, very few of stone:
for of them are the noble men's houses their temples, and Batthes. And yet are
there among the communes, men able of them self alone, to set furthe an whole
army, furnisshed at all poinctes. But because they are naturally given to
sparing and to abhor all sumptuousenesse, embrasing a low and simple state:
they well bear this volucarie poverty, and rude, homeliness. For this cause
also, do they not set by any kind of Painters Imagerie. As for the other
imagerie of corue^ graven or molten work, they do so hate and abhor: that
they call us Christians for delighting so muthe in them, very Idolatours and
Image worshippers. And do not only so call us, but will earnestly argue, that
we are so in deed. They use no Seals to their Lettres, of what sort so ever
they be, the kings or other. But they credit the matier, as soon as they have
red the superscripcion, or heard the name of the sender. They occupy no
belles, nor suffer not the christianes that dwell among them to do. They game
not for money, or any valewe else. And if it fortune that any manne be found
to do, in many su^drie wise they revile him, and bait him with shames and
reproach.

No man among them, of what degree or dignity so ever he be: requires form
chair, stool, or other kind of seat to sit upon. But foldinge both him
self and his clothes, aftre a most comely sort: rucketh down upon the
ground, not much unlike to the sitting of our ge^tlewomen often times here in
England. The table whereupon they eat, is for the most part of a Bullockes
hide, or a Hearts skin. Not dressed, but in the hear, facioned round, being
a four or five spanne over, and so set round about on the bordre, or verge,
with ringlettes of iron: that putting a couple of stringes through the ringes,
it may be drawn together, and shut and opened like a purse. House, or
Church, or any other place where they entende to sit, no man enters with his
shoes on. For it is compted a very dishonest and an unmannerly facion, to sit
shoed. wherefore they use a manner of slip shoes, that may lightly be put of
and on. The place where they sit, either at home, or at Church, is in some
place matted, and in some place ouerspred with course woollen Carpette. And
some places also, either for the low nes, moistenes, or vncleanelinesse thereof
are plancked with boorde.

The garments as well of the men, as the women, are large and long, and open
before: that they may the more hone silie and covertly hide all, when nature
craves to be eased. And in doeyng those niedes, they take great hiede, that
their face be not into the Southe, as it is when they pray. As also that they
discover no prinie part, that any man might fortune to see. The men make
water sitting, as well as the women. For if a man among them, ware seen to
make water standing: he should be judged of all, a fool, or an heritique.

From wine (as from a prouoker of al sin and uncleanness) they abstain by
their law. And yet eat they the Grapes, and drink must. They also forbear
to eat any thing, that comes of the Hog: or any thing else that dies
of sickness, or by adventure vnslain. But any other things, being man's
meat, they refuse not to eat. They worship the Fridaie, laieng all labor
and business aparte, with as great solempnitie and devotion, as we do the
Sondaie, or as the Jews do the Sabbath day. In every city there is ons
principal or head Church. In the which upon the Fridaie at aftre Noone,
they all assemble together. And aftre sole^pne prayers, hear a sermon. They
acknowledge one God, to whom they make no like, nor equalle: and Mahomet to be
his trusty and well-beloved Prophet. All the Saracenes are bound to pray five
times on the day, with their faces toward the South. And before they so do, to
the end they may be clean from all filthe of body: to wasshe them selves
top and tail, head, ears, eyes, nose, monthe, arms, hands, bealy,
colions, legs and fiete. Specially, if he have been late at the soil with a
woman or stouped on his tail to unburden his bealie. Ercept he have some let
of journey, or sickness. But if he lack watre to do this withal (as that
sieldome or never can happen, for that they have in all cities, bathes
ordenarie for the purpose) they supply the defaulte with the moulde of fresshe
clean earth, wherewith they rub over their whole bodies. Who so is polluted
in any manner wise: suffers no man before this clensing, to speak with him, or
to see him, if it be possible. Every year for the space of five wiekes
continually together, they fast al day as presicely as is possible, both
from meat, drink and women. But aftre the son is ones down, till the next
day he rises, they neither spare eating ne drinckyng, ne pressyng of pappes.
In the end of their lent, and again the sixtieth day aftre: They kiepe their
passover or Easter, in remembrance of the Rambe showed unto Abraham, to be
Sacrificed in the stead of his son, and of a certain night in the which
they do believe that the Alcorane was given them from heaven.

Every year ones, the Saracenes also are bound of duty to visit the house of
God, in the city of Mecha: both to acknowledge their homage, and to yield unto
Mahomete his yearly honor at his Sepulcher there. The Saracenes compelle no
man to forsake his opinion or be lief: ne yet labor so to persuade any
country to do. Although their Alcorane command them to tread down and
destroy all men of the contrary believe yea them and their prophets. But
through this sufferau^ce, there are to be found enhabiting in Turkey, peoples
of all opinions, and believe: every man vsinge such kind of worship to his
God, as to his religion apperteineth. Their priests do not much diffre from
the commune people, nor yet their churches from their dwelling houses. If they
know the Alcorane, and the praiours and ceremonies of their law, it
suffiseth. They are neither given to conte^placion ne yet schole study. For why
they are not ocupied with any church service or cure of souls. Sacraments
have they none, nor relics, nor halowinges of fontes, Aulters, and other
necessaries. But prouidinge for their wives their children, and householdes,
they occupy their time in husbo^drie marchaundise, huntings, or some other
mean to get the penie, and mainteyne their living, even as the temporal men
do. There is nothing forbidden them, nothing is for them unlawful. They be
neither burdoned with tillage, ne bondage. They be much honored of al me^,
for that they are skillful in the ceremonies of the law, teach them to other,
and be the governors of the churches.

They have many schools and large, In the which great nombres are taught the
laws there given by kings, for the civil governance and detence of the
Realm. Of the which some are afterward set fourth to be men of the
church, and some to be temporalle officers. Their spirituality is divided into
many and sundry sorts of religions. Of the which some live in the wooddes and
wyldernes shonnyng all company. Some kiepe open hospitality in cities, and
yet live by almose them selves. These if they lack meat to refreshe the niedy
stranger and pelligrine, yet at the least way they give him herbour and
lodgyng. Other, roumyng the cities up and down and caryeng always in bottles
fair watre and fresshe, if any man be disposed to drink, unasked they
willingly proffre it him, and refuse not to take, if he for their gentleness
offer aught unto them again Otherwise they crave nothing, but in all their
words gesture, behauour, and di^^des: show them selves aungelles r^^^^ there
then men. And every one of these has one knowledge or other, of difference
from the reaste. The Saracenes or Turks are very precise executours of
Justice. Who so commits bloodshed: has in like sort his own shed
again. Taken in adultery, both parties are straight without mercy stoned to
death. They have also a punisshement for fornication, which is to the manne
taken with the diede, four score ierkes or lasshes with a skourge. A thief for
the first and the second time, escapes with so many stripes. But at the
third time, has his hand cut of, and at the four the his foot. He that
endamageth any manne: as the loss or hinderaunce shall be valewed, so must he
of force recompense. In claiming of goods, or possessions, the claimer must
prove by witness that the thing claimed is his: and the denier shall be tried by
his oath. Witnesses they admit none, but persons of known honesty, and
such as might be believed without an oath.

They have also certain spiefaultes ordinarilye appoincted (much like to our
Sompnours) that spy in every shiere for such as be necligent, and let slip
such ^raisons, and service as they be bound to Those if they fortune to find
them: do they punish aftre this manner. Theiha^ge a board about their necks,
with a great many of fox tails, and togginge them up and down the streets:
all over the city, they never let them go until they have compounded by the
purse. And in this also nothing unlike to our Sompnours. It is lawful for no man, being come to man's state, to live unmarried. It is compted among them
as lawful to have. iiii. wives, as it is among us to have one. Marie
whatsoever is above this nombre (as they may if they list, and be able to keep
them, no degree excepted, but mother and fister, marie a hundred) they are not
judged so lawfulle. The children that they have both by the one, and the other
have equalle portion in the fathers enheritaunce. Saving that. ii. women
children are compted in porcio^ but for one man child. They have not. ii. of
their wives together in one house, ne yet in one city. For the bussnes, and
disquietinges that might happen thereby, but every wife in a several town. The
housebandes have liberty e to put the^ away chrise, and chrise to take them
again. But yet when he has ones put her away, if any manne have taken her,
and she lust to abide with him, she may.

Their women are most honestly appare^^ed. And upon their heads do^ use a
certain attire, not much unlike the veluer bonette of old England: whereof
the one lap so hangs upon which side seems her good: that when she is
disposed to go out of the doors, or to come amongst men within the house,
she may hide therewith by and by her whole face, saving her eyes.

The Saracenes woman, never dare show her self where there is a company of
men. To go to the marchate to occupy byeng or sellyng in any wise: is not
syttyng for their women. In the head churth they have a place far a part fro
ye men: so close that no man can look into them. Into the which not
withstandyng it is not laufull for every man's wife to enter: but for the
nobility only. Ne yet for thein neither, but on friday, at the only hour of
noone prayer: which as I have aforesaid, is kept among them high and holy.

To see a man and a woman talk together there, in the open street or abroad: is
so strange, and so vnwonte a thing, that in a whole year it ska^te happens
ones. For a man to sit with his wife in open sight, or to ride with any
woman behind him: amongst them ware a wondre.

Married couples never dally together in the sight of other, nor chide or fall
out. But the men bear always toward the women a manly discrete sobrenes,
and the women, toward them a demure womanly reverence. Great men, that
cannot alwaie have their wives in their own eye, appoincte redgelinges, or
guelte men to awaite upon them. Which wait them in diede so narrowlye,
that it ware impossible for any man beside the house band to speak with the
wife unseen: or the wife by any stealthe to false her troth and honesty.
Finally the Saracenes do so full and whole believe their Mahomete and his laws:
that they doubt no whitte, but the kepers of them shall have everlasting
blessedness That is to say, after their opinion, a paradise of pleasure, a
gardein plotte of delighte, full of swiete rindles of Christalline watre. In
whose botomes yt grauelle, popleth like glisteryng gold. The air alwaie so
attempre and pure, that nothing can be more swiere, more pleasant uor
healthsome. The ground covered and garnisshed with natures Lapesserie, neither
lacking any color that pleasant is to the eye, or savor that may delight
the nose. Birds syngyng with such armonie, as never mortaile ear heard.
Briefly flowyng in all pleasure that any heart can aftre think. Disshes for
the mouth, of all deinties. All manner of Silks, Veluettes, Purples,
Skarlettes, and other precious apparelle. Godly young damose^^es, with graie
rowlyng eyes, and skin as white as whales bone, soft as the Silk, and
breathed like the Rose, and all at their beck. Vessels of silver and gold.
Angels for their Butlers that shall bring them Milk in Goblettes of gold,
and red wine in silver. But contrariewise, they threaten unto the breakers of
them, hell, and everlasting destruction. This they also believe, that be a man wrapped in never so many sins, yet if at his death, he believe upon God,
and Machomete, he shall be saved.

The. xii. Chapitre. Of the Christians, of their first coming up, their
Ceremonies, and ordenaunces.
Christ Jesus, the eternalle and very son of thalmightie father, the second
person in the holy inseparable, equalle, and everlasting Trinity: Of a set
purpose, and spiritualle serrete, not revealed from the be ginnyng of time, and
above man's capacity: was by the mean of the holy ghost, conceived and borne
manne. In Iewrie, of a Virgin, of the stock of David, It appe^et^^ by this
place that this was written.xxx^* years g^n^*
a thousand five hundred, and twenty years* gone. To set us miserable, and
unhappy men on foot again, which ware in Adam and Eve, by the sin of
disobedience overthrown. And to bring us again, unto our heavenly native
country, from the which we have by s^ many ages, for that presumpcion been
banished. Finally, to repair and supply in heaven again ones, the ruin and
fall of those spirits, which a space before our creacion, ware thirst down
fro thence. For the which purpose, we chiefly ware made. This Jesus, from
thirty years of age, until thirty and four (in the which, through the
maliciousnes of the Jews, he suffered on the galowe tree) traueillyng all
Iewrie over: first moved and exhorted the Jews, and then other peoples, from
the old Law of Moses, and their wicked Image worship, to his new
ordenaunce and trade. And as many as would follow, and do aftre him, he called
them his scholars or disciples. Out of the which, he gave unto.xij. that he
had specially chose^, Commission aftre his death (when he had appeared to the^
on live again, as he had forewarned the^ yt he would) to go as Legates, or
Embassatours into ye whole world, and to preach unto all creatures, what so
ever they had seen or learned of him. Simon Petre (to whom long before he had
surrendered the governance and chiefteinshippe of his Church, as in reuercion
aftre him) when aftre the coming of the holy ghost some went into one cost,
and some into another, every manne his way, as they ware allotted and
commanded: came first unto Antioche. And there setting up the first and chief
chair of the Church, kept a counsaille with the other Apostles, which often
times came to him. In this Counsaille among other things it was decreed, that
asmany as should receive, and cleave unto the doctrine, and right persuasion
of Christ's godliness: should fro thence furthe be called Christianes. This
Seat of superiority, being aftrewarde translated to Rome: both he and his
Successors, took it for their chief charge and business, to put the rude and
raw sect of their Christ, and the folowers of the same, in some good order
and trade of governance. Both aftre the manner of Moses Law (which Christ
came not to break, but to consummate and finishe) and the state of the Romain
governance, the Greek, and Egipcian: and also by pattern of the Ceremonies,
obseruaunces, laws, and ordenaunces Ecclesiasticalle and Temporalle, of many
other peoples: But specially aftre the doctrine, of Christ Jesus, and the
woorkyng of the holy ghost, to bring them in to frame and facion. When they
ware entered in the mattier: As they saw that me^ not among the Hebrews alone,
but among other peoples also, ware divided into Ecclesiasticalle and
Temporalle, Spirituality and Laietie: and each of them in most goodly wise,
into their dignities and degrees (The Roman Emperor then being governor of
the whole world alone, to have Consulles, Fathers or Senators: at whose beck
all things ware devised and done: And in the residewe of the earth to be
many Kings, many Dukes, Earls, Presidentes, and Deputies of countries, and
their Lieutenauntes: Maresshalles of the field, and high Conestables for the
co^munes, Pretours or Prouostes, Standerdbearers roialle, Centurianes, and
Disners, Serieauntes, Conestables, Collectours, Surueiours, Porters, Scribes,
Listers, and many other persons without office, both men and women. And in
the Temples of their Gods, a Sacrificer roialle, which is to say in
effect, a high Priest of the dignity of a king. Archeflamines, Flamines of
honor, and other Flamines inferior and last in degree their Priests. And by
like order among the Hebrews: an high Bisshoppe, and inferior Priests,
Levites, Nazareis, candle quenchers, commanders of Spirits, Church
Wardeines, and Syngers, which we call Chauntours aftre the French. And
among the Greeks: Capiteines, or heads over a thousand, over an hundred, over
fiuetie, over te^ne, and over five. And that there ware yet beside these, both
among the Hebrews, and the Romans, many couentes, or compaignies of men and
women Religious. As Sadduceis, Esseis, and Phariseis among the Hebrews: Salios,
Diales, and Vestalles, among the Romans: The most holy Apostles did all
consent, that Petre, and they that should follow him in the seat of Rome,
should for evermore be called Papa. As who would say, father of fathers, the
vniuersalle, Apostolicalle, most holy, and most high bishop. And that he
should at Rome be Presidente over the vniuersalle Church, as the Emperor
there, was ruler of the universal world. And to match the Consulles (which
ware ever twain) they appoincted four head Fathers, in the Greek named
Patriarchs, one at Constantinople, another at Antioche, a third at
Alexandrie, and the fowrthe at Jerusalem. In the place of the Senators, they
took the Cardinals. To match their kings, which had three Dukes at
commandment, they devised Primates: To whom ware subject three
Archebishoppes. So that the Archebishoppe or Metropolitan, stands in the
place of a Duke. For as the Duke had certain Earls or Barons at his
commandment: so have the Archbisshoppes, other inferior Bisshoppes at
theirs. which also by reason must rountreuaile an Earl. The Bisshoppes
roadintour or Suffragane, came into the Presidentes place. Thordenarie into the
Deputies, then did the Officialle match with the Mareshalle. And with the high
conestable for the co^munes, the Bishops Chauncelour. And for the Pretour or
Prouoste, they set up an Archedeaco^ Instead of the Ce^turiane, was a Deane
appoincted. And for the Disnere, the Person or Vicare. For the Advocates,
crept in the Parisshe Priest, Soul Priest, Chaunterie Priest, Morrow Mass
Priest, and such other. The Deacon stands for the Surueiour. The Subdeacon,
for the Serieaunte. For the two Conestables, came in the two Co^maunders of
Spirits, called Exorcistae in the Greek. The Collectours office, was matched
with the Church wardeines. The Porter became the Serteine. The Chau^tour,
Scribe, and Lister, kiepe stille their name. The Atholite, which we call
Benet and Cholet, occupies the room of Candlebearer.

All these by one commune name, they called Clerj, of the Greek word Cleros,
that is to say, a Lotte. For that they ware first from among the people, so
allotted unto God. Thereof comes our term Clerque, and his cosine Clergy
Nevertheless, this name Clergy, was not so commune unto all: but that it
siemed most proprely to rest in the seuende, grees, that the Pope of Rome
used for his Ministres, when he said Mass in person him self. That is to
sa^e, the Bishop, the Priest, the Deacon, and subdeacon, ye Acholite, and the
Chau^tour. Unto every of these gave they in ye church their seueralle dignities
officies, and appareile.

To the Bishop was given aucth^ritie, to ordeine and make other Clerckes. To*
enueile virgins, That is to ^ie, to make ^onnes,
and to hallow them. To consecrate their likes, and their superiors also. To
lay hands upon the^. To confirm and Bisshoppe children. To hallowe Churches.
To put Priests from their Priesthode: and to degrade them, when they deserve
it. To kiepe Conuocacio^s and Sinodes. To make holy oil: to hallowe the
ornaments and vessels of the church. And to do also other things, that the
inferior Priests do. To enstructe those that be newly come to the faith. To
Christian, to make the Sacrament of the Altar, and to give it to other. To
absolve the repetaunte of their sins, and to fectre the stubberne more
streighte. To show furthe the Gospelle. To enjoin all Priestres to shave
their heads in the croune, like a circle of.iiii. fingres broad, aftre the
manner of ye Nazareis. To keep their hear short, to wear no bearde. And to
live chaaste for ever.

Their living only to rise of the first fruictes, tenthes, and offringes: and
vttrely to be void of all temporalle and Laiemennes cares and business. To be
honestly appareiled, and accordyngly to use their pass and conversation.
Only to serve God and the church. Diligently to plye the reading of holy
scripture, ye they them selves might perfectly know all things perceining to
Christian religion, wherein they are bound to enstructe other. The companies or
coue^tes of religious, as well men as women: are Benedictines, Preachers,
Franciscanes, Augustines, Barnardines, Anthonines, Ioha^nites, Cisternois, and
innumerable other. which al have their habit, and manner of living by them
self: acordinge to the rule that echeone privately prescibed to them selves.
And lived for the most part a solitary life, professing, chastity, pouretie,
and perpetualle obedience. And for their solitarines the Greek called them
Monachi. Some of these have for their heads Abbotes, some Priours: which are
either subject to the Pope only, or to the bishops. Al these used coules,
much aftre one facio^, but in color diverse, and ab stained fro flesh. The
bisshoppes when they say mass, have, ^v. holy garments, aftre ye manner of
Moses law, for ye perfection of the^. His boatewes, his Amice* an Albe, a
Girdle a Stole, a Maniple, a Tunicle of violette in grain fringed, his gloves,
ringe, and chesible or vestimente, a Sudarie, The latin calls it a shiepe
hook.
a cope, a mitre and a * cross staff. And a chair at the Aultares end,
wherein he sits. Of the which.vi. are commune to every inferior priest:
the Amice, the Albe, the girdle, the stole, the Maniple, and the vestiment. But
over, and above all these the Pope, by the gift of Constantine the great,
has liberty to wear all the ornaments Imperialle. That is to say a kirtle
of skarlet, a robe of Purple, a scepter, and a close corone. With the which
aftre he has rauisshed him self in the vestrie, upon solemn feasts, when
he ente^deth to do mass: he comes forth to the aultare, having on the right
side a priest, on the left side a Deacon, a Subdeacon going before him with a
book fast shut, two candle bearers, and an encensour with the censoure in
his hand smoking. When he is come^ to the griessinges, the stayers, or foot
of the aultare: That is, he says confiteor.
putting of his mitre, he makes open * confession of his sins together with
his company.

That done he goes up to the aultare, opens the book, lienge upon the left
corner of the same, kysseth it, and so proceeds in the Solempnisacio^ of ye
Mass. The subdeacon reads the epistle, and the Deacon the godspelle.
Priests of al degrees, are charged to praise God seven times a day, and to
pray with ordenarie oraisons. Toward the eueninge, euensonge: and compline
more late. Matines in the morninge, and incontinente prime, and hours, in
order of time, Hora prjma, tertia, sexta, nona.
as they stand in * order of name. And this humbly before the aultare, if he
may conveniently, with his face toward the East. The pater nostre and the
Creed said they, only at the beginning of their service, as the commune people
do now a days also. Saint Jerome, at the urgent request of Pope Damasus,
parted out the Psalms acording to the days of the wieke. And appoincted for
every hour a porcio^ of propre psalms. For the night hours on the holy
day.ix. and on the worcking day.xii. For lauds in the morning.v. for
euensonge as many, and for each other hour but three. He also ordained the
Epistles, Godspelles, and other service, used to be red out of the old or new
testament, in manner altogether, saving ye note. The Anthemes (which Ambrose,
Bishop of millayne wrate, and endited) Damasus put order that the quiere
should sing side aftre side, and added to every psalms end. Gloria patri.
etc. The lessons and Himpnes that go before each one of the hours did ye
cou^ceiles of Thoulouse and Agathone aucthorise. The orisons, the grailes, the
tractes, the Alleluya, thoffertorie, the Communions in the Mass, the Anthemes,
Versicles, repitions, and other things, either song or read by night or by
day, to the beautifieng, and praising of God: did Gregory, Gelasius, Ambrose,
and many other holy fathers, devise, and put furthe. not at one time but at
sundry. The Mass (so term they the sacrifice) was first used to be done in
such simple sort, as yet is accustomed, upon good friday, and Easter even,
with certain lesso^s before it. But then Pope Celestinus put to the office of
the Mass. Thelesphorus, Gloria in excelsis: But Hilarious of pictauia made the
Et in terra. Simachus ordained it to be songue. The Salutacio^s, which by ye
term of Dominus vobiscum, be made seven times in a Mass, ware taken out of
the book of Ruthe, by Clemente, and Anaclete, and put in, in their places.
Gelasius made up all the rest to the Offertory, in the same order they be
used. Except the Sequenres and the Creed: whereof Nicolas put in the first,
and Damasus the next: acordinge to the Sinode of Constantinople. The bidding
of the beads, with the collacion that was wont to be made in the pulpite on
Sondaies, and halydaies: raither grew to a custom by the example of Nehemias,
and Esdras, then was by any aucthorised. In this collation at the first
coming up thereof, when so many as ware prese^te at the Mass did receive the
communion, acording as was ordained by a decree: they that ware at any discord
ware exhorted to concord, and agremente. And that they should receive the
sacrament of the altar clean from the fylthe of sin, upon the which
consideracion at this day it ends with confiteor, or an open confession.
There ware they wont to teach the instruments of the old law, and the
new. The ten commandments. The.xii. articles of our believe. The seven
sacraments, holy folks lives, and Martirdomes, holy days, doctrines, and
disciplines: virtues, and vices, and what soever are necessary beside forth,
for a christian to know. Gregory lineked on the offertorie. Leo the prefaces.
Gelasius the great Cano^, and the less. The Sanctus blessed Sixtus. And
Gregory ye Pater noster out of the Gospel of saint Mathewe. Martialle the
scholar of blessed Peter, devised that Bysshoppes should give their benediction
at the Agnus. And as for other infeour priests. Innocentius commanded them to
give ye paxe, that is to say peace. Sergius tacked on the Agnus, and Gregory
the post communion. The closing up of all with Ite missa est, Benedicamus, Deo
gratias: was Leoes inuencion.

The. xii. articles of our believe, which the blessed Apostles would every
manne not only to confess with mouth, but to believe also in heart, are these.

First that there is one God in Trinity, the father almighty maker of heaven
and earth. The second, Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. The third
the same being conceived of the holy ghost, to have been borne of ye Virgin
Marie. The fourth, to have suffered under Ponce pilate, to have been crucified,
dead, bewried, and to have descended in to hell. The fiueth, to have risen
again the third day fro the dead. The sixteth to have ascended up into the
heavens, and to sit on the right hand of God the father almighty. The
seventh, that he shall come fro thence like a triu^pher, to judge the quick
and the dead. The eight, that there is an holy ghost. The nineth, yt there is
an holy church vniuersalle, the communion of the godly and good: The tenthe,
forgiveness of sins. The eleue^th, the rising again of the flesh. The
twelueth, aftre our departing, life in another world everlasting.

The ten commandments, which god wrate with his own fingre, and gave
unto the Israelites by Moises, which thapostles willed us also to kiepe The
first, thou shalt have none other Gods but me. The second, thou shalt not
make the any graue^ Image, or likeness of any thing that is in heaven above,
in the earth benethe, or in the water under the earth, thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them. The third, thou shall not take the name of
thy lord God in vain. The fowrthe, remember that thou kiepe holy thy Sabbath
day. The fiueth, honor thy father and mother. The sixteth, thou shalt do no
murdre. The seventh, thou shalt not commit adultery. The eight, thou shalt
not steal. The nineth, thou shall bear no false witness against thy
neighbor. The tenthe, thou shalt not desire thy neighbors house, his wife,
his servant, his maid, his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy
neighbors.

The seven Sacraments of the church, which are contained in the five last
Articles of our believe, and commanded us by the holy fathers to be believed.

The first, diepyng into the water, called Baptisyng aftre the Greek. This, by
canonicalle decree, in time paste was not wont to be given (except great
necessity sooner required it) but to those that had been scholars a space
before, to learn the things appertine^t to christendom. Yea, and that aftre
they had been exceadingly well enstructed in the faith: and proof taken of
their profityng, by seven examinacions, which ware made upon seven seueralle
days in the Lent, and so ware they Baptissed upon Easter even, and
Whitesondaie even. Upon which days, they ware accustomed to hallowe the
christening watre, in every Paroche But because this specially of all other, is
chiefly necessary unto everlasting salvation: leasse any body should die
without it, they decreed that as soon as the child was borne, godfathers should
be sought for it, as it ware for witnesses or sureties which should bring the
child unto the Church door, and there to stand without. And then the Priest
should enquire, before the child be dieped in the Font, whether it have
renounted Satan and all his pomp and pride. If it believe certeinely and
wholly, all the Articles of the Christian faith. And the Godfathers
answeryng, yea: for it, the Priest breathyng thrice upon his face, exorciseth
it, and cathechiseth it. Aftre that, does he seven things to the child in
order. First, he puts into the mouth hallowed salt. Secondely, he mingleth
earth and his spattle toguether, and smereth the eyes, ears, and nosethrilles
of the child. Thirdly, giuyng it such name as it shall ever aftre be called
by: he marketh it on the breast and back with holy oil, aftre the facion of
a cross. Fourthly, he diepeth it thrice in the Watre, or besprinckleth it with
watre thrice, in manner of a cross, in the name of the holy Trinity, the
father the son, and holy ghost. In the which name also, all the other
Sacraments are ministered. Fiuethly, weting his thumb in the holy ointement,
he makes therewith a Cross on the childs foreheade. Sixthly, he puts a
white garment upon it. Seventhly, he takes it in the hand a Candle brennyng.
The Jews before they be Christened (by the determinacion of the counsel
holden at Agathone, are cathechised, that is to say, are scholars as the
enstruction of our believe, nine months. And are bound to fast forty days:
to dispossess them selves of all that ever they have, and to make free their
bond men. And look which of their children they have Circumcised, acording
to Moses law: him are they bound to banishe their company. No merueile
therefore if they come so unwillingly to christendom.

Bishopping, which the Latins call Confirmacion, a confirming, a ratifieng
establishyng, aucthorisyng, or allowyng of that went before: is the second
Sacrament. And is given of the Bishop only, before the Aultare in the
Church, to such as are of growe^ years, and fasting (if it may be) aftre
this manner. As many as shall be Confirmed, come all together with every one a
godfather. And the Bishop aftre he has said one oraison over the^ all,
wetyng his thumb in the holy oil, makes a cross upon each of their
foreheades: In the name of the father, son, and holy ghost. And gives him
a blow on the left chieke, for a remembrance of the Sacrament, that he come
not for it again. The godfathers, to the end the enoilyng should not drop
away, or by negligence be wiped away, clappe on a fair filette on the
foreheade. which they judge to be unlawfully taken away, before the seventh
day. The holy fathers esteemed this Sacrament so highly, that if the name
given to the child at his Christendom, f^^med not good: the Bisshoppe at the
giuyng hereof might thaunge it.

The third Sacrament is holy Ordres, which in the first Church, was given
likewise of the Bishop, only in the monethe of Decembre. But now at six
seueralle times of the year: that is to say, the four Saturdaies in the embre
wekes (which ware purposely ordained therefore) upon the Saturdaie, which the
Church men call Sitientes, because the office of the Mass for that day
appoincted, begins with that word, and upon Easter even. This Sacrament
was given only to men: and but to those neither, whose demeanor and life,
dispocisio^ of body, and quality of mind, ware sufficiently tried and
known. Aftre the opinion of some, there ware seven ordres, or degrees, whereby
the holy fathers would us to believe that there ware ^^ue^ special influences,
as it ware printed in the soul of the receiver, whereby each one for each
order, was to be compted an hallowed manne. Aftre the minds of other there
ware nine. That is to say, Musicens (which encludeth singing and plaieng)
Door kiepers, Reders, Exorcistes Acholites, Subdeacon, Deacon, Priest and
Bishop. And for all this, it is co^pted but one Sacrament, by the reason that
all these tend to one end, that is to say, to consecrate the Lords body.
To every one of these, did the Counsel of Tolede in Spain, appoincte their
seueralle liueries, and offices in the Church. The Doorekepers had the office
of our Common Sexceine, to open the church doors, to take heed to the church,
and to shut the doors. And had therefore a keie given unto them, when they
ware admitted to this order. The Reader, in sign and token of liberty to
read the Bible, and holy stories, had a great book given him. The
Exorcistes, served to command evil spicices out of men, and in token
thereof, had a less book given them. The Acholite, had the bearyng and the
orderyng of the Tapers, Candelstickes, and Cruetres at the Altar: and therefore
had a Candlestick, a Taper, and two empty Cruorettes delivered him. The
Subdeacon, might take the offering, and handle the Chalice, and the Patine,
ca^ie them to the Altar, and fro the Altar, and give the Deacon Wine and
water, out of the Cruettes. And therefore the Bishop delivers him an empty
Chalice with a Patine, and the Archedeacon one Cruet full of wine, and another
full of watre, or Chaptres, and those again into Paroches, and to set that
goodly order, that yet continues, as well among the clergy as the laietie.
That the parish should obeie their lawful Person, the Person the Deane: the
Deane, the Bishop: the Bishop, the Archebishoppe. The Archbishop, the
Primate or Patriarche: the Primate or Patriarche, the Legate: the Legate, the
Pope: the Pope the generalle Counsel: the generalle Counsel, God alone.

For the fourth Sacrament it is holden, that every priest rightly priested,
acordyng to the keys of the Church, having an encente to consecrate, and
observing the form of the words: has power, of wheaten bread to make
the very body of Christ, and of Wine to make his very blood.

Christ our Lord him self, the day before he suffered, kept it solemply
with his disciples, and consecrated, and ordained it continually to be
celebrated, and eaten in the remembrance of him self. And about this mattier
a man had need of a great faith. First to believe the bread to be changed
into the body, and the wine into the blood of Christ. Again though this be
done every day that yet Christ for all that should grow never a whitte the
bigger for ye making, nor the less for the eatinge. Thirdely that the
Sacrament being divided into many parts, Christ should yet remain whole in
every cromme. Fourthly that though the wicked eat it, yet should not it be
defiled. Fiuethly that it brings to as many evil as receius it, death: and
to the good everlasting life. Sixthly that it tourneth not into the nature of
the eater to his nourishemente as other meat does: but turns the eater
contrariwise into the nature of it self. And yet being eaten, that it is rapte
into heaven, unhurt or untouched. Seventhly that in so small a syse of bread
and wine, the infinite, and incomprehensible Christ, God and manne should be
comprehended. Then, that one, and the self same body of Christ, at one very
instaunce, should be in many places, and of many men received at ones, and
in sondrye parcelles. Ninethly yt though the bread it self be changed into
the very flesh of Christ, and the wine into his blood, that yet to all the
senses they remain bread and wine, and neither flesh ne blood. Further that
all these commodities contained in these verses following should happen unto
those that worthily eat it.

It puts in mind and kindles, increases hope, and strengthens.

Mainteineth, cleanses, restores, gives life, and unites.

Stablissheth belief, abates the food of sin, and all uncleanness quenches.

Finally, to be very profitable for the salvation as well of those living as
dead, for who^ it is specially offered by the priest in the Mass. And
therefore to have to name Eucharistia communio.

In the beginning of the Christian faith (and yet among certain
schismatiques as they say) one whole lofe was consecrated, of such
bigguenesse, as when the Priest had broken it in a platter into small pieces,
it might suffice the whole multitude that ware at the mass to participate of.
For in time paste the Christianes came every day to communicate by a special
commandment, and ordenaunce. Aftrewarde but ones in a wicke and that on the
Sunday. But when it began to be skant well kept upon the Sunday neither: then
was it commanded that every manne should receive it thrice in the year, or
ones at the least, at every Easter. And that every christian manne, when he
stood in any daungier of death, being whole of mind, should receive it as a
waifaring viande, to stay him by the way: with as good preparacion of body
and soul, as he possibly might.

Matrimony (which is the lawefulle coupling of the manne and the woman)
brought in by the law of nature, the law of God, the law of all peoples,
and the law civil, is the fiueth Sacrament, The holy fathers would have but
one marriage at ones, and that not in secret but with open solemnity either in
ye church, or in the church porche, and so that the priest be called to the
matier. Who should first examine the man, and then the womanne, whether they
both consent to be married together. If they be agreed (which is chiefly in
this case requisite) he taking them both by the right hands: coupleth them
together in the name of the holy and inseparable trinity, the father, the
son, and the holy ghost. And commands, and exhorts them that they
always remembering this their coupling of their owue free will and consent: as
long as they live, never forsake one a another, but love and honor one
another, be debonaire and buxome one to another, giving them selves to
procreacion, and not to lecherous lust. And that they honestly and diligently
bring up, such children as God sends them of their bodies. Aftre that he
affiaunceth the^ both with one ringe. And sprinckling holy water upon them,
reaches them a stole, and leads them into the church. where (if they ware
not blessed before) he blesses them knieling before the altar. The woman has
on a red fillet or frontelette, and over that a white veil, without the
which it is not lawfulle for her fro that day forewarde, to go out of doors
abroad, or to sit by any manne. Twelve things there be, which the holy
fathers would have to bar persons from contracting of matrimony, and to
disseuer them again, if they be contracted. Error of person, that is to say,
mistaking one for another. A betrowthing upon a condition, Co^sanguinitie or
kindred, An open crime Diversity of sect, Force, or co^strainte. Holy ordres,
a Bo^de or former contracte, Commune or open honesty, Affinity, and
Dishabilitie of enge^drure.

The sixteth Sacrament is penance or repentance, given of Christ as it ware
for a wrack boorde, whereby men are preserved fro drowninge. Each christian
ought undoubtedly to believe that this consists in four poinctes. To say,
in Repe^tau^ce of our sins, Canonicalle confession, Absolucion, and
Satisfaction, or amends. First let him sorrow, not with a light
forthinckinge, but with a most earneste and bittre repentance in the botome
of his conscience: for the purity and innocence that he had gotten either by
baptism or ye benefit of former repentance, and now has eftsoon lost,
and forgone through sin. And let him hope with this repentance, to be
reconciled to the favor of God again And let him humbly, and truly with his
own mouth, confess to a wise priest, in the stead of God: all those
offenses wherewith he knows him self to have lost his innocence and
clennesse, and to have provoked the wrath of GOD against him self. And let
him assuredly believe that the same priest, has power given him of Christ (as
being his vicare, or deputy on earth) to absolve him of all his sins.
Finally for satisfaction or amends making for the fault: let him not with
grudginge, but chierfully, and gladly do, what so ever he shall be commanded.
Beleuig with undoubted faith, that he is absolved, and quyte of all, as soon as
the priest in dew form of words, has pronounced the absolucion.

The seventh, and the last Sacrament is the last enoynting, by an oil that
is made to this use, by the bisshope in every diocese, by an yearly custom
upon mau^dy thursdaie, like as the chrismatory oil is. And this by the
precepte of saint James the Apostle, and by the ordinance of Felix the
fourth Pope after Saint Peter: was given only to them that lay in dyeng,
being of full age, and requyring it. They use to enoynte with a prescripte
form of words, and with often invocation of saints: those parts of the
body, where our five wits or senses; the hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting
and touching, bear most stroke, and with which man is judged chiefly to
sin. That is, the ears, the eyes, the nosethrilles, the mouth, the hands,
and the fete. Whereby the holy fathers would us to be leave, that there was not
only purchased clean forgiveness of all smaller offenses, or venialle
sins: but also either present recou^rie, or a riper and gentier death. All
the feasts and holydaies, throughout the year, which the church has
commanded to be observed and kept: begin at the Aduente, or approach of
Christ our Lord. Which Peter the Apostle instituted to be observed in
Decembre, with fasting and prater, three wiekes and a haulfe before Christemas,
when we close up the last. viii. days of that month, with great joy and
feast. They divided the year into two and fiuetie wekes, and. xij. several
months. The months commonly into. xxx. days. The first day of January the
church records how Christ was circumcised acordinge to Moses law. The.
iii. day aftre, how he was worshipped of the three Sages, with three sundry
presents: and how being baptissed of John in Iordaine the floude, he laid
the foundation of the new Law. The second of February, how his mother
unspotted, obeyeng the manner of her co^try: brought him into the temple, and
suftred her self to be purified or cleansed, which we call churching of
child. In memory whereof the church uses that day, solemn procession, and
halowing of candles. The five and twentieth of March, how ye aungel brought
word to the virgin Mart, that Christ should be borne of her, being
conceived in her womb, by the ouershadowing of the holy ghost. At the which
time they willed us to fast the forty days that he fasted him self, being
with us upon earth, and to renew the remembrance of his passion, and death,
which he willingly sustained to deliver us fro ye yoke and bondage of the
deuell. The last day of that fast, which oftentimes falls in Aprille, to
celebrate the highest feast in all the year: in remembrance how he overcame
death, descended into hell, vanquisshed the deuell, and returned again on
live, and appeared in glorious wise unto his scholars, or disciples.

In May, how all those his scholars loking upon him, he by his own virtue
an^ might, stied up into the heavens. At the which time, by thordenaunce of
saint Mamerte, bishop of Vienne: there be made ganginges with the less
Letanies from one Church to another, all Christendom over. In June, and
sometime in May, how the holy ghost, promised to the disciples, given from
above, appeared to them like glowing tongues: and gave them to vndrestande, and
to speak the tongues of al nations. Theight day following, Trinity Sondaie.
The fiueth day aftre that, how Christ in his last supper, for a continualle
remembrance of himself, instituted the most wholesome Sacrame^te of his body
and blood, under the form of bread and wine, leauyng it to be seen and eaten
of his. The fiuetenth of July, how the blessed Apostles, acordyng as they ware
commanded, the twelueth year aftre the Ascencion of their Master into heaven:
went their ways into the vniuersalle world, to Preach unto all people. The
departing of Christ's mother out of this life, the fiuetenth day of Auguste.
And her Nativity, theight of Septembre. And the one and twenty of N^uembre, how
she from three years of age (at the which time she was presented to the temple)
until she was marriage able, remained there serving God still a peate And
theight of Decembre, how she was of her parents begotten, that long before had
been barreine. The second day of Iulie, how Elisabethe passing the Mounteines,
visited her kind eswoman.

There wars also certain holy days appoincted to the.xii. Apostles. To
certain Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins. As the four and twentieth of
February to saint Matthie. To saint Mark the Euangeliste, the.xxv. of
Aprille. Upon the which day, Gregory ordained the great Letanies to be
song^ The first of May is hallowed for Philippe and James the more. The.xxix.
of June, for Petre and Paul: and the.xxiiij. of the same, for the Nativity
of. S. Ihon Baptiste. The.xxv. of July, for James the less. For Bartholomewe
the four and twenty of August. For Mathewe, the one and twenty of Septembre.
And the eight and twenty of Octobre, for Simo^ and Jude. The last of Nouembre,
for. S Andrewe, The one and twenty of Decembre, for saint Thomas. And
the.vij. and twenty of the same month for Iho^ the Evangelist. The day
before, for Stephin the first Martire. And the day aftre for the Innocents.
The tenth of August for saint Laurence. And the three and twenty of Aprille,
for saint George. Of all the Confessors, there are no more that have
holidaies appoincted, but S. Martine and saint Nicholas. The first, on the
eleventh of Nouembre: and the other the sixteth of Decembre. Ratherine the
virgin, the five and twenty of Nouembre, and Marie Magdalene the twenty and
two of July. There is also under the name of saint Michael alone, the.xxix.
of Septembre: a holy day for all blessed Angels. And one other in commune
for all the sain^tes, and chosen of GOD, the first of Nouembre.

They would also that every seuenthe day, should be hallowed of the
Christianes, by the name of Sondaie, as the Jews do their Sabbath: restyng
from all worldly work, and being only occupied with praising of GOD, and the
divine Service in the Church. To learn by the Priests preaching, the
Gospelle and the commandments of our faith. And by what means so ever we
think in our conscience we have provoked the wrath of God against us all the
wieke before: that, this day to amend, to set cliert, and ask pardone for.
In time past tuery Thursdaie also was kept as the Sondaie. But because we
might sieme therein, somewhat to gratefie the Heathen (which that day kept
solemn holy day, to Jupiter their Idolle) it was laid down again. More
over the clerks and the people, used both Thursdaie and Sondaie before Mass,
to go round about the Church a Procession, and the Priest, to sprinckle the
people with holy watre. Agapitus instituted the one, and the other. The
Thursdaie, in remembrance of Thristes Ascencion, and the Sondaie, of his
glorious Resurrection: which we celebrate fro Sondaie to So^daie continually,
ones every eight days. The night before every ordenary holidaie or feast full
day: the whole clergy, and the people, ware bound to kiepe Vigile in every
church. That is to say, to wake all night, in divine service and prayer. But
upon consideracion of many slanderous crimes and offenses, that ware by diverse
naughty and malicious persons committed, by the opportunity of the dark:
this manner was taken away, and or deined that the day before the feast,
should be fasted, which yet kiepeth stille the name of Vigile. The fathers
decreed that the church in the whole year should renew the memory of five
things.

Fro the Sondaie called Septuagesima (because there are seventy days,
betwiene that and the octauaes of Easter) they would us to renew the memory of
Thristes Fasting, Passion, Death and Be wrialle. The miserable fall also of
our first parents, and those extreme errors of mankind, by the which they
ware led away fro the knowledge and worship of one verte GOD: to the
wicked supersticion and honor of Idolles and deuelles. And further, the
grievous and intolerable bondage that the people of Israel suffered under the
Pharao of Egipte. Upon which consideracion, the books of Genesis and Erodus
be read in the service of the church. Which shows then in all her
demeanor, and appareilyng, heaviness and sorrow.

From the octauaes of Easter, to the octauaes of Whitsontide, Christ's
Resurrection, and Ascencion, with the coming of the holy Ghost. And together
with that, the redemption, reconciliacio^, and at onement of mankind with God
the father, through Jesus Christ: and the restoryng again of the children of
Israel, to the land of beheste. Wherein was prefigured our reconciliacion and
redemption aforesaied. For that cause is all the service out of the new
Testament, and al things done with joy and gladness.

From the octauaes of Whitsontide, till Aduente, rx. wiekes space, and more,
they would haut to be celebrated the co^uersacion of Christ here in the
world, with his miracles and works of wondre. And over and beside that, the
long pilgrimage that mankind, by long renolucion makes, from one generation
to another, from the time of our redemption, salvation and saving, until the
last day of time. Wherefore during this while, upon consideracion of the
diverse hap and hasarde, wherewith the Church is tossed, like a Ship in the
troubled Seas, she neither greatly reioiseth, ne soroweth, but redeth great
change of books, out of the old and new Testamente: to the end she may
walk the warelier, and the bettre wtjnde her self out of the storms, that are
trady to assail her.

From Aduente to Christemas, to remember the time from Moses, to the coming of
Messiah. In the which mankind certefied of salvation, both by the law and
the Prophets, awaited with most earneste desires for his coming, and the
kingdom that he should have Wherefore they ordained that the Prophecies should
be read, and fasting exercised. That the church the bettre enstruited, and
abled by these, might the worthelter receive the Birche day of Christ her
Lord (which ever falls the fowerth wieke aftre) and from thens hold on
with feast, and continual gladness, until Septuagesima. Retoisyng that he
was now rome: which should be the saulutour of the world. Their oratories
Temples, or places of prayer (which we call Churches) might not be built
without the good will of the Bishop of the Diocese. And when the Timbre was
ready to be framed, and the foundation dug: it behooved them to send for the
Bishop, to hallowe the first corner stone of the foundacio^, and to make the
sign of the cross thereupon, and to lay it, and direct it just Cast and
Weste. And then might the Masons set upon the rest, but not before. This
Church did they use to build, aftre the facion of a cross, and not unlike
the shape of a man. The Chauncelle (in the which is contained the high
Altar and the Quiere) direct full into the East, represents the head. And
therefore ought to be made somewhat round, and much shorter then the body of
the church. And yet upon respect that the head is the place for the eyes, it
ought to be of more light, and to be separate with a particion, in the stead
of a neck, from the body of the Church. This particion the Latin calls
Cancellj: and out of that comes our term, Chauncelle. On each side of this
chauncelle peradventure (for so fitteth it best) should stand a Turret, as it
ware for two ears. And in these the Belles to be hanged, to call the people
to Service, by day and by night. Undre one of these Turrettes, is there
commonly a voulte, whose door opens into the quiere. And in this are laid
up, the hallowed vessels and ornaments, and other vtensiles of the church.
we call it a vestrie. The other part ought so to be fitted, that having as
it ware on each side an arm, the rest may resemble the body with the fete
stretched in breadthe, and in length. On each side of the body the pillars to
stand. Upon whose coronettes or heads the vaulte or rophe of the church may
rest. And to the foot beneth, aulters to be joined.

Those aulters to be ordrely always covered with two altar clothes, and
garnisshed with the cross of Christ, or some little cofre of relics. At each
end a candelsticke: and a book toward the mids. The walls to be parieted
without, and within, and diversely paintted. That they also should have in every
parisshe a fair sound stone, made holowe, and fit to hold water: in the
which the water consecrate for baptism, may be kept for the christening of
children. Upon the right hand of the high altar, that there should be an
almorie, either cut into the wall, or framed upon it: in the which they
would have the Sacrament of the Lords body, the holy oil for the sick, and
the Chrismatorie, alwaie to be locked. Furthermore they would that there should
be a pulpite in the mids of the church, wherein the priest may stand upon
sondaies and holidayes, to teach the people those things that it behooves
them to know. The Chauncelle to serve only for the priests, and clerks. The
rest of the te^poralle multitude to be in the body of the church. Separate
notwithstonding, the men on the right side, and the women, on the left. And
each of them to be sobre and honest in apparelle and behauour. Whatsoever is
contrary to good facion or christian religion, with great diligence to shonne
it. It was the manner in the first church, both among men and women to let
their hear grow, to show out their naked skin, and very little or nothing
to diffre in apparelle. Saint Peter put first order, that women should cover
their heads, and men round their hear, and either of them to go in
seueralle and sondrye apparelle. Moreover that to every church, should be laid
out a churchyard, of the ground adjoining, in the which all christen men's
bodies might indifferently be bewried. The same to be consecrate, or hallowed
by the bisshoppe, and to enjoy all the priuilegies that the church may enjoy.

The funeralle for the dead, they keep not in every place ylike. Some mourn
and keep dirige and Mass seven days continualle together, some.ix. some.xxx.
or fourtye some, fiuetie, and a hundred, and other a whole year, wrapped up in
black. The cou^seile of Toledo ordained that the corpse being first washed,
and then wrapped up in a shiete, should be carried forth with singing by men
of his own condition or sort, clerks by clerks, and lay men of lay
men. And aftre what time the priest has sensed the corpse, thrown holy water
upon it, and said certain prayers, to lay it into the grave with the face
upward, and the head into the weaste. Then to throw in the earth again, and
in token that there is a christian there bewried, to set up a cross of wodde,
garnisshed with yvie, cipres, or laurelle. These be the ordres and facions of
the Christian religion.

FINIS.
The treatise of Josephus, cont eyning the ordres, and Laws of the Jews
commune wealth.
To the Reader.
THis little treatise, good Reader, have I translated out of a Latin text,
laid word for word, aunswe, ringe to the Grieke (for in that tongue Josephus
compiled it) as niere as it was possible. And look how scrupulous mine
Author was in matching the latin: so scrupulous have I also been in devising
mine english. Remembering always, that though in other writings of men's
denyse, an enterpretour may, either to give light to the sentence, or to
observe the naturalle phrase of the tongue that he enterpreteth in (specially
where there lies no matier of importance or coutrouersie) use a more liberty
of words and sentence: yet in these holy writings delivered us fro GOD, in
them I say, and enery branch of them, we ought rather to shonne then to
seek such liberty, as much as we may. Studienge now not so m^che to
flourishe in painted penning, as ^brely, and sensibly to give the meaning of
those infinite threasoures, with such words as fall most feling. lie for
them, run they never so roughe in the prose, or be they never so simple and
hard framing with our phrase. If my doings therefore herin shall seem to the
in certain places, more Grekisshe then English, or liker the manner of the
Latin then of our own land: impute it to the reverence that I owe to these
manner of Authors.(...)

When Moses had governed the Israelites, by the space of fowrtie years,
but.xxx. days lackyng: He assembled the people hard upon Iordane, where the
coune now stondeth, that is called Abila (so named of the plenty of Abeles,
theraboute growing) and all the people being gathered together, he spoke unto
them in this wise. Fellows and companions of my long trauelles, forasmuch as
it pleases God that I depart this life, and mine age is now comen to the
nombre of an hundred and twenty years: and for that I can be no help, ne aid
unto you, in ye things ye shall have to do on the other side I ordeine (the
Lord restrainyng me) I thought it not miete, no not even now at the last
cast, to slack mine endeu our to ward you for the aduaunceme^t of your
wealth But to study how to purchase afwell to you eternalle enioyeng of
prosperit^e, as to my self perpetualle memory emo^gest you, when ye shall have
opteined plenty of al blessedness. Go to then, aftre what time I shall have
declared, how both ye your selves may be blessed, and leave un to your
posterity an everlasting possession of the same, I will so depart this life.
And ^^uly I am worthy me thinckes to be credited, A good man at no time
dissombleth, and much less when he lies at the poincte if death.
and believed of ye, both for the earnest sticking in your quarelle sondrie
times heretofore, and also for that the souls of men brought unto the last
cast are then most estreightly allied and knitte with all virtue.

O Israelites, a favorable GOD, is the only cause of all the good things
that men possess. And he alone can give unto the worthy, and take fro the
wicked. If ye show your selves toward him, such as he requires, and such
as I perfectely knowinge his will and pleasure admonysshe ye to be: he shall
never with draw himself from you, neither shall ye at any time cease to be
blessed, and honorable over all. Yea the wealth that ye now possess, shall
remain sure your own: and that that is promised ye in time to come, shall
spiedely the given ye. So that ye obeie the things, which God would ye to
obeie: and prefer no trade of Civil order or governance, before the laws
that I presently give you: ne straie unto strange manners, contempnynge the
love and fear, which ye now have unto the Lord. And in following these* ye
shall be of all men most strong and ^aliaunte in fight, and vanquisheable to
none enemy. Neither is it mete that they should fear any manne: for whose
help God has armed himself to battle:

Great rewards are laid before ye for virtue: if during your life she dwell
continually in you. For first, she her self of all goodness is the best: and
purchases habound aunce of all other things that good are. She truly, used
among ye, shall give unto you a blessed life: make ye to be praised above all
foreme nations, and cause ye to be renoumed among those that shall be aftre your
days. All these things may ye obtain, if ye be obediente and keep well the
laws which I have given ye from the mouth of God, and exercise your minds
in the vndrestanding of the^ As for my self, I depart glad of your
prosperity, commendyng ye to the rul^ of sobre discrecion, and to those
honest ordres and Laws, that I leave among ye: and to the virtue of your
chiefteines, to whom the advancement of your commodities and profits shall be
committed. God also, that hitherto has governed you, and by whose will I have
been your profitable minister: shall not yet cease to provide for ye. But even
as long as ye your selves shall wish to have him your governor and helper
(continuyng in your earneste zeal of virtue) so long shall ye be sure that he
will foresee to deliver ye from danger. And the high Priest Eleasar, and
Joshua, the counsel, and the Officers of the Tribes: shall declare and open
unto you, what is best to be done. Which if ye follow, ye shall have blessed
wealth among you Obeie ye them therefore without grudge. understanding, that
the men which praise worthily can obeit: shall also have knoweledge how
praise worthily to rule, if they shall ones come to that prerogative of
dignity. And judge it to be frank liberty, not to repine against the
things* whereunto your Capiteines shall require ye. For now ye take this to be
liberty. If ye may hurt those that have done good un to you: and set
naught by them, which are your welwillers and friends. The which evil, if
ye shall from hence furthe avoid: the world shall go the bettre with you.
Beware I require you, that ye never entreprise such outrage against them, as
ye have often attempted against me. For ye know that I have been oftener in
hasarde of my life, through you, then by mine enemies. Wherein I would ye
should not think, that I mean in any wise to atcwighte ye, or ^aunte ye. For
loathe would I be, by this my rehersalle of things paste, to leave in your
minds any displeasure against me, now, at my departing. Seeing that eue^ then,
when ye thus dealte with me: I showed none anger against ye. But by this, to
give ye warnyng that ye uprightly behave your selves heraftre, and offer no
injury to your superiors for riches sake. Whereof ye shall have plenty, being
ones passed Iordane, and having achieued Chanaan. But if through these, virtue
shall become contemptible and fulsome unto you, ye shall lose also the favor
of God. Who becomen your enemy, ye shall also lose the land which ye shall
possess: with shame enough ouercomen of your enemies in the field. And being
skatered the world over, ye shall be as thralles and bondemen, in every coaste
and country, by Sea and by land. And as for the remembrance, and repentance
of the laws not observed: shall then, when ye shall be fallen into those
euilles, stand ye to none effect. Wherefore, if ye entende to conserve these
laws: leave ye not an enemy on live, when ye shall have vanquished them. But
judge it necessary for your welfares, to destroy them every mothers child.
Less if they be suffered to live: ye take savor in their manners, and corrupt
your own country discipline and ordenaunces. I counsel ye also that ye hew
down their groves, throw down their Altares, and what so ever Churches they
shall have: and abolishe with fire, the memorialle of them, and their people.
For by that, and none other means, shall ye stablishe your selves a sure
quiet, in your bliss. And that your nature lead ye not to the worse, for
lack of knowledge of the bettre: I have both made unto you Laws, as I
learned the^ at the mouth of the lord, and also an order of public
discipline. Acordyng to the ordenaunces whereof, if ye shall direct your
lives, ye shall be judged of all people the most happy.

Having spoken these things, he delivered unto the^ the laws, and the order
of their common wealth, written in a book. But they universally wept, and
greatly lamented the departure of their capitein that so fast approached.
Remembering what daungters and carcke, he had suffered for their sauftie: and
much distrustyng what should aftrewarde come of them. As the people that
never was like to have such a governor again. And much fearyng least God
would withdraw his tendrenes toward them: when there lacked a Moses to
entreat. And they bewailed with great repentance, the things, which in
their anger they had done unto him in the deserte. So that the tears of the
people, their dole, and sobbyng complaints: ware greater then could be
recomforted with words. Although Moses did what in him lay, to persuade the^
that there was no cause why they should bewail him: But rather remember to put
in use the order of the common wealth that he had given them. And so he
dissolved the assembly.

These woores be spoken a the person and Josephus
Now then afire what time I shall have showed ye thordre of the communewealth,
miete for the worthiness and virtue of Moses, and shall have described the same,
that it may appear unto al men (being willing to read) what our state has
been in times paste: I will proceed to the declaracion of the other things.
With such faith, that I neither will pen any thing other wise then he
left it, ne add (either for setting out of the matier, or other wise) any
title of mine own. Saving only those that he left written by piecemeale, as
he received the^ at the mouth of God: we have framed toguether into one
ordenarie treatise. Whereof I thought good to give warni^g, least some of our
blood happenyng upon these, might by occasion say that we had swarued from
the truth

The laws then perteinyng to the institucio^ of our city, are such as
follow. But such as he left us common among our selves: those have I
deferred until I put furthe my book, A book of Josephus so named.
De moribus and causis, which I have purposed God willing, to go in hand with
next aftre this.

Moses speaks again.
* What time then ye shall have achieued the land of Chanaan, and as men that
have found laisure to use their goods, shall determine from thencefurthe to
build cities: if ye shall accomplish these things, ye shall both have bone
a thing acceptable unto God, and shall win to your selves a grounded wealth.

See that there be one holy city, in the most goodly place of all the
land of Chanaan. See that there be but one church in it, and one altar: of
stones neither squared nor karued, ne yet framed by Masonrie, but hand somely
heaped together, as they be gathered. And let the same be so plastered over,
that it may appear to the sight, a plain and comely Altar. But se there be
none ascence there unto by staiers, but only a fair up going, by a slope
bancque of Turfes. In any other of your cities, se there neither be Church, ne
Altar. For God is but one, and the people of the Hebrews but one. Whosoever
shall have spoken * villainy against God, Blasphen.
let him be stoned, and hanged fro morrow till night, and vilely be bewried,
without any solempnitie.

Thrice a year the people shall assemble into the city where the church is:
fro far, and niere, through the whole land that the Nebrues shall possess.
Both to render thanckes to GOD, for that he shall have sent them: and to make
supplicacio^ for things that are to come. And further, to the end that with
often hauntynge one with another, and festing together: there may be a
friendship engendered amongst them. For truly it is miete that men of one
nation, and blood, and coupled in one trade of laws: should be acqueinted one
with another (as by such fellowshippeit shall come to pass) and that they
should cause a remembrance to remain one of another emo^gest them with such
repair, and co^panieng together. Without the which ye shall seem one to a
another most strange.

Ye shall also reserve aparte, a tenthe of all the fruictes of the earth:
beside the tenthe appoincted to be given to the priests, and Levites. The
which ye shall selle each man at home in his country. But the profecte coming
thereof, shall be spent upon the feasts, and sacrifices to be made in ye holy
city. For so is it mete that men take part of the fruictes coming of the
land which the Lord shall give them, to the honor of the giver. The price
that comes of the commune har lot, shall thou not convert unto the use of
Sacrifice. For God delights not in the fruits of any kind of iniquity: and
nothing is more abominable then such lewdenes of the body. Likewise if any
manne require either thy dog for the fold, or for the chase to lime his
bitche, the price coming thereof shalt thou not convert to the sacrifice of
the Lord. No man shall rail against those that other cities hold for their
gods. Neither shall ye spoil or rob, church or chapel of any foreine
Idolle, ne take away any gift consecrate to them. See that none of you be
apparelled with a garmente * of linen and woollen meinte: Linsy wolsy.
for that apperteineth only to the priests.

And when the multitude shall be assembled into the holy city, to celebrate the
seventh years sacrifices, at such time as the feast of the Bowthes draws
nighe: let the bishop, standing in some place alofte made for the purpose,
fro whence he may well be hard, recite the laws unto them all. Withholdinge
neither woman, ne child: no not the bondeman from hearing of them. For it
behooves them to have them written in their hearts and minds: that they may be
kept, never to perisshe. For by that means shall it come to pass that they
shall not offend, when they shall have none ignorance to excuse them in the
ordinances and laws: and the laws shall have ye greater authority upon the
offenders, in that they have warned them before of the penalty, and by hearing
have graven in their minds what things they command. That they may have
the effect of their meaning, even dwelling within them. The which neclegted:
they shall offend, and be the cause of their own euilles. Yea, and let the
very children learn the laws fro their youth, as being a most good lie
discipline, and the cause of blessed wealth. Twice a day also, both in the
morning, and at the hour of bedtime, let them testify to the Lord, his
bounteous goodness from the time of their deliverance out of Egipte.
Forasmuch as tha^ckes giuinge of very nature is dew: and is had as well to
yield recompense for the benefits paste, as to allure the like in time
afterward. Let them also write upon their doors, each most notable benefit
received of God: and what soever may set forth hie power and favor toward
them. Let them bear them for broches on their cappes, and braselettes on
their arms, and let them show them to all men: that gods tendrenes
toward the^ may on every side be apparent.

Let there be chosen for every city, seven rulers, exercised in all virtue,
and in the way of equity. And to every of those let there be given two
ministres, of the Tribe of the levites. And let those which are appointed to
ministre the laws to the city: be had in all honor, and reverence. So that
no man be bold to speak any words of dishonestie, they being present: ne to
behave him self malapertly. That this their reverence toward men of dignity:
may make them more fearde to offend against God. And let the judges have power
to pronounce their sentence, except any man can show that they are corrupted
with money to peruerte the law: or can bring any other cause to convince them
not to have judged a right. For it is not miete that such should sit in
judgment, as will lean to lucre or dignity: but such as prefer equity
before all other things. For so might God seem to be smallie reputed among
you, and to be judged of less authority then they: to whose sentence ye
should yield your consent, for fear of power. The power of GOD is equity.
He then that bears in any point with them that are of power, for dignities
sake: enhaunseth their power above the power of GOD.

But if the judges be not able to determine, in some race brought before the^
(as among men it oftentimes happens) let the^ remitte ye whole cause to ye
holy city. And let the high priest, the prophet and the counsel assembled,
give their sentence. Cleave not to the Testimony of one witness. But of three,
or twain at the least: such as have so lived, that for their honesty they
may be reputed credit worthy. The woman shall not be admitted as a witness, for
the lightenes, and disshonest holdenes of that kind. No the bondema^ shall
have no voice in matier of witness, for that he lacks the francque noblenes of
mind: and either for lucre or fear, is like to testify untruths. If any
shall be guilty of false witness, convicted thereof: let him suffer the same that
the person should have against suffered whom he wytnessed.

If there shall have been in any place a murder committed, and neither the doer
can be found, ne any man suspected upon malice to have done it: let search
be yet made for the doer with all diligence, appointing reward to him who so
ever shall detecte him. But if then neither, no man shall disclose in the
officers of the towns next unto the place where the murdre was done, shall
mesure the distau^ce fro the plotte where the dead lies. And look what town
shall be found next thereunto, the rulers of the same shall lead a boughte cow
into a valley and place, neither fit for ploughe ne plant, and shall cut in
two the senowes of the beast in the houghes. And the priests and levites, and
the counseille of that town: wasshinge over the head of the ox, shall with
loud voice protest that they neither did it, ne ware present at the diede. And
to desire God to forbear his wrath, and that never there happen so heinous a
diede in the land again.

At this present ye are not governed by any king, or any one man alone: but by
a nombre of the best, chosen out among ye. The which of all gouernaunces is
the best: and to live under it, passing all other lives. Wisshe ye not then
for any other trade of common wealth, but be ye co^te^ted with this:
acco^ptinge your laws for your lords, and doing al things acordi^g unto
the^. For god is sufficient enoughe to be your ruler. But if ye shall be at any
tune desirous to have a king over ye: let him be of your blood, and such a
one as estiemeth righteousness, and all other virtues. And let him not stick to
his own wisdom, but order all matiers of weight by the laws, and the lord.
And let him do nothing without the high priest, and the sentence of the
counseille. Neither let him be given to many marriages, ne to seek abundance
of money and horses. Which having obtained, he may wax full of the law, and
utterly contempne it. And if ye perceive that he busily seeks such things:
let him be cut shorter, that his power encreace not more tha^ is expedient
for you. It shall be lawful for no man to remove ye bound either of his own
land, or of other men's, with whom ye have peace. But let it be seen to,
that they may continue in their steades, as the sure marks of god, there
placed for ever. For thereof comme the wars, and sedicion: when the coueitous
manne will encroche beyond his bounds. Yea who so thus ouerleapeth the
bound, will not greatly stick to ouerleape also the law.

He that planteth an horteyarde, if the settes bring fruit before the fourth
year: let him neither yield unto God the firstlinges thereof, ne occupy them
to his own use. For they are comen in undue time, and sooner then their nature
permits. And be nether miete for God, ne the owner. But in the fourth fruit
harvest (for then are they seasonable) let him bear the whole gather into
the holy city, and let them be spente together with the tenth of all other
fruits: festing with his frindes, the fatherles child, and the widow. And in
the.v. year, he shall have liberty to take to him self the profectes of his
plants. Let not the vineyarde be planted or sown with aught elies. For it
is enoughe for the ground to nourishe the vine, and to be free fro the labor
of the ploughe. Let the ground be tylled with oxen, and let none other beast
be yoked with them. Yea let the ploughe be hand somed for them also, acording
to their sorts. Let your siede be most piked and clean, pure, and
unmingled: nor let them not be sown by two or by three sorts together. For
nature likes not such fellowship of sundry kinds. Neither shall ye put to your
cattaille a male of adiuerse, or contrary kind. For it is to be feared, lest
thereby the unkindly couplinge against kind, pass also at length unto men:
beginning at things of small regard, and so crieping on further. Lertes there
is nothing to be suffr^d for other to follow: whereof might proceed any
change of your state. But it behooves you (forasmuch as the laws have taken
charge of the weightyer things) to foresee with all diligence, that nothing
be blame worthy in these smaller. He that reapeth his corn, and gathers it
into shefe: shall not glene up the ears as h^ goes. Yea, let him leave some
of the gauelles ungathered: that the niedie mate find and be relieved by. The
clusters of grapes also, by chaunche (as it happeth) ouersene in the gatheryng:
shal^e thou leave to the poor. See also of thine Olive gather, that thou leave
somewhat to the^m that have not of their own. For there comes not so great
profit to the owners by the nighe gatheryng: As there shall come good will,
at the hand of the poor. And the goodness of the lord shall increase the
goodness of the soil, that the frui^tes mate abound: if men shall not only
have regard to their own private profecte, but also to the sustentation of
other. Thou shalt not mowseale thine Ox in the floor, whilst he treads
the ears. For it is vnmiete to shut them fro the fruicte: that have helped
and labored for the obreinyng thereof. Neither shall ye prohibit the
waifaryng man to taste of the frui^tes that be ripe: but ye shall suffer him to
eat his fille (as if they ware his own) whether he be an indweller of the
land, or a foreiner. Reioisyng in so susteryng him to take his pleasure, of
such as be ripe, but none shall he ^ary away. Neither shall the Grape
gatherers, forbid such as they miete: to eat of the Grapes they bear to
the Press. For vnsittyng it is, to grudge the gifts which the lord has
given to the maintenance of our life: to such as desine to take pleasure of
their seasonablenes, being now at the highest, and sone ready to decaie, as it
pleases God to ordeine. Yea, if any man of a shamefaced mainde^lines, for
lack of audacitie, shall strain courtesy to take them, ge^tly provoke ye
the^. If they be Israelites, in the name of co^panio^ or master for your
bloudessake. But if they be foreiners, as willing them to take part of such
ghestan commodities as God has given ye, for the time of the year. For it is
not to be judged as cost, that thou suffer a man to take of ge^tlenes: God
sending ye plenty and enough of all good things. Not for your own use and
welfare alone: but also that ye may liberally give unto many. To thend that he
might this way declare unto other, his favor and plentuous hand toward you
in such largenes: That of the overplus, ye may also participate unto many And
he that shall do contrary hereunto, let there be given unto him by the
commune Sergeaunt of the batte.xxxix. stripes with a waster. And let him
suffer this most dishoneste punishemente, for as much as where he was fre by
nature, he has diminished his own dignity, in becomyng slave unto lucre. And
a goodly thing is it, and co^ueniente for you that have suffered misery in
Egipte, and in your passing the wilderness: to regard them that suffer the
like. And seeing that ye by the merciful provision of GOD, have obtained
plenty: to give part of the same unto the nedie, moved with like pity and
mercy.

Beside the two tenthes which I have commanded ye yearly to pay (the one to
the Levites, and the other to the feastinges) let there be a third tenthe
also given the third year, to be distributed to all widows and fatherles that
lack. The first of all ripe things that shall happen to every manne to come
furthe: let them bear into the house of the lord And there (having given
thanckes unto GOD, for the ground that bare them, which he gave them to
possess: and the holy Sacrifices being finished: let them give the first
handseale of the things that the law commands them to bring, to the
Priests. And when any man sh^l have thus done with his fruictes, and tithes,
as well perteinyng to the Levites, as other: and shall have banquetted with his
firstlings acordingly, and is about to return home to his own: then
standing against the Tabernacle of witness let him give thanckes unto God,
that he has vouchedsaulfe to deliver them from the oppressions of the
Egipcianes, and to give them a good land and a large to occupy, and use to
their commodity and pleasure. And protesting that he has yielded his tithes
acordyng to the Laws of Moses^let him beseech God to be always mercifulle and
favorable to him. And that it may please his goodness, to continue
indifferently to the vniuersalle nombre of the Israelites: those benefits and
commodities, that he has already given them, and to heap unto the^ what so
ever more over may be given.

Let such as are come to years of marriage, marie with maidens free borne, and
of good parentage of honest stock. And who so refuses to mary with a maiden,
let him not couple to him one that has lived with another manne: neither such
a one as has forsaken her former housebande. But let not the free borne
couple with the bond, although some one among ye sieme forced thereto, with
feruencie of love. For it is mete that men should bridle their desire: and it
makes for your honor. Furthermore, let there be no marriage made with the
commune harlotte: whose Matrimonial Sacrifices God will not admit, for the
dishonest reproach of her body. For by this means the natures of your children
shall be disposed to honest courage, and toward to all virtue: if they shall
not be begotten of dishoneste marriages, neither of the lust of engendrure with
those that are bond.

If any man having betrouthed himself to one whom he takes for a maiden, shall
aftrewarde find her to be none: it shall be lawful for him before a Judge to
accuse the wenche, vsyng such proves as he can allege. And the father or
brother of the maid, or he that shall seem next of her kind, shall defend
her. And if it shall be Judged that the maid has not offended, let her
remain with her accuse, now having no power to put her from him, except she
give unto him great and vehement causes, such as cannot be gainesaied. But if
he have laid this crime upon her, of an unshame faced boldenes, and without
cause: let him receive for punishment.xxxix. stripes, and pay unto the father
fiuetie* Sicles. As some make count, about ten (...)* sterlyng.
But if he shall convince the maiden, to have lost her maidenheade: if she be
one of the communaltie, let her be stoned, for that she did not prudently
defend her Virginity, until her lawfulle marriage. But if she be a Priests
daughter, let her be burnte quick. If any manne have two wives, and the
one is with him in great estimacion and favor, either for love, or beaultie,
or other cause: and the other in worse condition or state: If the child b^rne
of the beloved (being younger then the child tofore borne of the other) would
enjoy the prerogative of age, for the same favor of his father toward his
mother: and so enjoy a double part of his fathers substance (acordyng to that
I have appoincted in the Laws) let him not be suffered so to do. For it
fitteth not with equity, that the elder should be put beside the
enheritau^ce of his father, because the other passes him, by the mothers side.

Who so def^oureth a maide^, betrouthed to another, she being before persuaded,
and consentyng to the same: let the^ both dye together. Because they are both
indifferently wicked. He for his persuasion of the maid, to suffer so filthy
a dishonor, and to prefer that wickedness before lawful marriage: and she for
that she consented to abandon her body to dishonestie, either for pleasure or
lucres sake. But if the manne have done this diede, having gotten her alone in
some place where she could have no defendour, let him alone die. Who so
def^oureth a Virgin not yet betrouthed to another, let the same marie her.
But if the father be not contented to knitte her with him, let the
transgressour pay fiuetie* Sicles, The Sicle is judged *^^^s. sterlyng.
as a dime taxed for the injury done.

He that will be deuorced from his wife, dwelling with him, for what so ever
cause it be (as there happen many unto men) let him confirm by writing, that
he never had diede of matrimony with her. That is to say, that he never
carnally knew her, and so shall she receive power to dwell with another, which
before ware wickedness. And if also she agree not well with the second, or that
he being dead, the former would marie, her again: let it not be lawful for
her to return unto him. The housebande of one that lacks issue being dead:
let his brother marie the widow. And the child between them borne, let him
nourishe up to the succession of the enheritaunce, namyng him aftre the name of
the dead. For if ye shall do thus, it shall make much for your commune
wealth, in that the name of the kindredes shall never be extincte: and the
possessions shall always remain unto the blood. And it shall be a comfort of
sorrow unto the woman, now dwelling with the next kindesman of her former
housebande. But if the brother will not marie her, let the widow before the
Senate or counsel, thus testify. That where she was willing to remain
stille in the lignage, and to bear children by him, he will not admit her. But
rather finds in his heart to offend against the name and memory of his
brother. And the Counsel demau^ding for what cause he abhors the marriage:
whether he shall show a cause of weight, or of no weight, let them incline
thereunto. But as for the widow of his Brother, plucking of his shoes, and
spittinge in his face: let her say unto him that he is worthy to suffer
this ignominy at her hand, for that he has found in his heart to hindre
and empaire the name, and memorialle of the dead. And let him thus depart
out of the senate, having this reproach during his life: and let her mary to
whom soever she will, that shall afterward require her. If any manne shall
have taken prisoner in the wars, a maiden, or married woman, and be desirous
to have her fellowshippe of body: let him not touch her bed, or body,
before that she (being tonsed, and having taken on her mourning wiede) have be
moved her kinsfolk, and friends that perisshed in the war. That when she
shall have satisfied and appeased the dolor that she conceived for the^: she
may then convert her self to the ba^quet and marriage. For it is a goodly and
a decent thing, for a man that goes about to get him self an honest wife: to
seek how to cure her grieved mind: and not to neglecte her favor, in pursuing
only his own pleasure. And thirty days being ones passed thus (for that is
enough to those that are of discretion to bemourne even their derest beloved)
let her then go to and mary. But if he, at the first having satisfied his
lust, wax full of her, and refuse her to wife: let him not have power to make
her bond, but let her go when she will at free liberty.

If there shall be found any young men contempninge their parents, or not
yeldinge dew honor unto them, either of shamefacednes or set purpose of
despighte: First for that the parents are wont to be fittest judges over
their children, let their fathers, with words correct them. Saying that
they joined not matrimony betwiene their mothers and the^, for pleasures sake,
or to encreace their substance in layeng each others goods together in
commune: but to opteine children that might nourisshe the^ in their age, and
ministre unto them what they lack. After thou warte ones come in to this
world, we diligently brought ye up with gladness, and great thanks unto god
for the, sparinge nothing that might sieme in any wise to make for thy
sauftie, profit, and enstruction in all honest knowledge. Now therefore (for
that it is miete for men to bear with the faults of youth) let it suffice
the hitherto to have neclegted thy dew reverence unto us: and come again now
into the right way. Co^fidering that God him self hainously takes yt that is
committed against the father: for that he him self being father of all
mankind siemeth to be offended when offense is committed against those that
bear the name of father with him: and can not have of their children that
which is dew unto them. And the law against all such is an vnmercifulle
judge: the which we wisshe child thou should not prove. And if by these
admonicio^s, the lewdenesse of the young man shall be redressed and amended:
let them be quyte of reproach for their misdemeanour, and offenses. For by
this means both the law maker shall become comme^dable, and the fathers
fortunate: which shall neither see son ne daughter punisshed. But if the
parents words, and good enstruction to amend, shall not avail, but that
they will with continual dishonours, and oultrages against them, make the laws
their implacable ennemies, let him be brought for the of the City by the
parents them selves, and the multitude following, and let him be stoned to
death. And when he has lain all the day, for all men to look upon: let
him be buried in the night. So let them also be handeled that are condemned
of any capitalle crime by the law, aftre what sort so ever it be. Let euin
the very ennemie be engraued, and let no corpse lie without burial. For that
ware a punisshement beyond conscience.

It shall not be lawful for ye to make any lone to any of the Hebrews, either
for usury or gain. For it is not sittinge that men of one lignage should
seek gain with that, that God sent them. But to judge it raither gain, to
have helped his necessity, and to think that he shall so hothe deserve his
thancke, and be requyted of God for his gentleness. They that have borrowed
either silver, or any parcel of moist fruits, or dried: let the^ (referringe
the matier to their conscience that lent them) pay again their le^ders with
good will, and gladness: thincking that the thing so restored is laid up euin
in their own house and custodye. And that it shall be at all times ready again
for them when they lack it. But if they shall be shameless in profering, and
payenge it home again^: let them not so much as go home for a gauge, before
sentence be given upon them by the judge.

And as for the gauge let them require it of some neighbor abroad, and let
the debtour him self without contradiction, bring it to the creditour now
enterprising upon him with the aid of the law. And if he that has gauged be
a man of substance: let the creditour keep the gauge vntle the restitutio^
of the lone be made. But if he be poor, let him redeliuer it before the son
set. Specially, if the pledge be a garmente, that he may have it to sleep
with, acording to gods tendrenesse that naturally pitieth the poor. As for
his querne or any tool of his shalt you not take to pledge: less they should
also be diffurnished of the instruments perteininge to the necessity of their
living, and so be driven for niedsnesse to greater inconvenience.

Let him that has robbed a man be punisshed with death. But let him that
shall have picqued either Gold or silver pay the double. Who so ever shall
have slain the thief in the robbinge of his house, let him be unpunished.
Yea though he ware but vndermininge his house, or making his entry therinto.

He that has stolen any manner of beast, let him restore the value. iiij.
fold. But if the same be a labouringe ox: he shall restore the value. v.
fold. And he that shall not be able to pay the sum dew for the damage:
shall be bond unto them to whom the beast stolen shall be known to apperteine.
A man sold unto his kindesman; shall be bond to him six years, and the
seventh year he shall be free again. But if he shall fortune to have a child by
some bondewoman there, and for the love and favor of her, and his child, be
content to serve stille: let him be made free in the year of Iubiley (which
is the fiuetieth year) and be delivered with his wife and children free also.

If any manne shall find in the high way, either gold or silver, let him
show the place where he found it, and sekinge aftre him that lost it,
'restore it him again. Iudginge the profighte which redoundeth unto him by
another man's loss, not to be good. Likewise shall be done with any kind of
catteille that a man shall fortune to fijnde a straye in any place. And if the
owner of the same shall not straight way be known, let him keep it with him
at home saulfe. Protesting GOD, that he intended not to turn aside, or hide
out of the way, any thing that is another man's. Let it not be lawfulle for
any man to pass by a beast in any sort evil bestradde, or fallen in the
mire: but let him help and relieve it, iudginge it to be his own propre
grief. Let them also show the way unto them that are ignoraunte, and not go
about to make them selves game in settinge them wrong, and so hinderinge
their commodity. In like manner let no man say evil against him that is
absent or deaf. A man hurt in a fraye where there was no weapon used: shall
inco^tine^t be revenged, he that hurt him being made to suffce the like. But
if he shall be carried home upon the hurt, and aftre he has lien sick a good
space, shall fortune to salle in, and be marred: let him in who the fault is,
pay the worth of the beast to the owner. Let them be fensed also about, to
kiepe of such things as otherwise by sliding or rolling, might perish.

Who so ever has taken any thing of another man's to keep: let him keep it
eue^ as a relic. And let no person consent to defraude any manne of thing
so betaken to his trust. Neither manne nor woman, no though he might game by
it thousands of pounds: as being sure that no witness could chardge him with
all* For out of all peradventure, it behooves every man to deal iuffly, even
for conscience sake: as having himself a full witness against himself. Let
every man therefore do those things, that may cause him to be praised of
other: having before him principally the reverence of God. From whom no
lewdenesse can be hidden. But if it shall fortune this man so put in trust, to
lose the thing committed to his custody, and cannot be found to mean any
practice of knavery, or deceit in the matier: Let him go unto the seven
Judges, and there swear by God that nothing thereof was lost by his will, or
through his defaulte, nor no piece of it occupied for him, and so let him
depart acquitted thereof. But if he have occupied never so li^le a part of the
thing, so delivered to his custody, and have so lost the same: let him be
condemned to make recompense for the whole that he received.

Like as I have said for the saulfe keeping of things, if any manne shall with
hold the hire of the labouryng manne, that toileth and drudgeth with his body:
let him remember that the wages of the poor, ought not to be kept back. As
the thing which god has given him (know thou well) in stead of land and
other possessions. Furthwith therefore conte^te him, without delaie the same
day. For God will not have the labourer defrauded of the profit of his
labors.

Punish not the son, for the fathers fault: but let the children rather
that are found virtuous, be tendered and pitied for that they have so leude
fathers or mothers, and not hated because their parents be vicious. No, the
naughtines of the son, is not to be imputed to the parents neither:
considering that young men will do many things, contrary to the discipline
of their parents, upon a selfwilled wilfulness, that thincketh skorne to be
taught. As for the redgeling or guel^ person, let him be abborred, and his
compaignie shonned of al men: as one whose manhood is (as a man would say)
curtalled or clipped away, and the fruicte of engendrure, which God gau^ unto
man for the increase of our kind, for his part destroyed. Yea, let them be
hunted out of all men's compaignie, as murderers of ma^kinde, in taking await
that, that should have been the cause of issue aftrewarde. For why, it is
euidente that because they had lost tofore al manlines of mind: therefore
they like wise be came conformable of body. So shall ye also do with what so
ever thing it be, that siemeth mo^struous to the beholders It shall not be
holden lawful among ye, to guelde manne, woman, or beast. And now let these
be as statutes and laws, peaceably and quietly to join ye into one commune
wealth. And the tendrenes of God, when he shall see it without sedicion: shall
advance and enhaunce it. Let the time never be seen, that shall altre any one
of these, and change them into contrary. But forasmuch as there ^s no
remedy, but that men shall fall into business and troubles, either
willingly or unwillingly: Let us also devise some what in that be haulfe,
that through foresighte of things, miete to be done: ye may have wholesome
remedies, when need is, and not be driven to sieke remedy at vnsette steuin,
when the daungier lies in your lappes. But that ye may possess and enioie
the land, that GOD has given ye, banishyng sluggardise, and kieping your
minds in continual exercise, to the practice of virtue and manhod even when
ye have gotten it, that ye may live there, without thencursions of strangers,
and without any civil discencion, to vere ye or trouble ye. Through the
which tiu^le discord, if ye shall fall to doing things contrary to your
forefathers, and let stippe their ordenaunces and rules: or shall not
continue in the laws, which the Lord veliuereth unto you, most assuredly
good for what so ever affairs of war ye shall have, either now in your time,
or your children aftre you: the Lord shall throw the breakers of the same,
clean out of his favor and protection.

When ye are in mind to war upon any people, and to show your force upon
them: send first your Heralde unto the^ though they be never so much bent to
be your enemies. For before ye lift up weapon against them, it behooves ye to
use communicacion with them, declaryng that although ye have an army of great
power, and horses, harneis, and weapons and (that which far passes all
these) God your favorer and helper: yet by your good wills ye would have no
war with the^. Neither that it ware any pleasure to you, to enriche your
selves with the spoil of their substance: but rather a thing that ye hate, if
it may otherwise be If they shall lean unto you, then it becomes ye to kiepe
peace: Thincking with your selves, that they are your bettres in strength. But
if they will endamage you then lead ye your army against them, vsyng God
for your head capiteine and governor: but for your chiefteine under him, make
ye some one of passing wisdom and courage. For where there are many
governors, beside the hinderau^ce that it causes when a man's necessity
moves him to use spiede: it is wont also not to be very prosperous to them
that use it. Let your army be piked of the strongest, and hardiest of
courage ^leaste tournynge their backs when it comes to stripes, they profit
more your ennemies then you.

They that late have builded, and not yet taken one years commodity of
the same, and they that have planted either vineyarde or horteyard, and not
recemed as yet any fruictes thereof: let them be suffered at home. Like wise
those that are trouthplite, and toward marriage, or such as are newly married:
least upon longing aftre their desires, they be to render over their lives. And
sparing them selves to enioie their pleasure, shrincke back for the nones,
and abasse the courage, upon regard of their wives. And when ye shall be
assembled into camp, let it be foresene that nothing be done out of course,
to much against courtesy. And when ye shall besiege any fortress or town of
defense, and lack Timbre for the making of your engines and devises: pille ye
not the country, cutting down the trees about the city or fortress, what
so ever it be: but sparingly use the^. Remembering that the earth brings
them furthe for the commodity of man: and that they would lay to your
charge, if they could speak, that undeservedly ye hurt them. As no whitte
occasion of the war, and those that gladly would have given place, and passed
into some other quartre, if it had been possible for them. When ye shall have
ouercomen them in the field: flea ye as many as stand in the battle
against ye. The residue reserve ye to pay tribute unto ye: the Cananites
excepted, for those it behooves ye to destroy every mothers son. And have ye
a specialle regard in the skirmishe or battle, that no woman, either use the
appareille of men, or any manne, the appareille of women. Such then was the
order of the commune wealth that Moses left. Beside these he delivered them
laws in writing fouretie years before, of the which we will treat in another
book.

Aftre this in the days following (for he every day continually preached unto
them) he delivered them prayers of blessinge and banning: the one for the
fulfillers, the other for the trangressours of the law. The^recited he unto
the^ ye verses that he left in the bible, consistnge each one of.xii. measures
the piece: and containing ye forewarning of things to come, acording to the
which all things have happened, and happen at this present. So to the
poincte, that it can not be said that he missed the truth in any thing.

These books delivered he unto the priests, and the Arcke. In the which he
left the ten articles of the law, which we commenly call the.x.
commandments written in two tables, and the Tabernacle also. And he gave a
lesson to the people, that when they had conquered the land, and ware satled
in the same: they should not forgette the injury of the Amalechites, but that
they should make a voyage against them, and take revenge upon them, for the
damage and displeasure they did them, when they ware in the deserte. And that
when they should enjoy the contrie of Cananie, and should have destroyed the
whole multitude of it (as it behooved, and was miete for them) they should
build up an altar looking toward, the East in some place, not far from
the city of ye Sichemites, between the two mounteines. Garised on the right
hand, and Gibalo on the left hand. And that they should place their whole
multitude upon those two mounteines being divided into two equalle parts.
That is to say on each hille. vi. tribes, with the levites, and priests and
all. And that they first, that ware in the mount Garisin, should wysshe all
felicity, and blessedness unto those that ware devout in the religion of GOD,
and the keeping of the laws, and threw not at their hieles those things that
Moses had taught them. And that then the other in Gibalo, aftre what time
they had luckely given their good consent unto the^: should also wish like
prosperity, and like blessedness to the like doers, answerably to the former.

Whereunto the first should again give like lucky consent, with praisinge
them. That done he willed them in like sort to do with the cursinges,
answering one another, for the establisshing of the laws that should be given
them. And that the manner and discipline of this blessinge, and cursing, might
never fall our of use: he wrate them out the order of both with the prayers,
and curses thereto appertinente. The which also when he died he wrate upon
each side of the altar, where he enjoined also the people to make the
sacrifice stondinge, that the Latin calls Sacrificium Solidum, and aftre,
not to offer that day any more sacrifice. For why he said it was not
lawfulle. Thus I say did Moses institute these things, and the people of the
Hebrews from day to day observed them forth on.

The next day calling the whole multitude together, in so much that there
was neither woman nor child, ne bond body absence: he charged them
wondrefully sore to take heed to the laws, and not to tra^sgresse them. But
that as nion that diligently waied gods mind and will: they should spare
none that offeded against them, neither for kindredes sake, ne for fear. Nor
yet as thincking any other cause to be more to be weighed, then the obseruacion
of the laws. But raither if any one manne of their kindered or any whole
city, would go about to disturb, or abrogate the ordinances of their commune
wealth: that they should take vengemente upon them, both by officer, and
without. And that if in such case it fortuned them to have the bettre of such
adversary to the law: that they should utterly destroy him or them, not
leaving an agguelet of a poincte for the memorial of such hopeloste persons,
if it ware possible. And in case they ware not able to revenge for lack of
power: that yet they should so work, that they might well show that those
things ware done full evil against their will. And the multitude forsothe
did swear. He taught the^ to, how their sacrifices might be made more
acceptable unto God, and how they should when they set forth to the wars
chose their luck by stone lottes as I have showed before. Joshua also
prophesied, Moses yet being present among them. And Moses thus wayeng all
those things that he had done for the people, both concerning war, and
peace in making them laws, and teachinge them an order of a commune wealth,
by the which if they directed their steps, they might enjoy a prosperous
blessedness: signified unto them, that God had given knowledge that they should
in time to come forsake his laws and ceremonies: and therefore suffer much
affliction and adversity. In sort that their land should be even filled with
their ennemies. Their Cities, and towns beaten down smothe to the ground,
the Temple burned, and they them seues being sold, should serve as thralles
unto men that should take no pity of their calamities. And that when they
suffered these things they should sore repent the^ of their transgressions,
but then in vain. God notwihsta^ding that fourmed, and made ye shall restore ye
again unto your citezins, both their Cities, and the Temple. And the loss of
these quoth he shall happen often ner then ones or twyse.

Then Moses encouraging Joshua to march out with the army against the
Cananites (as one assured to have God his ayder in all his entreprises) and
prai enge for prosperous luck, and success, for all the whole multitude,
says. Saying that I must depart unto our forefathers, and God has
appoincted this the day of my departure unto them: I openly confess before ye
all yet being alive, and present with you: the thanckes that Iowe unto him, and
now give him, not only for the regard that he always had to ye, to turn fro
ye that that was evil, and to give unto ye that that was good: but also that
it pleased him to succoure me when I had niede of his helping hand, in all my
cares and troubles of mind, for your reformacion, and amendment into bettre,
and showed him self tender unto us in all our affairs. Or raither that it
pleased him to take in hand his self to lead in, and let out, vsinge me as a
lieuetenaunte, and ministre of the benefits, wherewith he would bless your
people. For the which now at my leave taking, I thought it convenient, and
fitting with my duty, first to praise and magnify together with you, the
mighty power of GOD, the which shall also show him self carefulle for you in
times to come. And he, yea eue^ he shall yield again to you a thanckefulnes, of
his gentleness, for your thanckefulnes of duty: where through he shall make
you confess in conscience, that ye are for his bounteousnes bound to
reverence, worship, and honor him, and to have his laws in price. Both
those which he has given you, and per hereafter shall, that ye may keep him
favorable unto you: of all stores the most goodly treasure. For manne him
self that is a law maker, becomes a bittre enemy, when he sees his laws
broken, set at naught, and thrown under foot.

But be not ye in will diere brethren, for the tender love of GOD, to prove
what manner of one he is, when he begins to kindle into wrath for the
contempt of the laws, which he gave unto you, as the maker of them all.
Moses speaking these words, euin to the last farewell of his life, and
prophecieng the destenies of every several tribe, with many words of good
fortune and chance: the whole multitude braste out into tears, so that the
women also wringinge their hands, and throwinge their arms abroad, showed the
strong sorrow that they felt for his death now at hand. Yea the children
cryenge, and sobbinge above the rest, as less able to bridle their grief and
lamentacion, declared by their pietifull wailinges that their understood, the
wonderfulle virtue of him, and the excellency of his doings, above the course
of their age. And to say all, the sorrows of the younger, and the elder,
straue as it ware in balaunce, for the maistery, acording as they diuersely
felt in their mind. For the one, knowing by experience what a governor, and
chiefteine they lost: lamented their lack for the time to come: and the other
both sorowed for that, and also and yet more, because he was berafte them
before they had well tasted his pierelesse wisdom.

A man might guess the greatness of the lamentacion, and moan of the
multitude: by that that happened unto Moses him self. For where he had
almost assured him self all the dates of his life, that his departure out of
this world should never any whitte trouble him (as the thing that he must
necessarily suffer by the will of God, and natures law) yet was he by the
compassion of the dolor of the people compelled to let fall the tears. And
going forth together to the place where he should depart fro them, they al
followed him, howling for sorrow. And those that ware farthest of, Moses
commanded with the beckening of his hands to stay still there aloof. And
those that ware nierer, with comfortable words, he entreated that they would
not bring aftre him their tears any nigher to make his farewell more dolorous.

And they thinkinge it miete to give him place therein, that he might depart
his own way as him siemed best: turned their heads into each others bosom
and sobbed up their sorrows with many salt tears among them selves, and with
many a long eye aftre Moses. Who was accompanied to the place only with the
fathers of the Counselle, the high priest Eleasarus, and Joshua now chiefteine.

And when he was comen to the mounteigne named Abary (a very high hylle over
against Jericho, giving a goodlieye unto those that are on it, into the
pleasant land of the Cananites, far and wide about, he willed the counseil
to depart. And as yet taking leave of Eleasarus and Joshua, and talkinge with
them, he vanisshed in a noque of the hille, being soubdenly ouercaste with a
cloud. He wrate nevertheless in the holy books (which we call the bible)
that he was dead. Fearing less they should take up on them to say that he
departed quick unto God, for the incomparable virtue that was in him. He lived
in all, a hundred and twenty years. Of the which he continued.xl. in his
governance, lacking but one month. He took his leave the last month of the
year called of the Macedonies Dwistre, and of the Jews Adar, in the change of
the moon. And he excelled in wit all the men that ever ware, and did all
that he did with goodly aduisement and discrecio^. He was eloque^t, and fair
spoken in uttering his mind to the people. But so bridlinge his affeccions
that a man would have thought there had been none in him. But that he knew
raither the name of them, by that he saw them in other: then the worcking of
the^, by aught that he felt in him self. A chiefteine with the best, and most
expert, but such a Prophet as none was again: so that what soever he spoke,
god him self might have been thought to have spoken it. Aftre he was thus
with drawn from this world, the people be, mourned him thirtye days. with
such moan, as never had been seen so great among the Hebrews for any
mishappe. And not only they that had had experience of him, ware sorye that
they lacked him: but they also that read his laws ware much kindled with the
desire of him, as folks gessinge by the work, what excellency was in the
woorckeman. Let this then suffice aftre this manner to have declared the passage
of Moises fro this lyse to everlasting immortality.

The table
The first book under the title of Affrique contains.
THe preface of the Author. The true opinion of the Divine, concerning the
beginning of man. Cha. i. The false opinion of the Philosopher, concerning
the beginning of man Chapter. ii. The division and limits of the Earth.
Chapitre. iii. Of Ethiope, and the aunciente manners of that nation. Chapter.
iiii. Of Egipte, and the aunciente manners of that people. Chapter. v. Of the
Penois, afterward called Car thaginenses: and the other peoples of Affrique.
Chapter. vi.
The second book ^ndre the title of Aste, contains.
The description and division of Asie with the peoples most famous therein.
Chapter. i. Of Panchaia, and the manners of the Panqueis. Chapitre. ii. Of
Assiria and Babilonia, and the manners of those peoples. Chapi. iij. Of Jury,
and of the life, manners, and laws of the Jews. Chapter. iiii. Of Media, and
the manners of the Medes, Chapter. v. Of Parthia, and the manners of the
Parthianes. Chapter. vi. Of Perse, and the manners and ordenaunces of the
Persianes. Chapi. vii. Of Ynde, and the uncouth trades and manners of life, of
the peoples therein. Chapitre. viii. Of Scithia, and the stern manners of the
Scithianes. Chapter. ix. Of Tartaria, and the manners, and power of the
Tartares. Chapter. x. Of Turckie, and of all the manners, laws and ordenaunces
of them. Chapter. xi. Of the Christianes, of their first cominge up, their
Ceremonies and ordenaunces. Chapter. xii. Atreatyse of Josephus the Jew,
concerning the ordenaunces and laws of the Jews commune wealth.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Kyngston and Henry Sutton. The.xxii. day of
December.

ANNO DOMINI, M.D.I.V.


