THE Second part of the Mirror for Magistrates, containing the falls of the
unfortunate Princes of this Land.

From the Conquest of Caesar, unto the coming of Duke William the Conqueror.

Imprinted by Richard Webster, Anno Domini, 1578.

Go straight and fear not.

The Printer to the friendly Reader.
GEntle Reader, I trustyng in thy accustomed kyndnesse, have published this
Book, Entitled, The Second part of the Mirror for Magistrates, the Author
whereof is now beyond the Seas, and will marvel at his return, to find this
imprinted. For his intent was but to profit and pleasure one private man, as
by his Epistle may appear. But I fyndyng the copy by chance, showing it unto
diverse men, both learned and wise: and findyng a book already in print,
Entitled, The first and third part of the Mirror for Magistrates, I was moved
diversely of diverse men, by printyng this latter work, to make perfect the
former book. It may be (good Reader) that the friendely acceptyng hereof, will
encourage the Author to set things of greater price in Print: yet esteem
thou this as a Lantern, having light sufficient to guide thy wandryng steps,
both unto the happiness of this world, and of the world to come. Which
happiness God grant we all may enjoy.

The Authors Epistle unto his friend.
SIr, it would be too manifest an Argument of a nature degeneratyng from al
gentry, if I should not consider of your request, you asking and urging both
honest and profitable things. I therefore to ensure you, that I am not forgetful
of your demand, presumyng like blind Bayard to this my boldness, have not
with Apolloes Pensile, but with Pans pleasantlesse Pen, endeavored to endite
that which you are so desirous to have done. And although I once translated for
you, Ovid, De remedio amoris, as you said, to your contentation, we being then
in Cambridge, where ask help, and have help, might be had: yet now I will
ensure you, like one amazed, I have strayned my strength unto the v^^termost,
being desirous to finish this work. You know that Love matters be agreeing
with Caliopes Quill, every Apprentise can of such matter, make a Meter. But how
hard a thing it is to compel Clio, with her boisterous banners, to couch under
the compass of a few metered lines, I refer you unto the good Turberuile,
who so soon as he began to take the terrible Treatise of Lucan in hand, he was
inforst to unyoke his Steeres, and to make holy day. Shall I then with Bochas
Pen declare the falls of the unfortunate Princes of the old world? O
intolerable presumption, that timorous Tyro should dare to deal with
menasing Mars: or that a young infant should offer to put on the Buskins of
Hercules: shall I then with silence cease to accomplish your request? O
singular ingratitude, that any friend should refuse to sweat, to pleasure and
profit his friend. Do you not consider, that all the fine wyts that England
has inioyed these many years, have busied their brains very much, to make an
English Mirror for Magistrates, which book is left even unto this day, like
the unperformed image of Venus, painted by Apelles? No man is able to finish
the work, which they with Homers hawtie Heroycal style have begun: and yet
you would have me (the least of the Poets) to make trial what I am able to do
therein. But me think I do hear you say, as you were wont, we being
conversant together, What mean al these words? thou know that the vain of
thy verse does most delight my humor. And seeing it is but for my private
Study, what mean you to allege all these allegations, as though Orestes were
Zoilus? Sir, I confess all this to be true: yet this I speak, to signify unto
you, how willing the good will I do bear unto you, has made me, being
otherwise vnwil^^^^ ^o bear a sail in such rough weather, where every Sea is
ready to devour me. And when with sails and Oars (as they say) I with all my
diligence endeavored to compass the thing now^ accomplished, I found my self
even in the myddest of the matter, clapped close with Theseus, in a returnable
Labarinth, to fight with Despair that miserable Minotaur: where, when I could
find no Ariadne, to lend me a bottom of Twist, I looked that Parcae should
have shread my twyne before my return. Yet at the last wandering Erato, with
her sister Terpsichore perceiving me with such diligence to trauise that Maze,
they willing to help the desires of my mind* said thus unto me: Come forth
thou wandering wight this way,
Do follow us outright:
We give thee leave with Poets pen,
On Princes Falls to write.


Wherewith they leadyng me unto the fountain Permestus, I without any further
determination, gallopped through the rest, which when leisure shall give you
leave to read, cease then to think on the L. Buchurst, or Sackuyll, let
Gascon and Churchyard be forgotten. And if you chance to see the Meter, or
matter not so well polished, as beseems, then remember, that they whose
falls I have here penned, were not of late time, but such as lived presently
after the Incarnation of Christ: and I have not thought it decent, that the
men of the old world should speak with so garnished a Style, as they of the
latter time.

Moreover, you may, if you please to consider, that Soldiers, of which I am
one by profession, we be not always lusking in our Forte or Castle, but be as
time and occasion will permyt, here to day, we know least our selves, where
to morrow. And I will ensure you, the most part of these my Princes did plead
their causes unto me, even in the Sea, a place in faith, not meet to pen
Tragedies. And as for books, I was altogether destitute: for when I, to please
my fantasy, trauayled (as you know) I could not bear about with me a
library but for carriage sake, contented my self with these four: With the
third Decade of Titus Liuye, with Boswelles Concordes of Armorie, with
Monsignor de Lange, that notable Warrior, and with the imperfect Mirror for
Magistrates: which books made nothing to this purpose. I had not those
Chronicles which other men had: my Memory and Invention were unto me in stead
of Grafton, Polidore, Cooper, and such like, who did greatly aid other men.
And last of al you must consider, that the other part of the miseries of those
miserable Princes were written, I sittyng on a Rock in the Sea, not in Spain,
Italy, France, Scotland, or England, but in Garnzie Castle, where although
there be learned men, yet none which spend their time so vainly as in
Poetry. So that the complaints of these men were written (as I say) where the
want of help did diversely daunt me with despair. You have greatly requested
me by your last letter, to make unto you a Discourse of the I Will of Garnzie, and
how it is possible for the Castle to be a place so pleasant for habitation,
as I have reported it, seeing it stands in the Sea, separate from any land.
Good Sir, to write thereof (so manyfolde be the commodities and things worthy
the writing of) would rather require a good volume, then a piece of an
Epistle. Let it therefore suffice for this time, that I by writing unto you
some few lines of the Couernour, I may briefly declare what the government
and commodities be. The right woorshipful Master Thomas Leighton is her
Majesty's Lieutenaunt there.

Sir, I do remember, how constant Constantine the Great was in Religion, and
how that noble Emperor minded the Reformation thereof. You know how
careful Licurgus and Solon were for making of good Laws, and ministering of
justice. And Histories do record, how passing happy Epaminundas was in all
his affairs: But what a seemly sight is it, to see al these virtues so to
concur in one man, that he who should, compare him with them, should, I will
ensure you, do him great injury? for (that I may briefly conclude)
undoubtedly a few such men as he is, being plaste at a Princes elbow, were
sufficient to keep the most ruinous common weal that is, from ruin and
destruction. And now, judge you the commodities of the Country, by the
goodness of the Governor, for as Seneca says: Where Governors be good, and
rule their charge aright,
Without an ebb, there flows the flood, which virtuous minds delight.


And here I do turn me from these things, until by talk with you, I may
dilate more at large thereof, and returning my self unto my former purpose, I
have not thought it convenient to write the complaynts of these men, with so
obscure a style as some other have done, but with so plain an exposition, that
he who does read them shall not need to be Oedipus, for every plain Dauus
shall by reading them, easily understand the Authors drift. And because
Diligence and Memory be all the helpers that I have, therefore I have
ordained them, as the chief workers of my will. Higgins used (I know not what)
Morpheus, the God of dreams, But I dream not: the other had Baldwine for
their hearer, but I have diligent Inquisition, who can find out al things, and
Memory, who knows al things, for the Arbiters of my matter. Take you
therefore, the fruits of these my idle hours, sent unto you with a good will,
and according unto the trust reposed in you, keep these trifles from the view
of all men, and as you promised, let them not raunge out of your private Study.
And thus wishing unto you honor and long life, I end, the.15. day of May,
An. 1577.

Your Friend to use, Thomas Blener Hasset.

The Table of the Contents of this second Book of the Mirror for Magistrates.
HOw Guidericus refused to pay tribute unto Claudius Caesar, how he subdued
Galba, how he being desirous to win all the world, spoiled France,
Germany, and a great part of Italy, and lastly how he was miserably slain in a
tempest of thunder, even at what time he should have dealt with Caesar. This
history is a singular example of Gods vengeance against pride and arrogancye.
Fol. 2 How Carassus a husbandmans son, slew Lodri^e the King of the Pictes,
and how the Emperor made him a Captain. Then how he obtained the Brittayne
Crown, and how suspicion brought him to Decay. Fol. 10. How Queen Hellina
was Empress of all the world. This Storye does declare how happy they be
which live in the fear and love of God. Fol. 18. How Vortiger destroyed the
young King Constantine, and how he obtained the Crown. How the abusing of
his prosperity, brought him and his Realm so low, that he was constrained
to hyre soldiers to defend himself from his enemies, and how after many
miseries he was miserably burnte in his Castle, by the brethren of
Constantine. Fol. 24. How Vter Pendragon was inamoured with Duke Garelus wife,
and how by lawless love he lost his kingdom. This example is most necessary
for the present time. Fol. 31. How Cadwallader the last King of the Brittaynes,
after he had behaved himself very valiauntly against the Saxons, resigned his
Crown, and went to Rome, where he lived in a Religious house. This Story
contains in it the estate of al estates. Fol. 36. How Sigebert was thrust
from his Throne, and miserably slain by a Heardman. This Tragedy does teach
both Prince and Subject his duty at large. Fol. 41. How Lady Ebb did flea her
Nose and upper Lyppe away, to save her Virginity. Fol, 48. How Alurede was
brought unto disease, and unto untimely death, being inclyned unto the sin of
the flesh. By his example we may learn, that one vice is sufficient to deface
a hundred Virtues. Fol. 51. How Egelrede for his wickedness was diversely
distressed by the Danes, and lastly dyed for sorrow, seeing himself not able to
deal with Canutus. Fol. 55. How Edricus destroyde the valiant King Edmunde
Ironside, hoping to have great preferment for his labor of Canutus the Dane:
and how the same Canutus caused him to be headed for his labor. A necessary
example for all such as think by craft and deceit to increase they^ credit.
Fol. 59. How King Harolde reigning but nine months, had continual war with
the Danes, with the Norway King, with his Brother Tosto, and with Duke William*
who partly by his strength, but chiefly by policy overcame him, and by kylling
him in the feeld, obtained the kingdom of England. This History does
declare, that no manhod nor courage can keep the Crown from the right Heirs
head. Fol. 62
FINIS.
The Induction
DIligent Inquisition (says Memory) behold in the bottomless ^^yt of blind
Oblivion: there remains as yet a multitude, who although in their time, they
were of all men most famous, and even in this our time, their ensamples be
patterns passing singular, to refourme the deformities of this age,
notwithstanding they are so covered and hidden with those mistie clouds of
fylthy forgetfulness, that if thou Inqusitio^ do not with all dilygent
inquiry, and I Memory, (who have howrded up in my treasury the knowledge of
all things) except we with all our industrye, do endeavor our selves, they
are not like ever to come into the light. For at what time those barbarous
nations, (I mean the Goths, Hunes, and Danes) did with so great outrage
ouerrunne all the world: even then the ancient Historyes, and Records of
time, were by them utterly defaced, so that Princes, before that time, how
renowned so ever they were, be at this present, even by their means, buried so
deep in oblivion, that I Memory cannot without a new inquirye of many most
Noble Princes, repeat a few words: speak you therefore Inquisition, and
declare your mind, how we might renew the decayed Memory of those men. See
here (quoth Inquisition,) with great and diligent Memory, I have found out
diverse, who with their continual complayninges, have even for conscience sake
made me their procleare, to exhibit unto you in their behalf a Supplycation,
in which they complain of the great injury they suffer, because they be
excluded out of the English Mirror of Magistrates: their only desire is, that
you would once again, by celebrating their decayed names, with a fresh
Memoryall, give them liberty to declare their estates themselves. Of which, as
first though not chiefest, Guidericus the third King of the subdued
Brittaynes: and the first that refused to pay trybute to Rome, desires to be
hard. We will says Memory assist him in what we may, and not only give
them leave, but also entreat them to declare their estates. But where is that
Guidericus, the exployts of wose life were so passing singular, that had he
not been moved with two much boldness, even he had brought under his rule
the whole World: we will hear him wyllingly, for his death is a great
ensample of Gods vengeance, unto all them which think by their own courage
and ability, to compass their desires. Behold quoth Inqusition, he is even
here, his body rent and torn does declare, that great was his mishappe.
Speak then Sir Knight (quoth Memory) and let us hear what you will say:
wherewith the sorrowful Prince said as follows.

The Complaint of Guidericus.
How Guidericus refused to pay tribute unto Claudius Caesar: how he subdued
Galba, how he became desirous to win all the world, spoiled France,
Germany, and a great part of Italy: and lastly, how he was miserably slain in
a tempest of thunder, even at what time he should have dealt with Caesar.
This History is a synguler ensample of Gods vengeance, against pride and
arrogance.

ON staylesse top of Honors high renown,
With busye brain to build a bower there,
Is done to fall at Fortunes froward frown,
Whose turning wheel, the highest first does fear,
And them below it vpwardes still does rear.
Let them therefore for good estate that strive,
With sails half hoyst, in happy Haven ariue.
I pressed to tell my suddayne ill success,
Amidst the mean which did not dayne to dwell,
To higher state whilst I did me address,
By changing chance of Fortunes force, I fell
Even suddaynly from Heaven to hateful Hell,
From Heaven (I say,) I fell from that my bliss,
To hateful Hell, I mean, to wretchedness.
Guidericus which ruled the Brittayne land;
I am the same, of Simbaline the son,
Cassiuelane my Grandsyer, did withstand
Sir Caesar's force, till Parcae had undone
The fatal knot, and twist that they had sponne,
Even then to soon the Romans did oppress
This Realm, which I to right, did me address*
Which that I might the better bring about,
The three estates in Court to Parle I
In have did call, amongst which Royal route,
As one who meant for welthe of commonty,
How to restore their ancient liberty,
Pronounst the speech which here I shall recite,
Which moved much there manly minds to fight.
The Emperor of Rome has sent you see,
Ambassatours, the tribute to obtain,
Which Theomant subdued, did agree
To pay, But I such greement do disdain.
Shall I to Rome a Tribute slave remain,
Because they did subdue this realm of Yore?
Shall we buy yoke with tribute evermore?
Shall we this badge of beastly blemishe bear?
Shall Trojans we to Trojans tribute yield?
Of Brutus blood a Prince withouten pear,
We do descend, whose father first did build
In Italy: he Alba longa fylde*
And furnishte fine, with princely byldinges brave,
He was encombde next good Aeneas grave.
Then Romulus of Siluius did suc^eede,
And Rome of him (as London took of Lud)
Her name, which Alba Longa was in deed,
Built at the first by good king Brutus blood.
Dare they for Guerdon of so great a good,
Demand of us whose parents Patrons were
To them? to do this deed, they do not fear.
Let them demand, ungrateful beasts they be*
Even tribute of us Trojans let them crave,
But we in Mars his feeldes will pay their fee,
If needs they must of us a payment have,
They shall right stoutly then them selves behave.
We will not fear to fight it out in feelde,
Without revenge we never al will yield.
Did Caesar's princely prowess so prevail,
That Britaynes were by Romans brought to bay?
Was Caesar's valor of so great avail,
That it could cause Cassiuelaynes decay?
Why should not then Guidericus assay
By furious force of Mars his bloody feelde,
To make those roming Romans al to yield?
By prowess worn (who does not know) by skyl,
That he who o^ce as Victor wore the wreath,
By changed chance is forced against his will*
That garlande gay, and vital life to leave?
Such ill mishappes misfortune still does heave,
That he who did subdue but yesterday,
Is now subdude, and has the like decay.
Which may appear by King Cassiuelayne,
Whom Caesar thryce in fight did synd too strong,
Yet at the last, (the lewder chance was thine,
Thou little I Will) he thrust in with a throng
Of mighty men, and did thee double wrong.
Thee then subdude, to Rome he servile made:
Which wrong to right, with this my bloudye blade,
If you my subjects will thereto consent,
I will not cease, till I revenge have seen,
And them destroyed with dreadful diery dent
Of wrathful war: and therefore now I mean
To bid the Bace, and fetch them from their den,
To send them word, We owe no tribute we,
But we of them must recompensed be.
I to the Gods which rule the rolling skies,
Have vowde a vow, for countries liberty,
To die in feelde, or else that these mine eyes
Shall see you free from forrayne tyranny,
To which no doubt their goodness will agree.
Now that you have the whole of mine intent,
You know the cause why I for you have sent.
Al you therefore which comp^ this quarrel good,
By heaued hands let me them understand.
My brother Aruiragus by me stood,
I must not I (he said) hold up my hand,
Nor thee herein assist with any band.
For since we both have sworn a^eagance due
To Rome, to Rome I ever will be true.
No Fear of force, no hasarde, no mishappe,
Does dant my mind, I dare what dare be done,
Though now we sit in Lady fortunes lap*
By faith defilde, no honor can be won,
The wrath of God men periurde can not shun.
Do thou therefore what best thy self does seem,
Give them their right, for that is best I dee^e.
Since all but you (my brother) do consent,
My counsel and my Commons do agree,
Yea, all the force of this my Realm is bent,
To live and dye for countries liberty:
Take you therefore this sentence in boun gre,
Because thou seemst a servile life to love,
The Tower a house is best for thy behoue.
An oath constraynd, is made to none avail,
To break such oath does not the faith def^le:
Let them go tell to Claudius this tale,
We mean with force to furnishe this our I Will,
Which force him self shall feel within a while.
For if he will not fetch his tribute here,
We then will go and pay him tribute there.
Which when the Roman Claudius had heard,
Though he at home had civil strife in hand,
And though he were by foreign foes debarde,
And could not come him self, yet he a band
Of thirty thousand sent, for to withstand
My strength: which strength in the first foughten feelde
They found so strong, that forced, they al did yield.
From Galba then my self his shield did get,
In golden feelde which had the horse of fame,
Even Pegasus in seemly silver set,
The curious skill of Heraultes there did frame
Thasheument true, of ancient Troy by name,
Imbordred brave with golden letters thus:
Senatus, Populusque Romanus.
Wherewith as one pri^t forth with good success*
A great attempt I quickly did devise,
I meant O Rome, upon thy walls to press.
It easy seemde to me in my surmise,
To commpasse all that I did enterprise.
Me thought I could win all the world in haste,
But first I meant the Roman state to waste.
I did prepare in every point my power,
I sayld the Seas, I spoiled them of France,
I made the Germans and the Lumbartes lowre.
Yea good success did so my state advance
In Italy, such was my luckye chance,
I did subdue, my soldiers had the spoil,
Of all the chiefest Cities in that soil.
See here how Roming Rumor ran about,
See how report did tell a truthlesse tale:
For Hannibal the Carthage Duke so stout,
Renide, it said, would once again assail
The Roman state, and cause it now to quake.
Which false Report, did put them in such fear:
Cities would yield, before my Camp came near.
His former feats the fuming fancies fed,
That doutful now affrighted sore with fear,
They tell how at Trisemenus they sped,
In Cannas feeldes how they despoyled were:
They hate to tell, they loathe that hap to hear.
A bushel there he fyld (most true it is)
With golden Ringes Equestri ordinis.
And whilst their minds on these mishaps do muse,
They wish that now good Graccus were not dead.
For Fabius, he who wisely would refuse
Forthwith to fight, they wish for such a head.
Camillus now would stand them in great stead.
And some with sighs did wish for Scipio,
Them to defend from me there deadly foe.
But as the Lion passente once with fear
Gardante, a moving mollhil did behold,
From whence he thought some wonder would appear:
A little Moule crepte from the moving mould,
Which made the quaking Lion then so bold,
Fear set a side, that he for his delyght,
Played with the Moule, and kilde the strengthlesse wight.
So now the camp of Claudius did draw near,
Where he him self was Lord chief general,
Which greatly did delyght my heart to hear,
And caused me my Captains then to call,
To whom I said, We two must strive for all
The world so wide: which if I chance to win,
Then you your selves have ample part therein.
Even whilst I marched my men in good array,
A corsser post came praunsing in the field,
Who coming to my Cabin, thus did say,
Guidericus, thy friends at home be kilde,
Thy native soil, to forrayne force did yielde,
The Romans they have spoylde thee of each thing,
Thy brother there Aruiragus is king.
Which news although they did amaze me much,
Yet I whose heart did never faint for fear,
Although said I their good success be such,
Yet if we can subdue the Romans here,
They shall I think buy Britayne very dear.
Which out of doubt if you as you have done,
Will fight like men, the field will soon be won.
But they who hilde their wives and children dear,
Could not digest the loss of that their land,
For which they fled, left me their Chieftayne there.
When Claudius host to fight was even at hand,
Whose mighty force I could not then withstand,
Yea all my pag^, my footmen fled for fear,
And left me post alone, with heavy cheer.
That cruel Queen of hell, Proserpina,
From forth whose loins this Fury fear first fled,
Megeras sighs, no no, nor Medusa,
Who has ten thousand Snakes about her head,
The fiery flames of hell does not so dread
The mind, as fear, which makes man's heart we see,
To shake, and quake, like leaf of Aspen tree.
My Martial knights who once so valiant were,
That they the world, even all the world would spoil,
This fury fyerce, this feeble fayntyng fear,
Did causlesse cause them thus here to recoyle,
Her only force inforst me to this soil,
Not Caesar's force: no strength of Roman power,
But fear, even fear, did make me here to lower.
Which fear (for truth) did never me dismaye,
But too to soon, my hartlesse men it made
To shrink, to flinche, to flee each man his way,
And me a pray most fit for Claudius blade,
They left alone: alas what may be said,
What may be done, what fittes for mine avail?
I will not flee, to fight cannot prevail.
What, must I then go crouche unto my foe?
Fie on that fate, that I should sue for grace,
To him who is the worker of my woe,
Whose heart from forth his breast for to displace,
I gladly would ten thousand deaths embrace.
My life (in faith) does loathe to live with shame,
By death therefore, my life shall purchase fame.
For as I once did win with courage stout
In Galbas shield, the praunsing Pegasus,
So with renown I now will go about
To see if Claudius dare the cause discuss
With me alone, if courageous
Dare do that deed: that we in open feeld
May try the case, then he or I must yield.
And therewithal in armor bright I clad
Mine arming swoorde, my Targate I did take,
And on my Helm, or Burgonet, I had
My royal crown, and so I did forsake
The place, whereas my soldiers fled of late,
I marched and met the scoute of Claudius,
To whom I did address my language thus:
The Britayne King is come alone you see,
Conduct him then your Emprour to salute,
You for your pains shall gain a golden fee,
For why my grace to Claudius has a suit.
The scurers they al silent mumme and mute,
Yet well appayde of such a princely pray,
In have they did to Caesar me convey.
With ten times twenty thousand men, I met
Him marching there, to meet with me but one:
To whom I said, thy power is passing great,
My force is fled: what, must I then bemone
My self to thee? not so, but I alone
Am come to know with Magnanimity,
If thou do dare to wrecke thy wrath on me.
The crown for which so many men be slain,
Thy Galbas shield, with many jewels more,
Which unto me do only appertain:
For in the field I won them al of yore,
And unto thee I will them not restore.
If thou, as I, can win them with renown,
Then al is thine, both realm and royal crown.
Why do thou muse as though thou were dismayde?
Does doubtful dread now daunt thy Roman mind?
Faint not for fear, thou needst not be afraid,
A Britayne borne thy self right well shall find,
I am a man, and not a God by kind.
Wherewith to ground a golden gauntlet I
Did cast, and he at last did thus reply:
Thou mighty Jove which have thy seemly seat,
Above the sphere of Mars and Mercury,
Thy fleshlesse eyes (my tongue can not repeat
What syghtes they see) nothing is hid from thee:
Thy eyes, the heart, and secret thoughts do see,
Thou know O Jove, how just my quarrel is,
Which here to prove, thou know I count a bliss
No God thou man? thou art no God in deed,
I faint for fear? and do thou thus me dare?
Thy gauntlet lo to take I do not dread,
Such courage though I find but very rare
In pryncely breast: what though? I will prepare
My self to feelde, where thou I hope shall find,
My self alone will cause thee curse thy kind.
To deal with thee I Caesar might disdain,
My tryple Mace does rule the world you see,
Thou subject art the meanest of the train,
Whom conquest has compeld to wait on me:
A meaner knight were meet to match with thee.
Yet I my self with all my heart do dayne,
To reave thy life, and cause thee to complain.
Then I whose heart was al beglarde with glee,
To Caesar said, If fate has framde my foil,
If now the last of all my life I see,
It shall delight that Caesar did me spoil,
And that his blade did cause my bloody broyle.
And whilst I meant a longer speech to make,
A storm most strange constraynd the earth to quake.
Strange sundry sightes, then suddenly were seen,
The lightsome day was turnde to loathsome night,
Then darkness did affraight me much with fear,
The seemly Sun, did lose her loving light:
And that which would amaze each worldly wight,
The thundering heavens constraynde the earth to quake,
The trees did dance, the mighty mountes did shake.
Have here mine end, from threatening thunder clap,
A burning bolt did pearce my heart with pain,
Wherewith I cried, O Caesar, my mishap
Is comne, for whilst I thought thee to have slain,
Jove's vengeance just has torn my corpse in twain.
This was my end, although some writers say,
That Claudius blade did cause my last decay.
To slip at first, such fall has little foil,
Great ruth it is to lose a race forerunne,
And at the end by slipping subtle soil,
Wagelesse too lose a race too well begone,
The Turrets top let wise men wisely shun.
Who falls from top, he merciless is slain,
Who falls below, can quickly rise* again,
I tell this tale who knowledge bought too dear,
I could not be content with mean estate.
Let them therefore which shall this story hear,
So love the mean, extremity so hate,
That they may live in bless without debate.
Who is content amidst the mean to dwell,
With perfect bliss he only does excel.
With royal rule you Kings which run your race,
Take heed, beware, flee fancies fond delight,
Ambition blind will move you to embrace
A thousand evils, disdain with all your might,
Her luring looks: she me a wretched wight
Transformde, and made with Circes sorcerie,
A brutishe beast, and worse if worse may be.
When Thanatos had thus destroyed my days,
Then due desert my soul to hell conuayde.
I fearde not God, his name I did not praise,
But foolish fate and fortune still me stayde:
For which, with pinching pain I now am paid.
Fortune I find is now of none avail,
But God is he whose power does prevail.
The Induction.
IT was great pity (quoth Memory) unto Inquisition, that this man lived in
the time of blind ignorance, when neither virtue, nor religion were known.
Believe me, if he could have contained him self within the limits of his
own Country, or if too much courage had not moved him to so great
interpryses, surely eue^ he had restored the Britains unto their ancient
liberty, and might have lived long without paying any tribute. You have said
(quoth Inquisition,) he might have had a very glorious day over the Romans, if
he had not desired Rome. For when Claudius Caesar had him abroad, he did not
presently encounter with Guidericus, as he supposed he would have done, but
remembering how Scipio Africanus laid siege unto Carthage, did draw Hannibal out
of Italy, he imitating his grand Chieftayne and predecessor, first brought
Britayne unto his obedience, then he invaded Guidericus, with whom God being
displeased, he was destroyed as you have hard. After whom, the Britains were
grievously oppressed by the Romans, and daily invaded by the Scots and Pictes,
which Lodrike their King brought out of Scithia, insomuch that at this time
the Britaynes were compelled to send unto the Emperor Bassianus for aid: who
sent unto them the Roman Seuerus with a great power. And then how Carassus a
Britayne, not Nobilis, but altogether ignotus, did both redeem his country
from the Pictes and Romans, and also obtained the crown, and raygned eight
years, this story following shall declare: who although he felt the fall of his
own folly, yet surely his story is very profitable, chiefly for all such as
do suffer suspicion to seduce them, as the diligent noting of the process
will declare.

The Complaint of Carassus.
How Carassus a Husbandmans son, slew Lodrike the King of the Pictes, and
how the Emperor made him a Captain. Then how he obtained the Britayne
Crown, and how suspicion brought him to decay.

Since men be borne by Nature naked all,
With their estates why are not men content?
Why do they deem the want of wealth a thral?
Why should they loathe the lot, which God has sent?
Adam him self I find, at first was sent,
As one who did disdain his poor estate,
To disobay, with God to be a mate.
Thou may be made a God, (quoth satan than,)
If on the fruit forbidden thou will feed:
The senseless wight, the feeble forcelesse man,
Did cast thereof, supposing that with speed
He should in have have been a God in deed.
He not content, hoping for higher place,
Brought bitter bale to him and al his race.
And I the son of Adam by descent,
Did seek to set my self in princely seat,
With mine estate I could not be content,
For which I felt the force of hatreds heat.
As at the first, my good success was great,
So at the last, by fancies fond desires,
I gropte for grapes amidst the bramble brires.
Let such as would by virtue them advance,
Mark by what menes I did my self address,
To fly at first my poor allotted chance
By honest means: let them from wickedness
Which feign would fly, learn this by my distress,
That he who does from right and reason stray,
Destruction shall destroy him with decay.
For I by birth borne next to beggars door,
Was stayde aloft with staff of high estate:
But whilste that I so hye a pitche did soore,
I left the means which made me rise of late,
I vices loud, I did al virtues hate.
For which, Carassus ran a race in vain,
And nothing got, but death and deep disdain.
When civil strife had Bryttayne qui^e undone,
So that her strength was now of none avail,
The faythlesse Scots with ruth did ouerrunne
That royal realm: the Pictes did so prevail,
That sorrow did on every side assail
My native soil: and being thus dismayde,
To Rome we se^^ for succor, help, and aid.
Seuerus then by Bassianus sent,
To bring this realm unto some quiet stay,
The Romans and the Brittaynes both were bent,
To bring the Scotts and Pictes to their decay,
Them to return again to Scithya.
And at the last, by good Seuerus aid,
We them destroyde, when we were most afraid.
Whose force though twice the Romans felt to strong,
Yet at the last, we got a goodly day
Even by my means, who thrust into the throng
Of Scots and Pictes, I desperate there did play
The part of him, whom fear did never fray.
And at the last, to end this mortal strife,
I did deprive king Lodrike of his life.
And when the Pictes did see their king depriude
Of vital life, Lord, how they fled the field:
They made me muse, to see how fast they striude,
With staylesse steps, each one his life to shield:
Who could not fly, he there with care was kilde.
So by my means, my country did obtain
Her ancient state, and liberty again.
At my return I to Seuerus said,
See here how I with wounds am all bestead?
I cannot live, I feel how life does fade,
Lodrike him self did carue and cut my head,
For which my blade his lukewarm blood has shed*
He cut my cap, and I have got his crown,
He lost his life, and I have found renown.
Seuerus then unto his Surgion said,
Heal him, and bring him safe and sound again,
Thou for thy pains with pounds shall well be paid,
And he shall have such honor for his pain,
As unto him for ever shall remain*
For by the Gods which rule the skies above.
His noble acts deserve eternal love.
When by the skill of Surgions curious art,
My hurtes were healde, and wholesome health ensude,
Seuerus then rejoicing at the heart,
Made me a Lord, with wealth he me indude,
Yea, he although my learning were but rude,
Sen^ me to Rome, as Legate of this land,
To make report how here our state did stand.
My deeds at home, inrichte me with renown,
My talk abroad, with proper filed phrase,
Adornde my head even with a Laurel crown.
The Emperor did much commend my ways,
So that I was bedeckt with double praise.
I could not read, my lerning was but weak.
Yet they of Rome did muse to hear me speak.
As learned Art does give a goodly grace
To some: so some by natures gifts do get
Eternal fame, and purchase them a place
Above the place where learned men do si^.
We find the fine dexteritye of wit
In them which be both wise and full of skill*
Yet never striude to clime Pernassus hill.
So I with praise a time at Rome did stay,
And tracte of time returnde me ba^ke again,
The Emperor, he gave my right away
Within a while, which made me storm amayne:
I had great cause me thought for to complain,
Seuerus, he was made the king of all:
The gifts he gave to me were very small.
I was but made the Captain of the coast,
From Forrayne force to keep my realm in rest,
Seuerus, he was crowned king in post,
Which did so boil within my warrelike ^rest,
That I with grief most strangely was distressed.
Shall he (said I) thus reap the high renown
Which I deserve? Shall he enjoy the Crown?
I won the wreath, and he will wear the same:
I got the goal, and he will get the gain.
For me in faith it were a deadly shame,
If I in this his regal royal raygne,
Without repulse should suffer him remain.
Which if I do, then let the dreadful darte
Of Vulcans wrath, torment in twain my heart.
For why, I see what servile servitude
Shall then ensue, if he may ^aigne in rest:
Shall Bryttayn ^raue by Romans be (...)?
It shall no doubt, by Romans be distressed,
Except my might against his might be pressed.
My might as yet cannot his strength constrain,
Yet may my might compel him to complain.
The drainyng drops do make the Marble yeel^
In time: the seas the cragged rocks do rende:
And Courtly Kings by tearing time be kilde.
For time does make the mighty Oaks to bend,
And time does make the little twigges ascend:
So I in time, such power may prepare,
As shall constrain Seuerus death, with care.
But whylst I did endeavor to destroy
Seuerus strength, the Pictes were prickte with pride,
For their revenge us Britaynes to annoy.
Which when I hard, in post I did provide
A power great, then I in have did ride,
And kept the Coast so strong with men of war,
That no man could ariue, to make or mar.
The poor Pictes prevented of their pray,
In waltering waves did bous^ their bittter ^ayne,
They digde a diche, and caught their own decay,
On rocks their Barks, in seas them selves were slain.
The Western winds with woe did them constrayne,
By Britayne banks to make so long delay,
I, and the Seas, brought them to their decay.
By means whereof my credit did increase:
Seuerus did esteem me as his stay,
I from my first devises could not cease,
For aye I hop^e to have a happy day,
To bring the Roman rule to their decay,
With fauning fa^e good fortune smyled so,
I had my wyshe, what might I hope for mo?
For into Spain the Roman soldiers sent,
I had at home the might him to deprive,
Then wisely I al perilles to prevent,
Provided so that no man could ariue,
No Picte, nor Scot, nor Roman then could strive
With me at home, then I the Lords with speed
Of Brirttayne calde, and thus I did proceed:
The Roman rule us subject slaves has made,
You se my Lords, a Roman here does reign,
Whom to destroy my power shall invade,
I do in deed this servile life disdain:
And you your selves do much thereof complain.
If you with help will me assiste, I swear,
The Roman rule shall have no power here.
Then they most glad with one consent replide,
We will assist thee with what might we may,
And we our selves most wylling will provide,
No Britayne borne against thee shall display
His shield, but al at the appointed day,
As pressed to please thy heste, shall thee assist:
Win thou the Crown, and wear it at thy list.
Which when I hard them say with one consent,
Blame not though pride did then possess my heart
For Princely Crown* the dreadful dierie dent
Of wrakful war, who would not feel the smart
Of griping grefe? who would not feel the dart
Of dreadful death? or who regards pain?
If he a Crown and kingdom may obtain?
For gunnehole grotes the country Clown does care,
Restless with ruth, the Rusticke gets his gain:
The Merchant man for wealth does send his ware
About the world, with peril and great pain.
And all the world for wealth does not disdain,
Amidst the surge of mighty mounting Seas,
To cast them selves, their own delights to please.
If to obtain such trifles they do toil,
And never cease to bring there driftes about:
Why should I fear the force of forrayne foil?
Why should I not assay with courage stout,
To wreake my wrath upon the Romish route
Which here remain? whom to the bale to bring,
Were me to crown my native countries King.
One thing there is which greatly does me grieve,
Seuerus, he who did inhance my state,
He did in my distress with life relieve
My dyinge days, he never did me hate:
Yet now with him I must be at debate.
Even him with might I greatly must disgrace,
^ are I can set my self in princely place.
Untimely death shall not destroy his days:
For if he will return to Rome again,
Or if he will resign his ^^owne with praise,
Or if he will amongst us still remain.
If he can like of these, we will ref^ayne
From sheading blood: which if he does disdain,
I then against my ^yl, (...) work his pain.
So forth I past with all my power pressed,
Seuerus did at Durham then delay,
Whereas I mente his state to have distressed:
But some I think my secrets did bewray,
For he to York in have did take his way.
Which when I had bessiegde on every side,
with care and grief of mind, Seuerus did.
Se here the force of cruel fretting care?
Se here how sorrow does dismay the mind?
For when he hard Carassus did prepare
To reave his crown, he judging me unkind,
With sobbing sighs of sorrow, he resignde
Before his time his mind from manly breast:
Behold with care how sorrow reaues man's rest.
Thus he intombde in his untimely Chest,
It was decreed Carassus should be King,
The three estates of al my Realm were pressed,
With one consent they al to me did bring
The kingly crown, then thus they al did singe,
The due deserts of this renowned wight,
Deserves to be the Britayne king by right.
Mark by what steps I did the top obtain,
With keeping sheep my youthful years were spent:
Then with the whyp I plide the Plowe amayne,
In Mars his feeldes to fight my mind was bent,
As Legate then to Rome my self was sent,
I dubbed was a Lord, of high renown,
And now at last, I have obtaynd the Crown.
The end, the act (the Plaudite) does prove,
And all is well, whose endyng is not ill:
Who sittes aloft had never need to move,
For fear least he should fall against his will.
Though creepyng he did gain the top with skill,
Yet at the last, by turning of his toe,
A suddayne fall may work his wretched w^e.
Which fall I felt, and how? I here will show:
When I as King did all the Realm comaunde,
I fearful did suspect mine overthrow,
The place (me thought) did shake where I did stand.
Then for my guard I did provide a band
Of warlyke wights, to guard my Noble grace,
I lastly did my Noble men displace.
From forth the Feeldes I for my Father sent,
Him of a Clown a Noble man I made:
My Brethren all even for the same intent,
Like Courtiers there in Court with me they stayde,
And all my stock were glad and well apayde:
For they of late which ruled the paynefull Plow,
Of Brittayne Land they be the Rulers now.
From Cart to Court, a Country man to call,
With brave attire to deck a dunghyll Dycke,
Is like a painted Image in a wall,
Which does deceive, and seems to vee quick,
Though woorkmanship most trimly does it trick,
Yet of a stone, a stone will still remain:
A Clown cannot from Clownish deeds refrain.
As hard it is of quarryed Marble stone,
For man to make a lively moving wight,
As of a Lout, or else of such a one
Who daily does employ his whole delyght
To dig and delue, it passes mortal might,
To make him serve in Court a kings behest:
Turn him to plowe, the Cart for him is best.
For though thou can by cunninge art compel
Nature a time to leave her wonted place,
She will return, in spite of heaven or hell:
No Alcumist Dame Nature can displace,
Except that God does give abundant grace.
The Caske will have a taste for evermore,
With that wherewith it seasoned was before.
Why did I then my courtlesse court maintain
With Hob and Ihon, Rafe Royster, and his mate?
Whose greedy jaws aye gaping after gain,
Did ^olle, and pil, and bred bitter debate:
Men much unmeet to maintain mine estate.
Why did I them so near mine el^owe place?
Because my self by birth was borne but bace.
Like will to like, the Mule does claw her mate,
With horned beasts the Ienite cannot jest,
Those bauling Hounds, the haughty Heart does hate,
With Bears the Bear in safety countes her best.
So I amongst my like did look for rest,
Their deeds by me were always well alowde,
By them likewise my doings were avowd.
But as you see the Husbandman with care
From new sown feeldes the ravening Ro^kes to dri^^e.
So did the Gentry of my Realm prepare,
My Country Court and me for to deprive.
But Gentlemen were then to weak to strive
With me, and mine, for which they did prepare
A new found snache, which did my feet ensnare.
In surgelesse Seas of quiet rest when I
Seven years had sayld, a perrye did arise,
The blastes whereof abrigde my liberty:
For whilste I did with busye brain devise
Them to destroy, which did my Court despise,
The boystrous blastes of hatred blewe a gale,
My Cables crakte, my Bark was bongd with bale.
For they (I mean the Gentry of my Land)
Both me, and mine, theirs, and themselves had sold
Subjects to Rome, from whence a mighty band
They had conuaide, to make my courage cold:
Into my Realm they could not be controlde,
But when they were ariude, they quickly brought
Both me and mine, and all the rest, to naught.
Alectus then the Chieftayne of the res^,
Spoiling my friends, he forced me to the feelde,
The day was come, we both in fight were pressed.
His trustlesse train, did seem to me to yield,
But all the feeldes with great ambushmentes filde,
I could not flee, Alectus had the day,
With his own sword for breath he made me bray.
As due desert did force my ship to flote,
So vices vile me drencht in waves of woes.
O false suspect, why did thou make me dote?
Fearing my fall, my friends I deemd my foes:
Fearing the worst, the best I did depose,
And was deposde: let other learn hereby,
The crooked Crabbe will always walk awry.
And let them know which do not loathe to learn,
That kings in Court, be combred most with care.
The Pilotes charge, who sits at the stearne,
Does make him watch, when other do prepare
Them selves to sleep: so kings distressed are
With doutful dread, and many other things:
The sheepheardes life is better then the kings.
The Induction
CArassus having thus finished his Tragical History, Inquisition presented
unto Memory the Lady Hellina. But Memory having her at the first sight in
great admiration, said as follows: Why have you brought before us the
Goddess Diana? Our intent is to hear the complayntes of them who are
smothered with Forgetfulness: as for this Goddess, she is renowned more then
sufficient. O Memory (quoth Inquisition) this is not Diana: no Diana, no
Gouzaga, no Emila, no Cariclia, no Pallas, no Juno, no, not knowing Minerua,
may compare with her, for the flourishing feature of her incomprehensible
complexion, for the comely composition of her Ladilike limbs, being the
perfectest piece of work that ever Nature created, that ever earth nouryshed,
or that ever death destroyed, for the passing great dexterity of her ingenious
Capacity, the very Phoenix of women, and ye chiefest amongst men, that ever
thou Memory did celebrate, for learning, for knowledge of Tongs, and for the
diverse gifts of the mind she only did inhabit betwixt the wings of flitting
Fame, for a happy, long, quiet life in this world, she only was favored by
Fortune, or rather singularly preserved by her maker. For that she never
tasted in all her reign, any aduersytie, she is to be esteemed immortal:
for that in all her actions she had her hearts desire, she may justly be
esteemed a Goddess (or rather the very beloved of God. Now I report me unto
you, is there any Goddess, or Nymph inhabiting the Mount Helicon, which may
compare with Queen Hellina, not she of Greece, which brought final
destructton unto the flourishing Troy, but she of Brittayne, who redeemed her
decaying Country from foreign tyranny, which made not only a menes for the
bodies of her subjects, to live in quiet peace: but she also prescribed unto
the^ an order, how they might save their souls. She planted religion amongst
her subjects, which were at that time savage, neither knowing God, nor
esteeming godliness, she was Daughter unto King Coell: she was Queen of
Bryttayne, Empress of the world, Wife unto Constantius: Mother to Constantine
the Great. Yet the descriptions of time, I mean the Chronicles, have left so
little report of her, that I found her standing betwixt Forgetfulness and
Memory, almost smothered with Oblivion. If she be so renowned as you have
spoken of (said Memory) we should do her great wrong to deny her a place in
this Pageant, Speak therefore good Madame Hellina with good leave your mind,
and as other by their falls do set down examples very necessary for the
avoiding of vice, so let your history be a means to encourage all men to
embrace virtue. Then the good Queen although somewhat abashed, yet glad to
repeat her life forerunne, said as follows.

The Life of Queen Hellina.
How Queen Hellina was Empress of all the World. This Story does declare
how happy they be, which live in the fear and love of God.

Men's due deserts each Reader may recite,
For men of men do make a goodly show,
But women's works can never come to light,
No mortal man their famous factes may know^
No writer will a little time bestow,
The worthy works of women to repeat,
Though their renown and due deserts be great.
For I by birth to Coel Daughter dear,
King Lucy was my good Grandmothers son,
My Father dead, I ruled his kingdom here.
And afterward, the World so wide I won.
^ Empress was of all under the Sun,
^ lived long, I did with perfect bliss,
^et writers will repeat no word of this.
But now at last I have obtained leave,
My spotless life to paynt in perfect white:
Though writers would al honor from me reaue,
Of al renown they would deprive me quite,
Yet true report my deeds shall burnishe bright,
And rub the rust which did me much disgrace,
And set my name in her deserved place.
From Roman rule who Brittayne did redeem?
Who planted first Gods word in Brittayne land?
Who did so much virginity esteem?
Who did the force of forrayne foes withstand?
Who all the world subdude without a band
Of Martial men? who did these noble acts?
I Hellina, have done these famous factes.
And now have here the storye of my state:
The Brittayne Queen inheritage me crownde,
Even then when Romans had so great debate
Amongst them selves for Caracallas wound,
An Emperor, who highly was renownde
As then at Rome, whose death undoubtedly,
Diminishte much the Roman Emperie.
The Romans then were storde with civil strife,
And many Realms against them did rebel,
There trouble turned me to a quiet life,
My common weal did prosper passing well,
When all the world agreed like Devils in hell,
Then I and mine be calmde from Hatreds blast:
In happy Haven we harbored were at last.
Then I a maid of tender youthful years,
Report did say, of beutie fresh and fair,
Refusde the suit of many noble Peers,
Which daily did unto my court repair.
What though there were unto my Crown no heir?
Yet I who did regard my Commons good,
Refusde to link my self with forrayne blood.
On forrayne Costs, on Kingdoms to incroche,
With wrath of wrackful wars I did despise,
And fearing aye the ruth of rude reproach,
With carking care I daily did devise,
How I with peace might make my kingdom rise,
And how by law of God and man, I might
Give Caesar his, and unto God his right.
No God of heaven, no Christ my people knew:
Wherefore to Rome for learned men I sent,
King Lucies laws decade I did renew,
Then preaching made my people so repent
There former faults, that all incontinent
Were baptized, and they within a space,
The faith of Christ so firmly did embrace,
That nothing seemed current in their sight,
But that which holy writers would allow:
And that they would embrace with all their might,
To shed their blood, the same for to avowe.
They did not fear, at Verolane even now,
Amidst the force of fiery flashing flame.
Albon the Protomartyr proud the same.
As careful merchant men do much rejoice,
When from those Isles Molocchi, they have brought
There frayghted ships, for then they have great choice
Of Merchandise, which traffic long has sought
To find the ware which trial true has taught
Will get most gain, which being got, they give
And cast there care, how they thereby may live:
So I, whom both Sir Neptunes surging Seas,
And Eoles winds, even God him self above
Did favor much, my laboring mind to please,
Giving those things were best for my behoue,
Gods word I mean, which al my men did love.
The Pearls which Christ commanded to be bought.
Must here be found, and no where else be sought.
Then they and I made haste, post have, to lead
Our sinful lives as Scripture did allow.
We knowing God, him loud with fear and dread,
Devotion made us crouche, and creep, and bow
Our hearts, our heads, we savage were but now,
Yet by and by such was the good success,
In fiery flames the truth we did profess.
Then flittinge Fame the truth to testify,
Against my will, at Rome made such report,
That Constantinus thence did hither hye,
And being come unto my Brittayne Court,
With lovers looks he striude to scale the Fort
Of my goodwyll: but when it would not be,
He sighing, thus addressed his talk to me:
O Queen quoth he, thy deeds deserve great fame,
The goodly gifts that God has given to thee
Be such, as I can not thee greatly blame,
Though thou without desert disdaynest me,
Who for thy sake does loathe al cruelty.
But for thy ^oue, with Mars his cruel knife,
I could command thy Realm, and reaue thy life.
But (out alas) whilst breath does lend me life,
My heart shall hate to thrall thy happy state,
What though thou do refuse to be my wife,
Thy hatred tho, shall never cause me hate:
But whyl^te I live, I will thee love, let Fate
And Fortune fell pour on me al their spite,
To die for thee shall greatly me delight.
Then I replide, O Duke, without desert
Thou doste me love a little Islands Queen,
I know thou to the Emperor heir art,
Thy valiant acts I diverse ways have seen,
I like thy deeds, most noble which have been,
And thee I love: yet private pleasures lust
May never make me throw my Realm to duste,
If thou (quothe he) will dayne my Queen to be,
Thy Bryttaynes shall to Rome no tribute yeilde,
You if you please, to Rome may go with me,
Your myghtie mate the world so wide may wielde,
Or if you please, I here with you will bylde
My byding place, and in this littell land,
I will remain yours, at your command.
His comely corpse, his friendly promise plight,
His famous acts, his Noble royal race,
Some other things which here I could recite,
The Romans heart within my breast did place.
And when my wit had wayed well the case,
Then for the chief of all my Realm I sent,
And thus I spoke to know the whole intent.
My loving Lords, and you my subjects, see
This Roman heir, whom I indeed do love,
He will restore your ancient liberty,
If I will bend my hest to his behoue:
Which benifites they chiefly do me move,
To love at last, a man by whom you may,
Receive a Shield to keep you from decay.
Perhaps you think I love, because I see
His comely corpse, and seemly sanguine face.
You be deceaude, no outward bravery,
No personage, no gallant courtly grace.
What though he be by birth of Royal race?
I recke it not, but this I do regard,
My common weal by him may be preserude.
For if he will from tribute set you free,
And end the work which I have well begone,
That Christ's Gospel preached still may be,
God may by him send unto me a son,
To you a King: what wealth then have you won?
What great renown? what honor will ensue?
Speak you your minds, these things me think, be true.
O Queen quoth they, the Lord preserve thy grace:
Do thou the thing that semes to thee the best,
We do allow the match in every case:
If by that means we may have quiet rest,
With what great good shall this our Realm be blessed?
Do thou therefore O noble Queeene, we pray,
The thing which best may keep us from decay.
The Roman Duke he nothing would deny,
But granted more then I could ask or crave,
So that there was proclaimed by and by,
A famous feast, a banquet passing brave.
There to the Duke the Britayne Crown I gave,
With sacred spousall ryghtes, as man and wife
We wedded, liude in love, for term of life.
And whylste we meant to rule this little I Will,
A greater good unlooked for befell,
Death did destroy his Sire with hateful hand:
For which we both at Rome must now go dwell,
And so we did: things prospered passing well,
My Feere was made the Emperor Lord and King
Of al: and I the Queen of every thing.
His myghtie Mace did rule the Monarchy,
My wit did rule (some writers say) his Mace,
And to increase with joy our merye glye,
I brought him forth a babe of Royal race,
The boy he had an amiable face.
O Rome thou maiste rejoice, for this was he,
Which did at Rome erect Divinity.
Whilste thus in bless I did at Rome remain,
On Britain still my mind her care did cast,
For which I causde my husband to ordain,
That evermore those ancient Laws should last,
Which heretofore amongst them there I past,
And that to Rome no Brittayne borne, for aye,
Should tax, or toll, or tenth, or tribute pay.
Though there at Rome an Empress life I led,
And had at hand what I could wish or crave,
Yet still me thought I was not well bestead,
Because I was so far from Brittayne brave.
Which when my loving Lord did once perceive,
He set a stay in all the Emperye,
To Brittayne then he did return with me.
We raygnde of years thrice seven with good success,
Then Dolor and Debilitie did drive
My loving Lord with faynting feebleness,
For vital life with braying breath to strive:
He felt, how death of life would him deprive,
He calde his Lords, his child, and me his wife,
And thus he spoke, even as he left his life:
The haughtye Pynes of loftye Libanus,
From earth, to earth, in tracte of time return:
So I whose spreading praise were marvelous,
Must now return my flesh to filthy slime,
On Fortunes wheel I may no longer clime.
Therefore my Lords, although my glass be run,
Yet take remorse on Constantine my son.
My Monarche, Court, my Kingdoms all,
(O stately Rome) farewell to them, and thee,
Farewell my Lords, which see my final fall,
Farewell my Child, my Wife, more dear to me
Then all the world, we must depart I see:
And must we needs depart? O Fortune fie,
We must depart, adue, farewell, I dye.
Wherewith he sight and senseless did remain,
Then I his death as women do, did wayle:
But when I viewd, that weeping was but vain*
I was content to bear that bitter bale,
As one who found no means for her avail.
His corpse at York in Princely Tomb I laid.
When Funeral sacred solemn rights were paid,
And when report his death about had blown,
Maxentius then the triple Crown to wear,
Did challenge all the Empire as his own,
And for a time that mighty Mace did bear:
Which when my Son, my Constantine did hear,
The youthful Lad, indeuourd by and by,
To Claim his right by Mars his cruelty.
I then his tender youthful years to guide,
Went with my son to see his good success,
He being Campt by fruitful Tybers side,
To spoil his foe he did himself address,
He knew that God did give all happiness.
Therefore to God, even then the Youth did pray,
With mighty hand to keep him from decay.
Behold how God does godly men defend,
And mark how he does beat Usurpers down.
Maxentius now he al his force does bend,
For to defend his Diade me and Crown.
But froward Fate upon the Prince did frown:
For why his men were scattered every where,
In Tyber he did drown him self for fear.
To Rome then we and all our host did hie,
The Romans they with joy did us receive,
To Constantine they gave the Emperie,
But he of them most earnestly did crave,
That I the rule of all the world might have,
It is (quoth he) my mothers right to rain.
Til dreadful death has shred her twyst in twain.
I grant my son, the Monarchy is mine,
For at his death thy father gave it me
For term of life: but let it now be thine,
I aged must go pay the earth her fee,
I am content to live with less degree.
O loving son give ear unto my hest,
I will not rule, that charge for thee is best.
And when he might not rule his mothers mind,
Against his will he wylling did assent,
That al should be as I had then assignde,
To rule the world, he grieved was content.
And whilste that there my happy days I spent,
Rejoicing much to see my sons success,
I did, and had a heavenly happiness.
Thrice happy I who ran this Royal race,
And in the end my wished Goal did get:
For by my means al people did embrace
The faith of Christ, the orders I did set
They were obayd, with joy which made me iet.
Even in this bless a better bless befell,
I did, and now my soul in heaven does dwell.
So now you see the happy hap I had,
Learn then thereby to do as I have done,
To praise gods name let every Prince be glad,
To persecute the truth let al men shun,
By virtuous ways great honor may be won.
But he who does to vices vile incline,
May be comparde unto a filthy swine.
Who does not love the plain nor pleasant way,
He can not fear to sleep amidst the green,
But, in the mire he does delyght to lay:
So Princes such as vile and vicious been,
Do tumble aye amidst a sink of sin,
Whose names on earth, whose souls in hell remain
In infamye, the other pincht with pain.
Let them that seek for everlasting fame,
Tread in the steps that I before have trod,
And he who would avoid reprochful shame,
And flee the smart of Plutoes ruthful rod,
Let him not cease to learn the law of God,
Which only law man's stumbling steps does (...)
Who walks therein, his feet can never slide.
The Induction
Behold (quoth Memory) the effect of virtue and godliness. If the
contentatio^ of the mind be perfect happiness, as some Philosophers have
defynde it, then no doubt this Queen was most happy, and happp is he who can
imitate her in her happiness. But not long time after her, there lived a King
named Vortiger, who for his vice was as diversely afflicted, as this Woman for
her virtue was blessed. I do remember the wickedness of this man was
exceeding great. Have you found him out Inqusition? is not this he (good
Memory) quoth Inqusition? I found him both sitting, and sighing, amongst the
miserable, and it would appear that he is ashamed to make rehearsal of
things past. It is even he (quoth Memory) you may know him by his fyry
looks, for though it be long since he lived, yet he bears about with him
the badge of his destruction. Note you his story with dilyge^ce (good
Inquisition,) for this is he who subverted the common weal of Brirtayne. And
you Sir Prince, I do conjure you, by the duty you owe unto me, who do know
all things: that you do here repeat unto us the whole Story of your estate.
Wherewith, he with smoking sighs, greatly against his will, said as follows.

The Complaynt of Vortiger.
How Vortiger destroyed the young king Constantine, and how he obtained the
Crown: how the abusyng of his prosperity brought his Realm so low, that he
was constrained to hyre souldyers to defend him self from his enimyes, and
how after many miseries, he was miserably burnt in his Castle, by the brethren
of Constantine.

BY quiet peace of Ianus ioylitie,
Their happy havens with forewinds forced some have,
By wrackful wars of Mars his cruelty,
With much adoo some get the Goal they crave,
By subtyl sleightes and fetches boulstred brave,
My hapless hand did hit with leueled line,
The aimed mark, the more mishap was mine.
By gifts of grace some men have happy hap,
By blessed birth to Kingdoms borne some be:
Succession sets some men in Fortunes lap,
By wisdom, wit, and prudent policy,
Some clyme aloft by trustlesse treachery:
And courage does a multitude advance,
Driftes finely filde they did my state inhaunce.
I Vortiger by birth was borne a Lord,
King Constantine his Coosin did me call,
I cride amayne, and clapped his crown a board,
And for a time til Fortune forced my fall,
With restless bless I sat in stately stall:
But men of war of much more might then I,
For my desert my careful corpse did fry.
As furious force of fiery flashing flame,
With Cinders brought my body to decay,
So smulderyng smokes of everlasting shame
Reude my renown, and wipte my fame away.
What may I more of my misfortune say?
I sigh to see, I silent cease to tell
What me destroide, and drowned my soul in hell.
Here to repeat the parts that I have played,
Were to vn^ippe a trusse of trumpery,
For me to show how I aloft was stayde,
Were to erect a school of Treachery:
Silence is best, let no man learn by me
Nor by my means, how they by wicked ways,
From low estate, aloft them selves may raise.
As good men can by wicked works beware,
So wicked men by wicked works be wise,
If ill men read my deeds which wicked were,
They by my means will compass their surmise:
For wicked workers daily do devise,
To make examples vile and vicious,
To stand in stead, to serve their lawless lust.
The Serpent thence his venym vile does draw,
From whence the Be her honny sweet does get,
Leawd livers learn to break the written law,
By that, whereby good men do learn much wit.
For wicked men each fetch is thought most fyt,
To serve their turn: therefore I count it best,
To leave my faults and follyes vnconfest.
Give leave therefore good Memory, I may
Not here repeat my tedious Tragedy,
Inquiry, let me now depart away.
My common weal subverted was by me,
I leawdly liude, and did in misery,
And for my faults I felt disdayneful smarte,
Let this suffice, and let me now depart.
With that he seemde as on that would away,
But Memory (stay stay thy steps quoth she)
Let wicked men procure their own decay,
We recke it not, if warned once they be.
Let that suffice, and let thy misery
Make just report, how vain, and vile a thing
It is, to live as a usurping King.
Since needs I must repented faults forerunne
Repeat, and tell the fall and foil I felt,
Patience perforce, to speak shame bids me shun,
To think thereof does make my heart to melte.
But since I needs must show how here I dealt,
I am content to tell the truth of al,
Let wise men learn to stand, which read my fall.
For first I causde the young king Constantine,
Of faythlesse Scots and Pictes to make his guard,
They by my means did kill their king in fine,
For which, with speed I sent them al to ward,
And hangde them al, their cause was never hard,
So I who first did cause them kill their king,
To stop their mouths, them al to death did bring.
Where Rancor rules, where hatreds heat is hot.
The hurteles^e men with trouble be turmoylde:
Where Malice may send forth her Cannon shot,
There might is right, there reasons rules are foylde.
For ru^hful Rancor evermore has boylde
With griping grief: her smuldring smokes of spite,
Would gladly choke al justice, law, and right.
So might, not right, did thrust me to the Throne,
I syxteene years did wear the royal Crown,
In all which time with grief I aye did groan,
As on who felt the fall from high renown.
My Noble men deuisde to thrust me down
In all this time, and many did protest,
I laid the king in his untimely Chest.
At last, my foes my friends were made, and I
Had quiet peace, and liude a happy king:
Yea, God who rules the haughty heaven a high,
Inricht my realm with foysen of each thing,
Abundant store did make my people sing.
As they of yore were pressed with penury:
So now they hate their great fertility.
My people had of Corn and Oil such store,
That Country men of tyllage left the toil,
The rich man fed no better then the poor,
For all did reap the fatness of the soil,
No man for meat nor money then did toil,
But al rejoice with joyful Iubily,
And al were soust with sinful Gluttony.
As clouds dissolude fair Phoebus does deface,
So plague my plenty dimd with dark disease*
For whilste my realm in riot ran her race,
They playde, not prayed, and did their God displease.
For which they drownde in sorrows surging seas,
Like rotten sheep by thousands did so thick,
The dead could not be buried by the quick.
When thus the plague my people did oppress,
That few were left alive within my land,
The Scots and Pictes, with speed they them addressed,
Knowing their time, they raysde a mighty band,
They knew right soon, how here my state did stand.
And to revenge the wrong that erst I wrought,
They meant to bring both me and mine to naught.
See how abuse breeds blake and bitter bale,
Misuse does make of plenty, loathsome lack,
Amidst his bless with woe it makes man wale,
Only abuse does work man's wretched wrack:
Amidst my joys, from joy it beat me back.
For I and mine misusde our present bless,
Which brought both me and mine to wretchedness.
We first misusde our present pleasant plenty,
For which we whipped in thrall with scourges three,
Had Pestilence, which made my kingdom empty,
It did destroy my men of each degree,
Then faynting Fa^ine playde her Tragedy,
Bellona then that ^eastly bloody Queen,
Did blow her Trumpe to dashe my courage cleene.
When sickness had consumde my subjects quite,
The Pictes with pride did have to spoil my land,
I had no men, nor means with them to fight,
For which I sent and did obtain a band
Of Saxons, such as did the Scots withstand.
Whose help that I when need requirde might have,
I gave them Kent, a country passing brave.
These Saxons were a crewe of warrelike wightes,
They liude by spoil, and had no byding place,
They were of truth a troop of Martial knights,
Which serude for pay where Mars extolde his Mace.
Saxons in deed they were of royal race,
They Angli high, a stock of worthy fame,
Of them this realm of England took her name.
These Angli brought the Britaynes to the bay,
We Welchemen called, to Wales they did us drive,
They brought six sorts of Saxons to decay,
And got the Goal for which they long did strive.
Of other stocks they left not one alive,
They all this realm did plant with Angli then,
And termde themselves of Angli, Englishmen.
But how they brought this enterprise about,
Mark well the sequel which I shall recite:
Hengestus he the Chieftayne of the route,
A subtle Sir, an vndermiming wight,
To feed my veins he took a great delight.
His crafty head did deem it the best way,
With pleasant baytes to make my Crown his pray.
He me his king invited to a feast,
A feast in faith, which forced my final fall:
Where Cupides curse constraynde me like a beast,
From Pallas prince to give the golden Ball.
For Venus vantes to Helline threw me thrall,
Whose heavenly hew, whose beauty fresh and fair,
Was burnishte bright like Phoebus in the air.
I being set at Bacchus banqueting,
His daughter decked with Natures Tapistrie,
And trimly trickte with every other thing,
Which might delight a lovers fantasy:
Why should man's mind to love thus subject be?
I had a wife, a passing princely piece,
Which far did pass that gallant Gyrle of Greece.
Yet from my wife (the woorthiest wench alive,)
My fancies fell, I lothde her lovely bed:
How I Hengestus daughter might achieue
Was al my care, I did this Damsel wed,
My wife diuorste, I had her in the steed.
Her lovely looks, her pretty pleasant cheer,
Made me esteem her only love most dear.
I wore the crown, her will did rule the rest,
And her demand I never did deny:
What she alowd I did esteem that best.
Which when her Father Hengest did espy,
He had the pray for which he long did prye.
He made his hay whilst weather fayer was,
And by her means he brought it thus to pass:
That Bryttaynes we with toil should till the ground,
They Saxons would defend our wealth with war,
Which granted once, they did inhabtie rownde
About my realm, and might both make and mar.
New Saxons in my realm aryued were,
By means whereof my Brittaynes did suspect
The Saxons slayghtes, and did their deeds detect.
Then they good men to me their king complaind,
These men quoth they, from us our realm will win,
Except they from our frontiers be refraind.
Which when they told, my wife she was within,
O Husband dear, they be (said she) my kin,
Cease of thy force thy faithful dreads to fear,
They mean no hurt, by Jove the just I swear.
So I esteemed not my subjects health,
That I might still my ladies love enjoy,
They vewde me careless of my common wealth,
To save themselves they meant me to annoy.
My ne eldest son a proper pretty boy,
They made their king, and me for my desert,
They did deprive: with pain which pincht my heart.
Then Vortiger my son and king pursude
The Saxons sore, and did amaze then much,
For which my wife his mother law indude
With devilish spite, against the youth did grutche,
She him destroyde, her good success was such.
When he seven years had raygnde with great renown,
With poison she depriude him of his crown.
I to obtain the seat from whence I fell,
With sacred oath I solemnly did swear,
To end the work, which was begone so well,
And to subdue the Saxons every where.
The Britains to my kingly crown did rear
Me quickly then, I at the first, by might
Defaste my foes in every fray and fight.
Then loathsome Luck did turn her whurling wheel*
With treason trust intrapte did me betray,
Hateful Mishappe she had me by the heel,
And clapte me close in dungeon of Decay,
To Hengest now I must a ransom pay.
And if I loud my life and liberty,
A needs must grant al he does ask of me.
For changed chance of Mars his wars, has ma^e
Me of a king a Captains prisoner,
To whom there must now four Sheares be paid,
Northfolke, Southfolke Southsexe, and Kent they were,
Me to release from out my cave of care.
Which being done, I led my life in doubt,
And fled for fear to Wales with all my route.
Where as I found a place that pleased me much,
The situation seemde so passing strong,
The world me thought might not annoy it much,
A Castle there I builte: it were to long
Here to repeat, silence shall do no wrong
To Marlayne, he who wonders there has wrought,
If ancient write to us the truth has ^aught.
When I had buylt my princely bower there,
In bloody feeldes I meant no more to strive:
But true report did dashe my present cheer,
In Tornesse haven two brethren did ariue,
Which quickly would from that my forte me drive.
The brethren both of Constantine the King,
Peccaui they did mean to make me sing.
From worse to worse seldom is better seen,
Our present joys hereafter thralles do threate,
And he who now does flourish fresh and green,
Must fade and fall as Hyems frostes do frette
Dame Floraes feeldes, or as the rain with wet
In dropping days the pleasant playnes does drown:
So ruthful men reaues us from renown.
Men may therefore like Marmaydes ever mourn,
The shining Sun who do so much delight,
That aye they wail like Furies quite forlorn.
When Sol does shine, when Titans beams be bright,
They fear the storms that may hereafter light,
They weep because they must the Sun forgo,
When storms do fall, they wayle their present woe.
So mortal man with malice al bested,
When good success does sound a blessed blaste,
With brinishe tears then may they eat their bread*
For happy days from man does flee as fast
As poulders force from piece does pellet cast,
And troubles tedious time with pacelesse stay,
Once won (alas) will never walk away.
How I in maze of trouble here did toil,
Judge you which see me trauise in the same,
And how I was inforst to final foil,
Not now, for now although it does me shame,
I will declare, how I was fryde with flame.
For Ambrose he and Vter Pendragon,
My Castle brent, me and my men each one.
Then Ambrose with his brothers Crown was crownde,
Which I from him had reafte against al right.
So now you see upon what slipperie ground
They stand, which do extol them selves by might,
Their wandering feet do walk as in the night,
Their stumbling steps their guilty minds do fear,
They daily see the block of bale appear.
With scalding sighs they do them selves consume,
For fear to fall does yield none other fruit,
They rage with wrath, they daily frette and fume,
Ruthful revenge them always has in suite,
And right in time makes might both mum and mute:
For that which might by secret means has wrought,
By tracte of time to open show is brought.
Usurpers then do reap their right reward,
The foil once felt, they feel how vile and vain
It is, to be too high degrees preferde
By lawless means: they find what pinching pain,
Amidst the minds of such men do remain,
They always throngde with cruel thretting thrall,
Do feed upon none other food but Gall.
A proof whereof a plat a pattern plain,
The ruthful race I Vortiger have run,
Disciphers so, that man may see how vain
A thing it is his former Fate to shun,
Honor obteynde (alas) what have we won?
A hidious heap of cruel carking care,
Which to consume man's life does never spare.
The Induction.
WHat Constantine was this (quoth Inquisition) that was made away by this
miserable Vortiger? Not Hellines son said (Memory) but an impe descended out
of her loins, who for his soft spirit was made a Monk at S. Swithens in
Winchester, and afterward his eldest brother being dead, he was taken out, and
made king. He made mention of two brethren (said Inquisition) who ariuing at
Totnesse, did bind the said Vortiger for making away the young king. What
were they? know you? Yea quoth (Memory) they were ye brethren of the
unfortunate Constantine, who fled out of the realm for fear of that cruel
Vortiger: and afterward obteyning succor beyond the Sea, came with a Navy
and obtained the revenge of their so deadly enemy. And when the eldest, called
Aurelius Ambrose, had raygned nienteene years, he dyed as some write, by
poison, without issue: Then the youngest, named Vter Pendragon, took unto him
the rule of this realm? Vter Pendragon? (quoth Inquisition) do you mean the
great king Arthurs father? he is here, and has sued unto me to be a means
that his fall might be known unto the world. Let him says Memory, speak
his mind, for his story is exceedyng necessary for this present time.
Wherewith, he bearing still about with him his amorous looks, said as follows.

The Complaint of Vter Pendragon.
How Vter Pendragon was inamoured with Duke Garelus wife, and how by
lawelesse love he lost his kingdom. This example is most necessary for the
present time.

WE lead our lives by fancies fond delight,
For kingdoms some do busy much their brain,
But Cupids curse that wretched little wight,
That blinded boy unto my pynching pain,
Dubde me a Knighte of daynty Venus train,
Where beams of Beauty brought me by and by,
To cast my care to please my Ladies eye.
O Beauty brave, thy gladsome glittering Gleames,
With smilyng cheer and wildie winking eyes,
Does drown with dole amidst the surging streams
Of deep despair, the wightes which be most wise.
Aye me, my wit, my pen cannot devise
Of Beauty brave to make a true discourse,
To think thereof I feel my self the worse.
I Pendragon of Britain crowned king,
The fretting force of Beauties hateful hew*
Those frying flames I felt, that hateful sting,
Which quickly me from crown and kingdom threw.
Whilst with delight I did thy vaunting vewe,
I like the Halke which sores in good estate,
Did spy a Stale, I sloopte, and took a Mate.
For at what time the Saxons did assail
My Britane state, and took each man a share,
My Kindome they even for their best avail,
Did then divide: for which with carking ca^e
Them thence to drive, I did my power prepare.
And being come to Cornewal with my band,
I meant to have Duke Garelus helping hand.
I knew right well the valor of his mind,
Me to my crown his courage did advance,
Him for my good most forward I did find,
He never fearde the force of changing chance.
Here I intrapte, did stand as in a trance,
Amazde I gazde, as one bewichte, my heart
Was wounded deep with Cupids cruel Dart.
In sacred Church I set to sacrifyce,
Those holy vows, which victories require:
Even whilst I did with all my heart devise,
How to subdue my foes with swoorde and spear,
Even then there did this peerlesse Pearl appear,
Duke Garelus wife, whose gallant gate and grace,
Stealing mine heart, my honor did deface.
When Vortiger my brother did oppress,
In exile then my youthful years were spent,
At my return his fault he did confess,
And from his crown the crown in haste I sent.
Then my delight was in the diery dent
Of wrackful war, but now transformde I stand,
The ancient Oak must grow now like a wande.
I marueilde much how Cireus songs might please,
But now I muse that Circes sorcery,
Does not from every man bereave his ease.
Calipsoes cups with poisoned Treachery,
Can not so much abridge man's liberty,
As Circus songs and Circes subtle art,
Whose chaunting charms inwrapt with woe my heart.
Ulysses sailing by the perilous place,
Where these to please the passours by, did play,
Where Lady Love does vante with garishe grace,
Her daynty Damsels gallant Gyrles, and gaye,
Intysyng trulles, they causde the Greek to say,
With Cables come and tie me to this Mast,
Lest I my self to Pleasures Court me cast.
Muse not therefore though feature fine of face,
Though comely corpse, and trim intysing cheer,
Made me obey Sir Cupids mighty Mace:
The force whereof Ulysses wise did fear.
He saild aloffe, he from these banks did bear
His shaking ship, but other many more
Did there ariue, and weaud the web of woe.
There Solomon did reap the croppe of care,
There David loud as I, Vrias wife,
There Samson strong was snarled in the snare,
There Paris liude, even there he lost his life,
There Helens hate, brought Troy her final strife,
Alcides he the myghtie Herculus
There to ariue, did find it dangerous.
And I did learn with loss of life at last,
That he who does delyght in lawelesse love,
Must play the fool ear all the parts be past,
And taste the sauce preparde for his behoue.
Let men take heed how they there fancies move,
Let man beware where he does cast his eye,
The lymed bird does prove in vain to fly.
O ancient Rome, thou did ordain of yore,
That women should no banqueting frequent,
At Rome she was esteemde a harlot whore,
If from her house without her veyle she went,
Which laws no doubt were made to good intent*
For why the beams of Beauties sanguynde sight,
Like Basilisco spoils the gazing wight.
Therefore the maids and Roman Matrons all,
A shadowing veyle before there face did wear,
Their heavenly hew did throw no man to thrall,
They were content with plain and decent gear,
They hus^e it not with painted frisled hear.
The married wife, the matron, and the maid,
They of there veyles were glad and well apayde.
If women thus had walked in my time,
I had not stoopte unto that painted lure,
Which did entice me to commit the crime,
Which to the perch of lewdness tide me sure,
For her disport my Lady could procure
The wretched wings of this my muting mind,
Restless to seek her empty fiste to find.
I thus ariude in Pleasures cursed Court,
I lothed Mars, I hated Mercury,
It was me thought a passing pleasant sport,
Leauinge the feeldes at Bacchus bravery,
Sometime to sit upon my Mistress knee,
Where that I might be at my pleasure plaste,
I sent the noble Duke to wars in have.
You which have played with pleasures banding bales,
You know the life which lingering lovers lead,
You know how sweet it is to scale the walls
Of her good will, who liude in fear and dread,
You know right well how well those wightes have sped,
Who have at last by driftes of long delay,
Their hoped meede, and wished pleasant pray,
Which pray when I by tract of time obtaynde.
And had my will when best it did me please,
As I three months amidst my bless remaynde,
The Dukes return, returned me from my ease,
No promise might his raging wrath appease.
But when he knew the dr^fte of my delays,
To cause my death he sought an hundred ways.
Then I the wrath of rash revenge to fly,
Thinking that time might mitigate his mood:
To Troynouant in have I did me hye.
Which when the wrathful Duke once understood,
He raysde my Realm, and by his might and power
I lost my life, my Crown, and Princely bower.
Learn they which live in high or low degree,
To flee the foil which I by Folly felt:
Let them refrain those lofty Dames to see,
They know how lofty looks with me have de^^,
You se how sight did make my honor melte.
Let al men know, man's heart did never rue
The thing which he with sight did never vewe.
But how may men the sight of Beauty shun
In England, at this present dismal day?
All void of veyles (like Lays) where Ladies run
And rome about at every feast and play,
They wanderyng walk in every street and way:
With lofty luering looks they bounsing brave,
The highest place in all men's sight must have.
With pride they pranke to please the wandering eye,
With garishe grace they smyle, they Iet they Jest:
O English Dames, your lightness verily,
The Curtizantes of Rome do much deteste,
In Closets close to live they count it best.
They give not grace to every wandering wight,
Your smiling chere does every man delight.
The Poets gods Saturn, and Jupiter,
To Beauties beck, their highness did obey,
Pluto of hell did plead at Beauties bar,
And Phillis causde Demophoon to stay:
Pasiphae a Bull brought to the baye.
So Gods and Diuilles, both men and beasts, they all*
By women's wyles are slaves to Beauties thrall.
What gain is got by light and wanton ways?
You reap reproach a guerdon got thereby:
Men by your means do cause their own decay,
And you your selves al souste in sin must die.
Refrain therefore to please man's gazing eye,
Let men like wise the bayted hooks refrain
Of luering looks, their vaunting vows be vain.
The Induction.
Very well said quoth Memory, I would I had ability to redeem this princes
soul out of Lymbo lake, I will insuer you the short Tragedy of this man's life
has made along discourse of the present estate of England, in which there be
more by three parts which serve like Carpite Knights, Venus, and her
darlinges, then god and their Prince: who I fear are so fast seized upon
Beauties fiste, that this example will be little auailable unto them. But let it
be as it will, warned folks may live, and happy are they whom other men's
harms do make to beware. But good Inquisition, whom have you there? what,
have you brought us in steed of a Prince, a Priest? It would appear by his
shaven Crown that he has bin a Monk, or a Friar. What, shall we allow tippet
wearers to plead amongst Princes? me think by the deformity of his apparel,
he should not be of the Religion, nor of the reformed Church, yea I will insuer
you, his precise looks makes me to suspect that he is one of them which do
cry out, O these indifferent things do not edifye. Speak therefore
Inquisition, if he be one of that precise order, he get no place here. O
Memory (quoth Inquisition) they of the reformed Church be the most zealous
Pastoures of the world, most of the^ both godly, good livers, and wise: and in
my fancye in many points greatly deserving the name of reformed. But this man
was both a Prince and a Prelate, whom I refused oftentimes to hear, because
he looked so devoutly, yet he being importunate, did overcome me with his
prayers: and when I gave ear unto him, I rejoiced. And not without a cause
good Memory, for it is even he whom you sent me to seek. Let me see (quoth
Memory, is it Cadwallader? In good time: it is even he in deed. O se what the
alteration of apparel does: in good faith I had almost forgotten the man, he
was the last King of the Brittaynes, and when things would not fall out after
his desire, he went to Rome, and there he became a Friar. But we will not accuse
him of any thing, let him do the thing that he comes for, you may persuade
your self that seeing he is of the Church, his conscience will constrayne him in
every thing to tell the truth. Then he stepped forth, booted, and spurde, al in
black, with a long priests Gown, a square cappe, a Scala Caeli in his hand,
and a long pair of Beads by his side: then he sighing, proceeded unto his
purpose, and said as follows

The Complaynt of Cadwallader.
How Cadwallader the last King of the Brittaynes* after he had behaved him
self very valiantly against the Saxons, resigned his Crown, and went to Rome,
where he lived in a religious house. This storye contains in it the estate of
al estates.

You mourning Muses al, where ever you remain,
Assist my sobbing soul this drierye tale to tell:
You furious Furies fearce of Lymbo Lake below^,
Help to unlade my breast of all the bale it bears:
And you who felt the fall from honors high renown:
From graves you grizie ghosts se^d forth, to help me mourn.
O Pallas, give thou place, that mourning Clio may
On Lute lamenting, sound and sing my doleful dumpes.
Let riming metered lines and and pleasant Music cease:
Let Satyrs sollome sound send forth the fall I felt:
And when the truth of al my Tragedy is known,
Let them that live then learn, al things must have an end
The Persian Monarch and Medes it down did fall,
That of Assiria, in tracte of time did end:
Yea Alexanders force in fight subdude them both,
And brought the world so wide into one Monarchy.
What though the fretting force of Fate did him dism^y?
He felt at last the foil, his vaunting was in vain,
He dead, the world it was divided as before.
The Roman Emperie came tumbling down at last.
And where is Troy, and Greece, and mighty Macedon?
They flourishte for a time like this my little I Will:
The Soldian brought them down, and did their states destroy:
Even so the Saxons brought the Britayns to the bay,
Even these mine eyes did see, that hateful* hidious sight,
These feeble hands when long they labourde had in vain,
Did yield their interest: then thus I did complain:
Who can refrain the force of mighty mounting Seas?
When bellows make a breach and beat the banckes adown,
Does not the saltish surge then beat the banks adown?
Then man may not withstand the the rigor of their rage.
But wisdom would have kept the waves within their bounds
Counsel does come to late, when hope of help is past.
Such was my filthye fate, my lewd and loathsome luck:
I sought a salve to cure and help the helpelesse wound.
For long before my time, seven Kings were settled here,
The Saxons such as dwelt by East, Sibertus ruled,
The Angles in the East, Redwallus ^ulde as king,
Then Ethelbert was king of all the coast of Kent,
In Southsex Ethelwolfus wore the regal crown:
Then Quincillinus was a Saxon king by west,
Of Martia in the midst king Penda was the Prince,
And Edwin in Northumberland did rule and raygne,
How did my Grandsire grand renowned Arthur he
These seven destroy with deadly field of wrackfull war*
But Mordred made the mean, that brought them in again:
Vor^iporus with war almost consumde them all.
Then Malgo he with peace restorde again their state,
Cariticus the sin of Civil strife did love,
For which Gurmundus did the Britaynes much annoy.
Then Cadwin out of Wales king Etheldred did spoil,
Cadwalline then did force king Penda to a foil,
And I Cadwallader at last did press in place,
Then Lothar king of Kent in war that wretch I slew.
And Ethiwolne ^he king of Southsaxons I spoylde,
The other five did me invade with cruel fight,
With whom in diverse wars, I diversely did speed.
Sometime Bellona blewe a blessed blaste for me,
And changed chance sometime did farce my men to flee.
Whilst thus I wagde my wars in secret silent night,
The very voice of God, it thus to me did speak:
Thou striust against the stream, the tide does beat thee back,
Strike thou thy Sails, take Ancor hold, else must thou feel a wrack*
Which saying did in deed amaze me more by much,
Then all the force that man against my will might bend:
For who the will of God with weapons may resist?
And when as sin has sold a country to decay,
Then prayer must prevail, for weapons will not help.
And when the end is come, when all the glass is run,
Who can resist the force of Fate and destinies?
Who things forerunne to fall from falling can refrain?
It passes mortal might to bring such things about.
Let man content himself to do what best he may,
By trying too to much, no man his God may tempte,
But mortal man must think that God the best does know,
Who can depresse to dust, and cayse when best him please.
And as I thus amidst my musinges did remain,
I did resign my crown, and deemde al honors vain.
And though it greeude me much to feel the fall I felt,
Yet was I well content, I could not as I would:
For which I left my land, my people, and my place.
The Saxons they obtaynde the wage for which they warrde.
When I three years had raygnd, without one day of rest,
Even then in mourning robes at Rome I did ariue,
And there contemning all the world, and worldly things,
I made my self a Monk, (cease Memory to muse)
A Monk I made my self, thou know it passing plain:
Amongste the Friars there, I led my lyngring life.
And till my dying day I daily did devise,
How by my means it might to all the world be known,
That mortal flesh is frail, and every thing must fade:
And even amongst those things which Nature does create,
Nothing so vile as man amongst the rest is found,
Which made Heraclitus with ceasslesse sighs to wayle,
He to his dying day did nothing else but weep,
Affirming all the world under the heaven, to be
A path of penitence, a maze of misery.
What is the life of man but care and daily toil,
Bearyng always about a burden of mishappes?
All his delights repentance does daily does pursue:
Nothing but death does bring him peace and quiet rest.
Yet that which bringes him bless, he most of all does hate,
Which made Democritus with mirth to spend his days.
He laughing aye, did mock the madness of mankind,
Whose love is long to live, and fears much to dye:
Death reaues us from desease, Death ends the fear of death.
When Midas did demand Silenus, what was best
For mortal man to wish, the Satyr thus did say,
Not to be borne, if borne, not long our lives to lead,
For life I most do loathe, and death I least do dread.
And how did Timon lead with savage beasts his life?
How did that Hermit poor, his loathsome life detest?
Affirming with the wise Aurelius Emperor,
Tha^ if a man should make a true discourse of all
The wretched woes he felt, from birth to dying day,
The feeble flesh would faint to feel so sharp a ^ight,
The heart would quake to hear Dame Fortunes sharp assaults.
And I Cadwallader a king, can make repor^,
That nothing may content the mind of mortal man:
The more my self did eat, the hungryer ay I was,
The more I drank, the more thirst did me still distress.
The more I s^ept, the more I sluggishe did remain,
The more I rested me, the more I wearyed was,
The more of wealth I had, the more I did desire,
The more I still did seek, the less I aye did find.
And to conclude, I found I never could obtain
The thing, but in the end it causde me to complain,
My present good success, did threaten thrall to come,
And changing chance did still with sorrow me consume,
For which my royal robes, my crown I laid aside,
Meaning to prove by proof the pains of pouertye,
Which poverty I felt all riches to exceed,
It bears much more bless, then high and courtly state,
Codrus and Irus poor for wealth did far surpass
Midas and Craesus king, for wealth who did surpass.
And I amongst my mates the Romish Friars, felt
More joy and less anoye, then erst in Britain brave.
For there I doubted still, the Saxons subtle sleyghtes,
I feared there the fall from royal regal seat:
But here at Rome I liude not fearing force of foe,
I had for mine estate, what I could wish or crave,
And this I there did find: they of the Cleargye be,
Of all the men that live the least in misery.
For all men live in care, they careless do remain.
L^ke buzzing Drones they eat the honey of the Be,
They ^nely do excel for fine felicity.
The ki^^ must wage his wars, he has no quiet day,
The noble man must rule with care the common weal:
The Countreyman must toil to till the barren soil,
With care the Merchant man the surging seas must sail,
With trickling drops of sweat the ha^dcraf^es man does thrive.
With hand as hard as bourde the woorkeman eats his bread.
The soldier in the field with pain does get his pay,
The serving man must serve and crouch with cap and knee,
The Lawier he must plead and trudge from bentch to bar,
Who Physic does profess, he is not void of care.
But Churchmen they be blessed, they turn a leaf or two,
They sometime sing a Psalm, and for the people pray,
For which they honor have, and sit in highest place,
What can they wish or seek, that is not hard at hand?
They labor not at al, they know no kind of pain,
No danger does with dread their happy lives distress.
Cease you therefore to muse what madness made me leave
The Court and courtly pomp of wearing royal crown,
No madness did that deed, but wisdom wished it so,
I gaynd thereby the bless which few before me felt,
I niene years led my life, and never felt annoy.
And certaynely if now I might be king again,
Refusing all that pomp, I would become a priest,
A Deacon, or a Dea^e, Prebende, or Minister.
For these men lead their lives with livings two or three:
Some have their substitutes in Uniuersities,
Some lead the brauest lives that any man may have,
They feed upon the fleece, they force not of the flock:
Three hours in the year, with beastly bosomde stuff
They spend, and that is all that law of them requires.
Muse not though many thrust and shoulder for degrees,
For happy man is he, who has a Preachers fees.
But let me now return unto my Romish route,
Who fed like Bacon fat, did naught but play and pray.
With whom for niene years space, when I my life had led,
I song my Requiem, and paid the earth her fee.
Then in Saint Peter's Church at Rome they did me lay,
Booted and spurd, even as you see me here this day.
So now you have the whole of all my Tragedye.
Of Brutus blood the last I ^ude that ruled as king,
My Britains driven to Wales they Welchmen then were calde,
And I at Rome their king, a mumbling Monk instald.
The Saxons had the day, for which they longed long.
They England calde the I Will, of Brute which took her name.
Some men be borne to bliss, and some to hateful hap:
Who would have thought, that I in war a raging king,
Should by the force of Fate, at Rome have did a Monk?
Let all the world then know, that nothing is so sure,
That can affoorde and say, I thus will aye endure.
For that which seems best, is soonest brought to naught,
Which plainly does appear by that which I have taught.
The worthiest in the world, princes, philosophers,
Will teach that I have taught, and prove it passing plain.
Paulus Aemi^ius did dye but wretchedly.
And was not Scipio even to his dying day
Constraynde, to help his neeede, the painful plowe to plye?
Caesar and Silla both, did not they taste the whyppe?
And made not Hannibal a miserable end?
And how was Socrates before his time destroyed,
And Anaxagoras inprisoned long with pain?
For cruel beastly coin divine Plato was soulde,
And Aristotle sent to exile, where he did.
And so was Solon sage, and that Licurgus wise,
And many more, which here I could at large repeat.
But let these few suffice to teach for certain truth,
That all the men that live, are subjects al to ruth.
And seeing so it is, then let them learn the mean,
That if the bark do break, they safe may swim to land.
The Induction.
The great desire (quoth Inquisition) which we have had to hear this man,
has made us to ouerpasse king Arthur and Cariticus, the one no less famous
for his noble acts, then the other for his vices and wretchedness infamous. Yea
said (Memory) so have we forgot two or three other, whose examples would have
been goodly lanternes to lighten wandryng pylgrimes. But it is not much amiss,
for of Arthur there be whole volumes, and of the rest there be the like
ensamples both in Bochas and Baldwin: let us therefore pass them over, and
speak somewhat of some of the Saxons: for seeing they were made of flesh and
blood, no doubt some of them stumbled also. But first tell me Inquisition,
will you pen this man's meterlesse Tragedy as he has pronounst it? good
Memory give me your advise, for it agrees very well with the Roman verse called
Iambus, which consists on six feet, every foot on two syllables, one short
and an other long, so proper for the English tongue, that it is great marvel
that these ripewitted Gentlemen of England have not left of their Gotish kind
of ryming, (for the rude Goths brought that kind of writing first, and
imitated the learned Latins and greeks) O what brave beams and goodly timber
might be found amongst Churchyardes Chippes, if he had not affected the ryming
order of his predecessors? Which Meeter made not only him inferior unto
Horace, but it also made a great inequality to be betwixt Buchurst and Homer:
betwixt Phaer and Virgill: betwixt Turberuile and Tibullus: betwixt Golding
and Ovid: betwixt George Gascon and Seneca: for all these coming near unto
Marot whom they did imitate, did put a great distance betwixt the^ and the
Latins, with whom they might have binne equal, even with as little labor, and
with much more praise, and renown. Truly (quoth Memory) let it be as it is,
you shall see good sport shortly. I smyle to see how Zoilus and Momus, will
cry out* O vain glorious head, which now for a singularity does endeavor
to erect a new kind of Poetry in England. What need thou care
Inquisition, these labors will get thee no living, and these be but the
trifles of thy idle hours, yet such as be in many respects of great value, I
promise you I would the rest of your princes would proceed in the like order.
But how shall we go forward with the seven Saxon kings: which way shall we
turn us? Where or with whom shall we begin? With the West Saxons (quoth
Inquisitio^) For they subdued ye other six, and returned the realm into one
Monarchy. And surely Ewe their first king were worthy the speaking of, who for
his wife Etheldredas pleasure, gave over al his royalties, and then went to
Rome, like a beggar in pilgrimage. But we will not spend our time in hearing
these devout men. Let us (if you please) see what this means: behold, a
Heardman does hold in his hand a headless body, who by his apparel would
seem to be some forlorn thing: shall I inquire of the man what the matter
means? No quoth Memory, you need not, for I see he will do it without
request. Wherewyth the Heardman lamenting both his hard hap, and his good
success, said as follows.

The Complaint of Sigebert.
How Sigebert was thrust from his throne, and miserably slain by a Heardman.
This Tragedy does teach both Prince and subject his duty at large.

Two parts in one a Heardman here must play,
My tale must tend each princes life to mende,
And this my talk most plainly must displaye,
How far a subject may him self defend
Against his leache, his sovereign Lord and king,
If his default his common weal^ does bring
To misery: therefore a little while
Attend, and know the tenoure of my style.
A subject I of base and low degree,
This headless corpse of life I did deprive,
(King Sigebert it was) with cruelty.
Whose lust was law, whilst he was here alive,
To feel my force it was his destiny,
Then cruelty I wrackt with cruelty,
And to revenge the wrong that erst he wrought,
With loss of life his lawless lust he bought.
This Sigebert the Saxons ruled by West,
Their ancient laws he at his list did change,
For which his commons did him much detest.
The Duke of Cornwell would not let him raunge
Thus at his will, but wished him like a friend,
To mende his faults, or else his life to end.
Then he in rage this Duke my masters life,
His cruel hands bereaude with blooddy knife.
A lawelesse life to lawesse death does hale,
When witless will, will pass the power of may:
Then il mishappe does drown in Dolours Dale,
The peruer^e Prince, whose wit does bear the sway.
Just Abels blood to God for vengeance calde,
For blood with blood the Bloodsheader is thralde,
And him whom here before you I present,
For sheading blood, my blade his life has hent.
As he three years his people did oppress,
Then they whose back that burden could not bear,
With one consent they did his state distress,
To reaue him of his Crown they did not fear,
They him desposde from honor and renown:
His hateful hap so frowardly did frown,
That he who had a kingdom but of late,
Forlorn he now must beg from gate to gate.
Do nothing muse at his deserved hap,
For many more as he their lives have led:
Jove's vengeance just such wretches does inwrappe,
With change most strange, when he their blood will shed.
Of Dionise of Syracusia,
Of Neroes death, of Phalaris decay,
Who list to read, he passing plain shall find,
That he of heaven their sorrow has assignde.
And out of doubt God did ordain the fall
Of him, whom here I headless have in hand,
Who wandering in a wood amidst his thral
I met by chance, of whom I did demand
His name, and place* who thus replide with fear:
O friend, I am for meat now statuen well near,
Give me therefore I thee beseech and pray
Some meat, to keep my carcass from decay.
Some Pilgrim poor, or wayfaryng man him straight
I iudgde, and gave him what my scrippe would yield,
And whilst we both thus on a bank did bait,
From sighs and sobbes him self he could not wielde,
Which made me ask again his name and place,
But silent he did mourn with frowning face:
Yet at the last by urging too and fro,
He thus declarde the cause of al his woe.
O miser I, more wretch then thee by much,
I never could compare with thine estate.
This heard of Swine against thee never grutch*
I kept a heard, which did their Heardman hate,
A hateful heard of murmuring men I mean,
Which did depri^e me of my honor clean.
And now I lead my loathsome life you see,
Impalde amidste a maze of misery.
With changed chance (aye me) I chased am,
And frowning Fate such sorrow has assignde,
That lothing life, most like a quiet Lamb,
My naked neck to block of bale I bind.
With cruel knife (O Care) come shread my twist,
So shall my soul by corpse decay be blist.
But since that Care nor Fate will do this deed,
Do thou the same I thee be seech, with speed.
First hateful hope with flattering face did faune,
With dread when deep despaier would have drownde,
Then changed chance did check me with the paune
Of woeful want, when good success did sound
A blessed blast: and now (^o tell the truth)
I have the mate, by raging Rooke of ruth.
Lothus I live, which daily wish to dye:
And life (alas) does make my misery.
If loathsome life (of this my corpse the king)
Does move one way, the Bishop bids me back:
If to that point, the Queen me back does bring,
On the other side, the Knight does work my wrack,
The other points with Pannes be al possessed,
And here the Rooke of ruth does reaue my rest.
And being brought into this strange estate,
I do confess my self to have a mate.
Since sorrow so has seasde upon my bones,
That now too late I do lament my loss,
And since no means may turn my gastfull groans
To joyful glye, since trouble still does toss
Me to and fro, in walteryng waves of woe:
Death is my friend, and life I count my foe.
Which death though once my feeble flesh did fear,
Yet now I feign would feel his murdring spear.
In gurging gulf of these such surging seas,
My Pouer soul who drowned you will request,
I wretched wight have sought mine own disease,
By mine own means my state it was distressed.
For whilst I meant to make my lust a law,
Justice me from my high estate did draw.
So that I find, and feel it now with pain,
Al worldly pomp, al honor is but vain.
Which honor I to fiery flames compare,
For when they flash and flourishe most of all,
Then suddaynely their flamings quenched are.
For proof whereof, to mind now let us call
Antigonus, and Ptollemeus Great,
Caesar, and Mithridate, we may repeat,
With Darius, and great Antiochus,
Cambises eke, and conquering Pyrrhus.
And I the last might first have had my place,
They al as I with flaming fiery show,
Were quenched quite: Dame Fortune did deface,
Yea hateful hap, even then did overthrow
Us most, when most we had our hearts desire.
When most we flourisht like the flames of fire,
Even then the seas of sorrow did prevail,
And made us wear a black wamenting sail.
And here before my death, I will repeat
To thee the thing which I of late did dream,
That thou and all the world may see, how great
A care it is to rule a royal realm.
My dream shall show, that bliss does not consist
In wealth nor want: but he alone is blessed,
Who is content with his assigned fate,
And never strives to clime to higher state.
When seemly Sol had rest his glittering gleames,
And Nox the earth with darkness did imple:
Dame Sinthia then with her bright burnishte beams,
The shadowed shades of darkness did assail,
Then Somnus causde my senses al to quayle.
On careful couche then being laid to rest,
With doubtful dreams I strangely was distressed.
In cottage cold where care me thought did keep,
With naked need and want of wherewithal:
Where poverty next beggars door did creep,
And where expenses were so passing small,
That al men deemde that man forethrongd with thral,
Which there did dwell, even there from bondage free,
I veiwde a man al void of misery.
And whilst I musde how he in bliue of bliss
Could lead his life amidst that cave of care,
From princely Court proceeded ear I wist,
A man, with whom there might no man compare.
His wealth, his wit, his courage were so rare,
That none before nor since were like to him:
Yet he me thought in waves of woe did swim.
This man had all that men could wyshe or crave
For happy state, yet naught he had in deed:
The other, he had naught that men would have,
Yet had he al, believe it as thy Creed.
This saying of that happy man I read,
That having naught, yet al things so I have,
That having naught, I nothing more do crave.
The king me thought with all his Courtly train,
Past to the place where poverty did dwell,
With frowning face and with a troubled brain,
With woe and want, his vexed veins did swell,
With mirth and joy the poor man did excel.
And being come unto his house ymade
Of one poor hogsheadde, thus to him he said:
Diogenes, thou leadst a loathsome life,
Me think thou might much better spend thy time
Within my Court, both thou and eake thy wife:
Thou by that means to high estate may clime:
I have the wealth, and thou art void of crime,
And lo, before thy face I here am pressed
To give thee that, which thou shall now request.
Stand back (Sir King) thy vaunting vows be vain,
I no thing recke thy promise, goods, nor land,
And Titans stately streams would me sustain
With heat, if thou from this my door would stand:
Thou takst away much more then thy command
Can give again: thy gifts so vile I deem,
That none but fools such follies do esteem.
With Conquest thou have won the world so wide,
And yet thou can not win thy wandering will:
Thou would win an other world beside,
But ^ushe, that fact does far surpass thy skyll.
Thou never wilt of Conquest have thy fill,
Til Death with daunting darte has conquered thee,
Then must thou leave behynd, thy Monarchy.
With great assaults my self I have subdude,
In all respects, I have my hearts desire,
With a contented mind I am endude,
To higher state I never will aspire.
More like a Prince then any pore Esquire,
I lead my life: and since my state is such,
Ask thou of me, for I can give thee much.
All dashed with dread me thought in fuming heat
He said, departing thence in have with speed,
If I were not Alexander the Great,
I would become Diogenes in deed,
Who leads his life al void of woeful dread.
He has the wealth which I cannot obtain,
I have the wealth which wise men do disdain.
I live in fear, I languishe al in dread,
Wealth is my woe, the causer of my care,
With fear of death I am so il bestead,
That restless I much like the hunted Hare,
Or as the canuiste Kite, does fear the snare.
Ten hundred cares has brought me to the baye,
Ten thousand snares for this my life men lay.
When Philip he of Macedon the king,
One Realm me le^te, I could not be content,
Desire prickte me to an other thing,
To win the world it was my whole intent,
Which done, an other world to win I meant.
When least I had, then most I had of bless,
Now, all the world, and al unquietness.
No woe to want of contentation.
No wealth to want of riches and renown,
For this is seen in every nation,
The highest trees be sonest blown down:
Ten kings do dye before one clubbishe Clown.
Diogenes in quiet Tun does rest,
When Caesar is with carking care distressed.
Wherewith me thought he was departed quite,
And Morpheus that sluggishe God of sleep,
Did leave my limbs, wherewith I stood upright,
Devising long what profit I could reap
Of this my dream, which plainly did express
That neither want nor wealth does make man's bless.
Who has the mean with a contented mind,
Most perfect bless his God has him assignde.
But I, who liude a Crowned king of late,
And now am forste of thee to beg my bread,
I cannot be content with this estate,
I loathe to live, I would I wretch were dead:
Despayer she does feed me with decay,
And Patience is fled and flowne away.
Do thou therefore O Heardeman play thy part,
Take thou this blade, and thrust it to my heart.
O Sir, I said, the Gods defend that I
Should causeless kill a man in myserye,
Tell me thy name and place, then by and by
I will provide for thine adversity.
Then he replide, my name is Sigeberte,
I am the man which wrought thy masters smart:
I ruled of late this Realm even at my list,
Take thou revenge with that thy friendly fiste.
And well content: I will revenge with speed
The death of him whom causeless thou did kill.
King Sigebert, and art thou he in deed?
Since he thou art, dispa^th and make thy will,
For to my Lord this day I will present
Thy head: therefore thy former faults repent,
Thou see the block on which thy life must end,
Call thou for grace that God may mercy send.
Wherewith the kneelyng by he block of bale,
Dispatch (quoth he) and do that friendly deed:
O welcome death, and farewell Fortune frail,
Dispatch good friend, dispatch my life with speed.
Wherewith, on block he stretched his neck out right,
And said no more, but praying me to smite,
I gave the stroke which ended al his care,
A blouddie stroke, which did my death prepare.
For I who hopte to have some great reward
For killing of my masters fathers foe:
Was hanged straight, my cause was never heard,
Such was my chance and well deserved woe.
For when my Lord had heard me tell the tale,
How I his king and mine did there assail,
His frowning face did put me in great fear,
He sight and sobde, and said as you shall hear.
O Caitife vile, O impe of Satan's seed,
And have thou kylde our Sovereign Lord and king?
His due deserte deserves death in deed,
Yet what made thee to do so vile a thing?
What though he did my Father causeless kill?
What though he ruled the Realm with lawless will?
Shall we therefore, with cruel bloody knyfe,
Deprive our Lord and king of vital life?
O filth fie, may subjects false surmise,
With murdering minds their Governor resist?
That may not be: for Tully wondrous wise,
Plato, in whom true knowledge does consiste.
They both agreed that n^ man ought to kill
A Tyrant, though he has him at his will.
Yet thou (thou wretch) this bloody deed have done,
The like was never seen under the Sun.
When God will plague the people for their sin,
Them then to scourge he does a Tyrant send:
We should therefore that subjects be, begin
With earnest mind our former faults tamende:
Which if we do, it is to great avail,
Man's force is fond, fighting cannot prevail.
And he who does resist the Magistrate,
Resists god, repenting al to late.
If subjects be by perverse Prince oppressed,
They then must pray that God the change may make:
Which God no doubt Rebellion does detest,
No subject may his sword nor armoure take
Against his Prince, whom god has placed there.
Yet has this wretch al void of Subjects fear,
Destroyde a King whom God did thrust from throne,
Alas poor king, thy death I do bemone.
But he who has thy lyngring life destroyde,
Shall Be destroyed, and find it passing plain,
That no man may a Princes life anoye.
Although the Prince desiers to be slain,
Yet subjects must from sheading blood refrain.
From which seeing this wretch could not abstain,
Let him be hangde as I before decreed,
A just reward for his so vile a deed.
Then I forthwith to end my life was led,
I hopte to have preferment for my deed,
I was preferde, and hangde al save the head,
Did ever man the like example read?
Not one I think, therefore good Memory,
In register inrolle thou this for me,
That they who live and read the fall I felt,
May ^inde how Fate most strangely with me delte.
Yet my desert no doubt did death deserve,
Though hatred did not make me kill my king,
Yet lucre lewd did force my feet to swerve,
That hateful hap, me to this bale did bring.
Let them then learn that heedlesse live by hope,
Her hateful hestes will bring them to the rope:
And happy he, who void of hope can lead
A quiet life, all void of Fortunes dread.
Perillus he who made the Bull of Brass,
Like him I hopte to have some great reward,
But he in brazen belly broyled was,
And to a Skarfe of Hemp I was preferde.
So they that mean by others harms to rise,
Their dying day shall end with doleful cries*
And here I end, approving that most true,
From wicked works no goodness can ensue.
The Induction.
THis Heardman quoth Inquisition, does make me call to mind Pans Preachers, I
mean Maroes shepherds, Siluanus, Ca^didus, and such like, who with their Oten
Pipes did often times dis^lose very intricate mysteries, reasoning pro et con
of many high points belonging unto the common weal. And I know not with what
knowledge, they did decide doubtful matters, according unto the opinyon of the
best Philosophers. Surely Memory, I marvel much at the men of the old world,
for I read of many who having many passing great gifts of learning and
knowledge, were content with the base estate of Heardmen. In these our days,
none be Heardmen but fools, and every man though his wit be but mean, yet
he cannot live with a contented mind, except he has the degree of a Lord* It
is most true said Memory, for heretofore men did not raunge untied in such a
world of liberty as they do now, then the wisest was best content with the
lowest estate, yea, Reason so bridled the affections of men, that Apollo whom
Poets do faygne to be the very God of wisdom, what was he but a shepehearde?
and that very poor as it would seem, for he kept Admetus heard in
Thessalie. And Argus, who for the sharpness of his wit was reported to have an
hundred eyes, he also was content to be a Cowheard. And were not Bacchus,
Saturn, and mighty Jupiter, delighted in husbandry? But he who is most wise
in these our days, does approve him self most folish, by thrusting himself
unto his own destruction, which this Heardman has declared sufficiently ^n
this story of Sigebert. But let us now proceed, and let us by examples
teach, what fruit virtue, and vice, co^tentation and ambition, does yield. Then
let them of this world choose, whether like the wise Mariners they will avoid
those dangerous rocks: or willingly cast themselves away. Proceed therefore
good Inquisition, and let us see whom you have here. She will declare her
self (quoth Inquisition) what she is: but for the better understanding of her
talk, you must think that you see.51. Nu^nes, al Ladies by birth, having all
their noses and upper lips flead of, al flaming in a fire, being shut into a
church: then do you imagine yt you see this Lady, the mistress and gouerner of
the rest, standing dismembered and burning amongst the rest, to say as follows.

The Life of Lady Ebb.
How Lady Ebb did flea her nose, and upper lip away, to save her Virginity.

DO nothing muse at my deformed face,
For Nature it in perfect moulde did make:
And when your wits have wayed well the case,
You will commend me much for Uertues sake.
With these my hands which from my face did take
Mine over lip, and eke my seemly Nose,
So to avoid the rage of all my foes.
For I by birth a Princes daughter borne,
An Abbiesse by my profession,
Of which estate I never thought it scorn,
It greatly did delight me to be one,
Which might erect divine Religion.
At Collingam I took this charge in hand,
And fifty more of chaste Dianaes band,
Al Ladies borne by birth of high degree,
Which there did vow with me their lives to lead,
And to avoid carnal fragilitie,
We al did vow as you right well may read,
With single lives to live in fear and dread
Of God our Lord, so to refrain the vice
Of fleshly lust, which does to sin entice.
Then did the Danes the Saxon state invade,
And they who did the Brittayne state destroy,
To sue for grace were glad and well apayd,
So strangely did the Danes us then annoye,
That Saxons like the men of broyling Troy.
Amazde, they gazde, not knowing what was best,
So strayghtly were the Saxons then distressed.
These dreadful Danes they had no fear of God,
But savage, they did make their lust a law,
Whom god did send for a revenging rod,
To make us Saxons live in fear and awe
Of him, who did from servile bondage draw
Us out, and made us live at liberty,
When as we serude with cruel slavery.
Not much unlike the murmuryng Israelites,
Sometime we serude our Lord with fear and dread,
In trouble we imployde our whole delights,
To fast and pray: but when we quiet were,
We restless led our lives, all void of care,
Forgetting him who did in each distress,
With helping hand us bless with good success.
See here the fruit of health and good success,
It makes man both proud and insolent:
In health we hate the god who has us blessed,
Trouble does make us mortal men repent
Our former faults: in sickness we be bent
To fast and pray, and in aduersitye,
To pray to god, is man's felicitye.
And for this fault abusing this our bless,
The Danes with ruth our realm did ouerrunne,
Their wrath inwrapte us all in wretchedness,
There was no sin from which those men did shun.
By them the common weal was quite undone.
They did destroy the state of every Town,
They churches burnt, they plucked the Abbeys down.
Yet not content, us Nuns they did annoy,
O cruel deed, our beltes they did unbind,
With rapine they did rauishe and destroy,
Deflowring all that ever they could find.
I seeing then what sorrow was assignde
To me and mine, my vowed virgins I
Did call, then thus I spoke with weeping eye.
Alas alas my loving ladies all,
These hard mishappes do press us too to near,
What shall we do, how may we escape the thrall
Which has destroyde the Nunneries every where.?
Alas, my feeble flesh does quake for fear,
Alas, how shall we escape their cruelties,
Which thus be plast amidst extremities?
For if we do their hateful heastes deny,
Then dreadful death shall presently ensue:
And if we grant unto their villainy,
Our sinful souls in hell that deed shall rue.
Believe me then my Ladies, this is true,
Much better twer for us to dye, with fame,
Then long to live, with everlasting shame.
And for because the faces form does move
With beauties beams and comely countenance,
The mind of man to lust and lawless love,
I have deuizde, my honor to advance,
With face deformde to try my hard mischaunce.
For these my hands from this my face shall rippe
Even with this knife, my Nose and ouerlippe.
They which will fly reproachful infamye,
To do the like will them beseem the best,
You shall preserve your vowde virginity
Thereby, and live perhaps with quiet rest,
My daughters dear, give ear unto my hest.
Wherewith, with Rasors sharp I first, then they,
Each one her Nose, and lip did flea away.
Whilste thus we liud deformde to outward show,
Yet vessels garnisht gaye before gods sight,
The Danes did us invade, who straight did know
Our feate, them to defeat of their delight:
For which they wrackt on us their wicked spite.
With fiery flames they burnt our Nunnery,
And us therein: O wretched cruelty.
The ear of man the like has never heard,
No pen, nor tongue the like has ever told,
Had ever man a heart that was so hard,
That with his iron breast durst be so bold,
To do the like against the Femine kind?
Not on in faith that ever I could hear,
But these all void of mercy, love, and fear.
Thus we content to leave this present life,
In hope to have hereafters better bless,
Were brent and broyld, and so did stint the strife
Which might have made us live in wretchedness:
We gaynde thereby a heavenly happiness.
Which happiness they doubtless shall obtain,
Which do from sin and wickedness abstain.
The Induction.
O Diana quoth Memory* bring forth your Damsels, let us se if any of your
court have done the like deuoier to save their virginities. But seeing that
writers have made mention of none that might compare with her, both for the
goodness of the cause, and the valiant going through with the quarrel, me
think she should rather be esteemed a goddess then thou, and her train
rather the Ladies of chastity then thine. Give thou place therefore, and let
this Lady have thy seat. But (good Inquisition) this woman lived in the golden
world, let us enquire in this our iron age, if there be any which do come any
thing near unto her. Alas not one (quoth Inquisition) for as she in her time
did disme^ber her well membred body to preserve the jewel which she esteemed of
so great a price: so now a multitude may be found, who furnishe their
imperfect personages with all kind of foolish fylthy furnitures, to bestow
that on every he who will have it, which she was so desirous to keep. But let
us now hear this man's matter: it is Alurede, who if he had not been given
unto one kind of vice, had passed Arthur for wars, and Lucy for godliness.
What vice was that quoth Memory? You need not enquire quoth Inquisition, for
he is even now repeating his history: wherewith he said as follows.

The Complaynt of Alurede.
How Alurede was brought unto disease and unto untimely death, being inclined
unto the sin of the flesh. By his example we may learn, that one vice is
sufficient to deface a hundred virtues.

MY wrinckled cheeks bedeawde with drops of dole
My visage pale, my wan and withered face,
Do well declare how I have run my race.
And since I must my doings here inrolle,
The lives of them which live for to controlle,
I am content my cruel wretched case
Shall teach the way, how all men may embrace
The knowledge how they honor may obtain,
And how they may from falling there remain.
Though many clime by a means a hye,
Yet few on top can sit in suer seat:
For every storm an overthrow does threate
To them, who get the top by cruelty,
Whose suddayne fall does tell their treachery.
But they who will their heads for honor beat,
And fly the fall, the grief whereof is great,
Let them renown their former factes with fame,
And shun the path which leads man's life to shame.
^ho walks in this wilderness of woe,
And loves aloft on fl^tting Fame to flee,
Must pace the paths of Mother Mysery.
That man through gastfull grief must go,
By thousand thickes which wrapped are with woe:
By Dangers den where lurking she does lie,
By Hatreds house, where spite will thee espy,
By cave of Care, by woeful cry, alas,
His manly mind with courage stout must pass.
By plesaunt plain where pleasure does place
Her princely Palace painted passing fine,
To gazing eyes where glitteryng glass does shine
Of beauties blaze, where feature fine of face,
Where Lady love does vaunte with garishe grace,
Where vain delight does draw that loathsome line,
Which makes man from virtue to decline,
Be wise and ware, and loathe their luering looks,
Least craftye Cupide catch thee in his hooks
To Pleasures court a company does come,
Even fame to find, the loss I do lament,
For flitting Fame, them Rumor rud has hent,
Which does declare their dole til day of Dome.
With tooth and nail which travail, there be some,
Virtue to find, where when some time is spent,
Her to obtain, and that with good intent,
They weary, by the way do stay their race,
And rest them in this pleasant bitter place.
They mean as there no long delays to make,
But Bacchus comely Carpites so do please,
Such courtly caves, such mirth, such quiet ease
They have, that they to Venus them betake,
The wearye ways of virtue they forsake.
Those trustlesse traynes from dolor and disease
Doubtless do come, to drown in surging seas
Of secret smarte, those which do them delight.
Flee thou therefore this court^, with spite.
From Pleasures place, when thou shall turn thy face,
The high way then discretion will thee show
To virtues Lodge, which thou right well may know
By such as dwell about that pleasant place:
A hundred virtues raunging on a row,
Thou there shall see, how Fame her trumpe does blow,
For great exploytes: where when thou art renownde,
Then Fame thy name through all the world shall sound.
And when thou have obtainde that place with pain,
There is no doubt desert will honor have,
Which being had, beware that waltering wave
Of wordly lust, which virtue does disdain,
Beware least thou thy former deeds do slain.
For he who could himself from sinning save,
He seeking that which most his mind did crave:
Which being found, his feeble feet do faint,
And straight he does with sin himself acquaynt.
When man has most of that he does desire,
Then most the flesh does force the soul to sin,
The end does prove how well we do begin.
For he who does from virtues lore retire,
His wretched end does make the world admire.
Let him therefore which will the Garlond win,
Even to the end avoid the hateful ginne
Which Satan sets, with traynes of tastlesse bayte,
The gloss whereof prognosticates desayght.
What gain is got by him who runs in have,
If that his stumbling feet do make delay?
An other man does bear the price away,
He got no game, one fall has him defast:
Even so that man from fame is quite displaste,
If once his feet in vices steps do stay,
As may appear by me, and my decay.
For once I slipped, one vice did me deface,
One only vice, did Alurede disgrace.
I the fourth son of Ethelwolfus king,
Twice ten and eight I wore the Saxon crown,
For Martial feats I had a great renown,
My governance was good in every thing,
I ruled my realm to every man's liking,
My stature tall, my face did never frown,
My learning did deserve a Laurel crown,
My wisdom and my justice purchased fame,
My courage bold did much extol the same.
In seven conflictes I did the Danes destroy,
But more ariude which did me more molest,
Yet they likewise were by my means destrest.
But when my strength their strength could not destroy,
I did devise a pretty pleasant toy,
By means whereof my Saxon soil was bles^e.
Amidst my fone I Minstrel like did ieste,
I played the part of Scoggin Skeltons mate,
Transformde, I trudgde about from gate to gate,
In Minstrels robes my Fiddle tuned fine,
With warbling notes my tongue the song did sing,
Mine eyes and heart did note each other thing
That there was done: first how they did incline,
There lothesome lives, much like to filthy swine.
I played my part before their Hoggish King,
A part which him and his to bale did bring.
For when I knew their purposed intent,
By my return I made them al repent.
For in the night I did their camp invade,
With bloddye blade I did destroy them al,
And those which did as then escape the thrall.
Of Infidels them Christened men I made,
And though with wars my Realm were quite decayed,
Yet at the last after so great a fall,
I won the Price that pleased me most of al.
Even quiet peace a bless of all the best,
The fruit whereof is nothing else but rest.
Thus being blessed with peace and quiet rest,
At Oxford I a Grammar school did buyld,
By means whereof my common weal was filde
With learned men: and having thus my hest.
A Abbeys buylt, esteeming it the best,
That God who me in all my wars did wielde,
And me preserude even with his myghtie shield
That he in peace the only praise might have,
I builded up religious houses brave.
At Winchester the Minster there I made,
At Shaftesburye I buylt a Nunnerye,
I daily did erect. Divinity,
All which good deeds even by one wicked trade,
Were quite defaste and from my fame did fade.
O hateful thing that fuming fantasye,
Should make a man that sees, not to see,
Alas I byte on pleasures bitter bayte,
Whose hateful hooks are covered with desayte,
In lawless love I had a great delyght,
That sugered sweet of little lasting joy,
Those luering looks of dayntie Damsels coy,
Made me commit that like a Carpite knighte.
I did consume full many a day and night
With such delyghtes as did my name anoye,
My health and life at last they did destroy:
Yea these delights did so my fame deface,
That now with shame I blushe to show my face.
Those lewd delights did draw me to disease,
Consuming sickness brought me very low,
Physicians they Sicus that evil do know,
A kind of sore which did me much displease,
It always did bereave me of my ease:
On parts below that gryping grief does grow,
On me my God a just revenge did show.
And at the last, continuing in my sin,
I lost my life, and hateful Hell did win.
What though I did from forrayne foes defend
My Saxon soil, with thrice renowned fame?
What though I ruled with equity the same?
What though to buyld up Abbeys I did bend
My self, and prayed that God his word would send?
Though these good deeds did honor much my name,
Yet these defaste with deeds of foul defame,
Be of no price: for filthy fleshly lust
Destroyed them al, and laid them in the duste.
For as you see dissolved clouds with rain
The beams of Phoebus do deface:
Even so one sin did al my virtues race,
They blemished mine honor with disdain,
So that I find al virtue is in vain,
If vices be with virtue linkt in place,
On vice an hundred virtues does disgrace.
Therefore the man who hops for renown,
Must fight with flesh, and beat al vices down,
And he who can his raging will resist,
Is much more strong then Alexander great,
Who w^nne the world, yet had he not the feate,
With conquest to compel his lawless list,
To do the thing whereby he might be bliste.
But they who hope to have a heavenly seat.
Their lust and fleshly fancies down must beat.
And here by me you may perceive at large,
The things which God commits to man's charge.
The Induction.
IT is requisite (quoth Memory) that now you seek for Edmund Ironsides Father,
I mean Egelrede, of some Writers called Etheldrede, who as his Predecessor
Alurede, had but one vice: so he had never a virtue. In whose time the Danes
did more then ouerrunne England, for they ruled and reigned over the whole
Realm, and although a very valiant impe proceeded out of his raynes, who for
his ableness to endure pains, and travail, was surnamed Ironside, yet had
not William Duke of Normandy Nephew unto the said Edmunde, made a conquest
thereof, the Danes no doubt had ruled it even unto this day. It is necessary
therefore that we hear this man's Complaynt, I have him here (quoth Inquisition)
but I have no mind to hear him speak, for seeing he did despise all virtue
and learning, it is to be thought, that he will tell a crooked tale, such a
one as will (I fear except it be fyled after him) deforme all the rest. But I
will take pains to polish that which he roughly does frame. Not at all (quoth
Memory) the brown Byl is a goodly weapon: and let it suffice if the matter
will beat down vice, let the meeter delight as it may. Seeing you say so,
(quoth Inquisition) I am content that by the example of his death, he may
admonish all the world to flee the fall which he felt: wherewith he stepped
forth, and said as follows.

The Complaynt of Egelrede.
How Egelrede for his wickedness was diversely distressed by the Danes, and
lastly dyed for sorrow, seeing him self not able to deal with Canutus.

THe mind and not the Man does make or mar,
For as the Stearne does guide the Argocy:
So by their minds all men they guyded are.
From out the mind proceeds fantasy,
All outward acts, virtue or vanity,
Not from the man, but from the mind proceed:
The mind does make the man to do each deed.
For Phalaris with beastly bloody mind,
And Nero did in murder much delight,
To mercy Antoninus was inclinde,
Midas for Gold extended all his might.
For worldly pomp how did Pompeius fight?
The mountyng mind of Alexander, made
Him win the world, his fame can never fade.
How did the mind move Calicratides,
Xerses, Cirus, and Argantonius?
Philip of Macedon, Theramines,
Ajax, Jason, and Aurilianus,
Achilles, and the old King Priamus,
Hector, and Hercules, with false Sino,
Their minds did make them weaue the web of woe.
The Twig does bend as Boreas blastes does blow,
So man does walk even as his mind does move.
Then happy he who has a mind to know
Such things as be the best for his behoue,
No doubt the mind which virtuous acts does love,
Does make a man even Caesar to surpass,
For Noble deeds who Prince of prowess was.
But he who has his mind to mischief bent,
All his delight from virtue does decline,
Like me to late he shall his faults repent*
His sinful soul shall feel the fall in fine
That I have felt: which makes me to repine,
Against my mind for Nature did her part,
My evil inclyned mind did spoil my heart.
What though I were of comely personage?
Jointly my joints were ioynde with perfect shape,
Adorned eke with so sweet a visage,
That never yet from Natures hands did escape
A work ymade of such a perfect shape?
But what of that? these gifts for want of grace,
Deformed quite the feature of my face.
For why my mind to ruthful ruin hent,
I did delyght in loathsome lechery:
I never did my odious deeds repent,
In drunkenness, in extreme cruelty,
I did delight in every villannye.
As for delyght in princely exercise*
The feats of arms I did them most despise.
By means whereof my subjects did me hate,
And forrayne (...) to burn my Realm were bold:
With war (...) Danes did alter straight the state.
First Fortune did my common weal unfold,
Then pestilence did make my courage cold,
And last of al, the dreadful devilish Danes
Did make me pay them tribute for their pains.
Even now the Realm of England did decay:
For when the Danes their tribute had consumde,
Forthwith they made us greater sums to pay.
From ten to fifteen thousand they presumde
Of pounds to make us pay: so I redeemde
With money bags my careful common wealth,
The only means reserved for my health.
When thus the want of courage on my part
Had given my foes so sure footing here,
And when disease with her destroying Darte,
Had wypte away my subjects euerywhere:
Even then to late my wisemen did appear,
Whom heretofore I always did detest,
There counsel grave at last they thus expressed:
O Egelrede the fruit of fearfulness,
Of riote thou the right reward do reap,
But if thou will avoid this wretchedness,
Be wise and look about before you leap,
Of hateful happes you see a hidiouse heap
Before your face, therefore in time give ear,
And wisely way the words which thou shall hear.
That nobel Duke Richard of Normandy*
A sister has, whom then we wish to we^,
By means whereof from this captivity
We may be brought, and that without bloodshed.
For why these Danes these Normans so do dread,
That if from thence an aid we can procure,
Thy foes no doubt can never long endure.
The maid she may a princes fancye please,
Her brother is a man of great renown,
This way O king may make thy subjects ease,
It may restore the freedom of thy Crown,
This only way will force thy foes to frown.
If thou thy Crown and common weal do love,
Do thou the thing so much for thy behoue.
So by their means I married the maid,
She Emma hight, the flower of Normandy,
Of whom I was so glad and well apayde,
That all the world with my prosperity
Could not compare: and in that Iolitye
I did devise by traynes of secret treason,
To bring the Danes to death, in a good season.
I did a feast through al my Realm proclaim,
At which both Danes and Englishmen did meet,
Then secretly my friends and I did frame,
That Englishmen the Danes should friendly greet,
And at the feast that they should do their feate.
And that they might the better work their will,
They thus were plast according unto skill.
Two before one, and three before five,
Here two, and there two, and four then beliue:
Here one, and there one, and three at a cast,
Then one, and twice two, and one at the last.
They mingled thus, the watchworde wisely given,
And Englishmen with weapons well bestead,
The Danes amidst their Cups were shaven and shriuen,
Five hundred thousand in one day were dead.
Now note the end of blood so beastly shed,
For Swane the king of Denmark did ariue,
He for revenge did me to Richard drive.
Mark here how lawless policies prevail,
Their good success do promise present pain.
What? May man's vain devises ought avail?
Dishonest deeds no honor can obtain,
Al murdering Massacers be vile and vain,
Such subtle slayghtes have never good success:
The proof whereof with pain I here express.
For Swane with swoorde and fire did destroy,
Both man and beast, and every earthly thing,
He did that noble London much annoy,
He won the Realm and was the English king.
When tract of time him to his Beer did bring,
Canutus then his son did him succeed,
Whom to displace I did despatch with speed.
My brother Richard Duke of Normandy,
Of Normans gave to me a goodly band,
By help of whom Canutus forced to flee,
I got again the kingdom of England.
But out (alas) what thing may fyrmely stand,
Whose under propt is of so little might?
That want of strength does let things drop downright.
Canutus did from Denmark now return,
The wrathful wight appointed passing strong,
My subjects slew, my Cities he did burn,
Which when I heard I liude not very long,
My faynting heart was thronged with a throng
Of cares, which broke it in my fearful breast,
And so at last death brought my bones to ^est.
Twice ten and eight I ran my ruthful race,
And then in Paul's my cursed corpse was laid,
Canutus did my common weal deface,
The Danes were kings, my kingdom was decade,
This world is frail, and every thing must fade,
But always that which wants government,
That first does feel the force of dangers dent.
The Induction.
O Memory (quoth Inquisition) what did become of Edmunde Ironsyde, of whom you
made mention, in your former induction? That virtuous valiant Prince (quoth
Memory) was miserably made away by an Earl. By an Earl? (quoth Inquisition) I
have here an Earl called Edricus, who murdered a King, it may be, that
chance has yielded unto us the factour unlooked for. He is even the same
said Memory, and his Tragedye is very necessary, for he, as this worthy
King was set on a Privy to do as nature and necessity does constrayne,
caused him miserably to be thrust up into the fundament with a Spear,
wherewith the good Prince ended his days. If we do hear him, give him
warnyng (quoth Inquisition) that he be brief: for we have no time too
bestow in hearing the complayntes of those miserable Princes, and yet we
must needs hear one more beside him. Let him therefore go roundly to the
purpose. He shall not be tedious quoth Memory. Wherewith the wretched man said
as follows.

The Complaint of Edricus.
How Edricus destroyed the valiant king Edmunde Ironsyde, hoping to have
great preferment for his labor of Canutus the Dane, and how the same Canutus
caused him to be headed for his labor. A necessary example for all such as
think by craft and deceit to increase their credit.

YOu hellish hagges of Limbo Lake below,
Which daily do my cursed corpse torment,
Come forth, come forth, come forth, (I say) and show
How I on earth my dismal days have spent.
And will you not you wretched wightes assent
To help me here to tell that drierie tale,
Which may amongst men living much prevail?
O cursed ghost condemde to endelesse thral,
Since they refuse to aid thee in this need,
Do thou declare and tell the truth of al,
That men alive my wretched works may read,
And see the fruit of subtle Satan's seed,
Avoiding vice, and fancies fond delight,
Note well my tale, the truth I shall recite.
When Etheldrede had given Canutus place,
Edmunde dis son surnamed Ironside,
Devising how he might his foe deface,
By wrath of war the cause they did decide:
And in the end the Realm they did divide.
Edmunde had h^lfe, Canutus had the rest,
Then they with peace and quietness were blessed.
O blind belief, O hope of higher hope,
Why did you move my mind to meditate,
How I in woe king Edmunde might inwrap,
And how I might depresse my kings estate?
Thou blind belief, thou breeder of debate,
I wanting grace did let thee move my mind,
Causlesse to kill a courteous king, and kind.
He being kilde, I to Canutus went,
To whom I said, See here a faithful friend,
I for thy love with bloody blade have bent
And brought my king to his untimely end,
Thou by that means shall rule thy realm with rest,
My friendly fist with happy good success
Has thee inricht with bliss and happiness.
Have thou (quoth he) destroyde thy souerayn king?
Thou faythlesse fauning friend, for love of me?
Thou verlet vile, and couldste thou do the thing
The which might more abridge my liberty?
O heinous act, O bloody cruelty.
But since that love did move thee do that deed,
Thou for thy pains shall be preferde with speed.
Wherewith in have he to the hangman said,
Let this man's head the highest place obtain
On London walls: wherewith I never stayde.
But on a block my neck was cut in twain,
In all men's sight, my head did long remain.
See here what wit the grape of hope does yield,
See on what sand such buste brains do build.
O hateful thing that fancies fond delight,
The sense of mortal man should senseless make.
When vices vaunts with virtues deeds dare fight,
Then does the soul the hapyie heavens forsake,
Then man makes have to Plutoes sothsome sake.
Why should man love that sugered sour sweet,
Which wisedoms lore to loathe has thought most meet?
FINIS.
The Induction.
THe just reward for so vile an offense does prove (quoth Inquisition) this
Canutus to be both a wise and a worthy Prince. Yea said ( Memory) if he had
lived amongst those prattling Poets which made so much tattle of Hector and
Hercules, certaynely he should not have been inferior unto each of them. This
Canutus was king at one time of four kingdoms: as for England, and
Scotland, and Norway, he held them by conquest. By birth he was the king of
Denmark: yea he so demeaned him self, that during his life all these four
kingdoms honored him with the honor due unto a native king. But not long
after his death, that good king Saint Edmunde the confessor, obtained again
the rule of England, but chiefly through the help of his Nephewe William
duke of Normandy, to whom for that after his death he by liniall descent was
next, he promised the Crown of England, if that he dyed without issue. How
chanced it then (quoth Inquisition) that the Duke made such sharp war upon
Harolde, for the obteynyng thereof? How did it chance (quoth Memory?) that is
necessary too be known, for that chance did not only destroy the Danes, but
it brought both Harolde and the Englishmen to confusion: and although now our
idle hours be spent, time and our affairs do call us from the further
hearing these men's complayntes, yet let us as we may, hear what this Harolde
will say: his story will furnishe our work with a fit conclusion. And for
the better understanding of this man's matter, do you imagine that you see this
king, coming from the conquest of the Danes, even sweating in his armor, to
say as follows.

The Complaint of Harolde.
How King Harolde raygnyng but niene months, had continual war with the
Danes, with the Norway King, with his brother Tosto, and with Duke William, who
partly by his strength, but chiefly by policy, overcame him, and by killyng
him in the feelde, obtained the kingdom of England. This history does
declare that no manhood nor courage can keep the crown from the right heirs
head.

Would he have war, and we to war proclaim?
O Bastard Duke, and do thou dare to fight?
My Noble men, Come forth, and purchase Fame.
Give me my swoorde, let me defend my right
Step forth with speed my Martial men of might:
With Bows and Bylles, let us their course restrain:
And teach them that their vaunting vows be vain.
But that we may with wisdom wisely work,
It us behoues in Normandy to fight
With him, and not to let his soldiers lurk
Here in my Realm, we shall thereby achiue
No noble act, though hence we him do drive.
But if we deal with him in Normandy,
We shall receive renown and victory.
It is the best, with foreign foes to fight
Abroad, as did the haughty Hannibal,
And not at home to feel their hateful spite.
Of all the rest it is the greatest thrall,
That foes ariude should spoil our subjects all:
And for a truth this always has bin found,
He speedeth best which fightes on forrayne ground.
My men of war were mustered in have.
But have to late was then of none avail,
The Duke ariude, he in my Realm was plaste,
He every where my subjects did assail,
And every where he caused them to quayle.
For which I bode him battle by and by,
Where equal wars gave neither victory.
For both our strengthes were weakened in such wise,
We both for breath to pause were well content,
Even then the Duke he wisely did devise,
How here to yield my crown I might be bent:
For which to me a Pursiphaunt he sent,
With letters, such as here I shall recite,
Wherein he claims the Birttayne Crown his right.
William Duke of Normandy, and right heir to the English Crown, to Harolde
the Usurper.
Though birthright cannot cause thee yield to me my crown,
Yet have thou some respect of honor and renown,
For thou by oath did swear to yield to me my right,
When as I thee preferred, and stalde thee there bymight.
Mine uncle Edward he, thy fathers faithful freende
Gave me his crown, and thou thereto did condescend,
Yet now thou would feign defeat me of my right,
And prove thy self forsworn of former promise plight.
Shall Harold have his hest? shall Godwines son here guide?
Shall William want his will, and have his right denide*
Well Harolde, if thou can with wars determine so,
I am content: if not, provide, I am thy foe.
My sons and al my kin shall never stint to strive,
To pluck thee from thy place, whilst one is left alive:
But if thou wylt be wise, to me my right resign,
And thou shall have the place belonging to thy line.
If not, with fire and swoorde I mean thy Realm to spoil,
I never hence will starte till I have forced thy foil.
And now thou knowste my will, determine for the best,
Thou may have wars, and if thou wylt, thou may have rest.
Willyam Duke of Normandy.

THese letters were of little might, to make
My manly mind to grant him his request,
For which I did to Fortune me betake,
To wage new wars with him I deemde it best,
So from his fist his threatening blade to wrest.
But see the force of Fortunes changing cheer,
An other cloud before me did appear.
My brother Tosto who from me was flead,
Did now return, and brought the Norway king:
They did devise to have from me my head,
Which made me to indite an other thing
Unto the Duke, then plain and true meaning.
I gave him hope of that I never meant,
These were the lines which to the Duke I sent.
Harolde the English king, to thee William Duke of Normandy.
HArold the English king, thee William Duke does greet.
Thy letter being read, I have not thought it meet,
Without a parliament to do so great a thing,
As of a forrayne Duke, to make an Englshe king.
But if my three estates will follow mine advise,
Thou shall receive the crown, and bear away the price.
Therefore delay a time, thou shortly shall receive
With full consent the thing, which now thou seekst to have.
Harolde.

Then I in have my power did prepare,
For why, I heard my brother Tostoes train,
Two of my Earls by North he had destroyed,
And many a thousand men he there had slain:
But when we met, his triumph was in vain.
For I and mine the Norway king there kilte,
And I my self my brothers blood there spilte.
Now when the Duke my friendly lines had read,
And heard how I my men did muster new,
There lies a Snake within this green grass bed
Quoth he, therefore come forth my warrelike crewe,
We will not stay to see what shall ensue.
By long delays, from Foreign coasts he may
Procure an aid, to scourge us with decay.
But when he heard with whom I had to deal,
Well done (quoth he) let him go beat the bushe,
I and my men to the lurche line will steal,
And pluck the Net even at the present push,
And one of them we with decay will crushe.
For he who does the victor there remain,
Shall never rest, till he has dealt with twain.
So I in vain who had the victory,
Within few days was forced again to fight,
My strength half spoylde, the rest wounded and weary,
His camp was comne unawares within my sight,
There was no hope to flee by day nor night.
I Harolde then, a Harande sent in haste,
To know whither the Duke his camp had plaste.
He sent me word, my yfs and ands were vain,
And that he knew the driftes of my delay,
For which he said he would yet once again
Make trial, who should bear the crown away.
If I would yield, he said his men should stay,
If not, he then was present presently,
To try the cause by Mars his cruelty.
Which when I heard, and saw him march amayne,
His Trumpets did defy me to my face,
In have I did appoint my very train,
And soldier like I al my men did place,
I never sude, nor prayde, nor gapte for grace.
For having plaste my men in battle ray,
Mine Ancient bearer did my arms display.
The battle, vanard, and the rerewarde,
Were plaste in frunte, that men might fight at will,
The forelorne hope of Bowmen I preparde,
In skirmishing who had the perfect skill.
With Archers eke I did the wings fulfill,
To rescue them my men at arms were pressed,
Then thus my speech amongst them I expressed.
My mates, in arms see here the last assault,
Win now the field, and be you ever blessed.
This Bastard base borne Duke, shall he exalt
Him self so high? give ear unto my hest,
This day no doubt we shall have quiet rest:
For good success shall set us free from fear,
Or hateful hap shall bring us to our Bear.
Even here at hand his power does appear,
March forth my men, we must no longer stay:
Let every man abandon faynting fear,
And I as guide will lead you on your way*
Even I my self the foremost in the fray,
Will teach you how you shall abate his pride.
Fight fight my men, Saint George shall be your guide.
His Crosbowe men my Archers did assail
With three to one, yet were they al to weak:
And when his forlorn hope could not prevail,
Them to assist his Horsemen out did break,
Three troops I sent on them the wrath to wreake,
And by and by the battayles both did join,
With many a thrust, and many a bloody foyne.
Of three main battayles he his army made,
I had but one, and one did deal with three:
Of which the first by me were quite dismayde,
The other two they did discomfort me,
Not yielding, but in yielding blows we be
(With loss of life) constraynd at last to yield
The Crown, the kingdom, and the foughten feelde.
Note now the lot which on my limbs did light,
Nine months no more, I wore the English Crown,
In Every month I in the feelde did fight,
In every fight, I won a fresh renown,
Yet at the last my strength was beaten down,
And here before you, now I do protest,
I never had one day of quiet rest.
For first with war I won the Princely seat,
With civil strife I daily was distressed,
My brother twice indeuorde to defeat
Me of my throne, the Norway king was pressed,
The dreadful Danes they daily me distressed.
At last, this Duke did make me strike my sail,
When wind, nor tide, nor Oars, might prevail.
My kingdom then was proud his lawful price,
With conquest he recovered his right,
And as you see of conquering the guise,
The Englishmen they were defaced quite,
Then of his train he did prepare each wight.
And this was that which only brought me bless,
I did not live to see this wretchedness.
But woe to me which caused all this coil,
I was an Earl my father being dead.
Why did my breast with scalding malice boil,
To keep the Crown from the right heyers head?
O Fancye fond, thy fuminges has me fed,
The stinking stinch of thine inclined hest,
Has poisoned all the virtues in my breast.
The ruthful roodes of proned evil success,
Who has sustaynde, that passing pinching pain,
That woeful wight al wrapped in wrecthednesse,
Can well report man's fancye is but vain,
That man does know, by proof he finds it plain,
That he who stoopes to fancies fond desires,
Does grope for Grapes amidst the bramble briers.
Let no man think by fetches finely filde,
By double driftes conuayed cunningly,
To get or gain by any craft ^^guile,
A good estate with long prosperity.
His lust obtaynde, he lives in misery,
His guilty ghost does see his plague appear,
Who goes straight he needs not to fear.
FINIS.
Go straight and fear not.

