M. BLVNDEVILE His Exercises, containing six Treatises, the titles whereof are
set down in the next printed page: which Treatises are very necessary to be
read and learned of all young Gentlemen that have not been exercised in such
disciplines, and yet are desirous to have knowledge as well in Cosmographie,
Astronomy, and Geographie, as also in the Art of Navigation, in which Art it
is impossible to profit without the help of these, or such like instructions.
To the furtherance of which Art of Navigation, the said M. Blundevile
specially wrote the said Treatises and of mere good will does dedicate the
same to all the young Gentlemen of this Realm.

THOU SHALL LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTY



LONDON. Printed by John Windet, dwelling at the sign of the cross Keys,
near Paul's wharffe, and are there to be sold. 1594.

The Titles of the Treatises contained in this book.
FIrst, a very easy Arithmeticke so plainly written as any man of a mean
capacity may easily learn the same without the help of any teacher.

Item the first principles of Cosmographie, and especially a plain treatise of
the Sphere, representing the shape of the whole world, together with the
chiefest and most necessary uses of the said Sphere.

Item a plain and full description of both the Globes, as well Terrestrial as
Celestial, and all the chiefest and most necessary uses of the same, in the
end whereof are set down the chiefest uses of the Ephemerides of Johannes
Stadius, and of certain necessary Tables therein contained for the better
finding out of the true place of the Sun and Moon, and of all the rest of
the Planets upon the Celestial Globe.

Item a plain and full description of Petrus Plancius his universal Map,
lately set forth in the year of our Lord 1592. containing more places newly
found, as well in the East and West Indies, as also toward the North Pole,
which no other Map made heretofore has, whereunto is also added how to find
out the true distance betwixt any two places on the land or sea, their
longitudes and latitudes being first known, and thereby you may correct the
skales or Tronkes that be not truly set down in any Map or Card.

Item, A brief and plain description of M. Blagraue his Astrolabe, otherwise
called the Mathematical Jewel, showing the most necessary uses thereof, and
meetest for sea men to know.

Item the first and chiefest principles of Navigation more plainly and more
orderly taught than they have been heretofore by some that have written
thereof, lately collected out of the best modern writers, and treaters of that
Art.

And moreover, I have thought good to add unto mine Arithmeticke, as an
appendix depending thereon, the use of the Tables of the three right lines
belonging to a circle, which lines are called Sines, lines tangent, and lines
secant, whereby many profitable and necessary conclusions as well of
Astronomy, as of Geometry are to be wrought only by the help of Arithmeticke,
which Tables are set down by Clauius the Jesuit, a most excellent
Mathematician, in his book of demonstrations made upon the Spherickes of
Theodosius, more truly printed than those of Monte Regio, which book whilst
I read at mine own house, together with a loving friend of mine, I took such
delight therein, as I mind (God willing) if God give me life, to translate all
those propositions, which Clauius himself has set down of his own, touching
the quantity of Angles, and of their sides, as well in right line triangles,
as in Sphericall triangles: of which matter, a Monte Regio wrote diffusedlie
and at large, so Copernicus wrote of the same briefly, but therewith somewhat
obscurelie, as Clauius says. Moreover, in reading the Geometry of Albertus
Durcrus, that excellent painter, and finding many of his conclusions very
obscurelie interpreted by his Latin interpreter (for he himself wrote in high
Dutch) I requested a friend of mine, whom I knew to have spent some time in
the study of the Mathematicals, not only plainly to translate the
foresaid Durerus into English, but also to add thereunto many necessary
propositions of his own, which my request he has (I thank him) very well
performed, not only to my satisfaction, but also to the great commodity and
profit of all those that desire to be perfect in Architecture, in the Art of
Painting, in free Masons craft, in Ioyners craft, in Carvers craft, or any
such like Art commodious and serviceable in any common Wealth, and I hope that
he will put the same in print ere it be long, his name I conceal at his own
earnest entreaty, although much against my will, but I hope that he will make
himself known in the publishing of his Arithmeticke, and the great Art of
Algebra, the one being almost finished, and the other to be undertaken at his
best leisure, as also in the printing of Durerus, unto whom he has added many
necessary Geometrical conclusions, not heard of heretofore, together with
diverse other of his works as well in Geometry as as in other of the
Mathematical sciences, if he be not called away from these his studies by
other affairs. In the mean time I pray al young Gentlemen and seamen to take
these my labors already ended in good part, whereby I seek neither praise nor
glory, but only to profit my country.

To the Reader.
I Greatly rejoice to see so many of our English Gentlemen, both of the Court
and Country in these days so earnestly given to travel as well by sea as
land, into strange and unknown countries, and specially into the East and
West Indies, following therein the good example of diverse worthy knights and
Gentlemen that have ventured their lives to discover strange countries to the
great honor of their country, and to their own immortal fame. And because
that to travel by sea requires skill in the Art of Navigations, in which it is
impossible for any man to be perfect unless he first have his Arithmetic, and
also some knowledge in the principles of Cosmographie, and specially to have
the use of the Sphere, of the two Globes, of the Astrolabe, and cross staff,
and such like instruments belonging to the Art of Navigation, I thought good
therefore to write the Treatises before mentioned, to serve as an introduction
for such young Gentlemen as have not been exercised in such kind of studies,
which Treatises if they shall vouchsafe to read with attentive mind, and in
such order as they are before set down, I doubt not but that it will cause
them hereafter to seek for further knowledge therein. And in any wise I wish
them to begin with my Arithmeticke, the contents whereof are declared in the
next chapter following. In the mean time I do earnestly request all young
Gentlemen to take these my simple pamphlets no less thankfully than they have
done my horse book, and in so doing I shall have just cause to think my
labor well bestowed.

What cause first moved the Author to write this Arithmeticke, and with what
order it is here taught, which order the contents of the chapters thereof
hereafter following do plainly show.
I Began this Arithmeticke more than seven years since for a virtuous
Gentlewoman, and my very dear friend M. Elizabeth Bacon, the daughter of Sir
Nicholas Bacon Knight, a man of most excellent wit, and of most deep judgment,
and sometime Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and lately (as she
has been many years past) the most loving and faithful wife of my
worshipful friend M. Justice Wyndham, not long since deceased, who for his
integrity of life, and for his wisdom and justice daily showed in
government, and also for his good hospitality deserved great commendation.
And though at her request I had made this Arithmeticke so plain and easy as
was possible (to my seeming) yet her continual sickness would not suffer her
to exercise her self therein. And because that diverse having seen it, and
liking my plain order of teaching therein, were desirous to have copies
thereof, I thought good therefore to print the same, and to augment it with
many necessary rules meet for those that are desirous to study any part of
Cosmographie, Astronomy, or Geographie, and specially the Art of Navigation,
in which without Arithmeticke, as I have said before, they shall hardly profit.
But now to return to my matter, the contents of this Arithmeticke are these
here following. First, having defined what Arithmeticke is, and what numeration
or numbering is, and of what parts it consists, and how to number any great
sum written in many figures, I deal with the four special kinds of
Arithmeticke, that is, Addition, Subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Then I show the order of working in whole numbers, called in Latin Integra,
by the rule of proportion, otherwise called the golden rule, or the rule of
three. Then I treat of broken numbers called Fractions, setting down seven
necessary rules belonging thereunto, by the help whereof you shall be the
better able to add, subtract, to multiply and divide the same. That done, I
show how to use the rule of three as well in dealing with sole fractions as with
fractions annexed to integrums, which rule of three is threefold, that is, the
common rule, the rule reverse, and the double rule, the order of all which
three kinds I do plainly teach by examples, showing wherein, how, and when,
they are to be used. Next to that I set down the rule of fellowship, a
necessary rule for those that have to traffic in any trade of merchandise,
giving diverse examples thereof. Next to that I treat of Arithmeticall, and
Geometrical progression, and also of proportion, and of the three kinds
thereof, that is, of proportion Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and musical. Then
I show how to find out the square root of any number, and also the use
thereof in setting of Battles, and also how to find out the cubique root of
any number. And last of all I treat of Astronomicall fractions, showing how to
add, to subtract, to multiply and divide the same. And also to take the square
root thereof, without the knowledge of which fractions, you can never calculate
any thing truly out of the Astronomicall Tables.

Some perhaps do look here that I should speak somewhat of the rules of
Algebra, whereby all subtle and intricate questions of Arithmeticke are to be
unfolded, wherewith I leave indeed deal, partly, for that I have not of long
time exercised my self therein, and partly because I know that one has
begun to write thereof, whose book being once ended, I doubt not but that he
will shortly after print the same to the great profit and furthera^ce of al
those that delight in such good exercises. But in the mean time I have thought
good to add (as I have said before) unto this Arithmeticke a plain
description, together with the use of the Tables of Sines, of lines tangent and
secant, which Tables will pleasure many that would gladly know how and wherein
to use them, and specially such seamen as have some taste of Arithmeticke,
without the which no good almost is to be done in any science.

This Treatise of Arithmeticke contains 26. Chapters as follows.
WHat Arithmetique is, what numeration is, and of what parts it consists,
and what signification every digit has according to his place, and how to
express or tell a great number written in many figures. Chapter. 1.

Of the four special kinds of Arithmetique, and first of Addition, with
examples thereof. Chap. 2.

Of Subtraction, with examples thereof, and how to try the same. Chap. 3.

Of Multiplication and certain Tables belonging thereunto, together with the
use thereof, and what is to be observed therein, with examples and trial
thereof. Chap. 4.

Of Division, and what is to be observed therein, with examples and trial
thereof, and of halfing any number. Chap. 5.

Of the rule of three, called the Golden rule, and what order is to be
observed in working thereby, and of the three kinds thereof. Chap. 6.

Of Fractions what they be, with a Demonstration thereof, together with seven
necessary rules belonging to the same, and what every rule teaches. Chap. 7.

Of Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division of Fractions. Chap. 8.

Of the common rule of three belonging to Fractions with examples. Chap. 9.

Of the rule reuerse, called in Latin Regula eversa, and the order of working
thereby with examples. Chap. 10.

Of the double rule called in Latin Regula duplex, and the order of working
thereby with examples, and in working thereby how to know when you have to use
Regula eversa, or the common rule of three. Chap. 11.

Of the rule of Fellowship, and the order of working thereby, with diverse
examples thereof. Chap. 12.

Of Progression, what it is, and of the two kinds thereof, that is,
Arithmeticall and Geometrical. Chap. 13.

Of Addition belonging to progression Arithmeticall, and the order thereof,
with examples. Chap. 14.

Of Addition belonging to progression Geometrical, and the order thereof, with
examples. Chap. 15.

Of proportion, what it is, and of the three kinds thereof, that is,
Arithmeticall, Geometrical and Musical. Chap. 16.

Of Arithmeticall proportion, what it is, and how it is divided. Chap. 17.

Of proportion Geometrical, what it is, and how it is divided. chap. 18.

Of the chief and special kinds of Geometrical proportion, that is, of
equality and inequality both greater and lesser. Chap. 19.

Of proportion of the greater inequality, and of the 2. kinds thereof, that
is, Simplex, and Multiplex, and of their diverse kinds, with certain Tables
belonging thereunto Chap. 21.

Of proportion of the lesser inequality. Chap. 21.

Of Musical proportion, what it is, and of the two kinds thereof, that is,
Simple and compound, of which compound there be also 2. kinds that is proper
and improper. Chap. 22.

How proportions are to be set down in writing, and how they are to be added,
subtracted, multiplied, and divided even like to fractions in all respects.
Chap. 23.

How to find out the square root of any number with examples. Chap. 24.

The use of the square root in setting of Battles, which according to the
Italian use are to be set four manner of ways, the order whereof is here set
down with examples. Chap. 25.

How to find the cubique root of any number, and the order thereof with
examples. Chap. 26.

Of Astronomicall Fractions, vvhereto they serve, and how to add, subtract,
multiply, and to divide the same. Chap. 27.

How to divide such fractions when the divisor is greater than the dividend.
Chap. 28.

How to take the square root of Astronomicall Fractions. Chap. 29.

And immediately after these Chapters do follow the use of the Tables of
Sines, lines tangent, and lines secant before mentioned, together with the
Tables themselves.

To the Reader touching the order of finding and correcting the faults escaped
in printing.
FIrst, I pray you vouchsafe with your pen to correct the numbers of the
leaves of these books, which numbers are not in some leaves truly set down,
that done, for the rest of the faults resort to the Table following, which
consists of five collums, whereof the first on the left hand shows the true
number of the leaf, the second collum shows the page both first and second:
the third shows the line: in counting whereof you must begin at the head of
every page, and so proceed downward, leaving no printed line untold, though
it contains but one word, omitting notwithstanding such lines as do contain
the title of any chapter, so shall you be sure to find any fault mentioned in
the said Table, and the correction thereof hard by it on the right hand: for
the fourth collum of this Table contains the faults, and the fifth collum the
correction thereof: by help of which Table you may correct your own book,
where need is, in setting down the correction in the margent right against the
fault found.

Errata.
Leaf Page Line The faults. The Correction. 1 2 27 for, 4270570. read 43 20,
70. 2 1 15 for, what, read. Why. 3 2 5 for, calling, read Culling. 5 2 9 for,
squarewise, read squirewise. 10 1 32 for, limediate, read immediate. 24 2 33
for, the former 4. read the former doubled 4. 29 1 29 for, 2650. read 2550. 32
1 4 for, the productes, read the particular productes. 32 1 27 for, contain
many, read contain so many. 32 2 31 for, over 1. read over 1. 32 2 32 for,
appointing to his, read appointing to the product his 34 1 1 for, the number
must be 24. r. the number 24. must be 37 1 18 for, 53. read 50. 42 1 4 for, 10.
read 16. 42 2 23 for, 20. read 19. 53 1 16 for, 890. read 899. 56 2 13 for, 23.
degr. 38. read 23. degr. 28 131 1 30 for, precession, read precession. 137 2 13
for, ever the heaven, read every heaven, 139 2 3 for Anges, read Auges. 169 1
6 for returning, read returns. 173 1 16 for, or, read and. 181 1 32 for,
2160. miles, read 2160 b. miles. 193 2 6 for, Island, read Island. 199 2 5 for,
Aphiscii, read Amphiscii. 210 1 31 for, before fastened, read before taken. 215
2 2 for, the hour of the north, r. the hour of the night. 216 2 2 for, dawning
twilight, read dawning and twilight 217 1 28 for, the Celestial globe, read the
terrestrial Globe. 227 2 20 for, mere lately, read more lately. 229 2 7 for,
in a great sph are, read in a right sphere. 233 1 32 for, the 7. of Scorpio,
read the 8. of Scorpio. 236 2 16 for, 30. degrees. 47. of, read the 3. degrees. 47. of
249 1 22 for, Equinoctionall, read Equinoctial. 300 1 In the figure, for 1..
read. 1.

Of Arithmetike. Cap. 1.
WHat is Arithmetike?

It is the art of counting or numbering by figures.

What is to number by figures?

It is to express the value of any number in his proper Characters and
figures, which is called by a Latin name Numeration.

What belongs to Numeration?

Two things, to know the shapes of the figures, and the signification of their
places.

How many figures are there?

These ten. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 0. Whereof the tenth made like an. 0. as
you see here, is called a Cipher, which is no number of it self, but serves
only to fill up a number.

What is number?

Number is a collection or sum of many ones added together.

How is number divided?

Into three kinds, that is Digit, Article and compound.

Which be they?

The Digit is any of the first 9. figures before set down. Article is any
number ending in ten, as ten is one Article, twenty is two Articles, thirty
is three Articles, etc. Compound is that which is compounded of Article and
Digit, as 13. 14. 17. 24. etc.

Show what signification every Digit has according to his place, and in what
order such place is to be considered in expressing any number?

The order as touching the place, is to begin at the right hand, and so to
proceed toward the left hand. For any of the 9. Digits whatsoever, standing
in the first place, which is on the right hand, signifies the value of
himself only, in the second place ten times himself, in the third place
Hundredth times himself, in the fourth place a Thousand times himself, in the
fifth place ten Thousand times himself, in the sixth place a hundredth Thousand
times himself, in the seventh place a Myllion, in the eight place ten
Myllions, in the ninth place a hundredth Myllions in the tenth place a thousand
Myllions, etc.

Does the Cipher signify nothing?

Yes it makes a place wheresoever it stands, so as it be not the outermost
on the left hand: for there it has no place at all, as here you may see in
this number, 04500. whereof the first Cipher on the right hand, signifies the
first place, the second Cipher the second place, but the last and outermost
Cipher on the left hand, signifies no place at all, because it has no Digit
standing before it toward the left, hand, and therefore though in this number
there be 5. figures, yet it signifies no more but four Thousand and five
Hundredth.

By what means may a great number written in many figures, be readily
expressed or told?

By dividing the same into diverse parts with streekes, or pricks made at the
end of every third figure, beginning to tell from the right hand toward the
left, as in this number, 4/270/ 570. In which, beginning with the Cipher on the
right hand, I tell one, two, and three, and there make a Streeke, and so
proceeding forth still toward the left hand, I make a Streeke at the end of
every third figure, by which Streekes or partitions I make them now seuerst
numbers, and every Streeke must be named by this word Thousand.
Notwithstanding, in expressing this number being thus divided, or any other
such like, you must begin at the left hand, and say thus four Thousand
thousand, three Hundredth twenty Thousand, five Hundredth and seventy: for by
reason of this Division, the figure 4. stands here alone, and in the first
place, and in deed signifies 4. Myllions, and by that means, you may more
fitly express the said number in saying thus, four Myllions, three Hundredth
and twenty Thousand, five Hundredth and seventy: And the better to discern
the Myllions from ye rest in great numbers, it shall not be a miss to set an M.
signifiing Myllions, right over the head of y^ Streek which is drawn betwixt
the sixth and seventh figures, as in this example co^taining a leaven figures,
34/545 m / 678/694. which is to be uttered thus, thirty four Thousand, five
Hundredth forty five Myllions, six Hundredth seventy eight Thousand, six
Hundredth nintie and four Crowns, or Pounds, or whatsoever other denomination
or name, it shall please you to give them.

Of the four special kinds or parts of Arithmetike. Cap. 2.
WHich are those four kinds?

These, Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division.

What, is not Numeration also counted as a part?

Because Numeration together with the figures, and places whereof it
consists, are counted rather as first Elements, and principles of
Arithmetike, then as parts or special kinds thereof.

Of Addition.
WHat is Addition?

It is that which teaches to bring many several Sommes into one sum.

How is that done?

First by placing every several number one right under another, under which
you must draw a line, that done, you must add together the numbers of the
first rank, beginning on the right hand with the lowest figure of the same
rank, and so going upward to the highest figure of the same rank, and so
from rank to rank, til you come to the last, and if the Sum of any rank
do not exceed the number of any of the foresaid 9. Digits, then set down
that Digit which comprehends that number right under his proper rank,
beneath the line, but if the Sum of that rank, exceeds the number of any
one Digit by reason that it consists of Articles and Digits, then set down
the Digit and keep the Article or Articles in your mind, to be added to the
first figure of the next rank on the left hand, but if the Sum be an even
Article or Articles: then set down a Cipher, keeping the number of Article or
Articles in your mind, be it, one, two, or three, to be added to the next
rank, all which things you shall better understand by this example here
following. As for example, I spent in one year 125. l. in another year 234.
l, and in another year 240. l. Now to know the total Sum of all this, I
place these several Sommes one right under another. l
125. 234. 240. 599.
and then I draw a line under them as here you see.

Then beginning on the right hand with the lowest figure of the first rank
above the line, I say that a Cipher and 4. is but 4. Again 4. and 5. makes 9.
which I set down under ye line, then proceeding to the second rank toward
the left hand, I say that 4. and 3. makes 7. and 7. and 2. makes 9. which I
also set down, then remoouing to the third rank, I say that 2. and 2.
makes 4. and 4. and 1. makes 5. which I also set down as you see in the
former example, so as the total Sum under the line is. 599. l.

Another example having Ciphers mixed with Digits.

3047. 4508. 3049. 10/604.
Here I say that 9. and 8. makes 17. and 17. and 7 makes 24. wherefore I set
down the Digit 4. and keep 2. Articles in mind, which being added to the
lowest figure of the second rank, which is 14. makes 6. then 6. and 4.
makes 10. here I set down a Cipher, keeping one Article in mind, which being
added to the figure 5. of the third rank makes 6. which I also set down,
then I say that 3. and 4. makes 7. and 7. and 3. makes 10. for the which I
set down first a Cipher, and then because there is no more to be added. I set
down on the left hand the one Article which I had in mind, so as the whole
Sum comes to 10/604. as in the former example.

How are pounds, shillings, pence, half pence, and farthings and all other
numbers of diverse Denominations to be added?

You must divide every several name into diverse Collums or Spaces by
themselves, and then beginning with the first on the right hand, you must add
every Collum by it self, bringing farthings to half pence, and half pence to
pence, pence to shillings, and shillings to pounds, setting the Sum of every
Collum under the nether line as you see in this example following.

l s^ d ob. que 345 13 1 0 1 234 11 0 1 1 45 14 9 1 0 320 6 8 1 1 946 5 8 0 1

Here first beginning with the Collum of farthings, I find therein 3.
farthings which is one half penny and one farthing. Wherefore I set down the
od farthing as you see, and keep the half penny in mind: then adding the
half penny in mind to the lowest half penny of the second Collum, I say
that 1. in mind and 1. makes 2. and 2. and 1. makes 3. then 3. and 1. makes
4. which 4. half pence because they make just two pence, I set down a Cipher
keeping the two pence in mind, which two pence being added to 8. makes 10.
then 10. and 9. makes 19. and 19. and 1. makes 20: How because that 20. d.
makes one shilling and 8. d. I set down the 8. d. keeping the shilling in
mind, which on shilling being added to the 6. of the next Collum makes 7.
then 7. and 4. makes 11. and 11. and 1. makes 12. then 12. and 3. makes 15.
wherefore I set down 5. keeping the Article in mind, which being added to one
of the next Collum makes 2. and 2. and 1. makes 3. and 3. and one makes 4.
Articles, which 4. Articles makes 40. s^ which is two pound which I keep in
mind, and therefore I add the 2. l. to the Collum of pounds, saying that 2.
and 5. makes 7. and 7. and 4. makes a 11. and 11. and 5. makes 16. wherefore
I set down 6. keeping the one Article in mind, which being added to 2. of the
next Collum, makes 3. then 3. and 4. makes 7. and 7. and 3. makes 10. then
10. and 4. makes 14. wherefore I set down 4. keeping one Article in mind,
which being added to 3. of the next Collum makes 4. then 4. and 2. makes 6.
and 6. and 3. makes 9. which I also set down, so as the total Sum
amounts to 946. l. 5. s^. 8. d. no half penny, one farthing as you see in
the former example.

How shall I know whether these several Sommes be truly added or not?

Some do teach it to be done by calling out all the nines, which way is more
tedious then sure: for the surest trial indeed is to be done by Subtracting
the several Sommes out of the total Sum, of which Subtraction we come now
to speak, for all the four special kinds are tried one by an other.

Of Subtraction. Cap. 3.
WHat does Subtraction teach?

It teaches to take a lesser number out of a greater and to see what remains.

What is to be observed in this kind?

First, you must set down your greater number above, and then the lesser
number right under the same. As for example, I have lent to one 564. l. and he
has paid me thereof 57. l. Here to know what remains, I first set down
the number lent, and under that the number paid, and then draw a line as you
see in this manner.

Lent. 564. l. Paid. 57. l.
Here beginning on the right hand, I first say, take 7. out of 4. that cannot
be: wherefore I take one Article of the next figure or place of the lent
number, which Article being added to 4. makes 14. then I say take 7. out of
14. and there remains 7. which I set down under the 4. then I add that one
Article which I borrowed, to the second figure of the paid number which is 5.
saying that 5. and 1. in mind makes 6. then take 6. out of 6. and there
remains nothing, wherefore I set down a Cipher, under the 5. of the paid
number, then I proceed to the third figure of the lent number, which is 5. and
because I find nothing written under it, nor have nothing in mind to take out
of it, I say, take nothing out of 5. and their remains still 5. so as the
remainder is 507. l as you see in this example following.

Lent. 564. l. Paid. 57. l. Remain. 507
How shall I know whether this be right or not?

By adding the remainder and the number paid together, the Sum whereof (if
you have done well) will be all one with the number lent, as in the former
example, I first add 7. and 7. together and that makes 14. wherefore
according to the precepts of Addition before taught, I set down 4. keeping the
Article in mind, then I say, one in mind and 5. makes 6. which I also set
down, then I say nothing and 5. is 5. which I set down in the third place,
which in all makes 564. a number equal to the number lent, as you see here
following.

Lent, 564. l. Paid. 57: Remain. 507. Proof. 564.
You may perceive by this, that if any figure of the paid number be greater
then the figure over him, out of the which it is to be Subtracted, you must
always borrow one Article of his next fellow, to be added again to him in his
proper place. But you have to note, that having to deal with numbers of
diverse Denominatio^s, the^ in borrowing any number, you must always have
respect to the Denomination or name of the thing, from whence you borrow, as in
borrowing from shillings you borrow 12. and not 10. from pounds you borrow not
one Article but 2. Articles which do make 20. s^ but when the whole number is
altogether of one self Denomination, then you must always borrow one Article
which is 10. to make up your number yt wants. As you shall more plainly
perceive by this example containing numbers of diverse Denominations, as of
pounds, shillinges and pence, half pence, and farthings. Suppose therefore
that you have lent to one 467. l 13. s^. 4. d. ob. q. and he has paid you
again thereof, 89. l. 16. s^. 9. d. ob. q. Here having set down the Sum
lent in several Collums, according to their diverse names, and then the Sum
paid, right under the same, draw a line as you see in this example following.

l s^ d ob que Lent. 467 13 4 1 1 Paid. 89 16 9 1 0 Remain. 377 16 7 0 1

Here beginning with the first Collum on the right hand, I say take nothing out
of one, and one still remains, which I set down, then proceeding to the next,
I say take one out of one and nothing remains, wherefore I set down a
Cipher, then proceeding to the next Collum, I say take 9. out of 4. that cannot
be, wherefore I borrow a shilling of the next Collum that is 12. d. which
being added to 4. makes 16. pence, then I say take 9. out of 16. and there
remains 7. which I set down, then proceeding to the next, I add the one
shilling which I borrowed, to the 16. which makes 17. s^. then I say take 17.
s^. out of 13. s^. that cannot be. wherefore I borrow one pound which is 2.
Articles of the next rank, yt is 20. s^. which being added to the 13. s^.
makes 33. s^. then I say take 17. out of 33. s^. and there remains 16. s^.
which I set down, then I add the one pound which I borrowed, to 9. and that
makes 10. then I say take 10. out of 7. that cannot be, wherefore I borrow one
Article out of the next 6. which being added to the 7. makes 17. then I say
take 10. out of 17. and there remains 7. which I set down, then the one,
which I borrowed, I add to the 8. of the next rank, and that makes 9.
Again I say take 9. out of 6. that cannot be: wherefore I borrow one Article of
the next 4. which being added to 6. makes 16. then I say take 9. out of 16 and
there remains 7. which I set down, then I take the one which I borrowed out
of the 4. and there remains 3. so as the remainder is as you see in ye former
example. 377. l. 16. s^. 7. d. 0. q.

How shall I try whether this be true or not?

By adding the remainder and the Sum paid together: as in the former example,
and of that Addition, will rise if you have done truly a Sum like in every
condition to the Sum lent: In making which proof or trial you cannot
lightly err, if you remember to reduce pence to shillings, and shillings to
pounds, and therefore in the Collum of pence, no particular Sum can be above
11. d, nor in the Collum of shillings no particular sum can be above 19, s^
for if it be 20, s^, then it is a pound and must be brought to the Collum of
pounds,

Of Multiplication. Cap. 4.
WHat is Multiplication?

It is the producing or bringing forth of a third number, by Multiplying two
other numbers the one into the other: And it consists of three numbers, that
is the multiplycand, the multiplyer, and the product.

What signify those names?

The Multiplicand is that number which is to be multiplied, and the multiplyer
is that whereby the same is multiplied, and the product is the Sum of such.
Multiplicatio^: As for example, if I would multiply 4. by 3. as in saying 3.
times 4. makes 12. here the number of 4. is the Multiplycand, and the number
3. is the multiplyer, and the number 12. is the product of that Multiplycation.

What order is to be observed in multiplying, and how are those numbers to be
set?

Before I teach you the true order of multiplying, I think it good to set your
down a table of Multiplycation, which unless you learn perfectly by heart,
you shall never multiply readily nor quickly.

The Table of Multiplycation.
2 2 4 2 3 6 2 4 8 2 5 10 2 6 12 2 7 14 2 8 16 2 9 18 2 10 20 3 3 9 3 4 12 3 5
15 3 6 18 3 7 21 3 8 24 3 9 27 3 10 30 4 4 16 4 5 20 4 6 24 4 7 28 4 8 32 4 9
36 4 10 40 5 5 25 5 6 30 5 7 35 5 8 40 5 9 45 5 10 50 6 6 36 6 7 42 6 8 48 6 9
54 6 10 60 7 7 49 7 8 56 7 9 63 7 10 70 8 8 64 8 9 72 8 10 80 9 9 81 9 10 90 10
10 100

How is this Table to be read?

In this manner, 2. times 2. makes. 4. and 2. times 3. makes 6. and 2. times
4. makes 8. and so forth: multiplying still one Digit by another, until you
come to a 100. for this Table serves only for Digits, which may be made to
extend so far as you will, and until you have learned the foresaid Table
without book, you may help your self with this other Table of Digits made
squire-wise as you see here.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2 9 12 15 18 21
24 27 3 16 20 24 28 32 36 4 25 30 35 40 45 5 36 42 48 54 6 49 56 63 7 64 72 8
81 9

In the front of which Table are set down the 9. Digits beginning on the left
hand, and so proceeding to the right hand, from 1. to 9. Again on the right
side of the said Table are set down the foresaid 9. Digits, beginning above,
and so proceeding right down from 1. to 9. the use whereof is thus, first
seek the Digit to be Multiplied in the front, and seek the other whereby you
have to multiply the same on the right hand, and the square Angle aunswering to
these. 2. Digits will show the product of such Multiplycation. As for example
having to multiply 7. by 6. I first seek the greater Digit which is 7. in the
front, and the lesser which is 6. on the right hand, the product whereof I
find in the square Angle answering both to 7. and to 6. to be 42. and the like
is to be observed in any 2. Digits that are of like value as 7. times 7. the
product whereof is 49. But the first Table being perfectly learned without
book, whenever you have to multiply one number by another, you must observe
these rules here following.

First that you set down the first figure of your multiplyer right under the
first figure of the number that is to be multiplied, on the right hand, and
then orderly to place the rest of the figures of your multiplyer, be they few
or many, toward your left hand, directly under the rest of the figures of the
number that is to be multiplied, for if the figures stand not in order one
right over another it will breed a confusion in your working. Secondly you
must not forget to multiply all the figures of the number that is to be
multiplied, by the first figure of your multiplyer before you deal with the
next multiplyer, beginning always on your right hand, and so to proceed from
one to another, whereby you shall make as many several products as there be
figures in your multiplyer. Thirdly you must remember to set down the first
figure of every several product, right under the figure of that multiplyer,
whereby you do multiply, and having ended your Multiplication, draw a line
under the several products: yt done, ad the several products together
according to the rules of Addition, and the Sum thereof shall be the total or
general product of that Multiplycation: al which rules you shall the better
understand by working this example following. Suppose the^ that you would know
how many hours there are in a year, knowing first yt a year consists of
365. days, here because that every natural day contains 24. hours
comprehending both day and night, you have to multiply 365. by 24. and
therefore you must first set down 365. because it is the greater number, and is
the multiplycand, which must always stand above, and right under yt, your
multiplyer which is 24. is to be set down in his due place, according to the
Rules before taught thus as you see here. 365. the multiplica^d 24. the
multiplier.
Then say thus 4. times 5. makes 20. and having set down a Cipher right under
the 4. keep the 2. Articles in mind, the^ say 4. times 6. is 24. and 2. in mind
is 26. here set down 6. and keep 2. in mind, then say 4. times 3. is 12. which
with the 2. in mind makes 14. here first set down the 4. under the 3. and
because you can proceed no further: you must therefore set down hard by the
4. on the left hand the one Article which you had in mind, then having
cancelled the first figure of the multiplyer, by making a Dash through it with
your pen, as you see in the example following: Proceed with the other figure
of the multiplyer, saying that 2. times 5. makes 10. wherefore set down a
Cipher right under the said 2. keeping the one Article in mind, then say 2.
times 6. is 12. and one in mind makes 13. wherefore set down 3. and keep one
in mind, then say 2. times 3. is 6. which with one in mind makes 7. the
which you must set down, and because you have made an end of your
Multiplycation, cancel the 2. and draw another line under the 2. several
products, that done, ad together whatsoever is contained betwixt the two lines,
and you shall find the general product to be 8/760. hours.

The multiplycand. 365. The multiplyer. 24. The several products. 1460. 730.
The general product or total Some. 8760.
How shall I know whether the last Multiplycation be right or not?

By dividing the general product by the Multiplyer, for in so doing your
quotient will be like unto the first Sum that was Multiplied, which you
cannot do, until such time as you have learned to divide, and therefore having
first showed certain compendious ways of Multiplycation, I will then proceed
to Division.

Certain compendious ways of Multiplycation.
When is any such way to be used?

When the Multiplyer beginning on the right hand with one Cipher or with many,
ends on the left hand with the digit 1. as these numbers following,
10/100/1000/etc.

Why what is then to be done?

If you have to Multiply by 10. then you have no more to do, but to set down
on the right hand of the number that is to be Multiplied, one Cipher, if by a
100. then 2. Ciphers, if by a 1000. then 3. Ciphers, as for example: if you
would Multiply 365. by 10. then by setting down on the right hand one Cipher
as has been said, the product will be 3/650. if you set down 2. Ciphers the
product will be 36/500. if you set down 3. Ciphers, then the product will be
365/000.

What if the number do end on the left hand with any other Digit, as 2. 3. or
more, as 200. 300. 400?

Then you must Multiply the number of the Multiplycand first by that Digit, and
then add to the end of the product on the right hand all the Ciphers annexed
to the said Digit, as if you would Multiply 365. by 200. First say 2. times 5.
makes 10. and 2. 6. and one in mind is 13. and so to proceed in Multiplying
every figure of the Multiplycand by 2. and you shall find the product to be
730. whereunto if you add on the right hand 2. Ciphers the whole product will
be 73/000.

Of Division. Cap. 5.
WHat is Division?

Division is that whereby any number is divided into as many parts as you will.

How many numbers are incident to Division and how are they called?

These 4. that is to say, the number which is to be divided which is called the
dividend, the second number whereby you do divide which is called the Divisor,
the third number is called the quotient, which shows how many times the
Divisor is comprehended in the dividend, and the fourth number is called the
remainder, if any be.

What order is to be observed in Division?

This here following, first set down your dividend and directly under that,
beginning on the left hand, set down your Divisor, that is to say the first
figure of your Divisor right under the first figure of your dividend on the
left hand, and so consequently one after another proceeding toward the right
hand, which is always to be done, so often as your Divisor does not exceed in
quantity, the figure standing right over his head, for if it do, then you
must remove your Divisor one figure further toward the right hand. As for
example if you would divide 487. by 53. you must not set the first figure of
your Divisor which is 5. under the first figure of your dividend, which is but
4. but under the second figure of your dividend which is 8. for you cannot take
53. out of 48. and therefore you must set the first figure of your Divisor,
under the second figure of the dividend, and so follow on with the rest and
then draw a line as you see here in this example following.

What is the^ to be done? The dividend. 487. The divisor. 53.
(9. the quotient

Then you must ask how many times 5. is comprehended in 48. and you shall
find that 5. is comprehended in 48. 9. times which 9. being the quotient, must
be placed on your right hand, behind a crooked line made like a half Moon as
you see in the example above, then Multiply the first figure of the Divisor by
the quotient 9. and the product thereof shall be 45. which being taken out of
48. there will remain 3. which you must set down over the head of 8. and
streeke out the 48. and also the first figure of your Divisor which is 5. that
done Multiply the second figure of your divisor which is 3. by the foresaid
quotient which is 9. and the product thereof will be 27. which being taken out of
37. there remains 10. which you must set over the head of 37. and cancel the
37. and also the 3. beneath, as you see in this example following. ^

Wherein you see that the dividend is 487. the Divisor 53 the quotient 9. and
the remainder 10. which if you will apply to any use you may imagine that there
is 487. l. to be divided amongst 53. soldiers, and by working as before, you
shall find that every Soldier must have 9. l. and there shall be remaining 10.
l. to be divided amongst the foresaid 53. Soldiers, which 10. l. being
reduced to shillings, may be divided amongst the Soldiers as well as the
pounds: As for example if you Multiply 10. l. by 20. s^. it will make 200. s^.
which being divided by 53. the first Divisor, the quotient will be 3. s^. and
the remainder 41. s^. and that being reduced into pence, which is done by
Multiplying 41. by 12. the quotient, will be 9. d. and the remainder 15. d.
which if you Multiply by 4. you shall reduce them to farthings, the product
whereof will be 60. which product being divided by 53. the first Divisor you
shall find in the quotient 1. farthing and the remainder to be 7/53 of a
farthing, the value of which Fraction how to find out is taught hereafter when
we come to speak of Fractions. So as you see by this means that every
Soldier shall have for his share 9. l. 3. s^. 9. d. q. and some what more a
thing of no moment.

How many things are to be remembered in Division?

These five Rules here following. First that you put no number at one time in
the quotient above 9. Secondly to moderate your quotient in such sort, as
having Multiplied the first figure of the Deuisor by the quotient, there may
remain sufficient for the next figure of the Divisor being Multiplied by the
quotient to be deducted out of that number which stands right over his head.
Thirdly that you Multiply every figure contained in the Divisor by the
quotient. Fourthly that if at any time in working it happens so as your
Divisor is not comprehended in the number over his head, then to put a Cipher
in the quotient and to remove your Divisor one figure further toward the right
hand, and that done to work as before. Fifthly to see that the last remainder,
if there be any left, do not exceed in quantity the Divisor, all which
things you shall better understand by this one example following: Suppose then
that you have to divide 819096. by 92. here having set down your dividend and
Divisor in such order as is before taught, and as you see here in this example.
^

First ask how many times 9. is in 81. and you shall find the quotient to be
8. which being Multiplied into 9. makes 72. which if you take out of 81. there
shall remain 9. which must be set down over the head of the figure 1. and
cancel the said 81. together with the first figure of the Divisor, which is 9.
then say 2. times 8. is 16. which being Subtracted out of 99. there remains
83. which you must set over the head of the 99. and cancel the 99. that is
above, and also the 2. beneath, as you see in the former example. That done
remove your Divisor toward the right hand, that is to say by setting the last
figure of your Divisor which is 2. under the next Cipher on the right hand, and
place the first figure of your Divisor which is 9. next to that toward the
left hand: then ask how many times 9. is comprehended in 83. and you shall
find 9. times, which 9. must be set down in the quotient next to the 8. then
say 9. times 9. is 81. which being taken out of 83. there remains 2. then
having set down the 2. over the head of 3. cancel the 83. above and also the
9. beneath, then Multiply the last figure of the Divisor which is 2. by the 9.
which is in the quotient, and the product thereof is 18. which being taken out
of 20. there remains 2. which 2. must be set down over the Cipher, and the
Cipher cancelled and also the 2. beneath, as you see in this example following.
^

That done remove your Divisor one figure further toward the right hand by
setting the 2. under the 9. which is the last figure save one of the dividend,
and place the first figure of your Divisor which is 9. next to that on the left
hand, then ask how many times 9. is contained in 2. and you shall find none,
wherefore you must set down a Cipher in the quotient and cancel the Divisor
as you see in this example ^

That done remove your Divisor again by setting the 2. under the last figure
of the diuide^d and place the 9. next to that on the left hand, then ask how
many times 9. is contained in 29. and you shall find 3. times, which 3. you
must set down in the quotient as you see in the example following, then
Multiply the first figure of your Divisor which is 9. by 3. and the product
thereof will be 27. which being taken out of 29. there will remain 2. which 2.
you must set over the head of 9 and cancel the 9. above, together with the 9.
beneath, then Multiply the 3. which is in the quotient by the last figure of
your Divisor which is 2. and the product thereof will be 6. which being taken
out of 26. there remains 20. wherefore you must set down a Cipher over the
6. which is the last figure of the dividend, and cancel the said 6. above, and
also the 2. beneath and then you have done rightly, and in such order as all
the former examples and this also next following do plainly show. ^

For here you see that ye diuidende is 819/096. the Divisor 92. the quotient
8903. and the remainder 20. which remainder must be set on the right hand of
the quotient over the Divisor, having a line drawn betwixt them as you see in
the last example.

How shall I know whether I have divided truly or not?

By Multiplying the quotient by your Divisor and by adding to the product
thereof the remainder, for so shall you have a number like to the first
dividend if you have wrought well, if not, then your Sum will be either more
or less then the dividend.

Certain compendious ways of Division.
IS there no shorter way of Division?

No, unless the Divisor has one Cipher or more on the right hand, for then
you may use a breefer way by cutting off the last figure, or figures of the
dividend: As for example if you had to divide 3708. by 10. here cut off the
last figure 8. with a dash of your pen in this wise 370/8. and the quotient
will be 370. and the remainder shall be 8. Again if you had to divide the
foresaid number by 100. then cut off the 2. last figures of the dividend, that
is the 8. and the cipher standing next it, and then the quotient will be but 37.
and the remainder 8. as before. but if you have to divide any number by 1000.
then you must cut off 3. figures of the dividend, and so forth, remembering
always for every Cipher in the Divisor, to cut off one figure or Cipher of the
dividend.

Of halfing any number.
HOw is that done?

By dividing the number by 2. As for example, if you would know the half of
3708. divide the same by 2. and you shall find the quotient to be 1854. which
is the just one half of the dividend.

Of the Rule of three otherwise called the golden Rule whereof there be three
kinds, that is, the common Rule, the rule Reuerse, and the Double rule. Cap. 6.
WHerefore is it called the Rule of three?

Because that by 3. known numbers, it teaches you to find out a fourth
number unknown.

How are such 3. numbers to be placed?

The first is to be placed on the left hand, the third on the right hand, and
the second in the midst betwixt both.

How shall I know in what place each one is to be set?

By marking to what number the question is annexed, for yt must always be the
third number, and having the third number, you shall quickly have the first,
because the first and third must always be of one self Denomination or name,
betwixt which two, the second number is to be placed: As for example let this
be the question. If I pay 35. s^. for 13. yards of Linen cloth, how much
shall I pay for 3. yards, here because the question is annexed to the number 3.
yards, that must be the third number and is to be placed on the right hand,
then because that the number 13. yards is of the self same Denomination, that
must be the first number, and is to be placed on the left hand, and the number
35. s^. (which is the price) is to be placed in the midst betwixt the other
two, as you see here following. yards, s^. yards: 13. 35. 3.

Now must you make your question in this manner, if 13. yards did cost me 35.
s^. what shall 3. yards cost me, and so the first and last shall be of one
Denomination or name, that is to sayyards.

What order is to be observed in working by this rule?

You must Multiply the third and second numbers the one into the other, and
divide the product there of by the first, and the quotient will show you what
the fourth number should be, which fourth number is always of like
Denomination to the second or middle number, as in the former example, first
Multiply 35. by 3. and the product will be 105. which if you divide by 13. the
quotient will be 8. s^. and one third of a shilling which is 4. d. and that is
the price of 3. yards which is the number that you seek to know. And this is
the common kind of working by the Rule of 3. whereof it is called the common
Rule of three.

What if there be diverse Denominations either of Coin as of pounds,
shillings, and pence, or parts of yards, as quarters, and half quarters, and
such like?

Then you must reduce them all to the smallest Denomination which belongs to
Fractions, whereof we come now to treat of.

Of Fractions. Cap. 7.
WHat are Fractions?

They are broken parts of some whole thing called in Latin Integrum.

What is Integrum?

Any thing that is whole, and not broken, or divided into parts: As one whole
yard, a pound, a shilling.

Of how many numbers does a Fraction consist?

Of two, that is the Numerator, and the denominator, whereof the Numerator is
always set above, and the denominator beneath, having a little line drawn
betwixt them thus which signifies one second or one half, again two thirds
and three fourths are written thus, 23/34 whereof the first signifies two
thirds, and the other three fourths and such like.

What is meant by these two words Numerator, and Denominator, and whereto serve
they?

The denominator is as much to say as the namer of the parts, which shows
into how many parts the Integrum is to be divided, and the Numerator is as much
to say as the Numberer, and shows how many of those parts are to be taken: As
for example of a shilling, here the nethermost called the denominator, shows
that the shilling is to be divided into three parts, as into three groats, and
the upper number called the Numerator, shows that you must take 2. out of
those 3. parts, so as of a shilling is as much to say as 2. groats or 8. d.
Again Fractions may be divided into two kinds, that is, into simple Fractions,
and into Fractions of Fractions.

Define those two kinds?

Simple Fractions are such as I speak of before which are the first and
limediate parts of any Integrum that is divided into parts, but if those
Fractions be divided into more Fractions, then are they called Fractions of
Fractions, as when I say three fourthes of two thirds, of six seuenthes and
such like.

How are such Fractions to be set down in writing?

In manner of simple Fractions thus of of 6/7.

Make some demonstration of this example that I may the better understand it?

Imagine that there is a whole piece of Gold of vii. s^. as our Angel in times
past has been, which vii. s^. be the vii. parts of that piece of Gold, for
trial whereof lay down before you vii. twelve penny pieces of Silver, or in
steed thereof vii counters, to signify those vii. parts, of which vii. parts
you must first take away vi. rejecting or laying a side the od seventh part,
then divide those 6. parts into 3. parts, and every such part will be just 2.
s^. of which 3. parts you must take away 2. parts that is 4. s^. rejecting the
other third part which remains, that done, divide those 2. parts which you
have taken away into 4. parts, which is 4. s^. and take 3. of them rejecting
the fourth part, so shall you find that of of 6/7 of the foresaid piece of
Gold is just 3. s^. and there remains still of the parts rejected 4. s^.
which being added to 3. s^. that was taken away, do make up again the whole
Integrum of 7. s. Notwithstanding Fractions of Fractions do seeldome chance
in the Division of any number, but if they do, you must reduce them into
simple Fractions, before you can deal with them any manner of way, and because
there are diverse rules belonging to Fractions, without the knowledge whereof
you can nether add, nor subtract them, nor yet join them with any Integrum, I
will briefly set down here seven necessary rules for the same.

Seven necessary Rules belonging to Fractions.
What does the first rule teach?

To bring Fractions of Fractions into simple Fractions.

How is that done?

Thus, Multiply the first Numerator into the second, and if there be any more
Fractions, then Multiply also the said product of the first two Numerators into
the third Numerator, and that shall be the Numerator of the simple Fraction,
then Multiply the denominators in like manner, and the Sum thereof shall be
the denominator of the simple Fraction, as in the former example of of 6/7 here
I Multiply the first 2. Numerators together, in saying 2. times 3. makes 6.
now because I have a third Numerator, I multiply the product of the first 2.
Numerators, which is 6. into the third Numerator which is also 6. saying, 6.
times 6. makes 36. and that shall be the Numerator of the simple Fraction,
which I set down. Then by Multiplying the 3. denominators in like manner, I
find the denominator of the simple Fraction to be 84. the which I set down
under the 36. and draw a line betwixt them so as now I find that of of 6/7 do
make 36/84 which indeed is no more but 3/7 as you shall learn hereafter by the
sixth rule.

What does the second rule teach?

To bring Fractions being more in value then Integrums into integrums.

When are Fractions said to be more then integrums?

When the Numerator is a greater number the^ the denominator, for if they be
both of like value as 34/34 and such like, then such Fraction is an even
integrum.

How shall I know how many Integrums such Fractions as be more then Integrums
do contain?

By dividing the Numerator by the denominator, and if any thing remain, write
that above the denominator, as in this example 806/7 here if you divide 806. by
7. which is the denominator, you shall find the quotient to contain 115.
Integrums, and the remainder to be 1. which is 1/7.

What does the third rule teach?

To bring Integrums into parts by Multiplying the number of the Integrums by
the denominator of those parts, as if you would bring 64. yards into quarters,
Multiply 64. by 4. and there will arise thereof 256. quarters.

What does the fourth rule teach?

It teaches to bring Integrums having Fractions annexed to them, into one
Fraction.

How is that done?

Multiply the number of the Integrums by the denominator of the Fraction, and
then add to the product the Numerator of the said Fraction, and that sum
shall be the Numerator, under which write the denominator aforesaid, and so you
shall find that 23. Integrums having annexed thereunto shall make ^1/3.

What does the fifth rule teach?

It teaches to express a Fraction written with many figures, in so few as
may be.

How shall I do that?

Thus, find out some number that may first divide the Numerator, and then the
denominator severally by themselves, without leaving in either of them any
remainder, and the quotient of the first Division will show the Numerator, and
the quotient of the second Division will show the denominator, but if you
cannot readily find out a number that will divide them both without leaving
some remainder, then leave not to Subtract the lesser number out of the
greater, until you find two like numbers, by one of the which two like
numbers divide both the Numerator, and also the denominator severally as
before, and the quotient will show that which you seek: but if such 2. like
numbers cannot be found, then you may assure your self that the Fraction
cannot be written in fewer figures then they already be.

Give examples of these two ways?

For example of the first way, suppose that you would express 9/12 in lesser
numbers, here seek out some number that may divide euenly both the Numerator,
and also the denominator, without leaving in either of them any remainder,
which by dividing each of them by the number of 3. you may do: For by asking
how many times 3. is contained in 9. the quotient will be 3. and in asking how
many times 3 is contained in 12. the quotient shall be 4. so shall you find
9/12 to be no more then. Now for example of the second way, let 27/81 be the
Fraction which you would set down in fewer figures, here because you cannot
readily find out a number that will euenly divide both the Numerator and the
denominator, Subtract the lesser out of the greater, that is to say 27. out of
81. and there will still remain 54. from which Subtract 27. and there will
remain 27. which 2. numbers because they are both like, divide the Numerator
and denominator of the foresaid Fraction, each of them by one of these numbers,
that is to say, by 27. and the quotient of the first Division will show you the
Numerator which is 1. and the quotient of the second Division will show you the
denominator which is 3. so as you shall find to be as much in value as 27/81 and
note that when there be Ciphers both in the Numerator and in the denominator
standing in such sort as they may be euenly cut off, the remainder will show
the fewest figures, where in the Fraction may be written as 200/500 here by
cutting off the two Ciphers as well beneath as above the line, with a dash of
your pen in this manner 00/00 the remainder shall be which is as much in
value as 200/500.

What does the sixth rule teach?

It teaches to find out the value of the Fraction of any integrum.

How is that done?

Thus, Multiply the Numerator by the known parts of the Integrum, and divide
the product thereof by the denominator, so shall you have the value of the
Fraction: As for example, if you would know the value of of an Angel, consider
first what parts an Angel has, and you shall find the parts thereof to be 10.
s. or 30. groats, here if you Multiply 3. by 10. s. it will make 30. s. which
being divided by 4. you shall find in the quotient 7. s. and the remainder to
be 2/4 or one half of a shilling, which is 6. d. Again if you Multiply 3. by
30. groates it will make 90. groats, which being divided by 4. you shall find
in the quotient 22. groats, and the remainder to be 2/4 or one half of a groat
which is 2. pence, making in all 7. s. 6. d. like unto the first Sum, so as
you see that of an Angel is 7. s. 6. d. and thus you may deal with the
Fractions of any other Integrum that has known parts.

What does the seventh rule teach?

It teaches to bring Fractions of diverse denominations to one self
denomination, without the which nether Addition, nor Subtraction of Fractions
can be made: As for example if you would add and together, you must first
bring them to one self denomination thus, Multiply the denominators the one
into the other, and the product thereof shall be a common denominator to both
the Fractions, wherefore say 3. times 5. do make 15. which must be set down
in 2. several places by them selves thus, 15. and 15. then Multiply the
Numerator of the first Fraction into the denominator of the second, as 2. into
5. makes 10. which set down over the first common denominator thus 10/15 then
Multiply the Numerator of the second Fraction into the denominator of the first
Fraction, as 4. into 3. which makes 12. and that must be likewise set down
over the second common denominator thus 12/15 so shall you find that and are
all one in value with 10/15 and 12/15.

Addition of Fractions. Cap. 8.
HOw are Fractio^s to be added together?

Fractions being first brought to one denomination are easily added, for then
you have no more to do but to add the Numerators together, and to write the
common denominator under the Sum of such Addition, as in the former example,
10/15 being added to 12/15 makes 22/15 but if the denominators be not like,
then you must make them like by the seventh rule before taught.

What if there be three Fractions of diverse denominations to be added together
as?

Then having reduced the 2. first to one self denomination add the 2.
Numerators together and write under the Sum thereof the common denominator,
that done, deal with that Fraction last found, and with the third as you did
before with the 2. Fractions that had diverse denominations, and so you shall
find that and being first brought to one denomination, and then added together
do make 17/12. whereto if you will add. then you must bring them again to
one self denomination, and so you shall find that 17/12. and do make 85/60.
and 48/60. which last 2. Numerators being added together do make in all
133/60. which is 2. Integrums and 13/60.

Subtraction of Fractions.
HOw are Fractions to be Subtracted, one out of another, or out of Integrums?

First make the denominators like as you did before in Addition, then take the
lesser Numerator out of the greater, and under the remainder thereof write the
common denominator, so shall you find that 3/7. being taken out of 6/7. there
remains 3/7. but if you would Subtract Fractions out of Integrums, then you
must take one of the Integrums and break it into parts. As for example, to
Subtract 3/7. out of 9. Integrums take one from 9. and break it into parts
making it 7/7. for that is one Integrum, for whenever the Numerator is made
like and equal to the denominator, it signifies one Integrum, then take 3/7.
out of 7/7. and there remains 4/7. and 8. integrums.

What is to be observed in breaking the integrum?

In breaking the Integrum, you are to be directed always by the denominator of
the Fraction which you have to Subtract, for the Integrum which should be the
Numerator, must be equal in value to the said denominator, as before is said.

Multiplycation of Fractions.
HOw are Fractions to be Multiplied by Fractions, or Integrums by Fractions?

As touching Fractions, Multiply the Numerators one into another, and the
product thereof shall be the Numerator, then Multiply the denominators in like
manner, and the product thereof shall be the denominator, so shall you find that
5/7. being Multiplied by. do make 15/28. But if you would Multiply integrums
by Fractions, then Multiply the integrums by the Numerator of the Fraction, and
under the product thereof, set down the denominator of the same Fraction,
drawing a line betwixt them, so shall you find that 20. integrums being
Multiplied by 5/12. do make 100/12. that is to say 8. integrums and 4/12.
which is, etc.

Division of Fractions.
HOw are Fractions to be divided by Fractions, or integrums by Fractions, or
Fractions by integrums?

The diuison of Fractions is done by Multiplycation thus, first set down your
dividend on the left hand, and the Divisor always on the right hand, and then
draw 2. cross lines like a Saint Andrews cross betwixt them, which shall
direct you in your working: As for example, if you would divide. by. set them
down dividend thus divisor work as follows, first Multiply the Numerator of
the dividend, by the denominator of the Divisor, and the product there of
shall be the Numerator, then Multiply the denominator of the dividend, by the
Numerator of the Divisor, and that shall be the denominator, so shall you find
that. being divided by. there remains 10/12. that is. but if you would divide
Integrums by Fractions, or co^trarywise Fractions by Integrums, then make of
the Integrums a Fraction, by setting down 1. in the place of a denominator
under the Integrums, and work as before, so shall you find that 7/1. Integrums
being divided by. do make 28/3. contrarily if you divide. by 7/1. Integrums
there will arise 3/28.

What if I have to divide Fractions annexed to integrums?

Then you must first reduce each Integrum with his Fraction annexed, into one
self Fraction by the fourth rule of Fractions before taught. As for example,
if you would divide 9. Integrums having. thereunto annexed, by 3. Integrums
and. here the fourth rule of Fractions teaches you first to Multiply the
Integrum 9. by 4. which is the denominator of the Fraction annexed, the product
whereof is 36. whereunto by adding the Numerator of the same Fraction which is
3. you shall make the Numerator of the Dividend to be 39. under which you must
set the denominator 4. thus 39/4. and that is your whole dividend, then having
in like manner brought the Divisor which is 3. Integrums and. into one self
Fraction, work as the former rule of Division teaches you, and you shall
produce 117/40. which is 2. Integrums and 37/40.

The rule of three belonging to Fractions. Cap. 9.
What order is to be observed in this rule having to deal with Fractions
only?

The self same order that has been taught before touching Integrums: for in
working with Fractions you must have also 3. several numbers, and you must see
that the first and third numbers be of one self denomination, and that number
to be placed always in the third place whereunto the question is annexed, and
then to Multiply the second by the third, and to divide by the first, and so
the fourth number which you seek to know, shall appear: As for example if. of
an ell of fine Holland cost me. of an English crown, in value 15. groats, what
shall. of an ell cost me, here first you must set down your 3. several
numbers in order thus, ell ell. so as the first and third may be of one self
denomination, then Multiply the second and third Fraction the one into the
other, which will make 10/18. and that being divided by. which is the first
Fraction will produce 40/54. of a crown, the value of which Fraction if you
seek to know by help of the sixth rule of Fractions, teaching you to Multiply
the Numerator of the Fraction, by the known parts of a crown which are 5 s^ or
15. groats, you shall find the value of that Fraction to be 11. groats and
6/54. of a groat, which is one farthing and somewhat more, supposing the least
known parts of a groat to be 16. farthings.

The golden Rule reuerse called in Latin regula euersa that is to say turned
back-ward. Cap. 10.
WHat is the order of this rule?

Multiply the first by the second, and divide the product thereof by ye third,
as if a penny Loaf must weigh 2. l. Wheat being at 3. s^. the bushel, what
shall a penny Loaf weigh when Wheat is at 2. s^. the hushell, the question
must be framed thus, if 3. s^. require 2. l weight, what shall 2. s^. have,
then by working according to this rule you shall find that the penny Loaf
must weigh. 3. l.

Another example of the same rule.
I would know how many yards of Bays bearing in breadth 7/4. will suffice to
line 7. yards of Silk bearing in breadth 3. quarters and a half. Here you
must frame your question thus, if. and require 7. yards, what shall 7/4.
require, but because the first and third number of this question are not of one
self denomination by reason of the Fraction annexed to the first number, you
shall do well to reduce the first and third number both into half quarters,
and then to work as though they were all Integrums, which is more easy then
to make all the numbers Fractions, wherefore say thus: If 7. half quarters do
require 7. yards, what shall 14. half quarters require, and in working by the
rule Reuerse, you shall find in the quotient 3. yards of Bays and a half.

The double rule called in Latin regula duplex. Cap. 11.
WHereto serves this rule and what order is to be observed therein?

This rule serves to unfold two questions wrapped in one, as thus. If I pay 4.
d. for the carriage of 20. l. weight 30. miles, what shall I pay for the
carriage of 50. l. weight 60. miles, here of this and such like demands, you
must make 2. sundry questions, and the fourth Sum of the first question
being found, shall be the second or middle number of the second question:
wherefore frame your first question thus, if 20. l. cost 4. d what shall 50. l
cost, and shall find that it will cost you 10. d. then say if 30. miles cost
10. d. what shall 60. miles cost and you shall find that it will cost 20. d.
And note that each of these 2. questions is to be wrought by the common rule
of 3. that is to say by Multiplying the second into the third, and by dividing
the product thereof by the first, and the fourth found number of the first
question must be the second, or middle number of the second question, as in the
former example, you see that 10. d. which was the fourth found number, is here
the middle number of the second question.

Another example.
If 25. l. do gain me 8. l. in 4. years, how much shall a 100. l. win one in
10. years, both these questions are also to be wrought by the common rule of
3. Wherefore set down the first question thus, if 25. l. yields 8. l. what
shall 100. l. yield, and you shall find 32. l. then say 4. years yields
32. l. what shall 10. years yield, and you shall find 80. l. But note that
these double questions, may be put in such sort as you must work ye first or
second question, sometimes by the rule reuerse. As in this question here
following, if 6. l. win 8. Crowns in 10. years, in how many years shall 3.
l. win 12. Crowns, here frame your first question thus, if 6. l. require 10.
years how many years shall 3. l. require: And in working this question by the
rule Reuerse, you shall find 20. years, then for the second question say
thus, if 8. Crowns require 20. years, how many years shall 12. Crowns
require: Here if you work by the common rule of 3. you shall find 30 years.

Another example.
If 7. horses do eat 12. bushels of Dates in 20. days, how many bushels
shall 14. horses eat in 15. days, here frame your first question thus, if 7.
horses do eat 12. bushels, what will 14 horses eat, and in working by the
common rule of 3. you shall find in the quotient 24. bushels, then frame your
question thus, if 20. days require 24. bushels, what will 15. days require,
here in working by the common rule of 3. you shall find in the quotient 18.
bushels.

Another example.
If ten reapers reap 15. Acres in 7. days, in how many days shall 16.
reapers reap 20. Acres: Here frame your first question thus, if 10. reapers
require 7. days, how many days shall 16. reapers require, which question must
be wrought by the rule Reuerse, and so you shall find 4. days and. of a day
which is 9. hours, then say, if 15. Acres require 4. days and. of a day, how
many days shall 20. Acres require, and in working this second question by the
common rule of 3. belonging of Fractions as is before taught, you shall find
that 20. Acres will require 5. days and 10/12. or. of a day which is 20 hours.
But it were more easy in this second question to reduce the days into hours
by Multiplying the 4. days by 24. hours, the product whereof will be 96.
hours, whereunto if you add the od 9. hours it will make in all 105. hours,
which being Multiplied by the third number of this second question, which is
20. the product shall be 2100. hours, which divided by the first number of the
said question which is 15. you shall find in the quotient 140. hours, which
if you divide again by 24. you shall find in the quotient 5. days, and the
remainder to be 20. hours, which agrees in all points with the first manner
of working by Fractions, and is the easier way of the two.

How shall I know having to work by this Double rule, when to use the rule
reuerse?

By considering whether the third number requires more or less of time, or of
any other measure or quantity, as in the former example, of Bays for lining,
the more breadth it had, the less did serve for lining. Again in the example
of the gain by years, of 6. l. and 3. l. you did see that 3. l. require more
years then 6. l. and therefore that first question was wrought by the rule
reuerse: Also in this last example of ye reapers, the more reapers, the less
time they require, and therefore that question was wrought by the rule reuerse.

The rule of Fellowship Cap. 12.
WHat does this rule teach?

To know the gain or loss of such as do make a stock and do occupy
together in the trade of Merchandise: As for example, four Merchants did put
their money in lot in this manner. The first brought 30. Crowns, the second 50.
the third 60 and the fourth 100. and with these portions they gained 3000.
Crowns, the question is how much every one shall have to his share of that
gain according to the portion which he brought. To know this, you must first
gather all the several portions together by Addition into one Sum, and you
shall find the sum of the portions to be 240. Crowns, then say if 240.
Crowns do gain 3000. Crowns, what shall 30. gain, and after this manner
work by the common rule of 3. with all the rest of the portions, and so you
shall find that he which brought 30. ought to have 375. Crowns, and he that
brought 50. ought to have 625. Crowns, and he that brought 60. ought to have
750. Crowns, and he that brought 100. ought to have 1250. which makes in all
3000. Crowns, for that is the very Sum of the gain before set down, the
order of working whereof, this figure plainly shows.

240. -- 3000. -- 30. -- 375. 50. -- 625. 60. -- 750. 100. -- 1250. The common
Divisor which is the Sum of the particular portio^s added together. the
general gain. the particular portions. every man's single share.

A like example of loss received by Shipwreck.
Three Merchants do venture their goods in one Ship, the goods of the first
were worth 300. Crowns, the second 400. the third 500. there were as much
goods cast out as was worth 100. Crowns, the question is how much every one
should loose according to his portion, here work as before, and you shall
find that every one shall loose so much as this figure following shows.

1200. -- 100. -- 300. -- 25. 400. -- 33. which is 5. groats 500. -- 41. which
is 10. groats The common divisor which is the Some of the particular portio^s
added together. the general loss. the particular portions. every man's several
loss

Here to know whether the 3. several losses do make up the general loss, do
thus, first add the Integrums of the several losses together, the Sum
whereof will be 99. whereunto if you add the 2. Fractions which do make one
whole Crown, the Sum will be 100. a number like unto the general loss.

Another example.
Three Merchants have bought 1000. l. of Pepper for 300. crowns, the first
takes 200. l. the second 350. l. and the third 450. l. what shall every man pay
according to the portion which he has received, then say if 1000. l. be worth
300. Crowns, what is 200. l. worth, here working by the common rule of 3. with
every man's several portion received, you shall find that the first must pay
60. Crowns, the second 105. and the third 135. Crowns, as this figure here
following shows.

l.
1000. -- 300. -- 200. -- 60. 350. -- 105. 450. -- 135. The common Divisor. the
general price. the several portions received. every ma^s particular paime^t.

Another like example of diverse distance of time.
Three Marchaunts occupying together did gain 2345. Crowns, the first put in
40. Crowns for the space of 14. Months, the second put in 50. Crowns for the
space of 8. Months, and the third put in 85. Crowns for the space of 6.
Months, the question is, how much every one shall have after the rate of his
money, and according of the quantity of time: This is to be wrought according
to the rule of Fellowship thus, Multiply every man's money by his time, either of
which, that is to say, the money and the time must be of one self denomination,
then add the Sommes of those several portions together, and the total sum
of such Addition shall be the first number, and the common gain shall be the
second number, and the third number shall be every man's money Multiplied by his
time, then in working by the common rule of 3. you shall find that every man
shall have such share as this figure here following shows.

1470. -- 2345. -- 560. -- 893. 400. -- 638. 2/21. 510. -- 813. 4/7 The common
Divisor which is the total Sum of the several portions of money added
together. the general Sum of the gain. the particular portions of the money
multiplied by his time. every man's single share.

Now if you would know whether the single shares in this example do make up
the general Sum of the gain, then add together the Integrums or whole
Sommes of every man's single share, and you shall find the Sum to be but
2344. which wants one whole Integrum of the second or middle number of the
question, which you shall easily supply by adding the 3. several Fractions
together according to the rule of Addition of Fractions before taught, for so
shall you find the said 3. Fractions to make in all one whole Integrum, which
being added to 2344. will be aunswerable to the second number of the question,
which as you see in the example is 2345. And remember in adding together the
said 3. Fractions, to set them in this order / 2/21 / 4/7. and then to bring
them to one self denomination, as the seventh rule of Fractions teaches you.
But first because you shall find ye 3. remainders after the first 3. Divisor of
the 3. several portions, made by the first common Divisor of the question to
be written in many figures, you must set them down in fewer figures according
as the fifth rule of Fractions teaches you, so shall you find the first
remainder containing 490/1470. to be no more but. and the second remainder
containing 140/1470. to be 2/21. and the third remainder containing 840/1470.
to be 4/7. which 3. Fractions being added together according to the seventh
rule of Fractions, will make 441/441. which is one whole Integrum and must be
added by the name of 1 to the middle or second number of the question, as I
have said before: you may also make up the foresaid number by seeking to know
the value of every Fraction annexed to the Integrums, according as the sixth
rule of Fractions teaches, for so shall you find the value of the first
Fraction to be five groats, and the value of the second Fractio^ to be one
groat 6. farthings, and 18/21. of a farthing thing, and you shall find the value
of ye third Fraction to be 8. groats 9. farthings and. of a farthing, and if
you add 18/2^ and 1/7 of a farthing together, you shall find that it will make
147/147. which is one whole Integrum or one whole farthing. Now if you add 6.
9. and 1. farthings together, it will make in all 16. farthings, and yt is one
groat which being added to ye 14 groats before found out, will make in all 15.
groats which is one Crown, and yt being added to the Sum 2344. will make it
2345. Crowns, which is a number agreeable to the middle Sum of the question.
Truly if you exercise your self in this and such like questions, it will make
you perfect not only in Addition, Subtraction, Multiplycation, and Division of
whole numbers, but also of Fractions, and almost in all the other rules
belonging as well to Fractions, as to Integrums: Wherefore I would wish you
often to use your pen therein.

Having hitherto treated of the 4. special kinds of Arithmetike, that is of
Addition, Subtraction, Multiplycation and Division, as well belonging to whole
numbers, as to Fractions, and also showed the use of the Golden rule, otherwise
called the rule of 3. and of all the three kinds thereof, that is the common
rule, the rule Reuerse, and the Double rule, and given examples how and when
every one is to be used, together with the rule of Fellowship, necessary for
them that use any trade of Merchandise, I think good now to speak somewhat of
Arithmeticall and Geometrical progression, and also of Proportion, and of the
three kinds thereof, that is Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and Musical
proportion, and then of the extraction of roots both square and Cubicall, and
last of all, of Astronomicall Fractions, showing how they are to be added,
Subtracted, Multiplied and divided.

Of Progression and how manifold it is. Cap. 13.
WHat is Progression?

It is a certain order of proceeding with diverse numbers in such sort as
every one may exceed each other, either by like difference of quantity, or
else by likeness of Proportion, whereof springs 2. kinds of Progression, the
one called Arithemeticall, and the other Geometrical.

What is Arithmeticall Progression?

It is that which proceeds by like difference of quantity, as thus, 3. 5. 7.
9. 11. 13. whereof every one exceeds his fellow by the difference of 2.

What is Progression Geometrical?

It is that wherein every number exceeds his fellow by like proportion, for
as 6. contains 3. twice, so does 12. contain 6. twice, etc.

Of Addition belonging to Progression Arithmeticall. Cap. 14.
How are numbers being set in order according to Progression Arithmeticall, to
be added together and to be reduced into one total sum?

Thus, first see how many several numbers there be in all, and note the Sum
by it self, then add the first number of the Progression to the last thereof,
and note that Sum by it self, that done, Multiply the one of these 2.
reserved Sommes by the one half of the other, and you shall have the total
Sum. As for example let this be your Progression 6. 10. 14/18/22/26/30/34/
wherein every number exceeds his fellow by the difference of 4. here having
told the numbers, I find them to be 8. which I set down by it self, then I
add 6. which is the first number to 34. which is the last, and the Sum
thereof is 40. which I also set down by it self, then in Multiplying 40. by
4. which is the one half of 8. before set down a part by it self, I find
the total Sum of the Progression to be 160.

Of Addition belonging to progression Geometrical. Cap. 15.
HOw are numbers being set in order according to progression Geometrical, to
be added and to be brought into one Sum?

Thus, Multiply the last Sum of the progression by the number of the
proportion whereby such progression proceeds, and from the product of that
Multiplycation, Subtract the first number of the progression, that done, divide
that which remains by a number which is less then the proportion by one, and
the quotient of such Division shall show you the total Sum of the said
progression. As for example, let this be the progression 2. 6. 18. 54. 162.
486. 1458. the proportion of which progression is tryple, wherefore according
to the rule, I Multiply the last number of the progression by 3. and the
product of such Multiplycation amounts to 4/374. out of which Sum I
Subtract the first number which is 2. and there remains 4372. which I divide
by 2. (for it is less then be proportion 3. by 1.) and so I find in the
quotient 2186. which is the total Sum of the progression Geometrical.

Is there no brieffer way of adding such kinds of progression?

Yes indeed, but not so plain as this way is, and therefore I think not good
to trouble your memory therewith.

Of Proportion. Cap. 16.
WHat is Proportion?

Proportion is taken generally for the comparing of 2. diverse quantities or
numbers together, showing what likeness is betwixt them. But before we deal
with Proportion, and with the 3. kinds thereof, that is Proportion
Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and Musical: You have first to understand, that
of numbers some are said to be abstract, and some concreate.

The abstract are such as are not tied to any denomination, and such are
twofold, that is absolute and relative.

The absolute, are simply pronounced without having any relation to any other
number, measure, or quantity, as 2. 3. 4. etc. and all numbers whatsoever,
that are without denomination and are not attributed to any other thing.

The relative are those which have relation one to another, which may be three
manner of ways. First in respect of difference which is found by Subtraction,
secondly in respect of the quotient found by Division, thirdly in respect of
both. Of the first way springs Arithmeticall proportion: Of the second way
Geometrical proportion: And of the third Musical proportion.

Cap. 17.
WHat is Arithmeticall proportion?

Arithmeticall proportion improperly so called, (because it is no proportion
indeed) is when many several numbers have one self and like difference, as 8.
12. 16. which do only differ one from another by 4. and this Proportion is
twofold, that is continual and disiunct.

Continual is when many numbers proceed with like difference, as has been
said before when we spoke of Arithmeticall Progression, as 8. 12. 16. 20. etc.
whose difference betwixt every 2. numbers is 4.

The Disiunct, is when many numbers being severally propounded, the difference
of the first 2. numbers is not like to the difference that is betwixt the
second and the third, and so forth as 5. 8. 4. 7. for 8. differs from 5. by
3. and 4. from 8. by 4. and 7. from 4. by 3. Now of the second way of comparing
which is done by Division, springs as has been said before, Geometrical
proportion.

Cap. 18.
WHat is Geometrical proportion?

Geometrical proportion is that which shows what part or parts one number is
of another number, as 3. is the half of 6. which proportion is found by
Division, wherein you have to note that if the Divisor be greater then the
dividend, then it is to be made a Fraction, as in the former example, if you
would divide 3. by 6. then you must make it a Fraction thus, 3/6. or, and this
kind of proportion which may be truly and properly called a proportion indeed
or rather a proportionalitie, is said to be twofold, that is, direct, and
reuerse, and the direct is either Coniunct, or Disiunct

Coniunct differs not from Geometrical Progression before taught.

Disiunct proportion Geometrical, consisting most commonly of 4. numbers or of
3. at the least, is when there is not like proportion betwixt the second and
the third, that is betwixt the first and the second, or betwixt the third and
the fourth, as 3. 6. 4. 8. for here 6. contains 4. once, and one half
thereof, which is called Proportio Sesquialtera, and 6. contains 3. twice,
which is called Proportio dupla: and so is 8. to 4.

Cap. 19.
Again, proportion Reuerse differs not from the rule of 3. called Regula
euersa. But you have to understand that the two chief and special kinds of
Geometrical proportion, are these, that is, proportion of equality, and
proportion of inequality.

Proportion of equality, is when 2. numbers compared togethtr, are equal the
one to the other, as 3. to 3. 4. to 4.

The proportion of inequality, is when 2. unequal numbers are compared
together, as 6. to 5, 4. to 9. and of this there are two kinds, that is
proportion of the greater inequality, and proportion of lesser inequality.

Cap. 20.
PRoportion of the greater inequality, is when the greater number is compared
to the lesser numbers, as 6. to 5.

Proportion of the lesser inequality, is when the lesser is compared to the
greater, as 5. to 6.

Of proportion of the greater inequality there be two kinds, Simplex and
Multiplex, that is to say, simple and manifold.
SImplex, is when the Antecedent, that is to say the former number contains
the consequent, that is to say the latter number once and somewhat more, which
overplus must always be less then the consequent it self, as 5. contains
4. once and one part thereof more, for if you divide 5. by 4. the quotient
will be 1. and over. Again, this proportion is twofold, that is
Superparticuler, and Superpartient: Superparticular, is when the Antecedent
contains the consequent once and some one part thereof, as 3. to 2. for 3.
contains 2. once and one half thereof, which is called Sesquialtera, or as
4. to 3. for 4. contains 3. once and one third part thereof, and is called
Sesquitertia, the like is to be said of Sesquiquarta, Sesquiquinta,
Sesquisexta, and so forth infinitely as this Table shows.

Superparticular proportio^s are these and such like. Sesquialtera as 3. to 2.
6. to 4. 9. to 6. which is as much as. 1 Sesquitertia as 4. to 3. 8. to 6. 12.
to 9. 1 Sesquiquarta as 5. to 4. 10. to 8. 15. to 12. 1 Sesquiquinta as 6. to
5. 12. to 10. 18. to 15. 1 Sesquisexta as 7. to 8. 14. to 12. 21. to 18. 1
Sesquiseptima as 8. to 7. 16. to 14. 24. to 21. 1 1/7 Sesquioctaua as 9. to 8.
18. to 16. 27. to 24. 1 Sesquinona as 10. to 9. 20. to 18. 30. to 27. 1 1/9
Sesquidecima as 11. to 10. 22. to 20. 33. to 30 1 1/10 Sesquiu^decima as 12. to
11. 24. to 22. 36. to 33 1 1/11 Sesqiuduodec. as 13. to 12. 26. to 24. 39. to
36 1 1/12

But superpartient is when the Antecedent contains the consequent once and
some parts thereof, that is to say more parts then one, as 5. to 3. for 5.
contains 3. once and 2. third parts thereof, which is called Superbipartiens
tertias, of which kinds are these set down in the Table following.

Proportions superpartient are these and such like. Superbipartiens. Tertias as
5. to 3. 10. to 6. 15. to 9. which is as much as. 1 Quintas as 7. to 5. 14. to
10. 21. to 15. 2 Septimas as 9. to 7. 18. to 14. 27. to 21. 1 2/7 Nonas as 11.
to 9. 22. to 18. 33. to 27. 1 2/9 Vndecimas as 13. to 11. 26. to 22. 39. to 33.
1 2/11 Decimas tertias as 15. to 13. 30. to 26. 45. to 39. 1 2/13
Supertripartiens. Quartas as 7. to 4. 14. to 8. 21. to 12. which is as much as.
1 Quintas as 8. to 5. 16. to 10. 24. to 15. 1 Septimas as 10. to 7. 20. to 14.
30. to 21. 1 3/7 Octauas as 11. to 8. 22. to 16. 33. to 24. 1 Decimas as 13. to
10. 26, to 20. 39. to 30. 1 3/10 Vndecimas as 14. to 11. 28. to 22. 42. to 33.
1 3/11 Superquadripartiens. Quintas as 9. to 5. 18. to 10. 27. to 15. which is
as much as. 1 Septimas as 11. to 7. 22. to 14. 33. to 21. 1 4/7 Nonas as 13. to
9. 26. to 18. 49. to 27. 1 4/9 Vndecimas as 15. to 11. 30. to 22. 45. to 33. 1
4/11 Decimas tertias as 17. to 13. 34. to 26. 51. to 39. 1 4/13 Decim quintas
as 19. to 15. 38. to 30. 57. to 45. 1 4/15 Superquintupartiens. Sextas as 11.
to 6. 22. to 12. 33. to 18. which is as much as. 1 Septimas as 12. to 7. 24. to
14. 36. to 21. 1 5/7 Octauas as 13. to 8. 26. to 16. 39. to 24. 1 Nonas as 14.
to 9. 28. to 18. 42. to 27. 1 5/9 Vndecimas as 16. to 11. 32. to 22. 48. to 33.
1 5/11 Duodecimas as 17. to 12. 34. to 24. 51. to 36. 1 5/12
Supersextupartiens. Seqtimas as 13. to 7. 26. to 14. 39. to 21. which is as
much as. 1 6/7 Vndecimas as 17. to 11. 34. to 22. 51. to 33. 1 6/11 Decimas
tertias as 19. to 13. 38. to 26. 57. to 39. 1 6/13 Decimas septimas as 23. to
17. 46. to 34. 60. to 51. 1 6/17 Decimas nonas as 25. to 19. 50. to 38. 75. to
57. 1 6/19 Vicessimas tertias as 29. to 23. 58. to 46. 1 6/23

Hitherto of Simplex proportio. Now of Multiplex proportio.

Multiplex proportio is when the Antecedent contains the consequent more then
once, as 6. to 2. for 6. contains 2. three tunes, which is called Tripla
proportio, Also 12. to 5. for 12. comprehends 5. twice and. And this
Multiplex proportio is twofolde, that is either exact or not exact.

Multiplex exact, is when the Antecedent contains the consequet more then
once, and nothing remains, as 4. to 2. 6. to 3. etc. whereof are infinite
kinds, as Dupla, Tripla, and so forth as this Table shows.

The kinds of Multiplex exact are these and such like. Dupla as 4. to 2. 6. to
3. 8. to 4. which is as much as. 2/1 Tripla as 6. to 2. 9. to 3. 12. to 4. 3/1
Quadrupla as 8. to 2. 12. to 3. 16. to 4. 4/1 Quintupla as 10. to 2. 15. to 3.
20. to 4. 5/1 Sextupla as 12. to 2. 18. to 3. 24. to 4. 6/1 Septupla as 14. to
2. 21. to 3. 56. to 8. 7/1 Octupla as 16. to 2. 24. to 3. 32. to 4. 8/1
Nondupla as 18. to 2. 27. to 3. 36. to 4. 9/1 Decupla as 20. to 2. 30. to 3.
40. to 4. 10/1 Vndecupla as 22. to 2. 33. to 3. 495. to 45. 11/1

But Multiplex not exact, is when the Antecedent contains the consequent more
then once and some thing remains over, as 5. to 2. for 5. contains. 2.
twice and one remains, and this is also twofolde, that is, Multiplex
superparticularis, and Multiplex superpartiens

Multiplex superparticularis, is when the Antecedent contains the consequent
more then once and one only remains, as 7. to 3. for 7. contains 3. twice
and one only remains, whereof are diverse kinds, as Duplex sesquialtera, Duplex
sesquitertia, Triplex sesquisexta, and so forth as ye table hereafter following
shows.

But Multiplex superpartiens, is when the Antecedent contains the consequent
more then once and the remainder is more then 1. as 8. to 3. for 8. contains
3. twice and 2 thirds over, whereof there be many, kinds, as Dupla
superbipartiens tertias, Dupla supertripartiens quartas, and so forth as this
Table following shows, which comprehends both kinds, that is Multiplex
superparticularis, and Multiplex superpartiens

Multiplex not exact, is either Multiplex Superparticularis or else. Duplex.
Sesquialtera as 5. to 2. 15. to 6. Sesquitertia as 7. to 3. 21. to 9.
Sesquiquinta as 11. to 5, 22. to 10.
Triplex. Sesquisexta as 19. to 6. 38. to 12. Sesquiseptima as 22. to 7. 44. to
14. Sesquioctaua as 25. to 8. 50. to 16.
Quadruplex. Sesquinona as 37. to 9. 148. to 36. Sesquidecima as 41. to 10. 82.
to 20. Sesquiundecima as 45. to 11. 90. to 22.

which is. 2 2 2 3 3 1/7 3 4 1/9 4 1/10 4 1/11
Multiplex Superpartiens. Dupla. Superbipartiens. Tertias as 8. to 3. Quintas
as 12. to 5.
Supertripartiens. Quartas as 11. to 4. Quintas as 13. to 5.
Superquadripartiens. Quintas as 14. to 5. Septimas as 18. to 7.

Tripla. Superquintupartiens. Octauas as 29. to 8. Nonas as 34. to 9.
Supersextupartiens. Vndecimas as 39. to 11. Decim, tertias as 45. to 13
Superseptupartiens. Octauas as 31. to 8. Nonas as 34. to 9.

Quadrupla. superbipartiens. Tertias as 14. to 3. Quintas as 22. to 5.
Superquadripartiens. Quintas as 24. to 5. Nonas as 40. to 9.
Superquintupartiens. Sextas as 29. to 6. Septimas as 33. to 7.


which is. 2 2 2 2 2 2 4/7 3 3 5/9 3 6/11 3 6/13 3 3 7/9 4 4 4 4 4/9 4 4 5/7



Thus much of proportion of the greater inequality: Now we will speak
somewhat of proportion of the lesser inequality.

Cap. 21.
PRoportion of the lesser inequality, is when the Antecedent is less then the
consequent, as 2. to 3. 5. to 7. for if you divide 2. by 3. the quotient is. if
5. by 7. then the quotient is 5/7 and this Proportion has the same names which
the Proportion of the great inequality has, saving that you must add to the
beginning of every name, this word Sub. as Subdupla, Subtripla,
Subsesquialtera, etc. as 1 to 2 is Subdupla proportio, 3. to 9. is Subtripla
proportio, etc.

Of Musical proportion called in Latin Harmoniaca proportio. Cap. 22.
Musical proportion which requires 3. numbers at the least, is when the first
number has the same proportion unto the third, which the difference betwixt
the first and the second, has to the difference which is betwixt the second
and the third, as 3. 4. and 6. for look what proportion 3. has to 6. which is
Subdupla, the same has the difference betwixt 3. and 4. which is 1. to the
difference betwixt 4. and 6. which is 2. for 1. to 2. is Subdupla, and this is
called Musical proportion, because the numbers therein have the same
proportions one to another, which are found to be in Musical consorts, as 6.
4. and 3. for the proportion which 6. has to 4. is Sesquialtera, called of the
Musicians Diapente, or a fifth, and the proportion which 4. has to 3. is
Sesquitertia, called of the Musicians Diatesseron, or a fourth, and the
proportion which 6. has to 3. is Dupla, called a Diapason, or an Eight, and of
this Musical proportion there be two kinds, that is simple and compound.

It is said to be simple when it consists only of 3. numbers.

And it is called compound when it consists of more then 3. numbers: And of
compound there be 2. kinds, that is improper and proper.

The improper is, when to 3. numbers given, 2. other several numbers are
joined, which do contain the same proportions with the third, which the first
3. numbers have one to another: As for example, let be given these 3. numbers,
3. 4. 6. unto which if you join 8. and 12. here 6. 8. 12. have the same
proportion one to another which 3. 4. and 6. have amongst themselves, for like
as here betwixt 6. and 8. the proportion is Subsesquitertia, and betwixt 6. and
12. it is Subdupla, and betwixt 8. and 12. it is Subsesquialtera, so betwixt 3.
and 4. is Subsesquitertia, and betwixt 3. and 6. is Subdupla, and betwixt 4.
and 6. is Subsesquialtera,

Compound proper, is when diverse numbers in Musical proportion standing
together, and the first being omitted, the 3. next do continue still in
Musical proportion. Also when omitting the 2. first numbers the 3. next
following are in Musical proportion. And when omitting the first 3. the next
3. are in Musical proportion, and so forth how many numbers so ever there be:
As for example 10. 12. 15. 20. 30. these are numbers belonging to the proper
kind of compound Musical proportion, for 10. 12. and 15. are in Musical
proportion, then omitting 10. which is the first number, 12. 15. and 20 are
still in Musical proportion, and if you omit the 2. first numbers, that is 10
and 12. then the next 3. that is 15. 20. and 30. are still in Musical
proportion, and so forth how many so ever there be of them, so as they be in
Musical proportion: But our Musicians do make no more but 8. Musical
proportions in all, that is.

Dupla. Tripla. Quadrupla. Sesquialtera. Sesquitertia. Sesquiquarta. Dupla
superbipartiens. Sesquioctaua.
which are thus named Diapason. Diapason diapente. Bis diapason. Diapente.
Diatesseron. Diatonus semitonus. Diapason diatesseron. Tonus.


The use whereof is to be learned at the hands of the Musicians.

Cap. 23.
But now because it is not enough to know the foresaid proportions and their
names, unless you can both add, Subtract, Multiply, and divide them when
need is, I will therefore briefly here set down the order thereof, and first
show how to set them down in writing, and then how they are to be added,
Subtracted, Multiplied, and divided.

They are to be set down in writing in like manner that Fractions are wont to
be set down, saving that as in Fractions the upper number is called Numerator,
and the inferior number Denominator, so in proportions the upper number is
called Antecedent, and the inferior number Consequent, but whereas in
Fractio^s, there is wont to be drawn a little line betwixt the Numerator and the
Denominator, in proportions no line is drawn betwixt the Antecedent and the
Consequent, but the Antecedent is set over the Consequent, without any line
drawn betwixt them thus. 3. 4. 2. 5. 7. 1.

And look as Fractions are to be written in as few figures as may be, so are
proportions to be set down in so small numbers as may be, which is to be done
by the self same rule that Fractions are. Again as you can neither add nor
Subtract Fractions, having diverse denominations, before that you have brought
them to one self denomination: So can you neither add nor subtract
proportions having diverse consequents, until you have brought them to one
self consequent by the same rule that Fractions are reduced to one self
denomination: And look what order is to be observed in adding, subtracting,
multiplying and dividing of Fractions, the same is to be kept in adding,
subtracting, multiplying and dividing of proportions. Wherefore I wholly
refer you to the rules of Fractions before most plainly taught. And thus I
end with proportions, the knowledge whereof is very necessary to such as have
to deal in matters either of Geometry or of Astronomy or with Music.

How to find out the square root of any number. Cap. 24.
WHat is a square root?

It is any Digit or any other number, which being multiplied into it self
brings forth a square number, as 4. being multiplied in it self, in saying
4. times 4. makes 16. which is a square number, the root whereof is 4. And to
find out the square root of any number be it square or not square, you must
do thus. First having set down the number propounded which must consist of 3.
figures at the least, set a prick under the first Digit or Cipher of the said
number on the right hand, that done, prick every other figure thereof toward
the left hand, leaving always one void space betwixt every 2. pricks as you
see here done in this number 4 7 5. 6. 4. 5. and look how many pricks there
be, so many figures shall you have in the quotient, and this differs nothing
in a manner from Division, the order in working is thus, first seek out a
Digit, which being multiplied in it self, may take away that which stands
over the last prick on the left hand, or as much thereof as may be, and set
the Digit in the quotient, that done, double the said quotient, then consider
whether the double do consist of one figure or of many, if of one only, then
place that in the next void space on the right hand, but if the double do
consist of many figures, then take the first figure thereof, that is to say,
that figure or cipher which stands in the first place of the double, and
place that in the foresaid next void space toward the right hand, and next
to that, place all the rest of the figures of the said double orderly toward
the left hand, that done, seek another Digit, which being multiplied in it
self together with the doubled number, may take away all that which stands
right over it, or as much thereof as may be, which Digit you must not only put
in the quotient to his fellow, but also set down the same right under the next
prick on the right hand, and then multiply that Digit together with the double
whereto it is joined, by the said last found Digit set down in the quotient,
the product whereof you must subtract out of the upper number, standing right
over the foresaid prick, and if there be any remainder, write it above,
cancelling the other, and look how many pricks there be, so many times must you
double the quotient, observing always like order of working as before, which
you shall more plainly understand by these examples following, and for your
better understanding thereof, I will first give you an example of 3. figures
only as thus, 464. here to find out the square root of this number, you must
first prick the said number in such order as is before taught, and then seek
out some one of the 9. Digits, which being multiplied in it self, may take
away the first 4. on the left hand, or as much thereof as may be, which you
shall find to be 2. which 2. being set in the quotient, multiply the same in
it self, in saying 2. times 2. makes 4. which 4. does clean take away the
first 4. standing over the last prick on the left hand, and therefore cancel
the 4. that done, double the quotient which makes 4. and set the same in the
next void space on the right hand under the figure 6. thus.

And then seek out some Digit, which being multiplied ^ in it self together
with the doubled, may take away the Sum of 64. that remains, which by
asking how many times 4. is comprehended in 6. you shall find to be but one,
which you must not only put in the quotient, but also set it down under the
first prick on the right hand thus.

So as you shall make the lower Sum to be 41. ^ which is to be multiplied by
the last found quotient which is 1. wherefore you must say that 1. times 41. is
41 which being taken out of 64. there remains 23. so as the root is 21. and
the remainder 23. as this example shows.

^ And to know whether you have done well or not, multiply the quotient in it
self, and if there be any remainder left, add that unto the product of the
multiplied quotient, and if you find the sum thereof to be like to the
first, then you have done well, if it be not like, then you have erred, the
product of this quotient being multiplied in it self amounts unto 441.
whereto by adding the remainder which is 23. you shall find the sum to be
like unto the first number that is 464. whereof you sought the square root.
But if such number do consist of many figures, then in working you must double
the quotient once, twice or thrice, according as the number does require, as
you shall more plainly perceive by this example following: as let 50/467. be
the number whereof you would know the square root, here having pricked this
number in such order as before, first seek out some Digit which being
multiplied in it self may take away the Digit or number standing right over
the last prick on the left hand, which you shall find to be 2. and having set
down the said 2. in the quotient, say 2. times 2. makes 4. which being
subtracted from 5. there remains 1. which you must set over 5. and cancel
the said 5. as this example shows.

That done, double the quotient which makes ^ 4. and set down the 4. in the
next space toward the right hand, under the cipher as you see in the former
example, then seek out a Digit, which being multiplied in it self together
with the double quotient, may take away all that which stands over the second
prick toward the left hand, or as much thereof as may be, which Digit by
asking how many times 4. is comprehended in 10. you shall find to be 2. then
set down the said 2. not only in the quotient, but also under the second
prick toward the right hand, which together with the former 4. makes 42.
as you see in this example.

^ Then multiply that 42. in a place by it self by the figure 2. last set
down in the quotient, and it will make 84. which 84. being taken out of 104.
there remains 20 which you must set over the second prick and cancel the
104. and also the 42. beneath, as you see in the former example: that done,
double the whole quotient, which makes 44. whereof set the first 4. in the next
void space toward the right hand under the figure 6. and the other 4. under
the second prick toward the left hand, the^ ask how many times 4. is
comprehended in 20. and you shall find 4. which you must not only set down in
the quotient, but also under the next and last prick on the right hand, and so
the nether Sum shall be 444. which being multiplied by the Digit 4. last set
down in ye quotient, will make in all 1776. which being taken out of the upper
number which is 2067. there will remain 291. so as the square root of the
first number is 224. and the remainder 291. as you may see in this example.

^ The square root whereof being multiplied in it self amounts unto 50176.
whereto if you add the remainder which is 291. the Sum thereof will be like
unto the first number which is 50467. Moreover you have to note that if you
find any number out of the which your quotient being doubled cannot be
subtracted, then you must set down a Cipher in the quotient, and proceed to
the next prick on your right hand, as in this example following. ^

In which example the first found Digit set in the quotient is 6. which being
multiplied in it self makes 36. and clean takes away the first number
standing over the last prick on the left hand, that done, I double the
quotient, which makes 12 and I place the 2. in the next void space toward
the right hand, and the 1. next to that toward the left hand orderly as in
this example. ^

Over which 12. there is but 6. remaining, so as I can not take 12. out of 6.
and therefore I cancel the 12. and set down a Cipher in the quotient, so as
the quotient is now 60. which being doubled makes 120. the Cipher whereof I
set down in the next void space toward the right hand, and the other two
Digits orderly toward the left hand, as you see in this example.

^Then I ask how many times one is contained in 6, and I find 5. which I set
down in the quotient and also under the last prick on the right hand, so as
the nether number is 1205. which I multiply aparte by it self by the 5. last
set down in the quotient, the product whereof is 6025. which being taken out
of the upper number, which is also 6025. there remains nothing, as this
example shows.

^ Wherefore I find the foresaid number to be a just square number, the root
whereof is 605. which being multiplied in it self makes 366025. a number like
unto the first number.

The use of the square root in setting of battles. Cap. 25.
THe knowledge of finding out the square root of any number, is very necessary
for a Sargent mayor in the field, that he may the more readily set and range
his Squadrans of Battle: And therefore I think it not amiss, to give them
here certain examples of such manner of squares as the Italians were wont to
use in my time, which is four manner of ways.

Whereof the first teaches how to set the Battle square of ground, the second
a square battle of men, the third a long square battle which we call the Hearse
battle, and the fourth teaches how to set a battle of so much and a third.

Show by what rules these battles are to be set?

Before I set down any rules you have to understand that all numbers given or
supposed, are not meet for such purpose, but only such as may be divided into
3. equal parts without leaving any remainder: for otherwise all the rules
following, take no place, and therefore when any number is given you to be
brought into any one of the foresaid 4. forms of battle, you shall do well
first to divide that number by 3. and if there be any remainder, to reject it,
and to take the rest for your number, As for example, A Sargent Mayor is
commanded by his General to set a battle square of ground, appointing him
thereunto 1345. men, here the Sargent by dividing that number by 3. finds in
the remainder one man too many, which being only rejected, all the rest of the
number which is 1344. is fit for his purpose.

How to set a battle square of ground, called in Italian Battaglia quadra di
terreno.
NOw show the order of setting such kinds of battle?

The order is thus, first double the number given, then take the square root
thereof, and that root shall be the Front, that done, divide the number given
by the said root, and the number in the quotient shall be the flank, now if
you multiply the front and the flank the one into the other, you shall have
your whole number first given, unless there be some remainder left in the
former Division, which remainder must be added to the product to make up the
sum. But if you would know how many men are to be put in a rank, and also
how many such ranckes you must have, then divide the front into 3. parts, and
the quotient will show you how many men you are to have in a rank, that done,
multiply the flancke by 3. and the product thereof shall be the number of the
ranckes: As for example, take the number before given, which was 1345. which
being divided by 3. you find the remainder to be 1. which you must reject, and
take all the rest which is 1344. and that being doubled makes 2688. the square
root whereof is 51. by which root you must divide the number given, Videlicet
1344. and the quotient will be 26. which shall be the flancke, now if you
divide the foresaid front 51. by 3. the quotient will show how many shall be in
a rank, that is 17. Finally, if you multiply the flancke, which is 26. by 3.
the product thereof will be 78. which is the just number of the rancks which
you must have.

How to set a battle square of men called in Italian Battaglia quadra
d'huomini.
TAke the square root of the number given, and that shall be both the front
and the flancke, which if you multiply together, the product thereof will make
up the number first given, and if you would know how many men are to be put in
a rank, and how many such rancks you must have, then do as you did before in
dividing the front by 3. and multiplying the flancke by 3.

How to set a long square battle which we call the Hearse battle, and is
called in Italian, Battaglia dun tanto emezzo.
TO the number given, add the just half thereof, and the square root of that
Sum shall be the front, by which root, or front you divide the first number
given, the quotient shall be the flancke. As for example, let the number given
be 6144. the half thereof is 3072. which being added to the given number 6144.
makes in all 9/216. the square root whereof is 96. which shall be the front,
by which root or front if you divide the given number 6144. you shall find in
the quotient 64. and that shall be the flancke, that done, divide the
foresaid front 96. by 3. and you shall find in the quotient 32. which number
shows how many men shall be in a rank, then multiply the foresaid flancke
64. by 3. and the product thereof shall be 192. which is the number of the
ranckes.

How to set a battle of so much and a third, called in Italian, Battaglia dun
tanto and dun terzo.
TO the number given, add the third part thereof and the square root of that
Sum shall be the front, then divide the first number given by the foresaid
root or front, and the number in the quotient shall be the flancke: As for
example, let the number given be 1575. the third part whereof is 525. which
being added to 1575. makes in all 2100. the root whereof is 45 which must be
the front, by which root or front, if you divide the number given which was
1575. the quotient will be 35. which shall be your flancke, then by dividing
45. which is the front by 3. the quotient will show you how many men you must
have in a rank that is 15. Again by multiplying the flancke which is 35. by
3. the product thereof will be 105. which is the number of your ranckes.

How to find out the Cubique root of any number. Cap. 26.
AS the square root is said to be a number which being multiplied in it
self, does make a square superficial number, having only length and breadth,
so as the Cubique root is a number which being first multiplied in it self,
and the product thereof being again multiplied by the first number, does make a
Cubique or Corporal number having both length breadth, and depth: As for
example, 2. times 2. makes 4. and 2. times 4. makes 8. Again 3. times 3.
makes 9. and 3. times 9. makes 27. and so you may deal with all the rest of
the 9. Digits, and make thereby a Table containing both the square numbers and
Cubique numbers of every root, consisting of any one of the 9. Digits, like
unto this table here following. Roots Squares Cubiques 1. 1. 1. 2. 4. 8. 3. 9.
27. 4. 16. 64. 5. 25. 125. 6. 36. 216. 7. 49. 343. 8. 64. 512. 9. 81. 729.

Then having to find out the Cubique root of any number that is greater then
1000. (for lesser it cannot be to work upon) then set a prick under the first
figure on your right hand, and so proceed toward the left hand, omitting
always 2. figures betwixt every two pricks, as in this example 41063625. and
look how many pricks there be, so many figures shall you have in the
quotient: That done, you have to find out three several numbers, first such a
Cubique number as will clean take away the number which stands right over
the head of the last prick on the left hand, or so much thereof as may be,
which you may easily find in the foresaid table: The root of which Cubique
number, you must set down in the quotient, the second number which you have to
find is a number called the Triple, which is easily had by tripling the
quotient, and the third number is called the Divisor which you shall most
readily find by multiplying the quotient into the Triple, both which numbers
are to be placed in such order as follows. First then having found the
Cubique number as is before said, and taken the same out of the number standing
over the last prick on the left hand, write the remainder (if there be any)
over his head, cancelling that which is under it, and then place the root of
the said Cubique number in the quotient: that done, Triple the root set down
in the quotient, and that shall be the Triple which you must place in the
second void space on the left side of the next prick which is on your right
hand, then multiply that Triple by the quotient, and the product thereof shall
be the Divisor which must be placed right under the Triple one figure shorter
toward the left hand: that done, draw a line as you see in the example
hereafter following and work thus: First ask how many times the first figure
of the said Divisor is contained in the number standing right over his head:
and having found an apt Digit for the purpose, put that Digit in the quotient
to his fellow, that done, multiply the said Digit into the Divisor and set the
product thereof right under the Divisor: Secondly multiply the said Digit in
him self, and again the product thereof into the triple, and set the sum yt
comes thereof right under the triple: Thirdly multiply the said Digit in it
self cubically, and set the product thereof lowest of all, right under the
next prick on the right hand: that done, draw a line, and by Addition bring
all the foresaid three products into one sum placing every figure so as you
may easily take the said sum out of the upper number, whereof you seek the
Cubique root, and write the remainder (if there be any) over the head, and if
such sum will not be subtracted out of the upper number, then you must seek
out a lesser Digit, reserving still the former triple and Divisor, and if there
be more pricks in the number then two, then you must for every prick find
out a new Triple, and a new Divisor by tripling the whole quotient, and by
working continually in like order as the rule before teaches, which rule you
shall more plainly perceive by example thus. First then having to find out
the Cubique root of the number before mentioned, which is 4 1 0 6 3 6 2 5
marked with pricks as before is taught: resort to the Table wherein you shall
find such a Cubique number as will take away as much of the 41. as may be,
which is 27. the root whereof is 3. for all the other Cubique numbers in the
table are either too small or too great, and therefore you must always have
due consideration thereof. Then take 27. which is the Cubique number, out of 41.
and there remains 14. which remainder you must set over the last prick on
your left hand cancelling the 41. as in this example.

^ Then triple the quotient which makes 9. which you must set down under the
figure 6. next unto the second prick which is on your right hand: Then to find
out the Divisor multiply the Triple 9. by 3. which is the quotient, and the
product thereof shall be ye Divisor: which divisor you must place right under the
triple one figure shorter toward the left hand: that done, draw a line as you
see in this example.

^ Now having orderly set down the Triple and the Divisor, ask how many times
2. which is the first figure of the Divisor is contained in 14. standing right
over his head, and remember to make choice of such a Digit as may not clean
take away the whole number at the first, but rather leave so much as the said
quotient having afterward to be multiplied diverse ways as shall be said
hereafter, may take away the rest or as much thereof as may be, as in this
example following, you shall find the aptest Digit for this purpose to be 4.
which you must put in the quotient, whereby the quotient shall be now 34. that
done, you must first multiply this last quotient which is 4. into the Divisor
27. the product whereof is 108. which you must set down right under the
Divisor, beneath the line already drawn, as you see in this example.

^Secondly you must multiply the said 4. in it self quadratly which makes 16.
then multiply that 16. by the triple 9. the product whereof is 144. which is to
be set right under the triple as in this example.

^ Thirdly you must multiply the said 4. in it self cubically, which makes
64. which is to be set right under the next prick on the right hand beneath
the former sums as you see in this other example.

^ So as every one of the foresaid three products do extend one further then
another by one figure toward the right hand, as you see in ye former example:
Now these products being thus placed, draw another line and bring all the
three several products contained betwixt the 2. lines, into one sum by
Addition, and you shall find the total sum to be 12304. which being
subtracted out of the number standing right over it which is 14063. there will
remain 1759. which you must set down above as you see in this example.

^ Now to proceed with the next, you must find out a new Triple and a new
Divisor.

How is that done?

Thus, multiply the whole quotient which is 34. by 3. the product whereof is
102. and that is the Triple which is to be placed in the next void space hard
by the next prick that is on your right hand: Then multiply the whole quotient
into the last found Triple 102. and the product thereof which is 3468. shall
be your Divisor, which is to be placed under the Triple one figure shorter
toward the left hand as you see in the example following: which two numbers
being thus found and rightly placed, draw a line, then ask how many times the
first figure of your Divisor which is 3. is contained in the number right over
his head which is 17. and you shall find it to be 5. times contained therein,
wherefore set down 5. in the quotient, that done, multiply the 5. into the
Divisor, and place the product thereof which is 17/340. right under the Divisor
beneath the line, as you see in this example.

^ Secondly square the same 5 that is to say, multiply it in it self, and that
makes 25. which 25. you must multiply again into the Triple 102. the product
whereof is 2550. which number you must set right under the said triple beneath
the line. Thirdly multiply the said 5. in it self cubically which makes 125.
and place that right under the first prick on the right hand, and draw a
line, that done, add all the foresaid 3. products together, and you shall
find the total sum thereof to be 1759625. which being subtracted out of
the upper number, there remains nothing, as this example plainly shows.

^ Whereby you may conclude that the foresaid number whereof you sought the
root, is a perfect Cubique number, for if you multiply the whole quotient in
it self cubically, it will produce the self same number whereof you sought ye
root. But note that if in making the first Subtractio^, the first Divisor is
not to be found in the upper number, then you must set a Cipher in the
quotient, that done, triple the whole quotient, and place the said triple
under the figure which is next to the next prick on the right hand, working in
such order as before, and to avoid confusion, having to deal with a multitud
of numbers it shall not be amiss at ye finding out of every new triple, and
divisor to set ye remainders in several places by themselves, and to work then
in the self same order that is before taught, also note that if you have to
deal with a few numbers, and that the Divisor cannot be subtracted out of
the number standing right over his head, then you must set a Cipher in the
quotient and so you have done, as for example, having to take the cubicall
root of 8597. here I find 2. to be the quotient, which being cubically
multiplied, does clean take away the 8. and now according to my former rule
12. must be my Divisor, which because I cannot take it out of 5. I set down
therefore a Cipher in the quotient, so as the quotient is now 20. which is the
cubicall root of the foresaid number, for if you multiply 20. cubically and
add thereunto 5 6 7. which is the remainder, the sum thereof will be like
unto the first number, as you may see in this example.

^ Of Astronomicall Fractions. Cap. 27
BEcause the use of these Fractions is very necessary for those that have to
calculate the motions of the Stars and the difference of time, I thought good
to show here how the same are to be added, subtracted, multiplied and divided,
for the measure of time falls not out always to be a whole year, month,
day, or hour, nor the moving of the celestial bodies are to be measured
always by whole circles, signs, or whole degrees, and therefore to have an
exact measure of such things it was thought best by the ancient writers to
divide all whole things called Integra into the lessest parts that might be,
for which purpose no number was thought so meet as 60. for there is no number
under 100. that receives so many Divisions as 60. which may be divided many
sundry ways, that is by 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 10. 12. 15. 20. and by 30. and
therefore they divided every whole thing that had no usual parts into 60.
minutes, and every minute into 60. seconds, and every second into 60. thirds,
and so forth unto 60. fourthes, fifts, sixts, seuenths, eights, ninthes and
tenths, and further if need were but that seldom chances. And you have to
note that minutes are marked with one streeke over the head, seconds with two
streekes, thirds with three streekes, and so forth thus, 23^ 6^ 7^ 8''''^ etc.
which do signify 23. minutes 6. seconds 7. thirds, and 8. fourths.

Of Addition.
What is to be observed in adding of these kinds of Fractions?

First that you bring Integrums to Integrums, and Fractions to Fractions, that
be of like denomination, beginning always with the least on the right hand,
and if the sum of such Addition do amount any where to the number of 60. or
above 60 then you must look how many 60. are comprehended therein, and for
every 60. add one to the next greater Fraction that is on the left hand,
observing still that order until you come to the Integrums, of which
Integrums, it is also necessary to know their values, that is to say, what
parts they contain, and what denomination those parts have: As for example, if
you add common signs such as the twelve signs of the Zodiaque be, then every
sign contains 30. degrees, so as every sum exceeding 30 is to be divided
by 30. but if they be Physical signs whereof 6. do make a whole circle, such
as be set down in the table of Alphonsus, then the sum of those degrees is
to be divided by 6. Moreover so often as the sum of the common signs do
exceed 12. or the sum of the Physical signs do exceed 6. the overplus is
always to be rejected, and the remainder to be set in the place of the signs,
as you may see in this example following wherein seconds are reduced to
minutes, minutes to degrees, and finally degrees, to signs.

An example of Addition consisting of signs, degrees, minutes and seconds.
Signs Degrees Minutes Seconds 9. 19. 1. 19. 0. 0. 35. 16. 11. 29. 33. 5. 9.
29. 38. 11. 0. 11. 49. 40. 4. 56. The total sum. 8. 0. 42. 27.

In which example beginning first with the seconds because they are here the
least Fractions, you shall find by Addition that the sum of them amounts
to 147. which being divided by 60. you shall find in the quotient 2. and the
remainder to be 27^ which remainder you must set down under the collum of
seconds, keeping the quotient which is 2. in mind to be added to the collum of
minutes, the sum whereof is 162. which being divided by 60. you shall find in
the quotient 2. degrees, and the remainder to be 42^ which is to be set down
under the collum of minutes, and the quotient 2. kept in mind to be added to
the collum of degrees, the sum whereof is 90. degrees, which being divided by
30. (because that 30. degrees do make one common whole sign) you shall find
in the quotient 3. signs and no remainder: wherefore you must set down a
Cipher under the collum of degrees, and add the 3. signs to the collum of
signs, the sum whereof is 32. which it you divide by twice 12. which makes
24. you shall find the remainder to be 8. signs, which is to be set down
under the collum of signs, for the quotient here is to be rejected according
to the rule before given, so as the total sum of this Addition is 8. signs,
0. degrees 42^ 27^

Another example of days, hours, minutes and seconds to be added together.
Days Hours Minutes Seconds 21. 14. 32. 11. 16. 16. 19. 41. 8. 16. 30. 30.
Summa totalis. 46. 23. 22. 22.

In this example one self order as in the other before is to be observed as
touching the secondes and mynutes, for the exceeding number in both, are
divided by 60. but when you come to the hours you must divide that number by
24. because that so many hours do make a whole day, and having set down the
remainder under the collum of hours, add that one day which was in the
quotient, unto the collum of days, and so you shall find the total sum to
be as the example above shows.

Of Subtraction.
What order is to be observed in Subtraction?

The self same that was before observed in Addition, so as you always
remember that when you have to take a greater number of Fractions, as of
minutes, seconds, thirds and such like, out of a lesser number of Fractions, to
borrow 60. and having set down the remainder to add the one borrowed, unto
the next collum on the left hand, for there the 60. borrowed, is but one, but
if you have to deal with degrees, which are counted Integrums, then you must
borrow but 30. for so many degrees do make one sign, and if you have to
subtract hours, then you must borrow 24. for so many hours do make one day,
as by the example here following you shall more plainly perceive. Signs
Degrees Minutes Secondes 8. 0. 42. 27. 0. 1. 9. 53. 7. 29. 32. 34.

In this example because you can not take 53^ out of 27^ you must borrowe one
minute from the next collum on the left hand, which one mynute is 60^ which
being added to 27. do make in all 87^ out of which if you take 53^ there will
remain 34^ that done, you must pay home the minute which you borrowed by
adding the same unto the next 9. on the left hand, which makes 10. then say,
take 10^ out of 42^ and there remains 32^ which being set down, proceed to
the next. But here to take one out of none that cannot be, and therefore borrow
one whole sign from the collum of signs which is 30. degrees, from whence
take one, and there remains 29. which being set down, take the one which you
borrowed out of 8. and there remains 7. so as the whole remainder of this
Subtraction is 7/ signs, 29/degrees, 32 / and 34^ as the former example
shows.

Of Multiplycation.
THough there be more difficulty in multiplying and dividing Astronomicall
Fractions then in adding or subtracting them, yet the greatest difficulty
thereof chiefly consists in the finding out of the true denomination of the
products, for first as touching Multiplycation you must multiply every number
of the multiplyer into all the particular numbers of the sum that is to be
multiplied, and then severally to add together the products that be of one
self denomination, and whatsoever in that Addition arises to the number of
60. or exceeds 60. it is to be reduced by the sexaginarie Division into the
greater sum, so shall you collect the whole sum of the Multiplycation. But
you have to note by the way, that if there be any Integrums of diverse
denominations in your multiplyer: That then such Integrums must be reduced to
one self kind of Integrums: As for example, suppose that you would multiply
the daily motion of the Moon which according to Alphonsus tables, is 13.
degrees, 10^ 35^ and 1^ by 29. days, 12. hours, 44, and 3^ here because there
be in this multiplyer Integrums of diverse denominations, that is to say days
and hours, you must therefore reduce the same into one self denomination,
before that you can make your Multiplycation.

How is that to be done?

By multiplying every number of the said multiplyer by 5. and then by halfing
the product thereof, by which halfing you shall reduce mynutes to seconds, and
seconds to thirds, and so forth to the smallest Fractions of all, and if any
product do amount to 60. or exceed 60. then you must divide that product by
60. the ^emainder whereof is to be set under his proper denomination, and you
must keep the quotient in mind to add the same to the next greater number as
this table shows: In the front whereof I have set down in several spaces
not only the denominations of the two Integrums, as days and hours, but also
the denominations of so many Fractions as I think meet to serve my turn,
under which from I place the foresaid multiplyer, and then draw a line as you
see in this example following.

Denomination. Days Hours '''' The multiplyer to be reduced into one self
denomination. 29. 12. 44 3 The products of the reductio^. 29. 31 50 7 30

Now beginning first on the right hand with the least Fraction of the said
multiplyer which is 3^ I multiply 3. by 5. which makes 15. the one half
whereof is 7^ and half a third which is 3''''0^ wherefore I set down the said
7^ and 3''''0^ under their proper denominations as you see in the example
above, then I multiply 44 by 5. the product whereof is 220. and the half
thereof is 110. which being divided by 60. the quotient is 1^ and the remainder
50^ which remainder I set under his proper denomination, keeping the quotient
still in mind, that done, I multiply 12. hours by 5. the product whereof is 60.
and the half of that is 30^ whereunto by adding the one which I had in mind, I
make it 31^ and so I set it down under his proper denomination, and because
there be no more Fractions to be multiplied, I set down on the left hand the
Integrum 29. and by this means I have brought the foresaid multiplyer to one
self denomination and to one kind of Integrum, that is to say to 29. days 31^
50^ 7^ 3''''0^ which now being the greater number is to be set above, and to be
Multiplied by the foresaid daily motion of the Moon, that is 13. degrees, 10
35^ and 1^ but to the intent that in multiplying these numbers together you may
set every product in his true place, that is to say, under his proper
denomination, it shall not be amiss in the front of your work to set down
two rows of numbers, whereof the first must contain many denominations or
Fractions as you think good, as minutes, seconds, thirds, fourths, and so
forth, marked with streekes and vulgar numbers, and the second row shall be
the natural order of numbers written in Arithmeticall figures as this table
shows. Integra '''' v^ vi^ vii viii The denominations. 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7. 8. The natural numbers.

Under which table you must first set the number that is to be multiplied, and
right under that the multiplyer in such sort as every particular product may
be placed under his proper denomination, and then draw a line as you see in
this example following, and when you have multiplied 2. numbers the one into
the other, and know not where to place the product, then mark under which of
the natural numbers in the front, the said two numbers, that is to say the
multiplyer and the multiplycand do stand: That done, add those two natural
numbers of the front together, and the sum thereof will them you under what
denomination the product is to be placed, as in this example.

Int^gra '''' v vi vii Denomination 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Natural numbers. 29 31 50
7 30 The multiplycand. 13 10 35 1 The multiplyer 29 31 50 7 30 The several
products. 1015 1085 1750 245 1050 290 310 500 70 300 377 403 650 91 390 389 6
24 2 31 12 37 30 The general ^roduct or total sum. The remainder.


In which example I first multiply 1^ into 3''''0^ the product whereof is
3vii0^ which must be set under the denomination vii. because the two natural
numbers that is 3. standing over 1. the multiplyer, and 4. standing over 30.
the multiplycand being added together do make 7. appointing to the product his
proper denomination, then multiply again the same 1^ into 7^ the product
whereof is 7vi^ which must be set under the denomination vi. because 3.
stands over both their heads, and therefore must be taken twice, that is to
say for each number 3. which being added together do make 6. appointing
thereby to the product his proper place of denomination, that done, multiply
the said 1^ into 50^ the product whereof is 50^ which must be set under the
denomination v. for the 3 which stands over 1. and the 2. over 50^ being
added together makes 5. appointing to his proper place of denomination, then
multiply the said 1^ into 31^ the product whereof is 1''''1^ here the two
natural numbers that is to say 3. standing over 1^ and one over 31^ being
added together, do make 4. appointing to the product his proper place of
denomination, then multiply the foresaid 1^ into 29. Integrums, the product
whereof is 29^ and must be set under the denomination because 3. stands over
1^ but 29. being an Integrum, has no natural number standing over him but a
Cipher, thus having gone through out all the numbers of the multiplycand, with
the first number of the multiplyer, proceed in like order with the second
number of the multiplyer, which is 35^ which being multiplied into 3''''0^
makes 10vi50^ to be set under the denomination vi. because 2. stands over
35^ the multiplyer, and 4. over 3''''0^ the multiplycand, which 4. and 2. being
added together makes 6. then multiply 35^ by 7^ which makes 245v^ which you
must set down under the denomination v. because 2. and 3. makes 5. that done,
multiply 35^ by 50^ which makes 1750''''^ which you must set down under the
denomination '''' because the multiplycand and the multiplyer are both under
the denomination which being twice repeated, makes 4. then multiply 35^ by 31^
and that makes 1085^ which you must set down under the denomination because
1. and 2. makes 3. finally multiply 29. Integrums, by 35^ and that makes
1015^ thus as you have gone through with two numbers of your multiplyer, so
proceed in like order with the other two numbers of the multiplyer which is
10. and 13. and when you have ended your Multiplycation, and set every product
in his proper place, and so as every figure may stand one right under another,
to avoid confusion when you come to Addition, (to which end the spaces of
collums had need to be the larger) then draw a line under all the products and
beginning on the right hand, add all the products contained in every sever all
collum together, and if the sum of any such particular Addition do arise to
the sum of 60. or exceed the number of 60. then divide that sum by 60. and
set down the remainder, keeping the quotie^t in mind to be added to the
product of the next collum on the lefthand, so shall you find the total sum
of your Multiplycation to be 389. degrees, 6^ 24^ 2^ 31''''^ 12v^ 37vi^ and
30vii^ as the former example plainly shows. Now if you dsuide 389. degrees,
by 30. because every common sign contains 30. degrees, you shall find your
total sum to be 12. signs, 29. degrees, 6^ 24^ 2^ 31''''^ 12v^ 37vi^ and
30vii^ and so much the Moon runs in the space of 2. 9. days 12. hours, 44
and 3^ of an hour, which is her full revolution betwixt every two changes, but
for as much as it chances as well in this example as in many others like, that
Integrums of two sundry denominations are propounded in the question, it may
be very well doubted with what denomination the product of such multiplycation
is to be named, as in this example having multiplied time by motion, a man may
ask whether the product shall be named days or degrees, the resolving of
which doubt depends upon the nature of the question propounded, for in the
foresaid example, because time or days do comprehend any certain appointed
motion, therefore the product of the Multiplycation is to be referred to the
degrees of motion which are comprehended under time, and not to time which
comprehends motion, wherefore this product of Integrums videliz. 389.
signifies here degrees and not days, so likewise when degrees and minutes are
multiplied by miles and minutes, the product of such Multiplycation takes his
name from miles and not from degrees, because degrees do comprehend miles, for
we say in matters of Geography that every degree of the great circle
comprehe^deth 60 miles, thus having spoken sufficiently of the Multiplycation
of Astronomical Fractions, we will now proceed to ye Division of such Fractions.

Of the Division of Fractions Astronomicall.
What is to be observed therein?

First you must consider whether your Divisor be compound, or simple, I call
that compound which contains Fractions of diverse denominations, and that
simple which consists of Integrums, or is one whole number of one self
denomination, wherein there is no dificultie, for then you have no more to do
but to divide every particular number contained in the dividend by ye same
Divisor and to place the product of every one under such denomination, as the
little table of denominations shows, and therefore it shall not be amiss to
set the foresaid little table over your dividend even as you did in
Multiplycation: Also the Sexagenary progression is always to be used, as well
in Division as in Multiplycation. Moreover if your Divisor be not exactly
contained in ye dividend, then having multiplied the dividend by 60. you must
add to the product thereof the next Fraction following: As for example, knowing
by Alphonsus tables that the daily motion of the Moon is 13. degrees, 10^ 35^
1^ 15''''^ you would know how much the goes in the space of an hour, here
because that one day contains 24. hours, the number must be 24. your Divisor
which is simple and not compound, first then set down in the front of your
work the row of denominations only, and not the natural numbers, because
they are not to be used in this way of Division, that done, right under the
row of denominations place your dividend, and right under y^ your Divisor, as
you see in this example.

Degree^ '''' v The denominations. 13 10 35 1 15 The dividend. 24 The divisor.
32 56 27 33 7 The several sum of every quotient.

In which example because the Divisor 24. is not contained in 13. therefore I
multiply 13. by 60. which makes 780. whereunto by adding the next Fraction on
the right hand which is 10^ the whole sum is 790^ which being divided by 24.
the quotient is 32^ which because they are minutes, I place them under the
denomination of minutes, and the remainder is 22^ which being multiplied by 60.
makes 1320^ whereunto I add the next figure which is 35. and so the whole
sum is 1355^ which being divided by 24. the quotient is 56^ which I place
under the denomination of seconds, and the remainder of this Division is 11^
which being multiplied by 60. makes 660^ whereto I add the next Fraction
which is 1^ so that now the whole sum is 661^ which being divided by 24. the
quotient is 27^ which I set down under the denomination of thirds, and the
remainder is 13^ which being multiplied by 60. makes 780''''^ whereunto I add
the next Fraction which is 15''''^ which makes in all 795''''^ which being
divided by 24. the quotient is 33''''^ which I place under the denominatio^ of
fourths. and the remainder is 3''''^ which being multiplied by 60. makes 180v^
whereunto having no Fraction to add, I divide the same by 24. and so I find in
the quotient 7v^ which I set under the denomination of fifts, so as I find the
howerly motion of the Moon to be 32^ 56^ 27^ 33''''^ 7v^ and somewhat more,
for I leave to deal any further with the smaller Fractions that would still
grow by multiplying the remainders by 60. thinking this sufficient to show you
in what order you have to work, to divide your dividend by a simple Divisor,
into as many small parts as you will: but if your Divisor be compound, then the
Division is to be done either by reduction into the smallest Fractions, or
without reductio^: which last way is very hard and tedious, and therefore I
will only show you how to make your division whereof the Divisor is compound
by reduction, and that by this one example here following. Suppose then that
the Moon according to her own course which is from West to East, is distant
from some fixed Star 36. degrees. 30^ 24^ 50^ and 15''''^ and that you would
know in what time she will run that distaunce, according to her daily moving
which as has been said before is 13. degrees, 10^ 35^ 1^ and 15''''^ here to
make this division by reduction, you must do thus. First reduce all the
numbers of your dividend into the smallest Fractions thereof by the Sexagenarie
Multiplycation and Addition of the next Fraction unto the product of that
Multiplycation: that done, reduce all the numbers of your Divisor by like
Multiplycation and Addition, into the smallest Fractions, so as the dividend
and the Divisor may be both of one self denomination, and divide the one by
the other, even as they were Integrums, as in this example you must first
multiply 36. degrees, by 60. and it will make 2160^ whereto by adding 30^ you
make the whole sum of minutes to be 2190^ which being multiplied again by
60. do make 131400^ whereto if you add the 24^ the sum of secondes will be
131424^ and so proceeding still with the Sexagenarie Multiplycation and
Addition of the next Fraction as you did before, you shall find the dividend to
be 473129415''''^ Then in like order reduce your Divisor into the smallest
Fraction, and you shall find the total sum thereof to be 170766075''''^ this
reduction being made, divide the dividend by the divisor, so shall you find in
the quotient 2. Integrums, that is to say 2. days, and the remainder to be
132597365''''^ which remainder if you multiply by 60. and divide the product by
the self same Divisor, you shall have in the quotient minutes, then multiply
again that remainder by 60. and divide the product thereof by the same
Divisor, and you shall have in the quotient seconds, and so by observing still
that order you shall bring it into as small Fractions as you will, thus shall
you find that the Moon according to her daily motion, will run the
foresaid space of distance that was betwixt her and the fixed Star in 2.
days, 46^ and 14^

How to divide Astronomicall Fractions when the Divisor is greater then the
diuidennd. Cap. 28.
THough by the last chapter you may learn how to divide any number in
Astronomicall Fractions, whereof the Divisor is greater then the dividend, yet
I mind once again, to set down a general rule to serve for such purpose,
because it comes often in use in having to deal with Astronomicall tables,
and to give you example thereof: First then having to divide any number, whose
Divisor is greater then the dividend, do thus; multiply the greatest
denomination of the dividend by 60. and if there be any Fractions annexed
thereunto which are of the next inferior kind, as minutes are to degrees, or
to hours, and seconds to minutes, and thirds to seconds etc. Then add them to
the former product, but if such Fractions be not of the next inferior kind,
then let them stand as they are until you come to deal with them, and having
divided according to the common rule of Division the first sum of the
dividend by the Divisor, multiply the quotient into the whole Divisor, and
subtract that product out of the upper number if it may be, if not, then make
the quotient lesser and lesser, until you can find such a number as will be
subtracted out of the said upper number, and if there be any remainder left,
then multiply that remainder by 60. not leaving to follow the former order of
working, until you have found the nearest exact quotient that may be. And you
have to note that the denomination of the first quotient must be of the next
inferior kind, to that denomination which the Divisor has, and to make this
rule the plainer, I will set down and example used by Standius ut the 115 page
of his Ephemerides who to know the very instant of the sull Moon the second of
March 1569. bids to divide the distance of the opposition which was 8.
degrees, 46^ by the diurnal excess of the Moons motion from the sun which
was then 13. degrees, 48^ which Divisor because it is greater then the
dividend, you must according to the rule before given, work thus: First
multiply the greatest denomination of the dividend which is 8. degrees by 60^
the product whereof will be 480^ whereunto by adding the Fraction annexed
videliz. 46^ it makes in all 526^ which is to be divided by 13. degrees, 48^
here in dividing the last product first by 13. degrees, I find in the quotient
39. which is one too many, considering that I must take out of the foresaid
dividend 48^ as often as I did take out thereof 13. degrees, wherefore I set
down but 38. in the quotient, and then the remainder will be 96. which because
I may easily divide by the common Divisor 13. degrees, and 48^ I divide
therefore that 96. first by 13. whereof the quotient is 7. and the remainder is
5. which I reduce into seconds by multiplying that 5. by 60. the product
whereof is 300^ that done, I multiply 48^ by 7. the product whereof is 336.
which though it be somewhat too great a number to be taken out of 300. yet I
let it stand because it approaches to a very nigh exactness, and by this
means I find the whole quotient to be 38^ and 7^ and you have to note that
if after the first quotient be set down, there happen any remainder which is
lesser then the Divisor, then you must set down a Cipher in the quotient, and
remove your Divisor one place further, even as you do in common Division, and
then to work as before.

How to take the square root of Astronomicall Fractions. Cap. 29.
THe greatest difficulty hereof consists in finding out the true
denomination of the root, for if the Fraction be seconds, then the root
thereof are mynutes, and if the Fraction be fourths, then the root are seconds,
for the Fraction must always have such denomination as may be halfed, as
seconds, fourths, and such like, the one half whereof gives always name to
the root, for if the question be of thirds, you must first reduce them to
fourths before you can take the root, and you must do the like with any other
Fraction, whose denomination is od and not even. As for example, if you would
take the root of 43^ here by multiplying these 43^ by 60. you shall reduce
them into 1580''''^ the root whereof is 50^ Moreover the Fractions where. with
you have to deal, are either simple or compound, if they be simple and less
then minutes, and therewith have even denominations and not odd, then you
need to make no further reduction, but to work as if you had to deal with
whole numbers. As in seeking the square root of 1600^ you find it to be just
40^ but if the number be compound, that is to say, consisting ot Integrums and
Fractions, or of many Fractions having diverse denominations, then you must
first reduce them all to the smallest Fraction that has an even denomination
before that you can take the root: As for example, you would know the root of
4. degrees, 25^ here you must by the Sexagenarie Multiplycation and Addition of
the next Fraction, reduce the degrees to minutes, and the minutes to seconds,
as you were taught before in Division, and then to work as you were wont to
do in taking the square root of whole numbers, and in so doing, you shall
find the sum of seconds to be 15900^ the square root whereof is 126^ which
if you divide by 60. it will make 2. degrees, 6^ Another example, as to take
the root of 13. degrees, 42^ and 45^ here by reduction as before, you shall
bring the degrees and minutes to 49365^. the square root whereof is 222^ which
being divided by 60. makes 3. degrees, 42^ And thus I end with the
Astronomicall Fractions, which kind of Fractions, though they be very
learnedly and orderly taught by Reinoldus in the beginning of his Prutenicall
tables, yet in mine opinion not in so plain order, and so fit for every man's
understanding, as I have here set them down according to the doctrine of Gemma
Frisius, which being once learned, you shall the sooner attain to the other.
And without the knowledge of these Fractions, you can never truly calculate
any thing out of the Astronomicall tables, and therefore such Fractions are
most necessary to be learned.

The description and use of the Sexagenarie table.
THis table consists of two figures, whereof the nether figure having four
Angles, is called in Latin Trapezium, marked with the letters A. D. E. B. and
the upper figure is a Triangle, marked with the letters A. B. C. and each
figure contains particular collums of numbers, serving to find out the
products of Astronomicall Fractions being multiplied one by another, and also
the quotients of the like Fractions being divided one by another, and also the
square roots of the said Fractions, for which purpose the first collum on the
left hand, contains 59. Fractions, counting from 1. standing above, and so
proceeding down ward to 59. and are contained betwixt A. and D. and the foot
of the said Trapezium, contains 30. counting from the lest hand toward the
right, which are contained betwixt D. and E. and the rest of the numbers to
make up 59. are to be found in the upper most front of the Triangle, proceeding
from C. toward A. you have to note also that in the outermost collum of the
Trapezium on the right hand, the numbers do proceed downward from 30. to 59.
that is from B. to E. and the numbers in the outermost collum of the Triangle
on the right hand, do proceed upward from 31. to 59. contained betwixt B. and
C. both which do serve to fill up the first multiplyers, and multiplycands,
for when you cannot find them in the Trapezium, then the outermost collum of
the Triangle on the right hand, serves to supply that want, and when you
cannot find the said numbers in the Triangle, then the outermost collum of the
Trapezium on the right hand, serves to supply that want, and in seeking any
multiplyer or multiplycand, either in the Trapezium or in the Triangle,
consider always which way they are most readily found out, so as they may
directly answer one against another.

All the rest of the numbers contained betwixt the two outermost collums and
are set down in square Angles, called common Angles, do signify either
products or diuidends or square numbers, according as occasion shall require.
And the outermost collums do signify sometime multiplyers, sometime
multiplycands. sometime quotients, and sometime roots. All which things you
shall better understand by the examples hereafter following.

The use of the Table.
By help of this table you may more readily multiply and divide Astronomicall
Fractions, and also find out the square root of such Fractions, then by those
rules which I have heretofore set down according to the doctrine of Gemma
Frisius. And first I will set down an example of Multiplycation, then another
of Division, and thirdly one example of finding out the square root of the
said Fractions, and let the example of Multiplycation be thus: Suppose that you
would multiply 29. degrees, 31^ 53^ 7^ 30''''^ by 13. degrees, 10^ 35^ 1^ which
you must set down in such order as follows, (that is to say) first the
denominations, then next under them the multiplycand, and next under that the
multiplyer, and under them the several products, and lowest of all the total
sum of the said products.

Integra De. '''' v vi vii Denominations 29 31 50 7 30 The multiplycand. 13 10
35 1 The multiplyer. 29 31 50 7 30 The first product. 17 13 34 14 22 30 The
second product. 4 55 18 21 15 0 The third product. 6 23 53 51 37 30 The fourth
product, 6 29 6 24 2 31 12 37 30 The total sum

Here beginning with the first number of the multiplyer on the right hand which
is 1^ say thus, one times 30. is 30 which is to be placed under the
denomination of 7. because the denominatino over 1. is 3. and the denomination
over 30. is 4. which being added together according to the rule before set
down in the Chapter of Multiplycation of Astronomicall Fractions do make 7.
then say one times 7. is 7. which you must place under the sixth denomination.
Again one times 50. is 50. which is to be set under the fifth denomination,
because 3. and 2. makes 5, then say one times 31. is 31. which is to be set
under the fourth denomination, for 3. and 1. makes 4, then one times 29. is
29. which is to be set under the third denomination, and thus you have the
first product: then proceed with the next number of the multiplyer toward
your left hand which is 35. and is to be multiplied into 30. which to do
readily, you must enter the table with these two numbers, and seeking in the
first Collum of the Trapezium on the left hand, for 35. in the foot of the
said Trapezium, for the number of 30. you shall find in the common angle the
product to be 17. and 30. whereof you must place the 30. under the sixth
denomination, and keeping the number 17. still in mind to be added to the next
product, multiply 35. into 7. and you shall find in the Trapezium the product
to be 4. and 5. whereunto if you add the 17. which you had in mind, the
product will be 4. and 22. whereof you must set the 22. under the fifth
denomination, and keeping the 4. in mind, multiply again the same 35. into
50. the product whereof you shall find in the Triangle to be 29. and 10.
whereto if you add the 4. in mind, it will make 29. and 14. whereof the 14. is
to be placed under the fourth denomination, and keeping the 29. in mind,
multiply again the said 35. into 31. and you shall find the product thereof
in the Triangle to be 18. and 5. whereunto if you add 29. in mind, it will
make in all 18. and 34. which 34. is to be set under the third denomination,
then keeping 18. in mind, multiply the foresaid 35. into 29. and you shall
find the product thereof in the Trapezium to be 16. and 55. whereunto if you
add the 18. in mind, the product will be 17. and 13. which 13. is to be placed
under the second denomination. Now because you have gone through all the numbers
of the multiplycand with the number 35. you must place the 17. which you had in
mind under the denomination of mynutes, and so having ended the second product,
proceed to the finding out of the third product by multiplying 10. first into
30. the product whereof you shall find in the Trapezium to be 5. and 0.
whereof you must set the Cipher under the fifth denomination and keeping the 5
in mind, multiply again 10. into 7. and you shall find the product to be 1.
and 10. whereunto if you add the 5. in mind, the product will be 1. and 15.
whereof you must set the 15. under the fourth denomination, and keeping the one
in mind, multiply 10. into 50. and you shall find the product thereof in the
Trapezium to be 8. and 20. whereunto if you add the 1. in mind, it will make
8. and 21. whereof you must set the 21. under the third denomination, and
keeping 8. in mind, multiply 10. into 31. and you shall find the product
thereof in the Trapezium to be 5. and 10. unto which if you add the 8. in
mind, the product will be 5. and 18. whereof set down the 18. under the
second denomination, and keeping 5. in mind multiply 10. into 29. the product
where of you shall find in the Trapezium to be 4. and 50. whereunto if you
add the 5. in mind, the product will be 4 and 55. Now because you have gone
through all the numbers of the multiplycand, with 10. you must set down the 4.
which you had in mind under the denomination of degrees, and so having the
third product, proceed to the fourth by multiplying 13. into 30. and you shall
find the product in the Trapezium to be 6. and 30. whereof set down 30. under
the fourth denomination of Fractions, and keeping 6. in mind multiply 13. into
7. the product whereof you shall find in the Trapezium to be 1. and 31.
whereunto if you add the 6. in mind, the product will be 1. and 37. whereof
set down the 37. under the third denomination, and keeping the 1. in mind
multiply 13. into 50. and you shall find the product in the Trapezium to be 10.
and 50. whereunto if you add the one in mind, the product will be 10. and 51.
whereof set the 51. under the second denomination of Fractions, and keeping 10.
in mind multiply 13 into 31. the product whereof you shall find in the
Trapezium to be 6. and 43. whereunto if you add the 10. in mind, the product
will be 6. and 53. whereof set down 53. under the first denomination of
Fractions, and keeping 6. in mind multiply 13. into 29. the product whereof you
shall find in the Trapezium to be 6. and 17. whereu^to if you add ye 6. in
mind, the product will be 6. and 23. whereof set down 23. under the
denomination of degrees. Now because you have gone through all the numbers of
the multiplycand with the last number of the multiplyer, you must set down the
6. which you had in mind under the denomination of Integrums, that done, add
all the four products together, beginning on the right hand, saying thus, 30.
and 0 is but 30. which set down under the neathermost line, as you see in the
former figure, then say 30. and 7. makes 37. which you must set down under
the neathermost live next unto 30. then say 22. and 50. makes 72. out of which
by subtracting the Sexagenarie number, the remainder is 12v. which is to be
set under the line next unto the 37. keeping still the 60. in mind, which in
this account makes but one, and is to be added to the next rank on the left
hand, then say 1. in mind and 5. makes 6. and 4. makes 10. and 1. makes 11.
here set down 1. and keep the Article in mind, then say 1. in mind and 3.
makes 4. then 1. and 1. and 3. being added to 4. do make in all 9. out of
which 9. you must subtract 6. which is but one 60. and is to be kept in mind
and there remains 3. which is to be set down by the 1. then say 1 in mind
and 7. is 8. and 1. is 9. and 4. is 13. and 9. is 22. here set down 2. and
keep the 2. Articles in mind, then say 2. and 3. makes 5. and 2. is 7. and
3. is 10. and 2. makes 12. tennes, which do make 2. sixties, and are to be
kept in mind, then say 2. and 1. makes 3. and 8. makes 11. and 3. makes 14.
wherefore set down 4. keeping the 1. Article in mind, then say 1. in mind and
5. is 6. and 1. is 7. and 1. is 8. then take 6. from 8. and there remains 2.
which set down by the 4. and keep one sixty in mind, then say 1. in mind and
3. is 4. and 5. is 9. and 7. is 16. wherefore set down 6. and keeping one in
mind, say that 1. and 5. is 6. and 5. is 11. and 1. is 12. which makes two
sixties to be kept in mind, then say 2. in mind and 3. is 5. and 4. makes 9.
which set down, then say 2. is 2. which set down by the 9. under the
denomination of degrees, then say 6. and nothing makes 6. which set down
under the denomination of Integrums, for that 6. in this place signifies 6.
sixties, which is in value 360. degrees, and being divided by 30. because 30.
degrees makes one whole sign, you shall find in the quotient 12. signs, so as
the total sum of the four products is 12. signs, 29. degrees, 6^ 24^ 2^
31''''^ 12v^ 37vi^ 30vii^ as the former figure shows, and this is the very
same example which I wrought before when I taught you how to multiply
Astronomicall Fractions according to Gemma Frisius his rule, and they both do
wholly agree in every condition, saving that to work by the Sexagenarie table
is the readier way of the two.

An example how to divide Astronomicall Fractions by help of the Sexagenarie
table.
SVppose then that you would divide the former total sum or product found by
Multiplycation, which is 6. Integrums, 29. degrees, 6^ 24^ 2^ 31''''^ 12v^
37vi^ 30vii^ by this Divisor 29. degrees, 31^ 50^ 7^ 30''''^ which in the
former example of Multiplycation was the multiplycand. Now to divide these two
numbers the one by the other, you must do thus, first you must set down the
row of denominations as you did before in Multiplycation, and next under that
the dividend, then right under that the divisor, and on the right hand behind a
crooked line made like a half Moon, all the several quotients are to be set
one by another in a right line, as you may see by the figures hereafter
following.

Denominatio^^* Integrum de '''' v vi vii The dividend. 6 29 6 24 2 31 12 37 30
The divisor. 29 31 50 7 30

Here having made your row of denominations, and set down your dividend, you
have to consider whether the first number of your Divisor be greater then the
first number of your dividend, for if it be, then you must place your Divisor
one space further toward your right hand, as in this example, because the
first number of your Divisor 29. cannot be taken out of 6. you set it under the
second number of the dividend, and so all the rest of the numbers successively
toward the right hand, as the former example shows, now the order of
working is thus: You must first seek out the first number of your Divisor, in
the first collum of the Trapezium on the left hand which is 29. then in the
row right against that 29. on the right hand, you have to seek out those
numbers of the dividend, which do stand right over the first number of your
Divisor which is 6. and 29. and if you cannot find those numbers justly, then
seek in the self same row a number which is somewhat less and nearest in
value unto it, as in this example, because you cannot find 6. and 29. you take
6. and 17. the quotient, whereof you shall find in the foot of the Trapezium
right under the said number 6. and 17. to be 13. degrees, which you must set
in the quotient line, and that is your first quotient, having his proper
denomination over his head which are degrees, and are to be found by the rule
before taught. Thus you see here that the number of the Divisor is to be found
in the outermost collum on the left hand, and the number of the dividend in
that row which is right against the said Divisor, and the quotient in the
foot of the Trapezium right under the number of the dividend last found. Then
you have to multiply the whole Divisor (that is to say) every particular number
thereof by the first quotient 13. which you may do by help of the Table, as
you did before in the example of Multiplycation, and is to be set down in this
manner. And you shall find the whole product to be 6. 23. 53. 51. 37. 30.

Which being set right under the first dividend, is to be subtracted out of the
same, and the remainder to be written over the head of the dividend as you do
in common Division, first then to multiply all the particular numbers of the
Divisor by the quotient 13. and to find every product thereof, resort to the
Table and seek for 13. in the foot of the Trapezium, and for 30. which is the
multiplycand in the outermost collum of the Trapezium on the left hand, and the
common angle will show the product which is 6. and 30. whereof you must set
down 30. under 30. and keeping 6. in mind, multiply again 13. into 7. the
product whereof you shall find to be 1. and 31. unto 29 31 50 7 30 The
Divisor. 13 The first quotient. 6 23 53 51 37 30 The first product. which add
the 6. which you kept in mind, and the product shall be 1. and 37. whereof you
must set down 37. and keeping one in mind, multiply again 13. into 50. and
you shall find the product to be 10. and 50. whereunto if you add 1. in mind,
the product shall be 10. and 51. whereof you must set down 51. and keeping 10.
in mind, multiply 13. into 31. the product whereof you shall find in the
Trapezium to be 6. and 43. whereunto if you add the 10. which you had in mind,
the product shall be 6. and 53. whereof set down 53. and keeping 6. in mind,
multiply 13. into 29. and you shall find the product to be 6. and 17. whereunto
if you add the 6. in mind, the product shall be 6. and 23. whereof set down
23 under the last number of your multiplycand, and because you have no more
numbers of the Divisor to be multiplied, set down 6. in mind on the left hand,
so shall the whole product be 6. 23. 53. 51. 37. 30. as the former example
shows, which product is to be subtracted out of the first dividend, and the
remainder is to be set down over the head of that dividend, as you see in this
example next following, wherein the first dividend is first set down, and
right under that the foresaid product which is the first product, and the
remainder above the dividend, and the quotient 13. is set in the quotient line
which is your first quotient.

The remainder. 5 12 32 25 1 The first dividend. 6 29 6 24 2 31 12 37 30 (13.
The first product, 6 23 53 51 37 30

And remember (in making your Subtraction) to begin with the first number of
the foresaid product which is on the right hand, and when you cannot take it
out of the number standing right over his head, to borrow always 60. of the
next number on the left hand, and to pay it home again with 1. for there 60.
is but one. This done, remove your Divisor one space further toward the right
hand (that is to say) set the first number of your Divisor under 12 which is
the second number of the second dividend, which together with the first
remainder is 5. 12. 32. 25. 1. 12. 37. 30. and al other numbers of the Divisor
orderly toward your right hand, as you see in this example.

The second dividend. 5 12 32 25 1 12 37 3^ The Divisor. 29 31 50 7 30

Then ask how many times 29. is in 5. and 12. which number you must seek in
the Trapezium in the row that answers toward the right hand, to the first
number of your Divisor which is 29. standing in the outermost collum of the
Trapezium on the left hand, and because you cannot find 5. and 12. in that
row, you must take in the same row the number which is nighest unto it, but
less, which you shall find to be 4. and 50. and right under that in the foot
of the Trapezium you shall find 10. which must be your second quotient, by
which quotient you have to multiply all the particular numbers of the Divisor
in such order as is before set down and you shall find the product of that
Multiplycation to be 4. 55. 18. 21. 15. 0. which product you must place under
the second dividend setting 4. under 5. and 55. under 12. and so forth orderly
toward the right hand, that done, subtract the same product out of the numbers
of the second dividend, standing right over the said product, and the remainder
will be 17. 14. 3. 46. 12. as you see in this example.

The remainder. 17 14 3 46 12 37 30 The second dividend. 5 12 32 25 1 12 37 30
(13.10. The second product. 4 55 18 25 15 0

Now remove your Divisor one space further toward the right hand by setting
the first number of your Divisor which is 29 under 14. which is the second
number of the third dividend, and so all the rest orderly toward the right
hand, as you see in this example.

The third dividend. 17 14 3 46 12 37 30 The Divisor. 29 31 50 7 30

Then ask how many times 29. is contained in 17. and 14. which dividend
because you can not find it in the row that answers to that 29. which
stands in the outermost collum of the Trapezium on the left hand (for all
those numbers are too little) you must seek for it in that collum which
stands right upon 29. in the foot of the Trapezium, neither shall you find
it there, but you shall find 16. and 55. which is somewhat lesser yet in value
nighest unto 17 and 14. and right against that you shall find in the outermost
collum on the right hand 35. which must be your third quotient to be set in
the quotient line, whereby you have again to multiply the whole Divisor in
such order as before, the product whereof you shall find to be 17. 13. 34. 14.
22. 30. which product being placed under the dividend by setting 17. under 17.
and 13. under 14 and so forth orderly toward the right hand, subtract the said
product (beginning at the right hand) out of the numbers which stand right over
the said product, and the remainder will be 29. 31. 50. 7. 30. which is to be
set down over the third dividend, and the rest to be cancelled as you see in
this example.

The remainder. 29 31 50 7 30 The third dividend 17 14 3 46 12 37 30 (13.10.35
The third product. 17 13 34 14 22 30

And now the remainder of the third dividend is come to be the fourth dividend,
wherefore remove your Divisor one space further toward the right hand by
setting 29. under 29. and the rest orderly toward the right hand as you see in
the example following. Then ask how many times 29. is contained in 29. which
being but once, your fourth quotient is 1. and is to be set in the quotient
line, whereby the whole Divisor being multiplied, the product will be 29. 31.
50. 7. 30. which you must place under the fourth dividend, and being subtracted
out of the same, nothing will remain, and so the whole quotient will be 13.
degrees, 10^ 35^ 1^ as you see in this example.

0 0 0 0 0 The fourth dividend. 29 31 50 7 30 (13. degrees 10^35^1^ The fourth
product. 29 31 50 7 30

Another example of Division.
IF the daily motion of the Moon be 13. degrees 3^ 53^ 56^ 23''''^ 58v^ in
what time shall she make her whole revolution allowing 360 degrees to that
revolution, which is otherwise called the month of Paragration. Here for so
much as this example is to be wrought by Division, and that your dividend is a
simple and whole number (that is to say) 360. degrees, without any Fractions of
diverse denominations annexed thereunto: you must first set down the 360.
degrees, and next to that toward your right hand set down a long row of
Ciphers with so many denominations over their heads as you shall think needful
to serve your turn, and right under your dividend set your Divisor as you see
in this example.

The denominatio^s. ^nte^rum De. '''' v vi vii viii ix The dividend. 360 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 The Divisor. 13 3 53 56 23 58 (27. The first product. 352 45 16 22
47 6

Here you must first ask how many times 13. is in 360. and by the common rule
of Division you shall find the quotient to be 27. which you must set down in
the quotient line, and by that quotient you have to multiply every particular
number of the Divisor beginning on the right hand, as you do in
Multiplycation, saying that 27. times 58. is 26. and 6. as the Trapezium
shows, for by seeking 27. in the foot of the Trapezium and for 58. in the
outermost collum on the right hand, you shall find in the common Angle 26. and
6. wherefore set down 6. under 58. and keeping 26. in mind, multiply 23. which
is the second number of the Divisor by 27. and by the Trapezium you shall find
the product thereof to be 10. and 21. whereunto if you add the 26. in mind, it
will make 10. and 47. whereof set down 47. under 23. and keeping 10. in mind,
multiply 56. which is the third number of the Divisor by 27. and in the
Trapezium you shall find the product to be 25. and 12. whereto if you add
the 10. in mind, it will make 25. and 22. whereof set down 22. under 56. and
keeping 25. in mind, multiply 53. which is the fourth number of the Divisor by
27. the product whereof you shall find by the Trapezium to be 23. and 51.
whereto if you add 25. in mind, it will make 76 which is one 60. and 16.
whereof set down 16. under 53. and add the one in mind to 23. and that will
make 24. which you must keep in mind, then multiply 3. which is the fifth
number of the Divisor by 27. the product whereof you shall find in the
Trapezium to be 1. and 21. whereto if you add the 24. in mind, it will make 1.
and 45. whereof set down 45. under 3. and keeping 1. in mind, multiply 13.
which is the last number of the Divisor by 27. the product whereof you shall
find in the Trapezium to be 5. and 51. whereunto if you add one in mind, it
will make 5. and 52. here because the first 5. is 5. sixties, it makes in all
352. and is to be set under 360. so as the first product of this Multiplycation
contains these numbers 352. 45. 16. 22. 47. 6. as you see them set down in
the former example, and this product is to be subtracted out of 360 which is
the first dividend. And to avoid confusion, it shall not be amysse to set
down the first Dividend and the first product apart by themselves thus.

The first remainder. 7 14 43 37 12 54 0 0 0 The first dividend. 360 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 (27. The first product. 352 45 10 22 47 6

Here beginning on the right hand say thus, take 6. out of nothing which will
not be, wherefore you must borrow 60 then by taking 6. out of 60. there will
remain 54. which you must set above that Cipher which stands right over 6.
and caucell the 6. keeping still the one 60. which you borrowed in mind, then
say 47. and one in mind makes 48. which will not be taken out of nothing, and
therefore you must borrow again one 60. as you did before, so shall the
remainder be 12. which is to be set above the Cipher which stands right over
47. and cancel 47. and so proceed with like order in subtracting all the rest
of the numbers of the first product out of the first dividend, so shall the
remainder be 7. 14. 43. 37. 12. 54. as you see them set down in the former
figure. Now having to remove your Divisor one space further toward the right
hand, you shall do well to make your first remainder which is 7. 14. 43. 37.
12. 54. to be your second dividend, and under that to set your Divisor as you
see in this example.

The second dividend. 7 14 43 37 12 54 0 0 0 (27.33. The Divisor. 13 3 53 56 23
58

Then ask how many times 13. is contained in 7. and 14. and having found 13.
in the foot of ye Trapezium, seek in that collum for 7. and 14. and not
finding it there, take in the self same collum that number which is nighest in
value unto it and less, which you shall find to be 7. and 9. right against
which in the outermost collum on the right hand is 33. which must be your
second quotient, and is to be set in the quotient line, next unto 27. and by
this quotient you have to multiply every number of the Divisor as you did
before, the product whereof you shall find to be 7. 11. 8. 40. 1. 10. 54.
wherefore you must first set down your second dividend, and then the second
product right under the same as you see in this example.

The second remainder. 3 34 57 11 43 6 The second dividend. 7 14 43 37 12 54 0
0 0 0 (27.33. The second product. 7 11 8 40 1 10 54

Which product being subtracted out of the second dividend, the remainder will
be 3. 34. 57. 11. 43. 6. which is to be set above the second dividend, and the
product to be cancelled as you see in the former example. Here having to
remoonue agine your common Divisor one space further toward the right hand,
set down first the last remainder which now must be your third dividend, and
under that set the common Divisor as you see in this example.

The third dividend. 3 34 57 11 43 6 0 0 0 (27. 33. 16. The Divisor. 13 3 53 56
23 58

Then ask how many times 13. is contained in 3. and 34. here by seeking in the
foot of the Trapezium for 13. though you cannot find in that collum 3. and 34.
yet you shall find 3. and 28. which is the nighest, right against which in the
outermost collum on the left hand you shall find 16. which must be your third
quotient, and is to be set in the quotient line, by which quotient you must
multiply the whole Divisor as before, the product whereof you shall find to be
3. 29. 2. 23. 2. 23. 28. which being the third product you must set down under
the third dividend which was your last remainder and to be subtracted out of
the same as you see in this example.

5 54 48 40 42 32 0 0 The third dividend. 3 34 57 11 43 6 0 0 0 The third
product. 3 20 2 23 2 23 28

And so the remainder will be 5. 54. 48. 40. 42. 32. which you must set above
the third dividend, and all the inferior numbers are to be cancelled as you see
in the former example. Here having again to remove your Divisor one space
further toward your right hand, the last remainder must be your fourth
dividend, under which the common Divisor is to be set thus.

The fourth dividend. 5 54 48 40 42 32 0 0 The Divisor. 13 3 53 56 23 58
27days / 33 / 16 / 26^

Here asking how many times 13. is contained in 5. and 54. seek for 13. in the
foot of the Trapezium, in whose collum you shall not find 5. and 54. but 5.
and 51. which is nighest unto it, and right against that in the outermost
collum on the left hand you shall find the quotient to be 27. by which if you
should multiply the whole Divisor, the whole product thereof would be 5. 56 21.
24. 1. 47. 6. which is more then the dividend, and therefore you must make your
quotient one less, setting down no more but 26. in the quotient line, by
which if you multiply the Divisor, the product will be 5. 26. 41. 22. 25. 14.
8. which being subtracted out of the fourth dividend, the remainder will be
28. 7. 18. 17. 17. 52. which remainder if you will, you may make to be a fifth
dividend, and then to work as before, if you would have your quotient to
extend to smaller denominations, which I leave to do because I think that
thirds be small enough. And as often as the product of any particular quotient
shall be greater then the dividend, remember to take a less quotient even as
you do in common Division. But now you have to note that though this whole
quotient here signifies time, for the first quotient signifies days, the
second quotient minutes of days, the third quotient seconds, and the fourth
quotient thirds, yet for so much as the day is to be counted by 24. hours and
not by mynutes, you must therefore reduce all the particular quotients saving
the first, into hours and parts of hours, even to so small denominations as
you shall think good your self, by help of this rule which in division of
Astronomicall Fractions bids to multiply the quotient by 2. and to divide
the product thereof by 5. as here if you multiply the 33. which is the second
quotient by 2. the product will be 66. which being divided by 5. the quotient
will be 13. hours and one sixty remaining to be kept in mind, wherefore set
down in the place of 33^ 13. hours, then multiply the third quotient which is
16. by 2. and that will make 32. whereunto if you add the one 60. in mind it
will make in all 92. which being divided by 5. the quotient will be 18. and two
sixties, which is 120. remaining to be kept in mind, wherefore in steed of
16^ which was the third quotient, set 18 of an hour, and then proceed to the
fourth quotient which is 26^ which being multiplied by 2. makes 52. whereunto
if you add, 120. it will make 172. which if you divide by 5. the quotient will
be 34^ of an hour, which is to be set down in the place of 26. so shall
your whole former quotient contain 27. days, 13. hours, 18^ of an hour and
34^ of an hour. And note that as in the Division of Astronomicall Fractions to
bring the quotients to like denomination, you do multiply by 2. and divide by
5. so in Multiplycation to reduce the numbers of the multiplyer being of diverse
denominations to one self denomination, you must by order reuerse, multiply by
5. and divide by 2. whereof I have given you an example before, whereas I show
you how to multiply Astronomicall Fractions according to Gemma Frisius, without
the help of the Sexagenarie table.

An example showing how to extract the square root out of Astronomicall
Fractions.
SVppose the number given to be 17^ 12^ 33^ 4''''^ whereof you have to take the
square root, here having set down the said numbers with their proper
denominations over their heads, as you see in the example following, first set
a prick under the last number on the right hand, and then prick every other
number leaving one void space betwixt every two pricks, as you do when you
seek the square root of whole numbers or Iutegrums, as you see here in this
example.

The number given 17^ 12^ 33^ 4''''

Then resort to the table and seek amongst the products which are placed next
to the line A. B. as well in the Trapezium as in the Triangle, and see whether
you can find the number standing over the first prick on the left hand which
is 17. and 12. but not finding it there, you must take that which is nighest
unto it and less, which you shall find in the Triangle toward B. to be 17. 4.
the root whereof you shall find both in the head, and also in the outward
collum of the Triangle on the right hand to be 32. aunswering to the foresaid
square root, which root you must place behind the quotient line, then
subtract 17. and 4. out of 17. and 12. and there will remain 8. which is to be
set over 12. and the 17. and 12. to be cancelled, that done, double the root
32. which will be 64. that is to say 1. and 4. and setting 1. under 8. and 4.
under 33. ask how many times 1. is in 8. and there is 8. which is the second
quotient by which you must multiply 1. and 4. the product whereof will be 8.
and 32. which being subtracted from the upper number which is 8. and 33. the
remainder is 1. which is to be set over 33. and the 8. and 33. to be cancelled.
Finally multiply the second quotient 8. in it self, and the product will be 1.
and 4. which being subtracted out of the former remainder of the given number
nothing remains, so as you shall find 32^ 8^. to be the root of the given
number, as this example shows.

Which root if you multiply into it self squarely, the product will be like
unto the number given, and by this means you shall find the given number to be
a just square number. But you have to note that if the last denomination
standing on the right hand be od and not even, as thirds or fifts, then you
must set down a Cipher beyond the last denomination toward your right hand,
and under that Cipher set your first prick, as in this example 3^ 2^. 9^
17''''^. 8v^ here because the last denomination on the right hand is od, that
is to say fifts, you must therefore set down next unto it toward the right
hand a Cipher having over his head the next denomination which is vi. and is
even, wherefore set your first prick under that Cipher and so proceed toward
your left hand pricking every other number, and then work as follows.

First then seek in the table amongst the square numbers nigh unto the line A.
B. for 3. and 2. which should stand in one self square Angle next unto the
line A. B. for those only are square numbers, and not finding it amongst the
square numbers, take that square which is nighest unto it and less, which you
shall find to be 2. and 49. the root whereof is 13. and is to be found as well
in the foot of the Trapezium right under the foresaid square number, as also
in the outermost collum of the said Trapezium on the left hand standing right
against the same square number, which root is to be set in the quotient line,
that done, subtract the foresaid square number out of the number standing right
over the last prick on ye left hand which is 3. and 2. and the remainder will
be 13. which is to be set over 2. and the 3. and 2. to be cancelled as you see
in the former example, that done, double the foresaid found root 13. which will
make 26. by which you have to divide 13. and 9. wherefore resort to the
Trapezium, in the foot whereof you shall find 26. in whose collum not finding
13. and 9. take that which is nighest unto it and less, which is 13. and 0.
right against which you shall find in the outermost collum on the right hand
30. which should be your quotient, but because it is too great and that the
square thereof cannot be taken out of the remainder, you must make the
quotient one less, and set in the quotient line no more but 29. by which 29.
if you multiply 26. the product will be 12. and 34. as the Trapezium shows,
which being subtracted out of 13. and 9, standing over 26. the remainder will
be 35. which 35. is to be set over 9. then by multiplying the second quotient
which is 29. into it self, you shall find by the Trapezium the product to be
14. and 1. which being subtracted out of 35. and 17. the remainder will be 21.
and 16. which is to be set over 35. and 17. as you see in this example.

That done, double both the quotients or whole root, and the product will be
26. 58. and having set 58. under 8. and 26. under 16. divide 21. 16. and 8 by
26. 58. wherefore look for 26. in the foot of the Trapezium, and for 21. 16.
in that collum, and not finding it there, take that which is nighest unto it
and less, which you shall find to be 21 and 14, and right against that in the
outermost collum on the right hand stands 49. which being too great to be
your quotient by 2. therefore make your quotient no more but 47. which being
set down in the quotient line, multiply thereby 26. 58. and the product will
be 21. 7. 26. which being subtracted out of 21. 16. and 8. the remainder will
be 8. and 42. then setting 42. over 8. and 8. over 16. cancel 21. 16. and 8.
then multiply 47. into it self squarely, and you shall find the product
thereof in the Triangle to be 36. 49. which being subtracted out of 8. 42. and
0. the remainder will be 8. 6. 11. as you see in this example.

^ And thus you have found the root of your given number to be 13. 29 and 47.
and whether you have done rightly or not, you may know by multiplying the said
root into it self squarely, and by adding to the product thereof the
remainder, and if you would find a more exact root, then add more Ciphers to
your given number toward your right hand, together with their denominations
over their heads as they increase successively, and be sure always that the
number of the Ciphers be even and not odd as 2. 4. 6. and so forth, and the
more Ciphers that you add to the given number (so as the number of them be
even) the more exact root you shall have.

Now to give to every number of the root his proper denomination, do thus,
take half of those denominations that are over every prick, and those shall
be the denominations of the root, as in the former example, whereas seconds
do stand over the last prick on the left hand take half of that which is 1^
wherefore the first number of your root must be minutes, and over the rest of
the numbers of the root set seconds, thirds and so forth successively until
you have brought your root to as small denominations as you desire.

FINIS.
A BRIEF DEscription of the tables of the three special right lines belonging
to a Circle, called Sines, lines Tangent, and lines Secant. Not only showing
why they were first invented, and defining the proper terms thereto
belonging: But also showing diverse necessary uses thereof, written by Master
Blundeuile 1593.

LONDON. Printed by John Windet, 1594.

THE DESCRIPTION and use of the Table of Synes.
BEcause there is no proportion, comparison, or likeness betwixt a right line
and a crooked, the ancient Philosophers, as Ptolomey and diverse other, were
much troubled in seeking to know the measures of a Circle or of any portion
thereof by his Diameter, and by knowing the Diameter to find out the length of
any chorde in a circle, which is always lesser then the Diameter it self, and
finding that the more parts whereinto the Diameter was divided, the nearer they
approached to the truth: Some of them therefore, as Ptolomey, divided the
Diameter of a circle into 120. parts, and the Semidiameter into 60. parts, and
every such part into 60^ and every minute into 60. seconds etc. And in like
manner did Arzahel, an ancient Arabian, who divided the Diameter into 300.
parts and the Semidiameter into 150. and every of those parts into 60^ and so
forth as before, according to which computation they made their tables: but
because the working by those tables was very tedious and troublesome, by reason
that it was needful continually to use the art of numbering by Astronomicall
Fractions: therefore Georgius Purbachius, and Regio montanus his Scholar to
avoid that trouble of calculating by Astronomicall Fractions, divided the
Diameter of a Circle into a far greater number of parts, and made such tables
as are used at this present, the description and use whereof does hereafter
follow, first of those that are set down by Monte Regio in Folio, and then of
those that were lately Corrected and made perfect by Clauius the Jesuit which
are Printed in quarto.

And because that the way to find out the proportion which any chord has to
the whole Diameter, was very hard, therefore the said Purbachius and Monte
Regio having direction from certain propositions of Euclyd, as from the 47.
proposition of his first book, and from the third proposition of his third
book, and also from the 15. proposition of his fifth book, they made choice of
the half chord and Semidiameter of the Circle, calling the half chord, Sinum
rectum, and the Semidiameter Sinum totum. And because that the proportion of
any circumference to his Diameter never changes, how great or how little so
ever the Circle be: after that they had calculated for one Circle, they made
such tables as might serve for all Circles, and though these tables of sines
do suffice to work thereby all manner of conclusions, as well of Astronomy,
as of Geometry, yet for more ease, our modern Geometricians have of late
invented two other right lines belonging to a Circle called lines Tangent, and
lines Secant, and have made like tables for them that were made for sines, and
both tables, that is to say as well of the sines, as of the lines Tangent and
Secant, have one self manner of working thereby, as shall plainly appear
hereafter when we come to describe the same. But first we will begin with
the tables of sines, and plainly define every term or vocable of Art,
belonging thereunto: The terms are these here following: An arch, a Chord,
Sinus rectus Sinus versus, Quadrans, Complementum, and sinus Complementi.

The definitions of the foresaid terms.
AN Arch is any part or portion of the circumference of a Circle, which in this
practice does not commonly extend beyond 180. degrees which is one half of the
circumference of any Circle how great or small so ever it be, for every Circle
contains 360 degrees.

A Chord is a right line drawn from one end of the Arch to the other end
thereof, and note that all chordes are always lesser then the Diameter it
self, for that is the greatest chord in any Circle.

Sinus rectus is the one half of a Chord or string of any Arc which is double
to the Arc that is given or supposed, and falls with right Angles upon yt
Semidiameter which divides the double Arc into two equal parts.

Sinus versus that is to say turned the contrary way, is a right line, and that
part of the Semidiamiter, which is intercepted betwixt the beginning of the
given Arc and the right Sine of the same Arc, and this is also called in
Latin Sagitta, in English a Shaft or Arrowe, for the Demonstratiue figure
thereof hereafter following, is not unlike to the string of a bow ready bent
having a Shaft in the midst thereof.

Quadrans is the fourth part of a Circle containing 90. degrees.

Complementum arcus, is that portion of the Circle, which shows how much the
given Arc is lesser then the quadrant, if the given Arc do contain fewer
degrees then the Quadrant, but if it contain more degrees then the Quadrant,
then the difference betwixt such given arch, and the half Circle is the
complement of the said given Arc.

Sinus complementi, is the right Sine of that Arch which is the complement of
the given Arc.

Sinus totus, is the Semidiamiter of the Circle, and is the greatest Sine that
may be in the Quadrant of a Circle, which according to the first tables of
Monte Regio contains 6/000/000. and according to the last tables 10/000/000
parts, for the more parts that the total Sine has, the more true and exact
shall your work be, notwithstanding sometime it shall suffice to attribute
unto the total Sine but 60/000. parts, which number Appian observes in
teaching the way to find out the distance of two places differing both in
Longitude and Latitude by the tables of Sines, and some do make the total
Sine to contain 100/000 parts, as Wittikindus in his treatise of Dials, and
diverse other do the like. Also Clauius himself says that in the tables set
down by him in quarto, you may sometime make the total Sine to be but
100/000. so as you cut off the two last figures on the right hand in every
Sine, but you shall better understand every thing here above mentioned, by the
figure Demonstratiue here following.

The figure Demonstratiue.


In this figure you see first a whole Circle drawn upon the Center E. and
marked with the letters A. B. C D. which Circle by two cross Diameters marked
with the letters A C. and B. D. and passing both through the Center E. is
divided into four Quadrantes or quarters, the upper Quadrante whereof on the
left hand is marked with the letters A. B. E. in which Quadrant, the right
perpendicular line marked with the letters F. H. betokens the right Sine of
the given Arc A. F. which right Sine is the one half of the chord or string
F. G. and the given Arc A. F. is the one half of the double Arc or bow G.
A. F. and A. H. is the Shaft called in Latin Sinus versus: Again the letters
F. B. do show the complement which together with the given Arc A. F. do make
the whole Quadrant A. F. B which is divided into 9. spaces, every space
co^taining 10. degrees, whereby you may plainly perceive that in this
demonstration, the given Arc A. F. is 50. degrees, and the complement F. B. is
40. degrees, both which being added together do make up the whole Quadrant of
90. degrees, marked with the letters A. F. B. Now Sinus complementi is the
cross line marked with the letters F. K. the total Sine which is the whole
Semidiameter and greatest right Sine, is marked with the letters B. E. But
because it is not enough to know the signification of the things above
specified to use the foresaid tables when need is, unless you know also how
to find out those things in the said tables, I think it good therefore to show
you the order of the said tables by describing the same as follows.

You have then to understand that the tables of Monte Regio printed in Folio,
are contained in 18. Pages, and every Page contains eleauen partitions,
called collums, whereof the first on the left hand contains 60. minutes,
which are to be counted from head to foot, as they stand in order one right
under another in several places, proceeding from 1. to 60. The second collum
contains Sines. The third contains only a portion or part of one second,
and from thence forth proceeding toward the right hand all the other collums
do contain in like manner Sines and the portion of one second. And right over
the head of every Sine (the first collum of Sines only excepted, having
nothing but a Cipher over his head) are set down the degrees of the whole
Quadrant called arches, in such order as from the first Page to the last, there
are in all 89. degrees, or arches, as by perusing the said tables you may
plainly see. Now to find out in these tables the things above mentioned, you
must do as follows.

First to find out the right Sine of any given Arc, you must seek out the
number of the said Arc in the front of the tables, and if the given Arc has
no minutes joined thereunto, then the first number of Sines right under the
said Arc, is the right Sine thereof. But if it has any minutes joined
thereunto, then you must seek out in that Page, where you found the given
Arc, the number of the minutes in the first collum of the said Page, on the
left hand, and right against those minutes on the right hand, in the square
Angle right under the said arch, you shall find the right Sine. As for example,
you would find out the right Sine of a given Arc containing 8. degrees, and
20^ here having found out in the front of the second Page the figure of 8.
standing right over the eight collum, seek in the first collum on the left
hand of the said Page, for 20. minutes, and right against the 20. minutes you
shall find on the right hand in the common Angle or square 8695 93. which is
the right Sine of the foresaid given Arc, so as you make 6/000/000. to be the
total Sine: but if you make 60/000. the total Sine, then you must always
reject the two last figures standing on the right hand of the said right Sine,
and the rest of the figures shall be the right Sine.

Now to find out the complement, there is nothing to be done, but only to
subtract the given Arc out of the whole Quadrant which is 90. degrees, and the
remainder shall be the complement: as in the former example by subtracting 8.
degrees, 20^ out of 90 degrees, you find that there remains 81. degrees, 40^
which is the complement of that arch. Again to find out the Sine of the
complement you must do thus, seek the complement in the front of the tables
of Sines, even as you do to find out any given arc: as in the former example,
the complement being 81. degrees 40^ you must seek 81. in the front of the 17.
Page of the first tables, which being found, seek out also the 40^ in the
first collum of the said Page on the left hand, and right against those 40^ in
the common Angle right under the Arc 81. you shall find 5/936/649. which
number is the right Sine of the foresaid complement, so as you make 6/000/000.
to be the total Sine, for if 60/000. be the total Sine, then you must reject
(as I said before) the two last figures on the right hand, and the number
remaining shall be the right Sine of the foresaid complement, and therefore in
working by these tables, you must always remember what number you make the
total Sine to be.

Sinus versus comes seldom in use, notwithstanding if you would know how to
find it out, you need to do no more but to subtract Sinum complementi of the
given Arc, out of the total Sine, and the remainder shall be Sinus versus, as
in the former example your Sinus complementi was 5/936/649. which being
subtracted out of the total Sine 6/000/000. there remains this 63/351. and
that number is Sinus versus: for if you add this remainder to the number which
you subtracted, it will make up the total Sine 6/000/000. But there is one
thing more necessary to be known then this, because it comes oftener in use,
and that is upon some division made how to find out the Arc of any quotient,
which is to be done thus: Enter with the quotient into the body of the tables,
and leave not seeking amongst the squares of the Sines, until you have found
out the just number of the quotient (if it be there) if not, you must take the
number of that Sine which is in value most nigh unto it, whether it be a little
more or less, it makes no matter, and having found that number, look in the
front of that collum, and you shall find the Arc of your quotient, standing
right over the head of that collum, and also the mynutes thereof in the first
collum of the said Page on the left hand. As for example, having divided one
number by another, I find the quotient to be 469/012. whereof I would know the
arch, now in seeking this quotient amongst the Sines, I can not find that just
number, but I find in the first Page, and in the tenth collum 469/015. which is
the nighest number unto it that I can see. In the front of which collum I find
the Arc to be 4. degrees, and directly against that Sine on the left hand, I
find 29^ belonging to that arch, whereof that quotient is the Sinus, so as I
gather hereof that the arch of the foresaid quotient is 4, degrees, 29^ But you
have to note by the way that the number of your quotient must never be much
less then 1745. for otherwise it is not to be found in these tables, unless
you make the total Sine to be but 60/000. for then by rejecting the last two
figures on the right hand, as I have said before, the first right Sine of these
tables shall be no more but 17. and by that account a very small quotient may be
found in these tables. And whatsoever has been said here touching the order
that is to be observed in the first tables of Monte Regio, whose total Sine is
6/000/000. the like in all points is to be observed in the last tables, whose
total Sine is 10/000/000. Thus much touching the order of the foresaid tables
of Monte Regio Printed in Folio: but for so much as those tables be not
altogether truly Printed, and for that they have been lately corrected, and
made more perfect by Clauius, who does set down the said tables in quarto and
not in folio, whereby they are the more portable, and the more commodious, as
well for that they are more truly Printed, as also for that the complement of
every Arc is set down in every Page at the foot of every collum, so as you
need to spend no time in subtracting the Arc from 90. I think it good
therefore to make a brief description of those tables, and the rather for that
I have requested the Printer to print the like here in quarto, and I do work
all such conclusions as hereafter follow, by the said tables, the total Sine
whereof is 10/000/000. according to the last tables of Monte Regio. But for so
much as some may have already the tables of Monte Regio Printed in Folio, not
knowing perhaps the use thereof, I will set down two conclusions to be
wrought by those tables, and all the rest of the conclusions are to be wrought
by those tables which I have here caused to be Printed in quarto like to those
of Clauius: and though the two conclusions next following, which are to show
the use of the foresaid tables, may be wrought by the tables of Sines in what
form so ever they be truly Printed if Folio, or in quarto, yet because I had
appointed them to be done by the tables of Monte Regio, Printed in folio
before that ever I saw Clauius his book, I mind not now to alter them but to
let them stand still as they are.

How to find out by the said tables, the distance betwixt two places differing
both in Longitude and Latitude, making the total Sine to be no more but 60/000.
THis is done by finding out two numbers, whereof the one is called in Latin
Primum inuentum: that is to say, the first found number, and the other is
called Secundum inuentum, that is the second found number in such order as
follows.

First then knowing the Longitude of either place, take the difference of their
Longitudes by subtracting the lesser Longitude out of the greater, that done,
multiply the right Sine of that difference into the Sine of the complement of
the lesser Latitude, and divide the product of that Multiplycation by the
total Sine, and then seek out the arch of that quotient according to the rule
before taught, so shall you have the first found number: That done, multiply
the right Sine of the lesser Latitude by the total Sine, and having divided
the product thereof by the right Sine of the complement of the first found
number, subtract the arch of that quotient out of the greater Latitude, and you
shall have the second found number. Then multiply the right Sine of the
complement of the first found number into the right Sine of the complement of
the second found number, and having divided the product of that Multiplycation
by the total Sine, seek the Arc of that quotient in the tables, and take
that Arc out of the whole Quadrant, and the degrees that do remain, are
degrees of the great Circle, which if you multiply by 60. the product of yt
Multiplycation will show you how many Italian miles the one place is distant
from the other, or if you would have Germane miles, the^ multiply the foresaid
degrees of the great Circle by 15. or else divide the product of the Italian
miles by 4. and you shall have your desire. As for example, you would know what
distance is betwixt Jerusalem and Noremberg a famous town in Germany,
Jerusalem according to Appian his tables, has in Longitude 66. degrees 0^ and
in Latitude 31. degrees, 40^ Again Noremberg has in Longitude 28. degrees,
20^ and in Latitude 49. degrees, 24^ the difference of their Longitudes is 37.
degrees, 40^ the right Sine whereof is 36/664. for in this example Appian makes
60/000. to be the total Sine, and therefore he rejects the two last figures
en the right hand found in the first tables of Monte Regio. Now you must
multiply 36/664. into the right Sine of the complement of the lesser Latitude
which Sine is 51/067. the product of which two Sines being multiplied the one
by the other, amounts to 1/872/320/488. which if you divide by the total
Sine. 60/000. you shall find in the quotient 31/205. whose arch is 31. degrees,
20^ and this shall be your first found number. This done, multiply the right
Sine of the lesser Latitude which is 31/498. by the total Sine 60/000. and the
product thereof will be 1/889/ 880/000. which sum if you divide by the Sine of
the complement of the first found number which Sine is 51/249. you shall find
in the quotient 36876. the Arc whereof is 37. degrees 55^ which arch being
subtracted out of the greater Latitude, there will remain 11. degrees, 29^ and
that shall be your second found number, then multiply the foresaid Sine of the
complement of the first found number which is 51/249. by the Sine of the
complement of the second found number which is 58/798. and the product thereof
will amount to 3/013/338/702. which if you divide by the total Sine, you shall
find in the quotient 50/222. the arch whereof is 56. degrees, 50^ which being
subtracted out of the whole Quadrant which is 90. degrees, there will remain
33. degrees, 10^ of the greater Circle, which 33. degrees, if you multiply by
60. it will make 1980. miles, whereunto you must add for the 10^ 10. miles, so
shall you find the distance betwixt the two foresaid places to be 1990. Italian
miles, which if you would reduce into German miles, then divide that number
by 4. for 4. Italian miles do make but one German mile, so shall you have
497. German miles, and two Italian miles remaining, which is half a German
mile, which sum agrees with that which Appian sets down in his
Geographie, whereas he uses the self same example, and works it in like
manner Per tabulas sinuum.

The Altitude of the sun being known how to find out the Longitude of the
shadow both right and verse of any body yielding shadow by help of the
foresaid tables.
FIrst you have to understand that every bodily thing yielding shadow, is
divided into 12. equal parts, and every such part into 60. minutes, and every
minute into 60. seconds, and so forth: Again, of shadows there be 2. kinds,
that is, Vmbra recta, and Vmbra versa, Vmbra recta is that which proceeds
from some body rightly erected upon the upper face of the Horizon, as from
some tower or post standing right up upon a leauel ground: And that shadow is
called vmbra versa which proceeds from some right style or perch being
thrust into a wall or post standing right up and not leaning, in such sort as
the said style or perch may be a just parallel to the upper face of the
Horizon. Now to find out the length of either the foresaid shadows, you must
do thus.

Multiply the right Sine of the complement of the given Solar altitude, by 12.
and divide the product by the right Sine of the said Solar altitude, and you
shall have the Longitude of the right shadow of the said body. Again if you
multiply the right Sine of the foresaid altitude by 12. and divide the product
by the Sine of the complement of the said altitude, you shall have the
Longitude of Vmbra versa, of the said body. As for example, suppose the given
Solar altitude to be 25. degrees, the complement whereof is 65. and the right
Sine of that complement is 54/378. if you make the total Sine to be 60/000.
Then in multiplying the foresaid right Sine by 12. the product will be 652/536.
which if you divide by the Sine of the altitude which is 25/357. you shall find
the Longitude of Vmbra recta to be 25. parts 44 42 and 6^ Now if you multiply
the Sine of the altitude which is 25/357. by 12. and divide the product by the
Sine of the complement which is 54/378. you shall find the Longitude of Vmbra
versa to be 5. parts, 35^ and in saying here parts, I mean always such parts
as are the 12. parts, whereinto the body yielding shadow is divided: but if you
work this example by the first tables of Sines making the total Sine
6/000/000. though you find it true in the parts and minutes, yet shall you not
find it so in the seconds and thirds, and if you work the same by the second
tables making the total Sine 10/000/000. you shall find it to agree only in the
parts, but neither in minutes nor secondes, which makes me to suspect that the
Printer has committed some error therein, for both the tables were made by one
self rule.

A brief description of the tables of Sines Printed in quarto like unto those
which Clauius sets down in his commentaries upon Theodosius his Spheriques.
Having here before plainly described unto you the tables of Sines made by
Monte Regio, which are Printed in folio, and how to use the same I will now
briefly describe the said tables lately corrected by Clauius, and were Printed
in quarto at Rome Anno 1586. the total Sine of which tables according to the
last table of Monte Regio, is 10/000/000. by which tables are to be wrought all
the conclusions hereafter following.

First then you have to understand that these tables are contained in 36.
Pages, in the front whereof are set down the degrees of the Quadrant
proceeding from 1. to 89. but because the whole number of minutes belonging to
the said degrees, which is 60^ can not be all placed in one self Page, but
only 30^ in the left outermost collum of the left hand Page: and other 30^ in
the left outermost collum of the right hand Page: therefore the degrees or
arches of the Quadrant are feign to be twice repeated in the front of every two
Pages, as you may plainly see by viewing the said tables, and every Page
contains seven collums, whereof the first on the left hand contains the
minutes belonging to the degrees or arches of the Quadrant, which minutes do
proceed downward from 1. to 30^ and the seventh collum on the right hand in
every Page contains the minutes belonging to the complement of every arch,
which minutes do proceed backward, that is to say from 1. set down at the
lowest end of the last collum of the second Page, and so proceeding upward to
30^ which 30^ is also set down at the lowest end of the last collum of the
left hand Page, and so proceeds upward to 60^ which 60. minutes do help to
make up the complement that is answerable to every arch whereunto no minutes be
annexed, for if the arch has no minutes, then you must add to the complement
thereof 60. minutes, which is one whole degree, to make up the complement. As
for example, suppose the Arc to be 46. degrees, without any minutes joined
thereunto, the complement whereof set down at the foot of the said arch, is
but 43. degrees, wherefore you must add thereunto 60^ which is one degree, so
shall the complement be 44. degrees, which is the true complement indeed, but
if you suppose the foresaid Arc to have 13^ joined thereunto you shall find
the complement to be 43. degrees, 47^ which is answerable to the foresaid Arc
46. degrees, and 13^ for if you take 46. degrees, 13^ out of 90. degrees, the
remainder will be 43. degrees, 47^ which is the complement, so as you need not
to make any Subtraction out of 90. to find the complement of any arch, that
has any minutes annexed thereunto: but when so ever you have to find out the
right Sine of any complement in these tables, you must then make the complement
an arch, seeking for the same in the front and not at the foot of the tables,
and if the said complement have any minutes annexed thereunto, you must seek
those minutes in the left outermost collum of every Page, and not in the
outermost right collum belonging to complements, for in this case the
complement is an arch and not a complement. The order of working by these
tables in all other things differs not one iotte from that which we have
observed in working the two former conclusions by the tables of Monte Regio
Printed in folio, as you shall easily perceive by the examples here following.

1 How to find out the declination of the Sun at any time his place in the
Zodiaque being given, Per tabulas Sinuum.
KNowing the place of the Sun for the day, consider how much the said place is
distant from the first point of Aries if the place of the Sun be nigher to
Aries then to Libra. But if it be nigher to Libra, then take his distance from
the first point of Libra, which distance must not exceed 90. degrees, and
seek that distance amongst the Arkes in the front of the tables if they be
degrees, if minutes, you shall find them in the first collum on the left hand,
then multiply the Sine of that distance by the Sine of the greatest declination
which is 23. degrees, 28^ and divide the product thereof by the total Sine, and
the quotient will show you the Sine of the declination for that day, the arch
whereof, is the very number of the declination it self. As for example, you
would know the declination of the Sun the eleauenth of April 1591. when as
the Sun was entered 33^ into Taurus unto which you must add according to the
rule before given 30. degrees, for that is his distance from the first point of
Aries, then seek out the said 30. degrees, in the front of the last tables
among the Arkes and the 33 in the first collum on the left hand right against
which you shall find the Sine of the said distance to be 5082/901. which being
multiplied by 3/982/155. (which is the Sine of the greatest declination) the
product thereof will be 20/240/890/631/655. which if you divide by the total
Sine which is 10/000/000. you shall find the quotient to be 2/024/089. which
quotient must be sought out in the said tables, and if you find no such number,
then take the nearest number thereunto, which is 2025025. and the Arc thereof
together with the minutes that stand right against the said quotient in the
first collum on the left hand, is the declination of the Sun for that day
which is 11. degrees, 41^

2 How to know the right ascension of the Sun, Per tabulas Sinuum.
FIrst knowing the Suns place, you shall learn the right ascension thereof
thus. First consider how far his place is from the Equinoctial point, as is
said before in the last proposition, and multiply the Sine of the complement of
that distance by the total Sine, then knowing the declination of the Sun for
that day by the last rule, divide the former product by the Sine of the
complement of the said declination, and the quotient will show the Sine of that
Arc whereof the complement is the right ascension. As for example, the Sun
being in the 33^ of Taurus and his declination 11. degrees, 41^ as you found by
the last proposition and his distance from the first point of Aries to be in
all 30. degrees, 33 the complement whereof is 59. degrees, 27^ the Sine of
which complement is 8/611/860. which being multiplied by the total Sine which
is 10/000/000. the product will be 86/118/600/ 000/000. which being divided by
the Sine of the complement of the Suns declination which is 78. degrees, 19^
whose Sine is 9792818. by which Sine if you divide the former product, the
quotient will be 8/773/600. the Arc of which quotient is 61. degrees, and 19^
and the complement of that, is 28. degrees, and 41^ which is the right
ascension of the place of the Sun for the foresaid day.

And here note that if the Arc from Aries to the given point, do contain
just 90. degrees, the right ascension thereof is also 90. degrees, but if the
said Arc be more then 90. degrees, and lesser then 180. degrees, then subtract
the same out of 180. and seek out the right ascension of the remainder as
before, whose right ascension if you take out of 180. the remainder shall be
the ascension of the propounded Arc. But if the said arch which is
comprehended betwixt Aries and the given point be greater then 180. degrees,
or 6. signs, and lesser then 270. degrees, or 9. signs, then having
subtracted 180. degrees from the same arch, calculate the right ascension of
the arch from the beginning of Libra, as before, and the right ascension
thereof being added to 180. degrees, shall be the ascension desired.

Lastly if the arch comprehended betwixt Aries and the point given, be greater
then 270. degrees, or 9. signs, then subtract the same out of 360. degrees,
and seek out the right ascension of that remainder as before, which if you
subtract out of 360. degrees, the remainder shall be the right ascension
desired.

3 How to find out the ascentionall difference, Per tabulas Sinuum.
MVltiply the Sine of the Latitude given by the total Sine, and divide the
product by the complement of ye said Latitude, that done, multiply the quotient
by the Sine of the Suns declinatio^, and divide the product by the Sine of
the complement of the declination, and the quotient thereof will show the sign
of the ascentionall difference: and by working according to this rule, you shall
find that when the Sun is entered 33^ into Taurus, at which time his
declination is 11. degrees, 41^ (as has been said before) the ascension all
difference will be 15. degrees, 21^ And here note that the ascentional
differences for one quarter of ye Circle serves also for all the rest, so that
the Latitude be not altered, and that the declination of the points in the
later quarters be equal to the declination of the points in the first quarter.

4 How to find out the oblique ascension of any point of the Ecliptique in any
Latitude assigned.
FIrst find the right ascension of the given point by the second proposition,
and also the ascentional difference thereof by the third proposition: then
consider whether the declination of the said point be Northward or Southward,
for if it be Northward, then subtract the ascentionall difference out of the
right ascension, and the remainder shall be the oblique ascension desired: but
if the declination be Southward, then add the ascentionall difference unto the
right ascension, and the sum shall be the oblique ascension. In working thus
for the Latitude 52. and supposing the Sun to be in ye 33^ of Taurus, and
having found by the former proposition his right ascension to be 28. degrees,
41^ and the ascentionall difference to be 15. degrees, 21^ you shall find his
oblique ascension in the foresaid Latitude to be 13. degrees, 20^

5 How to find out the time of the Suns rising and setand thereby the length
of the artificial day.
FIrst you must know the ascentionall difference, and convert the same into
hours and minutes, then if the Sun be in any of the Northern signs, add
those hours to 6. hours which is the one half of an Equinoctial day, and
the sum of such Addition shall be the one half of the artificial day, which
being subtracted out of 12. hours, the remainder shall be the hour of the
Suns rising: As for example, the Sun being in the 33^ of Taurus, you found
the ascension all difference to be 15. degrees, and 21^ which being turned into
hours makes one hour 1^ 2^ and somewhat more, which being added to 6. makes
7. hours 1^ 2^ and a little more which is the one half of the artificial day
which being doubled, makes in all 14. hours 2^ and 4^ but if the Sun be in
any of the Southern signs, you must remember to subtract ye hours of the
ascentionall difference out of 6. hours, and the remainder shall be the one
half of the artificial day, and by subtracting the half length of the
artificial day out of 12. you shall know the hour of the Suns rising, and
having the time of his rising, you must needs know the time of his setting.

6 How to find out the Meridian altitude of the Sun in any day though he does
not shine at all, the elevation of the Pole being given.
SVbtract the elevation of the pole from 90. and the remainder shall be the
elevation of the Equinoctial, then if the Sun be in any of the Northern
signs, add the declination of the Sun, unto the altitude of the
Equinoctial, or else if he be in any of the Southern signs, subtract the
declination, and the sum of the Addition, or remainder of the Subtraction,
shall show the Meridia^ altitude. As for example, the second of May 1591. the
Sun being in the 20. degrees, 42^ of Taurus, and his declination Northward
17. degrees, 56^ 21^ here by subtracting 52. degrees, which is our Latitude
from 90. you shall find the remainder to be 38. which is the altitude of the
Equinoctial, whereunto if you add the Suns declination for that day which
is 17. degrees, 56^ and 21^ the sum will be 55. degrees, 56^ and 21^ and
that is the Meridian altitude of the Sun for that day.

Let these few conclusions serve to show you the use of the tables of Sines,
for it would make a long book to set down so many conclusions as are to be
wrought by these tables, and therefore I leave to trouble you any further
therewith, minding now briefly to declare unto you the use of the tables of
lines Tangent and Secant by one example or two as follows. But first I think
it necessary to show you what those lines be, and whereto they serve.

THE DESCRIPTION and use of the Tables of Tangents and Secants.
EVclid in the second proposition of his third book defines the line Tangent
in this sort. A right line (says he) is said to touch a Circle when it
touches it so, as being drawn out in length, it would never cut the said
Circle.

The line Secant is not by him any where defined, but what these two lines are,
you shall better understand by this figure Demonstratiue here following, then by
any definition that can be made thereof: for a definition ought to be plain
and brief, and not long, intricate or doubtful, which will be hardly
performed in showing the nature of these two lines by way of definition, and
therefore mark well this figure following.



In this figure you see first a Circle drawn upon the Center C. from which
Center is extended to the circumference of the Circle a right line, called the
Semidiameter, marked with the letters A. C. then there is another right line
which touches the said Circle, and also the outermost end of the said
Semidiameter making therewith a right Angle in the point A. and is called the
line Tangent, then there is a third line which proceeding from the Center C.
does cut the circumference of the Circle in the point B. and also meets with
the line Tangent in the point D. and therefore is called the line Secant,
betwixt which two lines, I mean the Tangent and Secant, is intercepted or
included a certain portion or arch of the foresaid Circle less then a
Quadrant marked with the letters A. B. of which Arc the line A. D. is the
Tangent, and the line C. D. is the Secant thereof, which must needs meet with
the Tangent in the point D. because that the two Angles C. A. D. and D. C. A.
are lesser then two right Angles, for the one is right, and the other sharp,
by reason that the Arc is less then a Quadrant. And some do call the line
Tangent the line Ascript, because it is ascribed to the Circle, and they call
the line Secant the Hipothenuse, because it subte^deth the right Angle A. and
they call the Semidiameter or total Sine, y^ base of the rectangle Triangle C.
A. D which is called a rectangle Triangle because it contains one right Angle
marked with the letter A. and note yt whenever any manner of Angle is
propounded by three letters, that the middle letter does always signify the
Angle propounded, be it right, sharp, or blunt. Now if you would know to what
end the foresaid two lines were invented, and whereto they serve, you have to
understand that they chiefly serve in calculating the quantity of Angles and
their sides, as well in right lined Triangles, as in sphericall Triangles, for
the sides of Triangles are either right or crooked, and if they have right
sides, such Triangles are either right angled Triangles, or oblique angled
Triangles, and you have to note that the quantity of every Angle is to be
measured by the arch of a Circle subtending that Angle, for the point of every
Angle is imagined to be the Center of a whole Circle, which you may suppose to
be so great or little as you will, for every Circle (be it great or little) is
divided into 360. degrees, and look how many degrees and minutes the arch
subtending that Angle contains, so much is the quantity of that Angle, the
practice whereof is very well set down by Clauius in his commentaries upon
Theodosius, which I mind (God willing) hereafter to translate into our mother
tongue: In the mean time my intention here, is only to show you by one
example or two, the use of the tables made for the foresaid lines Tangent and
Secant.

The use of the said tables according to Clauius, is thus.
IN seeking out the Tangent or Secant of any Arc given, or of the complement
of any Arc by either of these tables, you have to observe the self same order
which you did before in finding out the right Sine of any Arc given, or of the
complement of any Arc, Per tabulas sinuum. As for example, if you would find
out the Tangent of an Arc containing 50. degrees, 24^ then resort to the
table of Tangents in the front, whereof look first for the Arc 50. degrees,
and then in the first collum on the left hand of the said table, for 24^ right
against which on the right hand under the Arc 50. you shall find in the common
Angle the Tangent to be 12/087/ 923. the total Sine whereof is 10/000/000. but
if you would find out the Secant of the foresaid Arc 50. and 24^ then you must
resort to the table of Secants, and having found out the Arc 50. in the front
of the said tables, and the 24^ on the left hand as before, you shall find in
the common Angle the Secant to be 15688144. And if you would have the Tangent
of the complement of the said Arc which is 39. degrees, and 36^ you shall find
the 39. degrees of the co^plement in the foot of the table of Tangents right
under the Arc 50. and the 36^. in the outermost collum on the right hand of
the said table, with which complement you must enter the table of Tangents,
seeking for 39. degrees in the front of the table, and 36^ in the first collum
on the left hand of the said table, right against which in the common Angle you
shall find 8272720. to be the Tangent of 39. degrees, 36^ which is the
complement of 50 degrees, 24^

And you must work in like manner with the table of Secants: As for example, if
you would find the Secant of 72. degrees, 36^ first then enter the table of
Secants, looking for 72. degrees above in the front of the table, and 36^ in
the first collum on the left hand of the said table, and in the common Angle
you shall find 33/ 440/240. which is the Secant of 72. degrees, 36^ But if you
would have the Secant of the complement of the said arch 72. degrees, 36^ then
looking in the foot of the table right under 72. degrees, you shall find 17.
degrees, and in the outermost collum on the right hand, just against 36^ you
shall find 24^ so as you see that 17. degrees 24^ is the complement of 72.
degrees, 36^ with which complement you must enter the table of Secants, looking
for 17. degrees, above in the front of the table, and for 24^ in the first
collum on the left hand of the said tables, and in the common Angle you shall
find 10/479/542. to be the Secant of the arch 17. degrees, 24^ which is the
complement of the arch 72. degrees, 36^

The use of which tables in Astronomicall matters, I have here set down as
follows.
1 To find out the declination of the Sun, the place thereof being known.
MVltiply the Secant of the complement of the greatest declination by the
total sine, and divide the product by the sine of the suns distance from one
of the equinoctial points, the quotient is the Secant of an arch, whose
complement is the declination of the sun: for example, suppose that the sun
be entering into to find the declination thereof, first I multiply 25112030 the
Secant of 66. degrees 32^ (which is the complement of 23. degrees 38 the
greatest declination) by 10000000. the product is 251120300000000. which being
divided by 5000000. (the sine of 30. degrees the suns distance from the
equinoctial point) the quotient is 50224060. for which number I seek in the
table of Secants, the arch answering unto it, is 78. degrees 32^ the complement
whereof is 11. degrees 29^ which is the declination of the sun.

2 Knowing the declination of the sun how to find his distance from the
equinoctial point, and so consequently his place in the Zodiac.
MVltiply the Secant of the complement of the greatest declination by the
total sine, and divide the product by the Secant of the co^plement of the
declination given, the quotient is the distance of the sun from the
equinoctial point. As for example, the declination of the sun is supposed to
be 11. degrees 29^ then to find his distance from the equinoctial, I multiply
25112030. the Secant of 66. degrees 32^ (which is the complement of the
greatest declination) by the total sine the product is 251120300000000. which
I divide by 50224350. the Secant of 78. degrees 31 the complement of 11.
degrees 29^ the supposed declination, the quotient is 5000000. the sine whereof
is 30. dedegrees 0 which is the distance of the sun from the equinoctial:
the^ for his place you must take the same according to ye season of the year:
for if it be in April, then the sun is entering into Taurus, but if it be in
August it is entering into Virgo, and being in October, it is entering into
Scorpio, and being in February it is in the beginning of Pisces.

3 To find out the right ascension of the sun.
MVltiply the Tangent of the distance of the sun from the equinoctial point
which is nearest unto it, by the sine of the complement of the greatest
declination, and divide the product by the total sine, the quotient is the
Tangent of the right ascension of the sun, for which if you seek in the
table of Tangents, the arch answering unto it is your desire: For example the
sun being in the first of Taurus, to know the right ascension thereof, I
multiply 5773502. the Tangent of 30. degrees (for that 30. degrees is the
distance of the sun from the equinoctial point) by 9172920. the sine of 66.
degrees 32^ which is the compleme^t of 23 degrees 28^ the greatest declination,
the product is 52959871965840. which being divided by 10000000. the total
sine, the quotient is 5295987. which is the Tangent of 27. degrees, 54^ which
is the right ascension of the sun being entered into Taurus.

4 How to find out the declination of the sun knowing only the right
ascension thereof.
MVltiply the Tangent of the complement of the greatest declination by the
total sine, and divide the product by the sine of the right ascension given,
the quotient is the Tangent of the complement of the suns declination: for
example the right ascension of the sun being 27. degrees 54^ I would know
the declination thereof, multiplying 23035062. the Tangent of 66. degrees 32^
the complement of 23. degrees 28 by 10000000. the product is 230350620000000.
which being divided by 4679298. the sine of the given ascension the quotient is
49224856. the arch of which Tangent is 78. degrees 32^ which being subducted
out of 90. the remainder is 11. degrees 28^ and so much is the declination of
the sun.

5 How to find the place of the sun knowing only the right ascension
thereof.
SVbduct the right ascension given out of 90. if it be less then 90. but if
the same be more then 90. subtract the ascension given out of 180. and being
greater then 180. subduct the same out of 270. or being greater then 270.
subduct the same from 360. and multiply the Tangent of the remainder by the
sine of the complement of the greatest declination, and divide the product by
the total sine, the quotient is the Tangent of the complement of the suns
distance from one of the Equinoctial points: which distance being known, the
place of the sun can not be unknown. For example, supposing the right
ascension of the sun to be 27. degrees 54^ the complement thereof is 62.
degrees 6^ the Tangent whereof is 18886715. which being multiplied by 9172920.
the product is 173245985757800. which being divided by 10000000. the quotient
is 17324598. for which I look in the table of Tangents, and I find the arch
thereof to be 60. the complement whereof is 30. which is the distance of the
sun from the equinoctial point, that is, from Aries, for that the right
ascension is less then 90. I say then that the sun is in the beginning of
Taurus. But if the right ascension had been more then 90. and less then 180.
the place of the sun had been betwixt Cancer and Libra 30. degrees from
Libra, so should it have been in the first point of Virgo, but if the right
ascension had been more then 180. the place of the sun should be betwixt
Libra and Capricorn, that is in the beginning of Scorpio, but being more then
270. the place of the sun should be betwixt Capricorn and Aries, that in the
beginning of Pisces.

6 To find out the ascentionall difference of the sun or any star in the
firmament, knowing the declination thereof, and also the latitude of your
region.
MVltiply the Tangent of the declination of the Sun or star by the Tangent of
the latitude of the place, and divide the product by the total sine: the sine
of the quotient is the sine of the ascentionall difference, the arch whereof is
the desired ascentionall difference. For example let the declination of the
sun, star, or other point in the firmament be 10. degrees 3^ and suppose
the latitude to be 52. degrees, the Tangent of 10. degrees 3^ is 1772268. the
tangent of 52. degrees is 12799416. which being multiplied together, the
product will be 22674995395488. which being divided by 10000000. the total
sine, the quotient is 2267499. for which number I look amongst the sines, the
arch answering thereunto is 13. degrees 6^ which is the ascentionall difference
desired.

7 To find out the oblique ascension of the sun.
KNowing the place of the sun, find out the right ascension of the same by
the third proposition, and find also the ascentionall difference of the same
point, then if the declination of the sun be North, subduct the ascentionall
difference out of the right ascension, the remainder is the oblique ascension.
For example, suppose the sun to be in the beginning of Taurus, now to find
the oblique ascension thereof in the latitude 52. degrees, first by the third
proposition I find out the right ascension of the beginning of Taurus, which I
find to be 27. degrees 54^ then by the sixth proposition I find the
ascentionall difference to be 15. degrees 4^ which being subducted from 27.
degrees 54^ (for that the declination is North) the right ascension the
remainder is 12. degrees 50^ and so much is the oblique ascension for the
latitude of 52. degrees. But if the sun be in any of the Southern sines, and
that the declination be South, then the ascentionall difference is to be added
unto the right ascension before given.

8 To find out the oblique descention of the Sun at any time.
FIrst find out the right ascension of the sun by the third proposition, the
same shall be the right descention thereof, then find the ascentionall
difference by the sixth proposition, and if the sun be in any of the Northern
signs, add the ascentional difference unto the right ascension, the sum
shall be the oblique descention of the sun: But if it be in any of the
Southern signs subduct the ascentionall difference out of the right
ascension, the remainder is the desired descention: as for example the sun
being in the beginning of Taurus, the right ascension thereof by the third
proposition is 27. degrees 54^ the ascentional difference thereof by the sixth
proposition is 15. degrees 4^ for as much then as Taurus is a Northern sign,
I add the ascentionall difference unto the right ascension, the sum is 42.
degrees 58^ and so much is the oblique descention of the sun being in the
beginning of Taurus.

9 To find out the length of the day or night.
Having found out the ascentionall difference by the sixth proposition, add
the same unto 90. if the sun be in any of the Northern signs, but if it be
in any of the Southern signs, subduct the ascentionall difference out of 90.
then divide ye sum of the addition or the remainder of the subtraction by 15.
the quotient will show the half length of the day in hours and minutes, which
being doubled you shall have the whole length of the artificial day: For
example the sun being in the beginning of Taurus, the ascentionall difference
thereof is 15. degrees 4^ which for that the sun is in a Northern sign, I
add unto 90. degrees, the sum is 105. degrees 4 which being divided by 15.
the quotient is 7. hours o^ the half length of the day which being doubled
will be 14. hours the whole length of the artificial day in the latitude of
52. degrees.

10 To find the hour of the Sun his rising or setting in any latitude
assigned.
FIrst find out the half length of the artificial day by the 9. proposition,
and subtract the same from 12. hours, the remainder will show the hour of the
suns rising, for example the sun being in the beginning of Taurus to know
the hour of his rising in the latitude of 52. degrees, by the ninth
proposition, the half length of the artificial day I find to be 7. hours,
which I subtract from 12. hours the remainder is 5. which shows that the
sun rises at 5. of the clock in the morning, but the half length of the
day it self is the hour of the suns setting.

11 To find out the length of the planetary hours and to find what Planet
reigns at any hour of the day.
FIrst find out the length of the artificial day by the ninth proposition, and
divide the same by 12. the quotient is the length of one planetary hour: or
thus, having an hour of the artificial day given, look what hour the same
is from the sun rising, and multiply the same by 12. divide the product by
the length of the artificial day, the quotient is the number of the Planetarye
hour. For example the sun being in the beginning of Taurus, and our latitude
being 52. degrees, the length of the artificial day by the ninth proposition
is 14. hours: then do I divide 14. by 12. the quotient is 1. that is 1. hour
10^ the length of one planetary hour. But if an hour of the artificial day be
given as yt I would know what planetary hour it is at 9. of the clock the
sun being in the first of Taurus in the latitude of 52. degrees, having found
that the sun rises at five of the clock by the tenth proposition, I see
that 4. hours of the artificial day are gone at nine of the clock, I
therefore multiply 12. by 4. the product is 48. which I divide by 14. the
length of the artificial day, the quotient is 3 3/7. which is the planetary
hour at the time set down: likewise shall you find the planetary hour of
the night, finding the length thereof, and then work with it as was showed
before for the day.

The^ to know the Planet which reigns at the appointed time, you must
consider the Planet whereof the day takes his name, for that Planet rules the
first hour of that day, the next Planet the second hour, and so forth. But
for your ease I have set down a table whereby to find the Planet which
reigns at any time.

Hours 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 of the day. 8 9 10 11 12 Hours 10 11 12 1 2 of the
night. 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Sunday. Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday Thurseday. Friday.
Saturday.

The use whereof is this, having found the number of the Planetary hour,
look for the same in the head of the Table, whether it be in the day or night,
and right under it just against the name of the day, you shall have the Planet
which rayneth at that time. For example the sun being in the beginning of
Taurus the 11. of April, being Thursday at nine of the clock in the morning, I
find the number of the Planetary hour at that time to be 3 3/7. the^ looking
for three amongst the hours of the day, I descend in that collum until I come
to be just against thursday, where I see the Character of Sol to be, I conclude
then that the sun reigns at that time.

12 To find the arch of the Equinoctial, comprehended betwixt the Meridian and
any Circle of position according unto Campanus and Gazula.
MVltiply the Sine of the complement of your latitude by the Tangent of the
distance of the given Circle of position from the Zenith, and divide the
product by the total Sine, the quotient is the tangent of the arch of the
Equinoctial, which is comprehended betwixt the given Circle of position, and
the Meridian. For example in the latitude of 52. I would know what part of the
Equinoctial is comprehended betwixt the Meridian and that Circle of position,
which is 30. degrees from the Zenith: the latitude being 52. degrees, the
complement thereof is 38. degrees, the Sine whereof 6156615. and the tangent of
30. degrees, (for that 30. is the distance betwixt the given Circle of position
and the Zenith) is 5773502. which being multiplied by 6156615. the product is
35545229015730. which being divided by 10000000. the total Sine, the quotient
is 3554522. for which I seek amongst the tangents, and I find the Arc
answering thereunto, to be 19. degrees 34 the Arch of the Equinoctial, betwixt
the Meridian and the given Circle of position.

13 Knowing the Latitude of your Region, and also the elevation of the Pole
above any Circle of position, how to find the inclination of the said Circle
of position unto the Meridian, and so consequently the Arch of the
Equinoctial, which is betwixt the said Circle of position and the Meridian.
MVltiply the Secant of the complement of the elevation of the Pole above the
Circle of position by the Sine of your Latitude, and divide the product by the
total Sine, the quotient is the Secant of the complement of the inclination of
the Circle of position unto the Meridian, and that is the distance betwixt the
Circle of Position and the Zenith, by help whereof you shall find the Arch of
the Equinoctial, betwixt the Circle of Position and the Meridian, as in the
former proposition. As for example, suppose the elevation of the Pole above a
Circle of position, in our Latitude of 52. to be 23. degrees 12^ Now to find
out the Inclination of that Circle of Position unto the Meridian, first I
multiply 25384445. the Secant of 66. degrees 48^ (for that is the complement of
23. degrees 12^ the elevation of the Pole above the Circle of position) by
7880108. the Sine of 52. the Latitude of our Region, the product is
200032168120060. which being divided by 10000000. the quotient is 20003216. for
which I look in the Table of Secants, and the Arch thereof is 60. degrees 0^
the complement whereof is 30. degrees 0^ which is the Inclination of the Circle
of position unto the Meridian, or the distance of the Zenith from the said
Circle, then to find the Arch of the Equinoctial betwixt the said Circle of
Position and the Miridian, repeat the work of the former proposition.

14 To find out the Elevation of the Pole above any assigned Circle of
Position in any given Latitude.
KNowing the Inclination of the assigned Circle of Position unto the Meridian,
multiply the Secant of the complement thereof by the total Sine, and divide
the product by the Sine of your Latitude, the quotient is the Secant of the
complement of the Elevation of the Pole above the given Circle of Position: as
for example, suppose the inclination of a Circle of position to be 30. degrees
0^ Now to find the elevation of the Pole above the same for the Latitude of
52. degrees 0^ First take the complement of 30. degrees 0^ which is 60. degrees
0^ the Secant whereof is 20000000. which being multiplied by the total Sine,
the product is 200000000000000. whcih being divided by 7880108. the Sine of 52.
the assigned Latitude the quotient is 25380362. for which I seek in the Table
of Secants, and the Arch answering thereunto I find to be 66. degrees 48^ the
complement whereof is, 23. degrees 12^ and so much is the elevation of the Pole
above the assigned Circle of Position in your Latitude.

And thus much shall be sufficient to have been spoken for the use of the
lines Tangent and Secant at this present, of whose ample and infinite use, you
shall have further taste in our Directorie tables and Horologies, whereof a
beginning is made, and shall be ended so soon as may be possible: in the mean
time I shall desire the Reader favorably to accept of these, until better
leisure and more fit opportunity will be offered. And now follow the Tables
themselves.

HERE FOLLOVVETH THE TABLE OF RIGHT SINES FOR EVERY MINVTE OF THE QVADRANT,
FIRST CALCVLATED BY I. REGIO MONTANVS, BUT NOW EXAMINED AND IN MANY PLACES
CORRECTED AND AMENDED BY CLAVIVS.
The Table of Sines.
The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 1 2 3 4 The minutes of degrees of the Quadrant
for right Sines of the co^plement of the Arches of the same Quadra^t. 0 0000
174524 348995 523360 697565 60 1 2909 177433 351902 526265 700467 59 2 5818
180341 354809 529170 703369 58 3 8727 183250 357716 532075 706270 57 4 11636
186158 360623 534980 709172 56 5 14544 189066 363530 537884 712073 55 6 17453
191975 366437 540789 714975 54 7 20362 194883 369344 543694 717876 53 8 23271
197792 372251 546598 720777 52 9 26180 200700 375158 549503 723678 51 10 29088
203608 378064 552407 726579 50 11 31997 206517 380971 555312 729480 49 12 34906
209425 383878 558216 732381 48 13 37815 212333 386785 561120 735282 47 14 40724
215241 389692 564024 738183 46 15 43632 218149 392598 566928 741084 45 16 46541
221057 395505 569832 743985 44 17 49450 223965 398412 572736 746886 43 18 52359
226873 401318 575640 749787 42 19 55268 229781 404225 578544 752688 41 20 58177
232689 407131 581448 755588 40 21 61086 235597 410038 584352 758489 39 22 63995
238505 412944 587256 761389 38 23 66904 241413 415851 590160 764290 37 24 69813
244321 418757 593064 767190 36 25 72721 247229 421663 595967 770090 35 26 75630
250137 424570 598871 772991 34 27 78539 253045 427476 601775 775891 33 28 81448
255953 430382 604678 778791 32 29 84357 258861 433288 607582 781691 31 30 87265
261769 436194 610485 784591 30 31 90174 264677 439100 613389 787491 29 32 93083
267585 442006 616292 790391 28 33 95992 270493 444912 619196 793291 27 34 98901
273401 447818 622099 796191 26 35 101809 276308 450724 625002 799090 25 36
104718 279216 453630 627905 801990 24 37 107627 282124 456536 630808 804889 23
38 110536 285032 459442 633711 807789 22 39 113445 287940 462348 636614 810688
21 40 116353 290847 465253 639517 813587 20 41 119262 293755 468159 642420
816486 19 42 122171 296663 471065 645323 819385 18 43 125079 299570 473970
648226 822284 17 44 127988 302478 476876 651129 825183 16 45 130896 305385
479781 654031 828082 15 46 133805 308293 482687 656934 830981 14 47 136714
311200 485592 659837 833880 13 48 139622 314108 488498 662739 836778 12 49
142531 317015 491403 665642 839677 11 50 145439 319922 494308 668544 842576 10
51 148348 322830 497214 671447 845474 9 52 151257 325737 500119 674349 848372 8
53 154165 328645 503024 677251 851271 7 54 157074 331552 505929 680153 854169 6
55 159982 334459 508834 683055 857067 5 56 162891 337367 511740 685957 859965 4
57 165799 340274 514645 688859 862863 3 58 168708 343181 517550 691761 865761 2
59 171616 346088 520455 694663 868659 1 60 174524 348995 523360 697565 871557 0
89 88 87 86 85 The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the complements
of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 5 6 7 8 9 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 871557
1045285 1218693 1391731 1564345 60 1 874455 1048178 1221580 1394612 1567218 59
2 877353 1051071 1224467 1397492 1570091 58 3 880250 1053964 1227354 1400373
1572964 57 4 883148 1056857 1230241 1403253 1575837 56 5 886045 1059749 1233128
1406133 1578709 55 6 888943 1062642 1236015 1409013 1581581 54 7 891840 1065534
1238901 1411893 1584453 53 8 894737 1068426 1241788 1414772 1587325 52 9 897634
1071318 1244674 1417652 1590197 51 10 900531 1074210 1247560 1420531 1593069 50
11 903428 1077102 1250446 1423410 1595941 49 12 906325 1079994 1253332 1426289
1598812 48 13 909222 1082886 1256218 1429168 1601684 47 14 912119 1085778
1259104 1432047 1604555 46 15 915016 1088669 1261990 1434926 1607426 45 16
917913 1091561 1264876 1437805 1610297 44 17 920809 1094452 1267761 1440684
1613168 43 18 923706 1097344 1270647 1443562 1616038 42 19 926602 1100235
1273532 1446441 1618909 41 20 929498 1103126 1276417 1449319 1621779 40 21
932395 1106017 1279302 1452197 1624649 39 22 935291 1108908 1282187 1455075
1627519 38 23 938187 1111799 1285072 1457953 1630389 37 24 941083 1114690
1287957 1460831 1633259 36 25 943979 1117580 1290841 1463708 1636129 35 26
946875 1120471 1293726 1466586 1638999 34 27 949771 1123361 1296610 1469463
1641868 33 28 952667 1126252 1299495 1472340 1644738 32 29 955563 1129142
1302378 1475217 1647607 31 30 958458 1132032 1305262 1478094 1650476 30 31
961354 1134922 1308146 1480971 1653345 29 32 964249 1137812 1311030 1483848
1656214 28 33 967144 1140702 1313914 1486724 1659082 27 34 970039 1143592
1316798 1489601 1661951 26 35 972934 1146482 1319681 1492477 1664819 25 36
975829 1149372 1322564 1495353 1667687 24 37 978724 1152261 1325447 1498229
1670555 23 38 981619 1155151 1328330 1501105 1673423 22 39 984514 1158040
1331213 1503981 1676291 21 40 987408 1160929 1334096 1506857 1679159 20 41
990303 1163818 1336979 1509733 1682027 19 42 993198 1166707 1339862 1512608
1684894 18 43 996092 1169596 1342744 1515484 1687761 17 44 998987 1172485
1345627 1518359 1690628 16 45 1001881 1175374 1348509 1521234 1693495 15 46
1004775 1178263 1351392 1524109 1696362 14 47 1007669 1181151 1354274 1526984
1699229 13 48 1010563 1184040 1357156 1529859 1702095 12 49 1013457 1186928
1360038 1532734 1704962 11 50 1016351 1189816 1362920 1535608 1707828 10 51
1019245 1192704 1365802 1538482 1710694 9 52 1022139 1195592 1368683 1541356
1713560 8 53 1025032 1198480 1371564 1544230 1716426 7 54 1027926 1201368
1374446 1547104 1719292 6 55 1030819 1204255 1377327 1549978 1722157 5 56
1033713 1207143 1380208 1552852 1725022 4 57 1036606 1210031 1383089 1555725
1727887 3 58 1039499 1212918 1385970 1558599 1730725 2 59 1042392 1215806
1388851 1561472 1733617 1 60 1045285 1218693 1391731 1564345 1736482 0 84 83 82
81 80 The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the
Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 10 11 12 13 14 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 1736482
1908090 2079117 2249511 2419219 60 1 1739347 1910945 2081962 2252345 2412041 59
2 1742^11 1913800 2084807 2255179 2424863 58 3 1745075 1916655 2087652 2258013
2427685 57 4 1747939 1919510 2090497 2260847 2430507 56 5 1750803 1922365
2093342 2263680 2433329 55 6 1753667 1925220 2096186 2266513 2436150 54 7
1756531 1928074 2099030 2269346 2438971 53 8 1759394 1950928 2101874 2272179
2441792 52 9 1762258 1933782 2104718 2275012 2444613 51 10 1765121 1936636
2107562 2277844 2447434 50 11 1767984 1939490 2110405 2280676 2450254 49 12
1770847 1942344 2113248 2283508 2453074 48 13 1773710 1945197 2116091 2286340
2455894 47 14 1776573 1948050 2118934 2289172 2458714 46 15 1779435 1950903
2121777 2292004 2461533 45 16 1782298 1953756 2124620 2294835 2464352 44 17
1785160 1956609 2127462 2297666 2467171 43 18 1788022 1959462 2130304 2300497
2469990 42 19 1790884 1962314 2133146 2303328 2472809 41 20 1793746 1965166
2135988 2306159 2475628 40 21 1796608 1968018 2138830 2308989 2478446 39 22
1799469 1970870 2141671 2311819 2481264 38 23 1802331 1973722 2144512 2314649
2484082 37 24 1805192 1976574 2147353 2317479 2486900 36 25 1808053 1979425
2150194 2320309 2489717 35 26 1810914 1982276 2153035 2323138 2492534 34 27
1813774 1985127 2155876 2325967 2495351 33 28 1816634 1987978 2158716 2328796
2498168 32 29 1819495 1990829 2161556 2331625 2500984 31 30 1822355 1993679
2164396 2334454 2503800 30 31 1825215 1996530 2167236 2337282 2506616 29 32
1828075 1999380 2170076 2340110 2509432 28 33 1830935 2002230 2172916 2342938
2512248 7 34 1833795 2005080 2175755 2345766 2515064 26 35 1836654 2007930
2178594 2348594 2517879 25 36 1839513 2010780 2181433 2351421 2520694 24 37
1842372 2013629 2184272 2354248 2523509 23 38 1845231 2016478 2187111 2357075
2526324 22 39 1848090 2019327 2189949 2359902 2529138 21 40 1850949 2022176
2192787 2362729 2531952 20 41 1853808 2025025 2195625 2365555 2534766 19 42
1856666 2027874 2198463 2368381 2537580 18 43 1859524 2030722 2201300 2371207
2540393 17 44 1862382 2033570 2204137 2374033 2543206 16 45 1865240 2036418
2206974 2376859 2546019 15 46 1868098 2039266 2209811 2379684 2548832 14 47
1870956 2042114 2212648 2382509 2551645 13 48 1873813 2044962 2215485 2385334
2554458 12 49 1876670 2047809 2218322 2388159 2557270 11 50 1879527 2050656
2221158 2390983 2560082 10 51 1882384 2053503 2223994 2393808 2562894 9 52
1885241 2056350 2226830 2396632 2565706 8 53 1888098 2059197 2229666 2399456
2568517 7 54 1890954 2062043 2232502 2402280 2571328 6 55 1893810 2064889
2235337 2405104 2574139 5 56 1896666 2067735 2238172 2407927 2576950 4 57
1899522 2070581 2241007 2410750 2579760 3 58 1902378 2073427 2243842 2413573
2582570 2 59 1905234 2076272 2246677 2416396 2585380 1 60 1908090 2079117
2249511 2419219 2588190 0 79 78 77 76 75 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 15 16 17 18 19 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 2588190
2756373 2923717 3090170 3255682 60 1 2591000 2759169 2926499 3092936 3258532 59
2 2593809 2761965 2929280 3095702 3261182 58 3 2596618 2764761 2932061 3098468
3263931 57 4 2599427 2767556 2934842 3101234 3266681 56 5 2602236 2770351
2937623 3103999 3269430 55 6 2605045 2773146 2940403 3106764 3272179 54 7
2607853 2775941 2943183 3109529 3274927 53 8 2610661 2778735 2945963 3112294
3277675 52 9 2613469 2781529 2948743 3115058 3280423 51 10 2616277 2784323
2951523 3117822 3283171 50 11 2619084 2787117 2954302 3120586 3285918 49 12
2621891 2789911 2957081 3123349 3288665 48 13 2624698 2792704 2959860 3126112
3291412 47 14 2627505 2795497 2962638 3128875 3294159 46 15 2630312 2798290
2965416 3131638 3296906 45 16 2633118 2801082 2968194 3134400 3299652 44 17
2635924 2803874 2970972 3137162 3302398 43 18 2638730 2806666 2973750 3139924
3305144 42 19 2641536 2809458 2976527 3142686 3307889 41 20 2644342 2812250
2979304 3145448 3310634 40 21 2647147 2815041 2982081 3148209 3313379 39 22
2649952 2817832 2984857 3150970 3316123 38 23 2652757 2820623 2987633 3153731
3318867 37 24 2655562 2823414 2990409 3156491 3321611 36 25 2658366 2826204
2993185 3159251 3354355 35 26 2661170 2828994 2995960 3162011 3327098 34 27
2663974 2831784 2998735 3164770 3329841 33 28 2666777 2834574 3001510 3167529
3332585 32 29 2669580 2837364 3004284 3170288 3335327 31 30 2672383 2840153
3007058 3173047 3338069 30 31 2675186 2842942 3009832 3175805 3340811 29 32
2677989 2845731 3012606 3178563 3343553 28 33 2680792 3848520 3015380 3181321
3346294 27 34 2683595 2851308 3018153 3184079 3349035 26 35 2686397 2854096
3020926 3186837 3351776 25 36 2689199 2856884 3023699 3189594 3354516 24 37
2692001 2859672 3026472 3192351 3357256 23 38 2694802 2862459 3029244 3195108
3359996 22 39 2697603 2865246 3032016 3197864 3362736 21 40 2700404 2868033
3034788 3200620 3365475 20 41 2703205 2870819 3037559 3203375 3368214 19 42
2706005 2873605 3040330 3206130 3370953 18 43 2708805 2876391 3043101 3208885
3373691 17 44 2711605 2879177 3045872 3211640 3376429 16 45 2714405 2881963
3048643 3214395 3379167 15 46 2717204 2884748 3051413 3217150 3381905 14 47
2720003 2887533 3054183 3219904 3384642 13 48 2722802 2890318 3056953 3222658
3387379 12 49 2725601 2893103 3059723 3225412 3390116 11 50 2728400 2895888
3062492 3228165 3392852 10 51 2731198 2898672 3065261 3230918 3395588 9 52
2733996 2901456 3068030 3233671 3398324 8 53 2736794 2904240 3070798 3236423
3401060 7 54 2739592 2907023 3073566 3239175 3403795 6 55 2742389 2909806
3076334 3241927 3406530 5 56 2745186 2912589 3079102 3244679 3409265 4 57
2747983 2915371 3081869 3247430 3411999 3 58 2750780 2918153 3084636 3250181
3414733 2 59 2753577 2920935 3087403 3252932 3417467 1 60 2756373 2923717
3090170 3255682 3420201 0 74 73 72 71 70 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 20 21 22 23 24 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 3420201
3583679 3746066 3907311 4067366 60 1 3422934 3586395 3748763 3909989 4070023 59
2 3425667 3589110 3751460 3912666 4072680 58 3 3428400 3591825 3754156 3915343
4075337 57 4 3431133 3594540 3756852 3918020 4077993 56 5 3433865 3597254
3759548 3920696 4080649 55 6 3436597 3599968 3762243 3923372 4083305 54 7
3439329 3602682 3764938 3926048 4085960 53 8 3442060 3605395 3767633 3928723
4088615 52 9 3444791 3608108 3770327 3931398 4091269 51 10 3447522 3610821
3773021 3934072 4093923 50 11 3450253 3613533 3775715 3936746 4096577 49 12
3452983 3616245 3778408 3939420 4099231 48 13 3455713 3618957 3781101 3942093
4101884 47 14 3458442 3621669 3783794 3944766 4104537 40 15 3461171 3624380
3786486 3947439 4107189 45 16 3463900 3627091 3789178 3950112 4109841 44 17
3466629 3629802 3791870 3952784 4112493 43 18 3469357 3632512 3794562 3955456
4115144 42 19 3472085 3635222 3797253 3958128 4117795 41 20 3474813 3637932
3799944 3960799 4120446 40 21 3477540 3640642 3802635 3963470 4123096 39 22
3480267 3643351 3805325 3966140 4125746 38 23 3482994 3646060 3808015 3968810
4128395 37 24 3485721 3648768 3810704 3971480 4131044 36 25 3488447 3651476
3813393 3974149 4133693 35 26 3491173 3654184 3816082 3976818 4136341 34 27
3493899 3656892 3818771 3979487 4138989 33 28 3496624 3659599 3821459 3982155
4141637 32 29 3499349 3662306 3824147 3984823 4144285 31 30 3502075 3665012
3826834 3987491 4146932 30 31 3504799 3667718 3829521 3990159 4149579 29 32
3507523 3670424 3832208 3992826 4152226 28 33 3510247 3673130 3834895 3995493
4154872 27 34 3512971 3675835 3837581 3998159 4157518 26 35 3515694 3678541
3840267 4000825 4160163 25 36 3518417 3681246 3842953 4003491 4162808 24 37
3521140 3683951 3845638 4006156 4165453 23 38 3523862 3686655 3848323 4008821
4168097 22 39 3526584 3689359 3851008 4011486 4170741 21 40 3529306 3692062
3853692 4014150 4173385 20 41 3532027 3694765 3856376 4016814 4176028 19 42
3534748 3697468 3859060 4019478 4178671 18 43 3537469 3700170 3861743 4022141
4181313 17 44 3540190 3702872 3864426 4024804 4183955 16 45 3542910 3705574
3867109 4027467 4186597 15 46 3545630 3708276 3869791 4030130 4189239 14 47
3548350 3710977 3872473 4032792 4191880 13 48 3551070 3713678 3875155 4035454
4194521 12 49 3553789 3716379 3877837 4038115 4197162 11 50 3556508 3719080
3880518 4040776 4199802 10 51 3559227 3721780 3883199 4043437 4202442 9 52
3561945 3724480 3885880 4046097 4205081 8 53 3564663 3727179 3888560 4048757
4207720 7 54 3567380 3729878 3891240 4051416 4210359 6 55 3570097 3732577
3893919 4054075 4212997 5 56 3572814 3735275 3896598 4056734 4215635 4 57
3575531 3737973 3899277 4059392 4218273 3 58 3578247 3740671 3901955 4062050
4220910 2 59 3580963 3743369 3904633 4064708 4223547 1 60 3583679 3746066
3907311 4067366 4226183 0 69 68 67 66 65 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 25 26 27 28 29 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 4226183
4383712 4539905 4694710 4848096 60 1 4228819 4386326 4542497 4697284 4850640 59
2 4231455 4388940 4545088 4699852 4853184 58 3 4234090 4391554 4547679 4702419
4855727 57 4 4236725 4394167 4550270 4704986 4858270 56 5 4229360 4396780
4552860 4707553 4860812 55 6 4241994 4399392 4555450 4710119 4863354 54 7
4244628 4402004 4558039 4712685 4865895 53 8 4247262 4404616 4560628 4715250
4868436 52 9 4249895 4407227 4563216 4717815 4870977 51 10 4252528 4409838
4565804 4720380 4873517 50 11 4255161 4412449 4568392 4722944 4876057 49 12
4257793 4415059 4570979 4725508 4878596 48 13 4260425 4417669 4573566 4728071
4881135 47 14 4263056 4420278 4576153 4730634 4883674 46 15 4265687 4422887
4578739 4733197 4886212 45 16 4268318 4425496 4581325 4735759 4888750 44 17
4270949 4428104 4583911 4738321 4891287 43 18 4273579 4430712 4586496 4740882
4893824 42 19 4276209 4433320 4589081 4743443 4896361 41 20 4278838 4435927
4591665 4746004 4898897 40 21 4281467 4438534 4594249 4748564 4901433 39 22
4284096 4441140 4596833 4751124 4903968 38 23 4286724 4443746 4599416 4753683
4906503 37 24 4289352 4446352 4601999 4756242 4909037 36 25 4291979 4448957
4604581 4758801 4911571 35 26 4294606 4451562 4607163 4761359 4914105 34 27
4297233 4454167 4609744 4763917 4916638 33 28 4299859 4456771 4612325 4766474
4919171 32 29 4302485 4459375 4614906 4769031 4921703 31 30 4305111 4461978
4617486 4771588 4924235 30 31 4307736 4464581 4620066 4774144 4926767 29 32
4310361 4467184 4622646 4776700 4929298 28 33 4312986 4469786 4625225 4779255
4931829 27 34 4315610 4472388 4627804 4781810 4934359 26 35 4318234 4474990
4630382 4784365 4936889 25 36 4320858 4477591 4632960 4786919 4939418 24 37
4323481 448019^ 4635538 4789473 4941947 23 38 4326104 4482792 4638115 4792026
4944476 22 39 4328726 4485392 4640692 4794579 4947004 21 40 4331348 4487992
4643268 4797132 4949532 20 41 4333970 4490591 4645844 4799684 4952059 19 42
4336591 4493190 4648420 4802236 4954586 18 43 4339212 4495788 4650995 4804787
4957113 17 44 4341833 4498386 4653570 4807338 4959639 16 45 4344453 4500984
4656145 4809888 4962165 15 46 4347073 4503582 4658719 4812438 4964690 14 47
4349693 4506179 4661293 4814988 4967215 13 48 4352312 4508776 4663866 4817537
4969740 12 49 4354931 4511372 4666439 4820086 4972264 11 50 4357549 4513968
4669012 4822635 4974788 10 51 4360167 4516563 4671584 4825183 4977311 9 52
4362785 4519158 4674156 4827731 4979834 8 53 4365402 4521753 4676727 4830278
4982356 7 54 4368019 4524347 4679298 4832825 4984878 6 55 4370635 4526941
4681869 4835371 4987399 5 56 4373251 4529535 4684439 4837917 4989920 4 57
4375867 4532128 4687009 4840462 4992441 3 58 4378482 4534721 4689578 4843007
4994961 2 59 4381097 4537313 4692147 4845552 4997481 1 60 4383712 4539905
4694716 4848096 5000000 0 64 63 62 61 60 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Qudrant. 30 31 32 33 34 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complement of the same Quadrant. 0 5000000
5150381 5299192 5446390 5591929 60 1 5002519 5152874 5301659 5448829 5594340 59
2 5005038 5155367 5304125 5451268 55967^1 58 3 5007556 5157859 5306591 5453707
55991^1 57 4 5010074 5160351 5309056 5456145 5601571 56 5 5012591 5162843
5311521 5458583 5603981 55 6 5015108 5165334 5313985 5461020 5606390 54 7
5017624 5167825 5316449 5463456 5608798 53 8 5020140 5170315 5318913 5465892
5611206 52 9 5022656 5172805 5321376 5468328 5613614 51 10 5025171 5175294
5323839 5470763 5616021 50 11 5027686 5177783 5326301 5473198 5618427 49 12
5030200 5180271 5328763 5475632 5620833 48 13 5032714 5182759 5331224 5478066
5623239 47 14 5035227 5185246 5333685 5480499 5625644 46 15 5037740 5187733
5336145 5482932 5628049 45 16 5040253 5190220 5338605 5485364 5630453 44 17
5042765 5192706 5341065 5487796 5632857 43 18 5045277 5195192 5343524 5490228
5635260 42 19 5047788 5197677 5345983 5492659 5637663 41 20 5050299 5200162
5348441 5495090 5640066 40 21 5052809 5202646 5350898 5497520 5642468 39 22
5055319 5205130 5353355 5499950 5644869 38 23 5057829 5207614 5355812 5502379
5647270 37 24 5060338 5210097 5358268 5504808 5649670 36 25 5062847 5212580
5360724 5507236 5652070 35 26 5065355 5215062 5363179 5509664 5654469 34 27
5067863 5217544 5365634 5512091 5656868 33 28 5070370 5220025 5368088 5514518
5659266 32 29 5072877 5222506 5370542 5516944 5661664 31 30 5075384 5224986
5372996 5519370 5664062 30 31 5077890 5227466 5375449 5521795 5666459 29 32
5080396 5229949 5377902 5524220 5668856 28 33 5082901 5232425 5380354 5526645
5671252 27 34 5085406 5234904 5382806 5529069 5673648 26 35 5087911 5237382
5385258 5531493 5676043 25 36 5090415 5239860 5387709 5533916 5678438 24 37
5092619 5242337 5390159 5536338 5680832 23 38 5095422 5244814 5392609 5538760
5683226 22 39 5097925 5147290 5395058 5541182 5685619 21 40 5100427 5249766
5397507 5543603 5688012 20 41 5102929 525224^ 5399955 5546024 5690404 19 42
5105430 5254716 5402403 5548444 5692796 18 43 5107931 5257191 5404851 5550864
5695187 17 44 5110431 5259665 5407298 5553283 5697578 16 45 5112931 5262139
5409745 5555702 5699968 15 46 5115431 5264612 5412191 5558120 5702358 14 47
5117930 5267085 5414637 5560538 5704747 13 48 5120429 5269557 5417082 5562956
5707136 12 49 5122927 5272029 5419527 5565373 5709524 11 50 5125425 5274501
5421972 5567790 5711912 10 51 5127922 5276972 5424416 5570206 5714299 9 52
5130419 5279443 5426859 5572622 5716686 8 53 5132916 5281913 5429302 5575037
5719072 7 54 5135412 5284383 5431745 5577452 5721458 6 55 5137908 5286852
5434187 5579866 5723844 5 56 5140403 5289321 5436620 5582280 5726229 4 57
5142898 5291789 5439070 5584693 5728613 3 58 5145393 5294257 5441510 5587106
5730997 2 59 5147887 5296725 5443950 5589518 5733381 1 60 5150381 5299192
5446390 5591929 5735764 0 59 58 57 56 55 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Qudrant. 35 36 37 38 39 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complement of the same Quadrant. 0 5735764
5877852 6018150 6156615 6293204 60 1 5738147 5880205 6020470 6158907 6295464 59
2 5740529 5882558 6022796 6161198 6297724 58 3 5742911 5884910 6025118 6163489
6299983 57 4 5745292 5887262 6027439 6165780 6302242 56 5 5747672 5889613
6029760 6168070 6304501 55 6 5750052 5891964 6032080 6170359 6306759 54 7
5752432 5894314 6034400 6172648 6309016 53 8 5754811 5896664 6036719 6174936
6311273 52 9 5757190 5899013 6039038 6177224 6313529 51 10 5759568 5901361
6041357 6179512 6315784 50 11 5761946 5903709 6043675 6181799 6318039 49 12
5764323 5906056 6045992 6184085 6320293 48 13 5766700 5908403 6048309 6186371
6322547 47 14 5769076 5910750 6050625 6188656 6324800 46 15 5771452 5913096
6052940 6190940 6327053 45 16 5773827 5915442 6055255 6193224 6329305 44 17
5776202 5917787 6057570 6195508 6331557 43 18 5778576 5920132 6059884 6197791
6333808 42 19 5780950 5922476 6062198 6200074 6336059 41 20 5783324 5924820
6064511 6202356 6338310 40 21 5785697 5927163 6066824 6204638 6340560 39 22
5788069 5929505 6069136 6206919 6342809 38 23 5790441 5931847 6071448 6209199
6345058 37 24 5792812 5934189 6073759 6211479 6347306 36 25 5795183 5936530
6076069 6213758 6349553 35 26 5797553 5938871 6078379 6216037 6351800 34 27
5799923 5941211 6080688 6218315 6354046 33 28 5802292 5943551 6082997 6220593
6356292 32 29 5804^61 5945890 6085306 6222870 6358537 31 30 5807030 5948228
6087614 6225146 6360782 30 31 5809398 595056^ 6089922 6227422 6363026 29 32
5811766 5952904 6092229 6229698 6365270 28 33 5814133 5955241 6094536 6231973
6367513 27 34 5816499 5957578 6096842 6234248 6309756 26 35 5818865 5959914
6099147 6236522 6371999 25 36 5821230 5962250 6101452 9238796 6374241 24 37
5823595 5964585 6103756 6241069 6376482 23 38 5825959 5966919 6106060 6243342
6378722 22 39 5828323 5969253 6108364 6245614 6380962 21 40 5830687 5971586
6110667 6247885 6383201 20 41 5833050 5973919 6112970 6250156 6385440 19 42
5835412 5976251 6115272 6252426 6387678 18 43 5837774 5978583 6117573 6254696
6389916 17 44 5840136 5980915 6119873 6256966 6392153 16 45 5842497 5983146
6122173 6259235 6394390 15 46 5844858 5985577 6124473 6261503 6396626 14 47
5847218 5987907 6126772 6263771 6398862 13 48 5849578 5990237 6129071 6266038
6401097 12 49 5851937 5992566 6131369 6268305 6403332 11 50 5854295 5994894
6133667 6270572 6405566 10 51 5856653 5997222 6135964 6272838 6407799 9 52
5859010 5999549 6138261 6275103 6410032 8 53 5861367 6001876 6140557 6277368
6412264 7 54 5863724 6004202 6142853 6279632 6414496 6 55 5866080 6006528
6145148 6281895 6416728 5 56 5868436 6008853 6147442 6284158 6418959 4 57
5870791 6011178 6149736 6286420 6421189 3 58 5873145 6013502 6152030 6288682
6423419 2 59 5875499 6015826 6154323 6290943 6425648 1 60 5877852 6018150
6156615 6293204 6427876 0 54 53 52 51 50 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 40 41 42 43 44 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 6427876
6560590 6691306 6819984 6946584 60 1 6430104 6562785 6693468 6822111 6948676 59
2 6432331 6564979 6695629 6824237 6950767 58 3 6434558 6567173 9697789 6826363
6952858 57 4 6436785 6569367 6699949 6828489 6954949 56 5 6439011 6571560
6702108 6830614 6957039 55 6 6441236 6573753 6704267 6832738 6959128 54 7
6443461 6575945 6706425 6834861 6961216 53 8 6445685 6578136 6708582 6836984
6963304 52 9 6447909 6580326 6710739 6839107 6965392 51 10 6450132 6582516
6712895 6841229 6967479 50 11 6452355 6584705 6715051 6843350 6969565 49 12
6454577 6586894 6717206 6845471 6971651 48 13 6456799 6589082 6719361 6847591
6973736 47 14 6459020 6591270 6721515 6849711 6975821 46 15 6461240 6593458
6723668 6851830 6977905 45 16 6463460 6595645 6725821 6853949 6979988 44 17
6465679 6597831 6727973 6856067 6982071 43 18 6467898 6600016 6730125 6858184
6984153 42 19 6470116 6602201 6732276 6860301 6986235 41 20 6472333 6604386
6734427 6862417 6988319 40 21 6474550 6606570 6736577 6864533 6990396 39 22
6476766 6608753 6738726 6866648 6992476 38 23 6478982 6610936 6740875 6868762
6994555 37 24 6481198 6613118 6743024 6870876 6996634 36 25 6483413 6615300
6745172 6872989 6998712 35 26 6485628 6617481 6747319 6875102 7000789 34 27
6487842 6619661 6749465 6877214 7002866 33 28 6490055 6621841 6751611 6879325
7004942 32 29 6492268 6624021 6753757 6881436 7007018 31 30 6494480 6626200
6755902 6883546 7009093 30 31 6496692 6628379 6758047 6885656 7011167 29 32
6498903 6630557 6760191 6887765 7013241 28 33 6501114 6632734 6762334 6889874
7015314 27 34 6503324 6634911 6764477 6891982 7017387 26 35 6505533 6637087
6766619 6894089 7019459 25 36 6507742 6639263 6768760 6896196 7021530 24 37
6509950 6641438 6770901 6898302 7023601 23 38 6512158 6643612 6773041 6900408
7025671 22 39 6514365 6645786 6775181 6902513 7027741 21 40 6516572 6647959
6777320 6904617 7029810 20 41 6518778 6650132 6779459 6906721 7031879 19 42
6520984 6652304 6781597 6908824 7033947 18 43 6523189 6654476 6783734 6910927
7036014 17 44 6525394 6656647 6785871 6913029 7038081 16 45 6527598 6658817
6788007 6915131 7040147 15 46 6529801 6660987 6790143 6917232 7042213 14 47
6532004 6663156 6792278 6919332 7044278 13 48 6534206 6665325 6794413 6921432
7046342 12 49 6536408 6667493 6796547 6923531 7048406 11 50 6538609 6669661
6798681 6925630 7050469 10 51 6540809 6671828 6800814 6927728 7052432 9 52
6543009 6673994 6802946 6929725 7054594 8 53 6545208 6676160 6805078 6931922
7056655 7 54 6547407 6678326 6807209 6934018 7058716 6 55 6549606 6680491
6809340 6936114 7060776 5 56 6551804 6682655 6811470 6938209 7062836 4 57
6554001 6684818 6813599 6940303 7064895 3 58 6556198 6686981 6815728 6942397
7066953 2 59 6558394 6689144 6817856 6944491 7069011 1 60 6560590 6691306
6819984 6946584 7071068 0 49 48 47 46 45 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 45 46 47 48 49 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 7071068
7193398 7313537 7431448 7547096 60 1 7073125 7195418 7315521 7433394 7549004 59
2 7075181 7197438 7317504 7435339 7550911 58 3 7077236 7199457 7319486 7437284
7552818 57 4 7079291 7201476 7321468 7439229 7554724 56 5 7081345 7203494
7323449 7441173 7556630 55 6 7083399 7205511 7325429 7443116 7558535 54 7
7085452 7207527 7327409 7445058 7560439 53 8 7087504 7209543 7329388 7447000
7562343 52 9 7089556 7211559 7331367 7448941 7564246 51 10 7091607 7213574
7333345 7450882 7566148 50 11 7093658 7215588 7335322 7452822 7568050 49 12
7095708 7217601 7337298 7454761 7569951 48 13 7097757 7219614 7339274 7456690
7571851 47 14 7099806 7221627 7341250 7458637 7573751 46 15 7101854 7223639
7343225 7460574 7575650 45 16 710390^ 7225661 7345199 7462511 7577548 44 17
7105949 7227662 7347173 7464447 7579446 43 18 7107995 7229672 7349146 7466382
7581343 42 19 7110041 7231681 7351118 7468317 7583240 41 20 7112086 7233689
7353090 7470251 7585136 40 21 7114131 7235697 7355061 7472184 7587031 39 22
7116175 7237704 7357031 7474117 7588925 38 23 7118218 7239711 7359001 7476049
7590819 37 24 7120261 7241718 7360970 7477981 7592714 36 25 7122303 7243724
7362939 7479912 7594606 35 26 7124344 7245729 7364907 7481842 7596498 34 27
7126385 7247733 7366874 7483771 7598389 33 28 7128425 7249737 7368841 7485700
7600280 32 29 7130465 7251741 7370807 7487629 7602170 31 30 7132504 7253744
7372773 7489557 7604960 30 31 7134543 7255746 7374738 7491484 7605949 29 32
7136581 7257747 7376702 7493410 7607837 28 33 7138618 7259748 7378666 7495336
7609725 ^7 34 7140655 7261749 7380629 7497262 7611612 26 35 7142691 7263749
7382592 7499187 7613498 25 36 7144727 7265748 7384554 7501111 7615384 24 37
7146762 7267746 7386515 7503034 7617269 23 38 7148796 7269744 7388475 7504957
7619153 22 39 7150830 7271741 7390435 7506879 7621037 21 40 7152863 7273737
7392394 7508801 7622920 20 41 7154895 7275733 7394353 7510722 7624802 19 42
7156927 7277728 7396311 7512642 7626683 18 43 7158958 7279722 7398268 7514561
7628564 17 44 7160989 7281716 7400225 7516480 7630445 16 45 7163019 7283710
7402181 7518398 7632325 15 46 7165049 7285703 7404137 7520316 7634204 14 47
7167078 7287695 7406092 7522233 7636082 13 48 7169106 7289687 7408046 7524149
7637960 12 49 7171134 7291678 7410000 7526065 7639838 11 50 7173161 7293668
7411953 7527980 7641715 10 51 7175187 7295658 7413905 7529894 7643591 9 52
7177213 7297647 7415856 7531808 7645466 8 53 7179238 7299635 7417807 7533721
7647341 7 54 7181263 7301623 7419758 7535634 7649215 6 55 7183287 7303610
7421708 7537546 7651088 5 56 7185310 7305597 7423657 7539457 7652961 4 57
7187333 7307583 7425605 7541367 7654833 3 58 7189355 7309568 7427552 7543277
7656704 2 59 7191377 7311553 7429501 7545187 7658575 2 06 7193398 7313537
7431448 7547096 7660445 0 44 43 42 41 40 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 50 51 52 53 54 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 7660445
7771460 7880108 7986355 8090170 60 1 7662314 7773290 7881898 7988105 8091879 59
2 7664183 7775120 7883688 7989855 8093588 58 3 7666051 7776949 7885477 7991604
8095296 57 4 7667919 7778777 7887266 7993352 8097004 56 5 7669786 7780605
7889054 7995100 8098711 55 6 7671652 7782432 7890841 7996847 8100417 54 7
7673517 7784258 7892927 7998593 8102122 53 8 7675382 7786084 7894413 8000339
8103827 52 9 7677246 7787909 7896198 8002084 8105531 51 10 7679110 7789833
7897983 8003828 8107234 50 11 7680973 7791557 7899767 8005571 8108936 49 12
7682835 7793380 7901550 8007314 8110638 48 13 7684697 7795202 7903332 8009056
8112339 47 14 7686558 7797024 7905114 8010797 8114040 46 15 7688418 7798845
7906895 8012538 8115740 45 16 7690278 7800665 7908676 8014278 8117439 44 17
7692137 7802485 7910456 8016017 8119137 43 18 7693995 7804304 7912235 8017756
8120835 42 19 7695853 7806123 7914014 8019494 8122532 41 20 7697710 7807941
7915792 8021232 8124229 40 21 7699566 7809758 7917569 8022969 8125925 39 22
7701422 7811574 7919345 8024705 8127620 38 23 7703277 7813390 7921121 8026440
8129314 37 24 7705132 7815205 7922896 8028175 8131008 36 25 7706986 7817020
7924671 8029909 8132701 35 26 7708839 7818834 7926445 8021642 8134393 34 27
7710692 7820647 7928218 8033375 8136084 33 28 7712544 7822459 7929990 8035107
8137775 32 29 7714395 7824271 7931762 8036838 8139465 31 30 7716246 7826082
7933533 3038569 8141155 30 31 7718096 7827892 7935303 3040299 8142844 29 32
7719945 7829702 7937073 8042028 8144532 28 33 7721794 7831511 7938842 8043757
8146220 27 34 7723642 7833320 7940611 8045485 8147907 26 35 7725490 7835128
7942379 8047212 8149593 25 36 7727337 7836935 7944146 8048938 8151278 24 37
7729183 7838741 7945912 8050664 8152963 23 38 7731028 7840547 7947678 8052389
8154647 22 39 7732872 7842352 7949443 8054114 8156330 21 40 7734716 7844157
7951208 8055838 8158013 20 41 7736559 7845961 7952972 8057561 8159695 19 42
7738402 7847764 7954735 8059283 8161376 18 43 7740244 7849566 7956497 8061005
8163057 17 44 7742085 7851368 7958259 8062726 8164737 16 45 7743926 7853169
7960020 8064446 8166416 15 46 7745766 7854970 7961780 8066166 8168094 14 47
7747606 7856770 7963540 8067885 8169772 13 48 7749445 7858569 7965299 8069603
8171449 12 49 7751283 7860368 7967057 8071321 8173126 11 50 7753121 7862166
7968815 8073038 8174802 10 51 7754958 7863963 7970572 8074754 8176477 9 52
7756794 7865759 7972328 8076470 8178151 8 53 7758630 7867555 7974084 8078185
8179825 7 54 7760465 7869350 7975839 8079899 8181498 6 55 7762299 7871145
7977593 8081613 8183170 5 56 7764132 7872939 7979347 8083326 8184841 4 57
7765965 7874732 7981100 8085038 8186512 3 58 7767797 7876525 7982852 8086749
8188182 2 59 7769629 7878317 7984604 8088460 8189851 1 06 7771460 7880108
7986355 8090170 8191520 0 39 38 37 36 35 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 55 56 57 58 59 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 8191520
8290376 8386706 8480481 8571673 60 1 8193188 8292002 8388290 8482022 8573171 59
2 8194855 8293628 8389873 8483562 8574668 58 3 8196522 8295253 8391456 8485102
8576164 57 4 8198188 8296877 8393038 8486641 8577660 56 5 8199854 8298501
8394619 8488180 8579155 55 6 8201519 8300124 8396199 8489718 8580649 54 7
8203183 8301746 8397778 8491255 8582142 53 8 8204846 8303367 8399357 8492791
8583635 52 9 8206508 8304987 8400935 8494326 8585127 51 10 8208170 8306607
8402513 8495860 8586619 50 11 8209831 8308226 8404090 8497394 8588110 49 12
8211491 8309844 8405666 8498927 8589600 48 13 8213151 831146^ 8407241 8500459
8591089 47 14 8214810 8313079 8408816 8501991 8592577 46 15 8216469 8314696
8410390 8503522 8594064 45 16 8218127 8316312 8411963 8505052 8595551 44 17
8219784 8317927 8413536 8506582 8597037 43 18 8221440 8319541 8415108 8508111
8598523 42 19 8223096 8321155 8416679 8509639 8600008 41 20 8224751 8322768
8418250 8511167 8601492 40 21 8226405 8324380 8419820 8512694 8602975 39 22
8228058 8325991 8421389 8514220 8604457 38 23 8229711 8327602 8422957 8515745
8605939 37 24 8231363 8329212 8424525 8517270 8607420 36 25 8233015 8330822
8426092 8518794 8608901 35 26 8234666 8332431 8427658 8520317 8610381 34 27
8236316 8334039 8429223 8521839 8611860 33 28 8237965 8335646 8430788 8523361
8613338 32 29 8239614 8337252 8432352 8524882 8614815 31 30 8241262 8338858
8433915 8526402 8616292 30 31 8242909 8340463 8435477 8527921 8617768 29 32
8244556 8342067 8437039 8529440 8619243 28 33 8246202 8343671 8438600 8530958
8620718 27 34 8247847 8345247 8440161 8532476 8622192 26 35 8249492 8346877
8441721 8533993 8623665 25 36 8251136 8348479 8443280 8535509 8625137 24 37
8252779 8350080 8444838 8537024 8626608 23 38 8254421 8351680 8446396 8538538
8628079 22 39 8256062 8353279 8447953 8540052 8629549 21 40 8257703 8354878
8449509 8541565 8631019 20 41 8259343 8356476 8451064 8543077 8632488 19 42
8260982 8358073 8452618 8544588 8633956 18 43 8262621 8359670 8454172 8546099
8635423 17 44 8264259 8361266 8455725 8547609 8636889 16 45 8265897 8362862
8457278 8549119 8638355 15 46 8267534 8364457 8458830 8550628 8639820 14 47
8269170 8366051 8460381 8552136 8641284 13 48 8270806 8367644 8461932 8553643
8642748 12 49 8272441 8369236 8463482 8555149 8644211 11 50 8274075 8370828
8465031 8556655 8645673 10 51 8275708 8372419 8466579 8558160 8647134 9 52
8277340 8374009 8468126 8559664 8648595 8 53 8278972 8375599 8469673 9561168
8650055 7 54 8280603 8377188 8471219 8562671 8651514 6 55 8282234 8378776
8472765 8564173 8652973 5 56 8283864 8380363 8474310 8565675 8654431 4 57
8285493 8381950 8475854 8567176 8655888 3 58 8287121 8383536 8477397 8568676
8657344 2 59 8288749 8385121 8478939 8570175 8658799 1 60 8290376 8386706
8480481 8571673 8660254 0 34 33 32 31 30 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 60 61 62 63 64 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 8660254
8746197 8829476 8910065 8987940 60 1 8661708 8747607 8830841 8911385 8989215 59
2 8663162 8749016 8832205 8912704 8990489 58 3 8664615 8750425 8833569 8914023
8991762 57 4 8666067 8751833 8834932 8915341 8993035 56 5 8667518 8753240
8836295 8916659 8994307 55 6 8668968 8754646 8837657 8917976 8995578 54 7
8670417 8756051 8839018 8919292 8996848 53 8 8671866 8757456 8840378 8920607
8998117 52 9 8673314 8758860 8841737 8921921 8999386 51 10 8674762 8760263
8843095 8923234 9000654 50 11 8676209 8761665 8844452 8924546 9001921 49 12
8677655 8763067 8845809 8925858 9003187 48 13 8679100 8764468 8847165 8927169
9004453 47 14 8680544 8765868 8848521 8928479 9005718 46 15 8681988 8767268
8849876 8929789 9006982 45 16 8683431 8768667 8851230 8931098 9008245 44 17
8684874 8770065 8852583 8932406 9009508 43 18 8686316 8771462 8853936 8933714
9010770 42 19 8687757 8772859 8855288 8935021 9012031 41 20 8689197 8774255
8856639 8936327 9013292 40 21 8690636 8775650 8857989 8937632 9014552 39 22
8692074 8777044 8859338 8938936 9015811 38 23 8693512 8778437 8860687 8940240
9017069 37 24 8694949 8779830 8862035 8941543 9018326 36 25 8696386 8781222
8863383 8942845 9019582 35 26 8697822 8782613 8864730 8944146 9020838 34 27
8699257 8784003 8866076 8945446 9022093 33 28 8700691 8785393 8867421 8946746
9023347 32 29 8702124 8786782 8868765 8948045 9024600 31 30 8703557 8788171
8870108 8949344 9025853 30 31 8704989 8789559 8871451 8950642 9027105 29 32
8706420 8790946 8872793 895193^ 9028356 28 33 8707851 8792332 8874134 8953235
9029606 27 34 8709281 8793717 8875475 8954530 9030856 26 35 8710710 8795102
8876815 8955824 9032105 25 36 8712138 8796486 8878154 8957117 9033353 24 37
8713565 8797869 8879492 8958410 9034600 23 38 8714992 8799251 8880830 8959702
9035847 22 39 8716418 8800633 8882167 8960994 9037093 21 40 8717844 8802014
8883503 8962285 9038338 20 41 8719269 8803394 8884838 8963575 9039582 19 42
8720693 8804773 8886172 8964864 9040825 18 43 8722116 8806152 8887506 8966152
9042068 17 44 8723538 8807530 8888839 8967440 9043310 16 45 8724960 8808907
8890171 8968727 9044551 15 46 8726^81 8810283 8891502 8970013 9045791 14 47
8727801 8811659 8892833 8971299 9047031 13 48 8729221 8813034 8894163 8972584
9048270 12 49 8730640 8814408 8895492 8973868 9049508 11 50 8732058 8815782
8896821 8975151 9050746 10 51 8733475 8817155 8898149 8976433 9051983 9 52
8734891 8818527 8899476 8977715 9053219 8 53 8736307 8819898 8900802 8978996
9054454 7 54 8737722 8821268 8902127 8980276 9055688 6 55 8739137 8822638
8903452 8981555 9056922 5 56 8740551 8824007 8904776 8982833 9058155 4 57
8741964 8825375 8906099 8984111 9059387 3 58 8743376 8826743 8907422 8985388
9060618 2 59 8744787 8828110 8908744 8986664 9061848 1 60 8746197 8829476
8910065 8987940 9063078 0 25 26 27 28 29 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 65 66 67 68 69 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 9063078
9135455 9205049 9271839 9335804 60 1 9064307 9136638 9206185 9272928 9336846 59
2 9065535 9137820 9207321 9274017 9337887 58 3 9066763 9139001 9208456 9275105
9338928 57 4 9067990 9140181 9209590 9276192 9339968 56 5 9069216 9141361
9210723 9277278 9341007 55 6 9070441 9142540 9211855 9278363 9342045 54 7
9071665 9143718 9212986 9279448 9343082 53 8 9072889 9144895 9214117 9280532
9344119 52 9 9074112 9146072 9215247 9281615 9345155 51 10 9075334 9147248
9216376 9282697 9346190 50 11 9076555 9148423 9217504 9283778 9347224 49 12
9077775 9149597 9218631 9284859 9348257 48 13 9078995 9150770 9219758 9285939
9349289 47 14 9080214 9151943 9220884 9287018 9350321 46 15 9081432 9153115
9222010 9288096 9351352 45 16 9082649 9154286 9223135 9289173 9352382 44 17
9083866 9155457 9224259 9290250 9353411 43 18 9085082 9156627 9225382 9291326
9354440 42 19 9086297 9157796 9226504 9292401 9355468 41 20 9087512 9158964
9227625 9293476 9356495 40 21 9088726 9160131 9228746 9294550 9357521 39 22
9089939 9161297 9229866 9295623 9358546 38 23 9091151 9162463 9230985 9296695
9359571 37 24 9092362 9163628 9232103 9297766 9360595 36 25 9093572 9165792
9233220 9298836 9361618 35 26 9094781 9165955 9234337 9299905 9362640 34 27
9095990 9167117 9235453 9300974 9363662 33 28 9097198 9168279 9236568 9302042
9364683 32 29 9098406 9169440 9237682 9303109 9365703 31 30 9099613 9170601
9238795 9304176 9366722 30 31 9100819 9171761 9239908 9305242 9367740 29 32
9102024 9172920 9241020 9306307 9368758 28 33 9103228 9174078 9242131 9307371
9369775 27 34 9104432 9175235 9243242 9308434 9370791 26 35 9105636 9176391
9244352 9309497 9371806 25 36 9106837 9177547 9245461 9310559 9372820 24 37
9108038 9178702 9246569 9311620 9373834 23 38 9109238 9179856 9247676 9312680
9374847 22 39 9110438 9181009 9248782 9313739 9375859 21 40 9111637 9182161
9249888 9314798 9376870 20 41 9112835 9183313 9250993 9315856 9377880 19 42
9114032 9184464 9252097 9316913 9378889 18 43 9115229 9185614 9253200 6317969
9379898 17 44 9116425 9186763 9254303 9319024 9380906 16 45 9117620 9187912
9255405 9320079 9381913 15 46 9118814 9189060 9256506 9321133 9382919 14 47
9120007 9190207 9257606 9322186 9383925 13 48 9121200 9191353 9258706 9323238
9384930 12 49 9122392 9192499 9259805 9324290 9385934 11 50 9123584 9193644
9260963 9325241 9386937 10 51 9124775 9194788 9262000 9326391 9387939 9 52
9125965 9195931 9263096 9327440 9388941 8 53 9127154 9197073 9264192 9328488
9389942 7 54 9128342 9198215 9265287 9329535 9390942 6 55 9129529 9199356
9266381 9330582 9391941 5 56 9130716 9200496 9267474 9331628 9392940 4 57
9131902 9201635 9268566 9332673 9393938 3 58 9133087 9202774 9269658 9333717
9394935 2 59 9134271 9203912 9270749 9334761 9395931 1 60 9135455 9205049
9271839 9335804 9396926 0 24 23 22 21 20 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 70 71 72 73 74 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 9396926
9455186 9510565 9563048 9612617 60 1 9397921 9456133 9511464 9563898 9613418 59
2 9398915 9457079 9512362 956474^ 9614219 58 3 9399908 9458024 9513259 9565596
9615019 57 4 9400900 9458968 9514155 9566444 9615818 56 5 9401891 9459911
9515050 9567291 9616616 55 6 9402882 9460854 9515944 9568137 9617413 54 7
9403872 9461796 9516838 9568982 9618209 53 8 9404861 9462737 9517731 9569826
9619005 52 9 9405849 9463677 9518623 9570670 9619800 51 10 9406836 9464616
9519514 9571513 9620594 50 11 9407822 9465555 9520404 9572355 9621387 49 12
9408808 9466493 9521294 9573196 9622179 48 13 9409793 9467430 9522183 9574036
9622971 47 14 9410777 9468366 9523071 9574875 9623762 46 15 9411760 9469301
9523958 9575714 9624552 45 16 9412742 9470236 9524844 9576552 9625341 44 17
9413724 9471170 9525730 9577389 9626129 43 18 9414705 9472103 9526615 9578225
9626917 42 19 9415685 9473035 9527499 9579061 9627704 41 20 9416665 9473967
9528382 9579896 9628490 40 21 9417644 9474898 9529264 9580730 9629275 39 22
9418622 9475828 9530146 9581563 9630059 38 23 9419599 9476757 9531027 9582395
9630843 37 24 9420575 9477685 9531907 9583226 9631626 36 25 9421550 9478612
9532786 9584057 9632408 35 26 9422525 9479539 9533664 9584887 9633189 34 27
9423499 9480465 9534541 9585716 9633969 33 28 9425472 9481390 9535418 9586544
9634748 32 29 9425444 9482314 9536294 9587371 9635527 31 30 9426415 9483237
9537169 9588197 9636305 30 31 9427380 9484160 9538043 9589023 9637082 29 32
9428356 9485082 9538917 9589848 9637858 28 33 9429325 9486003 9539790 9590672
9638633 27 34 9430293 9486923 9540662 9591495 9639408 26 35 9431260 9487842
9541533 9592318 9640182 25 36 9432227 9488761 9542403 9593140 9640955 24 37
9433193 9489679 9543272 9593961 9641727 23 38 9434158 9490596 9544141 9594781
9642498 22 39 9435122 9491512 9545009 9595600 9643268 21 40 9436085 9492427
9545876 9596419 9644038 20 41 9437048 9493341 9546742 9597237 9644807 19 42
9438010 9494255 9547607 9598054 9645575 18 43 9438971 9495168 9548472 9598870
9646342 17 44 9439931 9496080 9549336 9599685 9647108 16 45 9440890 9496991
9550199 9600499 9647873 15 46 9441849 9497902 9551061 9601313 9648638 14 47
9442807 9498812 9551922 9602126 9649402 13 48 9443764 9499721 9552783 9602938
9650165 12 49 9444720 9500629 9553643 9603749 9650927 11 50 9445676 9501536
9554502 9604559 9651689 10 51 9446631 9502443 9555360 9605368 9652450 9 52
9447585 9503349 9556217 9606177 9653210 8 53 9448538 9504254 9557074 9606985
9653969 7 54 9449490 9505158 9557930 9607792 9654727 6 55 9450441 9506061
9558785 9608598 9655484 5 56 9451392 9506963 9559639 9609403 9656240 4 57
9452342 9507865 9560492 9610208 9656996 3 58 9453291 9508766 9561345 9611012
9657751 2 59 9454239 9509666 9562197 9611815 9658505 1 60 9455186 9510565
9563048 9612617 9659258 0 19 18 17 16 15 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 75 76 77 78 79 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 9659258
9702957 9743600 9781476 9816272 60 1 9660011 9703660 9744355 9782080 9816827 59
2 9660163 9704363 9745008 9782684 9817381 58 3 9661514 9705065 9745660 9783281
9817934 57 4 9662264 9705766 9740312 9783889 9818486 56 5 9663013 9706466
9746963 9784490 9819037 55 6 9663761 9707165 9747013 9785090 9819587 54 7
9664508 9707863 9748262 9785689 9820137 53 8 9665255 9708561 9748910 9786288
9820686 52 9 9666001 9709258 9749557 9786886 9821234 51 10 9666746 9709954
9750203 9787483 9821781 50 11 9667490 9710649 9750849 9788079 9822327 49 12
9668233 9711343 9751494 9788674 9822872 48 13 9668976 9712036 9752138 9789268
9823417 47 14 9669718 9712729 9752781 9789862 9823961 46 15 9670459 9713421
9753424 9790455 9824504 45 16 9671199 9714112 9754065 9791047 9825046 44 17
9671938 9714802 9754706 9791638 9825587 43 18 9672677 9715491 9755346 9792228
9826128 42 19 9673415 9716180 9755985 9792818 9826668 41 20 9674152 9716868
9756623 9793407 9827207 40 21 9674888 9717555 9757260 9793995 9827745 39 22
9675623 9718241 9757897 9794582 9828282 38 23 9676357 9718926 9758533 9795168
9828818 37 24 9677091 9719610 9759168 9795753 9829354 36 25 9677824 9720294
9759802 6796337 9829889 35 26 9678556 9720977 9760435 9796921 9830423 34 27
9679287 9721659 9761067 9797504 9830956 33 28 9680017 9722340 9761699 9798086
9831488 32 29 9680747 9723020 9762330 9798667 9832019 31 30 9681476 9723699
9762960 9799247 9832549 30 31 9682804 9724378 9763589 9799827 9833079 29 32
9682931 9725056 9764217 9800406 9833608 28 33 9683657 9725733 9764845 9800984
9834136 27 34 9684383 9726409 9765472 9801561 9834663 26 35 9685108 9727085
9766098 9802137 9835189 25 36 9685832 9727760 9766723 9802712 9835714 24 37
9686555 9728434 9767347 9803287 9836239 23 38 9687277 9729107 9767970 9803861
9836763 22 39 9687998 9729779 9768593 9804434 9837286 21 40 9688719 9730450
9769215 9805006 9837808 20 41 9689439 9731120 9769836 9805577 9838329 19 42
9690158 9731789 9770456 9806147 9838850 18 43 9690879 9732458 9771075 9806716
9839370 17 44 9691593 9733126 9771693 9807285 9839889 16 45 9692309 9733793
9772311 9807853 9840407 15 46 9693025 9734459 9772928 9808420 9840924 14 47
9693740 9735124 9773544 9808986 9841440 13 48 9694454 9735789 9774159 9809551
9841956 12 49 9695167 9736453 9774773 9810116 9842471 11 50 9695879 9737116
9775387 9810680 9842985 10 51 9696590 9737778 9776000 9811243 9843498 9 52
9697301 9738439 9776612 9811805 9844010 8 53 9698011 9739099 9777223 9812366
9844521 7 54 9698720 9739759 9777833 9812926 9845032 6 55 9699428 9740418
9778442 9813486 9845542 5 56 9700135 9741076 9779050 9814045 9846051 4 57
9700842 9741733 9779658 9814603 9846559 3 58 9701548 9742389 9780265 9815160
9847066 2 59 9702253 9743045 9780871 9815716 9847572 1 60 9702957 9743700
9781476 9816272 9848078 0 14 13 12 11 10 The degrees of the Quadrant for right
Sines of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 80 81 82 83 84 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 9848078
9876883 9902681 9925461 9945219 60 1 9848583 9877338 9903085 9925816 9945523 59
2 9849087 9877792 9903489 9926109 9945826 58 3 9849590 9878245 990389^ 9926521
9946128 57 4 9850092 9878697 9904294 9926873 9946429 56 5 9850593 9879148
9904695 9927224 9946729 55 6 9851093 9879598 9905095 9927574 9927028 54 7
9851593 9880048 9905494 9927923 9947337 53 8 9852092 9880497 9905893 9928271
9947625 52 9 9852590 9880945 9906291 99^8618 9947622 51 10 9853087 9881392
9906688 9928965 9948218 50 11 9853583 9881838 9907084 9929311 9948513 49 12
9854079 9882283 9907479 9929656 9948807 48 13 9854574 9882728 9907873 9930000
9949100 47 14 9855068 9883172 9908266 9930343 9949393 46 15 9855561 9883615
9908659 9930685 9949685 45 16 9856053 9884057 9909051 9931026 9949976 44 17
9856544 9884498 9909442 9931367 9950266 43 18 9857035 9884938 9909832 9931707
9950555 42 19 9857525 9885378 9910221 9932046 9950844 41 20 9858014 9885817
9910610 9932384 9951132 40 21 9858502 9886255 9910998 9932721 9951419 39 22
9858989 9886692 9911385 9933057 9951705 38 23 9859475 9887128 9911771 9933393
9951990 37 24 9859961 9887564 9912156 9933728 9952274 36 25 9860446 9887999
9912540 9934062 9952557 35 26 9860930 9888433 9912923 9934395 9952840 34 27
9861413 9888866 9913306 9934727 9953122 33 28 9861895 9889298 9913688 9935058
9953403 32 29 9862376 9889729 9914069 9935389 9953683 31 30 9862856 9890159
9914449 9935719 9953962 30 31 9863336 9890588 9914828 9936048 9954240 29 32
9863815 9891017 9915206 9936376 9954518 28 33 9864293 9891445 9915584 9936703
9954795 27 34 9864770 9891872 9915961 9937029 9955071 26 35 9865246 9892298
9916337 9937355 9955346 25 36 9865722 9892723 9916712 9937680 9955620 24 37
9866197 9893147 9917086 9938004 9955893 23 38 9866671 9893571 9917459 9938327
9956165 22 39 9867144 9893994 9917832 9938649 9956437 21 40 9867616 9894416
9918204 9938970 9956708 20 41 9868087 9894837 9918575 9939290 9956978 19 42
9868557 9895257 9918945 9939609 9957247 18 43 9869027 9895677 9919314 9939928
9957515 17 44 9869496 9896096 9919682 9940246 9957782 16 45 9869964 9896514
9920049 9940563 9958049 15 46 9870431 9896931 9920416 9940879 9958315 14 47
9880897 9897347 9920782 9941194 9958580 13 48 9871362 9897762 9921147 9941509
9958844 12 49 9871827 9898177 9921511 9941823 9959307 11 50 9872291 9898591
9921874 9942136 9959370 10 51 9872754 9899004 9922236 9942448 9959632 9 52
9873216 9899416 9922598 9942759 9959893 8 53 9873677 9899827 9922959 9943069
9960153 7 54 9874137 9900237 9923319 9943379 9960412 6 55 9874597 9900646
9923678 9943688 9960670 5 56 9875056 9901055 9924036 9943996 9960927 4 57
9875514 9901463 9924393 9944303 9961183 3 58 9875514 9901463 9924393 9944303
9961183 3 58 9875971 4901870 9924750 9944609 9961438 2 59 9876427 9902276
9925106 9944914 9961693 1 60 9876883 9902681 9925461 9945219 9961947 0 9 8 7 6
5 The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the Arches
of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 85 86 87 88 89 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for right Sines of the complements of the same Quadrant. 0 9961947
9975640 9986295 9993908 9998477 60 1 9962200 9975843 9986447 9994009 9998527 59
2 9962452 9976045 9986598 9994109 9998576 58 3 9962703 9976246 9986748 9994208
9998625 57 4 9962954 9976446 9986897 9994307 9998673 56 5 9963204 9976645
9987045 9994405 9998720 55 6 9963453 9976843 9987193 9994502 9998766 54 7
9963701 9977040 9987340 9994598 9998811 53 8 9963948 9977237 9987486 9994693
9998855 52 9 9964194 9977433 9987631 9994787 9998899 51 10 9964440 9977628
9987775 9994881 9998942 50 11 9964685 9977822 9987918 9994974 9998984 49 12
9964929 9978015 9988061 9995066 9999025 48 13 9965172 9978207 9988203 9995157
9999065 47 14 9965414 9978398 9988344 9995247 9999104 46 15 9965655 9978589
9988484 9995336 9999143 45 16 9965895 9978779 9988623 9995424 9999181 44 17
9966235 9978968 9988761 9995512 9999218 43 18 9966374 9979156 9988899 9995599
9999254 42 19 9966612 9979343 9989036 9995685 9999289 41 20 9966849 9979530
9989172 9995770 9999323 40 21 9967085 9979716 9989307 9995854 9999356 39 22
9967320 9979901 9989441 9995937 9999389 38 23 9967555 9980085 9989574 9996019
9999421 37 24 9967789 9980268 9989706 9996101 9999452 36 25 9968022 9980450
9989837 9996182 9999482 35 26 9968254 9980631 9989968 9996262 9999511 34 27
9968485 9980811 9990098 9996341 9999539 33 28 9968715 9980992 9990227 9996419
9999560 32 29 9968944 9981170 9990355 9996496 9999593 31 30 9969173 9981348
9990482 9996573 9999616 30 31 9969401 9981525 9990608 9996649 9999644 29 32
9969628 9981701 9990734 9996724 9999668 28 33 9969854 9981877 9990859 9996798
9999691 27 34 9970079 9982052 9990983 9996871 9999713 26 35 9970304 9982226
9991106 9996943 9999735 25 36 9970528 9982399 9991228 9997014 9999756 24 37
9970751 9982571 9991349 9997085 9999776 23 38 9970973 9982742 9991470 9997155
9999795 22 39 9971194 9982912 9991590 9997224 9999813 21 40 9971414 9983082
9991709 9997292 9999830 20 41 9971633 9983251 9991827 9997359 9999846 19 42
9971851 9983419 9991944 9997425 9999862 18 43 9972069 9983586 9992060 9997491
9999877 17 44 9972286 9983752 9992175 9997556 9999891 16 45 9972502 9983917
9992290 9997620 9999904 15 46 9972717 9984081 9992404 9997683 9999916 14 47
9972931 9984245 9992517 9997745 99999^7 13 48 9973145 9984408 9992629 9997806
9999938 12 49 9973358 9984570 9992740 9997867 9999948 11 50 9973570 9984731
9992850 9997927 9999957 10 51 9973781 9984891 9992960 9997986 9999965 9 52
9973991 9985050 9993069 9998044 9999972 8 53 9974200 9985209 9993177 9998101
9999978 7 54 9974408 9985367 9993284 9998157 9999984 6 55 9974615 9985524
9993390 9998212 9999989 5 56 9974822 9985680 9993495 9998267 9999993 4 57
9975028 9985835 9993599 9998321 9999996 3 58 9975233 9985989 9993703 9998374
9999998 2 59 9975437 9986143 9993806 9998426 9999999 1 60 9975640 9986295
9993908 9998477 1000000 0 4 3 2 1 0 The degrees of the Quadrant for right Sines
of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

THE TABLE OF TANGENTS, OTHERWISE CALLED THE FRVITFVLL TABLE.
The Table of Tangents.
The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 0 1 2 3 4 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. 0 0000 174550 349207 524078 699269 60 1 2909 177459 352120 526995
702193 59 2 5818 180369 355033 529911 705116 58 3 8727 183279 357945 532828
708039 57 4 11636 186189 360858 535745 710962 56 5 14544 189100 363770 538663
713886 55 6 17452 192010 366683 541580 716809 54 7 20361 194920 369596 544498
719733 53 8 22270 197820 372508 547415 722657 52 9 2^17^ ^00^^^ 37^421 550^33
725580 51 10 2^08^ ^03^50 37^334 553251 728504 50 11 31906 206561 381247 556169
731428 49 12 34905 302471 384100 559087 734353 48 13 37814 212381 387073 562005
737277 47 14 40723 215291 389987 764923 74020^ 46 15 43632 218201 392900 567841
743127 45 16 46541 221111 39^814 570759 746052 44 17 49450 224022 398727 573678
748978 43 18 52359 226932 401641 576596 751903 42 19 55268 229842 404554 579514
754829 41 20 58177 232752 407468 582433 757754 40 21 61086 235663 410382 585352
760680 39 22 63995 238574 413295 588270 763606 38 23 66904 241485 416209 591189
766532 37 24 69813 244395 419123 594108 769459 36 25 72722 247306 422037 597028
772385 35 26 75631 250217 424951 599947 775311 34 27 78540 253128 427866 602866
778238 33 28 81450 256038 430780 605786 781164 32 29 84359 258949 433694 608705
784091 31 30 87268 261859 436609 611625 787017 30 31 90177 264770 439523 614544
789944 29 32 93086 267681 442438 617464 792871 28 33 95995 270592 445353 620384
795799 27 34 98904 273503 448267 623304 798726 26 35 101814 276414 451182
626225 801653 25 36 104723 279325 454097 629145 804581 24 37 107632 282237
457012 632066 807509 23 38 110541 285148 459927 634986 810437 22 39 113450
288059 462842 637907 813365 21 40 116360 290970 465757 640828 816293 20 41
119269 293882 468672 643749 819221 19 42 122178 296794 471588 646671 822150 18
43 125088 299705 474503 649592 825079 17 44 127997 302617 477419 652514 828008
16 45 130906 305528 480335 655435 830937 15 46 133816 308439 483251 658357
833866 14 47 136725 311351 486166 661278 836795 13 48 139635 314262 489082
664200 839724 12 49 142544 317174 491997 667121 842653 11 50 145454 320085
494913 670043 845583 10 51 148363 322997 497829 672965 848513 9 52 151273
325909 500745 675888 851443 8 53 154182 328821 503662 678810 854374 7 54 159092
331733 506578 681733 857304 6 55 160001 334645 509495 684656 860234 5 56 162911
337558 512411 687578 863164 4 57 165820 340470 515328 690501 866095 3 58 168730
343382 518244 693423 869025 2 59 171640 346295 521161 696346 871956 1 60 174550
349207 524078 699269 874886 0 89 88 87 86 85 The degrees of the Quadrant for
the Tangent of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 5 6 7 8 9 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadra^t. 0 874886 1051042 1227846 1405408 1583844 60 1 877817 1053983 1230798
1408374 1586826 59 2 880748 1056924 1233751 1411341 1589808 58 3 883680 1059866
1236704 1414308 1592791 57 4 886611 1062808 1239658 1417275 1595774 56 5 889543
1065750 1242612 1420242 1598757 55 6 892475 1068692 1245566 1423210 1601740 54
7 895407 1071634 1248520 1426178 1604723 53 8 898339 1074576 1251474 1429146
1607707 52 9 901271 1077518 1254428 1432115 1610691 51 10 904204 1080461
1257383 1435084 1613675 50 11 907137 1083404 1260338 1438053 1616660 49 12
910070 1086347 1263293 1441022 1619645 48 13 913003 1089291 1266249 1443992
1622630 47 14 915936 1092234 1269205 1446961 1625615 46 15 918870 1095178
1272161 1449931 1627601 45 16 921804 1098122 1275117 1452901 1631587 44 17
924738 1101066 1278073 1455871 1634573 43 18 927771 1104010 1281029 1458842
1637560 42 19 930605 1106954 1283986 1461813 1640547 41 20 933539 1109899
1286943 1464784 1643534 40 21 936473 1112844 1289900 1467755 1646522 39 22
939407 1115789 1292857 1470727 1649510 38 23 942342 1118734 1295815 1473699
1652499 37 24 945277 1121680 1298773 1476671 1655488 36 25 948212 1124625
1301731 1479644 1658477 35 26 951147 1127571 1304689 1482617 1661466 34 27
954083 1130517 1307648 1485590 1664456 33 28 957019 1133463 1310607 1488563
1667446 32 29 959954 1136409 1313566 1491536 1670436 31 30 962890 1139355
1316525 1494510 1673426 30 31 965826 1142302 1319485 1497484 1676417 29 32
968763 1145249 1322445 1500458 1679408 28 33 971699 1148196 1325405 1503433
1682399 27 34 974636 1151144 1328365 1506408 1685390 26 35 977573 1154092
1331325 1509383 1688382 25 36 980509 1157040 1334285 1512358 1691374 24 37
983446 1159988 1337246 1515334 1694366 23 38 986383 1162936 1340207 1518310
1697358 22 39 989320 1165884 1343168 1521286 1700351 21 40 992257 1168832
1346129 1524262 1703344 20 41 995195 1171781 1349091 1527239 1706337 19 42
998133 1174730 1352053 1530216 1709331 18 43 1001072 1177679 1355015 1533193
1712325 17 44 1004010 1180628 1357977 1536170 1715319 16 45 1006949 1183577
1360940 1539148 1718313 15 46 1009887 1186527 1363903 1542126 1721308 14 47
1012825 1189477 1366866 1545104 1724304 13 48 1015763 1192427 1369830 1548082
1727300 12 49 1018702 1195377 1372793 1551061 1730296 11 50 1021641 1198328
1375757 1554040 1733292 10 51 1024580 1201279 1378721 1557019 1736287 9 52
1027519 1204230 1381686 1559999 1739284 8 53 1030459 1207181 1384650 1562979
1742281 7 54 1033399 1210132 1387615 1565959 1745278 6 55 1036339 1213084
1390580 1568939 1748275 5 56 1039279 1216036 1393545 1571920 1751273 4 57
1042219 1218988 1396510 1574901 1754271 3 58 1045160 1221940 1399476 1577882
1757270 2 59 1048101 1224892 1402442 1580863 1760269 1 60 1051042 1227845
1405408 1583844 1763268 0 84 83 82 81 80 The degrees of the Quadrant for the
Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 10 11 12 13 14 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. 0 1763268 1943803 2125565 2308682 2493280 60 1 1766268 1946822
2128605 2311746 2496370 59 2 1769268 1949841 2131646 2314810 2499411 58 3
1772268 1952861 2134687 2317875 2502552 57 4 1775269 1955881 2137729 2320940
2505643 56 5 1778270 1958901 2140771 2324006 2508735 55 6 1781271 1961922
2143814 2327072 2511827 54 7 1784272 1964943 2146857 2330139 2514920 53 8
1787274 1967964 2149900 2333206 2518013 52 9 1790276 1970985 2152944 2336273
2521106 51 10 1793278 1974007 2155988 2339341 2524200 50 11 1796281 1977029
2159032 2342419 2527294 49 12 1799284 1980052 2162077 2345478 2530389 48 13
1802287 1983075 2165122 2348547 2533484 47 14 1805291 1986098 2168167 2351616
2536580 46 15 1808295 1989122 2171213 2354686 2539676 45 16 1811299 1992146
2174259 2357757 2542773 44 17 1814303 1995171 2177306 2360828 2545870 43 18
1817308 1998196 2180352 2363899 2548968 42 19 1820313 2001221 2183400 2366971
2552066 41 20 1823318 2004247 2186448 2370043 2555165 40 21 1826324 2007273
2189496 2373116 2558264 39 22 1829329 2010299 2192544 2376189 2561364 38 23
1832335 2013326 2192544 2379263 2564464 37 24 1835342 2016353 2195593 2382337
2567564 36 25 1838349 2019380 2201692 2385411 2570665 35 26 1841357 2022408
2204742 2388486 2573766 34 27 1844365 2025436 2207792 2391561 2576868 33 28
1847373 2028464 2210843 2394636 2579970 32 29 1850382 2031493 2213894 2397712
2583073 31 30 1853301 2034522 2216946 2400788 2586176 30 31 1856400 2037552
2219998 2403865 2589280 29 32 1859409 2040582 2223051 2406942 2592384 28 33
1862419 2043612 2226104 2410020 2595489 27 34 1865429 2046643 2229157 2413098
2598594 26 35 1868439 2049674 2232211 2416176 2601700 25 36 1871449 2052705
2235265 2419255 2604806 24 37 1874460 2055737 2238319 2422334 2607912 23 38
1877471 2058769 2241374 2425414 2611019 22 39 1880482 2061801 2244429 2428494
2614126 21 40 1883494 2064834 2247485 2431574 2617234 20 41 1886506 2067867
2250541 2434655 2620342 19 42 1889516 2070900 2253597 2437736 2623451 18 43
1892531 2073934 2256654 2440818 2626560 17 44 1895544 2076968 2259711 2443900
2629670 16 45 1898558 2080002 2262769 2446983 2632780 15 46 1901572 2083037
2265827 2450066 2635891 14 47 1904586 2086073 2268885 2453150 2639002 13 48
1907601 2089109 2271944 2456234 2642114 12 49 1910616 2092145 2275003 2459319
2645226 11 50 1913632 2095182 2278063 2462404 2648339 10 51 1916648 2098219
2281123 2465490 2651452 9 52 1999664 2101256 2284183 2468576 2654566 8 53
1922680 2104293 2287244 2471662 2657680 7 54 1925697 2107331 2290305 2474749
2660795 6 55 1928714 2110369 2293367 2477836 2663910 5 56 1931731 2113407
2296429 2480924 2667026 4 57 1934749 2116446 2299492 2484012 2670142 3 58
1937767 2119485 2302555 2487101 2673258 2 59 1940785 2122525 2305618 2490191
2676375 1 60 1943803 2125565 2308682 2493280 2679492 0 79 78 77 76 75 The
degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of
the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 15 16 17 18 19 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. 0 2679492 2867453 3057307 3249197 3443276 60 1 2662610 2870601
3060487 3252413 3446530 59 2 2685728 2873749 3063669 3255630 3449785 58 3
2688847 2876898 3066851 3258848 3453040 57 4 2691966 2880048 3070034 3262066
3456296 56 5 2695086 2883198 3073218 3265285 3459553 55 6 2698206 2886349
3076402 3268504 3462810 54 7 2701327 2889501 3079587 3271724 3466068 53 8
^704448 2892653 3082772 3274944 3469326 52 9 2707570 2895806 3085958 3278165
3472585 51 10 2710693 2898960 3085144 3281387 3475845 50 11 2713816 2902114
3092331 3284609 3479105 49 12 2716940 2905268 3095518 3287832 3482366 48 13
2720064 2908423 3198706 3291055 3485628 47 14 2723189 2911578 3101895 3294280
3488891 46 15 2726314 2914734 3105084 3297505 3492154 45 16 2729439 2917890
3108274 3300731 3495418 44 17 2732565 2921047 3111464 3303957 3498683 43 18
2735691 2924204 3114655 3307184 3501949 42 19 2738818 2927362 3117846 3310411
3505215 41 20 2741945 2930520 3121038 3313639 3508482 40 21 2745073 2933679
3124230 3316868 3511749 39 22 2748201 2936839 3127423 3320097 3515017 38 23
2751330 2939999 3130617 3323327 3518286 37 24 2754459 2943160 3133811 3326558
3521555 36 25 2757589 2946321 3137006 3329789 3524825 35 26 2760729 2946483
3140201 3333020 3528096 34 27 2763850 2952645 3143397 3336252 3531368 33 28
2766981 2955808 3146594 3339485 3534640 32 29 2770113 2958971 3149791 3342719
3537913 31 30 2773245 2962135 3152989 3345953 3541186 30 31 2776378 2965299
3156187 3349188 3544460 29 32 2779511 2968464 3159386 3352423 3547735 28 33
2782645 2971629 3162585 3355659 3515010 27 34 2785779 2974795 3165785 3358896
3554286 26 35 2788914 2977962 3168986 3362133 3557563 25 36 2792050 2981129
3172187 3365371 3560840 24 37 2795186 2984297 3175389 3368610 3564118 23 38
2798323 2987465 3178591 3371850 3567397 22 39 2801460 2990634 3181794 3375090
3570676 21 40 2804597 2993804 3184998 3378331 3573956 20 41 2807735 2996973
3188202 3381572 3577237 19 42 2810873 3000143 3191407 3384814 3580519 18 43
2814012 3003314 3194613 3388057 3583801 17 44 2817151 3006486 3197819 3391300
3587084 16 45 2820291 3009658 3201026 3394544 3590367 15 46 2823432 3012831
3204233 3397798 3593651 14 47 2826573 3016004 3207441 3401033 3596936 13 48
2829714 3019178 3210649 3404279 3600221 12 49 2832856 3022353 3213858 3407525
3603507 11 50 2835999 3025528 3217067 3410772 3606794 10 51 2839142 3028703
3220277 3414020 3610082 9 52 2842286 3031879 3223488 3417268 3613370 8 53
2845430 3035055 3226699 3420517 3616659 7 54 2848575 3038232 3229911 3423766
3619949 6 55 2851720 3041410 3233124 3427016 3623239 5 56 2854866 3044588
3236337 3430267 3626530 4 57 2858012 3047767 3239551 3433518 3629822 3 58
2861159 3050946 3242766 3436770 3633115 2 59 2864306 3054126 3245981 3440023
3636408 1 60 2867453 3057307 3249197 3443276 3639702 0 74 73 72 71 70 The
degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of
the same Quadra^t.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 20 21 22 23 24 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. 0 3639702 3838640 4040262 4244748 4452286 60 1 3642997 3841978
4043647 4248182 4455772 59 2 3646293 3845316 4047031 4251617 4459259 58 3
3649589 3848655 4050416 4255052 4462747 57 4 3652886 3851995 4053802 4258488
4466236 56 5 3656183 3855336 4057189 4261925 4469726 55 6 3659481 3858678
4060577 4265363 4473216 54 7 3662780 3862020 4063966 4268801 4476707 53 8
3666079 3865363 4067356 4265363 4480199 52 9 3669379 3868707 4070747 4268801
4483692 51 10 3672680 3872052 4074139 4272240 4487186 50 11 3675982 3875397
4077531 4275680 4490681 49 12 3679284 3878743 4080924 4279121 4494177 48 13
3682587 3882090 4084318 4282563 4497674 47 14 3685891 3885438 4087713 4286006
4501172 46 15 3689195 3888787 4091109 4289450 4504671 45 16 3692500 3892136
4094506 4292895 4508171 44 17 3695806 3895486 4097903 4296340 4511672 43 18
3699113 3898837 4101301 4299786 4515173 42 19 3702420 3902188 4104699 4303233
4518675 41 20 3705728 3905540 4108097 4306681 4522178 40 21 3709037 3908893
4111497 4310130 4525682 39 22 3712347 3912247 4114898 4313580 4529187 38 23
3715657 3915601 4118300 4317031 4532693 37 24 3718968 3918956 4121703 4327387
4536200 36 25 3722279 3922312 4125107 4330841 4539708 35 26 3725591 3925669
4128511 4334296 4543217 34 27 3728904 3929027 4131916 4337752 4546727 33 28
3732218 3932385 4135322 4341209 4550238 32 29 3735533 3935744 4138728 4344666
4553750 31 30 3738848 3939104 4142135 4348124 4557264 30 31 3742164 3942465
4145544 4351583 4560778 29 32 3745480 3945826 4148953 4355043 4564293 28 33
3748797 3949188 4152363 4358504 4567809 27 34 3752115 3952551 4155773 4361966
4571326 26 35 3755434 3955915 4159184 4365429 4574843 25 36 3758753 3959280
4162596 4368893 4578361 24 37 3762073 3962646 4166009 4372357 4581880 23 38
3765394 3966012 4169423 4375822 4585400 22 39 3768716 3969379 4172838 4379288
4588921 21 40 3772038 3972746 4176255 4382755 4592443 20 41 3775361 3976114
4179672 4386223 4595966 19 42 3778685 3979483 4183090 4389692 4599490 18 43
3782010 3982853 4186509 4393162 4603015 17 44 3785335 3986224 4189928 4396633
4606541 16 45 3788661 3989596 4193348 4400105 4610068 15 46 3791988 3992969
4196769 4403578 4613596 14 47 3795315 3996342 4200191 4407051 4617125 13 48
3798643 3999716 4203613 4410525 4620654 12 49 3801972 4003090 4207036 4414000
4624184 11 50 3805302 4006465 4210460 4417476 4627715 10 51 3808632 4009841
4213885 4420953 4631247 9 52 3811962 4013217 4217311 4424432 4634780 8 53
3815295 4016594 4220738 4427910 4638314 7 54 3818628 4019972 4224165 4431390
4641849 6 55 3821961 4023351 422759^ 4434871 4645385 5 56 3825295 4026731
4231022 4438352 4648922 4 57 3828630 4030112 4234452 4441834 4652460 3 58
3831966 4033494 4237883 4445317 4655999 2 59 3835303 4036877 4241315 4448801
4659540 1 60 3838640 4040262 4244748 4452286 4663081 0 69 68 67 66 65 The
degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of
the same Quadra^t.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 25 26 27 28 29 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. 0 4663081 4877328 5095254 5317094 5543090 60 1 4666623 4880930
5098919 5320826 5546893 59 2 4670166 4884533 5102585 5324559 5550697 58 3
4673710 4888137 5106252 5328293 5554503 57 4 4677255 4891742 5109920 5332028
5558310 56 5 4680801 4895347 5113589 5335765 5562118 55 6 4684348 4898953
5117259 5339503 5565927 54 7 4687896 4902560 5120930 5343242 5569738 53 8
4691444 4906168 5124602 5346982 5573550 52 9 4694993 4909777 5128275 5350723
5577363 51 10 4698543 4913387 5131949 5354465 5581177 50 11 4702094 4916998
5135625 5358209 5584993 49 12 4705646 4920610 5139302 5361954 5588810 48 13
4709199 4924223 5142980 5365700 5592628 47 14 4712753 4927838 5146659 5369447
5596447 46 15 4716308 4931454 5150339 5373195 5600268 45 16 4719864 4935071
5154020 5376944 5604090 44 17 4723422 4938689 5157702 5380694 5607913 43 18
4726981 4942308 5161385 5384445 5611737 42 19 4730541 4945928 5165069 5388198
5615562 41 20 4734102 4949549 5168755 5391952 5619388 40 21 4737664 4953171
5172442 5395707 5623216 39 22 4741227 4956794 5176130 5399463 5627045 38 23
4744790 4960418 5179819 5403221 5630875 37 24 4748354 4964043 5183509 5406980
5634707 36 25 4751919 4967669 5187200 5410740 5638540 35 26 4755485 4971296
5190892 5414501 5642374 34 27 4759052 4974924 5194585 5418263 5646210 33 28
4762620 4978553 5198279 5422026 5650047 32 29 4766189 4982184 5201974 5425791
5653885 31 30 4769759 4985816 5205670 5429557 5657725 30 31 4773330 4989448
5209368 5433324 5661566 29 32 4776902 4993081 5213067 5437092 5665408 28 33
4780475 4996716 5216767 5440861 5669251 27 34 4784049 5000352 5220468 5444632
5673096 26 35 4787624 5003989 5224170 5448404 5676942 25 36 4791200 5007627
5227873 5452177 5680789 24 37 4794777 5011266 5231577 5455951 5684637 23 38
4798355 5014906 5235283 5459726 5688486 22 39 4801934 5018547 5238990 5463503
5692337 21 40 4805515 5022189 5242698 5467281 5696189 20 41 4809096 5025832
5246407 5471060 5700043 19 42 4812678 5029476 5250117 5474840 5703898 18 43
4816261 5033121 5253828 5478621 5707754 17 44 4819845 5036767 5257540 5482404
5711611 16 45 4823430 5040414 5261254 5486188 5715469 15 46 4827016 5044062
5264969 5489973 5719329 14 47 4830603 5047712 5268685 5493759 5723190 13 48
4834191 5051363 5272402 5497546 5727052 12 49 4837780 5055015 5276120 5501335
5730916 11 50 4841371 5058668 5279839 5505125 5734781 10 51 4844962 5062322
5283959 5508916 5738647 9 52 4848554 5065977 5287280 5512708 5742515 8 53
4852147 5069633 5291003 5516501 5746384 7 54 4855741 5073290 5294727 5520296
5750254 6 55 4859336 5076948 5298452 5524092 5754125 5 56 4862932 5080607
5302178 5527889 5757998 4 57 4866529 5084267 5305905 5531687 5761872 3 58
4870127 5087928 5309633 5535487 5765747 2 59 4873727 5091590 5313363 5539288
5769624 1 60 4877328 5095254 5317094 5543090 5773502 0 64 63 62 61 60 The
degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of
the same Quadra^t.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 30 31 32 33 34 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. 0 5773502 6008606 6248693 6494076 6745085 60 1 5777381 6012566
6252738 6498212 6749318 59 2 5781262 6016528 6256785 6502350 6753553 58 3
5785144 6020491 6260834 6506489 6757789 57 4 5789027 6024455 6264884 6510630
6762027 56 5 5792911 6028420 6268935 6514773 9766267 55 6 5796797 6032387
6272988 6518917 6770508 54 7 5800684 6036355 6277042 6523063 6774751 53 8
5804572 6040324 6281098 6527200 6778996 52 9 5808462 6044295 6285155 6531359
6783243 51 10 5812353 6048267 6289214 6535510 6787491 50 11 5816245 6052241
6293274 6539662 6791741 49 12 5820139 6056216 6297336 6543816 6795993 48 13
5824034 6060193 6301399 6547971 6800246 47 14 5827930 6064171 6305464 6552128
6804501 46 15 5831828 6068150 6309530 6556287 6808758 45 16 5835727 6072131
6313598 6560447 6813016 44 17 5839627 6076113 6317667 6564609 6817276 43 18
5843528 6080096 6321738 6568772 6821538 42 19 5847431 6084081 6325810 6572937
6825801 41 20 5851335 6088067 6329883 6577103 6830066 40 21 5855241 6092055
6333958 6581271 6834333 39 22 5859148 6096044 6338034 6585440 6838602 38 23
5863056 6100035 6342112 6589611 6842872 37 24 5866966 6104027 6346191 6593784
6847144 36 25 5870877 6108020 6350272 6597958 6851417 35 26 5874489 6112015
6354355 6602134 6855692 34 27 5878702 6116011 6358439 6606312 6859969 33 28
5882617 6120009 6362525 6610491 6864247 32 29 5886533 6124008 6366613 6614672
6868527 31 30 5890450 6128008 6370702 6618855 6872809 30 31 5894369 6132010
6374792 6623039 6877093 29 32 5898289 6136013 6378884 6627225 6881379 28 33
5902211 6140018 6382977 6631413 6885666 27 34 5906134 6144024 6387072 6635603
6889955 26 35 5910058 6148032 6391169 6639792 6894246 25 36 5913984 6152041
6395267 6643984 6898539 24 37 5917911 6156052 6399366 6648178 6902833 23 38
5921839 6160064 6403467 6652373 6907129 22 39 5925769 6164077 6407569 6656570
6911426 21 40 5929700 6168092 6411673 6660768 6915725 20 41 5933633 6172108
6415779 6664968 6920026 19 42 5937567 6176126 6419886 6669170 6924329 18 43
5941502 6180147 6423995 6673373 6928634 17 44 5945438 6184168 6428105 6677578
6932940 16 45 5949376 6188190 6432216 6681785 6937248 15 46 5955315 6192213
6436329 6685994 6941558 14 47 5957255 6196237 6440444 6690204 6945869 13 48
5961197 6200263 6444560 6694416 6950182 12 49 5965140 6204290 6458678 6698630
6954497 11 50 5969084 6208319 6452798 6702845 6958813 10 51 5973030 6212350
6456919 6707062 6963131 9 52 5976776 6216382 6461042 6711281 6967451 8 53
5980926 6220416 6465166 6715501 6971773 7 54 5984876 6224451 6469292 6719723
6976097 6 55 5988827 6228488 6473419 6723946 6980423 5 56 5992780 6232526
6477548 6728171 6984750 4 57 5996734 6246566 6481678 6732397 6989079 3 58
6000690 6240607 6485809 6736625 6993409 2 59 6004647 6244649 6489942 6740854
6997741 1 60 6008606 6248693 6494076 6745085 7002075 0 95 58 57 56 55 The
degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of
the same Quadra^t.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 35 36 37 38 39 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 7002075 7265424 7535541 7812856 8097840 60 1 7006411 7269869 7540103 7817542
8102658 59 2 7010749 7274316 7544667 7822230 8107478 58 3 7015088 7278765
7549233 7826920 8112300 57 4 7019429 7283216 7553801 7831612 8117124 56 5
7023772 7287669 7558371 7836306 8121951 55 6 7028117 7292124 7562943 7841002
8126780 54 7 7032463 7296581 7567517 7845700 8131611 53 8 7036811 7301040
7572093 7850400 8136444 52 9 7041161 7305501 7576670 7855102 8141280 51 10
7045513 7309563 7581249 7859807 8146118 50 11 7049867 7314427 7585830 7864514
8150958 49 12 7054223 7318893 7590413 7869223 8155801 48 13 7058581 7323361
7594999 7873934 8160646 47 14 7062940 7327831 7599587 7872647 8165493 46 15
7067301 7332303 7604177 7883363 8170343 45 16 7071664 7336777 7608769 7888081
8175195 44 17 7076029 7341253 7613363 7892801 8180049 43 18 7070395 7345731
7617959 7897523 8184905 42 19 7084763 7350210 7622557 7902247 8189764 41 20
7089133 7354691 7627157 7906973 8194625 40 21 7093505 7359174 7631759 7911702
8199488 39 22 7097879 7363659 7636363 7916433 8204354 38 23 7102254 7368146
7640969 7921166 8209222 37 24 7106631 7372635 7645577 7925901 8214092 36 25
7111010 7377126 7650187 7930638 8218965 35 26 7115391 7381619 7654799 7935378
8223840 34 27 7119773 7386114 7659413 7940120 8228717 33 28 7124167 7390611
7664030 7944864 8233597 32 29 7128543 7395110 7668649 7949610 8238479 31 30
7132931 7399610 7673270 7954358 8243363 30 31 7137321 7404112 7677893 7959109
8248250 29 32 7141713 7408616 7682518 7963862 8253139 28 33 7146106 7413122
7687145 7968617 8258031 27 34 7150501 7417630 7691774 7973374 8262925 26 35
7154898 7422140 7696405 7978133 8267821 25 36 7159297 7426652 7701038 7982895
8272720 24 37 7163698 7431167 7705673 7987659 8277621 23 38 7168100 7435684
7710310 7992425 8282524 22 39 7172504 7440203 7714949 7997193 8287429 21 40
7176910 7444724 7719590 8001963 8292337 20 41 7181318 7449246 7724233 8006736
8297247 19 42 7185728 7453770 7728878 8011511 8302160 18 43 7190140 7458296
7733525 8016288 8307075 17 44 7194554 7462824 7738175 8021067 8311992 16 45
7198970 7476354 7742827 8025849 8316912 15 46 7203387 74718^6 7747481 8030633
8321834 14 47 7207806 7476420 7752137 8035419 8326759 13 48 7212227 7480956
7756795 8040207 8331686 12 49 7216650 7485494 7761455 8044997 8336615 11 50
7221075 7490033 7766117 8049790 8341547 10 51 7225502 7494574 7770781 8054585
8346481 9 52 7229931 7499117 7775447 8059382 8351418 8 53 7234362 7503663
7780116 8064181 8356357 7 54 7238794 7508211 7784787 8068983 8361298 6 55
7243228 7512761 7789460 8073787 8366242 5 56 7247664 7517313 7794135 8078593
8371188 4 57 7252102 7521867 7798812 8083401 8376136 3 58 7256541 7526423
7803491 8088212 8381087 2 59 7260982 7530981 7808172 8093025 8386040 1 60
7265424 7535541 7812856 8097840 8390996 0 54 53 52 51 50 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches
of the same Quadrant. 40 41 42 43 44 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant
for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0
8390996 8692867 9004040 9325151 9656888 60 1 8395954 8697975 9009308 9330591
9662511 59 2 8400915 8703085 9014579 9336034 9668137 58 3 8405878 8708198
901985^ 9341480 9673766 57 4 8410844 8713344 9025130 9346929 9679398 56 5
8415812 8718433 9030410 9352381 9685034 55 6 8420782 8723555 9035693 9357835
9690674 54 7 8425754 8728679 9040978 9363292 9696315 53 8 8430729 8733806
9046266 9368752 9701960 52 9 8435706 8738935 9051557 9374215 9707609 51 10
8440686 8744067 9056850 9379682 9713261 50 11 8445668 8749201 9062146 9385152
9718916 49 12 8450653 8754338 9067445 9390625 9724574 48 13 8455640 8759478
9072747 9396101 9730235 47 14 8460630 8764620 9078052 9401580 9735900 46 15
8465622 8769764 9083360 9407062 9741568 45 16 8470617 8774911 9088670 9412547
9747239 44 17 8475614 8780061 9093983 9418034 9752913 43 18 8480614 8785214
9099299 9423524 9758591 42 19 8485617 8790369 9104618 9429017 9764272 41 20
8490622 8795527 9109940 9434513 9769956 40 21 8495629 8800688 9115265 9440012
9775643 39 22 8500639 8805851 9120593 9445514 9781334 38 23 8505651 8811017
9125923 9451019 9787028 37 24 8510666 8816186 9131256 9456528 9792725 36 25
8515683 8821357 9136592 9462040 9798425 35 26 8520703 8826531 9141930 9467555
9804128 34 27 8525725 8831708 9147271 9473072 9809835 33 28 8530750 8836887
9152615 9478594 9815545 32 29 8535777 8842069 9157962 9484118 9821258 31 30
8540806 8847253 9163312 9489645 9826974 30 31 8545838 8852440 9168665 9495175
9832694 29 32 8550872 8857630 9174021 9400708 9838417 28 33 8555909 8862822
9179380 9506244 9844143 27 34 8560949 8868017 9184741 9511783 9849872 26 35
8565991 8873015 9190105 9517325 9855605 25 36 8571036 8878415 9195472 9522870
9861341 24 37 8576083 8883628 9200842 9528419 9867180 23 38 8581133 8888824
9206215 9533971 9872922 22 39 8586185 8899033 9211590 9539526 9878668 21 40
8591239 8899244 9216968 9545084 9884317 20 41 8596296 8904458 9222349 9550645
9890070 19 42 8601355 8909675 9227733 9556209 9895826 18 43 8606417 8914894
9233120 9561776 9901585 17 44 8611482 8920116 9238510 9567346 9907347 16 45
8616549 8925341 9243903 9572919 9913113 15 46 8621619 8930568 9249299 9578495
9918882 14 47 8626692 8935798 9254698 9584074 9924654 13 48 8631767 8941031
9260100 9589656 9930430 12 49 8636845 8946267 9265505 9595241 9936209 11 50
8641926 8951506 9270913 9600830 9941991 10 51 8647009 8956747 9276324 9606422
9947777 9 52 8652095 8961991 9281738 9612017 9953566 8 53 8657683 8967238
9287155 9617615 9959359 7 54 8662273 8972487 9292574 9623216 9965155 6 55
8667366 8977739 9297996 9628820 9970954 5 56 8672461 8982994 9303421 9634427
9976756 4 57 8677559 8988252 9308849 9640037 9982562 3 58 8682659 8993512
9314280 9645651 9988371 2 59 8687762 8998775 9319714 9651268 9994184 1 60
8692867 9004040 9325151 9656888 10000000 0 49 48 47 46 45 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches
of the same Quadrant. 45 46 47 48 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant
for the Tangents of the co^plements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0
10000000 10355302 10723686 11106124 60 1 10005820 10367332 10729942 11112623 59
2 10011643 10367365 10736202 11119126 58 3 10017469 10373402 10742466 11125634
57 4 10023299 10379443 10748734 11132146 56 5 10029132 10385487 10755006
11138662 55 6 10034968 10391535 10761282 11145182 54 7 10040808 10397587
10767562 11151706 53 8 10046651 10403643 10773845 11158235 52 9 10052497
10409702 10780132 11164768 51 10 10058347 10415765 10786423 11171305 50 11
10064201 10421832 10792718 11177846 49 12 10070058 10427902 10799017 11184392
48 13 10075918 10433976 10805320 11190942 47 14 10081782 10340054 10811627
11197496 46 15 10087649 10446135 10817938 11204054 45 16 10093520 10452220
10824253 11210617 44 17 10099394 10458309 10830572 11217184 43 18 10105272
10464401 10836895 11223755 42 19 10111153 10470497 10843222 11230330 41 20
10117038 10476597 10849554 11236910 40 21 10122926 10482701 10855889 11243494
39 22 10128818 10488808 10862228 11250082 38 23 10134713 10494919 10868571
11256675 37 24 10140611 10501034 10874918 11263272 36 25 10146513 10507153
10881269 11269873 35 26 10152418 10513275 10887624 11276478 34 27 10158327
10519401 10893983 11283088 33 28 10164239 10525531 10900346 11289702 32 29
10170154 10531664 10906713 11296321 31 30 10176073 10537801 10913084 11302944
30 31 10181996 10543942 10919459 11309571 29 32 10187922 10550087 10925838
11316203 28 33 10193852 10556235 10932221 11322899 27 34 10199785 10562387
10938608 11329480 26 35 10205722 10568543 10945000 11336125 25 36 10211663
10574703 10951396 11342774 24 37 10217607 10580867 10957796 11349428 23 38
10223555 10587034 10964200 11356086 22 39 10229506 10593205 10970608 11362748
21 40 10235460 10599280 10977020 11369415 20 41 10241418 10605559 10983436
11376086 19 42 10247380 10611742 10989856 11382762 18 43 10253345 10617929
10996280 11389442 17 44 10259314 10624119 11002708 11396126 16 45 10265286
10630313 11009140 11402815 15 46 10271262 10636511 11015577 11409508 14 47
10277242 10642713 11022028 11416206 13 48 10283225 10648919 11028463 11422908
12 49 10289212 10655128 11034912 11429615 11 50 10295202 10661341 11041365
11436326 10 51 10301196 10667558 11047832 11443042 9 52 10307193 10673779
11054283 11449762 8 53 10313194 10680004 11060748 11456487 7 54 10319199
10686233 11067218 11463216 6 55 10325207 10692466 11073692 11469950 5 56
10331219 10698702 11080170 11476688 4 57 10337234 10704942 11086652 11483431 3
58 10343253 10711186 11093138 11490178 2 59 10349276 10717434 11099629 11496929
1 60 10355302 10723686 11106124 11503684 0 44 43 42 41 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 49 50 51 52 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 11503684 11917537 12348972 12799416 60 1 11510444 11924580 12356320 12807093
59 2 11517208 11931628 12363673 12814776 58 3 11523977 11938680 12371032
12822465 57 4 11530751 11945737 12378394 12830159 56 5 11537529 11952799
12385762 12837859 55 6 11544312 11959866 12393136 12845565 54 7 11551100
11966938 12400515 12853277 53 8 11557893 11974015 12407999 12860994 52 9
11564691 11981097 12415288 12868717 51 10 11571494 11988183 12422683 12876445
50 11 11578301 11995274 12430083 12884179 49 12 11585112 12002370 12437489
12891919 48 13 11591928 12009471 12444900 12899665 47 14 11598748 12016578
12452317 12907417 46 15 11605572 12023690 12459739 12915175 45 16 11612401
12030807 12467167 12922939 44 17 11619234 12037929 12474600 12930709 43 18
11626072 12045056 12482039 12938485 42 19 11632915 12052188 12489484 12946267
41 20 11639763 12059325 12496934 12954055 40 21 11646615 12066467 12504389
12961848 39 22 11653472 12073614 12511850 12969647 38 23 11660334 12080766
12519316 12977457 37 24 11667200 12087923 12526787 12985263 36 25 11674071
12095085 12534264 12993080 35 26 11680947 12102252 12541746 13000903 34 27
11687827 12109424 12549233 13008732 33 28 11694712 12116601 12556725 13016567
32 29 11701602 12123783 12564222 13024407 31 30 11708497 12130970 12571724
13032253 30 31 11715396 12138162 12579232 13040105 29 32 11722300 12145359
12586746 13047963 28 33 11729208 12152561 12594265 13055827 27 34 11736121
12159768 12601790 13063697 26 35 11743039 12166981 12609321 13071573 25 36
11749962 12174199 12616858 13079455 24 37 11756989 12181422 12624400 13087343
23 38 11763821 12188650 12631948 13095237 22 39 11770758 12195883 12639501
13103138 21 40 11777700 12203121 12647060 13111045 20 41 11784646 12210364
12654624 13118958 19 42 11791597 12217613 12662194 13126877 18 43 11798553
12224867 12669769 13134802 17 44 11805514 12232126 12677350 13142732 16 45
11812479 12239390 12684937 13150668 15 46 11819449 12246659 12692530 13158610
14 47 11826424 12253933 12700128 13166558 13 48 11833404 12261212 12707732
13174512 12 49 11840388 12268496 12715341 13182472 11 50 11847377 12275786
12722956 13190438 10 51 11854371 12283081 12730577 13198411 9 52 11861370
12290381 12738203 13206390 8 53 11868374 12297687 12745835 13214375 7 54
11875383 12304998 12753473 13222367 6 55 11882397 12312314 12761116 13230365 5
56 11889417 12319635 12768765 13238369 4 57 11896438 12326961 12776420 13246379
3 58 11903466 12334293 12784080 13254396 2 59 11910499 12341630 12791745
13262419 1 60 11917537 12348972 12799416 13270448 0 40 39 38 38 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 53 54 55 56 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 13270448 13763820 14281480 14825610 60 1 13278483 13772243 14290325 14834916
59 2 13286524 13780673 14299177 14844230 58 3 13294571 13789109 14308037
14853553 57 4 13302624 13797552 14316905 14862884 56 5 13310683 13806002
14325780 14872223 55 6 13318749 13814459 14334662 14881570 54 7 13326821
13822922 14343552 14890925 53 8 13334899 13831392 14352451 14909288 52 9
13342984 13839869 14361354 14909659 51 10 13351075 13848352 14370266 14919038
50 11 13359172 13856842 14379186 14928426 49 12 13367276 13865339 14388113
14937822 48 13 13375386 13873843 14397048 14947226 47 14 13383502 13882354
14405990 14956638 46 15 13391624 13890872 14414939 14966058 45 16 13399753
13899397 14423896 14975486 44 17 13407888 13907930 14432861 14984923 43 18
13416029 13916470 14441833 14994368 42 19 13424177 13925017 14450812 15003821
41 20 13432331 13933571 14459799 15013283 40 21 13440492 13942131 14468794
15022753 39 22 13448659 13950698 14477797 15032231 38 23 13456832 13959272
14486807 15041717 37 24 13465011 13967853 14495825 15051211 36 25 13473197
13976441 14504850 15060714 35 26 13481390 13985035 14513883 15070225 34 27
13489589 13993636 14522924 15079744 33 28 13497794 14002244 14531972 15089271
32 29 13506006 14010859 14541028 15078807 31 30 13514224 14019481 14550091
15108351 30 31 13522449 14028110 14559162 15117903 29 32 13530680 14036746
14568241 15127464 28 33 13538918 14045389 14577327 15137034 27 34 13547162
14054040 14586421 15146612 26 35 13555413 14062698 14595523 15156199 25 36
13563670 14071363 14604633 15165794 24 37 13571834 14080035 14613750 15175398
23 38 13580104 14088715 14622875 15185011 22 39 13588381 14097402 14632007
15194632 21 40 13596764 14106097 14641146 15204261 20 41 13605054 14114798
14650293 15213899 19 42 13613350 14123506 14659449 15223545 18 43 13621653
14132221 14668613 15233200 17 44 13629963 14140923 14677785 15242863 16 45
13638279 14149672 14686965 15252535 15 46 13646602 14158409 14696153 15262216
14 47 13654932 14167153 14705349 15271905 13 48 13663268 14175904 14714553
15281603 12 49 13671610 14184663 14723765 15291309 11 50 13679959 14193429
14732985 15301024 10 51 13688315 14202202 14742212 15310748 9 52 13696677
14210982 14751447 15320481 8 53 13705046 14219769 14760690 15330222 7 54
13713422 14228563 14769941 15339972 6 55 13721805 14237365 14779200 15349730 5
56 13730194 14246174 14788466 15349497 4 57 13738590 14254990 14797740 15369273
3 58 13746993 14263813 14807022 15379057 2 59 13755403 14272643 14816312
15388850 1 60 13763820 14281480 14825610 15398651 0 36 35 34 33 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. 57 58 59 60 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for
the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 15398651
16003347 16642794 17320508 60 1 15408461 16013710 16653766 17332150 59 2
15418280 16024083 16664749 17343804 58 3 15428108 16034466 16675742 17355469 57
4 15437945 16044859 16686746 17367146 56 5 15447791 16055261 16697760 17378834
55 6 15457646 16065673 16708785 17390534 54 7 15467510 16076095 16719820
17402246 53 8 15477382 16086527 16730866 17413969 52 9 15487263 16096968
16741922 17425704 51 10 15497153 16107419 16752989 17437451 50 11 15507052
16117880 16764067 17449210 49 12 15516960 16128351 16775156 17460981 48 13
15526877 16138832 16786256 17472764 47 14 15536803 16149322 16797367 17484559
46 15 15546738 16159822 16808489 17496366 45 16 15556682 16170332 16819621
17508185 44 17 15566636 16180852 16830764 17520026 43 18 15576599 16191381
16841918 17531869 42 19 15586571 16201920 16853083 17543724 41 20 15596552
16212469 16864259 17555591 40 21 15606542 16224028 16875446 17567470 39 22
15616541 16233597 16886644 17579362 38 23 15626549 16244176 16897853 17591266
37 24 15636566 16254766 16909074 17603182 36 25 15646592 16265366 16920306
17615111 35 26 15656627 16275976 16931549 17627052 34 27 15666671 16286596
16942803 17639006 33 28 15676724 16297226 16954068 17650972 32 29 15686786
16307866 16965344 17662951 31 30 15696857 16318516 16976631 17674941 30 31
^5706938 16329176 16987929 17686945 29 32 15717028 16339847 16999239 17698960
28 33 1572127 16350528 17010560 17710987 27 34 15737235 16361219 17021892
17723027 26 35 15747353 16371920 17033236 17735079 25 36 15757480 16382631
17044591 17747143 24 37 15767616 16393352 17055957 17759220 23 38 15777761
16404083 17067325 17771309 22 39 15787915 16414824 17078714 17783410 21 40
15798078 16425575 17090115 17795524 20 41 15808251 16436337 17101527 17808651
19 42 15818433 16447109 17112950 17819790 18 43 15828625 16457892 17124384
17831942 17 44 15838827 16468685 17135829 17844107 16 45 15849038 16479488
17147285 17856285 15 46 15859259 16490302 17158752 17868475 14 47 15869489
16501126 17170231 17880678 13 48 15879729 16511960 17181721 17892894 12 49
15889979 16522805 17193222 17905123 11 50 15900238 16533660 17204734 17917364
10 51 15910507 16544526 17216258 17929618 9 52 15920785 16555402 17227794
17941885 8 53 15931073 16566289 17239342 17954164 7 54 15941370 16577186
17250902 17966456 6 55 15951676 16588094 17262473 17978761 5 56 15961992
16599013 17274056 17991079 4 57 15972317 16609942 17285651 18003410 3 58
15982651 1662088^ 17297258 18015753 2 59 15992994 16631833 17308877 18028109 1
60 16003347 16642794 17320508 18040478 0 32 31 30 29 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. 61 62 63 64 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for
the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 18040478
18807265 19626104 20503034 60 1 18052860 18820471 19640225 20518180 59 2
18065255 18833691 19654362 20533344 58 3 18077663 18846925 19668516 20548526 57
4 18090084 18860174 19682686 20563726 56 5 18102518 18873437 19696872 20578945
55 6 18114966 18886715 19711074 20594182 54 7 18127427 18900007 19725293
20609437 53 8 18139901 18913314 19739528 20624711 52 9 18152388 18926636
19753780 20640003 51 10 18164889 18939972 19768048 20655313 50 11 18177403
18953323 19782333 20670642 49 12 18189930 18966689 19796634 20685989 48 13
18202470 18980070 19810951 20701355 47 14 18215024 18993466 19825285 20716739
46 15 18227591 19006876 19839635 20732142 45 16 18240171 19020301 19854002
20747564 44 17 18252765 19033741 19868386 20763004 43 18 18265372 19047196
19882786 20778463 42 19 18277992 19060665 19897203 20793941 41 20 18290626
19074149 19911637 20809438 40 21 18303273 19087648 19926088 20824953 39 22
18315934 19101162 19940555 20840487 38 23 18328608 19114691 19955039 20856040
37 24 18341296 19128235 19669540 26871612 36 25 18353997 19141795 19984057
20887202 35 26 18366712 19155370 19998591 20902811 34 27 18379440 19168960
20013142 20918439 33 28 18392182 19182565 20027709 20934086 32 29 18404938
19196185 20042297 20949752 31 30 18417707 19209821 20056898 20965436 30 31
18430490 19223472 20071516 20981140 29 32 18443287 19237138 20086152 20996863
28 33 18456098 19250819 20100805 21012605 27 34 18468922 19264516 20115475
21028367 26 35 18481760 19278228 20130163 21044148 25 36 18494612 19291955
20144868 21059949 24 37 18507478 19305698 20159590 21075769 23 38 18520357
19319456 20174329 21091609 22 39 18533250 19333230 20189086 21107468 21 40
18546157 19347019 20203860 21123347 20 41 18559078 19360824 20218651 21139246
19 42 18572013 19374644 20233460 21155164 18 43 18584962 19388480 20248286
21171102 17 44 18597925 19402331 2026^130 21187059 16 45 18610902 19416198
20277991 21203036 15 46 18623894 19430081 20292870 21219032 14 47 18636900
19443980 20307767 21235048 13 48 18649920 19457894 20322681 21251083 12 49
18662954 19471824 20337613 21267138 11 50 18676002 19485770 20352563 21283213
10 51 18689064 19499732 20367531 21299308 9 52 18702140 19513710 20382516
21315423 8 53 18715231 19527704 20397519 21331558 7 54 18728335 19541714
20412539 21347713 6 55 18741454 19555739 20427577 21363888 5 56 18754587
19569780 20442633 21380083 4 57 18767735 19583837 20457706 21396298 3 58
18780897 19597910 20472797 21412534 2 59 18794074 19611999 20487906 21428790 1
60 18807265 19626104 20503034 21445067 0 28 27 26 25 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. 65 66 67 68 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for
the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 21445067
22460371 23558529 24750869 60 1 21461364 22477965 23577595 24771613 59 2
21477681 22495582 23596687 24792387 58 3 21494019 22513222 23615805 24813191 57
4 21510377 22530885 23634950 24834024 56 5 21526756 22548571 23654121 24854887
55 6 21543155 22566281 23673318 24875780 54 7 21559575 22584014 23692542
24896704 53 8 21576015 22601771 23711793 24917659 52 9 21592475 22619951
23731071 24938644 51 10 21608956 22637355 23750375 24959659 50 11 21625458
22655183 23769706 24980705 49 12 21641981 22673034 23789064 25001782 48 13
21658525 22690909 23808448 25022890 47 14 21675090 22708808 23827859 25044029
46 15 21691676 22726730 23847297 25065198 45 16 21708283 22744676 23866762
25086398 44 17 21724911 22762646 23886254 25107629 43 18 21741559 22780639
23905773 25128991 42 19 21758228 22798656 23925320 25150183 41 20 21774918
22816696 23944895 25171506 40 21 21791629 22834760 23964496 25192861 39 22
21808362 22852848 23984124 25214248 38 23 21825116 22870960 24003779 25235666
37 24 21841892 22889096 24023462 25257116 36 25 21858689 22907256 24043172
25278597 35 26 21875508 22925441 24062910 25300115 34 27 21892348 22943650
24082675 25321655 33 28 21909210 22961883 24102468 25343232 32 29 21926094
22980141 24122289 25364841 31 30 21944000 22998424 24142137 25386482 30 31
21959926 23016731 24162013 25408154 29 32 21976874 23035062 24181917 25429858
28 33 21993843 23053418 24201849 25451594 27 34 22010834 23071798 24221809
25473362 26 35 22027846 23090203 24241798 25495162 25 36 22044879 23108632
24261815 25516995 24 37 22061934 23127086 24281860 25538860 23 38 22079011
23145565 4301934 25560758 22 39 22096109 23164068 14322037 25582688 21 40
22113229 23182597 24342169 25604651 20 41 22130372 23201151 24362329 25626647
19 42 22147537 23219730 24382518 25648675 18 43 22164725 23238335 24402735
25670736 17 44 22181935 23256965 24422981 25692830 16 45 22199168 23275621
24443256 25714957 15 46 22216424 23294302 24463559 25737218 14 47 22233703
23313008 24483891 25759312 13 48 22251004 23331740 24504252 25781540 12 49
22268328 23350498 24524641 25803801 11 50 22285675 2336928^ 24545061 25826096
10 51 22303044 23388092 24565509 25848424 9 52 22320435 23406927 24585986
25870786 8 53 22337848 23425788 24606492 25893181 7 54 22355284 23444674
24627028 25915610 6 55 22372742 23463586 24647594 25938073 5 56 22390223
23482523 24668189 25960569 4 57 22407726 23501486 24688814 25983099 3 58
22425252 23520475 24709469 26005663 2 59 22442800 23539489 24730154 26028261 1
60 22460371 23558529 24750869 26050893 0 24 23 22 21 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. 69 70 71 72 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for
the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 26050893
27474777 29042105 30776834 60 1 26073559 27499665 29069569 30807323 59 2
26096260 2752459^ 29097080 30837866 58 3 26118996 27549559 29124638 30868465 57
4 26141766 27574565 29152243 30890119 56 5 2616457^ 27599612 29179895 30929828
55 6 26187411 27624699 29207595 30960593 54 7 26210286 27649827 ^9235343
30991413 53 8 26233196 27674995 29263139 31022289 52 9 26256141 27700204
29290382 31053221 51 10 26279120 27725453 29318873 31084208 50 11 26302135
27750742 29346811 31115252 49 12 26325185 27776072 29374797 31146352 48 13
26348270 27802443 29402831 31177508 47 14 26371390 27826855 29430913 31208720
46 15 26394546 27852308 29459043 31239989 45 16 26417738 27877803 29487221
31271315 44 17 26440966 27903339 29515446 31302698 43 18 26464229 27928917
29543719 31334138 42 19 26487528 27954536 29572041 31365636 41 20 26510863
27980196 29600411 31397191 40 21 26534234 28005898 29628831 31428805 39 22
26557641 28031642 29657301 31460470 38 23 26581084 28057429 29685820 31492205
37 24 26604563 28083258 29714388 31523992 36 25 26628079 28109129 29743006
31555838 35 26 26651631 28135043 29771674 31587742 34 27 26675220 28160999
29800392 31619705 33 28 26698845 28186998 29829160 31651727 32 29 26722507
28213040 29857978 31683807 31 30 26746206 28239125 29886847 31715946 30 31
26769942 28265253 29915765 31748144 29 32 26793716 28291424 29944734 31780401
28 33 26816527 28317638 29973753 31812717 27 34 26841375 28343895 30002823
31845093 26 35 26865260 28379195 30031943 31877528 25 36 26889183 28396539
30061113 31910 24 24 37 26913143 28422926 30090334 31942580 23 38 26937141
28449357 30119605 31975197 22 39 26961177 28475832 30148927 32007875 21 40
26985251 28502350 30178299 32040613 20 41 27009362 28528913 30207723 32073413
19 42 27033511 28555520 30237200 32106275 18 43 27057698 28582172 30266730
32139200 17 44 27081922 28608868 30296312 32172187 16 45 27106184 28635608
30325947 32205237 15 46 27130484 28662393 30355635 32238349 14 47 27154823
28689222 30385375 32271524 13 48 27179200 28716096 30415169 32304762 12 49
27203616 28743015 30445015 32338064 11 50 27228070 28769979 30474915 32371430
10 51 27252563 28796987 30504867 32404858 9 52 27272095 28824040 30534872
32438348 8 53 27301667 28851139 30564930 32471901 7 54 27326278 28878283
30595041 32505517 6 55 27350929 28905472 30625205 32539196 5 56 27375620
28932707 30655423 32572937 4 57 27400350 28959988 30685695 32606741 3 58
27425120 28987315 30716020 32640907 2 59 27449929 29014687 30746400 32674536 1
60 27474777 29042105 30776834 32708528 0 20 19 18 17 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for Tangents of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. 73 74 75 76 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for
the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 32708528
34874151 37320517 40107808 60 1 32745286 34912477 37363987 40157569 59 2
32776709 34950881 37407551 40207446 58 3 32810898 34989364 37451210 40257440 57
4 32845153 35027925 37494964 40307552 56 5 32879747 35066565 37538814 40357781
55 6 32913862 35105283 37582760 40408129 54 7 32948317 35144080 37626803
40458596 53 8 32982839 35182956 37670943 40509183 52 9 33017427 35221911
37715180 40559890 51 10 33052082 35260945 37759515 40610718 50 11 33086802
35300059 37803948 40661665 49 12 33121588 35339253 37848479 40712731 48 13
33156441 35378528 37893109 40763917 47 14 33191362 35417883 37937838 40815224
46 15 33226351 35457320 37982666 40866652 45 16 33261408 35496838 38027592
40918201 44 17 33296534 35536438 38072616 40969871 43 18 33331728 35576121
38117740 41021663 42 19 33366990 35615888 38162963 41073577 41 20 33402321
35655739 38208285 41125614 40 21 33437720 35695672 38253708 41177775 39 22
33473188 35735689 38299232 41230062 38 23 33508725 35775789 38344857 41282475
37 24 33544330 35815973 38390584 41335015 36 25 33580005 35856241 38436414
41387683 35 26 33615750 35896593 38482347 41440480 34 27 33651566 35937029
38528384 41493407 33 28 33687453 35977550 38574525 41546464 32 29 33723410
36018156 38620772 41599653 31 30 33759438 36058848 38667125 41652974 30 31
33795535 36099623 38713580 41706424 29 32 33831703 36140483 38760139 41760003
28 33 33867942 36181427 38806801 41813712 27 34 33904252 36222456 38853567
41867550 26 35 33940634 36263570 38900438 41921518 25 36 33977088 36304771
38947416 41975617 24 37 34013615 36346060 38994501 42029848 23 38 34050215
36387437 39041695 42084211 22 39 34086888 36428903 39088998 42138706 21 40
34123634 36470459 39136409 42193334 20 41 34160453 36512103 39183929 42248096
19 42 34197345 36553836 39231557 42302993 18 43 34234310 36595659 39279294
42358025 17 44 34271348 36637572 39327139 42413193 16 45 34308459 36679574
39375094 42468497 15 46 34345644 36721666 39423158 42523937 14 47 34382903
36763849 39471331 42579514 13 48 34420237 36806121 39519614 42635228 12 49
34457647 36848483 39568006 42691080 11 50 34495132 36890936 39616509 42747070
10 51 34532692 36933479 39665124 42803199 9 52 34570327 36976114 39713852
42859468 8 53 34608038 37018840 39762695 42915878 7 54 34645824 37061659
39811654 42972429 6 55 34683686 37104570 39860729 43029122 5 56 34721625
37147574 39909917 43085958 4 57 34759640 37190670 39959218 43142937 3 58
34797733 37233859 40008633 43200060 2 59 34835903 37277141 40058103 43257328 1
60 34874151 37320517 40107808 43314742 0 16 15 14 13 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 77 78 79 80 The minutes of degrees of the Quadrant
for the Tangents of the co^plement of the Arches of the same Quadrant 0
43314742 47046295 51445543 56712854 60 1 43372301 47113680 51525561 56809480 59
2 43430006 47181249 51605820 56906425 58 3 43487857 47249003 51686321 57003690
57 4 43545855 47316942 51767065 57101277 56 5 43604000 47385067 51848053
57199188 55 6 43662293 47453380 51929285 57297425 54 7 43720733 47521882
52010762 57395990 53 8 43779321 47590575 52092485 57494885 52 9 43838057
47659460 52174455 57594111 51 10 43896942 47728538 52256673 57693670 50 11
43955977 47797809 52339140 57793564 49 12 44015163 47867274 52421857 57893795
48 13 44074501 47936934 52504826 57994366 47 14 44133992 48006790 52588048
58095279 46 15 44193637 48076841 52671525 58196536 45 16 44253435 48147088
52755259 58298138 44 17 44313387 48217531 52839251 58400087 43 18 44373494
48288171 52923503 58502385 42 19 44433756 48359008 53008016 58605934 41 20
44494174 48430043 53092792 58708035 40 21 44554749 48501278 53177831 58811388
39 22 44615481 48572714 53263134 58915095 38 23 44676371 48644352 53348702
59019157 37 24 44737419 48716193 53434536 59123576 36 25 44798626 48788238
53520637 59228353 35 26 44859993 48860488 53607006 59333490 34 27 44921521
48932945 53693644 59438989 33 28 44983211 49005610 53780552 59544852 32 29
45045065 49078483 53867731 59651081 31 30 45107083 49151565 53955183 59757678
30 31 45169263 49224856 54042909 59864646 29 32 45231607 49298357 54130911
59971987 28 33 45294114 49372069 54219190 60079703 27 34 45356785 49445993
54307748 60187796 26 35 45419621 49520130 54396586 60296268 25 36 45482623
49594481 54485705 60405112 24 37 45545790 49669047 54575107 60514358 23 38
45609123 49743829 54664793 60623981 22 39 45672623 49818827 54754764 60733992
21 40 45736291 49894042 54845022 60844392 20 41 45800128 49969475 54935569
60955184 19 42 45864135 50045127 55029406 61066370 18 43 45928314 50120999
55117535 61177952 17 44 45992666 50197092 55208958 61289930 16 45 46057192
50273407 55300676 61402307 15 46 46121892 50349935 55392692 61515085 14 47
46186767 50246707 55485007 61628267 13 48 46251817 50503605 55577622 61741856
12 49 46318043 50580910 55670539 61855854 11 50 46382445 50658353 55763759
61970263 10 51 46448023 50736025 55857283 62085085 9 52 46513778 50813927
55951112 62200323 8 53 46579711 50892060 56045247 62315979 7 54 46645823
50970425 56139689 62432056 6 55 46712115 51049023 56234439 62548556 5 56
46778587 51127855 56329498 62665481 4 57 46845240 51206922 56424868 62782833 3
58 46912075 51286225 56520550 62900615 2 59 46979093 51365765 56616545 63018829
1 60 47046295 51445543 56712854 63137478 0 12 11 10 9 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangent of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 81 82 83 84 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 63137478 71153707 81443502 95143611 60 1 63256564 71304198 81639821 95410585
59 2 63376089 71455313 81837074 95679034 58 3 63496056 71607058 82035268
95948971 57 4 63616468 71759440 82234410 96220411 56 5 63737327 71912459
82434508 96493467 55 6 63858635 72066117 82635570 96767939 54 7 63980394
72220422 82837603 97044063 53 8 64102607 72375376 83040614 97321646 52 9
64225276 72530983 83244610 97600890 51 10 64348404 72687247 83449598 97881716
50 11 64471994 72844173 83655585 98164135 49 12 64596049 73001766 83862572
98448162 48 13 64720571 73160031 84070565 98733810 47 14 64845563 73318972
84279571 99021104 46 15 64971028 73478593 84489598 99310047 45 16 65096969
73638898 84700687 99600655 44 17 65223388 73799892 84912817 99893042 43 18
65350287 73961579 85125995 100187022 42 19 65477669 74123964 85340229 100482822
41 20 65605537 74287052 85555525 100780346 40 21 65733894 74450847 85771891
101079507 39 22 65862743 74615354 85989335 101380525 38 23 65992087 74780577
86207866 101683314 37 24 66121928 74946521 86427493 101987889 36 25 66252268
75113189 86648225 102294266 35 26 66383110 75280586 86870072 102602473 34 27
66514457 75448716 87093043 102912514 33 28 66646313 75617584 87317150 103224405
32 29 66778681 75787195 87542404 103538166 31 30 66911564 75957554 87768816
103853919 30 31 67044965 76128666 87996394 104171468 29 32 67178887 76300536
88225146 104491055 28 33 67313334 76473170 88455079 104812581 27 34 67448309
76646573 88686196 105136063 26 35 67583815 76820751 88918508 105461519 25 36
67719855 76995710 89152021 105788969 24 37 67856423 77171455 89386745 106118428
23 38 67993549 77347991 89622688 106449917 22 39 68131209 77525324 89859858
106783466 21 40 68269416 77703459 90098268 107119198 20 41 68408173 77882402
90337927 107456902 19 42 68547438 78062159 90578848 107796712 18 43 68687350
78242737 90821043 108138767 17 44 68827777 78424142 91064526 108482852 16 45
68968769 78606379 91309309 108829233 15 46 69110326 78789454 91555401 109177805
14 47 69252455 78973371 91802810 109528589 13 48 69395158 79158136 92051546
109881598 12 49 69538439 76343754 92301618 110236864 11 50 69682302 79530231
92553036 110594415 10 51 69826751 79717572 92805759 110954264 9 52 69971789
79905783 93059875 111316432 8 53 70117419 80094869 93315361 111680940 7 54
70263645 80284835 93572238 112047814 6 55 70410470 80475688 93830595 112417202
5 56 70557898 80667435 94090270 112788878 4 57 70705932 80860083 94351448
113163656 3 58 70854576 81053639 94614055 113539681 2 59 71003833 81248110
94878103 113918875 1 60 71153706 81443502 95143611 114300579 0 8 7 6 5 The
degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangent of the complement of the Arches of the
same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 85 86 87 The minutes of the degrees of the
Quadrant for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 114300579 143006601 190811200 60 1 114684819 143606943 191879163 59 2
115071619 144212307 192959095 58 3 115461005 144822757 194051200 57 4 115853017
145438358 195155685 56 5 116247668 146059175 196273146 55 6 116644985 146685275
197403054 54 7 117044995 147316726 198545993 53 8 117447864 147953611 199702191
52 9 117853346 148595987 200871878 51 10 118261757 149244148 202055705 50 11
118672834 149897753 203253093 49 12 119086890 150557233 204464726 48 13
119503669 151222301 205691260 47 14 119923488 151893462 206932111 46 15
120346233 152570581 208188402 45 16 120771937 153253487 209459545 44 17
121200643 153942729 210746693 43 18 121632370 154638158 212049271 42 19
122067151 155339855 213368214 41 20 122505017 156047923 214704085 40 21
122946003 156762433 216056022 39 22 123390142 157483474 217425507 38 23
123837634 158211136 218812405 37 24 124288195 158945509 220217049 36 25
124742169 159686753 221639784 35 26 125199280 160434770 223080983 34 27
125659878 161189849 224540987 33 28 126123842 161952305 226020167 32 29
126591211 162721698 227518902 31 30 127062036 163498660 229037584 30 31
127536341 164282764 230576614 29 32 128014165 165074651 232136427 28 33
128495548 165873906 233717425 27 34 128980531 166681172 235320041 26 35
129469305 167496287 236945285 25 36 129961652 168319085 238592501 24 37
130457692 169150247 240262714 23 38 130957670 169989613 241957021 22 39
131461286 170837304 243674732 21 40 131968930 171693461 245417543 20 41
132480297 172558198 247184785 19 42 132995769 173431641 248978216 18 43
133515636 174313925 250797165 17 44 134038804 175205183 252643455 16 45
134566419 176105555 254517088 15 46 135098153 177015180 256417991 14 47
135634096 177934219 258348100 13 48 136174272 178862806 260307416 12 49
136718731 179801085 262296605 11 50 137267523 180749537 264316358 10 51
137820702 181707670 266366704 9 52 138378319 182676299 268449755 8 53 138940429
183654941 270565570 7 54 139507087 184644417 272714927 6 55 140078545 185644562
274898633 5 56 140654481 186655202 277117516 4 57 141235334 187677207 279372435
3 58 141820765 188710414 281664304 2 59 142411234 189755028 283994009 1 60
143006601 190811200 286362498 0 4 3 2 The degrees of the Quadrant for the
Tangents of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the
Arches of the same Quadarnt. 88 89 The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant
for the Tangents of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0
286362498 572899830 60 1 288770746 582610421 59 2 291219764 592655713 58 3
293710598 603057015 57 4 296244357 613825994 56 5 298823024 624990311 55 6
301445987 636564040 54 7 304115322 648591509 53 8 306833212 661050728 52 9
309599077 674016435 51 10 312416191 687500725 50 11 315283945 701531474 49 12
318204757 716149676 48 13 321181137 731385593 47 14 324212583 747289264 46 15
327302782 763899813 45 16 330451272 781259259 44 17 333661982 799432199 43 18
336934467 818463792 42 19 340272744 838430438 41 20 343677949 859395374 40 21
347150587 881427652 39 22 350695255 904627361 38 23 354312962 929081086 37 24
358006024 954893332 36 25 361776788 982180553 35 26 365626388 1011062679 34 27
369560062 1041705454 33 28 373579199 1074263399 32 29 377686614 1108922084 31
30 381885288 1145891136 30 31 386178258 1185395877 29 32 390568737 1227736470
28 33 395060088 1273213435 27 34 399655828 1322188681 26 35 404359642
1375082163 25 36 409175388 1432363027 24 37 414111295 1494645462 23 38
419159137 1562590046 22 39 424335793 1637005697 21 40 429641796 1718863124 20
41 435082056 1809337410 19 42 440661780 1909864971 18 43 446386310 2022219818
17 44 452261453 2148619711 16 45 458293185 2291873854 15 46 464487853
2455533838 14 47 470852152 2644433955 13 48 477393195 2864819229 12 49
484118353 3125276745 11 50 491038024 3437829002 10 51 498155754 3819696333 9 52
505482730 4297181900 8 53 513030946 4911098124 7 54 520805157 5729633839 6 55
528821258 6875680006 5 56 537085003 8594003953 4 57 545610968 11457529506 3 58
554414914 17188033688 2 59 563504309 34376070815 1 60 572899830 Infinita. 0 1 0
The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of the complements of the Arches
of the same Quadrant.

THE TABLE OF SECANTS OTHERWISE CALLED THE BENEFICIAL TABLE.
The Table of Secants.
The degrees of the Quadrant for Secants. of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of the
same Quadrant. 0 1 2 3 The minutes of the Quadrant for the Scants of the
Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 10000000 10001524 10006095
10013723 60 1 10000001 10001574 10006198 10013875 59 2 10000002 10001626
10006301 10014029 58 3 10000004 10001679 10006405 10014184 57 4 10000008
10001733 10006509 10014339 56 5 10000010 10001788 10006615 10014495 55 6
10000014 10001844 10006721 10014653 54 7 10000020 10001900 10006828 10014811 53
8 10000027 10001957 10006936 10014970 52 9 10000034 10002015 10007045 10015130
51 10 10000042 10002074 10007155 10015291 50 11 10000051 10002134 10007265
10015453 49 12 10000060 10002195 10007376 10015615 48 13 10000071 10002256
10007488 10015778 47 14 10000083 10002318 10007601 10015942 46 15 10000095
10002381 10007716 10016107 45 16 10000108 10002445 10007831 10016273 44 17
10000122 10002510 10007946 10016440 43 18 10000137 10002576 10008062 10016608
42 19 10000152 10002642 10008179 10016777 41 20 10000168 10002709 10008298
10016946 40 21 10000186 10002777 10008417 10017116 39 22 10000204 10002846
10008537 10017287 38 23 10000223 10002916 10008658 10017459 37 24 10000243
10002987 10008779 10017632 36 25 10000264 10003058 10008902 10017806 35 26
10000285 10003130 10009025 10017981 34 27 10000308 10003203 10009149 10018157
33 28 10000332 10003277 10009274 10018333 32 29 10000357 10003352 10009400
10018510 31 30 10000381 10003428 10009527 10018687 30 31 10000407 10003505
10009655 10018865 29 32 10000433 10003582 10009783 10019044 28 33 10000461
10003660 10009912 10019224 27 34 10000489 10003739 10010043 10019405 26 35
10000518 10003819 10010174 10019587 25 36 10000548 10003900 10010306 10019770
24 37 10000579 10003982 10010439 10019954 23 38 10000611 10004060 10010572
10020138 22 39 10000643 10004148 10010706 10020324 21 40 10000677 10004232
10010841 10020510 20 41 10000711 10004317 10010977 10020698 19 42 10000746
10004403 10011114 10020886 18 43 10000782 10004490 10011252 10021086 17 44
10000819 10004578 10011390 10021266 16 45 10000857 10004666 10011529 10021456
15 46 10000895 10004755 10011670 10021649 14 47 10000934 10004845 10011811
10021842 13 48 10000975 10004936 10011952 10022035 12 49 10001016 10005028
10012098 10022239 11 50 10001058 10005122 10012238 10022424 10 51 10001100
10005216 10012383 10022620 9 52 10001144 10005310 10012528 10022817 8 53
10001188 10005405 10012674 10023015 7 54 10001233 10005501 10012822 10023213 6
55 10001280 10005598 10012970 10023412 5 56 10001327 10005696 10013119 10023612
4 57 10001375 10005795 10013269 10023813 3 58 10001423 10005894 10013419
10024014 2 59 10001473 10005994 10013570 10024217 1 60 10001524 10006095
10013723 10024420 0 89 88 87 86 The degrees of the Quadrant for the Tangents of
the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The degrees of the Quadrant for Secants. of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. 4 5 6 7 The minutes of degrees of the Quadrant for the
Secants of the co^plements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 10024420
10038198 10055082 10075098 60 1 10024625 10038454 10055390 10075459 59 2
10024830 10038710 10055699 10075820 58 3 10025036 10038968 10056009 10076182 57
4 10025242 10039226 10056320 10076545 56 5 10025450 10039486 10056632 10076909
55 6 10025658 10039747 10056944 10077274 54 7 10025868 10040008 10057256
10077639 53 8 10026078 10040269 10057570 10078005 52 9 10026289 10040532
10057884 10078372 51 10 10026500 10040796 10058200 10078740 50 11 10026713
10041061 10058517 10079009 49 12 10026927 10041326 10058834 10079479 48 13
10027141 10041592 10059153 10079850 47 14 10027357 10041859 10059472 10080222
46 15 10027573 10042128 10059792 10080595 45 16 10027790 10042397 10060113
10080968 44 17 10028009 10042667 10060435 10081332 43 18 10028227 10642936
10060757 10081717 42 19 10028447 10043207 10061080 10082093 41 20 10028667
10043479 10061405 10082470 40 21 10028889 10043752 10061730 10082848 39 22
10029111 10044025 10062056 10083226 38 23 10029334 10044300 10062383 10083606
37 24 10029559 10044576 10062711 10083987 36 25 10029784 10044853 10063039
10084368 35 26 10030009 10045130 10063369 10084750 34 27 10030236 10045409
10063700 10085134 33 28 10030463 10045689 10064031 10085518 32 29 10030692
10045969 10064364 10085903 31 30 10030920 10046250 10064690 10086289 30 31
10031150 10046532 10065035 10086677 29 32 10031381 10046815 10065365 10087065
28 33 10031614 10047098 10065701 10087454 27 34 10031846 10047383 10066038
10087843 26 35 10032079 10047669 10066376 10088243 25 36 10032314 10047954
10066715 10088623 24 37 10032550 10048241 10067054 10089015 23 38 10032786
10048529 10067394 10089408 22 39 10033023 10048818 10067735 10089802 21 40
10033261 10049107 10068076 10090196 20 41 10033500 10049398 10068419 10090592
19 42 10033740 10049690 10068763 10090988 18 43 10033981 10049983 10069107
10091385 17 44 10034223 10050276 10069452 10091783 16 45 10034465 10050571
10069808 10092182 15 46 10034708 10050865 10070155 10092582 14 47 10034952
10051160 10070493 10092983 13 48 10035196 10051456 10070842 10093385 12 49
10035441 10051753 10071192 10093787 11 50 10035688 10052051 10071543 10094190
10 51 10035936 10052350 10071895 10094624 9 52 10036184 10052649 10072247
10095030 8 53 10036434 10052951 10072600 10095406 7 54 10036684 10053252
10072954 10095813 6 55 10036934 10053555 10073310 10096221 5 56 100371^5
10053858 10073666 10096630 4 57 10037438 10054162 10074023 10097040 3 58
10037690 10054468 10074380 10097451 2 59 10037944 10054775 10074737 10097863 1
60 10038198 10055082 10075098 10098275 0 85 84 83 82 The minutes of degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the co^plements of the Arches of the same
Quadra^t.

The degrees of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants. of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 8 9 10 11 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Secants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 10098275
10124650 10154264 10187166 60 1 10098698 10125117 10154786 10187743 59 2
10099103 10125585 10155308 10188320 58 3 10099518 10126054 10155831 10188899 57
4 10099934 10126524 10156356 10189478 56 5 10100351 10126994 10156881 10190058
55 6 10100769 10127465 10157407 10190639 54 7 10101188 10127947 10157934
10191221 53 8 10101607 10128410 10158462 10191804 52 9 10102028 10128684
10158991 10192387 51 10 10102450 10129358 10159520 10192972 50 11 10102872
10129634 10160051 10193557 49 12 10103295 10130311 10160582 10194144 48 13
10103720 10130788 10161114 10194732 47 14 10104144 10131266 10161648 10195320
46 15 10104570 10131746 10162182 10195910 45 16 10104996 10132226 10162707
10196500 44 17 10105423 10132707 10163252 10197092 43 18 10105851 19133189
10163789 10197684 42 19 10106286 10133672 10164327 10198277 41 20 10106710
10134156 10165865 10198872 40 21 10107140 10134641 10165495 10199467 39 22
10107572 10135127 10165944 10200063 38 23 10108005 10135614 10166485 10200060
37 24 10108438 10136102 10167028 10201258 36 25 10108873 10136591 10167571
10201857 35 26 10109309 10137080 10168116 10202457 34 27 10109755 10137571
10168661 10203058 33 28 10110182 10138163 10169207 10203659 32 29 10110620
10138555 10169765 10204262 31 30 10111059 10139048 10170303 10204867 30 31
10111509 10139543 10170852 10205470 29 32 10111940 10140038 10171401 10206075
28 33 10112482 10140534 10171952 10206681 27 34 10112825 10141036 10172504
10207289 26 35 10113279 10141528 10173056 10207897 25 36 10113713 10142027
10173609 10208506 24 37 10114159 10142526 10174163 10209116 23 38 10114606
10143026 10174718 10209727 22 39 10115053 10143528 10175274 10210339 21 40
10115501 10144030 10175831 10210952 20 41 10115951 10144533 10176389 10211566
19 42 10116401 10145037 10176947 10211180 18 43 10116852 10145542 10177507
10212796 17 44 10117303 10146048 10178068 10213412 16 45 10117754 10146554
10178630 10214030 15 46 10118209 10147062 10179193 10214668 14 47 10118663
10147572 10179756 10215268 13 48 10119118 10148082 10180321 10215889 12 49
10119574 10148593 10180886 10216510 11 50 10120031 10149104 10181453 19217113
10 51 10120489 10149615 10182021 10217756 9 52 10120948 10150128 10182589
10218380 8 53 10121408 10150642 10183158 10219015 7 54 10121868 10151156
10183728 10219631 6 55 10122330 10151672 10184299 10220258 5 56 10122792
10152188 10184870 10220885 4 57 10123256 10152705 10185443 10221514 3 58
10123720 10153224 10186017 10222143 2 59 10124275 10153744 10186591 10222774 1
60 10124650 10154264 10187166 10223405 0 81 80 79 78 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the co^plements of the Arches of the same Quadra^t.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants. of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 12 13 14 15 The minutes of degrees of the Quadrant
for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0
10223405 10263040 10306136 10352762 60 1 10224037 10263730 10306884 10353569 59
2 10224671 10264420 10307633 10354377 58 3 10225305 10265112 10308383 10355186
57 4 10225941 10265804 10309134 10355996 56 5 10226577 10266498 10309886
10356807 55 6 10227215 10267192 10310639 10357619 54 7 10227854 10267888
10311393 10358433 53 8 10228493 10268584 10312148 10359247 52 9 10229134
10269281 10312903 10360063 51 10 10229775 10269979 10313660 10360880 50 11
10230417 10270688 10314417 10361698 49 12 10231060 10271379 12315176 10362517
48 13 10231644 10272080 10315935 10363337 47 14 10232288 10272782 10316696
10364158 46 15 10232994 10273485 10317457 10364980 45 16 10233641 10274190
10318220 10365802 44 17 10234289 10274895 10318984 10366626 43 18 10234938
10275601 10319749 10367450 42 19 10235587 10276318 10320525 10368276 41 20
10236238 10277016 10321282 10369102 40 21 10236889 10277726 10322050 10369930
39 22 10237541 10278436 10322819 10370758 38 23 10238195 10279148 10323589
10371588 37 24 10238849 10279860 10324359 10372418 36 25 10239505 10280573
10325131 10373250 35 26 10240161 10281287 15325903 10374092 34 27 10240818
10282002 10326677 10374916 33 28 10241476 10282717 10327451 10375750 32 29
10242135 10283434 10328127 10376586 31 30 10242795 10284151 10329003 10377422
30 31 10243456 10284870 10329781 10378260 29 32 10244118 10285589 10330559
10379098 28 33 10245782 10286310 10331339 10379938 27 34 10245445 10287032
10332119 10380778 26 35 10246110 10287754 10332902 10381620 25 36 10246776
10288478 10333684 10382463 24 37 10247442 10289202 10334467 10383307 23 38
10248110 10289928 10335252 10384153 22 39 10248778 10290654 10336037 10384999
21 40 10249448 10291381 10336824 10385846 20 41 10250119 10292119 10337612
10386694 19 42 10250790 10292838 10338400 10387543 18 43 10251461 10293569
10339189 10388393 17 44 10252136 10294300 10339980 10389244 16 45 10252811
10295043 10340771 10390096 15 46 10253482 10295766 10341564 10390949 14 47
10254162 10296501 10342347 10391803 13 48 10254839 10297237 10343152 10392657
12 49 10255517 10297973 10343947 10393513 11 50 10256196 10298710 10344743
10394370 10 51 10256876 10299449 10345541 10395228 9 52 10257557 10300188
10346340 10396087 8 53 10258239 10300928 10347139 10396947 7 54 10258922
10301669 10347940 10397808 6 55 10259606 10302411 10348741 10398670 5 56
10260291 10303154 10349544 10899533 4 57 10260977 10303898 10350347 10400397 3
58 10261661 10304643 10351151 10401262 2 59 10262351 10305390 10351956 10402128
1 60 10263040 10306136 10352762 10402994 0 77 76 75 74 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants. of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 16 17 18 19 The minutes of degrees of the Quadrant
for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0
10402994 10456917 10514621 10576207 60 1 10403862 10457847 10515616 10577267 59
2 10404730 10458779 10516612 10578328 58 3 10405590 10459711 10517609 10579400
57 4 10406471 10460645 10518607 10580463 56 5 10407343 10461580 10519606
10581518 55 6 10408216 10462516 10520606 10582583 54 7 10409091 10463453
10521607 10583650 53 8 10409966 10464391 10522608 10584717 52 9 10410843
10465330 10523611 10585795 51 10 10411721 10466270 10524615 10586855 50 11
10412600 10467211 10525620 10587925 49 12 10413479 10468153 10526626 10588997
48 13 10414360 10469096 10527633 10590070 47 14 10415241 10470041 10528642
10591145 46 15 10416124 10470986 10529651 10592220 45 16 10417007 10471933
10530662 10593297 44 17 10417892 10472880 10531673 10594375 43 18 10418778
10473829 10532686 10595455 42 19 10419665 10474778 10533699 10596534 41 20
10420553 10475729 10534714 10597615 40 21 10421442 10476680 10535730 10598697
39 22 10422333 10477633 10536747 10599780 38 23 10423224 10478587 10537765
10600865 37 24 10424116 10479542 10538785 10601950 36 25 10425009 10480498
10539805 10603037 35 26 10425903 10481454 10540826 10604125 34 27 10426798
10482412 10541848 10605214 33 28 10427694 10483371 10542872 10606304 32 29
10428591 10484331 10543897 10607395 31 30 10429489 10485292 10544923 10608487
30 31 10430388 10486254 10545950 10609580 29 32 10431288 10487217 10546977
10610675 28 33 10432189 10488181 10548006 10611770 27 34 10433091 10489146
10549036 10612867 26 35 10433995 10490113 10550067 10613964 25 36 10434899
10491080 10551099 10615063 24 37 10435805 10492049 10552133 10616163 23 38
10436711 10493018 10553168 10617264 22 39 10437619 10493989 10554204 10618366
21 40 10438528 10494961 10555241 10619469 20 41 10439436 10494934 10556279
10620574 19 42 10440346 10496908 10557318 10621680 18 43 10441257 10497883
10558359 10622787 17 44 10442170 10498059 10559400 10623895 16 45 10443083
10499836 10560443 10625004 15 46 10443998 10500814 10561496 10626114 14 47
10444913 10501793 10562531 10627226 13 48 10445830 10502773 10563577 10628338
12 49 10446749 10503754 10564623 10629451 11 50 10447668 10504736 10565670
10630566 10 51 10448588 10505719 10566719 10631682 9 52 10449509 10506704
10567769 10632799 8 53 10450431 10507689 10568820 10633917 7 54 10451354
10508676 10569872 10635037 6 55 10452279 10509664 10570925 10636157 5 56
10453204 10510653 10571980 10637279 4 57 10454131 10511643 10573034 10638402 3
58 10455058 10512635 10574091 10639526 2 59 10455987 10513627 10575149 10640651
1 60 10456917 10514621 10576207 10641777 0 73 72 71 70 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 20 21 22 23 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Secants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 10641777
10711449 10785347 10863603 60 1 10642905 10712646 10786616 10864945 59 2
10644034 10713888 10787885 10866289 58 3 10645164 10715042 10789155 10867633 57
4 10646295 10716242 10790427 10868979 56 5 10647427 10717444 10791700 10870326
55 6 10648560 10718647 10792974 10871675 54 7 10649694 10719850 10794250
10873024 53 8 10650829 10721056 10795527 10874374 52 9 10651965 10722261
10796805 10875626 51 10 10653103 10723469 10798085 10877079 50 11 10654242
10724677 10799365 10878434 49 12 10655381 10725887 10800647 10879790 48 13
10656522 10727098 10803214 10881147 47 14 10657664 10728310 10803214 10882506
46 15 10658807 10729524 10804500 10883865 45 16 10659951 10730738 10805787
10885226 44 17 10661097 10731953 10807074 10886588 43 18 10662244 10733170
10808363 10887952 42 19 10663392 10734387 10809652 10889317 41 20 10664541
10735606 10810942 10890683 40 21 10665692 10736826 10812234 15892051 39 22
10666844 10738048 10813528 10893417 38 23 10667996 10739270 10814823 10894788
37 24 10669150 10740494 10816119 10896159 36 25 10670304 10741719 10817417
10897531 35 26 10671460 10742945 10818715 10898905 34 27 10672617 10744173
10820015 10900280 33 28 10673776 10745401 10821316 10901656 32 29 10674936
10746631 10822617 10903033 31 30 10676096 10747864 10823920 10904413 30 31
10677258 10749094 10825225 10905790 29 32 10678420 10750327 10826531 10907171
28 33 10679584 10751561 10827838 10908553 27 34 10680749 10752797 10829146
10909936 26 35 10681915 10754034 10830455 10911322 25 36 10683082 10755273
10831766 10912709 24 37 10684250 10756513 10833078 10914096 23 38 10685420
10757753 10834391 10915484 22 39 10686591 10758995 10835706 10916874 21 40
10687763 10760237 10837023 10918265 20 41 10688936 10761481 10838341 10919657
19 42 10690111 10762726 10839660 10921051 18 43 10691287 10763972 10840980
10922436 17 44 10692464 10765220 10842301 10923833 16 45 10693642 10766469
10843623 10925241 15 46 10694821 10767720 10844947 10926641 14 47 10696001
10768971 10846272 10928041 13 48 10697182 10770224 10847597 10929442 12 49
10698364 10771477 10848924 10930846 11 50 10699548 10772732 10850252 10932249
10 51 10700732 10773988 10851583 10933654 9 52 10701918 10775244 10852914
10935061 8 53 10703105 10776502 10854246 10936469 7 54 10704294 10777761
10855578 10937879 6 55 10705483 10779022 10856912 10939290 5 56 10706674
10780284 10858247 10940702 4 57 10707866 10781547 10859584 10942115 3 58
10709059 10782802 10860922 10943527 2 59 10710254 10784078 10862262 10944945 1
60 10711449 10785347 10863603 10946362 0 69 68 67 66 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 24 25 26 27 The minutes of degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 10946362 11033783 11126021 11223262 60 1 10947781 11035280 11127601 11224927
59 2 10949201 11036779 11129182 11226593 58 3 10950622 11038279 11130765
11228260 57 4 10952045 11039780 11132349 11229929 56 5 10953469 11041283
11133933 11231599 55 6 10954898 11042787 11135519 11233270 54 7 10956320
11044293 11137106 11234943 53 8 10957747 11045799 11138694 11236617 52 9
10959175 11047306 11140284 11238292 51 10 10960605 11048815 11141875 11239969
50 11 10962036 11050325 11143467 11241648 49 12 10963469 11051837 11145061
11243329 48 13 10964903 11053350 11146656 11245011 47 14 10966338 11054865
11148254 11246694 46 15 10967775 11056381 11149853 11248378 45 16 10969213
11057898 11151453 11250064 44 17 10970652 11059420 11153055 11251751 43 18
10972092 11060939 11154658 11253440 42 19 10973533 11062461 11156262 11255130
41 20 10974976 11063985 11157868 11256822 40 21 10976420 11065510 11159475
11258516 39 22 10977865 11067037 11161084 11260211 38 23 10979312 11068564
11162694 11261907 37 24 10980760 11070092 1116430^ 11263605 36 25 10982210
11071621 11165919 11265304 35 26 10983661 11073152 11167533 11267005 34 27
10985113 11074684 11169149 11268707 33 28 10986567 11076218 11170766 11270410
32 29 10988022 11077753 11172385 11272114 31 30 10989480 11079289 11174006
11273820 30 31 10990938 11080827 11175627 11275528 29 32 10992398 11082366
11177249 11277238 28 33 10993859 11083906 11178873 11278949 27 34 10995321
11085448 11180499 11280661 26 35 10996783 11086990 11182125 11282374 25 36
10998247 11088536 11183753 11284089 24 37 10999712 11090082 11185383 11285805
23 38 11001179 11091629 11187014 11287524 22 39 11002647 11093178 11188647
11289244 21 40 11004116 11094729 11190281 11290965 20 41 11005587 11096280
11191916 11292688 19 42 11007059 11097833 11193553 11294412 18 43 11008533
11099387 11195191 11296132 17 44 11010008 11100943 11196831 11297864 16 45
11011484 1110250^ 11198472 11299593 15 46 11019262 11104058 11200114 11301324
14 47 11014441 11105618 11201758 11303056 13 48 11015921 11107179 11203404
11304789 12 49 11017402 11108741 11205051 11306523 11 50 11018884 11110306
11206700 11308259 10 51 11020367 11111871 11208550 11309996 9 52 11021852
11113438 11210001 11311735 8 53 11023338 11115006 11211654 11313476 7 54
11024826 11116575 11213308 11315218 6 55 11026315 11118145 11214963 11316961 5
56 11027806 11119717 11216620 11318706 4 57 11029298 11121290 11218278 11319452
3 58 11030791 11122865 11219938 11322199 2 59 11032287 11124442 11221599
11323949 1 60 11033783 11126021 11223262 11325700 0 65 64 63 62 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 28 29 30 31 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 11325700
11433540 11547004 11666331 60 1 11327452 11435384 11548944 11668371 59 2
11329206 11437230 11550886 11670413 58 3 11330961 11439078 11552829 11672457 57
4 11332718 11440927 11554774 11674502 56 5 11334479 11442777 11556720 11676548
55 6 11336237 11444629 11558669 11678597 54 7 11337999 11446483 11560619
11680647 53 8 11339762 11448339 11562570 11682698 52 9 11341526 11450196
11564523 11684752 51 10 11343292 11452054 11566480 11686807 50 11 11345060
11453915 11568434 11688864 49 12 11346830 11455776 11570393 11690923 48 13
11348601 11457639 11572353 11692984 47 14 11350373 11459503 11574314 11695046
46 15 11352149 11461370 11576277 11697110 45 16 11353923 11463238 11578242
11699176 44 17 11355698 11465107 11580208 11701243 43 18 11357475 11466978
11582175 11703312 42 19 11359255 11468850 11584145 11705383 41 20 11361036
11470723 11586116 11707455 40 21 11362819 11472599 11588089 11709530 39 22
11364603 11474483 11590064 11711606 38 23 11366389 11476354 11592040 11713684
37 24 11368177 11478235 11594018 11715764 36 25 11369966 11480117 11595998
11717845 35 26 11371756 11482001 11597979 11719928 34 27 11373548 11483887
11599961 11722012 33 28 11375341 11485774 11601946 11724099 32 29 11377136
11487662 11603932 11726187 31 30 11378933 11489353 11605919 11728276 30 31
11380731 11491445 11607909 11730367 29 32 11382530 11493338 11609900 11732460
28 33 11384331 11495233 11611893 11734555 27 34 11386134 11497140 11613888
11736652 26 35 11387938 11499028 11615876 11738751 25 36 11389744 11500928
11617882 11740851 24 37 11391551 11502829 11619881 11742953 23 38 11393359
15504731 11621882 11745057 22 39 11395169 11506626 11623885 11747162 21 40
11396981 11508532 11625889 11749269 20 41 11398794 11510450 11627996 11751378
19 42 11400609 11512360 11629904 11753489 18 43 11402425 11514271 11631913
11755603 17 44 11404243 11516183 11633924 11757718 16 45 11406063 11518097
11635937 11759834 15 46 11407884 11520013 11637952 11761951 14 47 11409706
11521930 11639968 11764069 13 48 11411530 11523849 11641986 11766190 12 49
11413356 11525770 11644005 11768312 11 50 11415183 11527692 11646026 11770437
10 51 11417012 11529616 11648049 11772564 9 52 11418842 11531542 11650075
11774696 8 53 11420673 11533469 11652099 11776822 7 54 11422507 11535398
11654127 11778954 6 55 11424342 11537328 11656156 11781088 5 56 11426178
11539260 11658188 11783223 4 57 11428016 11541193 11660221 11785361 3 58
11429856 11543128 11662256 11787500 2 59 11431689 11545065 11664292 11789640 1
60 11433540 11547004 11666331 11791783 0 61 60 59 58 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 32 33 34 35 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 11791783
11923633 12062179 12207745 60 1 11793927 11925886 12064546 12210233 59 2
11796073 11928141 12066916 12212723 58 3 11798221 11930397 12069286 12215214 57
4 11800371 11932656 12071660 12217708 56 5 11802522 11934917 12074036 12220204
55 6 11804675 11937180 12076413 12222702 54 7 11806830 11939445 12078792
12225201 53 8 11808987 11941701 12081174 12227703 52 9 11811145 11943979
12083558 12230207 51 10 11813306 11946250 12085943 12232713 50 11 11815468
11948522 12088330 12235221 49 12 11817632 11950796 12090720 12237732 48 13
11819797 11953071 12093111 12240245 47 14 11821965 11955349 12095504 12242759
46 15 11824134 11957629 12097899 12245275 45 16 11826306 11959910 12100296
12247794 44 17 11828479 11962194 12102696 12250315 43 18 11830654 11964479
12105097 12252837 42 19 11832830 11966766 12107500 12255361 41 20 11835008
11969055 12109905 12257888 40 21 11837188 11971346 12112312 12260417 39 22
11839369 11973638 12114722 12262948 38 23 11841552 11975932 12117133 12265481
37 24 11843737 11978229 12119546 12268016 36 25 11845924 11980527 12121960
12270553 35 26 11848114 11982828 12124377 12273093 34 27 11850305 11985131
12126796 12275634 33 28 11852498 11987435 12129216 12278187 32 29 11854693
11989741 12131638 12280722 31 30 11856890 11992050 12134063 12283270 30 31
11859088 11994360 12136490 12285820 29 32 11861288 11996672 12138919 12288372
28 33 11863489 11998986 12141350 12290925 27 34 11865693 12001303 12143783
12293481 26 35 11867899 12003619 12146218 12296039 25 36 11870107 12005938
12148656 12298599 24 37 11872316 12008259 12150095 12301161 23 38 11874527
12010582 12153536 12303725 22 39 11876739 12012907 12155978 12306291 21 40
11878954 12015233 12158423 12308859 20 41 11881171 12017562 12160870 12311430
19 42 11883389 12019893 12163319 12314003 18 43 11885609 12022226 12165770
12316578 17 44 11887831 12024560 12168223 12319156 16 45 11890054 12026897
12170677 12321736 15 46 11892280 12029236 12173135 12324317 14 47 11894508
12031576 12175594 12326900 13 48 11896737 12033919 12178055 12329486 12 49
11898968 12036264 12180518 12332074 11 50 11901202 12038610 12182983 12334664
10 51 11903437 12040958 12185450 12337256 9 52 11905674 12043309 12187919
12339851 8 53 11907912 12045661 12190390 12342448 7 54 11910153 12048016
12192864 12345046 6 55 11912395 12050372 12195340 12347646 5 56 11914640
12052730 12197817 12350^49 4 57 11916886 12055089 12200296 12352854 3 58
11919133 12057451 12202777 12355460 2 59 11921382 12059814 12205260 12358068 1
60 11923633 12063179 12207745 12360678 0 57 56 55 54 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 36 37 38 39 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 12360678
12521357 12690184 12867599 60 1 12363290 12524103 12693070 12870632 59 2
12365906 12526851 12695957 12873667 58 3 12368524 12529601 12698847 12876704 57
4 12371144 12532354 12701739 12879744 56 5 12373766 12535110 12704634 12882787
55 6 12376391 12537867 12707531 12885832 54 7 12379018 12540627 12710430
12888879 53 8 12381647 12543389 12713332 12891929 52 9 12384278 12546152
12716236 12894982 51 10 12386911 12548918 12719143 12898035 50 11 12389546
12551686 12722052 12901094 49 12 12^92183 12554456 12724964 12904155 48 13
12394822 12557229 12727878 12907218 47 14 12397464 12560005 12730794 12910283
46 15 12400108 12562783 12733713 12913351 45 16 12402754 12565563 12736635
12916422 44 17 12405402 12568345 12739559 12919494 43 18 12408053 12571130
12742485 12922569 42 19 12410705 12573917 12745413 12925647 41 20 12413359
12576706 12748344 12928727 40 21 12416015 12579597 12751277 12931809 39 22
12418674 12582912 12754213 12934895 38 23 12421335 12585087 12757151 12937983
37 24 12423998 12587885 12760092 12941073 36 25 12426663 12590685 12763035
12944166 35 26 12429331 12593488 12765981 12947262 34 27 12432001 12596293
12768929 12950360 33 28 12434673 12599101 12771880 12953461 32 29 12437348
12601911 12774833 12956565 31 30 12440024 12604724 12777788 12959671 30 31
12442702 12607539 12780746 12962780 29 32 12445383 12610356 12783707 12965892
28 33 12448066 12613175 12786670 12969007 27 34 12450751 12615997 12789635
12972124 26 35 12453438 12618821 12792602 12975243 25 36 12456128 12621648
12795573 12978366 24 37 12458821 12624477 12798546 12981491 23 38 12461516
12627308 12801521 12984618 22 39 12464213 12630141 12804498 12987747 21 40
12466913 12632977 12807478 12990880 20 41 12469614 12635815 12810460 12994015
19 42 12472317 12638655 12813445 12997153 18 43 12475022 12641597 12816432
13000293 17 44 12477730 12644343 12819422 13003436 16 45 12480440 12646191
12822415 13006582 15 46 12483152 12650041 12825410 13009730 14 47 12485866
12652893 12828407 13012881 13 48 12488583 12655748 12831407 13016034 12 49
12491302 12658605 12834409 13019189 11 50 12494022 12661464 12837414 13022348
10 51 12496743 12664325 12840421 13025509 9 52 12499469 12667189 12843431
13028673 8 53 12502197 12670055 12846443 13031839 7 54 12504927 12672924
12849458 13035008 6 55 12507659 12675795 12852475 13038180 5 56 12510394
12678668 12855495 13041354 4 57 12513132 12681543 12858517 13044530 3 58
12515871 12684421 12861542 13047710 2 59 12518613 12687301 12864569 13050892 1
60 12521357 12690184 12867599 13054077 0 53 52 51 50 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 40 41 42 43 The minutes of degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadra^t.
0 13054077 13250131 13456326 13673275 60 1 13057264 13253482 13459851 13676986
59 2 13060455 13256835 13463380 13680700 58 3 13063646 13260192 13466912
13684417 57 4 13066843 13263582 13470447 13688138 56 5 13070041 13266915
13473985 13691861 55 6 13073242 13270282 13477527 13695587 54 7 13076445
13273651 13481071 13699316 53 8 13079651 13277023 13484618 13703048 52 9
13082859 13280397 13488168 13706783 51 10 13086071 13283775 13491721 13710523
50 11 13089285 13287155 13495276 13714266 49 12 13092502 13290538 13498835
13718012 48 13 13095721 13293924 13502397 13721761 47 14 13098944 13297313
13505962 13725514 46 15 13102169 13300704 13509530 13729270 45 16 13105397
13304098 13513101 13733029 44 17 13108627 13307495 13516675 13736790 43 18
13111861 13310896 13520252 13740555 42 19 13114098 13314299 13523832 13744322
41 20 13118337 13317705 13527416 13748092 40 21 13121578 13321114 13531003
13751867 39 22 13124823 13324526 13534593 13755644 38 23 13128070 13327941
13538185 13759424 37 24 13131320 13331359 13541781 13763209 36 25 13134572
13334779 13545380 13766997 35 26 13134828 13338203 13548981 13770788 34 27
13141085 13341629 13552585 13774582 33 28 13144346 13345058 13556193 13778380
32 29 13147509 13348490 13559803 13782181 31 30 13150874 13351924 13563417
13785985 30 31 13154142 13355361 13567034 13789792 29 32 13157413 13358802
13570654 13793603 28 33 13160687 13362245 13574277 13797416 27 34 13163964
13365691 13577903 13801233 26 35 13167243 13369140 13581532 13805053 25 36
13170526 13372592 13585164 13808876 24 37 13173811 13376057 13588799 13812703
23 38 13177099 13379505 13592438 13816534 22 39 13180389 13382966 13596079
13820368 21 40 13183682 13386430 13599723 13824205 20 41 13186978 13389897
13603370 13828045 19 42 13190276 13393367 13607021 13831889 18 43 13193577
13396839 13610975 13835736 17 44 13196882 13400315 13614332 13839586 16 45
13200189 13403794 13617992 13843439 15 46 13203499 13407275 13621656 13847296
14 47 13206812 13410759 13625323 13851156 13 48 13210128 13414247 13628993
13855019 12 49 13213447 13417738 13632666 13858885 11 50 13216769 13421232
13636342 13862755 10 51 13220093 13424728 13640021 13866628 9 52 13223421
13428227 13643704 13870505 8 53 13226750 13431729 13647390 13874385 7 54
13230082 13435234 13651078 13878268 6 55 13233417 13438742 13654769 13882154 5
56 13236754 13442253 13658464 13886044 4 57 13240094 13445767 13662162 13889636
3 58 13243437 13449284 13665863 13893833 2 59 13246783 13452804 13669567
13897733 1 60 13250131 13456326 13673275 13901636 0 49 48 47 46 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 44 45 46 47 The minutes of degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadra^t.
0 13901636 14142135 14395564 14662790 60 1 13905542 14146251 14399901 14667366
59 2 13909451 14150371 14404242 14671946 58 3 13913365 14154494 14408587
14676530 57 4 13917281 14158621 14412937 14681119 56 5 13921201 14162751
14417290 14685712 55 6 13925126 14166884 14421647 14690309 54 7 13929052
14171021 14426008 14694910 53 8 13932982 14175162 14430374 14699514 52 9
13936916 14179306 14434743 14704122 51 10 13940854 14183454 14439116 14708735
50 11 13944795 14187606 14443493 14713352 49 12 13948739 14191761 14447874
14717973 48 13 13952686 14195919 14452259 14722598 47 14 13956638 14200082
14456648 14727228 46 15 13960592 14204248 14461040 14731862 45 16 13964550
14208418 14465437 14736500 44 17 13968511 14212591 14469838 14741142 43 18
13972476 14216769 14474242 14745788 42 19 13976444 14220950 14478650 14750438
41 20 13980416 14225135 14483062 14755094 40 21 13984391 14229324 14487478
14759753 39 22 13988370 14233517 14491898 14764416 38 23 13992352 14237713
14496322 14769083 37 24 13996338 14241913 14500750 14773755 36 25 14000327
14246115 14505182 14778430 35 26 14004319 14250321 14509617 14783110 34 27
14008315 14254531 14514056 14787794 33 28 14012314 14258745 14518500 14792482
32 29 14016316 14262961 14522946 14797174 31 30 14020322 14267182 14527397
14801871 30 31 14024332 14271407 14531852 14806571 29 32 14028345 14275635
14536311 14811276 28 33 14032361 14279867 14540773 14815985 27 34 14036381
14284103 14545250 14820698 26 35 14040404 14288343 14549711 14825416 25 36
14044431 14292587 14554186 14830139 24 37 14048461 14296834 14558665 14834866
23 38 14052494 14301086 14563148 14839597 22 39 14056531 14305331 14567635
14844332 21 40 14060572 14309599 14572126 14849072 20 41 14064616 14313861
14576621 14853815 19 42 14068664 14318127 14581120 14858563 18 43 14072715
14322396 14585624 14863315 17 44 14076770 14326670 14590131 14868071 16 45
14080829 14330947 14594642 14872831 15 46 14084891 14335228 14599157 14877597
14 47 14088956 14339513 14603676 14882377 13 48 14093026 14343802 14608199
14887141 12 49 14097099 14348095 14612725 14891919 11 50 14101175 14352391
14617256 14896701 10 51 14105255 14356691 14621791 14901487 9 52 14109339
14360995 14626330 14906278 8 53 14113427 14365303 14630873 14911073 7 54
14117518 14369615 14635421 14915873 6 55 14121612 14373930 14639973 14920677 5
56 14125709 14378350 14644528 14925486 4 57 14129810 14382573 14649087 14930299
3 58 14133915 14386900 14653651 14935116 2 59 14138023 14391230 14658218
14939938 1 60 14142135 14395564 14662790 14944764 0 45 44 43 42 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 48 49 50 51 The minutes of degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the co^plements of the Arches of the same Quadra^t.
0 14944764 15242532 15557239 15890158 60 1 14949594 15247634 15562635 15895869
59 2 14954429 15252741 15568036 15091586 58 3 14959268 15257852 15573441
15907307 57 4 14964112 15262969 15578852 15913034 56 5 14968960 15268090
15584267 15918766 55 6 14973812 15273216 15589688 15924504 54 7 14978668
15278347 15595114 15930247 53 8 14983530 15283484 15600545 15936095 52 9
14988396 15288626 15605981 15941748 51 10 14993266 15293773 15611422 15947508
50 11 14998104 15298924 15616868 15953273 49 12 15003020 15304080 15622319
15959044 48 13 15007903 15309240 15627775 15964820 47 14 15012791 15314405
15633237 15970603 46 15 15017683 15319574 15639704 15976390 45 16 15022580
15324748 15644177 15982184 44 17 15027481 15329926 15649655 15987983 43 18
15032387 15335109 15655138 15993788 42 19 15037297 15340297 15660626 15999599
41 20 15042212 15345491 15666119 16005416 40 21 15047131 15350689 15671617
16011237 39 22 15052054 15355892 15677121 16017065 38 23 15056982 15361100
15682630 16022898 37 24 15061915 15366313 15688144 16028736 36 25 15066852
15371530 15693663 16034579 35 26 15071791 15376753 15699188 16040429 34 27
15076739 15381980 15704717 16046283 33 28 15081690 15387212 15710252 16052143
32 29 15086645 15392449 15715791 16058008 31 30 15091605 15397692 15721337
16063878 30 31 15096569 15402939 15726887 16069754 29 32 15101538 15408191
15732443 16075637 28 33 15106571 15413447 15738003 16081524 27 34 15111490
15418708 15743569 16087418 26 35 15116472 15423974 15749141 16093318 25 36
15121459 15429246 15754718 16099224 24 37 15126451 15434522 15760300 16105135
23 38 15131447 15439803 15765887 16111053 22 39 15136447 15445089 15771479
16116976 21 40 15141453 15450380 15777077 16122905 20 41 15146463 15455675
15782680 16128839 19 42 15151478 15460976 15788289 16134779 18 43 15156497
15466182 15793903 16140424 17 44 15161520 15471593 15799523 16146676 16 45
15166548 15476908 15805147 16152634 15 46 15171581 15482229 15810777 16158598
14 47 15176619 15487554 15816412 16164567 13 48 15181661 15492885 15822052
16170542 12 49 15186708 15498220 15827697 16176522 11 50 15191760 15503560
15833349 16182509 10 51 15196816 15508905 15839005 16188501 9 52 15201877
15514256 15844667 16194499 8 53 15206943 15519611 15850335 16200503 7 54
15212013 15524972 15856008 16206513 6 55 15217088 15530338 15861676 16212528 5
56 15222168 15535710 15867370 16218550 4 57 15227253 15541083 15873058 16224577
3 58 15232342 15546463 15878753 16230610 2 59 15237435 15551848 15884453
16236648 1 60 15242532 15557239 15890158 16242692 0 41 40 39 38 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 52 53 54 55 The minutes of degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the co^plements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.
0 16242692 16616401 17013017 17434469 30 1 16248742 16622819 17019832 17441715
29 2 16254799 16629243 17026654 17448968 28 3 16260861 16635673 17033482
17456229 27 4 16266929 16642109 17040318 17463499 26 5 16273003 16648551
17047160 17470775 25 6 16279083 16655001 17054010 17478059 24 7 16285169
16661457 17060866 17485351 23 8 16291261 16667919 17067729 17492650 22 9
16297358 16674408 17074599 17499957 21 10 16303461 16680864 17081476 17507272
20 11 16309570 16687345 17088359 17514594 19 12 16315685 16693834 17095250
17521924 18 13 16321806 16700328 17102148 17529262 17 14 16327934 16706829
17109053 17536607 16 15 16334067 16713336 17115965 17543959 15 16 16340197
16719850 171^2885 17551319 14 17 16346353 16726362 17129812 17558687 13 18
16352505 16732877 17136747 17566063 12 19 16358663 16739430 17143689 17573446
11 20 16364827 16745970 17150638 17580837 10 21 16370996 16752517 17157593
17588236 9 22 16377172 16759070 17164556 17595643 8 23 16383359 16765629
17171525 17603057 7 24 16389542 16772195 17178502 17610480 6 25 16395736
16778767 17185485 17617909 5 26 16401936 16785347 17192476 17625347 4 27
16408152 16791933 17199472 17632793 3 28 16414365 16798525 17206477 17640246 2
29 16420573 16805124 17213488 17647707 1 30 16426798 16811729 17220507 17655175
60 31 16433027 16818341 17227532 17662651 59 32 16439263 16824960 17234565
17670136 58 33 16445505 16831585 17241605 17677627 57 34 16451754 16838217
17248653 17685127 56 35 16458008 16844856 17255708 17692635 55 36 16464269
16851502 17262770 17700151 54 37 16470536 16858154 17269839 17707674 53 38
16476809 16864813 17276917 17715206 52 39 16483089 16871479 17284002 17722744
51 40 16489385 16878151 17291095 17730290 50 41 16495668 16884830 17298194
17737844 49 42 16501967 16891515 17305300 17745407 48 43 16508272 16898207
17312413 17752978 47 44 16514582 16904907 17319514 17760555 46 45 16520898
16911613 17326662 17768142 45 46 15527220 16918326 17333798 17775740 44 47
16533548 16925046 17340941 17783343 43 48 16539883 16931772 17348091 17790955
42 49 16546224 16948504 17355249 17798575 41 50 16552571 16945244 17362415
17806203 40 51 16558920 16951990 17369587 17813838 39 52 16565286 16958743
17376767 17821481 38 53 16571642 16965498 17383954 17829132 37 54 16578026
16972270 17391148 17836792 36 55 16584406 16979044 17398350 17844460 35 56
16590792 16985824 17405560 17852135 34 57 16597184 16992611 17412776 17859818
33 58 16603584 16999406 17420000 17867509 32 59 16609989 17006208 17427231
17875209 31 60 16616401 17013017 17434469 17882917 30 37 36 35 34 The degrees
of the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 56 57 58 59 The minutes of degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadra^t.
0 17882917 18360816 18870800 19416039 60 1 17890632 18369014 18879589 19425445
59 2 17898356 18377251 18888389 19434862 58 3 17906089 18385497 18897196
19444290 57 4 17913830 18393753 18906018 19453727 56 5 17921579 18402017
18914846 19463175 55 6 17929337 18410291 18923685 19472635 54 7 17937102
18418574 18932534 19482114 53 8 17944876 18426865 18941393 19491595 52 9
17952658 18435165 18950261 19501076 51 10 17960448 18443454 18959139 19510578
50 11 17968247 18451792 18968027 19520091 49 12 17976054 18460120 18976926
19529615 48 13 17983869 18468456 18985834 19539150 47 14 17991693 18476802
18994752 19548697 46 15 17999525 18485157 19003680 19558254 45 16 18007365
18493521 19012618 19567822 44 17 18015214 18501895 19021516 19577401 43 18
18023071 18510278 19030523 19586991 42 19 18030936 18518670 19039491 19596592
41 20 18038811 18527072 19048468 19606204 40 21 18046693 18535483 19057455
19615827 39 22 18054584 18543903 19066453 19625462 38 23 18062482 18552332
19075461 19635107 37 24 18070389 18560770 19084480 19644765 36 25 18078305
18569217 19093509 19654434 35 26 18086229 18577674 19102549 19664114 34 27
18094161 18586139 19111598 19673805 33 28 18102102 18594614 19120658 19683507
32 29 18110051 18603098 19129727 19693220 31 30 18118009 18611591 19138807
19702945 30 31 18125975 18620094 19147897 19712680 29 32 18133950 18629606
19156998 19722428 28 33 18141934 18637127 19166109 19732186 27 34 18149926
18645658 19175231 19741956 26 35 18157927 18654198 19184362 19751738 25 36
18165937 18662748 19193504 19761531 24 37 18173956 18671507 19202656 19771335
23 38 18181984 18679875 19211818 19781141 22 39 18190021 18688452 19220990
19790968 21 40 18198065 18697038 19230172 19800808 20 41 18206118 18705634
19239365 19810658 19 42 18214179 18714239 19248569 19820320 18 43 18222249
18722854 19257783 19830393 17 44 18230328 18731480 19267008 19840277 16 45
18238416 18740115 19276242 19850172 15 46 18246513 18748760 19285488 19860079
14 47 18254618 18757414 19294744 19869997 13 48 18262732 18766078 19304010
19879927 12 49 18270854 18774752 19313287 19889068 11 50 18278986 18783436
19322574 19899820 10 51 18287126 18792130 19331872 19909784 9 52 18295276
18800833 19341181 19919760 8 53 18303434 18809546 19350501 19929748 7 54
18211601 ^8818268 19359831 19939749 6 55 18319776 18826999 19369172 19949760 5
56 18327961 18835741 19378524 19959784 4 57 18337154 18844492 19387886 19966820
3 58 18344356 18853252 19397260 19979868 2 59 18352567 18862021 19406644
19989928 1 60 18360816 18870800 19416939 20000000 0 33 32 31 30 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 60 61 62 63 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 20000000
20626654 21300545 22026892 60 1 20010083 20637484 21312206 22039475 59 2
20020179 20648338 21323882 22052074 58 3 20030285 20659184 21335570 22064690 57
4 20040404 20670054 21347275 22077322 56 5 20050534 20680937 21358993 22089970
55 6 20060676 20691834 21370727 22102635 54 7 20070832 20702744 21382475
22115316 53 8 20080995 20713667 21394238 22128014 52 9 20091172 20724603
21407016 22140728 51 10 20101361 20735554 21417808 22153459 50 11 20111562
20746517 21429615 22166204 49 12 20121776 20757494 21441438 22178971 48 13
20132001 20768484 21453275 22191751 47 14 20142239 20779488 21465128 22204548
46 15 20152489 20790505 21476995 22217361 45 16 20162751 20801535 21488877
22230191 44 17 20173035 20812579 21500774 22243038 43 18 20183321 20823636
21512686 22255902 42 19 20193619 20834706 21524612 22268782 41 20 20203930
20845791 21536553 22281680 40 21 20214252 20856888 21548509 22294595 39 22
20224588 20868000 21560481 22307526 38 23 20234936 20879125 21572467 22320474
37 24 20245296 20890264 21584469 22333439 36 25 20255669 20901416 21596487
22346420 35 26 20266054 20912582 21608520 22359419 34 27 20276452 20923761
21620568 22372434 33 28 20286863 20934955 21632631 22385466 32 29 20297286
20946162 21644710 22398418 31 30 20307721 20957383 21656804 22411584 30 31
20318170 20968618 21668913 22424667 29 32 20328630 20979867 21681038 22437768
28 33 20339102 20991130 21693178 22450886 27 34 20349587 21002406 21705334
22464022 26 35 20360084 21013696 21717505 22477175 25 36 20370594 21025001
21729691 22490346 24 37 20381116 21036319 21741893 22503543 23 38 20391751
21047651 21754111 22516748 22 39 20402198 21058997 21766344 22529965 21 40
20412758 21070357 21778593 22543201 20 41 20423331 21081731 21790858 22556358
19 42 20433916 21093119 21803138 22569723 18 43 20444514 21104522 21815434
22583025 17 44 20455126 21115938 21827745 22596336 16 45 20465750 21127368
21840072 22609663 15 46 20476387 21138814 21852415 22623009 14 47 20487037
21150273 21864774 22636372 13 48 20497700 21161747 21877149 22649754 12 49
20508376 21173235 21889539 22663152 11 50 20519064 21184737 21901946 22676569
10 51 20529765 21196253 21914369 22690004 9 52 20540479 21207783 21926808
22703456 8 53 20551205 21219328 21939263 22716924 7 54 20561945 21230887
21951734 22730414 6 55 20572697 21242460 21964220 22743919 5 56 20583463
21254048 21976722 22757443 4 57 20594242 21265650 21989240 22770984 3 58
20605033 21277267 22001775 22784543 2 59 20615837 21288899 22014325 22798120 1
60 20626654 21300545 22026892 22811726 0 29 28 27 26 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 64 65 66 67 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 22811726
23662013 24585936 25593051 60 1 22825329 23676784 24602010 25610602 59 2
22838962 23691575 24618107 25628180 58 3 22852612 23706387 24634227 25645783 57
4 22866281 23721220 24650370 25663414 56 5 22879968 23736073 24666536 25681071
55 6 22893674 23750947 24682727 25698754 54 7 22907387 23765842 24698940
25716464 53 8 22921140 23780757 24715178 25734201 52 9 22934901 23795692
24731439 25751965 51 10 22948680 23810648 24747724 25769755 50 11 22962478
23825625 24764033 25787582 49 12 22976294 23840623 24780365 25805417 48 13
22990129 23805642 24796721 25823287 47 14 23003983 23870683 24813101 25841185
46 15 23017855 23885844 24829504 25859104 45 16 23031747 23900827 24845932
25877061 44 17 23045657 23915931 24862383 25895040 43 18 23059586 23931055
24879958 25913046 42 19 23073534 23946200 24895356 25931080 41 20 23087501
23961366 24911878 25949142 40 21 23101486 23976553 24928423 25967230 39 22
23115490 23991762 24944993 25985345 38 23 23129513 24006992 24961587 26003487
37 24 23143556 24022245 24978^05 26021658 36 25 23157616 24037518 24994847
26039855 35 26 23171696 24052814 25011514 26058081 34 27 23185795 24068130
25028205 26076333 33 28 23199913 24083469 25044920 26094614 32 29 23214050
24098850 25061660 26112923 31 30 23228205 24114213 25078426 26131259 30 31
23242380 24129616 25095216 26149623 29 32 23256574 24145041 25112030 26168015
28 33 23270797 24160487 25128869 26186436 27 34 23285021 24175956 25145732
26204884 26 35 23299273 24191445 25162620 26223361 25 36 23313546 24206956
25179532 26241867 24 37 23327838 24222488 25196469 26260400 23 38 23342150
24238043 25213432 26278963 22 39 23356481 24253619 25230418 26297555 21 40
23370832 24269217 25247431 26316176 20 41 23385203 24284838 25264468 26334825
19 42 23399593 24300481 25281531 26353503 18 43 23414003 24316147 25298620
26372209 17 44 23428433 24331835 25315734 26390945 16 45 23442882 24347546
25332874 26409709 15 46 23457351 24363281 25350039 26428502 14 47 23471840
24379038 25367229 26447323 13 48 23486348 24394818 25384445 26366174 12 49
23500876 24410620 25401687 26485053 11 50 23515424 24426446 25418956 26503962
10 51 23529992 24442294 25436250 26522890 9 52 23544580 24458164 25453570
26541867 8 53 23559188 24474056 25470915 26560863 7 54 23573817 24489973
25488286 26579889 6 55 23588565 24505908 25505683 26598945 5 56 23603134
24521869 25523005 26618030 4 57 23617822 24537851 25540553 26637145 3 58
23632532 24553857 255580^7 26656251 2 59 23647262 24569885 25575526 26675466 1
60 23662013 24585936 25593051 26694672 0 25 24 23 22 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 68 69 70 71 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 26694672
27904284 29238045 30715531 60 1 26713907 27925445 29261433 30741500 59 2
26733172 27946642 29284861 30767516 58 3 26752467 27967873 29308328 30793579 57
4 26771791 27989139 29331835 30819689 56 5 26791145 28010440 29355382 30845846
55 6 26810529 28031776 29378970 30872051 54 7 26829942 28053147 29402599
30898304 53 8 26849390 28074553 29426268 30924605 52 9 26868867 28095994
29449978 30950953 51 10 26888373 28117469 29473728 30977350 50 11 26907910
28138980 29497519 31003793 49 12 26927479 28160527 29521350 31030285 48 13
26947078 28182108 29545222 31056824 47 14 26966709 28203725 29569136 31083412
46 15 29986370 28225378 29593090 31110047 45 16 27006062 28247067 29617087
31136731 44 17 27025785 28268793 29641124 31163462 43 18 27045539 28290553
29665204 31190241 42 19 27065323 28312349 29689326 31217019 41 20 27085138
28334181 29713488 31243945 40 21 27104985 28356049 29737692 31270871 39 22
27124864 28377954 29761938 31297848 38 23 27144774 28399894 29786227 31324873
37 24 27164717 28421871 29810558 31351948 36 25 27184690 28443884 29834931
31379072 35 26 27204686 28465934 29859347 31406247 34 27 27224734 28488021
29883705 31433472 33 28 27244804 28510144 29908306 31460747 32 29 27264906
28532304 29932850 31488072 31 30 27285040 28554501 29957438 31515448 30 31
27305205 28576735 29982069 31542873 29 32 27325402 28599007 30006743 31570349
28 33 27345631 28621316 30031460 31597875 27 34 27365893 28643662 30056220
31625453 26 35 27386186 28666045 30081023 31653080 25 36 17406513 28688467
30105870 31680758 24 37 27426872 28710925 30130760 31708486 23 38 27447264
28733422 30155714 31736265 22 39 27467688 28755956 30180672 31764094 21 40
27488145 28778549 30205694 31791974 20 41 27508635 28801139 30230760 31819906
19 42 27529157 28823787 30255871 31847891 18 43 27549722 28846473 30281026
31875929 17 44 27570301 28869196 30306226 31904019 16 45 27590922 28891957
30331460 31932164 15 46 27611578 28914756 30356759 31960358 14 47 27632266
28937594 30382092 31988606 13 48 27952989 28960471 30407470 32016909 12 49
27673745 28983386 30432893 32045263 11 50 27694535 29006340 30458361 32073672
10 51 27715358 29029332 30483873 32102132 9 52 27736215 29052363 30509430
32130649 8 53 27757105 29075435 30535033 32159212 7 54 27778029 29098546
30560682 32187832 6 55 27798987 29121697 30586375 32216504 5 56 27819978
29144888 30612115 32245231 4 57 27841003 29168^18 30637890 32274012 3 58
27862060 29191388 30663732 32302846 2 59 27883156 29214697 30689608 32331735 1
60 27904284 29238045 30715531 32360678 0 21 20 19 18 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 72 73 74 75 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 32360678
34203038 36279559 38637042 60 1 32389676 34235609 36316402 38679033 59 2
32418726 34268245 36353333 38721117 58 3 32447837 34300947 36390323 38763296 57
4 32477001 34333716 36427401 38805571 56 5 32506219 34366553 36464558 38847941
55 6 32535494 34399452 36501793 ^8890408 54 7 32564823 34432420 36539107
38932971 53 8 32594209 34465456 36570511 38975632 52 9 32623651 34498557
36613973 39018390 51 10 32653148 34531726 36651525 39061246 50 11 32682701
34564959 36689156 39104200 49 12 32712311 34598259 36726868 39147252 48 13
32741977 34631626 36764660 39190423 47 14 32771699 34665061 36802533 39233653
46 15 32801478 34698564 36840488 39277002 45 16 32831314 34732135 36878524
39320449 44 17 32861207 34765775 36916641 39363994 43 18 32891157 34799483
36954842 39407640 42 19 32921165 34833259 36993127 39451384 41 20 32951231
34867105 37031496 39495228 40 21 32981355 34901024 37069947 39539172 39 22
33011537 34935005 37108482 39583218 38 23 33041776 34966052 37147101 39627364
37 24 33072074 35003172 37185803 39671613 36 25 33102431 35037361 37224589
39715965 35 26 33131846 35071621 37263459 39760420 34 27 33163320 35105952
37302413 39804979 33 28 33193853 35140354 37341453 39849642 32 29 33224444
35174826 37380577 39894411 31 30 33255094 35209369 37419788 39939226 30 31
33285803 35243981 37459081 39984263 29 32 33316571 35278664 37498460 40029344
28 33 33347398 35313418 37537923 40074528 27 34 33378286 35348244 37577471
40119816 26 35 33409132 35383140 37617104 40165289 25 36 33440240 35418110
37656824 40210709 24 37 33471307 35453152 37696632 40256316 23 38 33502436
35488268 37736518 40302033 22 39 33533625 35523456 37776513 40347858 21 40
33564875 35558718 37816588 40393792 20 41 33596187 35594052 37856751 40439834
19 42 33627561 35629460 37897004 40485985 18 43 33658998 35664940 37937146
40532245 17 44 33690497 35700494 37977779 40578613 16 45 33722059 35736121
38018300 40625091 15 46 33753683 35771822 38058912 40671678 14 47 33785370
35807597 38099614 40718374 13 48 33817120 35843447 38140406 40765180 12 49
33848934 35879373 38181288 40812093 11 50 33880813 35915374 38222261 40859121
10 51 33912753 35951451 38263324 40906259 9 52 33944756 35987602 38304479
40953510 8 53 33976821 36023829 38345725 41004876 7 54 34008950 36060132
38387064 41048358 6 55 34041141 36096510 38428495 41095957 5 56 34073395
36132966 38470019 41143668 4 57 34105712 36169497 38511635 41191492 3 58
34138091 36206107 38553344 41239431 2 59 34170523 36242794 38595146 41287425 1
60 34203038 36279559 38637042 41335654 0 17 16 15 14 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 76 77 78 79 The minutes of the Quadrant for the
Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 41335654
44454097 48097335 52408433 60 1 41383937 44510183 48163151 52486983 59 2
41432338 44566415 48229350 52565774 58 3 41480856 44622793 48295633 52644807 57
4 41529492 44679318 48362102 52724084 56 5 41578245 44735990 48428756 52803604
55 6 41627117 44792810 48495599 52883368 54 7 41676108 44849777 48562631
52963377 53 8 41725219 44906892 48629854 53043632 52 9 41774450 44964155
48697269 53124134 51 10 41823802 45021567 48764877 53204885 50 11 41873273
45079129 48832678 53285884 49 12 41922863 45136843 48900673 53367134 48 13
41972573 45194707 48968853 53448635 47 14 42022405 45252726 49037249 53530390
49 15 42072357 45310898 49105830 53612399 45 16 42122431 45369223 49174607
53694666 44 17 42172625 45427703 49243590 53777191 43 18 42222942 45486338
49312751 53859976 42 19 42273380 45545127 49382118 53943022 41 20 42323942
45604073 49451684 54026331 40 21 42374627 45663175 49521449 54109903 39 22
42425439 45722435 49591416 54193739 38 23 42476377 45781853 49661584 54277840
37 24 42527442 45841429 49731956 54362207 36 25 42578635 45901164 49802532
54446842 35 26 42629957 45961059 49873313 54531744 34 27 42681409 46021115
49944301 54616915 33 28 42732991 46081333 50015497 54702356 32 29 42784705
46141715 50086901 54788068 31 30 42836551 46202261 50158514 54874053 30 31
42888527 46262969 50230335 54960312 29 32 42940631 46323841 50302367 55046847
28 33 42992865 46384877 50374610 55133659 27 34 43045229 46446076 50447065
55220751 26 35 43097722 46507440 50519732 55308122 25 36 43150347 46568970
50592614 55395775 24 37 43203103 46630665 50665711 55483710 23 38 43255992
46692527 50739024 55571930 22 39 43309012 46754555 50812553 55660434 21 40
43362166 46816752 50886299 55749226 20 41 43415454 46879117 50960263 55838300
19 42 43468877 46941653 51034447 55927677 18 43 43522435 47004361 51108850
56017340 17 44 43576129 47067242 51183475 56107297 16 45 43629^5^ 47130297
51258321 56197549 15 46 43683925 47193526 51333391 56288099 14 47 43738728
47256930 51408684 56378948 13 48 43792268 47320509 51484204 56470097 12 49
43846646 47384264 51559951 56561548 11 50 43901162 47448195 51635936 56653302
10 51 43955817 47512302 51712129 56745360 9 52 44000612 47576586 51788563
56837723 8 53 44065548 47641048 51865227 56930392 7 54 44120625 47705689
51942124 57023369 6 55 44175844 47770510 52019254 57116653 5 56 44231207
47835511 52096618 57210246 4 57 44286712 47900693 52174216 57304150 3 58
44342362 47966058 52252051 57398367 2 59 44398156 48031605 52330123 57492896 1
60 44454097 48097385 52408433 57587740 0 13 12 11 10 The degrees of the
Quadrant for the Secants of the complement of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 80 81 82 83 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 57587740
63924495 71852975 82055127 60 1 57682901 64042118 72002006 82249986 59 2
57778381 64160180 72151659 82445779 58 3 57874180 64278683 72301942 82642513 57
4 57970302 64397632 72452863 82840196 56 5 58066748 64517028 72604421 83038833
55 6 58163520 64636873 72756618 83238436 54 7 58260619 64757168 72909461
83439009 53 8 58358049 64877918 73062954 83640561 52 9 58455^10 64999124
73217100 83843097 51 10 58553904 65120789 73371903 84046626 50 11 58652333
65242916 73527367 84251153 49 12 58751099 65365508 73683499 84456680 48 13
58850205 65488566 73840302 84663213 47 14 58949653 65612095 73997782 84870760
46 15 59049444 65736097 74155942 85079327 45 16 59149581 65859675 74314786
85288957 44 17 59250065 65985531 74474318 85499628 43 18 59350898 66110967
74634544 85711347 42 19 59452082 66246886 74795468 85924121 41 20 59553618
66363291 74957095 86137958 40 21 59655506 66490185 75119429 86352864 39 22
59757728 66617572 75282475 86568849 38 23 59860346 66745453 75446238 86785921
37 24 59963291 66873831 75610721 87004089 36 25 60066612 67002708 75775928
87223362 35 26 60170285 67132088 75941864 87443750 34 27 60274319 67261972
76108533 87665261 33 28 60378718 67392365 76275941 87887909 32 29 60483482
67523270 76444091 88111704 31 30 60588615 67654691 76612989 88336657 30 31
60694118 67786629 76782641 88562776 29 32 60799995 67919089 76953050 88790069
28 33 60906246 68052073 77124223 89018543 27 34 61012875 68185585 77296165
89248201 26 35 61119882 68319630 77468882 89479054 25 36 61227271 68454208
77642381 89711108 24 37 61335043 68589313 77816665 89944373 23 38 61443202
68724977 77991740 90178856 22 39 61551749 68861175 78167612 90414568 21 40
61660686 68997920 78344287 90651519 20 41 61770013 69135315 78521769 90889717
19 42 61879735 69273018 78700066 91129181 18 43 61989853 69411469 78879183
91369917 17 44 62100367 69550434 79059128 91611941 16 45 62211280 69689963
79239905 91855265 15 46 62322594 69830059 79421520 92099899 14 47 62434312
69970726 79603976 92345849 13 48 62546437 70111967 79787381 92593126 12 49
62658971 70253786 79971439 92841739 11 50 62771918 70396188 80156456 93091699
10 51 62885274 70539174 80342336 93342963 9 52 62999049 70682751 80529087
93595620 8 53 63113241 70826919 80716713 93849647 7 54 63227855 70971684
80905219 94105066 6 55 63342890 71117047 81094612 94361964 5 56 63458352
71263014 81284899 94620181 4 57 63574240 71409586 81476087 94879901 3 58
63690559 71556760 81668183 95141050 2 59 63807309 71704564 81861195 95403639 1
60 63924495 71852975 82055127 95667689 0 9 8 7 6 The degrees of the Quadrant
for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant.

The degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of the same
Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the
Arches of the same Quadrant. 84 85 86 The minutes of the Quadrant for the
Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 95867689
114737188 143355808 60 1 95933204 115^19970 143954694 59 2 96200195 115505313
144558602 58 3 96468673 115893242 145167595 57 4 96738655 116283797 145781740
57 5 97010253 116676991 146401101 55 6 97283267 117072851 147025745 54 7
97557932 117471403 147655740 53 8 97834057 117872815 148291169 52 9 98111843
118276840 148932108 51 10 98391211 118683794 149578791 50 11 98672171 119093414
150230942 49 12 98954738 119506013 150888966 48 13 99236930 119921335 15155^578
47 14 99524766 120339695 152222283 46 15 99812250 120760985 152897946 45 16
100101400 121185232 153579394 44 17 100392329 121612482 154267179 43 18
100684851 122042752 154961155 42 19 100979193 122476076 155661396 41 20
101275259 122912485 156368008 40 21 101572962 123352014 157081063 39 22
101872522 123794696 157800648 38 23 102173854 124240732 158526854 37 24
102476971 124689836 159259771 36 25 102781890 125142353 159999560 35 26
103088639 125598007 160746121 34 27 103397202 126057149 161499724 33 28
103707656 126519656 162260744 32 29 104019959 126985568 163028671 31 30
104334254 127454936 163804188 30 31 104650345 127927785 164586836 29 32
104968474 128404152 165377268 28 33 105288542 128884078 166175067 27 34
105610566 129367604 166980877 26 35 105934564 129854921 167794536 25 36
106260557 130345812 168615879 24 37 106588558 130840395 169445585 23 38
106918589 131338917 170283495 22 39 107250680 131841076 171129820 21 40
107584955 132347264 171984431 20 41 107921201 132857174 172847712 19 42
108259554 133371390 173719700 18 43 108600151 133889600 174600528 17 44
108942779 134411312 175490331 16 45 109287702 134937471 176389247 15 46
109634817 135467749 177297417 14 47 109984143 136002235 178215000 13 48
110335695 136540955 179142131 12 49 110689503 137083887 180078954 11 50
111045597 137631223 181025951 10 51 111403988 138183016 181982628 9 52
111764699 138739177 182949802 8 53 112127750 139299830 183926988 7 54 112493167
139865032 184915009 6 55 112861097 140435034 185913698 5 56 113231316 141009514
186922883 4 57 113604036 141588910 187943432 3 58 113979204 142172885 188975184
2 59 114356941 142761897 190018342 1 60 114737188 143355808 191073059 0 5 4 3
The degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of
the same Quadrant.

The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants of the Arches of
the same Quadrant. The minutes of the degrees of the Quadrant for the Secants
of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 87 88 89 The minutes of the Quadrant for
the Scants of the Complements of the Arches of the same Quadrant. 0 191073059
286537048 572987098 60 1 192139567 288943841 582696234 59 2 193218044 291391404
592740072 58 3 194308693 293880683 603139919 57 4 195411723 296413087 613907444
56 5 196527729 298990299 625070305 55 6 197656182 301611807 636642580 54 7
198797665 304279687 648655621 53 8 199952408 306996123 661126359 52 9 201120639
309760533 674090521 51 10 202303011 312576192 687573461 50 11 203498943
315442491 701612741 49 12 204709121 318361849 716229489 48 13 205934200
321336774 731453951 47 14 207173596 324366765 747356168 46 15 208428431
327455509 763965262 45 16 209698119 330602545 781323254 44 17 210983811
333811800 799494739 43 18 212284914 337082830 818524878 42 19 213602421
340419652 838490069 41 20 214936837 343823403 859453551 40 21 216287319
347294586 881484374 39 22 217655350 350837799 904682629 38 23 219040792
354454051 929134899 37 24 220443981 358145679 954945691 36 25 221865261
361914968 982231437 35 26 223305005 365763113 1011112129 34 27 224763453
369095332 1041753449 33 28 226241278 373713015 1074309940 32 29 227738558
377818975 1108967170 31 30 229255785 382016194 1145934768 30 31 230793360
386307709 1185438054 29 32 232351718 390696734 1227777193 28 33 233931261
395186630 1273252703 27 34 235532422 399780916 1322226495 26 35 237156211
404483275 1375118522 25 36 238801972 409397566 1432297932 24 37 240470730
414227875 1494678912 23 38 242163582 419278406 1562622042 22 39 243879838
424453607 1637036239 21 40 245621193 429758156 1718892212 20 41 247386980
435196961 1809365043 19 42 249178956 440775230 1909891150 18 43 250996450
446498305 2022234532 17 44 252841285 452371994 2148642981 16 45 254713463
458402271 2291895669 15 46 256612911 464595485 2455554199 14 47 258541565
470958329 2644450861 13 48 260499426 477497828 2864894681 12 49 262487160
484221619 3125282743 11 50 264505458 491139838 3437843546 10 51 266554348
498256113 3819709423 9 52 268635944 505581634 4297193536 8 53 270750304
513128395 4911255640 7 54 272898206 520901152 5729642566 6 55 275080457
528915798 6875687278 5 56 277297985 537178089 8594018365 4 57 279551349
545702599 11458691197 3 58 281841763 554505091 17188036598 2 59 284170013
563593031 34376072269 1 60 286537048 572987098 INFINITA 0 2 1 0 The degrees of
the Quadrant for the Secants of the complements of the Arches of the same
Quadrant.

A plain Treatise of the first principles of Cosmographie, and specially of
the Sphere, representing the shape of the whole world: Together with all the
chiefest and most necessary uses thereof, written by M. Blundevill of Newton
Flotman, Anno Dom. 1594

The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work. Psalm. 19. depiction of astrolabe

LONDON Printed by John Windet. 1594.

The exposition of certain terms or principles of Geometry.
MInding to treat of the principles of Cosmographie, and especially of the
Sphere, I think it good first to expound unto you certain terms of Geometry,
without the which the unlearned shall hardly understand the Contents of this
Treatise, which terms are certain principles of Geometry, called
definitions: For there are but three kinds of principles, whereon the
demonstration of all Geometrical conclusions depends: that is, definitions,
petitions, and maxims, but I mind here to deal only with certain
definitions, Whereof I will set down as many as I think needful for this
purpose, in such order as follows.

1 A point called in Latin punctus, is a thing supposed to be indivisible,
having neither length, breadth, nor deapth, as the point or prick a.



2 A line called in Lataine linea, is a supposed length, having neither breadth
nor thickness, as the line a. b.



3. The ends or bounds of a line, are two points, and of lines some be right,
and some be crooked.



4 A right line is that which goes right from one point to another, and not
bowingly as does the line c. d. but so straight as is possible, as the line a.
b. Again the crooked line is either a whole Circle, or portion of a Circle, or
else goes winding in and out, as a serpent called in Latin Linea tortuosa, or
else winding about like the shell of a Snaile, called of the Latins, linea
Spiralis, as these figures here do show.

A whole Circle

A Portion of a circle

Linea tortuosa.

Linea spiralis.



5 Superficies or vpperface, is that which only has length and breadth,
without deapth, which is twofould, that is to say, plain and crooked.

6 The bounds of superficies are lines.



7 A plain superficies is that which lies straight betwixt his lines, as the
figure a. and a crooked superficies is that which goes bowing and lies not
straight betwixt his lines as the figure b. Again superficies being considered
in an hollow body, as a barrel, tun, or vault, may be divided into two other
kinds, that is Conuexe, and Concaue, for the upper part of such vault is said
to be conuex, and ye inward part cancaue as the figure b. shows.

Conuex. Concaue.



8 A plain Angle is when two lines being drawn upon a plain superficies not
directly one against another, but so as by meeting or touching one an other in
one self point, they may make a plain Angle, as the Angle a. For if two lines
be drawn directly one against another, though they meet in one point, yet
they make no Angle, but rather one self line as the two lines a. b. meeting in
the point c.

Right. Crooked. Mixed.



9 Of plain Angles, some are called right line angles, because that both the
lines whereof it consists are right, and some are called crooked line angles,
because that both lines are crooked, and some are said to be mixed, because the
one line is crooked and the other right, as you may perceive by the three
sundry shapes thereof made in the Margent.



10 If one right line standing upon another right line do make two equal
angles, that is to say, of each side one, then either of those Angles is a right
Angle, and the line so standing upon his fellow, is called the perpendicular or
plumbe line, as the line a. b. standing upon the line c. d.



11 A blunt Angle, is that which is greater then a right Angle, as the Angle e.

12 A sharp Angle, is that which is lesser then a right Angle, as f. so as
there be in all three Angles, that is right, blunt, and sharp, in Latin
rectus, obtusus, and acutus: And besides these Angles, there be also certain
Sphericall, that is to say, round Angles, which consist of two circular lines,
drawn upon a Sphericall superficies, which do cross one another in some
point, either rightly, or obliquely: if rightly, then they make right Angles,
on each side of the point where they cross, as the figure E. shows, if
obliquely then they make sharp Angles of the inside, and blunt Angles on the
out side of the point, where they cross as the figure F. does partly show, for
such Angles cannot be so well described in Plano, as upon the superficies of
some Sphericall body.



13 A term called in Latin terminus, is the bound or linute of any thing, as
points are the bounds of lines, and lines the bounds of superficieses, and
superficieses ye bounds of a body, which is that which has imaginatiuely, but
not materially, both length, breadth, and depth, and if such body have many
faces or sides, then it is bounded with many superficieses, as the figure g.
made like a six square dye. But if such body be round as a bowl, Sphere, or
Globe, then it is bounded or covered with one superficies only, as the figure
H. does show.



14 A figure is that which is comprehended within one bound, or many bounds.

Circumference.



15 A Circle is a plain figure bounded with one circular line, which is called
the circumference, unto the which as many right lines as are drawn from the
point standing in the midst, are all equal one to the other, that is to say,
one is as long as another, as the figure I. here does show.

diam^ter.



16 And the middle point of a Circle is called the Center, as the point A. in
figure I.

17 The Diameter of a Circle, is a right line passing through the Center, from
one side of the Circumference to the other, which deuideth the Circle into two
equal parts, as the line B. C.



18 A Semicircle is a figure, contained within the Diameter and half the
Circumference of a Circle as the figure D. C. E.

The cord.



19 The portion of a Circle, is a part of a Circle, greater or lesser than the
Semicircle, as the figures F. and G. do show, the right line in either of
which figures is called in Latin chorda, in English the string, and the
Circular line in Latin is called arcus in English the bow, but the Diameter
is always the greatest cord in any Circle.

The cord.



20 Right line figures, are those which are bounded with right lines.

21 Triangles or three cornerd figures, are those which are bounded with three
right lines as the figure H.



22 Four square figures, are those which are bounded with four right lines,
as the figure I.



23 Many square figures, are those which are bounded with more right lines then
four as K.



24 Of Triangles or three cornerd figures, there be six kinds, whereof the
first ^s called Isoplurus, having three equal sides and three equal Angles as
A.



25 The second is called Isosceles, ha^ing but two equal sides and angles as B.



26 The third called scalenos having ^o side equal, one with the other, but
one ^horter or longer then another as C.



27 The fourth is called Ort hogonius, ^auing one right Angle, as D.



28 The fifth is called ampligonius, because it has one blunt Angle, as E.



29 The sixth is called oxigonius, because (...) has three sharp Angles, but
not equal ^^des as F.



30 Of four square figures there is one just four square, having four equal
sides, and is right angled as G.



31 Another is called a long Square, which is right angled, but not having
four equal sides, as H.



32 There is another called rombus, th^^ is to say a Turbut, in shape like to
Diamant, which has four equal sides, but is not right angled, as I.



33 There is another called romboides, which though it has sides and Angles
one right against another, yet has it neither four equal sides, nor yet is
right angled, as K.



34 All other kinds of four squares are called trapezia, as L. or such like.

Right line paralels.

Circuler paralels.



35 Paralels are two right lines equally distant one from another, which being
drawn forth infinitely, would never tou^^ or meet one another in any part,
as the two lines M. N. And though the lines be^ circular, yet if they be
equally distant in a^^ places one from another, they are also call^^ paralels,
as the figure P. shows, y^^ though the lines be winding in and out (...)
Serpents, yet if they be equally distant in (...) places one from another, they
are parallel as well as if they were right lines as the ^^gure Q. shows.

Serpentine paralels.



The order and contents of this Treatise, touching the first principles of
Cosmography, and specially of the Sphere.
Having set down the exposition of certain terms of Geometry, for the better
understanding of this Treatise, I do first define what Cosmography is, and
therewith do briefly show what Sciences it comprehends, and who were first
inuentors thereof: That done, because the Sphere does represent the shape of
the whole world, I do define what a Sphere is, and then I do divide the world
into two essential parts, that is, the Celestial and Elementall part,
according to which two parts I do also divide this Treatise into two Books,
the first whereof treats of the Celestial parts, and the second of the
Elementall part of the world, with what order the Chapters of each Book
hereafter following, do plainly show.

The Chapters and Contents of the first Book.
OF Cosmography, what it is, and what kind of Sciences it comprehends, and
who were first inuentors thereof, Chap. 1.

The definition of a Sphere, and of the unity, roundnesse, and capacity of
the world, also of the Poles and Axletree thereof. Chap. 2.

Of the division of the world, and of the two Essential parts thereof, and
what things each part conteyneth. Chap. 3.

A figure of the whole world, wherein are set forth the two Essential parts
before mentioned, that is to say, the eleauen heavens and the four Elements.

A demonstration to prove the plurality of the heavens, Chap. 4.

Of the highest Sphere or heaven, called the Imperial heaven. Chap. 5.

Of the tenth Sphere or heaven called in Latin Primum m^bile, that is, the
first moveable, and what motion it has. Chap. 6.

Of the ninth heaven, what motions and names it has, and whether there be any
waters above the firmament or not. Chap. 7.

Of the eight heaven what motions it has, and what circles are imagined by the
Astronomers to be in that heaven, and to what use and purpose they serve: Also
in what time every one of the seven Planets makes his revolution, and of what
thicknes their Spheres be. Chap. 8.

Of the circles whereof a material Sphere consists, and of their diverse
divisions. Chap. 9.

Of the Equinoctial line, why it is so called, and of the diverse uses
thereof. Chap. 10.

A figure showing the Equinoctial line, the two poles and the Axeltree of the
world.

Of the Zodiaque, why it is so called, and of the 12. signs therein contained.
Also of the Latitude, Longitude and declination thereof. Chap. 11.

How much the Zodiaque declineth from the Equinoctial^ toward either of the
Poles, and of the greatest declinatio^ of the sun, what it is at this
present, and what it has been^ in times past. Chap. 12.

How to know the quantity of the suns declination, be it Northward or
Southward, every day throughout the year as well by a Table as by help of a
material Sphere or globe* Chap. 13.

An instrument to know thereby in what sign or degree the sun is every day
throughout the year.

A Table showing the declination of the sun every day throughout the year
lately calculated.

Upon what poles the Zodiaque turns about, also of the Ecliptique line and of
the diverse uses thereof. Chap. 14.

Of the Eclipses both Solar and Lunar, and of the head and tail of the Dragon
with certain figures showing the same. cap. 15.

Of the two Colures, why they are so named, and wheret^ they serve: also of the
four Cardinal points, that is, the tw^ Equinoctial, and the two Solsticiall
points, and of the entrance of the sun into any of those points, or into any
other sign. Chap. 16.

Of the Horizon both right and oblique, making thereby three kinds of Spheres,
that is, the right, the parallel, and the oblique Sphere. Chap. 17.

A figure showing the Latitude of any place to be equal unto the elevation of
the Pole.

Of the Meridian, and of the uses thereof. Chap. 18.

Of the vertical circle and uses thereof, whereof no mention is commonly made
by those that write of the Sphere. Chap. 19.

Of the four lesser circles, that is to say, the circle Artique, the circle
Antartique, the Tropique of Cancer, and the Tropique of Capricorn, and also of
the five Zones, that is to say, two cold, two temperate, and one extremely
hot. Chap. 20.

A figure showing the five foresaid Zones.

A Table showing how many minutes are requisite to make one degree, in every
lesser circle answerable to one degree of the Equinoctial.

Of the stars and celestial bodies contained in the firmament, and first of
their substance. Chap. 21.

Of the moving and shape of the stars. Chap. 22.

Of the number of the stars, and of their magnitude and greatness, and into
how many Images they are divided, and how many stars every Image contains.
Chap. 23.

Of the xij. Images or signs of the Zodiaque. Chap. 24.

Of the xxj. Northern Images. Chap. 25.

Of the 15. Southern Images. Chap. 26.

Of the longitude of the fixed stars, and of the procession of the vernall
Equinoctial point, and what it is. Chap. 27.

Of the Latitude of the fixed stars. Chap. 28.

Of the Declination of the fixed stars. Chap. 29.

Of the ascension and discention, that is the rising and setting of the
stars, as well according to the Astronomers, as according to the Poets. Chap.
30.

Of the Astronomicall ascension and discention in general both right, mean,
and oblique, and what a given ark is. Cap. 31.

Of the right, oblique, and mean ascension in particular, and of the chief
causes of such diversity of ascentions. cap. 32.

How to know the diversities of the ascentions and discentions, as well in the
right as oblique Sphere. Chap. 33.

Of the ascentionall difference and uses thereof. Chap. 34.

Of the threefold Poetical rising and setting of the stars, Chap. 35.

Of time, what it is, and into what parts it is divided. chap. 36.

Of the year, and of his diverse kinds, and of the diverse computations had
thereof in diverse ages, and amongst diverse Nations. Chap. 37.

Of the suns year called in Latin annus solaris, and of the diverse kinds
thereof, and first of the Tropicall year, both equal and unequal. Chap. 38.

Of the Syderall year, and how much it contains. chap. 39.

Of the Political year, and diverse kinds thereof. chap. 40.

Of the Julian year, why it is so called, and of the 2. kinds thereof, that
is, the common year, and the bisextile year, otherwise called the leap
year. Chap. 41.

Of the Egyptian year, and how many days it contains. Chap. 42.

How many Moons the Jews year, and the Athenian year do contain. Chap. 43.

Of the year Lunar, and of the kinds thereof. Chap. 44.

Of the diverse kinds of months, and into what parts every Solar month is
divided according to the Romans, that is, into Kallends, Nones, and Ides.
Chap. 45.

Of the diverse kinds of months Lunar. Chap. 46.

Of a week. Chap. 47.

Of days and nights both natural and artificial, as well in the right
Sphere, as in the oblique Sphere. Chap. 48.

Two figures showing the right and oblique Sphere, together with the arckes of
the days and nights in each Sphere. Chap. 49.

How to find out by the material Sphere or Globe, and by help of the
ascentionall difference before defined, the increase and decrease of every day
throughout the year in every several latitude, and at what hour the sun
rises and sets. c. 50

How to know by the material Sphere or Globe, in what part of the Horizon the
sun rises and sets every day, and thereby the length of the day. Also how
to know the Meridian altitude of the sun every day throughout the year, and
being at his Meridian altitude, to know how far distant he is from the Zenith
every day, Chap. 51.

Of hours as well equal as unequal, and into what parts they are divided.
Chap. 52.

How and in what manner the Jews do divide the artificial day and night, each
of them into four quarters. chap. 53.

How to know what Planet reigns in every hour of the day or night
artificial, as well by help of a table, as by a rule contained in one verse.
chap. 54.

Here end the Contents of the first Book.
The Chapters and Contents of the second Book, containing the Elementall part
of the world.
OF the Elementall part of the world. Chap. 1:

Of the fire, his nature and motion, Chap: 2:

Of the Air, and into how many Regions it is divided, Chap. 3.

A figure showing the three several Regions of the air.

Of the water, and whether it be round or not. Chap. 4.

A figure showing that the water is round.

Of the Earth, and whether it be in all parts round or not. Chap. 5.

Of the compass of the earth, and of the diversity of measures, according to
diverse countries. chap. 6.

Of the Longitude and Latitude of the earth. chap. 7.

A figure showing the Longitude and Latitude of the world.

How to know the Latitude of any place, as well in the day as in the night.
chap. 8.

How to know the true Longitude of any place. chap. 9.

A ready way to find out the Longitude of any place invented by Gemma
Phrizius. chap. 10.

Another way taught by Appian to find out the Longitude of any place with the
Crosse-staffe, by knowing the distance betwixt the Moon and some known star
that is situated nigh unto the Ecliptique line. chap. 11.

How to know the distance of places, that is to say, how many miles one place
is distant from another, and how many ways one place is said to differ in
distance one from another. Chap. 12.

A Table showing how many miles are answereable to one degree of every several
Latitude.

How to know by the help of the foresaid Table, the distance of two places
differing only in Longitude. chap. 13.

How to find out the true distance of two places differing both in Longitude
and Latitude, by the Arithmeticall way. chap. 14.

Also how to find out the same by help of a Demicircle divided into 180.
parts, without any Arithmetique.

How to find out the distance of places by the Geometrical way. chap. 15.

Of the five Zones. chap. 16.

A figure of the foresaid five Zones, that is to say, two cold, two temperate,
and one extremely hot.

Of Paralels. chap: 17.

A figure showing the 21. Paralels.

The Table of Paralels, showing how many degrees and minutes every one is
distant from the Equinoctial, made according to the rule of Ptolomie.

Of Climes both old and new. chap. 18:

A figure showing the order of the seven ancient common clymes whereunto
Appian adds two more, making in all nine clymes.

A Table showing the degrees of Latitude in the beginning, midst, and end, of
every one of the foresaid nine clymes.

A Table showing the longest day in every degree of Latitude, proceeding
orderly from the Equinoctial to the North pole, by whole degrees without
minutes from one degree to 90.

A Table showing how many miles every one of the seven clymes do contain,
as well in breadth, as in length.

Of the diverse seasons and shadows incident to diverse climes and paralels,
and first what seasons and shadows they have that dwell right under the
Equinoctial. chap. 19.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell betwixt the
Equinoctial and the Tropique of Cancer. chap. 20.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell right under the
Tropique of Cancer. chap. 21.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell betwixt the Tropique of
Cancer, and the circle Artique. chap. 22.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell right under the circle
Artique, and how long their day is. chap. 23:

What seasons, shadows, and length of day they have that dwell betwixt the
circle Artique, and the pole Artique. chap. 24.

Of those that dwell right under the Pole. chap. 25.

By what names certain inhabitants of the earth are called, according to the
diversity or likeness, as well of their shadow, as of their situation. chap. 26.

By what names certain parts of the earth are called by reason of their
diverse shapes. chap. 27:

Of the wind, what it is, what motion it has, and of the diverse names and
divisions thereof. chap. 28.

Of the nature and quality of the ancient twelve winds. chap. 29.

Of the modern division of the winds. chap. 30.

A figure of the 32. winds representing the Mariners compass.

The first part of the Sphere.
Of Cosmography, what it is, and what kinds of Sciences it comprehends, and
who were first inuentors thereof. Chap. 1.
WHat is Cosmography?

Cosmography is the description of the whole world, that is to say, of heaven
and earth, and all that is contained therein.

What special kinds of knowledge are comprehended under this Science.

These four, Astronomy, Astrology, Geographie, and Chorographie.

What is Astronomy?

Astronomy is a Science, which considers and describes the magnitudes and
motions of the celestial or superlour bodies.

Which call you superior bodies?

The Spheres or Heavens, and the Stars as well fixed as moveable, which we
shall define hereafter in their proper places.

What is Astrology?

It is a Science which by considering the motions, aspects, and influences of
the stars, does foresee and prognosticate things to come.

What is Geographie?

It is a knowledge teaching to describe the whole earth, and all the places
contained therein, whereby universal Maps and Cards of the earth and sea are
made.

What is Chorographie?

It is the description of some particular place, as Region, I Will, City, or such
like portion of ye earth severed by it self from the rest.

Who were first inuentors of these Sciences.

Some say that Atlas was the first inuentor, whom the Poets saine to bear up
the heavens with his shoulders, having his head placed in the North Pole, and
his feet in the South Pole, and his right hand bearing the East part, and his
left hand the West part of the world. Albeit that some apply this fiction of
the Poets to an high mountain in Africa called Atlas, which for his great
height surmounting the clouds, is said to bear up the skies. But some say
that Adam our first Parent, was the first inuentor thereof: And some others
affirm that Abraham was the first inuentor thereof. But whosoever was the
first inuentor, it well appears by Ptolomy his book, called Almagesti, that
he has been no small furtherer thereof, and since his time in these latter
days Georgius Purbacchius, Johannes de Monte Regio, Copernicus, and diverse
others have learnedly treated thereof. But leaving to speak of the first
inuentors, or of the furtherers of these sciences, I will speak of the shape,
capacity, and unity of the world, and because the shape thereof is likned to
a round body called a Sphere, I will first define what a Sphere is.

The definition of a Sphere, and of the unity, roundnesse, and capacity of
the world, also of the poles and axeltre thereof. Cap. 2.
WHat is a Sphere?

A Sphere is a round body, contained or covered with one only superficies or
vpperface, in the midst of which body is a point or prick, called the Center,
from which all right lines being drawn to any part of the superficies or upper
face thereof, are of equal length, as you may perceive by this figure here
following, the Center whereof is marked with the letter A.

And this Sphere before defined represents the frame of the whole world,
containing all things, and is contained of none.

How prove you that there is but one world?



By the authority of Aristotle, who says, that if there were any other world
out of this, then the earth of that world would move toward the Center of
this world, which cannot be, unless it should first ascend from his own Center
to the superficies or upper face of the same, which is against nature, for
every heavy thing naturally tends downward, and every light thing upward,
which common experience shows: for a stone being cast upwards, will fall
downewardes, and the flame of a candle being turned downward, will fly upward.

How prove you the frame of the world to be round?

By three reasons, First by comparison, for the likeness which it has with the
chief Idea or shape of Gods mind, which has neither beginning nor ending,
and therefore is compared to a Circle. Secondly by aptness as well of moving as
of containing, for if it were not round of shape, it should not be so apt to
turn about as it continually does, nor to contain so much as it does, for the
round figure is of greatest capacity and contains most. Thirdly, necessity
proves it to be round, for if it were with angles or corners, it should not
be so apt to turn about, and in turning about, it should leave void and
empty places, which nature abhors, for no place by nature can be without a
body, nor a body without a place.

Whereupon is this Sphere or great round frame turned?

Upon two most firm and immovable hooks called in Latin Cardines mundi, and
in Greek Poli, derived of the verb Polo, which is as much to say, as to turn,
for as a door turns upon his hooks, so the world turns upon his two
Poles, whereof the one is fixed in the North, and the other in the South, and
the North pole is called in Latin Polus arcticus, and the South pole is called
Antarcticus, through which Poles from the one to the other passes a right
immaginatiue line called of the Astronomers the Axeltree of the world, about
the which the world continually turns like a Cart wheel, which you may see
lively expressed in a material Sphere made for the purpose, for in Plano it
cannot be so well described.

Of the division of the world, and of the two essential parts thereof, and
what things each part contains. Cap. 3.
HOw is the world divided?

Most writers do make a twofold division thereof, that is according to
substance, and according to accidents, which accidents because they are none
other thing, but points, lines, and circles, and so incident and necessarily
belonging (by position though not by nature) to the substantial parts, as the
one can not be described without the other, neither the subject without the
accidents, nor the accidents without their subject, I will therefore make but
one division of the world, dividing the same into two essential parts, that
is, the celestial part, and the Elementall part, in the description of which
parts, it shall also plainly appear what those lines and Circles be, and to
what end they serve.

What does the celestial part contain?

The eleven Heavens and Spheres.

Make you no difference betwixt these Spheres, and the great Sphere which you
last defined to be covered with one superficies or vpperface.

Yes verily, for these have two superficies or upper faces, that is, the
Conuexe and Concaue.

Which call you Conuexe and which Concaue?

The Conuexe is the outermost upper face of any thing that is round, and
therewith hollow, as of an oven or vault, and the Concaue is the innermost or
hollow superficies of the said oven or vault, or of any such like round body
having concauitie or hollownesse.

Which be those eleven Spheres or Heavens whereof you did last speak?

In ascending orderly vpwardes from the Elements they be these, The first is
the Sphere of the Moon, The second the Sphere of Mercury, The third the
Sphere of Venus, The fourth the Sphere of the Sun, The fifth the Sphere of
Mars, The sixth the Sphere of Jupiter, The seventh the Sphere of Saturn, The
eight the Sphere of the fixed Stars, commonly called the firmament. The
ninth is called the second moveable or Crystal heaven, The tenth is called
the first moveable, and the eleueuth is called the Imperial heaven, where God
and his Angels are said to dwell.

What does the Elementall part contain?

It contains the four Elements.

Which be those?

The Element of the fire which is next to the Sphere of the Moon, and next to
that more downward is the Element of the air, and next to that is the Element
of the water, and next to that is the earth, which is the lowest of all. All
which things you may see here plainly set forth in the figure following on the
other side.

A figure of the whole world, wherein are set forth the two essential parts
before mentioned, that is to say, the eleven heavens and the four Elements.

EARTH AER FIRE 1 TE MOAN COLD AN MOIST BENEVOLENT SILVER 2 MERCVRI SVCHE AS
HE IS JOINED WITH QVCKSYLVER. 3 VENUS COLD AN MOIST BENEVOLENT COPPER 4 THE
SON HOT AN DRY BENEVOLENT GOLD 5 MARS HOT AN DRY. MALEVOLENT IREN 6
IVPITER HOT AND MOIST BENEVOLENT TYN 7 SATVRNE ^ COVLDE AN DRY MALEVOLENT LED
8 LEO * 4 / * 3 * 2 * 1 * 12 * 11 * 10 * 9 * 8 * 7 * 6 * 9 THE CRISTALINE
HEAVEN ^ 10 ^ THE FIRST ^ MOVEABLE. 11 ^ THE EMPYREAL HEAVEN. THE ABITATION ^
OF ^ THE BLESED^




A demonstration to prove the plurality of the heavens. Chap. 4.
HOw is it to be proved that there is such multiplicitie of heavens, since to
the eye it seems one whole body?

If there were not diverse heavens and diverse motions, there should neither
be generation nor corruption of any thing, for all things then should be as
one, and ever in one estate, but besides that reason men have found out by
experience in observing the diverse rising and setting of diverse wandering
stars called the Planets, that every such Planet has a several Sphere or
heaven by it self, for otherwise they should continually keep their places as
the fixed stars do, which do move altogether according to the moving of
the viii. heaven, wherein they are placed.

I grant that there may be diverse heavens or Spheres. But how prove you
that there be ten moveable heavens, besides the imperial heaven before
mentioned, and specially since of the old writers, some affirm that there be
but nine, and some have said that there be no more then eight.

The latter writers have found by good observation (as they say) that the
firmament or eight heaven has three several motions wherewith it is moved
and turned about, which could not be, unless there were two mooueable heavens
higher then that, as shall be declared when we come to show the threefold
motion of the said eight heaven, for here I mind briefly to describe unto you
all the heavens beginning at the highest, and so proceed to the lowest.

Of the highest Sphere or Heaven, called the imperial heaven. Chap. 5.
THe imperial heaven (as our ancient Deuines affirm) is immooueable and
being created by God the first day that he began the first creation of the
world, was by him immediately replenished with his ministers the holy Angels,
and this heaven being the foundation of the world, is most fine and pure in
substance, most round of shape, most great in quantity, most clear in
quality, and most high in place, where God and his Angels are said to dwell.

Of the tenth Sphere or heaven, called in Latin primum mobile, that is, the
first moveable, and what motion it has. Chap. 6.
THis heaven is also of a most pure and clear substance and without stars,
and it continually moves with an equal gate from East to West, making his
revolution in 24. hours, which kind of moving is otherwise called the
diurnall or daily moving, and by reason of the swiftness thereof, it violently
caryeth and turns about all the other heavens that are beneath it from East
to West, in the self same space of 24. hours, whether they will or not, so as
they are forced to make their own proper reuolutions, which is contrary from
West to East, every one in longer or shorter time, according as they be far or
near placed to the same: yet some writers do not admit any violence in the
heavens, but that ever the heaven has his proper and natural moving without
any violence.

I do not well understand by what reason the first moveable should have such
force over the rest.

For your better understanding how this may be, suppose that you turn with
your hand from East to West a Grindstone, or some other turning wheel,
whereon is placed a Fly or some other creeping worm which comes toward you
from West to East, and you shall easily conceive that by your swift turning of
the wheel, you shall turn about the said Fly or Worm many times contrary to
her own course, whether she will or not, before she can get about the said
stone or wheel.

That is true, proceed therefore to the rest, and tell the nature and moving
of the ninth heaven.

Of the ninth heaven, what motions and names it has, and whether there be any
waters above the firmament or not. Chap. 7.
THe ninth heaven is also clear of substance, and without stars, having two
moouinges, the one from East to West upon the poles of the world, according to
the daily moving of the first mooueable, and the other from West to East upon
his own poles, according to the succession of the signs of the Zodiaque,
which is in the first moveable, turning so slowly about as it makes but one
degree in 100. years, and accomplisheth his full revolution in 36000. years,
or as Alfonsus says in 49000. years.

Is there then in the first moveable any Zodiaque, that is to say, a broad
Circle carrying the 12. signs and yet no stars?

Yea though there be no stars, yet many superstitious fools do imagine that
there be diverse Characters and liniaments not to be seen, but with a most
sharp and subtle sight (by virtue of which Characters and fained
constellations) they imagine that they can work wonders and strange effects,
enough to deceive themselves and others too.

What is the cause that the ninth heaven is so long in making his proper
revolution.

Because as I said even now, this heaven is placed next to the first moveable,
which carries him about contrary to his own course with such violence as he
cannot make his own proper revolution so soon as the other heavens which are
placed further off.

If the ninth heaven be so long in making his course, it will never be complete
whilst the world lasts, for the whole age of the world according to some, is
but 6000. years?

Ye Plato was of an other opinion, and therefore this revolution was called,
magnus annus Platonis, that is to say, the great year of Plato, because he
affirmed that when this revolution was once complet, all things should be in
the same estate wherein they were at the first, and that he should then stand
reading to his Scholars in the self same chair wherein he stood at that
present, which fond opinion S. Augustine confuteth in his 12. Book de Ciuitate
Dei, speaking in this manner, God forbid (says he) that we should credit these
things, for Christ dyed once for our sins, and being risen again from the
dead, he is no more to die, neithet can death have any more power over him, by
virtue of whose resurrection, we also that believe shall rise again, and dwell
with God for ever.

With what names is this ninth heaven called?

Some do call it the Christalline heaven, because of the cleareues thereof, and
some the watrie heaven, because the Scripture affirms that there be waters
above the firmament as we read in Genesis cap. 1. let the firmament be made, and
divide the waters from waters. Again we read in the Psalms, all ye waters
that be above the firmament, bless ye the Lord.

The natural Philosophers allow no waters to dwell above the firmament.

That is true, yet notwithstanding if the holy Scriptures do manifestly
affirm that there be waters above the firmament, it behooves a Christian to
believe it, but question perhaps may be moved, what manner of waters they are
that are above the firmament, whether such as breed rain, or whether they are
only to be referred to the Christalline heaven, because it is of a watrie
substance, and therefore of some is called the watery heaven, affirming it to be
placed next to the primum mobile, or first moveable, to the intent that with
the coldness thereof, it might assuage and repress the extreme heat of the
same primum mobile, which otherwise (as some affirm) with his swift and violent
moving, would set all the heavens on fire, and yet no rain is bred therein,
for the great rain that drowned the world in Noahes time, did not fall from
above the firmament, but from the Air, which in the holy Scripture is many
times signified by this Latin world Coelum, that is to say, Heaven, as when
the Scripture says, the flood gates of heaven were opened, is as much to say
as the floodgates of the Air were opened, etc. but leaving this question, let
us proceed to the eight heaven.

Of the eight heaven what motions it has, and what circles are imagined by the
Astronomers to be in that heaven, and to what use and purpose they serve: Also
in what time every one of the seven Planets makes his revolution, and of what
thicknes their Spheres be. Chap. 8.
THe eight heaven otherwise called the firmament, is a most glorious heaven
adorned with all the fixed stars.

Why are they called fixed?

Because they are fastened in this heaven, like knots in a knotty board, having
no moving of themselves, but are moved according to the moving of this eight
Sphere or heaven wherein they are fixed.

How many fold is the moving of this heaven?

The moving of this heaven (as has been said before) is threefold, for first
it turns about every day from East to West in 24. hours, according to the
moving of the first mooueable, otherwise called the diurnall moving. Secondly
it moves from West to East, according to the moving of the ninth heaven
which makes but one degree in 100. years, and this moving is called motus
angium Stellarum fixarum.

What are Anges?

They be certain imagined points in the heaven, notifying the furthest
distance of any Orb or Sphere from the Center of the world: Thirdly it
moves sometime toward the South, and sometime toward the North, by virtue
of his own proper moving, called in Latin motus trepidationis, that is to
say, the trembling moving, whereby it is moved upon two little Circles, the
poles whereof are in the beginning of that Aries and that Libra which are
imagined to be in the ninth heaven, the Semidiameter of which little Circles is
4. degrees 18^ and 43^ and makes his whole revolution in 7000. years, and
this moving is otherwise called motus accessus and recessus, that is to say,
the moving of approaching and retiring, and is only proper to the 8. Sphere:
for every natural body by order of nature, can have but one proper moving,
and by reason of this moving the fixed stars be not always equally distant
from the immooueable poles of the tenth Sphere, nor always under ye
Ecliptique of the said 10. Sphere, but oftentimes clean without it. Nor the
fixed stars are in equal times equally distant from the beginning of that
Aries and Libra, which are imagined to be in the tenth heaven, but they seem
to move sometimes toward the East, and sometimes toward the West, now more
swiftly, and now more slowly. For Ptolomy in his time found them to be moved
in 100. years one degree. And the latter obseruers have found them when they
be in their swift motion to be moved one degree in 63. years, all which three
moouings are easy (as some affirm) to be demonstrated by an instrument made
of purpose, showing every several moving of this heaven by it self, but such
demonstrations as some others think be not altogether necessary conclusions:
for it may be that the daily moving is common to the whole frame, and that the
moving of the Angles of the fixed stars, is proper to the eight Sphere,
having some other moouer, and the like objection may be made touching the
trembling moving, called motus trepidationis. But now you have to understand
that for the better describing, dividing, and measuring of this heaven, and all
the apparances thereof, the Astronomers with the Pensill of imagination, or
rather of most necessary invention, do (as it were) trace the same with
certain Circles both greater and lesser, whereof we shall speak so soon as
we have briefly showed the moving of the rest of the heavens, contained in the
celestial part of the world, in such order as they follow one another. For
next to the firmament is the heaven of Saturn, which makes his revolution
from West to East in 30. years, next to him is the heaven of Jupiter, who
makes his revolution from West to East in 12. years, next to him is the
heaven of Mars, which makes his revolution also from West to East in 2.
years, next to him is the heaven of the Sun, which makes his revolution
from West to East in 365. days, and 6. hours lacking certain minutes, next
to him is the heaven of Venus, which makes her revolution from West to East in
like time as does the Sun, next to Venus is the heaven of Mercury, which
makes his revolution from West to East in the like space that Venus does: And
next to Mercury is the heaven of the Moon, which makes her revolution from
West to East in 28. days and certain minutes. Thus having briefly described
the eleven heavens, I will now treat of the Circles that are imagined (as I
said before) by the Astronomers to be in the eight heaven or firmament, to the
intent that the measures and distances of the stars, images, signs, and
other apparances therein contained, might be the better demonstrated.

Before you deal with these Circles, I would gladly understand some reason why
all these several heavens seem to the eye but as one entire body.

That is because they are all clear and transparent like fine birall glass,
or Crystal, through the which the sight does easily pearce, though there were
never so many coats of such clear substance, covering one another like the
skales of an Onion, for so the heavens do cover and enclose one another, and
every one is of an exceeding great thickness.

Why how thick is every such heaven?

The heaven of the Moon contains in thickness. -- 105/222 2/33 miles. The
heaven of Mercury contains -- 253372. The heaven of Venus -- 3274494 6/11.
The heaven of Sol, -- 343996 4/11 The heaven of Mars, -- 26/308/800. The heaven
of Jupiter, -- 1899654 6/11. The heaven of Saturn, -- 19604454 6/11.
What need have the heavens to be so thick?

Because otherwise they could not contain each one his star or stars, for
there is no fixed star so little, but that it is far greater in compass
then the earth, neither is there any wandering star, but that it is bigger
then the earth, the Moon, Venus, and Mercury excepted.

For the Sun contains the earth -- 166. times. Saturn contains it -- 95.
times. Jupiter contains it -- 91. times. Mars contains it -- 2. times.
Venus is less then the earth -- 39. times. Mercury is least of all and is
contained of the earth, -- 3143. times.
You have well satisfied me touching these matters, and therefore now
proceed with the Circles if you think so good.

Before that I describe unto you the Circles whereof a Sphere is made, or
declare the uses thereof: I think it not amiss here to set down the shape of
a Sphere, together with the names of every Circle written upon the same, to
the intent that you may be acquainted with all the parts of a Sphere before
you come to use the same: which shape or figure was first drawn by Master
Blagraue, and is set down in his book called the Mathematical Jewel.

depiction of astrolabe

Of the Circles whereof a material Sphere consists, and of their diverse
divisions. Chap. 9.
OF Circles which are imagined to be in the firmament, and whereof a Sphere
representing the shape of the world is commonly made, be in all 10. that is to
say, the Equinoctial, the Zodiaque, the two Colures, the Horizon, the
Meridian, the two Tropiques and the two polar Circles, of which Circles some be
greater and some lesser.

Which call you greater and which lesser?

Those are called the greater Circles, which passing through the Center or
midst of the firmament, do divide the whole circuit thereof into two equal
parts, and of such Circles there be six, that is to say, the Equinoctial, the
Zodiaque, the Colure of the Solstices, the Colure of the Equinoxes, the Horizon
and the Meridian. The lesser Circles are the four last mentioned, that is the
two Tropiques, and the two polar Circles, which are called lesser, because they
do not divide the world into two equal parts, but into unequal portions.

What other divisions do the Astronomers make of the said Circles?

Diverse, for some are said to be paralels, some right, some oblique, some
moveable, and some immovable.

Which are said to be paralels?

The two polar Circles, and the two Tropiques, and the Equinoctial which is in
the very midst of them all.

Which are said to be right and which oblique?

The right be the two Colures, the right Horizon, and the Meridian, because
they cut the Sphere or Globe with right Angles: And the oblique are these two,
that is, the Zodiaque, and the oblique Horizon, which are said to be oblique
because they cut the Sphere or globe with oblique Angles.

Which are said to be moveable, and which immovable?

The moveable are these, the Equinoctial, the Zodiaque, the two Tropiques, and
the 2. polar Circles which are said to be moveable, because they continually
move with ye firmament and are like in all places. And these also having
respect to a material Sphere, are said to be intrinsicall or inward. The
immovable are these 2. that is, the Horizon, and the Meridian, which are said
to be immovable because in the turning of the Sphere they remain unmoved,
for though we change both Meridian and Horizon by going from one habitation to
another upon the earth, yet every place has still his own Meridian and
Horizon, which do remain immovable, and these two Circles having respect to
a material Sphere, are said to be extrinsicall or outward, because they do
enclose on the outside all the other Circles of a material Sphere. Thus
having set down the divisions of the said Circles, I will now describe them
all in order, and show to what uses they serve, beginning first with the great
Circles, and so proceed to the lesser, and first I will speak of the
Equmoctiall.

Of the Equinoctial line, why it is so called, and of the diverse uses
thereof. Chap. 10.
WHat is the Equinoctial?

The Equinoctial is a great Circle, which being in every part equally distant
from the two poles of the world, deuideth the Sphere in the very midst
thereof, into two equal parts, and therefore it is called of some, the girdle
of the world.

Wherefore is it called by the name of the Equinoctial?

Because that when the Sun touches this Circle, which is twice in the year,
the day and night is of equal length throughout the whole world.

At what time of the year is it Equinox?

In the spring of the year, about the 11. day of March when as the Sun
enters into the first degree of Aries, and again in Autumn about the 13. of
September when as the Sun enters into the first degree of Libra, And by
reason that this Circle deuideth the world in the very midst, those that dwell
right under it, are said to have no Latitude either Northward or Southward, to
whom the days and nights are always equal. But if they dwell any thing
distant from the Equinoctial, toward any of the poles, then they are said to
have Latitude more or less, either Southward or Northward, as shall be
declared hereafter more at large, when we come to treat of the Longitude and
Latitude of the earth, both which are to be known by help of the Equinoctial.

To what other uses serves this Circle?

This Circle has many most necessary uses, for first it shows the daily
moving of the first moveable, which makes his revolution in 24. hours, which
hours are equal, and are to be measured by the degrees of the Equinoctial,
by allowing 15. degrees thereof to an hour. And therefore the degrees of the
Equinoctial are commonly called in Latin of the Astronomers tempora, of which
degrees it contains 360. which being divided by 15. do make 24. hours, which
is a natural day, containing both day and night: Moreover it shows the
declination of the fixed stars and their right ascentions, whereof we shall
speak when we come to treat of the stars, and by his equal motion, all the
inequalities of the Zodiaque, and of all the signs contained therein, are
measured: And to be short, this Circle has many other good uses not to be
declared until you have some knowledge of the rest of the other Circles
hereafter described.

A figure showing the Equinoctial line, the two Poles and Axletree of the
world.


Of the Zodiaque why it is so called, and of the 12. signs therein contained:
Also of the Latitude, Longitude, and declination thereof. Chap. 11.
WHat is the Zodiaque?

It is a broad, oblique, or stope Circle, having a circular line in the midst
thereof, called the Ecliptique line, and deuideth the Sphere into two equal
parts, by crossing the Equinoctial with oblique Angles in two points, that is,
in the beginning of Aries, and in the beginning of Libra, so as the one half
of this broad Circle declineth toward the North, and the other half toward
the South: in which Circle many things are to be considered, first the name,
then what breadth it has, and why it has such breadth, and into what parts it
is divided aswelt touching the breadth or Latitude, as circuit or Longitude
thereof, also into how many parts the firmament is divided by the spaces
described in the Zodiaque, and appointed to the 12. signs. Also how much it
declineth from the Equinoctial toward the South or North, and upon what poles
it turns about, and why the line in the midst is called the Ecliptique line,
and many other necessary points, which I mind here briefly to touch.

Why is this Circle named the Zodiaque?

It is named the Zodiaque either of this Greek word zoe, which is as much to
say as life, because the sun being moved under this Circle, gives life to
the inferior bodies, or else of this Greek word Zodion, which is as much to
say as a beast, because that 12. Images of stars, otherwise called the 12.
signs, named by the name of certain beasts, are formed in this Circle: and
therefore the Latins do call this Circle Signifer because it bears the 12.
signs.

How are these signs called, and with what Characters are they marked.

Their names and Characters this table here following does show, and also which
be opposite one to another, as Aries to Libra, Taurus to Scorpio, and so forth.

The six Northern signs: The six Southern signs. Aries Libra Taurus
Scorpio Gemini Sagittarius Cancer Capricornus Leo Aquarius Virgo Pisces

Of which signs the first six on the left hand are called the Northern
signs, because they are contained in that half of the Zodiaque, which
declineth toward the North. And the other six on the right hand being right
opposite to the first 6. are called the Southern signs, because they are
contained in the other half of the Zodiaque, declyning toward the South: And
against every sign is set his proper Character.

What divisions do Astronomers make of the 12. signs?

Diverse, as follows: for some are said to be ascendent, and some descendent.

Ascendent are those that rise from the South toward our Zenith, tending
Northward, which be these, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, and
Gemini.

The descendent are these, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpius, and Sagittarius.

Again some are said to be vernall, as Aries, Taurus, and Gemini.

Some Estiuall as Cancer, Leo, Virgo.

Some Autumnall as, Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius.

And some Hiemall or Brumall, as Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, signifying
the four seasons of the year, that is to say, the Spring, Summer, Autumn,
and Winter.

And some do make diverse other divisions, which because they appertame to
Astrology rather then to the Treatise of a Sphere, I willingly omit them.

Now tell what breadth the Zodiaque has, and why it is imagined to have such
breadth?

It has (according to the ancient writers) 12. degrees in breadth, that is to
say, 6. degrees on the one side of the Ecliptique line, and 6. degrees on the
other side of the Ecliptique line, but according to the modern writers, it
has 16. degrees in breadth, that is, eight degrees on each side of the
Ecliptique line, which breadth was necessarily imagined, first to the intent
that by the measures and degrees thereof it might be known, how much the
Planets (otherwise called the wandering stars, whose course is to pass
continually under this broad Circle) do wander at any time on either side of
the Ecliptique line, for they all wander, but some more, some less, the Sun
only excepted, which never swarueth from that line, but always goes right
under the same, and therefore the said line is called of some writers the way
of the Sun: And secondly it has such breadth to the intent it may contain
within the same, the 12. signs aforesaid, by means of which signs the whole
circuit or longitude of the said Circle is divided into 12. equal parts, and
every such part is divided into 30. degrees, and every degree into 60. minutes,
and every minute into 60. seconds, etc. so as the whole Longitude thereof
contains 360. degrees, according unto which division, all the rest of the
Circles both greater and lesser described in the Sphere, are made to contain
the like number of degrees, and every half Circle to contain 180. degrees,
and every quarter of a Circle to contain 90. degrees, and by this division
as well of the breadth as of the length of the Zodiaque, it appears that every
one of the 12. Signs has 30. degrees in length, and 12. degrees in breadth,
and thereof the Planets, Stars, and all other Celestial bodies are said to
have both Longitude and Latitude, the sun only excepted.

How is such Longitude and Latitude to be understood?

The Longitude of any Planet or Star is to be counted in the Ecliptique line
containing in circuit 360. degrees, reckoning from the first point of Aries,
and so to Taurus, Gemini, and Carcer, and so forth according to the succession
of the signs, until you come again unto the first point of Aries, at which
point such Longitude both ends and begimeth. The Latitude is counted from the
said Ecliptique line toward any of ye Poles of the Zodiaque. And hereof look
how many degrees any fixed star or Planet is distant from the Ecliptiqueline
toward any of the said poles, so much Latitude it is said to have either
Northern or Southern: moreover, by this division of the signs the whole
firmament is divided into 12. parts by reason of 6. Circles imagined to pass
through the poles of the Zodiaque, and also through the beginning of every
sign, whereby we know under what sign every star is situated though it be
clean out of the Zodiaque as this figure here plainly shows, marked with
these letters A. B. C. D. A signifies the North pole of the world, B. the
North pole of the Zodiaque, C. the South pole of the world, D. the South pole
of the Zodiaque.



How much the Zodiaque declineth from the Equinoctial toward either of the
Poles, and of the greatest declination of the Sun, what it is at this
present, and what it has been in times past. Chap. 12.
YOu have to understand that the Zodiaque or rather the Ecliptique line,
declineth from the Equinoctial toward either of the poles, 23. degrees 28^
and that is said in these days to be the greatest declination of the sun,
which declination is twofold, that is Northern and Southern, for like as the
Sun entering into the first point of Aries, begins then to decline from the
Equinoctial Northward, to the quantity of 23. degrees and 28^ so entering into
the first point of Libra, he declineth again from the Equinoctial as much
Southward. And note by the way that by reason of his slow motion, when he is
in the Northern signs, he spends 7. days, and. of a day more in making his
North declination then in making his South declination, because he is then in
his swift motion, and the time has been that he has spent above ten days
more in making his North declination, then in making his South declination:
neither is the greatest declination of the Sun in all ages of like quantity.
For in Ptolomies time it was 23. degrees, 51^ and 20^ ever since whose time it
has always continually decreased until this present, so as now the greatest
declination is no more but 23. degrees and 28^ And Copernicus makes the
declination of the sun in respect of quantity to be twofold, that is,
greatest and least, affirming the greatest to be 23. degrees and 52^ and the
least to be 23. degrees and 28^ as it is now accounted, the difference whereof
is 24^ and whilst the Ecliptique departs from the Equinoctial, and turns
again toward the Equinoctial, there do run (as he says) 34^4. years.

How to know the quantity of the Suns declination be it Northward or
Southward, every day throughout the year, as well by a Table as by help of
the Sphere. Chap. 13.
THis is chiefly to be known by Tables calculated of purpose, which Tables
most commonly are either made to answer every day of the month, or else to
the degree of the sign wherein the sun is every day, which kind of Table is
contained in lesser room then the other, but to work by such a Table, you
must first know in what sign and degree the sun is every day.

How is that to be done?

It is to be known most truly by the Ephemerides or such like Table
caluclated of purpose, showing not only the degree of the sign, but also the
very minute wherein the sun is every day, and for want of such a Table, you
may without consideration of the minutes, know it by such an instrument or
figure as this following, which consists of diverse Circles, whereof the
outermost conteyneth the degrees of the 12. signs, together with the names of
the said signs, and the next the days of each month, together with the names
(...) ^he said months, much like the backside of an Astrolabe, in the center
or midst of which ^^^^rument or figure is a thread, which if you lay upon the
day of the month which you seek, (...) straight direct you to the degree of the
sign wherein the Sun is that day, as for ex^^ple, if you would know in what
sign and degree the Sun is the 4. of May, then by draw^^^ the thread right upon
the said day over and beyond the outermost circle, you shall find (...) it will
fall right upon the 23. degree of Taurus.

An instrument to know thereby in what sign and degree the Sun is every day
throughout the year.


Then having found the degree of the Sun you must resort therewith to this
Table following, made for the declination of the sun.

A Table showing the declination of the sun every day throughout the year
Degrees of the Signs. Degrees of the signs. D M S D M S D M S 1 0 23 53 11
50 6 20 22 57 29 2 0 47 46 12 10 56 20 35 7 28 3 1 11 39 12 31 34 20 46 55 27 4
1 35 30 12 51 59 20 58 20 26 5 1 59 20 13 12 12 21 9 21 25 6 2 23 8 13 32 12 21
19 59 24 7 2 46 54 13 51 58 21 30 13 23 8 3 10 37 14 11 30 21 40 3 22 9 3 34 18
14 30 48 21 49 29 21 10 3 57 54 14 49 51 21 58 29 20 11 4 21 28 15 8 40 22 7 6
19 12 4 44 57 15 27 13 22 15 17 18 13 5 8 22 15 45 30 22 23 3 17 14 5 31 42 16
3 32 22 30 24 16 15 5 54 57 16 21 17 22 37 19 15 16 6 18 6 16 38 44 22 43 48 14
17 6 41 9 16 55 55 22 49 50 13 18 7 4 6 1^ 12 48 22 55 27 12 19 7 26 57 ^^ 29
23 22 0 38 11 20 7 49 40 17 45 40 23 5 22 10 21 8 12 16 18 1 39 23 9 39 9 22 8
34 45 18 17 18 23 13 29 8 23 8 57 5 18 32 37 23 16 53 7 24 9 16 16 18 47 38 23
19 50 6 25 9 41 19 19 2 18 23 22 19 5 26 10 3 12 19 16 37 23 24 22 4 27 10 24
56 19 30 36 23 25 57 3 28 10 46 30 19 44 14 23 27 5 2 29 11 7 53 19 57 30 23 27
46 1 30 11 29 5 20 10 25 23 28 9 0 ^ D M S D M S D M S D

The description and use of the Table.
This Table consists of 5. collums, whereof the first on the left hand, and
the last on the right hand do contain the degrees of the 12. signs of the
Zodiaque, counting from one to 30. And the three middle collums do contain the
degrees minutes, and seconds of declination, over the head of which three
middle collums are set down the characters of these 6. opposite signs, Aries
and Libra, Taurus and Scorpio, Gemini and Sagittarius, and at the foot of the
said midlde colums are set down the characters of the other 6. opposite signs,
that is, Virgo and Pisces, Leo and Aquarius, Cancer and Capricornus, for every
2. opposite signs, as well above as beneath, have like declination, the use of
which Table is thus: first having found out the degree of the Sun by the
instrument before described, or rather by some true Ephemerides, you must seek
out the number of the said degree, either in the first or last collum,
according as the character of the sign is placed. For if the sign or
character be above, then you must seek for the said number in the first collum
on the left hand, which numbers do descend from 1. to 30. but if the sign be
beneath, then you must find it out in the the outermost colum on the right
hand, the numbers whereof do ascend from 1. to 30. and the common angle or
square, standing right against the said number will show you the degree,
minutes and seconds of the declination, as for example, having found by the
former instrument that the 4. day of May the Sun is in the 23. degree of
Taurus, I seeing the character of Taurus to stand above, do seek my foresaid
number of 23. degrees in the first collum on the left hand, and in the common
angle or square right against that number, and under the sign Taurus, I find
the declination of the Sun to be 18. degrees 32^ and 37^ But this Table cannot
serve always: yea rather such tables are to be renewed as our Astronomers say
every 30. years. Also you may know the daily declination of the Sun, by help
of a material Sphere or globe: thus having set the Sphere at your latitude,
bring the degree of the sign wherein the Sanne is that present day unto the
moouable Meridian, and staying it there, mark whether it falls on the South
side or on the North side of the Equinoctial: for if it be in any of the
Northern signs, it will fall on the North side of the Equinoctial, and if it
be in any of the Southern signs, it will fall on the south side of the
Equinoctial, and by counting the degrees upon the Meridian, contained betwixt
the degree of the Sun and the Equinoctial, you shall know what declination the
Sun has that day, as for example in the latitude 52. in the year 1590. the
fifth day of May, I find the Sun by the Ephemerides to be in the 23. degree
and 48^ of Taurus, which point I bring to the moouable Meridian, and there
staying it, I find that point to be distant from the Equinoctial northward 18.
degrees and certain minutes, and so much of North declination I conclude the
Sun to have that day.

Upon what Poles the Zodiaque turns about, also of the Ecliptique line and of
the diverse uses thereof. Chap. 14.
THe Zodiaque turns about upon his own proper Poles from West to East,
whereof the one being placed in the Colure of the Solstices toward the North,
is distant from the pole Arctique 23. degrees and 28^ and the other is placed
in the said Colure toward the South, being of like distance from the pole
Antarctique, whereof the Astronomers have a general rule, affirming that the
distance of the two Poles of the world from the Poles of the Zodiaque, is
always equal to the greatest declination of the sun, which as has been said
before, is 23. degrees and 28^ as you may plainly see by the Sphere. And note
that these 2. Poles are otherwise called the Poles of the Ecliptique, for in
considering the declination of the Sun or of the Zodiaque from the
Equinoctial, you must have respect only to the Ecliptique line, which is in
the midst of the Zodiaque, and not to any other part of the Zodiaque. And as
the Equinoctial line shows the moving of the first moouable, which is from
East to West, so the Ecliptique line shows the moving of the second
mooueable, which is from West to East, clean contrary to the first moouable,
the causes whereof have been before declared.

What other uses has this line more than you have already declared?

It has diverse, for in this line or circle are noted the degrees, wherewith
any star rises or goes down, either rightly or obliquely, for all the
apparances of the heavens are chiefly referred to this circle. Again, by this
circle the chiefest distinctions and parts of times, as years and months are
known, and also the four seasons of the year, as Spring, Summer, Autumn,
and Winter: Moreover, the obliquitie of this circle under which the Sun
continually walks, is cause that the days both natural and artificial are
vnquaell. Finally, this circle does show the places and times of the Eclipses
both Solar and Lunar, from whence this line takes his name, of which Eclipses
we mind here briefly to treat.

Of the Eclipses both Solar and Lunar, and of the head and tail of the Dragon,
with certain figures showing the same. Chap. 15.
WHat signifies this word Eclipsis?

It is as much to say, as to want light, and to be darkened or hidden from our
sight, as when the Sun and Moon are both at one self time right under the
Ecliptique line, the one of these 2. lights most commonly is eclipsed and
darkened: for there be two Eclipses, the one of the Sun, and the other of the
Moon, but since that neither the eclipse of the Sun or of the Moon does
chance, but when they meet either in the head or tail of the Dragon, I think it
good to show first what is meant by the head and tail of the Dragon. The
Dragon then signifies none other thing but the intersection of 2. circles,
that is to say, of the Ecliptique, and of the circle that carries the Moon,
called her Defferent* cutting one another in 2. points, whereof that
intersection which is westward when as the Moon goes toward the North, is
called the head, and that which is Eastwardes when the Moon goes toward the
South is called the tail, marked with such characters as you see in the figure
following, and that part toward the South is called of some the belly of the
Dragon. And note that the Defferent of the Moon is at no time distant from the
Ecliptique above 5. degrees at the most.

The figure of the Dragon.


This being presupposed, I will speak first of the Eclipse of the Moon, and
then of the Sun, both which may be eclipsed either totally or in part.

When is the Moon said to be totally eclipsed?

When the Sun and Moon are opposite one to the other diame trallie, and the
earth in the very midst between them both, for the body of the earth being
thick and not transparent, casting his shadow to that point which is opposite
to the place of the Sun, will not suffer the Moon to receive any light from
the Sun, from whom she always borrows her light.

At what time is the Moon said to be diamtrallie opposite to the Sun?

When a right line drawn from the center of the Sun to the center of the
Moon, passes through the center of the earth: and note that every time that
she is at the full, she is opposite to the Sun, and yet the earth is not at every
such full diametrally betwixt her and the Sun, for then she should be eclypsed
at every full, which indeed cannot be but when she is either in the head or tail
of the Dragon.

When is the Moon said to be eclipsed in part?

When the Sun, the earth, and the Moon be met in one self Diametrall line,
but the Moon is declining either on the one side or on the other, as you may
plainly see by this figure following. But note that the Eclipses of the Moon
may be universal, because the Earth is far bigger than the Moon, and
thereby able to shadow her whole body.

When is the Sun said to be eclipsed?

When the Moon is betwixt the Sun and the Earth, which chances in a
Conjunction, and yet not in every conjunction, but when it falls either in
the head or tail of the Dragon, which may chance, as I said before, either
totally or in part: totallie I say, in respect of those parts of the earth
whereon the shadow directly falls. For since the Moon is far lesser than
the Earth, she cannot shadow all the Earth, and therefore the Eclipse of the
Sun cannot be universal, but yet to some parts of the Earth totally, and to
some partly, and to other some nothing at all, as you may plainly see by this
figure following.



Yet all the histories do affirm that the Eclipse of the Sun was universal
at the death of Christ.

Yea, that was miraculous, and also it was then at the full of the Moon, which
was also as miraculous: and therefore Dionisius a Senator of Athens, beholding
that Eclipse cried out, saying these words, Either God this day suffers, or
else the world must needs perish for ever: which Dionisius was the first that
converted the Frenchmen to the faith of Christ, doing there great miracles: in
honor of whom was erected the rich Abbey of S. Denise, not far from Paris,
whereas the Kings and Princes of France were wont to be buried.

How is it to be proved that the Eclipse at Christ his death was at the full
of the Moon?

As Well by ancient history, as by S. Augustine, who says that the Jews were
wont to keep their feast of Passover (at which time God suffered) always at
the full of the Moon.

If the Sun and Moon be eclipsed but in part, how are such parts to be
accounted?

By the parts of the Diameter of the bodies of those two Planets, for the
Astronomers do divide the Diameter as well of the Sun, as of the Moon into
12. and some into 24. parts, which they call points, and therefore are wont to
say, that the Sun or Moon are darkened or eclipsed 7. points, 8. points, 9.
points, etc.

Of the two Colures, and why they are so named, and whereto they serve: also of
the four Cardinal points, that is, of the two Equinoctial, and the two
Solstitiall points, and of the entrance of the Sun into any of those points
or into any other sign. Chap. 16.
WHat be Colures?

They be great moouable circles passing through both the Poles of the world,
which the Astronomers do otherwise call Circles of declination, whereof they
make 180. which are half so many as there be degrees in the Equinoctial
applying them to diverse uses not needful here to be rehearsed, for since that
there are but two Colures accustomablie set down in the Sphere, without the
which a material Sphere cannot be made, I mind here therefore only to
treat of them.

Show first what ^his name Colure signifies.

This word Colure being compounded of Colos and Oura, is as much to say as
imperfect or maimed, the tail being cut off, because none of those Circles are
euere seen whole above our Horizon, but part thereof, for some part is
always seen, and some part is always hidden, as that part which is above the
Horizon, and nigh unto the Pole, is always seen, because it never goes down
under the Horizon: likewise that which is nigh unto the South pole is always
hidden from us, because it never rises above our Horizon, as by turning the
Sphere about, you may easily perceive the same.

Which be those Colures that are commonly set down in the Sphere, and how are
they named?

They are two great moouable circles, passing through the Poles of the world,
crossing one another in the said Poles with right Sphearicall angles, by means
whereof they divide the whole Sphere into four equal parts, of which two
Colures the one is called the Colure of the Equinoxes, and the other the Colure
of Solstices.

Describe these two Circles, and show why they are so named.

The Colure of the Equinoxes is so called because it cutteth the Zodiaque in
the beginning of Aries, which is called the vernal Equinoxe: and also in the
beginning of Libra, which is called the Autumnall Equinoxe, at which two times
the days and nights be equal, as has been said before when we did speak of
the Equinoctial circle, and this circle deuideth the Ecliptique into two
halfes, the one Septentrionall, and the other Meridionall and thereby shows
the signs* wherein the Sun makes the days longer and shorter than the
nights, for whilst he is an the 6. Northern signs, he makes the days with
us longer than the nights, and when he is in the 6. Southern signs he makes
the nights longer than the days: now you have to understand that the Colure of
the Solstice, is so called because it cutteth the Zodiaque in the two
Solistitiall points, that is to say, in the beginning of Cancer, and the
beginning of Capricorn, as you may see in beholding and turning the Sphere
about with your hand.

Why are these two points called Solstitiall?

They take their name of these two Latin words Sol and stano, that is to say,
the Sun and standing, for when the Sun is in any of the two points, he
seems to stand still, or at the least moves so little, as his proper
moving from West to East cannot be easily perceived, during the space of
twelve days. And you have to note, that when the Sun enters into the first
degree of Cancer, which is about the 12. of June, then he is at the highest,
and the days be at the longest, and therefore, it is called the Summer
Solstice. Again, when he enters into the first degree of Capricorn, which
is about the 12. of December, then the Sun is at the lowest, and the nights
are at the longest, and therefore it is called the Winter Solstice. And in this
Colure there are set down the two Poles of the Ecl^ptique line being distant
from the Poles of the world 23. degrees and 28^ Moreover on this colure is
measured the greatest declination of the Sun, which is always equal to the
distance of the Pole of the Ecliptique, from the Pole of the world, as has
been said before. And you have to note that the 4. former points, that is to
say, the 2. Equinoxes, and the 2. Solistices, are commonly called the four
cardinal or principal points, and of some they are called, the four points
or Change, signifying the 4. beginnings of the four diverse seasons of the
year: for betwixt the beginning of Aries and beginning of Cancer, is contained
the Spring time, and betwixt the beginning of Cancer and the beginning of
Libra, is the Summer time: and from the beginning of Libra to the beginning of
Capricorn is the time called Autumn, or fall of the leaf: and from the
beginning of Capricorn to the beginning of Aries is contained the winter
season, albeit the Sun enters not into any of these signs always at one self
day or time of the year, for at Christ his incarnation, the Sun entered into
Aries the 25. of March, and into Cancer the 24. of June, and into Libra the 27.
of September, and into Capricorn the 25. of December, which was then the
shortest day in the year, and the beginning of Winter, and therefore is called
of the Latins, dies brumalis, on which day Christ our Savior was born, so as
from the time of his birth unto this present year, there are run almost 13.
days, wherefore, unless the kalenders be reformed as well here in England as
else where (for the Roman reformation is not so exactlie true as it might be)
we shall have in process of time, the Spring in Winter, and the Winter in
Autumn.

How shall I know this present year, or any year to come hereafter, at what
day and hour the Sun enters into any of the 12. Signs?

First you must learn by some good Ephemerides, or other Table, the true
entrance of the Sun into every sign in any year passed before, then from
the time of the entrance of the Sun into the sign which you desire to know,
consider how many years are betwixt, and how many leap years are in the same
contained, and subtract for so many times as there be leap years, 44^ of an
hour, and ad to the hours remaining, so many times five hours, and 49^ as
there be years remaining over and besides the leap years, and that sum
shall show you the day, hour, and minutes of the true entrance of the Sun
into that sign in the same year that you desire to know.

Of the Horizon both right and oblique, making thereby three kinds of
Spheres, that is, the right, the Parallel, and the oblique Sphere. Chap. 17.
WHat is the Horizon?

It is a great immoouable circle which deuideth the upper Hemisphear, which is
as much to say, as the upper half of the world which we see, from the nether
Hemispheare which we see not, for standing in a plain field, or rather upon
some high mountain void of bushes and trees, and looking round about, you
shall see your self environed as it were with a circle, and to be in the very
midst or center thereof, beneath or beyond which circle, your sight cannot
pass, and therefore this circle in Greek is called Horizon, and in Latin
Finitor, that is to say, that which determines, limitteth or boundeth the
sight, the Poles of which circle are imagined to be two points in the
firmament, whereof the one stands right over your head, called in Arabic
Zenith: and the other directly under your feet, called in the same tongue
Nadir, that is to say the point opposite, and from point to point you must
imagine that there goes a right line passing through the center of the world,
and also through your body both head and feet, which is called the Axletree of
the Horizon, and you have to understand that of Horizons there be 2. kinds, that
is, right, and oblique, making 3. kinds of Spears, that is to say, the right
Sphere, the parallel Sphere, and the oblique Sphere,

When is the Horizon said to be right, and thereby to make a right Sphere?

It may be said to be right two manner of ways, first, when the Horizon
passes through both the Poles of the world, cutting the Equinoctial with
right angles, in which Sphere they that dwell have their Zenith in the
Equinoctial, which passes right over their heads, to whom the days and
nights are always equal. Secondly, they are said to have a right Horizon, and
to dwell in a right Sphere, to whom one of the Poles of the world is their
Zenith, and their Horizon is all one with the Equinoctial, cutting the Axletree
of the world in the very midst with right angles, and because the Horizon and
the Equinoctial are Paralels, this kind of Sphere is called a parallel Sphere,
in which Sphere they that dwell have 6. months day, and 6. months night, as
you may easily perceive by placing the Sphere, so as one of the Poles may stand
right up in the midst of the Horizon, by means whereof you shall see 6. signs
of the Zodiaque to be always above the Horizon, and 6. signs to be always
under the Horizon: Again by placing the Sphere so as both the Poles may lie
upon the Horizon, you shall see the shape of the first right Sphere, wherein
the Horizon passes throught both the Poles of the world, and the Equinoctial
passes through the Poles of the Horizon, which are the two points called
before the Zenith and Nadir.

When is it said to be an oblique Horizon, and thereby to make an oblique
Sphere?

When the Pole of the world is elevated above the Horizon, be it never so
little, so as the Horizon do cut the Equinoctial with oblique angles, and look
how much the Pole of the world is elevated above your Horizon, so much is your
Zenith distant from the Equinoctial, and the nigher that your Horizon
approaches to the Pole, the nigher your Zenith approaches to the Equinoctial.
Again, look how much the Equinoctial is elevated above your Horizon, so much
is your Zenith distant from the Pole, all which things this figure here
following does plainly show, whereby you may easily perceive that the latitude,
which is the distance of your Zenith from the Equinoctial, is always equal to
the altitude of the Pole, which is the distance betwixt your Horizon and the
Pole, as for example, knowing the latitude of Norwich to be 52. degr. lay the
zenith of this figure upon the 52. degrees, reckoning from the Equinoctial
toward the pole Arctique on your left hand, and look what distance is betwixt
the said zenith and the Equinoctial, the self same distance you shall find to
be betwixt the Horizon and the foresaid Pole on your right hand, and you may
do the like upon the Sphere it self by raising the moouable Meridian above
the Horizon at that altitude, so as the 52. degr. may be even with the Horizon.

A Figure showing the latitude of any place to be equal to the elevation of
the Pole.


What other uses has this circle?

In this circle are set down the four quarters of the world, as East, West,
North and South, and the rest of the winds: Again, this circle deuideth the
a^^ificial day from the artificial night for all the while that the Sun is above
the Horizon it is day, and whilst it is under the same it is night. And by
this circle we know what stars do continually appear, and which are
continually hidden, also what stars do rise and go down. Again, in taking
the elevation of the Pole, this circle is chiefly to be considedered, for when
we know how many degrees the Pole is raised above the Horizon, then we have the
elevation thereof for that place. For to every several place, yea to every
little moment of the earth in an oblique Sphere, belongs his proper Horizon
and several altitude of the Pole, whereby it appears that the Horizons are
infinite and without number.

How shall I know in any place, having an oblique Horizon, how much the Pole
is elevated above the Horizon?

That is declared in the second book of this Treatise, whereas I speak of the
latitude and longitude of the earth, in the eight chapter.

Of the Meridian, and of the uses thereof. Chap. 18.
WHat is the Meridian?

It is a great immoouable circle passing through the Poles of the world, and
through the Poles of the Horizon.

Why is it called the Meridian?

Because that when the sun rising above the Horizon in the East, comes to
touch this line with the center of his body, the^ it is midday or noontide to
those, through whose Zenith that circle passes And when the sun after his
going down in the west comes to touch the self line again in ye point
opposite, it is to them midnight, and note that diverse cities, having diverse
latitudes, that is to say, being distant one from another North and South be
it never so far, may have one self Meridian: but if they be distant one from
another East and West, be it never so little, then they must needs have
diverse Meridians, and such distance betwixt the two several Meridians, is
called the difference of longitude, whereof we shall speak hereafter more at
large when we come to treat of the longitude and latitude of the earth, which
something differs from the longitude and latitude of the Stars or Planets,
whereof we have already spoken in the 11. chapter.

How many Meridians be there?

The Astronomers do appoint for every two degrees of the Equinoctial a
Meridian, so as they make in all 180. Albeit most commonly in the Sphere they
set down but one, which serves for all by turning the body of the Sphere to
it, which for that cause is called the moouable Meridian. And in such Spheres
as have not a foot and a standing Horizon, there is no Meridian at all, but
the two Colures are feign to supply their want, but all terrestrial Globes are
commonly described with twelve Meridians, cutting the Equinoctial in 24.
points, and dividing the lame into 24. spaces, every space containing 15.
degrees, which is an hour, by means whereof we know how much sooner or latter
it is noonetide in any place, for it is noontide sooner to those whose Meridian
is more Eastward then to them whose Meridian is more Westward. And contrariwise
the Eclpise of the Sun or Moon appears sooner to those whose Meridian is
more Westward.

What other uses has this circle?

This circle deuideth the East part of the world from the West and also it
shows both the North and South, for by turning your face toward the East,
you shall find the Sun being in that line at noone tide to be on your right
hand right South, the opposite part of which circle shows on your left hand
the North. Also this circle by reason that it passes through both the Poles of
the world, deuideth both the Equinoctial and all his Paralels into two equal
parts as well above the Horizon as under the Horizon, and by that means it
deuideth the artificial day and artificial night each of them into two parts,
that is to say, into two semidiurnal and into two seminocturnal parts. For
betwixt that part of the Horizon where the sun rises, mounting still until he
come to this circle, which is at noontide, is contained the first half of the
day, and the other half is from the same circle to the going down of the Sun
under the Horizon. And the first part of the night is the space betwixt the
Suns going down and his coming again to the Meridian, which is at midnight,
and from thence to the time of his rising is the other half of the night, and
also the Astronomers take the beginning of their natural day from this circle,
counting either from noontide to noontide, or else from midnight to midnight.
Again, this circle shows the right ascentions and declinations of the
stars, and the highest altitude, otherwise called the Meridian altitude of
the Sun or of any star, or degree of the Ecliptique, or of any other point in
the firmament, all which uses and many others more you shall better understand
hereafter, when we come to show the uses of the globe as well terrestrial as
celestial.

Of the vertical circle, and uses thereof. Chap. 19.
But here you have to note that though the most part of Geographers do set down
in their Spheres but 6. great circles, yet there is another great circle
called the circle Vertical, which passes right over our heads through our
zenith, wheresoever we be upon the land or sea, crossing our Horizon in 2.
points opposite, and dividing the same into two equal parts, and such kind of
circles are called in Arabicke Azimuthes, whereof you may imagine that there be
so many as there be rombes or winds in the Mariners Compass, which are in
number 32. yea, and if you will, you may make half so many as there be degrees
in the Horizon, which are in number 360. the half whereof is 180. If you be
right under the Equinoctial, and do go or sail right East or West, then the
Equinoctial is your Vertical circle, and if you go or sail right North or
South, then the Meridian is your vertical circle, which two circles
notwithstanding do always keep their names. But in sailing by any other
rombe, that circle which is imagined to pass from the true East point right
over your head unto the true West point, or which crosses your Meridian in the
zenith point with right Sphericall angles, is most properly called the
vertical circle, and the learned seamen have great respect to two special
kinds of Vertical circles, that is, the Magnetical Meridian, and the Azimuth
of the Sun.

What manner of vertical Circles be those, and whereto serve they?

M. Borrough in his discourse of the variation of the Compass, defines the
Magneticall Meridian to be a great Circle, which passes through the Zenith and
the Pole of the load stone called in Latin Magnes, and deuideth the Horizon
into two equal parts, by crossing the same in two points opposite. Again the
Azimuth of the sun is a great Circle, passing through the Zenith and the
Center of the sun in what part of the heaven so ever he be, so as he be above
the Horizon, which Circle deuideth the Horizon into two equal parts, by
crossing the same in two points opposite, And by help of these two Circles and
a certain instrument made of purpose to give a true shadow, he teaches to
find out the true Meridia^ of any place: And also to know how much any
Mariners Compass does vary from the true North and South, in Northeasting or
Northwesting, whereof I shall speak more at large hereafter in my treatise of
Navigations.

What use is there of the vertical Circle or Azimuthes?

The vertical Circle shows what time the Sun or any other star rising
beyond the true East point, is passed before the Sun or said star, comes
to the true East or any other rombe. Also in what Coast or part of heaven, the
Sun, Moon, or any other star is at any time being mounted above the
Horizon, as whether it be Southeast or Northeast, or in any other rombe: Also
by help of the vertical Circle most properly so called, are the twelve houses
of heaven set, according to Campanus and Gazula. And by help of these Circles
you may also know how any place upon the earth bears one from another either
Eastward or Westward, and so forth, for every place has his several Azimuth
answerable to the Horizon and Zenith of the said place.

Of certain Circles called Almicanterathes.

Since I have spoken here somewhat of the vertical Circles called Azimuthes,
it shall not be amiss to show you also that there be other Circles to be
considered of in the Sphere as well as in the Astrolabe called Almicanterathes,
that is to say, Circles of Altitude, which though they be not all great
Circles, for every one is lesser then other proceeding from the oblique Horizon
of any place to the Zenith of the said place, yet the first Almicanterath
which is the very oblique Horizon it self, is a great Circle dividing the
Sphere into two equal parts, and all the rest are lesser and lesser, until
you come to the very Zenith, and are paralels to the Horizon, even as the
Tropiques and the other lesser Circles are paralels unto the Equinoctial and
the Zenith in Sphericall bodies is the Center of them all, though it be not so
in Astrolabes, for there every Almicanterath is fame to have his several
Center, of which Circles there be in all 90. according to the number of 90.
degrees contained betwixt the oblique Horizon and the Zenith, and these Circles
do serve to show the Altitude of the Sun or Moon, or of any other star
fixed or wandering, being mounted at any time above the oblique Horizon, which
is easy to be found by any Quadrant, Crosse-staffe, or Astrolabe. But leaving
to speak any further of these Circles, because they are not used to be
described in Spheres but only in Astrolabes, I will now treat of the four
lesser Circles before mentioned, which are commonly set down in every Sphere
or Globe.

Of the four lesser circles, that is to say, the circle Arctique, the circle
Antarctique, the Tropique of Cancer, and the Tropique of Capricorn, and also
of the five Zones, that is to say, two cold, two temperate, and one extremely
hot. Chap. 20.
WHich call you the lesser Circles?

They are those that do not divide the Sphere into two equal parts, as the
great Circles do, and of such there be four, that is the two Polar circles,
and the two Tropiques, that is to say, the Tropique of Cancer, and the Tropique
of Capricorn, of which Polar circles the one is called Arctique, and the other
Antarctique, and are made by the turning about of the two Poles of the
Zodiaque, which Poles being situated in the Colure of the Solstices are so
far distant from the Poles of the world, as is the greatest declination of
the Sun from the Equinoctial, which is 23. degrees, 28^ as has been said
before.

Which is the Arctique Circle, and why is it so called?

The Arctique Circle is that which is next to the North pole, and has his name
of this word Arctos which is the great bear or Charles wayne, which are seven
stars placed next to this Circle on the outside thereof, and it is otherwise
called the Septentrionall Circle of this word Septentrio, which is as much to
say as seven Oxen, signified by the seven stars of the little Bear, which
do move slowely like Oxen, and are placed all within the said Circle, and
the bright star that is in the tippe of the tail of the said little Bear,
is called of the Mariners the load star or North star, whereby they sail
on the Sea, and the Center of this Circle is the North Pole of the world which
is not to be seen with man's eye.

What is the Antarctique Circle?

It is that which is next unto the South Pole, and it is so called, because it
is opposite or contrary to the Circle Arctique.

Now describe the two Tropiques.

The Tropique of Cancer is a Circle imagined to be betwixt the Equinoctial
and the Circle Arctique, which Circle the Sun makes when he enters into the
first degree of Cancer, which is about the twelfth or thirteenth day of June
being then in his greatest declination from the Equinoctial Northwarde, and
nighest to our Zenith, being ascended to the highest point that he can go,
at which time the days with us be at the longest, and the nights at the
shortest. And so from thence he declineth to the other Tropique called the
Tropique of Capricorn, which is a Circle imagined to be betwixt the
Equinoctial and the Circle Antarctique, which the Sun makes when he enters
into the first degree of Capricorn, which is about the twelfth or thirteenth
day of December, at which time he is again in his greatest declination from
the Equinoctial Southwarde, and furthest from our Zenith: whereby the days
with us be then at the shortest, and the nights at the longest: And note that
these two Circles are called Tropiques of this Greek word Tropos, which is as
much to say as a conversion or turning, for when the Sun arriueth to any of
these two Circles, he turns back again either ascending or descending, by
reason of which four Circles as well the firmament as the earth is divided
into five Zones, that is to say, two cold, two temperate, and one extremely
hot, otherwise called the burnt Zone, of which five Zones, the foresaid four
Circles are the true bounds. For of the two cold Zones, the one lies betwixt
the North pole and the Circle Arctique, and the other lies betwixt the South
Pole and the Circle Antarctique, and of the two temperate Zones, the one lies
betwixt the Circle Arctique, and the Tropique of Cancer, and the other lies
betwixt the Circle Antarctique, and the Tropique of Capricorn, and the extreme
hot Zone lies betwixt the two Tropiques, in the midst of which two
Tropiques, is the Equinoctial line, as you may see in this figure, and also in
the Sphere or Globe it self.

A figure showing the five foresaid Zones.


Of which Zones the ancient men were wont to say that three were uninhabitable,
that is, the two cold, and the extreme hot, which experience shows in
these latter days to be untrue, as we shall declare more at large when we
come to treat of the division of the earth: Again you have to understand
that every one of these lesser Circles does contain in length, 360. degrees
as well as every one of the greater Circles, but the degrees are not of like
bigness, no more then the Circles themselves are like in compass or circuit,
for the lesser the Circles are in circuit, the lesser their degrees must needs
be.

Since every of the lesser Circles differ one from another in circuit, and
thereby the degrees of every Circle be lesser then other, how shall I know the
true quantity of every degree in each Circle, and how many minutes are required
in every lesser degree proportionally to answer one degree of the Equinoctial.

For the better knowledge hereof, you must first imagine that there may be as
many Circles made from the Equinoctial toward any of the Poles, as there be
degrees of Latitude, which are in number 90. as has been said before: And
the nigher that any Circle is to the Equinoctial, the greater it is in
circuit, and the further from the Equinoctial toward any of the Poles, the
lesser in circuit, and therefore more or less minutes are requisite to answer
to one degree of the Equinoctial, as you may easily perceive by this Table
following, consisting of 6. collums, every front or head whereof is noted with
three great letters, D. M. S. signifying degrees, minutes and seconds, six
times repeated, and in the beginning of the first colum on the left hand is set
down one degree, which is the first degree of 90. and nighest unto the
Equinoctial, right against which one degree is placed toward the right hand,
59. minutes, and 59. seconds: and so proceeding from degree to degree
successively, until you come to 90. you shall find how many minutes and
seconds do answer to one degree of the Equinoctial, and this Table will also
serve to show the difference of miles in every sundry clyme or parallel,
whereof we shall speak hereafter when we come to treat of the earth.



A Table showing how many minutes are requisite to make one degree, in every
lesser circle answerable to one degree of the Equinoctial.
D M S 1 59 59 2 59 58 3 59 53 4 59 51 5 59 46 6 59 40 7 59 33 8 59 25 9 59 16
10 59 5 11 58 54 12 58 41 13 58 28 14 58 13 15 57 57 16 57 41 17 57 23 18 57 4
19 56 44 20 56 23 21 56 1 22 55 38 23 55 14 24 54 49 25 54 23 26 53 56 27 53 28
28 52 59 29 52 29 30 51 58 31 51 26 33 50 19 34 49 45 35 49 9 36 48 32 37 47 55
38 47 17 39 46 38 40 45 58 41 45 17 42 44 35 43 43 53 44 43 10 45 42 26 46 41
41 47 40 55 48 40 9 49 39 22 50 38 34 51 37 46 52 36 56 53 36 7 54 35 16 55 34
25 56 33 33 57 32 41 58 31 48 19 30 54 50 30 0 61 29 5 62 28 10 63 27 14 64 26
18 65 25 21 66 24 24 67 23 27 68 22 29 69 21 30 70 20 31 71 19 32 72 18 32 73
17 33 74 16 32 75 15 32 76 14 31 77 13 30 78 12 28 79 11 27 80 10 25 81 9 23 82
8 21 83 7 19 84 6 16 85 5 14 86 4 11 87 3 8 88 2 5 89 1 3 90 0 0

Of the stars and celestial bodies contained in the firmament, and first of
their substance. Chap. 21.
Having briefly described all the Circles as well greater as lesser that are
imagined to be in the 8. heaven, I think it good now to speak somewhat of the
stars and celestial bodies placed in the said heaven, And first of their
substance, and then of their moving, figure, shape, number, magnitude or
greatness, also of their Longitude, Latitude, declination, ascension, descention
both right and oblique, and of the ascentionall difference, and finally of the
threefold Poetical rising and going down of the stars, but first of their
substance.

Of what substance are the stars?

The stars be of the same substance that the heavens are wherein they are
placed, differing only from the same in thicknes, and therefore some defining
a star do say, that it is a bright and shining body, and the thickest part
of his heaven, apt both to receive and to retain the light of the Sun, and
thereby is visible and object to the sight: for the heaven it self being most
pure, thin, transparent, and without color is not visible, and for this
cause the milke-white impression in heaven like unto a white way called of the
Astronomers Galaxia, and of the common people our Ladies way is visible to the
eye, by reason that it is thicker then any other part of the heaven.

Why are not the stars seen as well in the day, as in the night.

Because they are darkened by the excellent brightness of the Sun from whom
they borrowe their chiefest light.

Of the moving and shape of the stars. Chap. 22.
WHat moving have the stars?

The self same moving that the heaven has wherein they are placed.

Whereby are the heavens moved?

Some say that the first mooueable is turned by God himself, and all the rest
of the heavens every one by his proper intelligence, which though it turns
his heaven about, yet it gives neither life, sense, nor understanding
thereunto, as some have untruly holden, affirming the heavens to be living and
intelligible bodies.

If the stars have no moving of themselves, whereof comes it then, that
some seem to our sight sometime nigher and sometime further off.

All the fixed stars of the firmament are always of like distance,
notwithstanding by reason of the manifold moving of the firmament, wherein
they are placed, they seem to change their places, and sometime to be more
toward the East or West, North or South. And whereas the vii. Planets called
the wandering stars, do change their places now here now there, that chances
not by their own moving, but by the moving of the heavens wherein they are
placed: for a star being round of shape has no members meet to walk from
one place to another, but only changes his place through the motion of his
Sphere or heaven wherein such Planet is fixed.

Of the number of the stars, and of their magnitude or greatness, and into
how many Images they are divided, and how many stars every image contains.
Chap. 23.
MAy the stars be numbered by man?

No, for as David says, that belongs only to God, who as he created them,
so he can number them and call them all by their names, notwithstanding the
Astronomers by their industry and diligent observation, have attained to the
knowledge of many: as first they know the seuenplanetes, otherwise called the
wandringe stars, and have made manifest demonstrations of their motions, and
by continual observation have found out the manifold virtues, powers and
influences of the same, but of the fixed stars they could never find more
then 1022. and because the stars are not equal in greatness or bigness, they
make fix differences of greatness, appointing to the first difference 15.
stars, which are bigger then all the rest, whereof every one contains the
earth 207. times, to the second difference 45. stars, whereof every one
contains the earth 90. times. To the third they appoint 208. stars, whereof
every one contains the earth 72. times. To the fourth difference they
appoint 474. stars, whereof every one contains the earth 54. times. To the
fifth they assign 217. stars, whereof every one contains the earth 57.
times. To the sixth or last greatness they appoint 49. small stars, whereof
every one contains the earth 18. times, and some say 20. times. Besides these
there be 14. others, whereof 5. be called clowdy and the other dark, because
they are not to be seen but of a very quick and sharp sight. And you have to
note that the ancient Astronomers do divide all the fixed stars to them
known into 48. images, whereof they liken some to living things as to men,
women, beasts, monsters, fowls, fishes, and creeping worms, and some to
things without life, having some artificial shape, of which 48. images, they
appoint 12. to the Zodiaque, commonly called the 12. signs, as Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius
and Pisces. Again they place in the North part of the firmament 21. images,
and in the South part thereof 15. images, which make in all 48. The description
of all which images, together with their names hereafter follows: and first I
will describe unto you the twelve Images contained in the Zodiaque.

Of the xij. Images or signs of the Zodiaque. Chap. 24.
THe twelve signs (as some affirm) do contain of the foresaid number of
fixed stars 273. For the first sign called Aries, that is to say, the Ram,
contains 13. stars, which Image or sign being placed in the conjunction of
the Zodiaque with the Equinoctial, has his back turned toward the North,
and his head toward the East, and rises with his head, and goes down with
his feet. The second sign called Taurus, that is to say, the Bull, contains
33. stars, whereof there is one bright star of the first bigness called
Oculus Tauri, that is to say, the Bulls eye, who has his head enclyning
toward the West as though he looked toward the earth, and rises and goes
down with his heels upward. The third Sign called Gemini, that is to say
the twins, do contain 18. stars, their heads looking toward the North,
and their backs being joined together do embrace one another, and do rise
lying, and do go down with their feet. The fourth Sign called Cancer, that
is to say, the Crabbe contains nine stars, extending his feet toward
both the Poles, and looking toward Leo, has his belly turned toward the
earth, and he rises and falls with his hinder part or back part of his
body. The fifth Sign called Leo, that is to say the Lion, contains ten
stars, whereof there be two bright stars of the first bigness, the one in
his breast called Cor Leonis, and Regulus, that is to say the Lions heart, and
the other in his tail called Cauda Leonis, that is to say, the Lions tail,
who looks toward Cancer, and having his back turned toward the North, he
rises and goes down with his head. The sixth Sign called Virgo, that is to
say, the Uirgine, whose head is behind the Lion and touches the Equinoctial
line with her left hand, holding in the same hand an ear of corn, she both
ryseth and goes down with her head: this image contains six and twenty
stars, whereof there is one bright star of the first bigness called Spica
Virginis, that is to say, an ear of corn. The seventh Sign called Libra,
that is to say the Balance, containing eight stars has two skales, whereof
the one hangs toward the North, and the other toward the South. The eight
sign called Scorpius, that is to say the Scorpion, contains one and twenty
stars, who looks toward, Virgo, and extends his feet toward both the
Poles, he boweth his tail toward the North, having his belly turned toward
the earth, and he rises and goes down bowing. The ninth Sign called
Sagittarius, that is to say the Archer, containing one and thirty stars,
has his head toward the North, and looks toward the Scorpion, having a
bow and a shaft, whereof the bow touches his left hand and left foot, he
rises right up, and goes down headlong. The tenth Sign called
Capricornus, that is to say, the Goat containing eight and twenty stars,
has his back turned toward the North, and his head toward the Archer,
and turning himself toward Aquarius, he rises right up, and goes down
headlong. The eleventh Sign called Aquarius, that is to say, the water-bearer
containing two and forty stars, has his head toward the North,
extending his left hand upon the back of Capricorn, and with his right
hand powers out water out of his pot, which bends toward the East,
runs even to Pisces, he rises and goes down with his head before any
other of his members. The twelueth Sign called Pisces, that is to say, two
Fishes, do contain four and thirty stars, whereof the back of the first
is toward the North, and the back of the second toward the West arm of
Andromeda, and one of the Fishes looks toward Aquarius, and the other
toward the North, and betwixt these two Fishes is a certain little line
wherewith their tails are bound together as it were with a bond, the lower
part of which Fishes, does always both rise and go down, and not the upper
part: And though the 12. Signs of the Zodiaque are said to be equal both in
length and breadth, that is to say, having thirty degrees in length, and
twelve degrees in breadth, as has been said before, yet these Images are not
equal, for some do extend further then the Zodiaque in breadth, and some are
more then thirty degrees in length; As the Tables of Alphonsus do manifestly
show, who says there that the twelve Signs do contain three hundred and
fifty stars, for he appoints to Aries eighteen, to Taurus forty four,
to Gemini twenty five, to Cancer thirteen, to Leo thirty five, to Virgo
thirty two, to Libra seventeen, to Scorpio twenty four, to Sagittarius
thirty and one, to Capricornus twenty eight, to Aquarius forty five, to
Pisces thirty eight, which make in all three hundred and fifty, in which
Tables are also set down the Longitude, Latitude, and Magnitude of the said
stars, but the Longitude of the said stars, is far altered from that
Longitude which they had in his tune, whereof we shall speak hereafter more
at large.

Of the xxj. Northern Images. Chap. 25.
WHich be they?

These here following, first Vrsa minor, that is to say, the lesser Bear
containing 7. stars, the tail star whereof being a bright star of the
third bigness is called the load-starre: The second is called Vrsa mayor, that
is to say, the great Bear containing 27. stars, whereof there be 7.
principal, making a shape like unto a Cart with four wheels, and therefore
it is commonly called Charles waine. The third is called Draco, that is to say
the Dragon that kept Iunos Orchard from robbing, containing 31. stars. The
fourth is called Cepheus, the proper name of a King of Ethiope, containing 11.
stars. The fifth is called Boots, that is to say the roaring keeper of the
Bear, containing 22. stars, whereof there is one bright star betwixt his
legs, of the first bigness called Arcturus. The sixth is called Corona
Ariadnae, that is to say the Crown of Ariadna the daughter of king Minos,
containing 8. stars. The seventh is Hercules, who lies groueling with his
heels toward the North pole, holding a clubbe in his right hand, and a Lions
skin hanging on his left arm containing 28. stars. The eight is called
Lira, that is to say an instrument of music like a Harp placed in heaven in
the memory of Orpheus, containing 10. stars. The ninth is called Cignus,
that is to say the Swanne, into which Jupiter transformed himself to deceive
the Nymph Laeda, containing 17. stars. The tenth is called Cassiopea sitting
in her chair, wife to Cepheus, and mother to Andromeda, containing 13.
stars. The eleventh is called Perseus, holding his sword in the one hand,
and the head of Gorgon or Medusa in the other hand, whose hairs were all
Serpents, containing 26. stars. The twelfth is Auriga and Ericthonius, who
was the inuentor of the first Chariot that ever was made, containing 13.
stars. The 13. is called Serpentarius and Anguitenens, that is to say, he
that holds the Serpent, who as some think was Aesculapius the famous
Physician, containing 24. stars. The 14. is called Serpens or Anguis, that is
to say, the Serpent of Esculapius containing 18 stars. The 15. is called
Sagitta or Telum, that is to say the shaft or dart wherewith Hercules slew the
Eagle tormenting Prometheus in the mount Caucasus, containing 5. stars. The 16.
is called Aquila, that is to say, the Eagle which carried Ganimedes into heaven
containing 9. stars. The 17. is called Delphinus that is to say the Dolphyn,
which saved Arion that excellent Musician, being cast by Pirates into the sea,
containing 10. stars. The 18. is called minor Equus, that is to say, the lesser
Horse, containing only 4. little dark stars in his head. The 19. is the
great Horse called Paegasus, that is to say the winged Horse, wherewith
Bellerophon conquered the monstrous beast called Chimera, which was half a
Lion and half a Dragon, and is adorned with 20. stars. The 20. is called
Andromeda the daughter of Cepheus by Cassiopeia, and wife to Perseus, who for
her constant love toward her husband, was placed in heaven nigh unto him, and
was adorned with 23. stars. The 21. is called Triangulum, that is to say a
Triangle or three cornerd figure, which being like in shape to the I Will Cicilia
the Goddess Ceres obtained to be placed in heaven, and was adorned with 4.
stars, that is to say, every corn one, and the fourth in the midst of the
shortest side: To these (in mine opinion) ought to be added Bernices hair,
called crinis Bernices, which in all celestial globes is placed not far from
the right hinder foot of the great Bear, and this Image contains 4. little
stars.

Of the 15. Southern Images. Chap. 26.
WHich be they?

These hereafter following, whereof the first is called Caetus, that is to say
the Whale, that monstrous fish which by the appointment of Neptune, would have
destroyed Andromeda, whom Perseus delivered by killing the Fish, and
afterward took Andromeda to wife, which Fish Neptune placed in heaven,
adorning the same with two and twenty stars. The second is called Orion with
his sword by his side, who afterward was slain by Diana by mis-hap against her
will, for the which she placed him in heaven, adorning him with 38. stars,
whereof there be two bright stars of the first bigness, the one in his right
shoulder called Bed Alguze, and the other in his left foot called Rigell
Alguze. The third is the flood called Eridanus, into the which Phaeton the
son of Apollo was stricken with a thunder bolt by Jupiter, for burning the
earth by rashly driving his fathers Chariot, which he was not able to guide, in
memory whereof the flood was placed in heaven, and adorned with 34. stars,
whereof one is a bright star of the first bigness called Acarnar. The fourth
is called Lepus, that is to say the Hare, placed nigh unto Orion, because he
was a hunter, adorned with 12. stars. The fifth is called Canis mayor, that is
to say the great Dog, passing all others in swiftness, which was given by
Aurora to Cepheus the son of Eolus, and is placed next to the Hare, being
adorned with 18. stars, whereof there is in his mouth a very fair star of
the first bigness called Syrius. The sixth is called Canis minor, that is to
say, the lesser Dog, without the which Orion his master would not be placed
in heaven, which has but two stars, whereof the one is in his flank, and is
a bright star of the first bigness called Canicula and Procion. The seventh
is the ship called Argos, in the which Jason and his companions sailed to
Cholcos to win the Golden Fleese, which is adorned with 45. stars, whereof
there is one bright star of the first bigness in the left oar called
Canopus. The eight is called Hydra, that is to say, the Water-serpent which
Hercules slew, or as some say which kept the water-bowle, and would not suffer
the thirsty Crow to drink, which Crow Apollo sent for water to do
sacrifice, and is adorned with 25. stars. The ninth is called Crater, that is
to say the Cup or Bowl which the Crow brought too late unto Apollo, and
therefore his feathers were made all black whereas before they were white,
containing 7. stars. The tenth is called Coruus that is to say the Crow
before mentioned, adorned with 7. stars. The 11. is called Chiron sieve
Centaurus, the son of Saturn passing all others in justice and religion, and
therefore is figured in heaven as though he were offering sacrifice upon an
altar adorned with 37. stars whereof there is one bright star of the first
bigness in his right foot called Chiron and Centaurus. The twelfth is called
Lupus, that is to say the Wolf, into which Licaon the cruel Tirant was turned
by Jupiter, or as some say that Wolf which Centaurus killed to do sacrifice
upon the altar containing 19. stars. The thirteenth is called Ara, that is to
say the Altar made by the Smithes of Vulcane, whereupon all the Gods swear to
revenge the insolency and pride of the Giants, which altar is placed next to
Centaurus being adorned with 7. stars. The fourteenth is called Corona
Australis that is to say, the Southern Crown which Bacchus did wear when he
fetched his mother Semele from hell, which is placed in heaven, and is adorned
with thirteen stars. The fifteenth and last of the Southern signs is
called Piscis Australis, that is to say, the Southern Fish which was placed in
heaven in memorial of the fishes which the people of Syria did worship as
their Gods, and is adorned with 12. stars, whereof there is one bright
star of the first bigness in his mouth called Fomahant: All which Images and
Signs before mentioned, as well Northern as Southern, you may see plainly
described in every celestial Globe, and also set forth in Plano in the nether
end of Vopellius his universal Map, that is to say the Northern signs on
the left side, and the Southern signs on the right side of the Map: Or in
the front of Planctius his great universal Map, who in the rondle
representing the Southern half of the celestial Globe, sets down also
certain Southern stars lately found out by the travelers into the Indies,
as the Cross, the Southern Triangle, Noe his Dove or Pigeon, and another in
shape of a man called Polophilax, so as there be now in all 19. Southern
Images.

Of the longitude of the fixed stars, and of the procession of the vernall
Equinoctial point, and what it is. Chap. 27.
WHat is the Longitude of a star?

The Longitude of any star, is that Arc or portion of the Ecliptique line
which is contained betwixt the first point of Aries, and that Circle which
passes through the Poles of the Zodiaque, and also through the body of the
star, as for example the star called Cor Leonis is distant in these days
from the vernall Equinoctial point of the Ecliptique line 143. degrees and 32^
and thereby is found to be in the 23. degree and 32^ of Leo, again the star
called Spica Virginis in these days is distant from the first point of Aries
198. degrees, and so is found to be in the eighteenth of Libra.

Why do you say in these days?

Because the fixed stars in process of time, do change their Longitude by
reason of their proper moving upon the Poles of the Zodiaque, which is from
West to East, for whereas Spica Virginis in Ptolomies time was in the 26.
degree of Virgo, it is found now to be in the 18. of Libra, the cause whereof
is the precession of the Equinoctial point or section.

Define what that Precession is?

It is an Arc or portion of the Ecliptique line, contained betwixt two great
Circles, both passing through the Poles of the Zodiaque, in such sort as the
one passes through the first minute of the vernall Equinoctial point of the
said Ecliptique, and the other Circle passes through the first or former
star of the Rams horn, from which star the Astronomers do make all the
celestial motions and reuolutions to take their first beginning, and this
star in old time past was known to be before the vernall Equinoctial
point, which is the first moment of Aries, but now it is found to have passed
that point so far toward the Solsticiall point, as in these days it is
known to be in the 27. degree and 42^ of Aries, and in process of time it
will be clean out of Aries, and enter into Taurus.

Of the Latitude of the fixed stars. Chap. 28.
WHat is the Latitude of a star?

The Latitude is none other thing, but the distance of any star from the
Ecliptique line either toward the North or South pole of the Zodiaque, and
such Latitude never changes or alters, for as the star Spica Virginis is
at this present two degrees distant from the Ecliptique line toward the South,
so it ever has been and ever shall be, and the like is to be said of all the
rest of the fixed stars which do always keep their Latitude, be it
Northward or Southward, near to the Ecliptique or far from the same.

Of the Declination of the fixed stars. Chap. 29.
WHat is the declination of a star?

The declination is none other thing, but the distance of any fixed star from
the Equinoctial, either Northward or Southward, which is mutable as well as
the Longitude: for as the fixed stars do change their Longitudes, so also by
little and little they decline either more or less from the Equinoctial: As
for example, the declination of the star called Canicula, that is to say the
lesser Dog in the year of our Lord, 138. when Ptolomie lived, was 15.
degrees 44^ and 38^ toward the South. But in these days the declination of
the said star is but six degrees and 7^ toward the South, and by reason
that the fixed stars in process of time do change their Longitude and
declination, they are not always under one self sign, but do flit out of
one sign into another.

How is the Longitude, Latitude, and declination of any star to be known,
and how are the stars themselves to be known in the firmament.

The Longitude, Latitude, and declination of any star is to be known most
truly by the Astronomicall Tables calculated of purpose, and you may know the
same also without having regard to every small minute, by help of the
celestial Globe, all the necessary uses whereof I have set down in a little
Treatise to be added hereafter to this Book, and there also I show you how to
find out any star in the firmament that is described in the globe, in which
Globe are set down as many stars as ever were known, a few excepted toward
the South pole, which were found out but of late days, of which stars I
shall have occasion to speak hereafter in my Treatise of Navigations. In the
mean time I will proceed to the ascension and descention of the stars both
right, mean, and oblique.

Of the ascension and descention, that is the rising and setting of the
stars, as well according to the Astronomers, as according to the Poets. Chap.
30.
Do the Astronomers and Poets differ touching this matter?

Yea they differ greatly, as well in name as in matter: for whereas of the Poets
it is called ortus and occasus Signorum, that is to say, the rising and falling
of the Signs, so of the Astronomers it is called Ascentio and descentio
Signorum, that is to say, the ascension and descention of the Signs, again
they differ in matter, or rather in manner, for that the Astronomers do
consider the rising and falling of the stars more exactly then the Poets, for
the Astronomers do consider the degrees and minutes of the same, and also do
ground their ascension and descention upon more certain demonstrations then the
Poets. Moreover whereas the Poets by their manner of rising and falling, do
simply set down the time of things done or to be done, the Astronomers do
the same a great deal more exactly, and by their manner of ascension and
descention do consider the increase and decrease of the days, of which
Astronomicall ascension and descention, I mind here to treat first in general
and then in particular.

Of the Astronomicall ascension and descention in general both right, mean,
and oblique, and what a given Arc is. Chap. 31.
DEfine what the Astronomicall ascension and descention is.

Astronomicall ascension is that portion or Arc of the Equinoctial line which
rises together with some given Arc of the Ecliptique line above the Horizon,
and the descention is that portion or Arc of the Equinoctial that goes down
or sets together with some given Arc of the Ecliptique line under the
Horizon, according to the moving of the world which is from East to West.

What mean you by a given Arc?

A given Arc is as much to say as some supposed portion of the Ecliptique or
of any other Circle, as if you would know the ascension of some supposed
portion of the Ecliptique, containing for example 25. or 30. degrees, here this
portion of the Ecliptique containing that number of degrees, is called the
given Arc, of which Arkes some are called continual, and some descrete or
divided, which I mind to English here whole and broken, for so I do English
quantitas, continua, and discreta in my Logic, That Arc is said to be
continual or whole which takes his beginning from the first point of Aries,
and so proceeding orderly, ends at some other degree of the said Ecliptique.
And that Arc is called discrete or broken, which does not take his beginning
from the first point of Aries, but begins at some other degree of the
Ecliptique, as for example, suppose that it begins at the fourteenth of
Taurus, and ends at the fifteenth of Gemini, this Arc is called a divided or
broken Arc, because it does not begin at the first point of Aries, and so
proceed successively: moreover you have to understand that the ancient
Astronomers do commonly make but two kinds of ascension and descention, that
is, right and oblique, but there be in deed three kinds of ascension, that is
to say, right, oblique, and mean ascension.

When is any ascension said to be right, oblique or mean?

It is said to be right, when that portion of the Equinoctial which rises or
goes down together with the Ecliptique, is greater or more in circuit then
that of the Ecliptique. And it is said to be oblique, when that portion of the
Equinoctial which rises or falls together with the Ecliptique, is lesser
then that of the Ecliptique, Again that is said to be mean ascension, when
that portion of the Ecliptique which ascends, is neither greater nor lesser
then that of the Equinoctial, for as in the right Sphere every quarter of the
Ecliptique has a mean ascension, and equal to every quarter of the
Equinoctial, beginning the quarters at any of the four principal points, so
if you take three signs in any other part of the Zodiaque, their ascentions
will not agree with a quarter of the Equinoctial, since there is no one sign
that does equally agree with the like portion of the Equinoctial, and all this
matter depends upon the knowledge of the use of certain Circles before
defined.

Which be they?

These three, the Zodiaque, the Equinoctial, and the Horizon: for first the
Zodiaque does show the place of the Sun, that is to say in what degree it is
of any sign together with the minutes of the same, and turning about every day
by the diurnall motion, does both appear above the Horizon, and also is hidden
under the Horizon. Secondly the Equinoctial with his equal rising and going
down, does measure the time of the sun whilst he makes his abode unequally
and diuersely above the Horizon. Thirdly the Horizon deuideth the one
Hemispheare from the other, on which Horizon is to be considered what Angle any
sign or star makes therewith, in his ascension or descention, and according
as any portion of the Ecliptique rises or sets rightly or obliquely, so in
respect of the Angle which it makes with the Horizon, it is called a right or
oblique ascension or descention.

Why should the ascentions and descentions be measured rather by the
equinoctial line then by the Ecliptique, since the course of the sun
measures all times?

The cause thereof is the obliquitie of the Zodiaque, having diverse and
variable situations, whereby the sun abides sometimes a great while above
the Horizon, and sometimes but a little while, all which inequality is only
to be measured by the Equinoctial, which is always equally moved upon his
Poles. Hitherto of the Astronomicall ascension and descention in general, now
of all three ascentions and descentions in particular.

Of the right, oblique, and mean ascension in particular, and of the chiefest
causes of such diversity of ascentions. Chap. 32.
ANd for the better understanding of the Astronomicall ascension and
descention, we will make this division, for either it is of some point or
star, or else of some portion of a Circle chiefly of the Ecliptique line. In
the ascension of any point or star, we consider two things. First what
Angle it makes with the Horizon either right or oblique. Secondly the time
from the rising of the first minute of Aries, which is the first beginning of
the Longitude of any star or Circle in heaven, and in respect of the Angle
every ascension is said to be right in a right Sphere, and oblique in an
oblique Sphere: Again the time of the ascension is to be measured by the
degrees of the Equinoctial from the first minute of Aries, unto that degree
and minute of the Equinoctial which ascends together with the stars, And
note by the way that 15. degrees of the Equinoctial do make an hour, and
four do make one degree of the same Equinoctial, for four times 15. do
make 60. minutes, which is an hour, Again every ascension considered,
according to the time of his gate, is either right, oblique, or mean: if it be
right, it is slow: if it be oblique, it is quick: if it be mean, it is
equal. Now the ascension of any Arc or portion of a Circle is also either
right, oblique, or mean: if it be right, it ascends slowely: if oblique, it
ascends quickly: if mean, it ascends equally. And the better to
understand all these three kinds of ascentions, I will set down these twelve
rules here following, whereof five do belong to the right Sphere, and seven
to the oblique.

In the right Sphere all the four quarters rising from the four principal
points, have a mean ascension, and so has all the four points themselves.

In the right Sphere all those signs that be equally distant from the four
principal points have equal ascentions.

3 In the right Sphere all stars or points that be in the Solsticiall
Colure have mean ascension.

4 In the right Sphere those signs that do ascend rightly, do descend
rightly, and those that do ascend obliquely, do descend obliquely.

5 In the right Sphere, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius, and Capricornus, do
ascend rightly, and all the rest obliquely.

6 In the oblique Sphere, the two Equinoctial points have mean ascension.

7 In the oblique Sphere each half of the Sphere, beginning at either of the
Equinoxes have mean ascension: but this rule holds not, if that you begin
any other where.

8 In the oblique Sphere, those signs that do ascend rightly, do desce^d
obliquely, and those which ascend obliquely do desce^d rightly.

9 In the oblique Sphere, the ascension of any supposed sign is equal to the
descention of his opposite sign, and the descention of any supposed sign, is
equal to the ascension of his opposite sign.

10 In the oblique Sphere, the ascension of any sign being added to his
descention, is equal to the ascension and descention of the same sign being
in the right Sphere.

11 In the oblique Sphere every two signs equally distant from the two points
of the Equinoctial, have equal ascentions and descentions.

12 In the oblique Sphere under the pole Arctique, al signs from Cancer to
Capricorn, do ascend rightly, and all the rest obliquely, but contrariwise
under the Pole Antarctique.

What is the chief cause of the diversity of ascentions and descentions,
as well in the right as in the oblique Sphere?

The chief cause is the diversity of the Angles which the Zodiaque makes with
the Horizon, for the sharper that the Angles be the lesser portion of the
Equinoctial rises together with the Ecliptique, and the righter that the
Angles be, the greater portion of the Equinoctial rises, but the Equinoctial
by reason of his uniformity, makes his Angles always equal one to another,
that is to say, in the right Sphere, it makes right Angles, and in the
oblique Sphere, though not right, yet in every sign it makes like Angles.

How to know the diversities of the ascentions and descentions, as well in the
right as oblique Sphere. Chap. 33.
THat is to be known most exactly by the Tables of ascentions calculated of
purpose by Johannes de Monte Regio, and by Reinholdus called in Latin Tabulae
directionum, and you may know it also without having respect to every minute
by marking and observing the same in a material Sphere or Globe, that has a
standing foot with a firm Horizon, for if you will know the diversities of
ascentions in a right Sphere, then you must lay the Sphere or Globe so as the
Horizon may pass through both the Poles, and in turning about with your hand
the Equinoctial, together with the Ecliptique from East to West, mark with
what degree of the Equinoctial any sign begins to ascend, and mark that
degree of the Equinoctial with a little piece of wax, then turn the Globe or
Sphere toward the West, until the last degree of the said sign do appear
just with the upper edge of the Horizon, and then mark what degree of the
Equinoctial is aunswerable to the said last degree of the foresaid sign, and
there set another piece of wax, then count the degrees of the Equinoctial
contained betwixt those two marks, and if it be more then 30. that sign is
said to ascend rightly, if it be less then 30. then that sign ascends
obliquely, if it be just 30. then it has a mean ascension, and by allowing
15. degrees of the Equinoctial to an hour, and 4^ to a degree, you shall know
in what time that sign rises. As for example if you would know what ascension
the whole sign Taurus has in a right Sphere, and also in what time it rises,
do thus, First lay both the Poles of the Sphere just upon the Horizon, so as
the same Horizon may pass through both ye poles, then bring the first point of
Taurus to the East part of the Horizon, so as it may touch the upper brimme or
edge of the Horizon, and staying it there with your hand, look what degree of
the Equinoctial does also touch the Horizon at that instant, which you shall
find to be 27. degrees 54^ and mark that degree of the Equinoctial with a
little piece of wax, or some other thing that may be easily put out or taken
away, that done, put forward the foresaid sign Taurus still toward the
West, until the last degree of the said sign be ascended up even to the
upper edge of the Horizon, and there staying it with your hand, look again
what degree of the Equinoctial does rise withal, which you shall find to be
57. degrees 48^ and there set another mark upon the Equinoctial, then by
telling the degrees contained in the Equinoctial betwixt the two marks, you
shall find the number of degrees to be 29. degrees 54^ and by allowing 15.
degrees to one hour, and 4^ to a degree, you shall find that the whole sign
Taurus spends in his rising one hour, 59^ 36^ But now since the Meridian in
any place (as has been said before) does always show the right ascension of
any star, sign, arc, or point, because that cutteth both the Equinoctial
and the Horizon with right Angles: you may therefore find the right ascension
of the said sign, or of any other sign or star without remoouing the
Sphere from your own elevation or Latitude in this manner following, bring
the first degree of Taurus close to the mooueable Meridian, and there staying
it mark what degree of the Equinoctial the Meridian cutteth at that present,
which you shall find to be 27. degrees 54^ which is the right ascension of the
first point of Taurus, then having brought the last point of Taurus to the
foresaid Meridian, mark what degree of the Equinoctial the said Meridian
cutteth at that present, and you shall find it to be the 57. degrees 48^ now
by counting upon the Equinoctial, the degrees contained betwixt those two
marks, you shall find the number to be 29. degrees 54^ and you may find the
self same number by subtracting the right ascension of the first point of
Taurus, out of the right ascension of the last point of Taurus, and thereby you
shall know the time of his rising to be the same that you found in the right
Sphere. Now if you would know the ascension of any sign in an oblique
Sphere, then having placed your Sphere according to your Latitude, which for
example sake suppose to be 52. degrees, and that in such Latitude you would
know what ascension the whole sign Taurus has, and in what time he rises,
you must first bring the first degree of Taurus to the East part of the
Horizon, so as it may meet even with the upper edge of the Horizon, and there
staying it, mark what degree of the Equinoctial rises therewith, which you
shall find to be 12. degrees 48^ and having marked that degree, put forward
the foresaid sign Taurus toward the West until the last degree thereof be
ascended up to the upper edge of the Horizon, and then make another mark upon
the point of the Equinoctial, which rises at that instant with the last
degree of Taurus, which you shall find to be 29. degrees 42^ and by counting
the degrees contained in the Equinoctial betwixt the two marks, or by taking
the lesser ascension out of the greater, you shall find the number of degrees
to be 16. and 54^ whereby you may conclude that the ascension of Taurus in that
Latitude is oblique, and that he spends in his rising one whole hour 7^ 36^
And look what order is here taught to find out the ascension of any sign,
the same order is to be observed for the finding out of the descention of any
sign, saving that you must seek for the descention of any sign in the West
part of the Horizon of the Sphere or Globe, and not in the East part. As for
example, if you would know what descention Taurus has, and in what time he
descends in the foresaid Latitude: here having brought the first degree of
Taurus to the West part of the Horizon, so as it may touch the upper edge
thereof, and having also marked what point or degree of the Equinoctial
touches the same Horizon at that instant, which you shall find to be 42.
degrees 30^ cease not to turn the Sphere or Globe, until all the whole sign
of Taurus be descended under the Horizon, and that the last degree thereof do
meet just with the upper edge of the Horizon, and there stay it until you
have again marked that point of the Equinoctial which touches the Horizon at
that instant, which you shall find to be 84. degrees 54^ and by counting the
degrees contained betwixt the two marks on the Equinoctial, you shall find
the number of degrees to be 42. degrees 24^ so as you may conclude that the
descention of Taurus in that Latitude is right, and that he spends in his
going down two hours 48^

How shall I know the right or oblique ascension of any of the fixed stars,
and also at what hour of the day or night they rise and set, and how long they
abide above the Horizon: finally when they are at the highest, and when they
are at the lowest, called the depression or lowest Meridian Altitude of the
stars?

All these things are most truly known by Tables calculated of purpose, and
also they are to be known by help of the celestial Globe in such manner as
shall be declared hereafter when we come to treat of the said Globe.

Of the ascentionall difference and uses thereof. Chap. 34.
WHat is the ascentionall difference?

It is a portion of the Equinoctial, whereby is known how much the right
ascension and oblique ascension of any star, or portion of the Ecliptique line,
or any other point in the firmament, does differ one from another, As for
example in that place where the Pole is elevated 52. degrees, the right
ascension of the first point of Taurus is 27. degrees and 54^ and the oblique
ascension of the same point is 12. degrees 48^ here by taking the lesser out of
the greater, that is 12. degrees 48^ out of 27. degrees and 54^ there will
remain 15. degrees and 6^ which is the ascentionall difference.

What uses has the ascentionall difference?

The ascentionall difference being known, all the oblique ascentions and
descentions of the stars are easily known by the Tables of directions,
again by this difference is known the increase and decrease of the
artificial day in every Latitude, and therefore it is called of some
incrementum diei. Moreover it shows the semi-diurnall Arc of the artificial
day, for in every oblique Sphere the artificial day is always either longer
or shorter then the Equinoctial day throughout the year, unless the sun be
in either of the Equinoctial points.

How is the increase or decrease of the day to be known by the ascentionall
defference?

That shall be declared hereafter in the 50. Chap. of this first book, whereas
we treat of the artificial day and night, in the mean time we will speak
somewhat of the poetical rising and setting of the stars.

Of the Poetical rising and setting of the stars. Chap. 35.
DEfine what the Poetical rising and setting is.

The Poetical rising is the appearing of some star above the Horizon,
determined by the sun, and the Poetical setting, is either the going down
of some star under the Horizon, or else the hiding thereof under the beams
of the sun.

How manifold is the Poetical rising and setting?

Threefold, that is, Cosmicus, Acronicus, and Heliacus, the signification of
which words shall appear unto you by the definitions of the foresaid three
kinds here following: For ortus Cosmicus, called in Latin mundanus, which is
as much to say here as the worldly or morning rising, is when any star rises
in the morning above the Horizon, together with the sun, or rather with that
point of the Ecliptique line wherein the sun is at that time. And the
Cosmicall setting, called in Latin occasus Cosmicus, is when a star goes
down under the Horizon at such time as the sun rises, so as this kind of
rising and setting is wholly to be referred to the rising of the sun.

What is Ortus and occasus Acronicus?

Ortus Acronicus which is as much to say as the Evening or temporal rising, is
when any star rises above the Horizon in the Evening at the going down of
the sun: And occasus Acronicus, that is to say, the Evening setting is when
any star goes down under the Horizon, together with the sun, and therefore
this kind is always to be referred to the going down of the sun, and not to
his rising: And whatsoever sign or star does rise Acronice, the same goes
down Cosmice, and whatsoever star does rise Cosmice, the same goes down
Acromice. And generally all stars that rise in the day time, are said to
rise Cosmice, and all those that rise in the Evening after the sun set, are
said to rise Acronice.

What is Ortus and occasus Heliacus.

Ortus Heliacus, that is to say, the Solar rising, is when any star by
departing from the beams of the Sun appears, and may be seen, which before
being darkened by the sun could not be seen, And occasus Heliacus, is when any
star by the nigh approaching of the sun cease to be seen, for by reason
that the sun by his yearly course and oblique motion of the Ecliptique, does
sometime approach to diverse stars, and sometime by little and little retireth
back again from the same, it falls out that those stars to whom he
approaches, are by nighnesse of his great light, darkened and not seen, and by
his departing from them, and especially when the sun is in the East or West
part of the firmament, they begin again to be seen. And therefore as in the
other 2. kinds, the Horizon together with the rising and setting of the sun,
are to be considered as chief causes thereof, so in this last kind the chief
cause is to be referred to the highness or farrenesse of the sun from the
star.

Whereto serves the knowledge of this threefold Poetical rising and setting
of the stars?

It serves chiefly to understand thereby those Poets and Histroriographers,
which in showing the time of any act done or to be done, do not set down the
day of the month, but are wont to describe the time by the rising or setting
of some notable star, which they think most meet for their purpose, and
thereby do greatly adorn their style, and specially being poetical: And
because that the times wherein such stars did rise or set, do greatly differ
in these days from the ancient times. Many therefore of our modern writers,
as Garceus and others, have made diuese Tables of purpose to find out the
difference, and thereby to come to the true knowledge of the times by the
ancient men described, of which matter I leave to speak, thinking it not
meet to trouble young Sailors therewith, for whom I chiefly wrote this
Treatise of the Sphere.

Yet some affirm that the ancient men did use the foresaid poetical rising
and setting of certain stars, and specially of the Pleiades, Hiades, Orion,
Arcturus, Capella, and Lira, (which stars were to them best known) as a
Calendar not only to know thereby the difference of times, and seasons of the
year: but also by their manner of rising, setting, hiding, and appearing to
prognosticate and to foresee tempests and storms, yea and that in these days
we also (as some write) might do the like, though there were neither Calendar
nor Ephemerides, and in that respect the knowledge hereof seems most
necessary for Mariners.

All such things are to be known more exactly by the Astronomicall ascension
and descention, then by the Poetical rising or setting of the stars: And you
have to understand that the stars since those days have changed their
places, their longitudes, and declinations, and thereby in diverse respects
have altered their Natures and qualities, yea and the very signs themselves:
As for example, neither Taurus, Gemini, nor Cancer, is so hot and dry now, as
in times past, neither does Scorpio cause so much thunder now, as in times
past, some again are more or less cold and moist then they have been
heretofore, the causes whereof I leave to the discussing of the Astrologers,
and so once again end with this matter.

Of time, what it is, and into what parts it is divided. Chap. 36.
MOst men that write of the Sphere, after they have spoken of the ascentions,
do immediately treat of the diversity and inequality of days and nights,
but since days, nights, and hours, are but parts of time, like as be weeks,
months, and years, I mind here therefore first briefly to treat of time, and
then of all his chiefest parts in order, for if you will be instructed at large
of these matters, then read the book of Johannes de sacro Busto de anni
ratione, and also Johannes Garceus his book de tempore.

How define you time?

Leaving to speak of time, without time, that is to say everlasting and
infinite, called of the Latins Eternitas, ascribed chiefly to God, and
therefore not contained within the mooueable Spheres or heavens: I mind to
speak here only of that time which is a number measuring the moving of the
first mooueable, and of all other mutable things, which time had his beginning
with the world, and shall end with the same, and this time consists of two
parts, that is first, and last, or rather before or after, successively
following one another, and these two parts are knit together with a common
bound called of the Latins Nunc, that is to say now, or at this present, which
is the end of that which went before, and the beginning of that which follows
after, and therefore some do divide time into three parts, that is, time past,
time present, and time to come, but the time present is a moment indivisible,
and is the beginning of time, even as a point or prick is the beginning of all
Magnitudes, and yet least part thereof it self: Again time is divided of some
into greater and lesser parts, the greater are such as these: Kalendes, Nones,
Ides, a week, a month, a year, the space of five years, called of the
Romans Lustrum, and of the Greeks Olympias, the Romans did call it Lustrum
a lustrando, that is to say, of going about, because that they used in the end
of every five years, with lights and torches of wax to go in precession
round about the City, and did purge the same by sacrifising a Dog, a Sow,
and an Ox, and at that time also they did choose their Dictator in a place
called the field of Mars, but the space of five years called Olimpias, took
his name of the high mount Olympus in Greece, whereas in the end of every five
years were celebrated all kind of martial plays, as Fencing, Wrestling,
Running, and such like in the honor of Jupiter Olympicus, also the space of
15. years called indictio, in which space those foreign Nations that dwelt
far off, and were tributary to the Roman Empire, paid their tributes, that
is to say, in the first five years they paid only gold, in token of their
obedience to the Empire: In the second five years they paid silver for
Soldiers wages, and in the last five years they paid brass toward the
reparation of armor and munition. Item the space of an hundred years, called
in Latin seculum, and in English an age, whereof the plays that were
celebrated in Rome every hundred year, were called Ludi seculares, and last of
all the space of a thousand years, called aeuum, containing ten ages, again
the lesser parts (as Johannes de sacro Busto says) are these five, the first
is called in Latin quadrans, which is the fourth part of a day, that is six
hours: The second punctus, which is the fourth part of an hour in the suns
account, but in the Moons account the fifth part of an hour: The third is
called momentum, which is the tenth part of punctus: The fourth is called
vncia, which is the twelfth part of momentum: The fifth is called Atomus, which
is the 48. part of vncia. But because in all the greater parts of time, there
is no greater variation or difference, then in that which in Latin is called
annus, and in English a year. I mind here therefore first to treat of a year,
and then of months, weeks, days, nights and hours.

Of the year, and of his diverse kinds, and of the diverse computations had
thereof in diverse ages, and amongst diverse Nations. Chap. 37.
BE there diverse kinds of differences of years?

Yea indeed, but I will speak here only of three kinds or differences, that
is of the great year, the Solar year, and the Lunar year, whereof the two
last are most necessary for our purpose.

What is the great year?

The great year is a space of time in the which not only all the Planets, but
also all the fixed stars that are in the firmament, having ended all their
reuolutions do return again to the self same places in the heavens, which
they had at the first beginning of the world: And therefore it is called of
some the year of the world, and of some the great year of Plato, which
contains according to Alphonsus, 49/000. years, whereof we have spoken
before, yet some affirm that the perfect year of the world contains but
36000. years, whose revolution is after one degree in 100. years, but leaving
this matter as not greatly profitable, we will speak now of the year Solar.

Of the suns year called in Latin annus solaris, and of the diverse kinds
thereof, and first of the Tropicall year, both equal and unequal. Chap. 38.
WHat is the year Solar?

It is that space of time in which the sun departing from any point of the
Ecliptique line, or from some fixed star of the Zodiaque, goes round about
the Zodiaque by his own proper moving, which is from West to East, and so
returns again to the self same point or star from which he first
departed, and the Astronomers do make diverse divisions of the Solar year,
for first they say that it is either Astronomical or Political: Secondly that
the Astronomicall year is either Tropicall or Syderall. Thirdly that the
Tropicall is either equal or unequal, which unequal year they otherwise
call the apparent year, and true year, all which kinds have in a manner one
self definition, saving that the Tropicall year takes his beginning from the
vernall Equinoctial point, and the Syderall year from the former star of
the Rams horn, and do differ chiefly in quantity.

Show then what quantity, that is to say, how many days, hours, and minutes
every such year conteyneth.

The equal Tropicall year being counted always from the middle point of the
vernall Equinoxe, contains 365. days, five hours, 49^ 15^ and 46^ But the
unequal or apparent Tropicall year conteyneth sometime more and sometime
less then the equal year, for sometime besides the 365. days and five
hours, it amounts to 56^ 53^ and 1^ so as it is more then the equal
Tropicall year by 7^ 37^ and 15^ and sometime over and besides the foresaid
365. days and five hours, it only contains 42^ 38^ and 27^ which is less
then the equal Tropicall year by 6^ and 3^ which inequality chiefly
chances by reason of the unequal precession of the two Equinoctial points
before defined in the 26. Chapter.

Of the Syderall year, and how much it contains. Chap. 39.
WHat is the Syderall year?

The Syderal or starry year is that space of time wherein the sun walking
under the firmament, departs from the first or foremost star of the Rams
horn, and returning to the same star again, which space of time always and
equally contains 365. days, six hours, 9^ and 39^ so as this year is
always greater then the Tropicall year, and by his equality does always
rule and rectify the inequality of the Tropicall year.

Of the Political year, and diverse kinds thereof. Chap. 40.
WHat is the Political year?

It is a yearly space of time which any people or nation attributes to the
course of the Sun or of the Moon or of either of them which is diverse and
manifold, according to the diverse customs of the Nations, of all which I
mean not to speak at this present particularly, but of certain special and
necessary to be known, as of the Julian year, of the Egyptian year, of the
Jews year, and of the Athenian year.

Of the Julian year, and why it is so called. Chap. 41.
WHat is the Julian year?

The Julian year is that which we use at this present day which of all other
years draws nighest unto the Tropicall year, for this year consists of
365. days and six hours, which six hours, if it should be reckoned every
year, it would make a great confusion, and therefore it is reckoned at the end
of every fourth year, which year consists of 366. days, for four times
six does make 24. hours, which is one whole natural day, whereof that year
is called the leap year, And thereby the Julian year is said to be two fold,
that is common, containing 365. days, and the other bissextile or leap year,
containing 366. days This word bissextile is derived of bis and sextus,
because the sixth day next before the Kalends of March is twice repeated or
reckned, which indeed is the 25. of February, upon which day the feast of
Saint Mathias commonly falls.

Why was it called the Julian year?

Because Julius Caesar the first Monarch of the Roman Empire caused the year
(according to the course of the Sun) to be reduced to the number of days and
hours before expressed, who brought an excellent Astronomer with him at his
coming from Egypt, as well for that purpose as to teach the Mathematical
disciplines unto the Romans, yet you have to consider that the Julian year
being greater then the Tropicall year, does cause great diversity in that it
makes as well the Equinoctial and Solsticiall points, as also the entrance of
the Sun into the other signs by little and little to anticipate or to run
before, for whereas in Julius Caesar's time the vernall Equinox was the 23. day
of March, the same Equinox is now about the 11. day of March, which is sooner
by 12. days.

Of the Egyptian year, and how many days it contains. Chap. 42.
THe Egyptian year contains the just number of 365. days, by reason of
which equality this year is very fit to serve the Astronomers turn in making
their Astronomicall computations, but the Egyptian year has no certain place
of beginning: For by omitting the six hours which is the Julian year, it
does anticipate in the space of 4. years one whole day in such sort, as 1460.
Julian years do make of the Egyptian years. 1461.

How many Moons the Jews year, and the Athenians year does contain. Chap.
43.
THe Jews year contains for the most part twelve Moons, and sometimes
thirteen Moons, which kind of years did agree with the years of the
Greeks, and of the Athenians, and also of the ancient Romans before Julius
Caesar's time: and the ancient Romans did begin their year from March, but
the latter Romans from the winter Solstice. Again the Jews did begin
their year at the first new Moon that followed next after the vernall
Equinox: But the Athenians began their year at the new Moon that followed
next after the Summer Solstice: The most people of Asia began their year at
the Autumnall Equinox: But the most part of those that dwell in these parts of
the world, following the custom of the Roman Church, do begin their year
at the Kalends of January, which in old time was not much distant from the
Winter Solstice, which Solstice at Christ's birth was the 25. of December, but
now the same Solstice is about the twelfth day of December, so as the Winter
Solstice falls sooner by thirteen days then it did at that time. But we
here in England do begin the year at the 25. of March.

Of the year Lunar, and of the kinds thereof. Chap. 44.
HOw many kinds of Lunar years be there, and which be they?

Of Lunar years there be two kinds, whereof the one is ordinary called in
Latin Annus communis, and the other extraordinary or excessive, called by a
Greek name Embolismalis, The ordinary or common year, is the space of twelve
Moons or changes, passing by course within the year Solar, and is called
common because it has twelve Moons Lunar, even as the Solar year has twelve
months Solar, and consists of 354. days and a little more, so as the Solar
year exceeds the Lunar year by 11. days, for the year Solar conteyneth
(as has been said before) 365. days, in which account the Fractions in both
years are omitted: And therefore if these two years should begin together at
one self time, the Lunar year would end his course sooner by 11. days then
the year Solar.

What is the extraordinary Lunar year called Embolismalis?

It is the space of thirteen Moons or changes containing 384 days, so as
this year exceeds the common Lunar year by 30. days, and is more then the
year Solar by 19. days.

Of the diverse kinds of months, and into what parts every Solar month is
divided according to the Romans, that is, into Kalends, Nones, and Ides. Chap.
45.
HOw many kinds of months be there, and which be they?

There be three kinds, that is, the month Solar, the month Lunar, and the
month Usual.

The month Solar is that space of time which the Sun spends in passing
through any one of the 12. Signs.

The Lunar month is that space of time which the Moon spends whilst she
departing from the Sun returns to him again.

The Usual month is that number of days which are set down in our common
Kalenders, whereof some contain thirty days, some thirty and one, and the
month of February has but 28. days. But if you will readily know which
contain more days and which less, keep always in memory these old English
verses here following.

Thirty days has November,
April, June, and September:
February has 28. alone,
And all the rest have thirty and one.
But when it is leap year, February has 29. days, Again the Romans
divided the Solar month into Kalends, Nones, and Ides.

What be Kalends?

The Kalends are the first day of every month from which the Romans counted
the days of the month proceeding backward, As for example the first day of
April they named the Kalends of April, and the last day of March next before
they called in Latin pridie Kalendas Aprilis, that is the day before the
Kalends of April, and the next day before that, the third Kalends of April,
and the next day before that the fourth Kalends, and so forth until they come
to the Ides.

Whereof sprange this name Kalends?

Of the Greek verb Calo, which is as much to say as call, for the first day
of every month the crier standing in a high place made four calls or more to
signify thereby to the people how many days in that month the faires or
markets called Nundinae should endure, and of Nundinae sprange this word Nonae,
that is to say the days of the faires: For look how many Nones there were in
every month, so many faires there were, during which time the Romans never
worshipped any God because there was no holy day during that time, and
therefore Ovid says that Nonarum tutela Deo caret, that is to say, no God had
tuition of the Nones.

What are Ides?

They are those days by which the Nones are divided from the rest, and these
Ides do divide in a manner the whole month into two equal parts, for the
first Ides most commonly falls either on the 13. 14. or 15. day of the month.

How many Ides, Nones, and Kalendes do belong to every month?

Of Ides every month has eight, but of Nones March, May, July, and October,
have six, and all the rest of the months have but four Nones, but they
differ most in the number of Kalends, as you may perceive by this Table
following, which shows how many Kalendes, Ides, and Nones, do belong to
every month. Thus far of the month Solar, now I will speak of the month
Lunar.

The Table.
Months. Kal. I Would. None. January. 19. 8 4 February. 16 8 4 March. 17 8 6
April. 18 8 4 May. 17 8 6 June. 18 8 4 July. 17 8 6 August. 19 8 4 September
18 8 4 October. 17 8 6 November. 18 8 4 December. 19 8 4

Of the diverse kinds of months Lunar. Chap. 46.
HOw many kinds be there, and which be they?

Johannes de Sacro Busto says that there be four kinds, that is the month
of paragration, the month of apparation, the month medicinal, and the month
of consecution.

The month of Paragration, is that space of time in which the Moon departing
from any one point of the Zodiaque, goes by her proper moving about the
Zodiaque, and returns again to the said point from which she first departed
which her revolution is accomplished in 27. days, and 8. hours. And this
revolution of some is called a year, and by this account the Moon tarrieth in
every sign two days six hours and 29^

The month of Apparation consists of 28. days, divided commenly by four
weeks, every week containing seven days, for four times seven makes 28. of
which four weeks the first is counted from her first appearance unto the end
of the seventh day, and so forth from week to week, so as the fourth week
ends at the 28. day, in which account the odd hours during the Moons abode
under the beams of the sun, when as she is said to be combuste, are not
reckned.

The month Medicinal contains but 26. days, and a half (as Galen says)
and is divided also into four weeks, the division being made by minutes.

The month of Consecution is that space of time wherein the Moon being in
conjunction with the sun, goes about her Circle and returns again to the
same point, and not finding the sun there because he has in that while
passed through one whole sign, she hastes after and in two days and four
hours 44^ and a little more she over takes the sun, and is again with him
in conjunction, of which her following and ouertaking, the sun this month is
called the month of Consecution, which month consists of 29. days and a
half: during which time as the sun by his own proper course passes through
one sign or there abouts, so the Moon by her course in the self same time
passes through the whole Zodiaque and one sign more: And note by the way that
the sun in making his own proper course does not enter into any sign in the
very beginning of any month, but rather about the midst of every month, or at
the least not much over or under that day.

Of a week. Chap. 47.
NOw because that every month as well Solar as Lunar is divided into four
weeks, I will speak somewhat of a week.

What is a week?

A week called most commonly in Latin Septimana, which is as much to say as
seven mornings, is the space of seven days, whereof the first is called
Sunday, the second Monday and so forth to Saturday, which names the Gentiles
gave to these seven days in honor of the seven Planets whom they worshipped
as Gods, for they called the first day the day of the sun, the second the day
of the Moon, the third the day of Mars, the fourth the day of Mercury, the
fifth the day of Jupiter, the sixth the day of Venus, the seventh the day of
Saturn.

Are there any more names belonging to this word week?

Yea, it is called also by a Greek name Hebdoma, that is to say, containing
seven days, and in the scripture it is called sometime Sabbatum, as when the
Pharisie said that he fasted Bis in Sabbato that is to say, twice a week, for
the Jews called Sunday the first of the Sabbath, and Monday the second of the
Sabbath, and so forth in order until Saturday, which in deed was their true
Sabbath or day of rest.

Why is it not still so counted amongst us Christians, but changed into Sunday?

For two causes, first to avoid the superstition of the Jews, and partly it
was done in the honor of Christ, whose day of birth, resurrection, and sending
of the holy Ghost, was on the Sunday.

Of days and nights both natural and artificial. Chap. 48.
THe Astronomers do divide the days into two kinds, whereof the one is
called natural, and the other artificial.

Which call you a natural day?

A natural day is one entire revolution of the Equinoctial about the earth,
whereunto must be added such portion of the Zodiaque, as the sun in the mean
while makes by his proper motion, which is from West to East.

In what time does the Equinoctial every day make his revolution?

In 24. hours, which space contains both day and night, according to which
revolution and number of hours, the most part of Horologies or clockes in the
East countries do go, and are set to show the hours of the day, but yet
diversely, for some begin their natural day at the rising of the sun, as the
Bohemians, and the Persians, and some at the going down of the sun, as the
Italians, the Athenians, the Jews, the Egyptians, and the Arabians, but the
Astronomers reckon their natural day from noonetide to noonetide.

If the Equinoctial does make his revolution just in 24. hours, then all
natural days are equal?

That is true if ye only consider the motion of the Equinoctial, but if you
add thereunto (as I said before) that portion which the sun in the mean
while makes by his own proper motion, you shall find them to be unequal,
because that portion is sometime more, sometime less, according to the swift
or slow ascension of the sign wherein the sun is.

What is the artificial day?

It is the distance or space that is betwixt the rising of the Sun, or going
down of the same.

The causes why the time betwixt the rising and going down of the sun is
unequal. Chap. 49.
IT must needs be unequal, because the abode of the sun above the Horizon
is variable, as well for the unequal ascension and descention of the signs, as
also for the obliquitie of the Horizon and Zodiaque: and therefore the spaces
of the artificial days must needs be unequal: for the sun as well in
ascending from the beginning of Capricorn, to the beginning of Cancer, as also
in descending from the beginning of Cancer to the beginning of Capricorn,
describes on each part 182. Circles or Paralels, the middlemost whereof is the
Equinoctial. All which Paralels are divided into two parts by the Horizon, and
the Arkes which are above the Horizon are called the artificial days, and the
Arkes beneath the Horizon are called the artificial nights, which Arkes to
those that dwell under the Equinoctial in a right Sphere are always equal,
that is to say, the diurnall Arc is equal to the nocturnal, because their
Horizon passes through the Poles of the world, but to those that dwell in an
oblique Sphere, above whose Horizon the Pole is any thing elevated, be it
never so little, the Arkes or Paralels are unequal one to another, that is to
say, either making short days and long nights, or else long days and short
nights, the Equinoctial only excepted, which as well in the oblique Sphere as
in the right, is always divided by the Horizon into two equal parts, and so
makes the days and nights equal in all places of the world. All which
things you shall easily comprehend by these two figures following, whereof
that on the left hand represents the right Sphere, and the other on the
right hand represents the oblique Sphere.

A figure of the right Sphere.
A figure of the oblique Sphere.


And here I think it not amiss to show you how to find out the length of
every artificial day and night throughout the year in every Latitude by the
material Sphere, and likewise how to know at what part of the Horizon the
sun rises and sets every day, and also how to find out his Meridian
Altitude, whereby you shall know how nigh or how far from your Zenith he is
every day.

How to find out by the material Sphere or Globe, and by help of the
ascentionall difference before defined, the increase and decrease of every day
throughout the year in every several Latitude, and at what hour the sun
rises and sets. Chap. 50.
FIrst having set the Sphere at your Latitude, learn to know by some Table
or instrument in what sign and degree thereof the sun is at such day of the
month and year as you seek, and bring that degree close to the mooueable
meridian, and there mark in what point or degree the said Meridian cutteth the
Equinoctial, and what number it has, for so shall you have the right
ascension of the degree of the sun for that day. That done, bring the said
degree of the sun to the East part of the Horizon, so as it may meet even
with the upper edge thereof, and staying it there, mark what degree of the
Equinoctial at that instant does also touch the Horizon, and what number it
has, and that is the oblique ascension of the foresaid degree of the sun,
then subtract the lesser number out of the greater, and that which remains
shall be the ascentionall difference, as for example in this present year
1590. the xi. day of April the sun is in the first degree of Taurus, whose
right ascension in the Latitude 52. by doing as before is taught, you shall
find to be 27. degrees and 54^ and the oblique ascension thereof to be 12.
degrees 48^ and the ascentionall difference to be 15. degrees 6^ which
difference you must first double, and then convert the same into hours and
minutes by allowing 15. degrees to an hour, and 4^ to a degree, that done,
add those hours and minutes to the Equinoctial day, which is always 12.
hours, and the sum of that addition will show you the length of the day,
when the sun is in the first point of Taurus, which is 14. hours and 12^ and
that is the true length of that day. But you have to note by ye way that as you
have to add the sum of ye hours to ye Equinoctial day, the sun being in any
of the 6. Northern signs, so must you subtract the said hours from the
Equinoctial day, the sun being in any of the six Northern signs, As for
example, suppose the sun to be in the first point of Scorpio, the right
ascension whereof is 207. degrees 54^ and the oblique ascension is 223.
degrees, here by taking the lesser out of the greater you shall find the
ascentionall difference to be 15. degrees 6^ which being doubled, makes 30.
degrees and 12^ that is two hours and 12^ which if you subtract from 12. there
will remain 9. hours 48^ which is the length of the artificial day, when the
sun is in the first degree of Scorpio, the one half whereof is called the
semi-diurnall Arc of that artificial day, which is 4. hours 54. minutes,
whereby you may gather that the sun at that time rises four minutes after
seven of the clock, and sets again four minutes before five: so likewise
in the former example where the ascentionall difference was 15. degrees six
minutes, which being doubled made 30. degrees and 12^ that was two hours and
12^ which being added to 12. hours made 14. hours and 12^ the half whereof
is seven hours and six minutes, whereby you may gather that the sun did
then rise 6^ before 5. of the clock in the morning, and did set 6^ after 7. of
the clock in the Evening, and so you have both the forenoone and afternoon of
the day, which two times are best to be reckoned always from 12. a clock at
noone, that is to say, the forenoone hours and minutes, from twelve backward,
and the after moon hours and minutes from twelve forward, and by subtracting
the whole length of the artificial day from 24. hours, you shall have the
length of the artificial night, as in the former example take 14. hours and
12^ from 24. hours, and there will remain for the length of the artificial
night 9. hours and 48^

How to know by the material Sphere or Globe, in what part of the Horizon the
sun rises and sets every day, and thereby the length of the day. Also how
to know the Meridian altitude of the sun every day throughout the year, and
being at his Meridian altitude, to know how far distant he is from the Zenith
every day. Chap. 51.
FIrst then having set the Sphere or Globe at your Latitude, which suppose to
be 52. degr. bring the degree of the sun for that day, to the East part of the
Horizon, so as it may meet just with the upper edge thereof, and there set a
little piece of wax upon the Horizon, that dove turn the said degree of the
sun to the West part of the Horizon until it meet again with the upper
edge of the Horizon, and there set another piece of wax upon the Horizon, and
those two marks will show you in what part of the Horizon the sun rises
and sets: As for example, I would know this present year 1594. in what part
of the Horizon the sun does rise and set the twelfth of June, here finding by
the Ephemerides that the sun is entered 16^ into Cancer at that day, I bring
that point of the Ecliptique to the East part of the Horizon, so as it may
meet just with the upper edge thereof, and there I set a little piece of wax
upon the Horizon: that done I turn the said point of the Ecliptique to the
West part of the Horizon, and whereas that point touches the upper edge of the
said Horizon, I set there another piece of wax upon the Horizon, then counting
the degrees upon the Horizon from the true East point thereof to the first
piece of wax Northward, I find the number of the degrees to be 40. degrees or
therabouts, which contains three points and a half and somewhat more, of the
Mariners Compass, whereby I gather that the sun rises at that time very
near to the Northeast, and sets near to the Northwest, because the number
of the degrees in both parts of the Horizon are like.

How shall I know how many points of the Mariners compass are contained in any
number of degrees, exceeding the number of degrees and minutes contained in one
point?

The Mariners Compass contains 32. points, and every point contains 11.
degrees and. of a degree which is 15. minutes, wherefore whenever you would
know how many points of the Compass are contained in any number of degrees be
it great or small, multiply that number by four, and divide the product
thereof by 45. and the quotient will show the number of the points, and if
there be any remainder, then because the Mariner does make every point to have
four quarters, multiply that remainder by four, and divide the product by 45.
which is the common divisor, and the quotient will show the quarters, or if the
remainder be but small, then multiply that remainder by eight, which are half
quarters, and divide the product thereof by 45. as before, and the quotient
will show the half quarters of a point: As in the former example in
multiplying 40. degr. by 4. the product is 160. which if you divide by 45. you
shall find in the quotient 3. whole points, and the remainder to be 25. which
being multiplied by 4. the product will be 100. which if you divide by 45. you
shall find in the quotient 2. quarters of a point, and the remainder to be
10/45. of a quarter, that is to say, if you can divide one quarter into 45.
parts, then you must take 10. of those parts, and add them to the former
sum, which being of small importance is not to be regarded. But now to return
to my first matter, I say that by counting the degrees upon the Horizon, from
the first piece of wax to the South point of the Horizon, I find the number of
degrees to be 130. degr. and by allowing 15. degr. to an hour, I find the
half day to contain 8. hours 10^ which being doubled makes 16. hours 20^
Then to know the Meridian altitude of the sun, you must bring the degree of
the sun right under the Meridian, and the number of the degrees contained in
the Meridian betwixt the South point of the Horizon, and the said degree of the
sun will show the Meridian Altitude of the sun, so shall you find the
Meridian Altitude of the sun, being in the first point of Cancer to be 61.
degrees, which once had, the distance from the Zenith is soon known: for if
you subtract 61. degrees from 90. you shall find the distance of the sun from
the Zenith to be 29. degrees. Again contrariwise the distance from the Zenith
being subtracted from 90. the remainder will show the Meridian Altitude, for
those two numbers being added together, do always make a just quarter of the
great Circle, which is 90. degrees.

Of hours as well equal as unequal, and into what parts they are divided.
Chap. 52.
AS of days and nights there be 2. kinds, that is natural and artificial
before defined, so likewise are there 2. sorts of hours, that is equal, and
unequal: An equal hour is the 24. part of a natural day, and every such
hour contains 15. degrees of the Equinoctial, for 15. times 24. makes 360.
degrees, which is the whole circuit or Longitude of the Equinoctial, which
according to the diurnall moving of the first mooueable makes his revolution
in 24. hours as has been said before, and therefore this equal hour is
also called an Equinoctial or natural hour. The unequal hour is the
twelfth part of an artificial day or artificial night, which days and nights
as they be sometimes long and sometimes short, according to the time of the
year, so are the hours of the same. For both day and night, be it never so
short, is divided by the Astronomers into twelve hours, so as when here in
some part of England toward the North, the artificial day is 17. hours long,
and the night but seven hours, if you divide either of these into twelve
parts, you shall find that every such twelfth part of the day shall contain
more then the natural or Equinoctial hour by 25^ and the twelfth part of the
said artificial night to contain but the one half of an equal hour and
five minutes, which notwithstanding being both added together, will make in all
24, equal hours, which is a natural day, so as by this means you may easily
perceive that a natural day comprehends both kinds of hours, as well
unequal as equal. Note also that the unequal hours are called sometime
artificial and sometime temporal hours, artificial, because they are daily
changed by the variety of the artificial days and nights, and are never
equal but twice in the year, when the sun is in either of the Equinoxes:
and they are called temporal, because the ancient obseruers of time were
wont to make diverse clockes and Horologies to show these unequal and
temporal hours, of which clockes there are yet some to be seen at this day.
Moreover the hours both equal and unequal are divided not only into
quarters of hours, but also intominutes, for every hour be it long or short,
is divided into 60. minutes, and every minute into 60. secondes, and every
second into 60. thirdes, and so forth to fourths, fifts, sixthes, and into as
many as you will, so as you make your division always by 60. But you have to
note, that as the Astronomers do divide the artificial day and artificial
night into hours both equal and unequal, so the Jews do divide each of them
into four quarters, in manner and form following.

How and in what manner the Jews do divide the artificial day and night, each
of them into four quarters. Chap. 53.
THey divide the artificial day into four quarters by allowing to every
quarter 3. hours, accounting the first hour of the first quarter at the
rising of the sun, and the third hour of the said quarter they called the
third hour, and the third hour of the second quarter they called the sixth
hour, which was midday or noonetide, again they called the third hour of the
third quarter, the ninth hour, and they called the second hour of the fourth
quarter the eleventh hour, and th^^ called the last hour which was the
twelfth hour of the day, euentide because then the sun went down.

Whereto serves the knowledge hereof?

By knowing this account you may the better understand certain places of the
Scripture making mention of things done at certain hours not like unto our
common hours, For whereas it is said in the Gospel of Saint John, that Christ
healed the Rulers son that was sick of an Ague in Capernaum, and that the
Ague left him the seventh hour, is as much to say, as the Ague left him at one
of the clock in the afternoon: Again where as mention is made in the Gospel
of S. Matthew, of the laborers that came to work in the Vineyard at the
eleventh hour is to be understood at five of the clock in the afternoon, or
rather one hour before the sun set, for you must think that the sun
rises not nor yet goes down in Iewrie always at six of the clock, for
then they should have no artificial day nor night, but all days and nights
should be a like. Also they divided the artificial night into four quarters,
otherwise called by them the four watches of the night, for the first three
hours was the first watch, during which time all the Soldiers both young and
old of any fortified Town were wont to watch, the second three hours they
called the second watch, which was about the dead of the night, at which time
the young Soldiers only watched, and the third quarter of the night
containing also three hours, and was called the third watch the Soldiers of
middle age did watch, and the last three hours called the 4. watch which was
about the break of day, the old Soldiers only watched. But now because the
ancient Astronomers do appoint the government of the unequal hours to the
seven Planets, it shall not be amiss to show you here what Planet reigns
every hour both day and night.

How to know what Planet reigns in every hour of the day or night
artificial, as well by help of a table, as by a rule contained in one verse.
Chap. 54.
But first I will describe unto you the Table, and then briefly set down the
use thereof. In the first collum of this Table on the left hand are set down
the seven days of the week, whereof the first is Sunday, and the second
Monday, and so forth downward to Saturday, against every which day the
Planets are placed toward the right hand, every one in course one after
another, and in the first row of this Table which is the head or front
thereof, are placed the hours of the day written in Arithmeticall figures, and
in the next row of the said front, are set down the hours of the night
written as you see in common numerall letters.

The Table.
Hours of ^^e day. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Hours of ^^e night. iij iiij v
vj vij viij ix x xj xij i ij Sunday. ^^nday ^^esday W^^nesday. ^hursday. Friday
Saturday

The use of the Table.
Now the use of the said Table is thus: whenever you would know in what
hour of the day or night any Planet reigns, you must first seek out the
hour of the day or night, and if it be of the day, then you shall find it in
the first row of the front, if of the night, in the second row of the front,
as has been said before: and from that hour descend with your finger to
the common Angle standing right against the day which you seek, and that will
show you what Planet then reigns. As for example, if you would know on
Wednesday at 8. of the clock of the day what Planet reigns, then having
found the number of 8. in the front, written in Arithmeticall figure, come
straight down from thence with your finger to the common Angle standing right
against Wednesday, and you shall find that Mercury reigns. And if you would
know what Planet reigns the same day at the eight hour of the night, then
descend from the hour of the night down to the common Angle, and you shall
find that the sun reigns, and so forth of all the rest.

The rule contained in one verse, and the use thereof.

The rule in verse is thus:

Sol, Ve, Mer, Luna, Saturnus, Jupiter, and Mars.

These vii. words (the conjunction and being left out) do signify the seven
Planets: For Sol is the Sun, Ve stands for Venus, Mer for Mercurius, Luna
is the Moon, and the other three Planets following, as Saturnus, Jupiter, and
Mars, do make up the number of seven, which must always follow one another,
in such order as they are here set down in the foresaid verse, and to have
the true use of this rule, you must first apply every Planet to his own proper
day, as Sol to Sunday, Luna to Monday, Mars to Tuesday, Mercurius to Wednesday,
Jupiter to Thursday, Venus to Friday, and Saturnus to Saturday: for every one
of these Planets governs the first hour of his own proper day, and the
Planet placed next to him in the verse, governs the second hour of the same
day, and so forth orderly, as for example, if you would know what Planet shall
reign on Sunday at the third hour of the day, you must first say that Sol
does reign the first hour because that is his day, and Venus reigns the
second hour, and Mercury the third hour according to your rule, and so by
keeping the order of the verse, you shall easily appoint to every hour both of
the day and of the night artificial his own governor: For though both day
and night be divided each of them into 12. hours, making in all 24. hours, and
that there be but seven Planets, yet by appointing every Planet to his own
proper day as governor of the first hour of the same day, and by observing
the order of the verse in repeating the said Planets, you shall not fail to
give to every hour his proper Planet. Thus having sufficiently spoken of the
celestial part, I will now proceed to the Elementall part of the world,
contained in the second Book of this Treatise.

The second part of the Sphere.
Of the Elementall part of the world. Chap. 1.
WHat does the Elementall part contain?

I told you before that as the celestial part does contain the eleven heavens
before described, so the Elementall part contains ye 4. Elements, that is to
say, fire, Air, Water, and Earth, which are of themselves pure substances, and
the first and next beginnings whereof all mixed bodies are compound, and
therefore not to be seen with our outward eyes: for as we our selves are
bodies compound, so with our outward senses we can discern nothing but that
which is compound: and therefore the fire, air, water or earth which we daily
feel or see, are not the Elements themselves, but things compounded of them.
The natures and properties of which Elements I mind here but briefly to touch,
since the exact handling thereof belongs rather to natural Philosophers and
to Physicians, then to Geographers, who have to deal only with ye situations
of the earth with Zones, Paralels, Climes, Longitudes, Latitudes, distances and
such like things belonging to the measure and description of this earth here
which we inhabit.

Define these Elements.

Of the Fire and of his nature and motion. Chap. 2.
THe Fire is an Element most hot and dry, pure, subtle, and so clear as it
does not hinder our sight looking through the same toward the stars, and is
placed next to the Sphere of the Moon, under the which it is turned about
like a celestial Sphere.

Of the Air and into how many Regions it is divided. Chap. 3.
NExt to the Fire is the Air whichis an Element hot and moist, and also most
fluxible, pure and clear, notwithstanding it is far thicker and grosser as
some say, toward the Poles the^ elsewhere, by reason that those parts are
farthest from the sun: And this Element is divided of the natural Philosophers
into three Regions, that is to say, the highest Region, the Middle Region, and
the lowest Region, which highest Region being turned about by the fire, is
thereby made the hotter, wherein all fiery impressions are bredde, as
lightnings, fire drakes, blazing stars and such like.

The middle Region is extreme cold by contra opposition by reason that it is
placed in the midst betwixt two hot Regions, and therefore in this Region are
bred all cold watery impressions, as frost, snow, ice, hail, and such like.

The lowest Region is hot by the reflexe of the sun, whose beams first
striking the earth, do rebound back again to that Region, wherein are bred
clouds, dewes, raynes, and such like moderate watery impressions, which three
Regions of the air with the rest of the Elements this figure does plainly
show.

The highest region of ye air Middle region Loest region Earth.




Of the Water, and whether it be round or not. Chap. 4.
NExt to the Air, is the Water which is cold, moist, and fluxible, and being
lighter then the Earth would of his own nature surmount and cover the whole
earth, had not God in the creation of the world divided waters from waters (as
the Book of Genes. says) and gathered together those waters that are under
the firmament into certain concauities of the earth, leaving other parts of
the earth dry, and discovered, that man and beast might inhabit the same, and
have food necessary for their behoof, so as now both water and earth does
make one entire and Sphericall body, which is environed with the Air.

Is not the water a round body of it self without the earth?

Many late writers do deny the whole body to be round, affirming only the
Conuere superficies or upper face of the water to be round, for (say they) the
earth being not altogether round the Concaue superficies of the water cannot be
round, notwithstanding the most part of the ancient writers do affirm the
whole body of the water to be round, saying that the water has the like shape
in his whole, that it has in his parts: For the parts which are drops, are
round, ergo the whole is round. Again they prove the water of the sea to be
round by demonstration thus, suppose a ship to depart from the shore whereon
some mark is set, which you may see with a right leauelled line standing at
the stearne of the said ship, but saying further from the shore, you cannot
see the mark any more standing upon the stern, but shall be feign to go up
to the top of the mast to see it, by reason that the water being a round
body rises and swells in the midst, and so lets your sight as this
figure plainly shows.



Of the Earth and whether it be all round or not. Chap. 5.
NExt to the Water is the Element of the Earth, which of his nature is thick,
heavy, cold, dry, and not fluxible as is the water and air, but is firm and
apt to keep his place, and though some deny the earth to be, round because of
the high mountains, and deep dales and vallyes therein, which are nothing in
comparison of the whole earth to alter that roundnes which it has by nature,
yet Aristotle affirms in his second book de coelo and mundo, the fourteenth
Chapter, that the earth of her own nature is round, proouing the same as well
for that the Moon when she is eclipsed in part, could not have such horned
shape as this figure represents.



Unless the earth were also round by the interposition whereof she is
eclipsed, either totally or in part as has been said before, Again he
proves the roundnes of the earth by the altering of the Horizon, for in going
from North to South, our Horizon alters in such sort as we discover those
stars which we could not see before, but were clean hidden from our sight,
some also deny that the earth is in the midst of the world, and some affirm
that it is mooueable, as also Copernicus by way of supposition, and not for
that he thought so in deed: who affirms that the earth turns about, and
that the sun stands still in the midst of the heavens, by help of which
false supposition he has made truer demonstrations of the motions and
reuolutions of the celestial Spheres, then ever were made before, as plainly
appears by his book de Reuolutionibus dedicated to Paulus Tertius the Pope,
in the year of our Lord 1536. But Ptolomie, Aristotle, and all other old
writers affirm the earth to be in the midst, and to remain immovable and
to be in the very Center of the world, proouing the same with many most strong
reasons not need full here to be rehearsed, because I think few or none do
doubt thereof, and specially the holy Scripture affirming the foundations of
the earth to be laid so sure, Psalm. 104.
that in never should move at any time: Again you shall find in the self
same Psalm these words, He appointed the Moon for certain seasons, and the
Sun knows his going down, whereby it appears that the Sun moves and
not the earth. But leaving this matter, we will now speak of the compass of
the earth, and of the Longitude and Latitude thereof.

Of the compass of the earth, and of the diversity of measures according to
diverse countries. Chap. 6.
CAn the whole earth be measured?

Yea very well, for since the earth and the water (as has been said before)
do make together, one whole Sphericall or round body, and that every great
Circle as well thereof as of the heavens, contains 360. degrees, there is no
more then to be done, but to allow for every such degree 60. Italian miles,
which differ not much from our English miles, so as in multiplying 360. degrees
by 60. you shall find the whole compass of the earth to be 2160. miles, of
which compass if you would know the true Diameter, then having multiplied the
said compass or circuit of 21600. miles by seven, divide the product thereof
by 22. and the quotient together with the remainder, will show the true
Diameter which is 6872. miles, five furlongs, and 9/11 of a furlong, and the
half of that is the semi-Diameter of the earth, which is 3436. miles, and 4/11
of a mile: and as the Italians and we English men do measure great distances
on the earth by miles, so the French, the Spanish, and the high Almaines, do
measure such distances by leagues both by land and sea, and every one
differs from other: for the French league contains two of our miles, the
Spanish league three, and the common league of Germany four, and the great
league of Germany contains five of our miles, yea in some places of Germany,
as in Sueuia, the leagues are so long as a man shall skant ride three of them
in a whole day. Again the Grecians did measure the distances of the earth by
furlongs, the Egyptians by signs, and the Persians by parasanges, all which
measures do greatly differ even in the smallest parts, from whence all
measures do take their first original: for as well amongst the ancient men,
as amongst them of latter days, four barley kernels couched close together
side by side, and not end long, are said to make a finger breadth, and three
finger breadthes an inch, and four finger breadthes a palm or hand breadth,
and three palms or nine inches a span, and four palms or hand breadthes a
foot, and two foot and a half to make a common pace, and five foot to make
a Geometrical pace, of which kind of paces, 125. do make a furlong, and eight
furlongs do make an Italian mile, and four such miles do make a common
German league, as has been said before, but by reason that the barley
kernels be not in all Countries of like bigness, neither finger breadthes,
inches, hand-breadthes, feet, nor any of the other measures are found any
where to be equal: for the French foot of Paris is longer then ours by an
inch, and the Italian foot is longer by two inches and more, and yet their
miles are somewhat shorter then ours: and the German foot (according to
Stophlerus.) is less then ours by two inches and a half. But to show the
diversity of measures would require a long discourse more intricable then
profitable, and therefore I lean to talk any further thereof, wishing you
when we speak of miles, furlongs, paces, or feet, to consider the measure
thereof according to the inch or foot of our English standard.

Of the Longitude and Latitude of the earth. Chap. 7.
WHat mean you by the Longitude and Latitude of the earth?

Longitude is as much to say as length, and Latitude signifies breadth, for
since the earth is a body, it must needs have both length, breadth, and depth.

How define you such Longitude and Latitude, and how is it to be counted?

The Longitude of the earth in general is that space or upper face of the
earth which extends from West to East, and again from East to West: And the
Latitude in general is that space which extends North and South even from
the one pole to the other. Now to know how such Longitude and Latitude is to be
accounted, you must first understand that ye Equinoctial Circle girding the
earth in the very midst, is divided into 360. degrees by reason of certain
Meridians which passing through the Poles of the world, do cut each half of
the Equinoctial in eighteen points, which being doubled do make 36. spaces,
every space containing ten degrees: and some do divide the Equinoctial with
36. Meridiaans, cutting each half thereof in 36. points, which being doubled
do make 72. spaces, every space containing 5. degrees, which comes all to
one reckoning, for five times 72. do make 360. as well as ten times 36. of
which Meridians, be there never so few or many (for you may if you will make
half as many Meridians as there be degrees in the Equinoctial which amounts
to a 180.) yet according to Ptolomie, that Meridian is said to be first and
furthest Westwarde which passes through the Islands called Insulae fortunatae,
for the West Indies were not known nor discovered in his days, nor yet long
time after, since the discovery whereof, the late Cosmographers of these days
do make the first Meridian to pass through the Islands called Azores, which
Islands, as appears by their Cards are situated more Westwarde from the
foresaid Insulae fortunatae, by five degrees, the reason that moves them so
to do, is because the Mariners Compass as they say, will never incline to the
true North pole, but when they sail either by the I Will S. Mary or S. Michaell,
affirming that in every other place the Compass does vary from the true
North, either by North asting or Northwesting. And by thus altering the
ancient placing of the first Meridian, they must likewise alter all the
Longitudes set down heretofore by Ptolomie or any other ancient writer,
notwithstanding the matter is easily helped, for by adding to every Longitude
Eastward five degrees, or by subtracting five degrees from every Longitude
Westward, you shall not greatly vary from those ancient Longitudes that be
truly set down. But to return again to my first purpose, I say tha^
wheresoever this first Meridian cutteth the Equinoctial, there begins the
first degree of Longitude, which proceeds Eastward until you come to 180.
degrees, which being the one half of the earth is as far as you can go
Eastwarde, for then the earth being round, you must needs turn again
Westward until you come to the 360. degree, which is the last degree of
Longitude, and ends where the first degree begins: and therefore the
Cosmographers measuring always the Longitude by the degrees of the
Equinoctial, do define Longitude to be that portion of the Equinoctial
Circle, which is contained betwixt the first Meridian and the Meridian of any
place supposed, but the distance betwixt any two supposed Meridians (neither of
them being the first Meridian) is not called of them Longitude, but the
difference of Longitude: For suppose the distance of the one Meridian to be
twenty degrees distant from the first Meridian, and the other but ten, these
Longitudes you see are not like but do differ, and therefore the distance
betwixt any such two places may be very well called the difference of
Longitude, and not Longitude it self, which has always regard to the first
Meridian and to none other.

Define once again what Latitude is?

Latitude is none other thing but the distance of any place from the
Equinoctial either toward the North pole or toward the South pole, so as
there be two kinds of Latitudes, the one Northern, and the other Southern:
And such Latitude is measured upon the Meridian which passes through any place
supposed. For every Meridian is also divided into 360. degrees, and by reason
that the Equinoctial girdeth all such Meridians in the very midst, it deuideth
them all into four equal quarters every quarter containing 90. degrees, which
is the greatest Latitude that any place can have, as you may see in this figure
following, whereof the first Meridian on the left hand is put to signify
according to Ptolomie, that which passes through the Fortunate Islands, or by
the Azores according to the modern Cosmographers (if you will have it so)
containing the degrees of the Latitude both Northward and Southward, and
through the midst of all the Meridians passes the Equinoctial containing the
degrees of the Longitude.

The figure of the longitude and latitude of the world.


What be the other manifold Circles in this figure dividing the Meridians on
each side of the Equinoctial, as well toward the North pole, as toward the
South pole.

They be called Parallels, whereof we shall speak in the next Chapter, in the
mean time mark well this figure that thereby you may the better conceive what
is the Longitude and Latitude of the earth.

Understanding now the Longitude and Latitude of the whole earth, I am desirous
to know how the Longitude and Latitude of every several place of the earth or
sea is to be found out, and how far any place is distant one from another.

How to know the Latitude of any place, as well in the day as in the night.
Chap. 8.
BEcause the Latitude of any place is more easy to be found (as most men
think) then the Longitude, I will first treat of Latitude. The Latitude the^
is to be known by the Astrolabe, Quadrant, Crossestaffe, and by such like
Mathematical instruments, and that diverse ways whereof the most easy is
thus: first with your Astrolabe or Quadrant, or any such like instrument, take
the height of the sun right at noone, when the sun is in the first point of
Aries or of Libra, which height if you subtract from 90. that which remains
is the true Latitude of that place. But if you would know the Latitude at any
other day or time of the year, then after that you have taken the height of
the sun at noone, otherwise called the Meridian altitude, you must first
learn to know the true degree of the suns declination by the Table of the
declinations before set down, together with the use thereof in the 13. Chap.
of the first book, or by some other Table more lately calculated, and if such
declination be Northernly, then you must subtract that from the foresaid
Altitude or height: but if the declination be Southernly, the^ you must add
the same unto the foresaid height, and by such subtraction or addition, you
shall have the height of the Equinoctial above your Horizon, which being
subtracted from 90. that which remains is the true Latitude of that place:
and to be sure in taking the Meridian altitude, it shall be needful to take
it diverse times one after another, with some little pawse betwixt, to see
whether it increases or decreaseth, for if it does increase, then it is not
yet full noone, but if it decreaseth then it is past noone. This last way of
finding out the Latitude, is, and has been most commonly taught, as well by
the ancient, as modern writers, as a most sure and ready way of finding the
Latitude of any place.

What if the sun do not shine at noone, nor perhaps all that day?

Then you must tarry until night that some star appear, which you
perfectly know, and such a one as both rises and sets. And having taken
the Meridian altitude of that star with your Astrolabe or Quadrant, you must
learn what declination he has, and whether it be Northern or Southern. For
if the star has North declination, then you must subtract his declination
from his Meridian altitude, and the remainder shall be the Altitude of the
Equinoctial, which being taken out of nintie, shall be the Latitude of the
place, or elevation of the pole: but if the declination of the star be
Southernly, then you must add his declination to his Meridian altitude, and
that sum shall be the Altitude of the Equinoctial, which being taken out of
90. the remainder shall be the elevation of the Pole. As for example, supposing
that you know the star called Arcturus, or Bubulcus, and that you find his
Meridian altitude by your Astrolabe or Quadrant to be 59. degrees 30. minutes
and also that you have learned by some Table, that his declination to the
Northwarde is 21. degrees 30. minutes: here by taking his said declination
because it is Northernly, out of his Meridian altitude, you find the remainder
to be 38. degrees which is the Altitude of the Equinoctial, which being taken
from 90. the remainder will be 52. degrees, which is the Latitude of the place
whereas you made your observation, and this is a far more ready way then to
wait all night to take the Meridian altitude, and also the depression of such
a star as never sets, which is seeledome done in one self night. And
therefore I would wish all Mariners to acquaint themselves with many stars
that do both rise and set, and so shall they be sure to find one such star
or other, to be at his Meridian altitude at any hour of the night that they
desire, if the stars do show.

How to know the true Longitude of any place. Chap. 9.
THough the Longitude may be found out by diverse ways not easy for every man's
capacity, yet because Gemma Frisius thinks none so sure as to know the same
by the eclipse of the Moon, (which also as he says) may sometime fail by
reason of the diversity of aspects and Latitude of the Moon, and for that
cause has invented a more ready way to find out at all times the Longitude
of any place, I mind here therefore briefly to show you first the order of
finding out the Longitude by the Eclipse of the Moon, and then how to find
out the same by that ready way which he has invented: the order then to know
it by the Eclipse of the Moon is thus: First you must learn by some
Ephemerides at what hour the Eclipse shall be in some place, where you know
already by some Table the Longitude, that done, you your self or some other
for you, must the same day of the Eclipse observe by the Astrolabe at what
hour the Eclipse begins in that place, whereof you know not the Longitude:
For if the Eclipse do begin in both places at one self hour, then assure
your self that both places have one self Longitude, but if it begin sooner
or later, then there is difference betwixt them, according to the variety of
the time, which difference is thus to be known: Take the lesser sum of
hours out of the greater, and there shall remain either hours, or minutes,
or both, if hours, then multiply the same by fifteen, if minutes, divide the
same by four, (for in this account fifteen degrees do make one hour, and
four minutes do make one degree) and add the difference so found to the
Longitude, if the Eclipse do appear there sooner: if later then subtract the
said difference from the known Longitude, and that which remains will show
the unknown longitude. But note by the way, that if there remain any minutes
after the division, you must multiply those minutes by 15. and so shall you
have the minutes of degrees.

Show the use of this rule by some example.

For example I find by the tables of Ptolomey that the longitude of Paris in
France is 23. degrees, and by some Almanacke or Ephemerides I find that the
Eclipse does begin there at three hours after midnight, now by this I would
know the longitude of Tubing a famous city in Sueuia, which is a region of
Germany, at which town in the very day of the Eclipse I cause to be observed
by Astrolabe at what hour the Eclipse begins there, and I find that it
begins at 3. of the clock and 24^ after midnight, then by subtracting the
lesser number of time out of the greater, I find the remainder to be 24^ which
being divided by 4^ which do make one degree, the quotient shall be 6.
degrees, and that is the difference, which being added to the known longitude
of Paris (because the Eclipse is sooner there than at Tubing) it makes in all
9. degrees, whereby I gather that the longitude of Tubing is 29. degrees, by
this means all the Tables of Cosmographers are most commonly made, and yet
many times they greatly differ in their longitudes for lack perhaps of using
diligence in taking the right hour and moment of the Eclipse, and for not
duly considering the diverse aspects, and what latitude the Moon has at that
instant which may cause great error.

A ready way to find out the longitude of any place, invented by Gemma
Frisius. Chap. 10.
THat way is done by the help of some true Horologie or watch apt to be
carried in iournying, which by an Astrolabe is to be rectified and set just at
such hour as you depart from the place where you are, to go to any other
place whereof you are desirous to know the longitude, in which your going you
must be diligent to see that your watch never cease going, and being arrived
at that place whereof you seek to know the longitude, you must tarry until the
Index do justly touch the prick of some perfect hour, and also at that
instant, to see what hour it is by your Astrolabe, for if your Astrolabe and
watch do both agree in one, then assure your self that there is no difference
of longitude, but that you have traveled still under one self Meridian either
toward the North or South. But if they differ one hour or certain minutes,
then reduce them to degrees, or to the minutes of degrees in such order as is
before taught, and thereby you shall find the longitude which you desire to
know. But to take the longitude of any place upon the sea by this manner of
way, most men think it were a great deal better to do it by the help of a
great hour glass, made to run 24. hours, which must be watched when it is
ready to run out, that it may be immediately turned: for watches made of Iron
or Steel will soon rust upon the sea. This way of taking the longitude and
many others I doubt not but that M. Borrough has tried, and thereby is able to
judge which is best, wherefore in mine opinion he may do his country great good
by setting down in writing that way which he by experience knows to be best
and readiest, for want whereof the Mariners cards do make the sea men often to
err in their voiages.

Another way taught by Appian to find out the longitude of any place with the
cross staff by knowing the distance betwixt the Moon and some known star
that is situated nigh unto the Ecliptique line. Chap. 11.
FIrst seek to know by the Astronomicall Tables the true moving of the Moon
according to the longitude at the time of your observation at some certain
place, for whose Meridian the roots of those Tables are calculated and
verefied. Also you must know the degree of longitude of some fixed Star nigh
unto the Ecliptique, going either next before or else next after the moving of
the Moon, then you must seek out the distance of the moving of the Moon and
of the said Star, which distance once had, apply the cross staff to your
eye, and move the cross up and down until you may see the center of the
body of the Moon with the one end of the cross and the foresaid fixed Star
with the other end of the cross, so shall the cross show you by the degrees
and minutes marked upon the staff, the distance of the Moon and of the
foresaid Star aunswerable to the place of your observation, which being set
down, set down also the distance betwixt the Moon and the foresaid Star
that was first calculated, and then take the lesser out of the greater, so
shall remain the last difference, which may be rightly called the diversity
of aspectes, which difference if you divide by the moving which the Moon
makes in one hour, you shall know thereby the time in which the Moon is or
was joined with the first distance of the foresaid Star, then having
converted that time into degrees and minutes, add or subtract the product
thereof to or from that Meridian, unto which the Tables (whereby you first
calculated the moving of the Moon) were verefied, that is to say, if the
distance betwixt the Moon and the fixed Star of your observation be lesser,
then add the degrees and minutes to the known longitude, so shall you find
the place of your observation to be more Eastward, but if it be greater, then
subtract the degrees and minutes from the known longitude, and the place of
your observation shall be more westward. All which rules Gemma Frisius
affirms to be true, so as the Moon be more westward than the fixed Star:
for if at the time of your observation the Moon be more Eastwarde, then you
must work clean contrary, that is to say, if the distance betwixt the Moon
and the fixed Star be lesser, you must subtract the degrees and minutes from
the known longitude, so shall the place of your observation be more Westward:
but if it be greater, then you must add the degrees and minutes unto the
known longitude, and you shall find the place of your observation to be more
Eastward.

How to know the distance of places, that is to say, how many miles one place
is distant from another, and how many ways places are said to differ in
distance one from another. Chap. 12.
THe distance may be known diverse ways, that is, either Arithmetically,
Geometrically, or by the Tables of Sinus. But before I show you the order of
any of these ways, you have to understand that any two places do differ in
distance one from another one of these 3. manner of ways, that is, either in
latitude only, or in longitude only, or else in both: if two places having one
self longitude do differ only in latitude, then according to the Arithmetical
way you must subtract the lesser latitude out of the greater, and the remainder
shall be the difference, which being multiplied by 60. will show the number of
miles as for example, London and Roan having in a manner one self longitude,
do differ only in latitude, for the latitude of London is 51. degrees 32^ and
the latitude of Roan is 49. degrees and 10^ which being the lesser latitude and
therefore to be taken out of 51. degrees 32^ there remains 2. degrees 22^
which 2. degrees being multiplied by 60. makes 120. whereunto if for the 22^
annexed to the degrees you add 22. miles (for every minute is a mile) it shall
make in all 142. miles, which by a right line is the true distance betwixt
London and Roan. But you have to note that the difference of 2. sundry
latitudes is not to be known by subtracting the lesser out of the greater,
unless both the places be so situated, as both may have either North latitude or
South latitude, for if the one place have North latitude and the other South
latitude, the difference is to be known by addition, and not by subtraction: as
for example, Naples in Italy has 41. degrees of North latitude, and la
Madalena in Aphricke not far from Manicongo, has 8. degrees of south
latitude, both places having one self Meridian, here the difference of these
two latitudes is to be known by addition, and not by subtracting the lesser
out of the greater, for 8. and 41. being added together do make 49. and that is
ye true difference, which being multiplied by 60. makes 2940. miles. So
likewise the difference of the two longitudes is not always known by
subtracting the lesser out of the greater, unless the two places have both
East longitude or else both West longitude: As for example Lisbona in Spain
has in East. longitude 13. degrees and Cap de losslauos in the West Indies
has in west longitude 334. degrees: here the difference of these two
longitudes is not to be known by taking the lesser out of the greater, but
thus, first take 334. out of 360. and there will remain 26. degrees, whereunto
if you ad the East longitude for Lisbona, which is 13. degrees, it will make in
all 39. degrees, which is the true difference of the 2. longitudes, for if you
should take 13. degrees out of 334. there would remain 321. which is not the
true difference. But to know the distance of two places differing in longitude,
this Table here following is needful.

The Table of miles aunswerable to one degree of every several latitude.
1 2 3 4 5 6 D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S 1 59 59 16 57 41 31 51 26 46
41 41 61 29 5 76 14 31 2 59 58 17 57 23 32 50 53 47 40 55 62 28 01 77 13 30 3
59 55 18 57 4 33 50 19 48 40 9 63 27 14 78 12 28 4 59 51 19 56 44 34 49 45 49
39 22 64 26 18 79 11 27 5 59 46 20 56 23 35 49 9 50 38 34 65 25 21 80 10 25 6
59 40 21 56 1 36 48 32 51 37 46 66 24 24 81 9 23 7 59 33 22 55 38 37 47 55 52
36 56 97 23 27 82 8 21 8 59 25 23 55 14 38 47 17 53 36 7 68 22 29 83 7 19 9 59
16 24 54 49 39 46 38 54 35 16 69 21 30 84 6 16 10 59 5 25 54 23 40 45 58 55 34
25 70 20 31 85 5 14 11 58 54 26 53 56 41 45 17 56 33 33 71 19 32 86 4 11 12 58
41 27 53 28 42 44 35 57 32 41 72 18 32 87 3 8 13 58 28 28 52 59 43 43 53 58 31
48 73 17 33 88 2 5 14 58 13 29 52 29 44 43 10 59 30 54 74 16 32 89 1 ^ 15 57 57
30 51 58 45 42 26 60 30 0 75 15 32 90 0 0

Describe this Table.

This Table is divided into 6. collums, every collum containing, first the
degrees of longitude, and then the miles and seconds of miles answerable to
every degree, for every degree of the very Equinoctial it self is in value
60. miles, but the further you go from the Equinoctial either Northward or
Southward, every degree of latitude is lesser in value than other, and
contains fewer miles, as you may easily see by the said Table, proceeding
from one degree to 90. which is the greatest latitude that any place can have.

How to know by the help of the foresaid Table the distance of two places
differing only in longitude. Chap. 13.
YOu must multiply the difference of the longitudes by the number of miles
answerable to the latitudes of the said places, omitting always the seconds of
miles set down in the said Table, because in this account they are of small
importance: as for example, London and Antwerp, having both in a manner one
self latitude, do differ only in longitude 6. degrees 42^ which difference
being multiplied by 37. miles answerable to 51. degrees of latitude, as you see
in the Table, do make in all 247. miles and 54^ of a mile. But in making this
multiplication, you must first multiply the 6. whole degrees by 37. and the
product thereof will amount to 222. then by the rule of proportion you may find
out the value of the minutes annexed to the degrees of the difference of
longitude in saying thus, if 60^ which is one degree, do require 37. miles,
what shall 42^ require. And by working according to the rule of proportion, you
shall find the fourth number which you seek to be 25. miles and 54^ which
being added to the first product 222. makes in all 247. miles and 54^ of a
mile, which wants but 6^ to make up another mile.

How to find out the true distance of two places differing both in longitude
and latitude by the Arithmeticall way. Chap. 14.
HOw is that done?

First, take the difference of the longitudes and latitudes of both places by
subtracting the lesser out of the greater, then convert the same into miles by
multiplying the difference of the two longitudes into the miles that be
answerable to the latitude of each place, which miles you shall find in the
Table aforesaid, and if there be any minutes annexed to the degrees of the
difference of longitude, then reduce the same also to miles by the rule of
proportion, as before is taught, and having added the two products together,
half the sum, and set it by it self. Then multiply the difference of the
latitudes into 60. miles, and add thereunto the fraction of minutes annexed to
the said difference if it has any fraction, allowing for every minute one
mile, and set that number also by it self: that done, square the sums
reserved, that is to say, multiply each one part by it self into it self, and
having added the two products together into one sum, seek out the square
root thereof, and that shall be the true distance of the two places. As for
example, if you would know the true distance betwixt London and Venice, first
you must know by some Table the longitude and latitude of both towns,
wherefore finding the longitude of London to be 19. degrees, 54^ and the
latitude thereof to be 51. degrees, 32^ And the longitude of Venice to be 35.
degrees, 30^ and the latitude thereof to be 44. degrees, 45^ Now by subtracting
the lesser longitude out of the greater, I find the difference of longitude to
be 15. degrees, 36^ and by subtracting the lesser latitude out of the greater,
I find the difference of latitude to be 6. degrees, 47^ Then knowing the
latitude of London to be 51. degrees, I resort to the table of miles appointed
for every degree of latitude before set down, and theer I find that to 51.
degrees of latitude do answer 37. miles and certain seconds, which being of
small moment are not wont to be reckoned. Then in multiplying the difference
of the longitudes which is 15. degrees 36^ by 37. miles I find the product of
the 15. degrees so multiplied to be 555. and because there be 36^ annexed to
the foresaid 15. degrees, I seek by the rule of proportion to know how many
miles that fraction contains, in saying thus, if 60. require 37. what shall
36. require? and I find 22. miles, which being added to 555. makes 577. then
by seeking in the foresaid table how many miles be answerable to the latitude
of Venice, which is 44. degrees, I find the number of miles to be 43. by which
number I multiply once again the difference of longitude, which is 15.
degrees. 36^ the product whereof, together with the fraction annexed thereunto
being converted into miles by the rule of proportion, as before, does amount to
670. which sum being added to the former converted longitude, which is 577.
makes in all 1247. the half whereof is 623. which half number I reserve by
it self, that done I multiply the difference of the latitude, which is 6.
degrees 47^ by 60. miles, in saying 6. times 60. makes 360. whereunto I add
for the 47^ annexed 47. miles, and it makes in all 407. which sum I reserve
also by it self. Then I multiply the first reserved number into it self, the
product whereof is 388129. That done, I multiply the second reserved number
also into it self, the product whereof is 165649. which two last productes
being added together, do make in all 553778. whereof the square root being
taken, is 744. miles, which is the true distance of Venice by a right line from
London. And to the intent that the order and working herein may more plainly
appear unto you, I have set down all the particular numbers of the same here
by them selves, as it were in a Table.

longitude. latitude London. 19. degr. 54^ 51. degr. 32^ Venice. 35. degr. 30^
44. degr. 45^ The difference of their longitudes and latitudes. 15. degr. 36^
6. degr. 47^

The difference of the longitudes converted into miles: for London is 577. For
Venice. 670. The sum of the two converted longitudes added together, is 1247.
The half whereof, which is the first reserved number, is, 623 The second
reserved number, which is the difference of the latitudes, converted into
miles, is 407 The sum of the first reserved number multiplied into it self,
is 388129 The sum of the second reserved number multiplied into itself, is
165649 The sum or both added together is 553778 The square root whereof,
which is the sum of the miles, is 744

How to find out the distance betwixt two places, differing both in longitude
and latitude by help only of a demicircle divided into 180. degrees without any
Arithmetike. Chap. 14.
But now because the way before taught to find out such distance by the
Arithmeticall way may seem perhaps to some folks very busy and tedious, I
have thought good therefore to set down this other way which was sent me not
long since from my loving friend M. Wright of Cayes college in Cambridge who
is well learned in the Mathematicals, and is so apt thereunto by nature, as he is
like inogh to attain to such perfect knowledge therein as he may be able thereby
hereafter greatly to perfect his country, if for want of sufficient exhibition
he be not forced to leave so noble a study, wherefore I wish with all my heart
that all Gentlemen of ability were minded to show their liberality toward
him in that behalf. But to return to my matter, I say that the way to find
out the foresaid distance is this here following: first having drawn a
demi-circle upon a right Diameter (the larger that the demi-circle is the
better,) and divided the same into 180. degrees, like unto this hereafter
described, and marked with the letters a b c d. whereof d. is the center and a.
c. the Diameter. Then learn first by some Table to know the longitude the
latitude of both places, and the difference of their longitudes, as you did
before in seeking to know by the Arithmetical way the distance betwixt London
and Venice, the difference of whose two longitudes is 15. degrees, and 36^ as
you may see in the former Table: for in working by this way, you have chiefly
to seek out in the circumference of the demicircle but three things, that is,
first, the difference of the two longitudes, secondly, the lesser latitude,
and last of all the greatest latitude. Knowing therefore the difference of the
said two places in longitude to be 15. degrees, 36^ seek out the same in the
demicircle, beginning to count at A. and so proceed toward B. And at the end
of those degrees and minutes set down a prick marked with the letter e. unto
which prick draw a right line by your ruler from D. the center of the
demicircle. That done, seek out the lesser latitude, which is 44. degrees, and
45^ in the forsaid demicircle, beginning to account the same from the prick e.
and so proceed toward the letter B. and at the end of the said lesser
latitude, set down another prick marked with the letter g. from which prick
or point draw a perpendicular line which by help of your squire or compasses
may fall with right angles upon the former right line drawn from D. to e. and
where it falls, there set down a prick marked with the letter h. That done,
seek out the greater latitude, which is 51. degrees, and 32^ in the foresaid
demicircle, beginning to account the same from A. toward B. and at the end of
that latitude set down another prick marked with the letter I. from whence
draw another perpendicular line that may fall by help of your squire or
co^passes with right angles upon the Diameter A. C. and there make a prick
marked with the letter K. That done, take with your compass the distance that
is betwixt k. and h. which distance you must set down upon your said Diameter
A. C. setting the one foot of your compass upon k. and the other toward the
center D. and there make a prick marked with the letter L. Then take with your
Compass the length of the shorter perpendicular line g. h. and apply that
wideness upon the longer perpendicular line I. K. setting the one foot of your
Compass at I. which is the end of the greater latitude, and extend the other
foot toward K. and there make a prick marked with the letter M. That done,
take the distance betwixt L. and M. with your compass, and apply the same to
the demicircle, setting the one foot of your Compass in A. and the other
toward B. and there make a prick marked with the letter N. And the number of
degrees contained betwixt A. and N. will show the true distance of the two
places, which you shall find to be 12. degrees and almost 24^ Now by allowing
for every degree 60. miles, and for every minute a mile, the sum of miles
will agree with the former distance found out by the Arithmetical way which was
744. miles. And thus you have to deal to know the distance of any other two
places whatsoever, differing both in longitude and latitude. But you have to
note by the way, that if the difference of the longitudes does exceed the
number of 180. then you must subtract that exceeding difference out of 360. and
the remainder shall be the difference of the longitudes, and then work in all
points as is before taught. And this way is as Geometrical, as that which
Appian sets down in his book of Geographie, to be done by the help of the
terrestrial Globe, the order whereof here follows.

Longitude. latitude. London. 19. degrees. 54'. 52. degrees. 32'. Venice. 15. degrees. 30'.
44. degrees. 45'. The difference of their longitudes and latitudes is 15. degrees. 36'.
6. degrees. 47'.



How to find out the distance of the places by the Geometrical way. Chap. 15.
HOw is that done?

Most readily and easily by help of a terrestrial globe in this manner
following. First take the distance of the 2. places by extending your compass
upon the globe, from the one place to the other, which if you would know how
many miles it comprehends, apply the same distance so taken unto the
Equinoctial line, setting the first foot of your compass upon the first
Meridian in that point, whereas it cutteth the Equinoctial, then see how many
degrees of the Equinoctial are comprehended betwixt the two feet of your
Compass, and multiply those degrees by 60. and the product thereof shall show
you how many Italian miles such distance is in length. But if either of the
places or both, be wanting and not expressed in the Globe, then you must learn
by the tables of Ptolomey or of some others, as of Appian, Gemma Frisius,
Orontius or such like, the longitude and latitude of the said places, that
done, having sought out the longitude of the first place in the Equinoctial,
turn the globe about with your hand until you have brought the longitude
right under the brazen Meridian, which being stayed there, seek out in the
said Meridian the latitude of the said place, and there set a mark upon the
globe, for there the place should stand, and do in like manner to find out the
second place: Then by extending your Compass from the one mark to the other,
you shall have the true distance, which distance if you apply to the
Equinoctial like as before is taught, the degrees thereof being multiplied by
60. will show you how many miles those two places are distant one from another.

May not the distance of places be found out as well by an universal Map as by
the globe terrestrial?

Yes indeed and more readily by reason that for the most part every Map has
his proper skale, so as you need to do no more but to take the distance of the
2. places with your Compass, and to apply the same to the skale showing the
miles or leagues.

What if the Map have no skale?

Then you must seek out the distance by such means as I do show in my
Treatise of the use of universal Mappes, and also in my description of
Planctius his Map.

I pray you in the mean time proceed in showing me the third way of finding
out of the distance of places which you said was per tabulas Sinuum.

The order of finding out the distance of 2. places differing both in longitude
and latitude per tabu^as Sinuum is plainly set down before in the end of my
Arithm^ticke, where as I boe make a plain description of the said Tables, and
do show the use thereof as well by this as by diverse other examples, wherefore I
wish you to resort to that treatise and you shall have your desire. For having
for this time sufficiently spoken of the longitude, latitude and distance of
places, and how the same is to be found out, I think it meet now to treat of
the 5. Zones, of Climes and Parallels, whereinto the amient Cosmographers
thought good to divide the earth, to the intent that every part thereof night
be the better known how it is situated either Northward or Southward, whether
it be hot or cold, or betwixt both, and of what length the day and night is in
every place, and what manner of shadow the Sun yields every where, and such
like accidents, and first of the 5. Zones.

Of the 5. Zones. Chap. 16.
THe most ancient Cosmographers considering how the Sun by his oblique, and
bariable course did warm with his beams one part of the earth more than
another, gathered thereby that the earth had three temperatures that is to say,
extreme hot, extreme cold, and a mean temperature, that is, neither too
hot, nor too cold: And therefore to show us unto which of these
temperatures, any part of the earth was subject, they divided the earth into 5.
Zones, answerable to the 5. Zones of the firmament, by help of the
Equinoctial and the 4. lesser circles before described in the first part of
this treatise, the 20. Chapter, and are there set forth in figure which figure
I thought good to set down again in this place, to the intent you might the
better remember what was said there touching the Zones.



But other Cosmographers coming afterward, not satisfied with the 5. Zones,
because they show nothing but the situation and the three temperatures of the
earth, did divide the earth into certain Climes and Paraliels, to find out
thereby^ the length of the day and night in every place, and the true latitude
thereof as Ptolomey and many others after him have done, making such divisions
as we shall speak of hereafter. But truly I think with Mercator, that the best
and most exact way of dividing the earth to serve all purposes is to be made
by degrees and minutes, wherein is less error than in Climes and Parallels,
neither can Climes or Parallels be so well described when you draw night to
any of the Poles, for that the spaces as well betwixt the Parallels as betwixt
the Meridians do grow continually straighter and straighter, as you may see
in the figure of Parallels hereafter following.

I remember that in the 20. chapter whereas you described the 5. Zones, you said
that the ancient men did greatly err in affirming 3. of the Zones to be
uninhabitable, that is, the two cold Zones and the hot Zone, I pray you
therefore show me here the cause why they erred?

They erred for lack of experience, because they had never traueled into those
regions, but in these latter days men of diverse nations, specially the
Spanish, English, French, and Flemmish have traveled very far, some toward
the North pole, and some toward the South pole, and also through the burnt
Zone, for those that sail from the North parres toward the South pole, or
from the South parts toward the North pole, must needs pass in their voyage
through the burnt Zone: and these men do affirm that they have found all the
3. Zones, that is to say, the two cold and hot Zones to be well inhabited.
And our late Cosmographers do not let to render cause why they should be
habitable, for (say they) though the cold be very extreme in those regions that
lie next unto the Poles, yet the Sun appearing and giving shine unto them both
day and night, does greatly qualify and moderate the extreme cold of those
regions. But truly, in mine opinion, they have small comfort of the Sun, since
it strikes almost round about their feet, without yielding any warm reflexe
from above, and especially to those that do inhabit nigh to either of the
Poles. Again, they say that the burnt Zone is habitable, by reason that the
night to them is continually as long as the day, the coolness whereof does
greatly refresh the extreme heat of the day. But now let us return to our
purpose, and speak somewhat of the Climes and Parallels, and because every
Clime consists of 2. Parallels, I think it best to speak first of Parallels.

Of Parallels. Chap. 17.
WHat be Parallels.

Parallels be lines either right or circular always equally distant one from
another so as they can never meet. And of Parallels that are to be considered
in the Sphere, some make 3. kinds, according to their threefold signification,
for some are called the Parallels of the sun, who in departing from the
Equinoctial toward any of the Poles, makes every day throughout the year
one Parallel, so as in going from the Equinoctial to the Tropique of Cancer,
he makes 182 Parallels. And as many again in going from the Equinoctial to
the Tropique of Capricorn. The second kind of Parallels are called the
Parallels of Latitude, And the third the Parallels of the longest day, which
two last are in effect both one, for the further that any Parallel is situated
from the Equinoctial toward either of the Poles, the more Latitude it has,
and so by consequent makes the day longer to those that dwell under that
Parallel, of which Parallels the ancient Cosmographers do make in all but 21.
proceeding proportionally either toward the North pole or South pole, as you
may see by this figure here following the middle line or Circle whereof is the
Equinoctial.



And every Parallel proceeding from the said Equinoctial, either Northward or
Southward, does lengthen ye day by one quarter of an hour in such proportion
as this Table here following shows, appointing to the first Parallel, and
next unto the Equinoctial 4. degr. and 15^ and to the second parallel 8. degr.
30^ and so forth until you come to the 21. Parallel passing through ye Island,
which Parallel is distant from the Equinoctial 63. degr. 16^ further then which
Parallel Northward, the Tables of Ptolomie do not extend, and Southward they
extend no further then to that Parallel which has less 20. degrees of
Latitude.

The Table of Parallels showing how many degrees and minutes every one is
distant from the Equinoctial, made according to the rule of Ptolomy.
Parallels D M the first 4 15 the second 8 30 the third 12 45 the fourth 16 35
the fifth 20 30 the sixth 24 15 seventh 27 30 the eight 30 45 the ninth 33 40
the tenth 36 24 eleventh 39 0 twelfth 41 20 thirtenth 43 15 fourtenth 45 24
fifteenth 48 40 sixteenth 51 50 seue^tenth 54 30 eightenth 56 30 ninetenth 58
20 twentieth 61 10 the xxj. 63 16

Of Climes both old and new. Chap. 18.
WHat is a Clime?

A Clime is a space of the earth comprehended betwixt two Parallels, in which
space the longest day does vary by half an hour.

How many Climes be there?

The ancient Cosmographers divided as well that part of the earth which lies
betwixt the Equinoctial and the North pole, so much I say as they thought to
be habitable, as also the habitable part which lies betwixt the Equinoctial
and the South pole, each of them into 7. Climes, to every of which Northern
Climes they gave a several proper name, according to the name of the place
through which the midst of the said Clime did pass, for they called the first
Clime Diameroes, Dia is a Greek preposition signifying in English By or
Through, and Meroes is a City of Egypt situated in a certain I Will enclosed
with the flood Nilus, which I Will has also the like name. The second Clime is
called Dia Syenes, which is also a City in Egypt situated right under the
Tropique of Cancer. The third Clime is called Dia Alexandrias, which is another
City of Egypt situated upon the West mouth of Nilus, falling into the sea of
Egypt. The fourth Clime is called Dia Rhodou, Rhodos is the chiefest City of
an I Will called Rhodos, standing in the sea called Mare Carpathium, washing the
Southwest end of Natolia, sometime called Asia minor, which Island, together
with the City Rhodos, Suliman the great Turk wan not many years since from
the Christians. The people of this I Will in S. Paul's time were called
Colossians, to whom he wrote one Epistle, and they were so called of a great
brazen Image called in Latin Colossus, containing in Altitude 105. feet,
which was dedicated to the Sun, or as some say to Jupiter. The first Clime is
called Dia Rhomes, that is to say by Rome that famous City of Italy, and
sometime head of all the world. The sixth is called of the old men Dia
Boristhenes, notwithstanding the modern writers think that it may be more
rightly called Dia Pontou, Pontus is both a Sea and Country lying Eastwarde
right against Constantinople. The seventh Clime is called of the old men Dia
Ripheos, but of the modern writers Dia Boristhenes which is a great flood of
Scithia in the South part of Sarmatia, which falls into the sea called Mare
Euxinum. To these seven Climes Appian adds two others, so as in all he
sets down nine Climes, making the eight Clime to pass through Ripheos
which are mountains enuironing Sarmatia on the North side, and the ninth
through Denmark.

What names did they give to the Southern Climes?

The self same that the Northern Climes have, saving that they put before
every such name this Greek word Anti, which is as much to say as Contrary or
Right against, as Anti Meroes, Anti Syenes, etc. as you may easily perceive by
this figure of Climes here following, notwithstanding none of those Southern
Climes were known to Ptolomie more then Anti-meroes, and hardly all that, the
furthest part whereof has not twenty degrees of Latitude.



And note that every such Clime is divided into 3. parts, that is the
beginning, the midst, and the end. And if you would know what degrees and
minutes of Latitude every such part has, that is to say, how many degrees
every such part is distant from the Equinoctial, then consider well this Table
following, which both briefly and plainly shows the same.

The beginning. The midst. The end. Degrees and Minutes of hours. D M D M D M
The first Clime. 12 45 16 35 20 30 The second Clime. 20 30 24 15 27 30 The
third Clime. 27 30 30 45 33 40 The fourth Clime. 33 40 36 24 39 C The fifth
Clime. 39 0 41 20 43 30 The sixth Clime. 43 30 45 24 47 15 The seventh Clime. 47
15 48 40 50 30 The eight Clime. 50 30 51 50 53 10 The ninth Clime. 53 10 55 30
56 30

May not the North and South part of the world each of them be divided into more
then 9. Climes?

Yes indeed as our latter writers affirm, for betwixt the Equinoctial and
the 66. degree and 30^ of Latitude in which the longest day contains full 24.
hours without having any night, they make 48. Parallels, and thereby 24.
Climes, for every Clime contains two Parallels, and every Parallel makes
the day to increase by one quarter of an hour as has been said before. But
from thence forth, though you may continue the Parallels almost to the very
pole, yet you can make no more but 24. Climes by reason that the spaces of the
Parallels toward either of the Poles, do grow more narrow every one then
other, so as from 66. degrees and 30. minutes of Latitude under which the
Circle Arctique passes, the longest day is not to be counted any more by
hours, but by whole days, weeks, and months, in so much as they which
dwell right under the North pole, whose Zenith is the pole it self, have six
months day whilst the Sun abides in the six Northern signs, and 6.
months night, the Sun being in the six Southern signs. And contrariwise
they that dwell right under the South pole have 6. months day, the Sun being
in the 6. Southern signs, and 6. months night whilst the Sun remains in
the 6. Northern signs. But because I think it a more ready way to account
the length of the day by the degrees of Latitude, then by Climes or Parallels,
I thought good here to set down Orontius his Table made for that purpose,
which from the 67. degree of Latitude to the North pole agrees in all points
with the Table of Johannes de Sacro Busto, in which Table from the said 67.
degree is not only set down the longest day, but also what portion of the
Zodiaque always appears above the Horizon, which portion when it contains
one whole sign, then the day is one month long, and the night as much, if two
signs, then the day is two months long and the night as much, and so forth
successively until you come to 6 signs, which is the one half of the
Zodiaque, making both day and night each of them six months long, as I have
said before, and as you may plainly see with your eye by placing the Sphere
on his Horizon at every such Latitude.

A Table showing the longest day in every degree of Laditude, proceeding
orderly from the Equinoctial to the North pole, by whole degrees without
minutes from one degree to 90.
Degrees of latitude. The longest day. D M H M S 1 0 12 3 28 2 0 12 6 56 3 0 12
10 24 4 0 12 14 0 5 12 17 28 6 12 20 56 7 12 24 46 8 12 28 0 9 12 31 36 10 12
35 12 11 12 38 48 12 12 42 44 13 12 46 8 14 12 49 44 15 12 53 28 16 12 57 20 17
13 1 4 18 13 4 46 19 13 8 56 20 13 12 46 21 13 16 48 22 13 21 4 23 13 25 4 24
13 29 20 25 13 33 35 26 13 38 0 27 13 42 24 28 13 46 16 29 13 51 30 30 13 56 16
31 14 1 12 32 14 6 8 33 14 11 12 34 0 14 16 24 35 0 14 21 52 36 0 14 27 20 37 0
14 33 4 38 14 37 36 39 14 44 56 40 14 51 12 41 14 57 44 42 15 4 24 43 15 11 20
44 15 18 40 45 15 26 8 46 15 34 8 47 15 42 24 48 15 51 4 49 16 0 8 50 16 9 44
51 16 19 52 52 16 30 32 53 16 41 52 54 16 54 8 55 17 7 4 56 17 21 4 57 17 36 16
58 17 52 48 59 18 10 48 60 18 30 56 61 18 53 20 62 19 18 24 63 19 48 40 64 20
24 24 65 21 10 32 66 22 20 40

Degrees of latitude The longest day The arch of the Zodiaque always appearing
above the Horizon. D M Days H M De. M 67 0 24 1 40 22 50 68 0 42 1 16 40 0 69
0 54 16 25 52 0 70 0 64 13 46 61 26 71 74 0 0 70 26 72 82 6 39 78 22 73 89 4 58
84 56 74 96 17 0 92 12 75 104 1 4 96 20 76 110 7 27 105 16 77 116 14 22 111 20
78 122 17 6 117 6 79 127 9 55 122 46 80 134 4 58 128 22 81 139 31 36 133 50 82
145 6 43 139 6 83 151 2 6 144 22 84 156 3 3 149 36 85 11 5 24 154 42 86 166 11
23 159 50 87 171 21 47 164 52 88 176 5 29 169 58 89 181 21 58 174 58 90 187 6
39 180 0

What things else do the Cosmographers teach to be considered in Climes and
Parallels?

Diverse things, as first how many Italian miles every clime has in breadth
and length, also what seasons of the year, and what shadows the sun
yields to those that dwell under diverse Climes and Parallels.

What breadth and length do the ancient writers appoint to every one of the
seven climes.

They appoint such breadth and length as this Table following shows, in which
also is set down the degrees and minutes of Latitude through which the middle
Parallel for every Clime passes, and also the number of miles answerable to
one degree of every such Latitude.

Climes. miles in breadth. miles in length. The degrees and minutes of Latitude
through which the middle parallel of every clime passes. The number of miles
answerable to one degree of every such Latitude. De. M. 1 465 20555 16 37 57 2
420 19453 24 15 54 3 370 18398 30 45 51 4 350 17299 36 24 48 5 270 16215 41 20
45 6 225 15136 45 24 42 7 195 14426 48 40 40

How the breadth and length of every Clime is to be known.

The breadth is to be known by multiplying the degrees of difference contained
betwixt the beginning and end of every Clime by 60. miles: And if the degrees
of difference have any minutes annexed thereunto, then you must add so many
miles as there be minutes, to the product of the former multiplication. Now to
have the length of every Clime, you must seek to know by the Table of miles,
how many miles be answerable to one degree of that Parallel of Latitude which
passes through the midst of the Clime, and by that number of miles multiply
360. and the product thereof shall be the^ length. But if the degrees of that
Latitude have any minutes annexed thereunto, then you must find out the miles
of those minutes by the rule of proportion in saying thus: if 60. do require
so many miles as you found in the Table of miles, what shall so many minutes
require, and add the quotient thereof to the product of the former
multiplication, so shall you have the true length of the Clime, all which
things are observed in the foresaid Table, which Table by observing like
order, you may extend (if you will) to the number of 24. Climes, set down by
Orontius and by diverse other modern writers.

Of the diverse seasons and shadows incident to diverse Climes and Parallels,
and first what seasons and shadows they have that dwell right under the
Equinoctial. Chap. 19.
THose that dwell right under the first Clime, and specially right under the
Equinoctial, which people at one instant may see both the Poles, have two
summers and two winters, for the sun having to pass right over their heads
twice in the year, which is when he is in Aries, and again in Libra, then
they must needs have two summers, because the sun at both those times is
nighest unto them, but when he is in Cancer or in Capricorn, then he is
furthest from them, and thereby makes unto them two Winters. But yet neither
of them so cold as our winter is, whereby it appears that our two times of
Spring and Autumn are to them 2. summers, and our two times of summer and
winter are to them two winters.

What shadows have those inhabitants?

They have five sundry shadows, for when the Sun is in either of the
Equinoxes, they cast their shadow in the morning when the sun rises toward
the West. And at night when he goes down toward the East, and at noone day
they have no shadow at all, but a perpendicular shadow, which streeketh right
down from head to foot, because the sun being then in the Equinoctial,
must needs at that time of the day be right over their heads, as you may
plainly see in every material Sphere, having a foot with a firm Horizon,
and dwely placed to show a right Sphere, but when the sun is in any of the
Southern signs, then the foresaid inhabitants do cast their shadow toward
the North, And when he is in the Northern signs, they cast their shadow
toward the South, and because they dwell in a right Sphere, their days and
nights be always equal.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell betwixt the
equinoctial and the Tropique of Cancer. Chap. 20.
THese have also two summers and two winters, and 5. shadows like unto the
others because the sun passes twice in the year right over their heads,
first in his declining from the Equinoctial toward Cancer, and again in his
returning from Cancer toward the Equinoctial, under which Clime Arabia foelix
is said to be situated. For Lucan writes that the Arabians coming to Rome to
aid Pompey, meruailed much to see that the trees did never cast their shadows
on the left hand, because in their country their shadow is sometime on the
right hand, and sometime on the left, sometime perpendicular, sometime
oriental, and sometime occidentall, but in Rome and in all other places beyond
the Tropique of Cancer the shadow always at noonetide tends Northward, the
words of Lucan be thus, Ignotum vobis Arabes venistis in orbem vmbras mirati
nemorum non ire sinistras.

How is Lucan to be understood here in using this speech on the left hand?

As all other Poets are, for they having regard to the West, do always make
the North part their right hand, and the South part the left. But the
Astronomers having regard to the South, do make the West their right hand, and
the East their left hand: again the Geographers contrariwise having regard to
the North, do make the East their right and the West their left hand, whereby
you may see that the right hand and left hand may be taken three manner of
ways, that is according to the manner of the Poets, of the Astronomers, and of
the Geographers.

Since these inhabitants have seasons and shadows like to those that dwell right
under the Equinoctial, wherein then do they differ?

They differ in that their days and nights be not always equal, by reason
that their Horizon declineth from the poles of the world, and by cutting the
Parallels of the sun with oblique Angles it deuideth those Parallels into
unequal parts, neither can their two summers be so extremely hot as the
others, because the sun for the most part is further from them.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell right under the
Tropique of Cancer. Chap. 21.
THey have but one summer and one winter, by reason that the sun never passes
right over their heads but once in the year, and that is when he enters into
the first degree of Cancer: In which time when the sun rises, the shadow
tends toward the West, and at noone the shadow is perpendicular enclining
on neither side, but falling right down. And at night when the sun goes
down, the shadow tends toward the East: and at all other times of the year
the shadow at noonetide falls always Northward, and as touching their days
and nights, they shorten and lengthen according as the sun either approaches
toward Cancer, or retireth toward Capricorn.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell betwixt the Tropique of
Cancer and the circle Arctique. Chap. 22.
THey have also one summer and one winter as we have here in England, for the
sun never passes right over their heads, by reason that so soon as he has
made his last and highest Parallel in Cancer, he returns again Southward,
and therefore their shadow is never at noonetide perpendicular but shoots
Northward, and the days and nights do lengthen and shorten according as the
sun makes his course either through the Northern or Southern signs. For
whilst he passes through the Northern signs the days are longer the^ the
nights, and in passing through the Southern signs he makes the nights longer
then the days.

Of the seasons and shadows which they have that dwell right under the Circle
Arctique, and how long their day is. Chap. 23.
THey have but one Winter and one Summer, and their shadow always tends
sidelong and Northward. And because their Zenith being in the circle Arctique,
is at all times of the year all one with the Pole of the Zodiaque: the
Ecliptique line therefore must needs be all one with their Horizon, whereby
the one half of the Zodiaque in a very moment does rise above the Horizon, and
the other half in the same instant goes down, and as the whole Tropique of
Cancer appears always above the Horizon: So the whole Tropique of Capricorn
is always hidden under the Horizon, so as when the sun enters into the
first degree of Cancer, their day is 24. hours long and their night but a
moment, so contrariwise when the sun enters into the first degree of
Capricorn, their night is 24. hours long, and their day but a moment, as you
may plainly see by placing the Sphere at the 66. degree and 30 of Latitude.

What seasons, shadows and length of day they have that dwell betwixt the
circle Arctique and the pole Arctique. Chap. 24.
THese have like seaso^s and shadows as those that dwell under the circle
Arctique, saving that their Winter is colder and longer, because the nigher
they approach to the Pole, the further are they from the sun, and also have
both longer days and nights, for the more that the Pole is elevated above
their Horizon, the greater portion of the Zodiaque does always appear above
the same, which portion if it contain one whole sign, then their day is a
month long, and their night as much, if two whole signs, then their day is
two months long, and their night as much, and so forth as has been said
before.

Of those that dwell right under the Pole. Chap. 25.
WHat seasons, shadows, and length of day have they that dwell right under the
Pole, if there be any such people?

Truly you do well to doubt thereof, for in mine opinion humane nature is not
able to suffer the extreme cold that by reason must needs be in those parts,
neither do I think that ever any man either Christian or Heathen did ever
sail so far as to discover any land there. Notwithstanding if there by any
such people their season is always so extreme cold as no part thereof is
worthy to be called a summer, but rather a continual winter, and as for their
shadow since the sun when he is at the nighest does never mount above their
Horizon more then 23. degrees 30 at the most, their shadow must needs go round
about them nigher, for the most part to their feet then to their heads, for
the pole is their Zenith, and the Equinoctial their Horizon, whereby 6. signs
which is the one half of the Zodiaque, does always appear above their
Horizon, and the other half is always hidden under their Horizon, and thereby
they have 6. months day and 6. months night, day I say whilst the sun is
in the 6. Northern signs, and night, whilst the sun is in the 6. Southern
signs, and yet the night can not be so dark there as elsewhere, by reason
that the sun is never distant from their Horizon above 23. degrees 30^ which
is only when he enters into the first degree of Capricorn. So likewise the
day with them can never be so clear as elsewhere, by reason that the sun
mounting no higher above their Horizon then 23. degr. 30^ which only is when
he enters into the first degree of Cancer, has no power to dissolve their
gross, thick, cloudie and mistie air, yet have they some pre-eminence in
that they may (if their cloudie air be not the let) always see all the fixed
stars that are placed in the sky betwixt the Equinoctial and the Pole,
because they never go down but are always remaining above their Horizon:
whereas in all other parts of the world, the said stars can not be seen all
at once, for that they both rise and set, more or less in number according as
the Zenith of the inhabitants of every place is more or less distant from the
Equinoctial.

By what names certain inhabitants of the earth are called, as well according
to the diversity or likeness of shadows as of situation. Chap. 26.
YOu shall understand that according to the diversity or likeness of
shadows, the ancient Cosmographers have given to the inhabitants certain
Greek names, whereof some are called Aphiscij, some Heteroscij, and some
Periscij.

Show what these names do dignifie.

Amphiscij be those that cast their shadows both ways, that is sometime
toward the North, and sometime toward the South, as those that inhabit the
burnt Zone.

Heteroscij be those that cast their shadow only one way, as those that dwell
in either of the temperate Zones, for if they dwell in the North temperate
Zone, they do cast their shadow always at noonetide toward the North. And if
they dwell in the South temperate Zone they cast their shadow at noonetide
toward the South.

Periscij are those that cast their shadow round about them as those that dwell
in either of the cold Zones, to whom the Pole is their Zenith: again they give
them certain names according to the diversity or likeness of their situation
and of the seasons incident to those places, whereof some are called Antoeci,
some Perioeci, and some Antipodes sieve Antichtones.

What do these names signify?

Antoeci be two sundry Nations, the one dwelling toward the North pole, and
the other toward the South pole, having one self Meridian and one self
Latitude, that is to say be of like distance from the Equinoctial, the one
Southward and the other Northward, as the letters a. b. in the figure following
do show.

Perioeci be those that dwell in one self Parallel, how distant soever they
be East and West as the letters b. c. in the said figure do show.

Antipodes be those that dwell feet, so as a right line being drawn from the
one to the other, passes through the Center of the world as you may see by the
Letters a. c. in the figure following.



And the first of these called Antoeci have contrary seasons of the year, for
when it is summer to the one, it is winter to the other: Again Perioeci,
though they have like seasons of the year, yet because they are so far
distant in length one from an other, it is therefore midday to the one when it
is midnight to the other. But Antipodes be contrary in seasons and in all
other things, having nothing common, more then that they have one self Horizon.

By what names certain parts of the earth are called by reason of their
diverse shapes. Chap. 27.
NOw besides the foresaid names attributed to the inhabitants of the earth for
such respect as is above said, the Cosmographers do give also to diverse parts
of the earth according to ye diverse shapes thereof diverse names also: for if any
part of the earth be environed round with water either salt or fresh, it is
called Insula, that is an Island, as England, Ireland, and such like, but if the
water go round about it saving in one part, the^ it is called peninsula, that
is to say, almost an Island, as Denmark, Italy, Morea, and such like, and if it
be a narrow straight enclosed with ye sea on both sides, then it is called
Isthmus as the narrow straight of Corinth lying betwixt Boetia and Achaia in
Greece which diverse Emperors of Rome have in vain attempted to cut, to
the intent to make there through a nauigable passage: finally, when it is neither
insula, peninsula, nor Isthmus, then it is called Continens, that is to say
firm land, as Saxony, Boemia, Sueuia, and such like, but these be special
continents, for the Cosmographers of these days do make but three general
continents, that is first so much as was known to Ptolomie, and to the rest of
the ancient writers, secondly the West Indies, lately found out, and thirdly
the South part of the world not yet wholly discovered: Again the ancient men
divided that portion of the world, which was known in their days into 3.
parts, that is, Europe, Asia, and Afrique, whereunto the modern writers have
added a fourth part called America, containing the West Indies. Now if you
would know what Kingdoms, Regions, Cities, Towns, Seas with their Havens,
Ports, Bays, and Capes, Isles, Floods, Marshes, and Mountains, are contained
in every one of these four parts, then peruse often the universal Maps, and
Terrestrial Globes, as well of the modern as of the ancient Writers, and
also the Tables of Ptolomie and of Ortelius, which I wish that they had been
made in such form as the Tables of Ptolomie are: for having the North always
set in the front, it should be the readier to compare the shape or situation of
any place or Region to the universal Map, and by knowing the Longitude and
Latitude of any place, it should be the easier to find the same, as well in
the special Table as in the universal Map or Globe. The use of which
universal Maps, I have already written in a several Treatise by it self
printed not long since. But now for so much as the knowledge of the winds has
been always thought a thing meet to be treated of by him that writes of
Cosmography, and specially of the Sphere, I will here speak some what of
them, neither do I mind to make any great discourse thereof, as natural
Philosophers are wont to do, but only to define what the wind is, and to
show into how many parts the same is divided, as well by the ancient as
modern writers, and by what names they are called, and somewhat of the
qualities thereof.

Of the wind, what it is, what motion it has, and of the diverse names and
divisions thereof. Chap. 29.
FIrst then you have to understand that Aristotle and the rest of his sect, do
define the wind to be an exhalation hot and dry, engendered in the bowels of
the earth, and being gotten out, is carried sidelong upon the face of the earth.

Why is not his motion right up and down, as well as sidelong?

Because that whilst by his heat he strives to mount up, and to pass through
all the three Regions of the air, the middle Region by his extreme cold, does
always beat him back, so as by such strife and by the meeting of other
exhalations rising out of the earth, his motion is forced to be rather round
then right.

What is the cause why he blows more sharply at one time then another, and
in one place more then another, and sometime not at all.

As the fumes that rise of new exhalations, and out of floods and waters, may
increase his force, so lack of heat and fumes does diminish the same. Again
the roundnes of the earth is cause that he blows sometime more in one place
then in another: also mountains, hills, and great woods may hinder his force in
some place of the earth whereas upon the plain or upon the broad sea he blows
most sharply, and as for his not blowing at all, it may chance diverse ways,
as either for lack of sufficient heat to open the pores of the earth to let
himself out, or for that some extreme frost and cold does close the pores of
the earth so strait as he cannot get forth, or for that the sun with his
extreme heat consumes the fumes and vapors that should maintain him. But
leaving to answer any more to these questions, I will show you how many winds
were observed by sailors in old time, and how many are observed at this present
day, and how they were named. True it is that all Nations do agree in placing
the four principal winds, according to the four quarters of the Horizon or
Angles of the world, that is to say, East, West, North and South: but in the
subdiuisions of the said four quarters they differ, for some divide every
quarter of the Horizon into two, making only eight winds, and some into three,
and there by do make 12. winds which the ancient Greeks and the Romans did
chiefly observe, the names of the 8. winds are commonly expressed in the
Italian tongue thus: Tramontano, North, Mezzodi, South, Lenante, East, Ponente,
West, Griego, Northeast, Garbino, Southwest, Maistro, Northwest, Syroccho,
Southeast, which names are often used by Christopher Columbus, Albertus
Vesputius, and others that sailed first into the East and west Indies, and if
you will know the names of the 12. winds used by the ancient Greeks and
Romans, then behold this figure here following, wherein you shall find them
set down in English, Greek, and Latin, that is to say, the English names
without the Circle, and the Greek and Latin names within the Circle, the
Greek upon the right side of every line pointing the wind, and the Latin
name upon the left side of every such line.



Of the nature and qualities of the foresaid 12. winds. Chap. 29.
THe North wind called Septentrio or Aparctias is extremely cold and dry,
prohibiting rain, it preserves health by clensing the Air of all pestiferous
infections, but it causes dry coldes, and hurts the fruits and flowers of
the earth.

2 The Northeast and by North, called Aquilo or Boreas, is also cold and dry
without rain, it hurts the flowers and fruits of the earth, and specially
the Vines when they bud.

3 The Northeast and by East, called Helispontus or Caecias, is hot drying up
all things.

4 The East wind called Subsolanus, is hot and dry, temperate, sweet, pure,
subtle, and healthful, and specially in the morning when the sun rises, by
whom he is made more pure and subtle, causing no infection to man's body.

5 The East Southeast, called Eurus or Vulturnus, is also hot and dry, he
blows loud, and therefore is called of Lucretius, Altitonans vulturnus.

6 The Southeast and by South called Euroauster or Euronotus, is hot and
moist, and breeds clouds and sickness.

7 The South wind called Auster or Notus, is hot and moist breeding thick
clouds, great raines, and pestiferous air.

8 The Southwest and by South, called Austro aphricus, is temperately hot,
and yet breeds sickens and rain as some write.

9 The Southwest and by West named Aphricus or Libs, is cold and moist causing
rain.

10 The West wind called Fauonius or Zephirus is temperately hot and moist,
and wholesome in the Evening, it dissolueth frost, ice, and snow, and makes
flowers and grass to spring, and some write that it causes Thunder.

11 The West Northwest, called Corus or Syrus, is cold and moist without any
great rigor.

12 The Northwest and by North called Syrus or Trachias is cold and dry of
earthly nature, breeding snow and winds.

Of the modern division of the winds. Chap. 30.
But the Mariners of these our latter days, to be the better assured of their
routes and courses on the sea, do divide every quarter of the Horizon into 8.
several winds, so as they make in all 32. winds, which of the Spaniards are
called Rombes, which win des together with their names, you may see plainly
set forth in this figure following representing the Mariners Compass.

A figure of the 32. winds representing the Mariners Compass.


And note that eight of these winds are called principal winds, that is
North, South, East, West, Northeast, Southwest, Northwest, and Southeast, and
all the rest are called Collateral winds, but the first four are chiefest,
from whence the names of all the rest are derived, neither do the learned
Pilots in their Tables, call the first four winds, Rombes, but will say the
first, second or third Rombe from North, from East, South, or West, unto the
number of seven, for so many Rombes they make in every quarter betwixt the
four chief and principal winds, of which matter I shall speak hereafter in
my treatise of Navigations. In the mean time I heartily pray all those that
shall vouchsafe to read this my treatise of the Sphere, to take my labor
therein bestowed in good part, and where any fault is, friendly to correct the
same without any skorne or disdain.

A plain description of Mercator his two Globes, that is to say, of the
Terrestrial Globe and of the Celestial Globe and of either of them: Together
with the most necessary uses thereof written by M. Blundeuill. Whereunto is
added a brief description of the two great Globes lately set forth by M.
Molinaxe: and of Sir Frances Drake his first voyage into the Indies.

He tells the number of the stars and calls them by their names. Psalm.
147. depiction of astrolabe

Imprinted at London by John Windet.

A plain description of the two globes of Mercator, that is to say, of the
Terrestrial Globe, and of the Celestial Globe, and of either of them,
together with the most necessary uses thereof, and first of the Terrestrial
Globe, written by M. Blundeuill.
THe Terrestrial Globe is a round body covered with an universal Map
containing both sea and land, which is divided by the later Cosmographers into
four principal parts, that is, Europe, Affrique, Asia, and America, the
Longitude and Latitude of every which part is already set down in my
description of universal Maps and Cards. And in this Globe are also set down
certain stars, some toward either of the poles, and some nigh to the
Ecliptique line, whereof we shall speak hereafter when we come to treat of
the Celestial Globe. But you have to understand that the one end of this Globe
is called the pole Arctique, that is to say, the North pole, and the other end
the pole Antarctique, that is to say, the South pole: upon which two poles it
is turned about. And this Globe is traced with certain circular lines, whereof
some be greater and some lesser, those greater which pass through both the
poles, are called Meridians of this word Meridies, which is as much to say as
noonetide, for when the Sun touches any of those Circles, it is noonetide
to all those that dwell right under that Circle, of which Meridians though you
may imagine to be half so many as there be degrees in the Equinoctial, which
amounts to the number of 180. yet there are set down in this Globe no more
but twelve which do cut the Equinoctial in 24. points, making thereby 24.
spaces, every space containing 15. degrees of the Equinoctial, which fifteen
degrees do make one hour, for the Equinoctial is a great Circle which
guirding the Globe in the very midst betwixt the two Poles, and representing
the motion of the first mooueable, makes his daily revolution from East to
West in four and twenty hours. And this great Circle by dividing the Globe
into two equal parts, causes the same to have two Latitudes or breadthes, the
one Northern and the other Southern, for that space of the half Globe which
lies betwixt the Equinoctial and the North pole, is called the North
Latitude, and the other half of the Globe which lies betwixt the Equinoctial
and the South pole, is called the South Latitude, each Latitude containing
every where from the Equinoctial to either of the Poles nintie degrees.
Again this Circle is divided into 360. degrees containing the whole Longitude
of the earth, and every degree is 60. Italian miles, which being multiplied
into 360. makes in all 21600. miles, and such Longitude is to be counted from
West to East, beginning the same at the first Meridian which passes through
the Isles of Canaria, otherwise called Insulae fortunatae, crossing the
Equinoctial and the Ecliptique line, in the first degree of Aries, and also in
the first degree of Libra, which are the two Equinoctial points, so as the one
half of the Equinoctial which goes from West to East, contains 180.
degrees, and the other half returning again from East to West contains also
180. degrees, which makes in all 360. degrees, ending where the first degree
of Longitude did begin: For though Mercator and others in their several
Mappes do in these days make the first Meridian to pass through the Isles
Azores which are five degrees more to the West. Yet Mercator in his great
Terrestrial Globe dedicated first to the Lord Granuella, and afterward to
the Emperor Charles the fifth, Anno Dom. 1541. places the first Meridian as
before is said, both whose Globes my Worshipful friend Sir Thomas Knyuet of
Ashwelthorpe Knight, did courteously lend me I thank him, who as he is very
well learned in all the liberal Sciences himself, so is he a great favorer
and furtherer of all such as delight in any learned or virtuous exercise: And
by help of those Globes I wrote this Treatise. But to return to my matter,
there is another great slooping and overthwart Circle, called the Ecliptique
line, under which the Sun continually walks, and this line is marked with
the Characters of the twelve signs, every sign containing in length thirty
such degrees as the Equinoctial has, so as in all, the Ecliptique line
contains 360. degrees, which is the Longitude of heaven, and the first degree
of the Longitude of any star begins at the first point of Aries, and
ends at the same point. Now of the lesser Circles there be four principal,
that is, the two Tropiques, that is to say, the Tropique of Cancer toward the
North pole, and the Tropique of Capricorn toward the South pole, betwixt
which two Tropiques, the Sun continually goes right under the foresaid
Ecliptique line, never mounting higher then the Tropique of Cancer, nor
descending lower then the Tropique of Capricorn. Of the other two lesser
Circles, the one is called the Circle Arctique enuironing the North Pole, and
the other the Circle Antarctique enuironing the South Pole: all which four
Circles are called Parallels, that is to say, equally distant one from
another, and by reason of these four Circles, the Globe is divided into five
Zones, that is to say, two cold Zones, two temperate, and one extremely hot:
of the cold Zones, the one lies betwixt the Circle Antarctique, and the South
pole, and the other betwixt the Circle Arctique and the North pole.

And of the temperate Zones, the one lies betwixt the Tropique of Cancer and
the Circle Arctique, and the other lies betwixt the Tropique of Capricorn and
the Circle Antarctique. The hot Zone is that which lies betwixt the two
Tropiques, through the midst of which Zone passes the foresaid Equinoctial
line, right under which, they that dwell, have no Latitude at all, and
therefore their days and nights are always equal, (that is to say) twelve
hours day, and twelve hours night. Also besides these four foresaid lesser
Circles or Parallels, the Globe is traced with eight other Parallel Circles on
each side of the Equinoctial toward either of the Poles, making on each side
nine equal spaces, every space containing ten degrees of the Equinoctial,
so as they do make in all 90. degrees, which is a quarter of the great Circle.
Moreover there be certain Mariners Compasses divided into 32. circular lines,
signifying the 32. winds, whereby Marmers do sail, and do direct their ships
from port to port, which lines do diuersely cross the other Circles before
rehearsed. Besides these circular lines before described, there is fastened unto
the two poles of the Globe, a Meridian of brass commonly called the mooueable
Meridian within the which the Globe turns about, and this Meridian is divided
into four quarters every quarter containing 90. degrees, so as the whole
circuit thereof is 360. degrees, one of which quarters toward the North pole
is divided with circular lines into three several spaces, in the first and
lowest whereof being next to the body of the Globe, are set down the numbers
of degrees of Latitude. In the next space above that, are graven the Parallels
and numbers of hours of the longest day in every Latitude, and the spaces of
every hour are divided with little streeks into four parts, signifying the
four quarters of an hour: and these hours do increase till you come to 24.
hours, and from thence the day incereaseth by months, from one to six, over
which is graven this Latin word Menses, (that is to say) months, and the
third and uppermost space contains the Climes, beginning at one, and so
proceeds to 8. The like Climes, Parallels, and hours of the longest day, are
to be accounted, also in the said Brazen meridian proceeding from the
Equinoctial toward the South pole, though they be not there set down. And
upon this Brazen meridian is placed at the North pole another little brazen
Circle, together with his Index called the hour wheel, every half whereof
contains twelve hours, the Index of which wheel being set upon the North
pole turns about as the Globe turns, and yet you must imagine the Pole it
self to be immooueable. Also there is a quarter Circle of thin brass plate,
divided into 90. degrees fastened in such sort upon the brazen Meridian, as
you may remove it too and fro, yea and also take it clean off if you will,
which quarter Circle has a square head of brass, signifying the Zenith or
vertical point of any place, and this Circle is called the quarter of
altitude, which quarter is divided into 90. degrees, proceeding from the
Horizon upward to the Zenith, whereby may be described upon the Globe the 90.
Almicanterathes or Circles of Altitude. And this quarter serves for diverse
purposes, as to find out thereby the Altitude of any star or point of the
Ecliptique line, or of any other point in heaven, and the very edge thereof on
the right hand, shows the Azimuth or vertical Circle of any place, and in
what coast and part of heaven any star is. Also how any place of the earth
bears one from another as you shall more plainly perceive hereafter by the
examples of certain propositions thereto belonging. Then there is another
Circle of brass plate somewhat thicker called the Semicircle of position,
which serves chiefly for matters of Astronomy, as to find out the twelve
houses of heaven, and is to be fastened on the Horizon, so as it may be removed
and set upon which side of the Globe you will. Also there belongs to the
Globe a little round squire of brass, made with right Sphericall Angles, the
head or style whereof is to show the shadow of the Sun being set upon the
Globe, in stead whereof a needle being set right up, will sometimes serve the
turn. Finally to the Globe belongs another Circle called the Horizon, which
is a broad Circle of wood, having a foot of wood, within which Horizon, the
Globe together with the brazen Meridian is to be set at what Altitude you list.
And this Horizon is divided with diverse circular lines into seven unequal
spaces, whereof the first and narrowest space next unto the body of the Globe,
contains the degrees of the 12. signs of the Zodiaque, every sign
containing 30. degrees. The second space contains the Characters and names
of the said signs, and also the number of the degrees, as 10. 20. 30. The third
the days of every month. The fourth the names of every month, and of
certain Festival days. The fifth, the names of the 12. winds, which the
ancient Greeks and Romans were wont to observe, whereof I have already
spoken in my Sphere. The sixth and seventh do show the 12. houses, together
with their significations necessary for the setting of figures and calculating
of natiuities, and in the foot of the said Horizon is a little Compass with a
needle to show the North and South, according to which the Globe is to be
placed. But yet not before the said needle be truly rectified, according to
the variation which it has in that place where you are to use the Globe: for
otherwise the needle may cause great error, whereof we shall treat in the next
Chapter. Thus having briefly described the Terrestrial Globe, and all the
parts thereof, I think it good now to show you how to place the Globe according
to the four quarters of the world.

This Treatise of the two Globes, contains 50. Propositions as follows.
HOw to place the Globe truly, according to the four quarters of the world,
and according to the Latitude of any Region. Proposition. 1.

To know under what Clime any place or Region is, and of how many hours the
longest day is there, and also what Latitude any place described in the Map
has. Proposition. 2.

How to know what Longitude any place described in the Map has. Prop. 3.

How to know the distance betwixt any two places described in the Map. Prop.
4.

To know how one place bears from an other. prop. 5.

How to find out by the Globe the place of the Sun, that is to say, the
degree and minute of that sign wherein the sun is every day throughout the
year. prop. 6.

How to rectify the Index of the houre-wheele for every several day
throughout the year. prop. 7.

How to know every day at what hour the sun rises or sets. Proposition.
8.

How to know in what part of the Horizon the sun rises and sets every
day. Prop. 9.

How to know the length of every day and night throughout the year, as well by
help of the houre-wheele, as by counting the degrees upon the Horizon. Prop.
10.

How to know by the Globe how much the sun declineth every day throughout the
year from the Equinoctial. Proposition. 11.

How to know by the Globe the Meridian altitude of the sun, that is to say,
his height at noone tid^ every day thoroughout the year, and how far he is
then distant from your Zenith. Prop. 12

How to know the altitude of the sun at every other hour of the day. Prop. 13.

How to know the hour of the day by the Globe. Proposition. 14.

To know how much the unequal hours otherwise called the Planetary hours,
do differ from the artificial hours throughout the year, and how many
minutes every unequal hour contains. Prop. 15.

How to know every day when the dawning of the day, and the twilight of the
night begins and ends, and the time of their continuance. Prop. 16.

How to know the ascension of the sun, both right and oblique. prop. 17.

The 18. proposition, containing the description of the Celestial Globe, and
showing wherein it is like or differing from the terrestrial Globe.

The 19. proposition containing a particular description of the 48. Images of
the fixed stars that are in the Celestial Globe, together with their sundry
names, and also the names of so many stars as are named in the Globe. prop.
19.

How to find out in heaven any unknown star described in the Globe two
manner of ways, that is, either by the help of some known star, or else by
knowing the true hour of the night. prop. 20.

How to know by the Globe the Meridian altitude which is the highest altitude
of any star, and also how high or low he is at any other time. prop. 21.

How to know by the Globe what stars are above the Horizon at any time of the
day or night. prop. 22.

How to know by the Globe at what time any star rises above the Horizon,
mounteth to the highest, and sets, and with what degree of the Ecliptique he
rises, mounteth, and sets: and also in what part of the Horizon he rises
and sets. prop. 23.

How to know in what part of the firmament any star is, and how many degrees
it is distant from the Meridian at any hour, and being right under the
meridian to know how far it is distant from your Zenith. Proposition. 24.

How to find the hour of the night by the Globe. pro. 25.

How to know the vertical stars in every latitude. Prop. 26.

How to know the true place of any star, that is to say, in what sign and in
what degree thereof any star is. Prop. 27.

How to find the place and Longitude of any star by the Globe. Proposition.
28.

How to find out the Latitude of any star. Prop. 29.

How to find out by the Globe, the declination of any star: Proposition. 30.

How to know the magnitude or greatness of any star, and his nature and
quality by the Globe, and also the right ascension of the Arque of the
Ecliptique, which accompanies the right ascension of any star. Prop. 31.

A Table of the fixed stars.

How to find out the right and oblique ascension of any star and also of the
ascentionall difference. Prop. 32.

To know in what quantity of time any whole sign or any other Arque of the
Ecliptique does rise or set. Prop. 33.

How to know by the Globe what stars do rise or set every day Cosmically,
Acronically, or Heliacally. Prop. 34.

To know in what time of the year any star rises or sets, either
Cosmically or Acronically. Prop. 35.

Of the Horoscope and the rest of the 12. houses. Prop. 36.

How to find out the Horoscope or asce^dent at any time of the day or night by
the Globe, and thereby to know the four principal Angles of heaven. Prop. 37.

How to erect a figure by the Globe according to Regio Montanus his way, which
is called the reasonable way, and is counted the best of all others. Prop. 38.

How to know the Latitude of any place or region by any of the fixed stars
described in the Globe. Prop. 39.

Another way to find the elevation of the pole. Prop. 40.

A third way how to find out by 2. stars the elevation of the pole, not knowing
their Meridian altitude. Prop. 41.

A fourth way to find out the Latitude of any Region by any known fixed star
or Planet that may be seen. Prop. 42.

A brief description of the diurnal Table set down in Stadius his Ephemerides,
together with the use thereof. prop. 43.

How to find out the place of any Planet by the Ephemerides. prop. 44.

A brief description of the Table of Stadius, set down in the 112. page of
his Ephemerides, to find out thereby the daily latitude of the Moon be it
North or South, together with the Cannon or rule thereof, plainly declared by
example. prop. 45.

How to know the true place of the Sun or Moon or of any other Planet every
hour of the day throughout the year. prop. 46.

How to find out the place of the Moon by the Globe, when she is above the
Horizon, without the help of any Ephemerides or other table whatsoever. prop.
47.

Another way to find out the place of the Moon without taking the altitude of
any star. prop. 48.

How to find out the longitude of any region. prop. 49.

Another way to find out the unknown longitude of any place by the Globe.
prop. 50.

How to place the Globe truly according to the 4. quarters of the world, and
according to the latitude of any region. The first Proposition.
FIrst in bedding your Globe together with the brazen Meridian into the 2.
nickes of the Horizon and also into the slit of the pin which stands in the
midst of the foot, so that the North pole of your Globe be answerable to the
North quarter or north wind of the world, described upon the Horizon, and see
that that part of the brazen Meridian, wherein are described the Climes,
Parallels and hours of the longest day, may stand above the Horizon, and also
that the one half of the brazen Meridian may justly and euenlie appear above
the Horizon, and the other half under the Horizon: Again, you must see that
the Equinoctial line of the Globe do meet just with the middle point or
streeke of the brazen Meridian whereas the first degree of latitude does
begin, and also that the body of the globe do not lean to the one side of
the Horizon more than to the other, but to be equally distant from the same in
all places, and in any wise to see that the Horizon stand always level, to
which end some Globes have a plummet of lead hanging by a little chain or
threede, which because it will move with every wind, I for my part do think
it better for you to have such a little level made of purpose, as you may set
the same upon any place of the Horizon where you list, and thereby make the
Horizon to stand leuel on every side as you will your self, and it may be made
of a little piece of thick boorde, like a Triangle, thus.



Then with your 2. hands laying hold of the 2. next pillars, turn the foot
of the Globe until it stand right North and South, which is to be done thus.
First find out the true Meridian of the place whereas you are to use the Globe
by such means as M. Borough teaches in his discourse of the variation of the
Compass, the 7. chapter. which undoubtedly is a most certain way, by which
you shall find three things at one instant, that is, the true Meridian, the
variation of the needle, and the true latitude of any place. But if you have
not the instrument of variation, by help whereof this matter is to be
accomplished, then in some open place betwixt 8. and 9. of the clock in the
forenoon or sooner, upon a smooth table or plancke, standing level, draw a
good large circle with your Compasses, in the Center whereof must be fixed a
round and straight pin of Iron or Latton wire, in length a good deal shorter
than the semidiameter of that circle, and to the intent that the pin or style
may stand right up, without inclining on either side, it would be rectified by
a true Squire: That done, wait diligently until the shadow of the pin head
do justly touch the circumference of the circle, so as it neither pass
beyond the circle, nor come short of the same, and there make a prick, and so
let it stay until about three of the clock in the afternoon, about which
time the shadow of the pin will begin to approach nigh unto the said circle,
and so soon as it touches the same, make there another prick: that done,
divide the Ark or portion of the circle, contained betwixt those 2. pricks into
two equal parts, and in the midst thereof set another prick, them laying your
ruler to the middle prick, and to the Center of the circle, draw a right line
through the Center and also through the middle prick from the one side of the
circle to the other, and beyond if you list: for you may make the said line of
such length as you shall think most meet to serve your turn, and that line
shall be the true Meridian for that place, showing the right North and South
part of your Horizon, and by crossing the said live with another right line in
the very midst with right angles, you shall have the true East and West, and
to avoid long waiting, you may draw diverse circles one within another. Thus
having found the true North and South, East, and West, place your Globe
accordingly, so as the brazen Meridian of the Globe may answer the Meridian
line already drawn upon the boorde or plancke, and to the intent that
afterward you may know at all times both day and night, how to place your
Globe right North and South, it shall be necessary to draw a right line upon
the foot of the Horizon, answerable to the foresaid Meridian first drawn upon
the board or planck, and vponthat line to fasten a pretty handsome Compass,
having a needle of an inch long at the least, which is much more certain, than
such a little needle as is wont to be set in the foot of every Globe: And
when the needle stands still, mark how much the North point thereof
declineth either East or West from the true Meridian before fastened, and
whereas you see the Needle to decline, be it East or West, there set fast a
little pin of Latton to serve as a mark, whereto you may always direct the
North point of the needle when you would have the Globe to stand right North
and South, for there is no needle touched with the load stone, be it never so
good a stone, but it will vary from the true Meridian line, either more or
less, and therefore no trust is to be given to the needle until you know the
true variation thereof, the finding of which variation, as I said before, is
most truly taught by M. Borough in his book before mentioned, whereunto I once
again refer you, and the rather for that it is written in our mother tongue.
But Gemma Frisius teaches to set the Globe right North and South thus, first
go into an open place whereas the Sun shines, and upon some table standing
leuel, and also the Globe standing level, the Pole being elevated above the
Horizon according to your latitude, fix a right needle in the degree of the
sign, wherein the Sun is that day so as the nedle may stand right up
without inclining any manner of way, and if it be in the forenoone, turn the
East side of the Globe toward the Sun, moving both the Globe and his seat
to and fro, until you see the needle to cast no shadow at all, for so shall
the Globe stand right North and South. But if it be in the afternoon, you
must turn the West side of the Globe toward the Sun, and then work as
before, and by any of these ways before taught you shall not only place the
Globe answerable to the four quarters of the world, but also you shall find
that the Circles, Poles, and Axletrees of the Globe, are answerable to the
Circles, Poles and Axletrees of the heavens. Now having placed your Globe
answerable to the 4. quarters of the world, learn to know by some Table or
modern Map, or else by such ways as are set down both in my Sphere, and also
in the latter end of this Treatise, the latitude of the region wherein you
dwell: As for example, the latitude of these parts here about Norwich is 52.
degrees, then taking hold of the brazen Meridian as well with your left hand
above the Horizon, as with your right hand beneath the Horizon, turn the same
up and down in the nickes of the Horizon, until the North pole be elevated
above the Horizon 52. degrees, the last of which degrees must meet even with
the upper brimme of the Horizon, that done, seek for England in the Globe, not
leaving to turn the body of the Globe to and fro until you have brought that
Meridian which passes through England right under the brazen Meridian, and
holding it still at that stay, draw the head of the brazen quarter of altitude
right over the place, and over that Meridian under which you dwell, so shall
the head of your brazen quarter stand for your Zenith in the very midst of
the Horizon and keeping al things thus at a stay, you may see how every region
or country is situated, and how it bears from you, and which be under your
Climate and which be not, and to be sure that the brazen Zenith may stand in
his right place, it shall be needful to set it so as the left square side
thereof made with a long notch may touch the self same degree of latitude in
the brazen Meridian, which it has of altitude, for look how many degrees the
Pole is elevated above the Horizon, which is called the altitude, so many
degrees must the brazen Zenith be distant from the Equinoctial of the globe,
which is called the latitude, and is ever all one with the altitude of the
Pole. Thus having showed you how to place the Globe according to the four
quarters of the world, I think good now to declare unto you, first the uses of
the terrestrial globe, whereof some are common also to the celestial globe,
as you shall perceive hereafter by the propositions following, which
propositions may be very well divided into 3. sorts, whereof the first do
properly belong to the description of the universal Map, wherewith the
terrestrial globe is covered, which are but few in number. The second kind of
propositions do chiefly belong to the Sun, and to his apparances, which are
also common to the celestial globe, and may be found out by either of the
globes. But the third kind do belong most properly to the fixed stars and to
their apparances, and therefore I mind not to set down them until I come to
describe the celestial globe, and to show the uses thereof.

The chiefest propositions belonging to the universal Map, wherewith the
terrestrial Globe is covered, are these following.

To know under what Clime any place or region is, and of how many hours the
longest day is there, and also what latitude any place described in the map
has. The 2. Proposition.
Having set the Globe at your latitude, bring the place or region which you
seek right under the brazen Meridian, and the upper space of the said Meridian
will show the Clime. And the second or middle space will show the hours of
the longest day. And the third space the latitude: As for example, if you
would know under what Clime London is, then having found London, fix a long
needle in the red spot next to the name of London (for all towns for the most
part in the Globe are marked with red spots) that done, turn the Globe with
your hand until the needle do touch the brazen Meridian, and by staying the
Globe there with your hand, you shall find London to be under the 8. Clime, and
that the longest day in the year is there 16. hours and 20. minutes, and the
third and nethermost space does show the latitude of the place, which is 51.
degrees, 32^ Again, by observing this order without changing your latitude,
you shall find Venice to be under the 6. Clime, and their longest day to be
15. hours and somewhat more, and the latitude of that City to be 44.
degrees, 30^ And you shall find Jerusalem to be under the third Clime, and the
longest day there to be 14. hours, and the latitude thereof to be 31. degrees.
30^

How to know what longitude any place described in the Map has. Proposition.
3.
THe Globe standing still at your own latitude, prick the needle in the place
whereof you seek the longitude, and bring it as before, to the brazen
Meridian, and staying it there, look at what number of degrees the brazen
Meridian cutteth the Equinoctial, and that is the longitude of the place,
counting the degrees from the first degree of the Equinoctial, which begins
at the first point of Aries unto the place of the section: by doing thus, you
shall find the longitude of London to be 19. degrees, and the longitude of
Venice to be 36. degrees, and the longitude of Jerusalem to be 67. degrees and
30. minutes.

How to know the distance betwixt any two places described in the Map.
Proposition. 4.
OPen your Compasses so wide as you may set the one foot thereof just in the
one place, and the other foot in the other place, and apply that wydenesse to
the Equinoctial line, counting how many degrees of the Equinoctial are
contained betwixt the two feet of your compasses, and by allowing to every
degree 60. miles, you shall have the true distance of the places. Thus you
shall find the distance betwixt London and Venice to be 13. degrees, 30^ which
being multiplied by 60. makes 810. miles, and the distance betwixt London and
Jerusalem to be 40. degrees. 30^ which being multiplied by 60. makes 2430.
miles. And it makes no matter to what part soever of the Equinoctial you do
apply the widenes of your co^passes, so as you set the first foot at the very
beginning of some one degree, and let the other foot fall out as it will,
either at a whole degree at a half, or at a quarter of a degree, which small
parts are to be counted by minutes by coniecturall discretion. And note here
that no 2. places can be distant one from another East and West more than 180.
degrees which is just the one half the circuit of the Earth, beyond which half
or on this side thereof the places must needs be nearer together by means of
the roundnesse of the Earth, and if either of the 2. places whereof you would
know the distance be not expressed in the Globe, then learn to find out the
longitude and latitude thereof by some table, whereof the first meridian is
supposed to pass through the Islands of Canariae and mark upon the Globe where
the said longitude and latitude do cross, for there ought that place to stand
which is missing, to which place direct the one foot of your compasses and then
work as before is taught. And by this means you may also know the distance
betwixt any two stars contained in the Globe.

To know how one place bears from another. Proposition. 5.
THough you may partly find out this by marking the direction of the lines,
proceeding from the mariners Compass set down in the Globe: yet in mine
opinion it is readier to do it by applying the Fly described in my little
treatise of universal Maps, unto the Globe by setting the center thereof upon
the first place from whence you go, and by drawing a thread through that place
whereto you would go, in such order as is there taught, so you shall find
Venice to bear from London South East and by East, and Jerusalem to bear from
London East, South East, and two quarters more toward the South. But Gemma
Frisius teaches to know by the Globe how one place bears from another thus,
having set the Globe and also the Zenith of the quarter of altitude at such
latitude as the first place or region has, from whence you would go, bring
that first place under the brazen Meridian, and there stay the Globe until you
have brought the quarter of altitude to the second place, and the nether end of
the quarter of altitude will show you upon the Horizon amongst the winds how
the second place bears from the first, so shall you find Hispaniola to bear
from Spain right West, these be the chiefest propositions belonging to the
universal Map, wherewith the terrestrial Globe is c^uered, and therefore I
will now set down those that belong to the Sun, which may be done as well by
the one Globe as by the other, and first how to find out the place of the Sun.

How to find out by the Globe the place of the Sun, that is to say, the
degree and minute of that figne wherein the Sun is every day throughout the
year. Proposition. 6.
THough the surest way be to find it out by the Ephemerides, which shows the
very minute, yet without having respect to the minutes, you may find it out by
the Globe thus, seek out the day of the month upon the Horizon, and that will
point you to ye degree of the sign wherein the sun is that that day: As for
example, the 6. day of May points right to the 25. degree of Taurus the Globe
standing leuel, and your rule being rightly laid upon the Horizon, but during
the leap year you must add one degree more than the Horizon shows every
day from the beginning of the leap year throughout all that year.

How to rectify the Index of the hour wheel for every several day
throughout the year. Proposition. 7.
Having placed the Globe at your latitude and also found out the degree of the
Sun, as is before taught, bring that degree of the Sun to the brazen
Meridian, and there staying it with the one hand, turn with your other hand
the index of the hour wheel to the highest part of the said wheel, marked
with the number of 12. setting the point of the index just with the streeke of
the wheel made to show the hour of 12. or neonetyde, and that will serve your
turn for all that day, and thus must you do every day in which you have to use
the help of the said hour wheel for any purpose.

How to know every day at what hour the Sun rifeth or sets. Proposition.
8.
Having set the Globe at your latitude, and rectified the index of the hour
wheel by the 7. proposition, turn the Globe to the East, so as the degree of
the Sun may touch the Horizon, and then the index of the hour wheel will show
you at what hour the Sun rises. Again, if you bring the said degree of
the Sun unto the West part of the Horizon, the index of the hour wheel will
show you at what hour he goes down. As for example, Anno 1590. the third of
June, the Sun being in the 21. degree 33^ of Gemini. I bring that point to the
very edge of the Horizon on the East part thereof, and there staying it, the
index of the hour wheel shows that the Sun rises 8^ before 4. of the
clock in the morning: and the said point of the Ecliptique being turned to the
West part of the Horizon, the index shows that he sets 8^ after 8. of the
clock at night.

How to know in what part of the Horizon the Sun rises and sets every
day. Proposition. 9.
Seek the degree of the Sun in the Ecliptique live, and turn it to the East
part of the Horizon, then you shall see whether it rises just East or not, and
whether it inclines toward the South, or toward the north, and likewise by
bringing the said degree to the West part of the Horizon, you shall see in
what part of the said Horizon he goes down: As for example, in the last
proposition the Sun being in the 21. degree, 33^ of Gemini, and brought to
the East part of the Horizon, I find that the Sun did rise distant from the
East toward the North 38. degrees, 30^ of the Horizon, which is three points
and somewhat more of the Mariners Compass from East, toward the North, so
as the Sun rises Northeast and by East, and a little more Northward, and the
said place of the Sun being brought to the West part of the Horizon, I find
that he sets North West and by West, and somewhat more Northward.

How to know the length of every day and night throughout the year, as well by
help of the hour wheel as by counting the degrees upon the Horizon.
Proposition. 10.
FIrst you must know when the Sun rises and sets by the 8. proposition,
then look how many hours the index does go from the Sun rising to the Sun
setting, and that is the length of the day, which number if you take from 24.
the night will appear: as for example, knowing by the 8. proposition, that the
Sun being in the 21. degree, 33^ of Gemini, rises 8^ before 4. in the morning,
and goes down 8^ after 8. of the clock at night, I find by counting the
hours which the index of the hour wheel has run, that the length of the day
is 16. hours and 16^ which you may know also by counting the degrees upon the
Horizon from the place of the Suns rising, unto the South point of the said
Horizon, which you shall find to be 128. degrees, which being doubled makes
256. degrees, which if you divide by 15. it will make 16. hours and 16^ as
before.

How to know by the Globe how much the Sun declineth every day throughout the
year from the Equinoctial. Proposition. 11.
Having found the place of the Sun, bring the same to the brazen Meridian,
and by counting how many degrees are betwixt that place and the Equinoctial,
you shall know what declination the Sun has that day: As for example,
supposing the Sun that day you seek to be in the first degree of Gemini,
bring the said degree of the Ecliptique to the brazen Meridian, and you shall
find upon the same Meridian the Sun to be declined from the Equinoctial
Northward almost 20. degrees. Again, supposing the Sun to be in the first
degree of Aquarius, if you bring the same degree of the Ecliptique unto the
Meridian, you shall find the declination of the Sun to be almost 20. degrees
Southward.

How to know by the Globe the Meridian altitude of the Sun, that is to say, his
height at noontyde every day throughout the year, and how far he is then
distant from your Zenith. Proposition. 12.
BRing the place of the Sun that day you seek to the brazen Meridian, and
staying it there, count upon the said brazen Meridian how many degrees are
contained betwixt the place of the Sun and the South point of the Horizon, and
that is the Meridian altitude of the Sun for that day, which if you subtract
from 90. the remainder will show how many degrees he is distant that day at
noontide from your Zenith: as for example, supposing the Sun to be that day
you seek in the first degree of Taurus, bring that degree of the Ecliptique to
the brazen Meridian, and stay it there until you have counted how many degrees
of the said Meridian are contained betwixt the place of the Sun, and the
South point of the Horizon, and you shall find the number of degrees to be 50.
which is the Meridian altitude of the Sun for that day, which 50. degrees
being taken out of 90. there remains 40. and so many degrees the Sun is that
day at noontide distant from your Zenith. The like order is to be observed in
seeking to know the Meridian altitude of any Star, or any other point in
heaven.

How to know the altitude of the Sun at any other hour of the day.
Proposition. 13.
Having rectified the index of the hour wheel by the 7. proposition, if the
hour which you seek be in the forenoone, turn the Globe so as the index of
the hour wheel may touch that hour of the forenoone, at which you desire to
know the altitude of the Sun, and there stay the Globe, until you have
brought the quarter of altitude on the Eastside of the globe unto the place of
the Sun, so shall you find upon the said quarter the altitude of the Sun at
that hour. And if you desire to know the altitude of the Sun at any hour in
the afternoon, then turn the Globe so as the index of the hour wheel may
touch the hour of the afternoon, and there stay the Globe until you have
brought the quarter of altitude on the West side of the Globe unto the place of
the Sun, and the said quarter will show you the altitude of the Sun at that
hour. As for example, I would know how high the Sun is at 8. of the clock in
the morning, the Sun being in the first degree of Taurus: here having
rectified the index of the hour wheel, I turn the Globe so as the index of
the hour wheel may lie upon the 8. hour of the forenoone, and there I stay
the globe until I have brought the quarter of altitude on the East side of the
Globe unto the place of the Sun, whereby I find the altitude of the Sun at
that hour to be almost 28. degrees. Again, if you will know how high the Sun
is being in the same degree of the Ecliptique at 5. of the clock in the
afternoon, then turn the index of the hour wheel, so as it may touch that
hour, and stay it there until you have brought the quarter of altitude on the
West side of the Globe unto the place of the Sun, so shall you find the
altitude of the Sun to be at that hour 21. degrees.

How to know the hour of the day by the Globe. Proposition. 14.
THis is to be done two manner of ways, the first is thus, set the Globe in
some open place whilst the Sun shines, and you must see that it stand both
level and also right North and South, as is taught in the first proposition,
and that the index of the hour wheel be rectified according to the degree of
the sign wherein the Sun is that day by the 7. proposition, that done, fix
a needle in the place of the Sun, and turn the body of the Globe to and fro
until the needle cast no shadow at all, and there staying the Globe, the
index of the hour wheel will show you the hour of the day. But if you seek
the hour in the forenoone, remember to turn the East side of the Globe
toward the Sun, if in the afternoon, then turn the West side of the Globe
toward the Sun. The second way is thus, having rectified the index of the
hour wheel, take the altitude of the Sun with some Quadrant or Astrolabe, and
having marked the same altitude upon the quarter of altitude, apply it to the
degree of the Sun on the East side of the Globe if it be in the forenoone: but
if it be in the afternoon apply the quarter of altitude to the degree of the
Sun on the West side of the globe, and the index of the hour wheel will show
you the hour which you seek. As for example, the 6. of June 1590. the Sun
being in the 24. degree, 24^ of Gemini, I found by my Astrolabe the altitude of
the Sun to be 48. degrees, which I marked upon the quarter of altitude, and
because I took the altitude of the Sun in the forenoone, I brought the
quarter of altitude marked with that degree to the place of the Sun on the
East side of the Globe, and there staying the Globe I found that the index of
the hour wheel did point to the 9. hour of the forenoone and somewhat past.
The like is to be done to know any hour of the afternoon, so as you forget
not to apply the quarter of altitude unto the place of the Sun on the West
side of the Globe. And by taking the altitude of any known Star, and working
in like manner as before, you shall know the hour of the north, as shall be
taught hereafeer when we come to treat of the Stars.

To know how much the unequal hours otherwise called the planetarie hours
do differ from the Artificial hours throughout the year, and how many minutes
every unequal hour contains. Proposition. 15.
FIrst you must know by the 10. proposition the length of the day, that is to
say, how many hours it is long, and reduce those hours into minutes, and
divide the product by 12. and the quotient, together with the remainder (if
there be any left after the division) will show you the quantity of the
unequal hour of the day, that is to say, how many minutes it contains: The
like is to be done to know the unequal hour of the night, for having the
length of the artificial night, work as before, and you shall have your
desire: As for example, knowing by the 10. proposition the length of the day
when the Sun is in the 21. degree. 33^ of Gemini to be 16. hours 16^ here
by reducing those hours into minutes, and by dividing the product thereof by
12. you shall find the unequal hour of the day to contain 81. minutes. and
of a minute or 20. seconds, which is more than one whole artificial hour of
the day by 21. minutes and 20. secondes. Again, knowing the length of the
artificial night by the said proposition to be 7. hours, 44. minutes, if you
do reduce the same into minutes, and divide by 12. you shall find thereby the
unequal hour of the night to contain no more but 38. minutes, and 40.
seconds, which is less than the artificial hour of the day by 21. minutes,
and 40. seconds.

How to know every day when the dawning of the day and the twilight of the
night begins and ends, and the time of their continuance. Proposition. 11.
Having rectified the index of the hour wheel by the 7. proposition, first
find out the opposite point to the degree of the Sun, and turn the Globe
together with that opposite point, and also together with the quarter of
altitude toward the West, so as the opposite point may meet even with the 18.
degree of the quarter of altitude, and staying the Globe there, the index of
the hour wheel will show at what hour the dawning begins. As for example,
I would know at what hour the dawning of the day begins the 19. of April
1590. when as the Sun is in the 8. degree of Taurus, the opposite point
whereof is the 8. degree of Scorpio, wherefore I turn the Globe together with
the said point opposite and also together with the quarter of altitude toward
the West, so as the said point opposite may meet even with the 18. degree of
the quarter of altitude, and there staying the Globe, I find by the index of
the hour wheel that the dawning of the day begins at 2. of the clock in
the morning and 20. minutes after, which dawning always ends when the Sun
rises, as in the former example, the Sun being in the 8. degree of Taurus
does rise 45. minutes after 4. of the clock in the morning, so as the
continuance of the dawning is two hours and 25. minutes, for by taking two
hours and 20. minutes out of 4. hours and 45. minutes, there remains 2.
hours and 25 minutes. Again, the twilight begins when the Sun goes down,
which in the former example is at 7. of the clock and 15^ Now to know when
the twilight ends, you must do thus, turn the Globe and the quarter of
altitude toward the East, so as the opposite point, which is the 8. degree of
Scorpio may meet even with the 18. degree of the said quarter, and the index
of the hour wheel will show you that the twilight ends at 9. of the clock
and 45^ after, so as the continuance of the twilight is two hours, and 30 for
by taking 7. hours and 15^ out of 9. hours and 45^ there remains 2. hours
and 30^ But you have to understand, that the dawning twilight is not always to
be known throughout the year by the Globe, for from the 11. day of May to
the 10. of Iulie, you shall find that the opposite point of the Sun will not
agree just with the 18. degree of the quarter of altitude: because that no
opposite point during that time will amount to above 16 or 17 degrees of the
quarter of altitude at the most, because the Meridian altitude it self of any
such opposite point is not above 17. degrees, for during all that time both
dawning and twilight had need in this our latitude to be accounted as night,
unless you will make no night at all.

How to know the ascension of the Sun both right and oblique. Proposition.
17.
Having set the Globe at your latitude, bring the degree of the Sun to the
brazen Meridian, and there staying it, mark at what number of degrees the said
Meridian cutteth the Equinoctial, counting that number from the first point of
the Vernall Equinoctial point to that section, and that is the right
ascension, As for example, the Sun being in the first degree of Gemini and
brought to the Meridian, you shall find that the meridian cutteth the
Equinoctial in the 58. degree thereof, and that is his right ascension. Now if
you would know his oblique ascension, being in the first degree of Gemini,
bring that degree to the East part of the Horizon, so as it may touch the upper
edge thereof, and staying the Globe there, look what degree of the
Equinoctial touches the Horizon at that instant, which you shall find to be
the 30. degree of the Equinoctial, and that is his oblique ascension. These
are the chiefest propositions that belong to the Sun, and are to be found by
either of the Globes, wherefore I will now proceed to those propositions that
are to be known most properly by the celestial Globe, But first I will make
a description of the said celestial Globe, whereby it shall plainly appear
wherein the one Globe is like the other, and wherein the one differs from the
other.

The 18. Proposition, containing the description of the celestial Globe, and
showing wherein it is like or differing from the terrestrial Globe.
Proposition. 18.
THe Celestial globe is like to the terrestrial globe, in that it is round,
having both like Axletrees, Poles, hourewheele with his index, brazen Meridian,
quarter of altitude of brass or Latton with his square head or Zenith, and a
half circle of brass or Latton, called the semicircle of position, also a
standing foot with an Horizon of wood divided into seven several spaces,
containing in a manner the self same things that are before described in the
Horizon of the terrestrial Globe, also in the body of the celestial globe
are set down certain circles like unto the terrestrial Globe, that is to
say, the Equinoctial and the Ecliptique line. Moreover the four lesser
circles, that is to say, the two tropiques, the circle Arctique, and the circle
antarctique. But the celestial Globe differs from the terrestrial Globe in
these four things following. First the celestial Globe has one thin
demicircle of brass or Latton more than the terrestrial Globe has, which
Demicircle is divided into two quarters, each quarter containing 90. degrees,
made so at each end as it may be fastened when need is, upon the 2. Poles of the
Zodiaque, to find thereby the longitude and latitude of every Star described in
the Globe, and therefore may very well be called the Semicircle of longitude
and latitude. The second difference is that whereas the terrestrial Globe is
traced with 12. Meridians, dividing the Equinoctial into 24. spaces, every
space containing 15. degrees. The celestial Gobe is only traced with 6.
Meridians, dividing the Equinoctial into 12. spaces, every space containing
30. degrees. The third difference is that the celestial Globe has not those
8. Parallels of latitude wherewith the celestial Globe is traced. The fourth
difference is that whereas the terrestrial Globe is covered with an universal
Map containing the four principal divisions of the earth, that is, Europa,
Africa, Asia and America: the celestial Globe is covered with a Map, wherein
are painted all the fixed Stars that were known to the ancient Astronomers
divided into 48. Images, with which Images, to the intent you might be the
better acquainted, and that you might the more readily find out any Star
described in the Globe, I thought good to set down a particular description of
the said 48. images as follows.

The 19. Proposition, containing a particular description of the 48. Images of
the fixed Stars that are in the celestial Globe together with their sundry
names and also the names of so many stars as are named in the Globe, of which
48. Images 21. are ascribed to the North part of the firmament, 12. to the
Zodiaque, and 15. to the South part of the firmament. Proposition. 19.
THis description is divided into two parts according to the twofold
declination of the fixed stars, that is to say, Northern and Southern, for
those Stars are said to have North Declination, which are situated betwixt the
Equinoctial and the North pole, and those to have South declinatition which
are situated betwixt the Equinoctial, and the South pole, and because that
six great Circles or Meridians, passing through the poles of the world, do
divide the Equinoctial into twelve equal spaces, every space containing 30.
degrees, I will begin my description at the first point of Aries, which is the
Uernal Equinoctial point, and so proceed toward the right hand round about
the Globe, setting down all such Images, or parts of Images as are situated
toward the north pole, and are contained in every several space betwixt two
Meridians, and having described all the north part, I will use like order in
describing the South part. And you may behold all the Northern Images by
turning the Globe about with your hand without taking the same out of his bed
or seat, the pole being elevated above the Horizon 50. or 60. degrees, but to
view the Southern Images, it shall be needful to take the Globe clean out of
his seat, and to hold it so as the north pole may stand right up, so shall you
see every Southern Image and Star at your pleasure. And yet to know how the
Stars are situated in heaven, you had need to imagine your self to be
within the Globe, in the very center thereof and not without the Globe for
otherwise those stars that are situated in heaven on your right hand, if you
have regard to the outside of the Globe, will seem to be on your left hand.

The Northern Images contained in the first space, intercepted betwixt the
first Meridian and the second Meridian.
IN this space you shall first see next unto the Equinoctial the following
Fish of the sign Pisces together with the bond, both Southern and Northern,
called in Latin Linum australe and Septentrionale, also the knot of the bond,
which is called Nodus, Syndesmon, and hipouraion, which is a fair Star of the
third bigness.

Item the first part of Aries with the two Stars in his right horn from the
former Star, whereof the Astronomers do always make their computation.

Item the whole Image of Andromeda, her head and right arm excepted, in whose
girdle is a Star of the third bigness called Mirach, and in her left foot a
Star of the third bigness called Alamac.

Item the Triangle called Triangulus and Deltoton with his four stars.

Item the whole Image of Cassiopeia saving her right arm, and the upper part
of the back of her chair, in whose breast is a star of the third bigness
called Shedar.

The Northern Images contained in the second space.
FIrst the head of the Whale called Cetus in whose snout is a star of the
third bigness called Menkar.

Item all the hinder parts of Aries called in Greek Chrios, in English the Ram.

Item the right leg, neck, breast, right ear, and mozell of the Bull, in
whose right thigh toward the shoulder point is a star of the fourth bigness
called Alfon and in his breast a star of the third bigness called Alfo, and
in his Mozel lying upon his right leg, is another star of the 3. bigness
called Alfon, and in his neck toward the Withers are 7. Stars of diverse
bigness called by these diverse names, that is, Vigilie, Atlantides, Pleiades,
and Athoratae, commonly called the 7. Stars.

Item the whole head of Medusa, called Caput Medusae vel Gorgonis, and Ras
Algol.

Item the whole image of Perseus otherwise called Chelube, his right hand,
sword, and right foot excepted.

The Northern Images contained in the 3. space.
FIrst the left leg of the Bull having 2. stars thereon: moreover his head,
horns and most part of his right ear, on whose left eye is a Star of the
first bigness, called Oculus Tauri, Palilicium, and Aldebaran, also in his face
are certain lesser stars called succulae and Hyades.

Item the upper part of Orion otherwise called Alguze, holding a club in his
right hand, and a Lio^s skin in his left hand on whose right shoulder is a Star
of the first bigness called Bed Alguze, and on his left shoulder a star of the
second bigness called Bellatrix

Item the left foot of the former Gemini, containing two stars of the fourth
bigness, whereof the one is called Propous.

Item the whole Image of Auriga, otherwise called Ericthonius and Heniochos,
holding a rain and a whippe in his right hand and having a goat hanging on his
back, which has two little Goats sucking her behind, which be two stars of
the second bigness, called by diverse names, as Hedi, heriphoi, and Sadateni,
and in the flank of the Goat is a star of the first bigness called hircus,
aix, holenie and Alhaiot.

The Northern Images contained in the 4. space.
FIrst the whole image of the little Dog, in whose left flank is a Star of
the first bigness called Canis minor, Procion, Algomeisa, and Alsahere.

Item the whole image of the two twins called Gemini or Didimoi, the left
foot of ye former twin only excepted, which former twin is called Apollo,
Castor, Anhelar, and the other is called Pollux, and Abrachaleus, in whose left
ear is a star of the second bigness called Ras Alguze.

Item the tail and half body of Cancer.

Item the Mozell of the great Bear, whereon is a Star of the fourth bigness.

The Northern Images contained in the 5. space.
FIrst the head and neck of Hydrus.

Item the fore part of Cancer, called in Greek Carchinos, upon whose right
Clea is a Star of the fourth bigness called Acubene, and betwixt his head and
his right Clea is a star called Presepe, Phatue, and Meelleph, and on his
back are two stars called Aselli and Onoi.

Item the fore part of Leo against whose heart is a star of the first bigness,
called with these names, Cor Leonis, Regulus, Basileus, and Calb alezet.

Item the fore part of the great Bear called Vrsa mayor, Arctos Eliche, and
Calisto.

The Northren Images contained in the sixth space.
FIst the hinder parts of Leo otherwise called Alezet, in whose tail is a
star of the first bigness called Cauda Leonis, and Deneb Alezet.

Item the head and shoulders of Virgo.

Item the dark star of Bernices hair.

Item the hinder parts of the great Bear, his tail excepted.

Item the hinder parts of the Dragons tail, containing two stars of the
fourth bigness.

The northern Images contained in the seventh space.
FIrst, the most part of Virgo, who is otherwise called Parthenos, Erigone,
Preuindemiator, Protigiter, Almucedie, and Alaraph.

Item the left leg and left arm of Bubulcus, otherwise called Boots
vociferator, Arctophilax and Lanceator, betwixt whose legs is a star of the
first bigness called Arcturus, Asimech, and Alramech.

Item Bernices hair, called Cincinnus, Cesaries, plochamos, Berenices crinis,
and Trica.

Item the tail of the great Bear containing 3. stars of the third bigness,
wherein that next his rumpe is called Aliot, and that which is in the tippe of
his tail, is called Benenacz.

Item a part of the Dragons tail containing 2. Sarres standing nigh together
nigh unto the Circle Arctique.

The northern images contained in the eight space.
FIrst the head and neck of the serpent called Anguis, serpens, Engchelis and
Ophis.

Item the crown of Ariadna, called Corona gnosia, Stephanos Ariadnis, and is
commonly called Corona septentrionalis, that is, the Northern Crown, in which
is a Star of the second bigness called Melfelcare, alpheta, and Muniir.

Item the most part of the Image of Bubulcus, having a club in his right hand,
in whose left sholder is a Star of the fourth bigness called Ceginus, and
there is another of the fourth bigness in his club, right against his face
called Incalurus.

Item the fore part of the little Bear called Vrsa minor, arctos and Cinosura.

The northern images contained in the 9. space.
FIrst the upper part of Serpentarius, otherwise called Ophioucos, and alangue
in the Crown of whose head is a Star of the third bigness called iras
alangue.

Item the whole Image of Hercules with the Lions skin hanging on his left arm,
otherwise called Engonasi, algethi, Nessus, and ignotum idolum (his right hand
holding the club, and his right leg excepted) in whose head is a star of the
third bigness, called Ras Algethi, and this Image lies groueling with his
heels toward the North pole, and his head toward the Equinoctial, which
meets almost with the head of Serpentarius.

Item the head of the Dragon called Draco and Aben, in whose head is a Star
of the third bigness called Ras Aben.

Item a part of his tail containing 6. stars.

Item the hinder part of the little Bear, containing 2. stars.

The northern images contained in the tenth space.
FIrst, the upper part of Antinous, having at each elboe a star of the third
bigness.

Item the last end of the Serpents tail, in the tip whereof is a star of the
fourth bigness.

Item the whole image of the Eagle called Aquila, Vultur volans, Aetos and
Alcair.

Item the whole image of the Shaft called Sagitta, Telum, and Hoistos.

Item the whole image of the Harp called Lira and Alohore, that is to say,
Vultur cadens, and Chelis, in the upper part whereof toward the left hand is a
fair Star of the second bigness called Fidicula, Lira, Alangue, Vega, and
Brineck.

Item the head, neck, and left wing of the Swan, called Auis, Cignus, Olor,
Hornis, Adigege, and of some Gallina.

Item the neck, body and fore part of the Dragon containing 11. Stars.

Item part of the little Bears tail, containing one Star next to his rump
of the fourth bigness.

The Northern Images contained in the 11. space.
FIrst, the Crown of Aquarius his head, containing one Star of the fifth bigness.

Item the little Horse called Equus and Hippos, whose neck is enclosed with a
cloud, and in his head are four little stars.

Item the head and two fore feet of the winged horse called Pegasus, on whose
right nostrell is a Star of the third bigness called Emph alpharaz.

Item the Dolphin called Delphinus, containing ten Stars, whereof one is of the
third bigness.

Item the body, legs, and the right wing of the Swan, which lies on her back
with her belly upward, in whose body toward the tail, is a fair Star of
the second bigness called Deneb Adigege, and Arided.

Item the right arm and right leg of Cepheus, on whose right shoulder is a
star called Alderaimim.

Item part of the little Bears tail containing the middle star of his tail.

The Northern images contained in the 12. space.
FIrst, the most part of the former fish of the sign Piscis together with part
of her band.

Item the neck, body, and wing of Pegasus, otherwise called Equus Gorgoneus,
and Alpharaz, rising out of a cloud, in which cloud is the head of Andromeda,
having on the right side thereof a fair star of the second bigness, and in
the right wing of Pegasus is a star of the second bigness called Marcab
Alpharaz and on his right shoulder another Star of the second bigness called
Scheat Alpharaz.

Item the right arm and hand of Andromeda holding part of her chain, in the
ring whereof is a Star of the fourth bigness.

Item the left arm of Cepheus.

Item the tip of the little Bears tail, in which is the North star called
Alrucuba of the third bigness.

The names of the Images contained in the celestial globe betwixt the
Equinoctial and the South pole together with so many stars as are named in
that part of the globe, beginning as I did before in describing the northern
Images at the Vernall Equinoctial point, and so proceed from space to space
contained betwixt every two Meridians toward the right hand.

The Southern Images contained in the first space, beginning at the Vernall
Equinoctial point.
FIrst, the most part of the Whale called Cetus, Pistrix, and Balena (his head
and fore part of his belly excepted) in the mid body whereof toward the
back, is a star of the fourth bigness called Baten kaetos, and in the lower
part of his tail is another star of the third bigness, called Deneb Kaitos.

The Southern Images contained in the second space.
THe fore part of the Whales belly and his ghilles, containing five Stars.

Item the most part of the Flood Eridamus, called of some Nilus, and in Greek
Potamos Eridanos, containing 22. Stars, whereof one is called Angetenar,
which is about the midst of the Flood nigh unto the Whales belly, and there
is in the very end of the Flood another star of the first bigness, called
Acarnar.

The Southern Images contained in the third space.
FIrst, the nether part of Orion or Alguze from the middle of his back
downward, in whose girdle are three fair stars, whereof the middle star is
of the second bigness called Orion or Alguze.

Item another part of the flood Eridamus which seems to come from the left
foot of Orion, which star in his left foot is called Algebar, Rigel, Alguze.

Item the whole Image of the Hare, called Lepus and Lagos containing 12. little
stars.

Item the rest of Eridanus containing four Stars, whereof there is one
called Beemum of the fifth bigness.

The Southern Images contained in the fourth space.
FIrst, the whole image of the great Dog called Canis mayor, and Syrios in
whose mouth is a Star of the first bigness called Asceher and Alhabor.

Item the fore part of the great ship Argos, with her two Oars having a
scutchen with 4. Stars, the greatest whereof being of the third bigness is
called Markeb, and under the upper hatches in the fore part of the ship is a
Star of the fifth bigness called Alphard, and in the least oar toward the
South pole, is a fair Star of the first bigness, called Canopus and Suhel.

The Southern Images contained in the fifth space.
FIrst, the mid part of the Serpent called Hydrus and Asuia, in the which is a
fair Star of the 2. bigness called Alphard.

Item the hinder part, mast and top of the ship Argos, which seems to come
out of a cloud, containing diverse Stars of diverse bigness without name.

The southern Images contained in the sixth space.
ITem another part of Hydrus whereupon stands the image of the cup or boule
called Crater, vas and patera, and also the Crows head.

Item the hinder part of Centaurus, in every part whereof are diverse Stars
without name.

The southern Images contained in the 7. space.
FIrst, the left wing of the sign Virgo and her left hand, holding an ear of
wheat, whereon is a Star of the first bigness, called Spica Virginis, stachis,
Acimon, Alacel, and Azimech.

Item the Crow called Coruus and Corax, his head and neck excepted, in whose
left wing is a star of the fourth bigness called Algorab.

Item the rest of Hydrus, whereon the Crow stands, containing three stars
without name.

Item the rest of Centaurus or Chiron with his borestaffe trimmed with boughs,
his right hand and right foot excepted.

The southern Images contained in the eight space.
THe whole image of Libra, the ring only excepted.

Item the fore part of Scorpio, whose fore cleas do lie upon the two balances,
that is to say, his right clea upon the North balance, and his left clea upon
the South balance, having upon each clea a star of the second bigness.

Item part of the Serpent called Anguis or Ophis, having one Star of the fourth
bigness.

Item the left hand of Serpentarius, holding part of the Serpent, upon which
hand are two stars of the third bigness called Yedd.

Item upon the head of Scorpio are 3. stars of the third bigness, standing all
in a row and diverse others as well upon his back as upon his left little clea
without name.

Item the whole Wolf called Fera, Lupus and Therion.

Item the right hand of Centaurus holding the said Wolf by the belly in both
which are diverse stars without name.

Item the right foot of Centaurus, in which is a fair star of the first
bigness, and is called by the name of Centaurus.

The southern images contained in the 9. space.
FIrst, the nether part of Serpentarius, that is to say, from his mid back
downward, having the serpent winding betwixt his legs and above his right arm,
in both which are diverse Stars without name.

Item the hinder part of Scorpio from his mid body to the outermost end of his
tail, who has diverse names, as Scorpius Nepa, Alatrab, in the midst of whose
body is a fair Star of the first bigness called cor Scorpionis, Antares,
and chalb Alatrab, and in the tip of his tail are two Stars of the third
bigness, called Alascha and scomlec Alatrab.

Item the most part of the Bow with the head of the shaft of Sagittarius and
his right foot, in all which parts are diverse stars without names

Item the Altar with the flame and smoke called Ara, thuribulum, lar,
sacrarium, thimiaterion.

The southern images contained in the tenth space.
THe lower part of Antinous from the breast downward kneeling upon an Altar
containing four Stars without name.

Item the forepart of Capricornus his head.

Item the image of Sagittarius, otherwise called Crotus, and toxeuter (his bow,
the end of his arrow, and his right foot excepted) having diverse Stars
without name.

Item the Southern Crown, called Corona Australist, and Notios stephanos, and
of Aratus, it is called Dinotos Cyclos, that is to say, the Southern circle
which Crown is placed betwixt the two fore legs of Sagittarius, and in the
said Crown are diverse Stars, amongst which there is one of the second bigness
touching the left knee of Sagittarius called Corona Australis, who also has on
his left foot another Star of the second bigness without name.

The southern Images contained in the 11. space.
THe fore part of Aquarius otherwise called Ganimedes and Hydrochos, holding a
handkercher in his left hand, wherein are three Stars, and he has diverse
Stars in his body without name.

Item the whole Image of Capricornus, otherwise called Pan Aigoceros, and
Algedi the fore part of his head only excepted in whose tail is a Star of
the fourth bigness called Deneb Aldegi.

Item the hinder part of the Southern Fish having diverse stars without name.

The Southern Images contained in the twelfth space.
FIrst Aquarius his right hand holding the water pot called Vrna and Chalpi,
out of the which he powers the water down into the mouth of the Southern fish,
which water is called Aqua and hydor in which are diverse Stars without name.

Item the lower belly part of the former fish of the sign Piscis wherein are
two Stars without name.

Item both the thighs and legs of Aquarius, upon the calfe of whose right
leg is a Star of the third bigness called Scheat Aquarii, and Crus Aquarii.

Item the head of the southern fish called Piscis Meridionalis, and Iothis
notios, in whose mouth is a fair Star of the first bigness, called Fomahant.

But you have to understand that besides the 15. Southern Images before
mentioned, there ar lately found out by the Portugales and others that have
sailed into the East and West Indies 4. other images toward the south Pole, as
the cross or Crosier, the south triangle, Noah's dove or Pigion, and another
image made like a Philosopher called Polophilax, all which are set down in the
celestial Globe, lately set forth, first at the great charges of M. Sanders,
and now at the like charges of M. Molinax of Lambeth of whom I lately bought
both the Globes, that is, the terrestrial and celestial, and I wish that the
longitude, latitude and declination of every Star contained in the said 4.
images were truly set down, for Plancius makes some doubt thereof.
Notwithstanding if you be desirous to know the longitude, latitude, and
declination of the said Stars by help of the foresaid great Globe, then you
must work as I do show you hereafter in seeking for any Star contained in
Mercator his globe, so shall you have your desire.

Moreover, to most of the Stars described in the Globe are annexed the
Characters of some of the 7. Planets, to show the nature and quality of the
Stars and some stars ar also marked with some one letter or other, the more
readily to find out thereby the foresaid characters, As for example to Cor
Leonis are annexed the Characters of Jupiter and Venus, and under the said Star
is set the letter m. to show the Characters which are not always set hard by
the Star, but sometime a good distance off, for where the characters are set
nigh unto the star, there needs no letter, as in the Star called spica
Virginis, whereunto are annexed the characters of Mars and Venus, without any
letter to signify the same, and where diverse Stars be of one self quality,
they are severally marked with letters of one self same shape, as about the
Star Spica Virginis you shall find diverse little Stars, each one marked
with the letter h. signifying their nature to be all one, that is, to
participate of Mars and Venus, to whose characters is also joined the letter h,
signifying that they be of that nature and quality.

The Characters are these here following set over every Planets head.
Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol. Venus. Mercury. Luna.

The nature of every one of the Planets here follows.
Saturn is cold and dry. Jupiter is temperately hot and moist. Mars is
extremely hot and dry. Sol hot and somewhat dry. Venus is temperately cold
and moist. Mercury is of changeable nature, and plyant to the nature, be it
good or bad of every other Planet or fixed Star whereto it is joined. Luna is
cold and moist.

Besides the images and stars both Northern and Southern above mentioned,
there is also set down in the celestial Globe a certain impression called in
Greek Galaxia, that is to say, the milk white way, the description whereof
here follows.

A brief description of the milk white way, called in Greek Galaxia, and in
Latin Via lactea.
THis way as Garceus writes, proceeds from the sign Gemini, and so passes
through the legs and loins of: Ericthonius, and from thence through the right
side of Perseus, and then through the whole image almost of Cassiopeia, and
from thence through the left wing of the Swan called Auis, Gallina and Cignus,
and from thence through the Image called in Latin Telum in English a Dart,
shaft, or quarrel, and from thence through the flying Eagle called in Latin
Vultur volans, and from thence through the greatest part of Sagittarius his
bow, and from thence through the Alter called Ara and Thuribulum, and from
thence through the legs of Centaurus, and so to the ship called Argos, from
whence rising again, and passing through part of the great Dog called Canis
mayor, it returns again to Gemini.

Thus having described unto you all the 48. Images, and showed the names of as
many Stars as are named in the Globe, and also the milk white way, I mind now
to proceed to the propositions belonging to the fixed Stars described in the
Globe, as follows.

How to find out in heaven any unknown Star described in the Globe two
manner of ways, that is, either by the help of some known star, or else by
knowing the true hour of the night. Proposition. 20.
THe first and surest way is thus, take with your Quadrant or Astrolabe the
altitude of the known Star, marking therewith in what part of the heaven the
same is situated East or West, North or South, and then having set your Globe
right North and South, and at the true latitude of the place where you are,
bring the quarter of altitude to the said Star, and therewith turn the Globe
until you see that the said Star has the like place and the like altitude
in the Globe that it had in heaven, then keeping the globe still at that stay,
seek in the globe the star that you would find out in the firmament, and mark
well in what part of the Globe it is situated, and how it bears from the
known Star, either East, West, North or South, and bring the quarter of
altitude to that Star, that you may know the altitude thereof by help of the
said quarter, which altitude once taken, turn your eyes toward that part of
the firmament, and having placed the Diopter of your Astrolabe, at that
altitude, look what Star in that part of the firmament does answer to such
altitude, and that is the Star which you seek, whose name for the most part
is set down in the Globe. The second way is thus, having learned the true
hour of the night by some clock or watch, bring the degree of the Sun unto
the brazen Meridian, and holding it there, set the index of the hour wheel
just at the 12. hour, that done, turn the body of the Globe to or fro until
the index of the hour wheel fall just upon the hour which you seek, and
keeping the Globe at that stay, seek out the unknown Star in the Globe, and
consider how it bears from you in the Globe either East, West, North or
South, then bring the quarter of altitude to the Star, that you may know
thereby what altitude it has in the Globe, which once found and having set the
Diopter of your Astrolabe at that altitude, turn your eye toward that part of
the firmament whereunto the place of the Star found in the Globe directs
you, and that Star which answers to that altitude is the Star which you seek.
But this way is not so sure as the other way first taught, unless you know the
true hour indeed.

How to know by the Globe the Meridian altitude which is the highest altitude
of any star, and also how high or low he is at any other time. Proposition.
21.
Having set the Globe at your latitude, bring the star to the brazen Meridian,
and there staying it, number upon the brazen Meridian the degrees contained
betwixt the said Star and the South or north point of the Horizon, according
as the Star is situated either Northward or Southward, for so in the latitude
52 you shall find the Meridian or highest altitude of the Star Arcturus or
Bubulcus to be 60. degrees. But if you would know his altitude at any other
time, then you must rectify the index of the hour wheel by the 7.
proposition, and having set the index at the hour wherein you seek, stay the
Globe there, until you have brought the quarter of Altitude unto the Star, and
that will show the altitude of the Star at that hour if it be above the Horizon.

How to know by the Globe what Stars are above the Horizon at any time of the
day or night. Proposition. 22.
OF Stars according to diverse latitudes some ar always above the Horizon and
some are always under the Horizon, and some do both rise and set, if you would
know what Stars he above the Horizon in the day time, then having rectified
the Index of the hour wheel by the 7. proposition, take the altitude of the
Sun with your Astrolabe or quadrant, and therewith consider whether the Sun be
in the East part or in the West part of the firmament. Then bring the quarter
of altitude on the East or West side of the Globe according as you saw the Sun
at that present to be in the firmament, and make the degree of altitude, marked
in the quarter of altitude to meet even with the degree of the Ecliptique line
wherein the Sun is that day, and there staying the Globe, you shall see all
the stars that be above the Horizon at that present, as well on the East side
as on the west side of the Globe, and the Index will show you at what hour you
took the aforesad altitude. But if it be in the night season, and that the
stars do appear, take with your Astrolabe the altitude of some known star,
and by doing as is before taught, you shall have your desire. But you must not
forget first of all to rectify the Index of the hour wheel by the 7.
proposition.

How to know by the Globe at what time any star rises above the Horizon,
mounteth to the highest, and sets, and with what degree of the Ecliptique he
rises, mounteth, and sets, and also in what part of the Horizon he rises
and sets. Proposition. 23.
Having rectified the Index of the hour wheel by the 7. proposition, bring
the Star to the East part of the Horizon, so as it may touch the edge thereof,
and the Index of the hour wheel will show at what hour he rises and by
looking at that instant to the Ecliptique line you shall see what degree of the
Ecliptique rises then with him. That done, bring the said star to the brazen
Meridian, and the Index of the hour wheel will show at what hour he is at
the highest, and there staying the Globe, mark what degree of the Ecliptique
line does fall right under the brazen Meridian at that instant, for that degree
is said to accompany him when he is at his highest. Then bring the said
Star to the West part of the Horizon, and you shall find by the Index of the
hour wheel at what hour he sets, and what degree of the Ecliptique does
accompany him at his setting. As for example, I would know the sixteenth day
of June 1590. the sun being in the fourth degree of Cancer, when Arcturus
otherwise called Babulcus and Lanceator does rise, mounteth to the highest, and
sets, here having rectified the Index of the houre-wheele by the seventh
Proposition, I bring the said star of the East part and very edge of the
Horizon, and I find that he rises a little before twelve of the clock at
noone, and that the 28. degree and 30^ of Virgo, rises with him, and by
looking amongst the winds upon the Horizon right against the place of his
rising, I find that he rises Northeast and by East. Secondly by bringing the
said star to the brazen Meridian, the Index of the houre-wheele shows that he
is at his highest half an hour after seven of the clock at night, and is
then plain South, and that the 29. of Libra, does then accompany him. Thirdly
by bringing the said star to the West part of the Horizon, the Index of the
houre-wheele shows that he sets or goes down a quarter of an hour
before four in the morning, and that the fourth degree of Capricornus does
accompany him at his setting: and by looking there upon the Horizon, I find
amongst the winds that the said star sets Northwest and by West.

How to know in what part of the firmament any star is, and how many degrees
it is distant from the Meridian at any hour, and being right under the
Meridian to know how far it is distant from your Zenith. The 24. Proposition.
Having rectified the Index of the houre-wheele by the seventh Proposition,
turn the Globe until the Index touch the hour wherein you seek. And staying
the Globe there, bring the quarter of Altitude to the star be it on the East
or West side of the Globe, and the nether end of the said quarter will show
upon the Horizon among the winds, in what part of the firmament the star is:
now if you would know how far that star is distant from the Meridian do
thus: look what degree of the Equator is at that instant under the Meridian,
and there make a mark, and then turn the Globe until you have brought the
said star under the brazen Meridian, and mark what degree of the
Equinoctial the said Meridian cutteth at that instant, that done, count the
degrees contained betwixt the two marks upon the Equinoctial, for so many
degrees is the star distant at that time from the Meridian either toward the
East or West, and by allowing 15. degrees to an hour, and 4^ to a degree, you
shall know in what time the said star has to approach to the Meridian, or
how much he is past the Meridian, and having brought the said star right
under the Meridian, you shall know how far it is distant from your Zenith,
by counting the degrees that are contained in the Meridian betwixt the said
star and your Zenith: As for example, the sixth of October 1591. (the sun
being then in the 22. of Libra) I find the star Cor Leonis at three of the
clock in the after noone to be West, Northwest, and there staying the Globe, I
see that the Meridian cutteth the Equinoctial at the 246. degree, whereas I
make a mark, that done, I bring the star Cor Leonis to the said Meridian at
which instant the Meridian cutteth the Equinoctial in the 146. degree, which
being taken out of 246. there remains 100. degrees, which is his distance
from the Meridian, which being divided by 15. I find in the quotient 6. hours
and 40^ for so much as he is past the Meridian toward the West, and by
bringing the foresaid star to the Meridian, I find him to be distant from
our Zenith 39. degrees, and 30. minutes.

How to find the hour of the night by the Globe. The 25. Proposition.
Having set the Globe at your Latitude, rectify the Index of the houre-wheele
by the 7. Proposition, then having taken the Altitude of some star that you
know, and is in the Globe with your Astrolabe or Duadrant, bring the quarter
of Altitude unto the star, be it in the East or West, according as you found
the star to be in the firmament, not leaving to turn the Globe until you
have made the star to have the like Altitude in the Globe upon the quarter of
Altitude, and also the like situation that you found it to have in the
firmament by your Astrolabe or Duadrant, and staying the Globe there, the Index
of the houre-wheele will show the hour: As for example, in the year 1590. the
first of January the sun being in the 22. of Aquarius, I having with my
Astrolabe found that the star called Canis mayor, that is to say the greater
dog, was elevated above the Horizon in the East part of the firmament 20.
degrees, I brought the quarter of Altitude to the East side of the Globe, not
leaving to turn the Globe until I had made the star to meet even with the
20. degree of the quarter of Altitude, and there staying the Globe, I found by
the Index of the houre-wheele that it was 8. of the clock at night, and a
quarter past.

How to know the vertical stars in every Latitude. The 26. Proposition.
THe Globe and the brazen Zenith being set according to the Latitude of the
place where you are, turn the Globe from East to West, and as many stars as
pass right under your Zenith are said to be vertical as in the Latitude 52.
you shall see the tail of the great Bear, the head of Perseus, and diverse
others to pass through your Zenith in turning the Globe from East to West.

How to know the true place of any star, that is to say, in what sign and in
what degree there of any star is. The 27. Proposition.
Having fastened the Semicircle of Longitude and Latitude upon the two Poles
of the Zodiaque, the North pole whereof is in the Circle Arctique not far
from the right clawe of the Dragon, and the South pole thereof is in the circle
Antarctique right opposite to the other, then bring the said Semicircle to
the star, whose place you seek, and mark therewith what point of the
Ecliptique the said Semicircle cutteth, and that is the place of the star.
As for example, by bringing the said Semicircle to the star called Hircus,
that is to say, the Goat, I find it to be in the 15. degree 30. minutes of
Gemini, and that is his place.

How to find the Longitude of any star by the Globe. The 28. Proposition
I Have told you in my Sphere, that the Longitude of any star is that arch
or portion of the Ecliptique line, which is contained betwixt the first point
of Aries, and that Circle which passes through the Poles of the Zodiaque, and
also through the body of the star, which Circle, the Semicircle of
Longitude and Latitude here represents: and by making the said Semicircle
to pass through the star called Hircus before mentioned, I find that the
number of degrees of the Ecliptique, contained betwixt the said Circle and the
first point of Aries to be 75. degrees and 30^ which is the Longitude of the
said star, and thereby makes his place to be in the 15. degree 30^ of
Gemini, as before is set down in the last Proposition.

How to find out the Latitude of any star. The 29. Proposition.
I Told you also in my Sphere, that the Latitude is none other thing, but the
distance of any star from the Ecliptique line, either toward the North or
South pole of the Zodiaque, which distance the Semicircle of Longitude and
Latitude made to pass through the body of the star, and cutting the
Ecliptique line does always show, as in the former example, in making the
foresaid Semicircle to pass through the foresaid star called hircus, I
find by counting the degrees of the said Semicircle contained betwixt the
Ecliptique line and the body of the star, that the Latitude of that star
is 22. degrees and 30. minutes toward the North, likewise by bringing the
said Semicircle to the star which is in the right shoulder of Orion called
Bed Alguze, I find his Latitude to be 17. degrees toward the South.

How to find out by the Globe the declination of any star. The 30.
Proposition.
THe declination is none other thing but the distance of any star from the
Equinoctial, either toward the North pole or South pole of the world, which
is to be found thus: First having brought the star right under the brazen
Meridian, and there staying the Globe, count the degrees of the said Meridian
contained betwixt the said star and the Equinoctial point or streeke of the
said Meridian, and that shall be the declination of the star: As for example,
bring the star Hircus unto the Meridian, and you shall find the declination
thereof to be 45. degrees toward the North pole of the world, and that the
star which is in the foot of the Hare called Lepus, has of South
declination 23. degrees.

How to know the magnitude or greatness of any star, and his nature and
quality by the Globe, and also the right ascension of the Arch of the
Ecliptique which accompaneth the right ascension of any star. The 31.
Proposition.
MArcator describes the six magnitudes of the stars by making six figures
or shapes of stars placed not far from the head of the great bear, whereof
the first and greatest has 16. points or beams, the second eight, the third
six, the fourth five, the fifth six, which indeed by that account would be
but four: and the sixth has five, which would have but three: but in mine
opinion it had been better to have made the first magnitude with ten points,
the second with nine, the third with eight, the fourth with seven, the fifth
with six, and the sixth with five: so should the magnitude of every star
described in the Globe have been the more easily known. But to the intent
that you might exercise your self in finding out by the Globe, the place,
Longitude, Latitude, and declination of any star that is described in the
Globe: I have thought good to add hereunto the Table of Garceus, showing not
only the Longitude, Latitude and declination of the most notable stars that
are both Northward and Southward, but also the right ascension, magnitude or
bigness, the quality or nature of every such star, and also the Arch of the
Ecliptique line, which accompanies the right ascension of every star, which
Table though by the said Garceus was calculated out of the Astronomicall
Tables for the year of our Lord 1564. and not by the Globe, yet for your
better exercise in matters of the Globe, I thought good to set down such
Longitude, Latitude, declination, magnitude, and right ascension, and all other
things contained in the said Table, according as they are to be found out by
the Celestial Globe of Mercator, and not calculated by any of the
Astronomicall Tables.

Though the Longitudes and declinations of the fixed stars set down in this
Table to serve Mercator his Globe, do not altogether agree with the great
Celestial Globe, lately set forth by M. Sanderson and by M. Molinaxe, by
reason that the Longitudes and declinations of the said stars are mere
lately calculated, that is to say, for the year of our Lord, 1592. yet it will
serve to show you the way how to exercise your self in the said Globe, and
thereby you may correct this Table, and make it to agree in all points with the
new great Globe, whereby you shall reap more pleasure then grief or pain.
For I had this Table (as I have said before) out of Garceus, and did here set
it down more for your exercise, and to acquaint you with the fixed stars
that are described in the Celestial Globe, then for any other purpose.

The use of the Table next ensuing.
THis Table is divided into eight collums, The first whereof on the left hand,
contains the names of the stars, the second the degrees and minutes of
Longitude, together with the Characters of the 12. signs: the third the
degrees and minutes of Latitude both Northern and Southern, the North
Latitude being marked with the letter N. and the South Latitude with the letter
S. the fourth contains the degrees and minutes of declination both Northern
and Southern, marked with the letters N. and S. as before. The fifth shows
the magnitude or greatness of the star, whether it be of the first, second
or third bigness, etc. The sixth contains the degrees and minutes of the
right ascension of the foresaid fixed stars. The seventh contains the
Characters of the Planets, signifying the nature and quality of the stars.
The eigth contains the degrees and minutes of the right ascension of the
Ecliptique line and the signs of the Zodiaque.

Here follows the Table.

The names of the stars. The Longitude and place. The signs. The Latitude
North and South. Declination Nor. and South Magnitude or greatness The right
Ascension Degr. Min. The nature of the stars showed by the charrect^ of the
Planets The right ascension of the arch Ecliptique acco^anin^ ^^^ star ^he
(...) of the s^gnes. The first star of the Rams horn. 27 40 7 40 Nor. 17
20 Nor. 3 23 0 25 0 The right shoulder of Cepheus 8 0 69 0 Nor. 61 0 Nor. 3 317
15 15 0 The last star of Eridanus. 22 30 53 30 Sou. 41 0 Sou. 1. 43 30 15 50
The shoulder of Andromeda. 16 20 24 30 Nor. 28 26 Nor. 3 5 0 5 0 The girdle of
Andromeda. 24 50 26 30 Nor. 33 0 Nor. 3 12 10 13 0 The right side of Perseus 25
0 30 0 Nor. 48 0 Nor. 2 43 0 15 29 The head Algol or Meduza. 20 40 23 0 Nor. 39
30 Nor. 2 40 20 13 0 The South star of Pleiades. 23 29 4 20 Nor. 22 0 Nor. 5
50 10 23 10 The North star of Pleiades. 23 10 5 0 Nor. 23 10 Nor. 5 50 0 22
20 The Bulls eye. 2 50 5 0 Sou. 15 30 Nor. 1 63 0 4 20 The right shoulder of
Orion. 23 0 17 0 Sou. 6 20 Nor. 1 83 20 23 50 The left shoulder of Orion. 12 0
17 0 Sou. 4 40 Nor. 2 72 0 13 0 The right shoulder of Auriga 24 0 20 0 Nor. 43
0 Nor. 2 82 0 22 50 The Goat, or Hireus. 16 0 22 30 Nor. 45 0 Nor. 1 71 30 13
0 The former of the Kiddes 13 0 18 0 Nor. 40 0 Nor. 4 68 50 10 28 The latter of
the Kiddes 13 30 18 0 Nor. 39 40 Nor. 4 69 0 11 0 The left foot of Orion. 10
10 31 30 Sou. 9 0 Sou. 1 73 0 14 20 The tail of the little dear 21 10 66 0
Nor. 86 0 Nor. 3 4 30 4 30 The nuddle star of Orions girdle. 18 0 24 30 Sou.
1 50 Sou. 2 79 25 20 20 Canopus in the ship Argo. 8 30 75 0 Sou. 52 0 Sou. 1
94 24 3 30 The great dog. 9 0 39 10 Sou, 16 0 Sou. 1 97 0 6 30 The little
dog. 20 30 16 0 Sou. 6 10 Nor. 1 109 30 18 0 The former head of Gemini. 14 20
9 40 Nor. 32 0 Nor. 2 106 47 15 28 The following head of Gemini 17 40 6 30 Nor.
28 30 Nor. 2 110 5 18 20 The North Asellus. 1 30 3 0 Nor. 22 30 Nor. 4 124 0 1
40 The South Asellus in Cancer. 2 20 0 10 Sou. 19 20 Nor. 4 124 50 2 0
Praesepe. the Manger. ^n Cancer. 1 20 0 40 Nor. 20 0 Nor. neb. 124 0 1 30 The
shoulder of the great dear. 11 40 49 0 Nor. 62 30 Nor. 2 161 0 9 30 ^he bright
star of Hydrus. 21 0 20 30 Sou. 5 0 Sou. 2 137 0 14 30 The Lions heart 23 30
0 10 Nor. 13 30 Nor. 1 145 93 23 30 The Lions neck. 23 10 8 30 Nor. 21 40 Nor.
2 148 40 26 0 The Lions tail. 15 30 12 0 Nor. 16 20 Nor. 1 171 10 20 30 The
middle star of the great Bears tail. 9 50 56 0 Nor. 56 55 Nor. 2 196 0 17 0
The right wing of Virgo. 3 10 15 10 Nor. 12 30 Nor. 3 189 0 9 40 The left
shoulder of Bubulcus. 10 0 49 30 Nor. 40 0 Nor. 3 213 0 5 0 The Ranens bill. 6
30 21 40 Sou. 22 30 Sou. 3 176 43 26 20 Arcturus the great star betwixt
Bubulcus his legs 18 0 32 0 Nor. 22 0 Nor. 1 209 0 1 0 Spica virginis. 17 40 12
0 Sou. 10 0 Sou. 1 195 10 16 30 The middle star in the front of Scorpio 26 40
1 30 Sou. 21 0 Sou. 3 234 0 26 30 The South balance of Libra. 9 0 0 40 Nor. 14
0 Sou. 2 217 0 9 20 The North star of the balance Libra. 13 10 9 0 Nor: 8 0
Sou. 2 223 10 15 46 The left hand of Serpentarius. 27 0 17 0 Nor. 3 30 Sou. 3
238 30 30 0 The bright star of Ariadnes crown. 5 30 44 30 Nor. 28 0 Nor. 2
229 0 21 20 The heart of the Scorpion. 3 30 3 30 Sou. 25 0 Sou. 2 241 0 3 0 The
head of Hercules. 8 40 37 30 Nor. 15 0 Nor. 3 252 35 14 0 The head of
Serpentacius. 15 30 36 0 Nor. 12 50 Nor. 3 258 30 19 10 The head of the Dragon
20 20 76 0 Nor. 52 0 Nor. 3 266 10 26 30 The bright star of Lyra 9 0 62 0
Nor. 38 20 Nor. 1 275 20 5 0 The Eagle, alias vultur volans. 24 50 29 20 Nor. 7
30 Nor. 2 210 40 20 4 The first star of the tail of Capricorn. 16 0 2 0
Sou. 18 0 Sou. 3 319 0 17 0 The following star thereof. 17 10 2 0 Sou. 17 30
Sou. 3 320 10 18 0 The tail of the Dolphin. 8 10 29 30 Nor. 10 0 Nor. 3 304 0
1 10 The Fomahant. 28 0 23 0 Sou. 33 10 Sou. 1 339 0 7 0 The point of the dart.
1 10 39 30 Nor. 18 10 Nor. 4 295 0 23 8 The tail of the Swanne, 0 20 60 0 Nor.
43 30 Nor. 2 307 10 5 0 The right thygh of Pegasus. 22 50 31 0 Nor. 25 0 Nor. 2
341 0 9 30 The tail of the Whale. 27 0 20 20 Sou. 19 50 Sou. 3 5 35 6 0

How to find out the right and oblique ascension of any star, and also of
the ascentionall difference. The 32. Proposition.
THe right ascension of any star is an arch or portion of the Equator, to be
counted from the first point of Aries according to the succession of the
signs, with which portion in a right Sphere any star both rises mounteth
to the Meridian, and sets: and in an oblique Sphere it is a portion of the
Equator, wherewith the star is mounted to the Meridian: as for example, in a
great Sphere the star called Cor Leonis, that is to say, the heart of the Lion,
both rises, mounteth and sets with the 145. degr. 30^ of the Equinoctial.
But the right ascension of the said star in an oblique Sphere, is to be
found only by bringing the said star to the Meridian, and you shall find it
to be all one with the right ascension in a right Sphere, for by bringing the
star called Cor Leonis to the Meridian in an oblique Sphere, you shall find
the right ascension thereof to be all one with that which it had in a right
Sphere, that is 145. degrees 30^ of the Equinoctial. But if you would know
the oblique ascension of any star, then having set the Globe at your Latitude,
bring the star to the East part of the Horizon, and mark what degree of the
Equinoctial rises therewith and that is the oblique ascension: As for example,
the Globe standing at the Latitude 52. bring the star, Cor Leonis to the East
part of the Horizon, and by staying the Globe there, you shall find the 127.
degree of the Equinoctial to rise with that star. Now if you would know the
ascentionall difference, that is to lay, the difference betwixt the right and
oblique ascension, you have no more to do but to subtract the lesser out of
the greater, and the remainder shall be the ascentionall difference, as in the
former example, take 127 degrees out of 145. degrees and 30 and there shall
remain 18. degrees 30^ and that is the ascentionall difference, by help
whereof you may know the increase and decrease of the artificial day and night
throughout the year in any Latitude, if you observe that order which I have
already set down in the first part of my Sphere, the 50. Chapter.

To know in what quantity of time any whole sign or any other Arch of the
Ecliptique does rise or set. The 33. Proposition.
Having set the Globe at your Latitude, and rectified the Index of the hour
wheel by the seventh Proposition, bring the beginning of any Arch or sign to
the East part of the Horizon, and mark what degree of the Equinoctial rises
therewith, that done, bring the end of the said sign or arch to the East part
of the Horizon, and mark there also what degree of the Equinoctial touches
the Horizon, and staying the Globe there, look how many hours or parts of
hours the Index of the houre-wheele has run betwixt the beginning and
ending of the said sign or arch, and so you shall know the quantity of that
time, you may know it also by the number of degrees of the Equinoctial
contained betwixt the beginning and ending of the said sign or arch by
allowing 15. degrees to an hour, and 4^ to a degree. As for example, supposing
the sun to be in the first degree of Taurus, you shall find by working
according to the rule before set down, that the whole sign of Taurus does
spend in rising one hour 8^ Now if you will know how much time he spends
in descending, bring the first degree of Taurus to the West part of the
Horizon, marking what degree of the Equinoctial touches the Horizon at that
instant, and also to what hour the Index points, then turn the Globe still
Westwarde until the last degree of Taurus meets even with the edge of the
Horizon, and then mark again as well the degrees of the Equinoctial that
touches the Horizon, as also to what hour the Index points, and you shall
find the number of degrees of the Equinoctist to be 42. degrees, which makes
two hours 48. minutes, which is answerable to the hour of the houre-wheele,
and so much time the whole sign of Taurus spends in his descention or going
down.

How to know by the Globe what stars do rise or set every day Cosmically,
Acronically, or Helically. The 34. Proposition.
AS for the threefold Poetical rising and setting of the stars, you shall find
them plainly defined in the first part of my Sphere, Chap. 35. but to find
out the same by the Globe, you must do thus. First having set your Globe at
your Latitude, and sought out the place of the sun for that day, bring the
degree of the sun to the East part of the Horizon, and stay the Globe there,
that you may see what stars do rise a little before the sun, and which rise
together with the sun. For those that rise a little before the sun, are
said to rise Helically, and those that rise together with the sun, are said
to rise Cosmically, and those stars that are in the very West part of the
Horizon at the rising of the sun, are said to set Cosmically. Again those
stars that rise immediately after the sun, do set Helically, that done,
turn the degree of the sun unto the West part of the Horizon, and staying
the Globe there mark what stars are ready to go down with him, for those
are said to set Acronically, ans staying the Globe still there in the West,
mark what stars at that present do rise in the East part of the Horizon,
for those are said to rise Acronically.

To know in what time of the year any star rises or sets, either
Cosmically, or Acronically. The 35. Proposition.
HEre having set the Globe at your Latitude, and knowing the degree of the
sun, bring the star to the East part of the Horizon, and therewith consider
what degree of the Ecliptique the Horizon cutteth at that present, that done,
find out the self same degree upon the Horizon in the narrow space of degrees
next unto the body of the Globe, and right against that degree, you shall
find in what day and month that star does rise Cosmically, As for example,
I would know at what time of the year Cor Leonis rises Cosmically in the
Latitude 52. I bring the star Cor Leonis to the East part of the Horizon, and
I find that the Horizon cutteth the Ecliptique in the 23. degree 30^ of Leo,
which degree being found again upon the Horizon, points to the sixth day of
August, so as I conclude that Cor Leonis does rise that present day Cosmically,
for then both he and the sun are in a manner in one self degree of the
Ecliptique: now to know the Cosmicall setting of the said star, turn the
same star to the West part of the Horizon, and mark what degree of the
Ecliptique does then rise in the East, and you shall find the same to be the
23. degree of Aquarius, which degree being found again upon the Horizon in
the narrow space of degrees next to the body of the Globe, containing the
degrees of the Zodiaque, will point to the 31. day of January, at which time
the sun is opposite to the said star, and therefore it is said to go
down Cosmically, because it goes down when the sun rises. Now to know the
Acronicall rising of any star at any time, bring the star to the East part
of the Horizon, and mark therewith what degree of the Ecliptique goes down
in the West at that instant, for the sun being in that degree is opposite to
the star: As for example, by bringing the star Cor Leonis to the East part
of the Horizon, you shall find that the 23. degree of Aquarius goes down at
that instant, which degree being found again upon the Horizon, will show the
day and month when the star rises Acronically, and so you shall find the
star Cor Leonis to rise Acronically the 31. day of January. Contrariwise if
you would know when the said star sets Acronically, bring the said star
Cor Leonis, to the West part of the Horizon, and therewith mark what degree of
the Ecliptique then sets in the West, which degree being found again upon
the Horizon, will show that the said star sets Acronically the 6. of
August.

Of the Horoscop and the rest of the twelve houses. The 36. Proposition.
THis word Horoscop does not only signify the degree of the Ecliptique,
otherwise called the ascendent which rises above the Horizon in the beginning
of any thing that is to be sought or known, but also sometimes the whole
figure of heaven containing the 12. houses, and does show the very secrets of
nature, so that there is nothing that chances to the inferior bodies, but
some cause thereof does appear by mean of the Horoscope in heaven, and
therefore the Astrologians have divided the whole heaven into 12. houses, which
are numbered from the Horoscope, which is the East Angle, and so forth
according to the succession of the signs, of which 12. houses the four
principal are four points of the Zodiaque whereof two do fall upon the
Horizon, and the other two upon the Meridian, and are called principal points,
poles, or Angles, that is the beginning of the first house, of the fourth
house, of the seventh house, and of the tenth house, and those that do follow
next any of these principal Angles, are called succeeding houses, in Latin
Succedentes, as the second, the fifth, the eight, and the eleventh house. And
those that go next before any of the four principal Angles, are called
falling houses, in Latin Cadentes, as the 12. the third, the sixth, and the
ninth: and such houses as have no familiarity with the Horoscop or ascendent,
as the second, the sixth, the eight, and the eleventh houses are said to be
slow and deiect, all which things this Table here following does show,
containing the number and names of the houses, and also their significations.

The 12. houses. The names of the houses. The significations of the houses. 1
Angle East life 2 succeeding the lower gate gain 3 falling the Goddess
brethren 4 Angle the bottom of heaven parents 5 succeeding good fortune
children 6 falling evil fortune health 7 Angle the West wife 8 succeeding the
higher gate death 9 falling God religion 10 Angle the middle of heaven kingdom
11 succeeding the good spirit benefactor 12 falling the evil spirit prison

A general figure of the 12. houses of Heaven, according to the Judicial of
Astrology.
1 the horoscope or ascendent. 2 the house succedent 3 the house cadent. 4 the
angle of the earth. 5 house succedent. 6 house cadent. 7 the angle of the
occident. 8 house succedent. 9 house cadent. 10 the angle meridionall. 11 house
succedent. 12 the house cadent.




How to find out the Horoscop or ascendent at any time of the day or night by
the globe, and thereby to know the 4. principal angles of heaven.
Proposition. 37.
FIrst having set the Globe at your latitude, and rectified the index of the
hour wheel according to the degree of the sign where in the Sun is that day
you seek by the 7. proposition, if it be in the day time, take with your
Astrolabe or Quadrant. the altitude of the Sun. But if it be in the night, take
the altitude of some known Star, that thereby you may know the hour of the
day or night in which you seek the ascendent. But if it happen that neither
Sun nor star is to be seen that day or night, then learn by some true
clock or watch what hour it is, and having set the Index of the hour wheel
at that hour, stay the Globe there, and therewith mark what degree of the
Ecliptique rises in the East part of the Globe above the horizon at that
instant, and that degree is the Horoscop or ascendent for that hour. As for
example, you would find out the ascendent the 16. of June 1590. at 8. of the
clock in the forenoone, at which day the Sun is in the 4. degree of Cancer,
here having first set the Index of the hour wheel at that hour by staying
the Globe there, you shall find that the 21. degree 30^ of Leo is the
ascendent, which is the East angle or first house, whereby you may also at that
instant find out the other three angles, that is, the west, South, and North
angles, for the opposite point of the Zodiaque to the ascendent is the West
angle or seventh house. And that degree of the Zodiaque, which is at that
instant right under the Meridian above head in the South angle or 10. house,
and the opposite point to that beneath, is the north angle or fourth house, for
having found the ascendent, which is the East angle or first house to be the
21. degree, 30. minutes of Leo, the West angle must needs be the 21. degree.
30. minutes of A quarius. Again ^he south angle or 10. house is the 8. degree
of Taurus, and the oposite point to that is the North Angle or fourth house
which is ^he 7. of Scorpio.

How to erect a figure by the Globe according to Regio Montanus his way which
is called the reasonable way, and is counted the best of all others.
Proposition. 38.
FIrst you must find out the degree of the ascendent as is taught in the last
chapter, which is always the first house, then staying the Globe with some
pretty wedges of wood being thrust betwixt the Horizon and the body of the
Globe, mark there what degree of the equinoctial does touch the Horizon at
that instant, and number from thence upward upon the said Equinoctial 30.
degrees, to the end of which 30. degrees, bring the semicircle of position
being first fastened in his due place upon the East side of the Horizon, and
look what degree and sign of the Zodiaque the circle of position cutteth at
that present, and that degree shall be the twelfth house: then number again
other 30. degrees upon the Equinoctial vpwardes toward the brazen Meridian,
and to that bring the semicircle of position, marking what degree of the
Zodiaque the said semicircle cutteth, and that shall be the 11. house, that
done, look what degree of the Zodiaque is right under the brazen meridian
above head, and that shall be the 10. house. Then having set the semicircle of
position upon the West side of the Globe, number from the brazen Meridian
westward upon the Equinoctial other 30. degrees, to the end whereof bring the
semicircle of position, and mark what degree of the Zodiaque the circle of
position cutteth, and that shall be the 9. house, then from thence downward
number upon the Equinoctial other 30. degrees, to the end whereof bring the
semicircle of position, marking there what sign and degree of the Zodiaque the
said semicircle cutteth, and tha^ shall be the 8. house. Now having these six
houses, the opposite points of the said six houses will show you the other
six houses, and if you will know which houses, and also which signs are
opposite one to another, mark well this Table following.

The houses opposite are these, 1 to 7 The Signs opposite are these, to 12 6
11 5 10 4 9 3 8 2

And to make al these things the more plain unto you, I thought good to set
down this example following. Suppose that the 16. of June, Anno 1590. and at
8. of the clock in the morning you would erect a figure to know how the 12.
houses of heaven are situated at that present, first having drawn such a
square figure as this here following, representing the 12. houses, learn by
the last proposition, who is the ascendent at that instant, and you shall find
find it to be the 21. degree 30^ of Leo, which must be set in the first
house, and the 28. degree of Cancer in the 12. house and the 22. degree of
Gemini in the 11. house, and the 9. degree of Taurus in the 10. house, and the
5. degree of Aries to be in the 9. house, and the 12. degree of Pisces in the
8. house. Now the opposite house to the first house or ascendent is the 7.
house which is the 21. degree. 30^ of Aquarius, for the opposite sign must
always have like number of degrees, then the opposite to the 12. house is the
6. house, which the 28. degrees of Capricorn, and the opposite to the 11. is the 5.
house, which is the 22. degree of Sagittarius, and the opposite to the 10.
house is the 4. house, which is the 9. degree of Scorpio, and the opposite to
the 9. house in the 3. house, which is the 5. degree of Libra, and the opposite
to the 8. house is the second house which is the 12. degree of Virgo, all which
things this figure here following does plainly show. And if you would know
what Planets should be placed in every house, you must learn that out of the
Ephemerides, or out of some of the Astronomicall Tables.

16. Iunii, Anno 1590. the Sun being in the 4. degr. of Cancer, in the latitude
52.


Now because most men that do show the use of the Globes, do also teach
therein how to find out the latitude and longitude of any region, I thought
good therefore to set down here some of their manifold ways touching the
finding out of the same, notwithstanding that I have already written something
thereof in the second part of my Sphere, in the 8. 9. 10. and 11. chapters.

How to know the latitude of any place or region by any of the fixed stars
described in the Globe. Proposition. 39.
TAke in the night season with your Astrolabe the Meridian altitude of some
known star that is to be found in the Globe, then having brought the star
under the brazen Meridian, turn the Meridian up and down in the nickes of the
horizon, until the same Star have the said altitude in the brazen Meridian,
which you found it to have in the firmament by your Astrolabe, that done,
number the degrees of the Meridian contained betwixt the Pole and the Horizon,
and that is the latitude of that place.

Another way to find the elevation of the Pole. Proposition. 40.
Having brought the Globe into an open place where the Sun shines at
nonnetide, and placed the same right North and south as is taught in the first
chapter, set a needle in the degree of the Sun, and bring the same to the
brazen Meridian, not leaving to turn the same Meridian up and down in the
nicks of the Horizon, until the needle cast no shadow at all, and there
staying the Globe, look how many degrees the pole is elevated above the
Horizon, for that is the latitude of that place.

A third way to find out the latitude of any place without taking the Meridian
altitude of any Star. Proposition. 41.
TAke at any hour the altitude of 2 known stars, and such as are to be found
in the Globe at one self instant whereof the one must be situated toward the
East, and the other toward the West, then turn the Globe together with the
Meridian up and down in the nicks of the Horizon, until you find by help of
the quarter of altitude each Star to have the self same altitude in the
Globe, that it had in heaven, which being done, look how many degrees the
North pole is elevated above the Horizon, and that is the latitude of that
place. But if you would know the latitude of any place that is toward the
South Pole, then you must first place the South pole above the Horizon, and
then work as before.

A fourth way to find out the latitude of any region by any known fixed star
or Planet that may be seen. Proposition. 42.
FIrst take his Meridian altitude, and then learn to know either by the Globe
or by some table his declination, which if it be Northern you must subtract
the same from the Meridian altitude, if Southern add it to the Meridian
altitude so shall you have the elevation of the Equinoctial, which being
subtracted from 90. the remainder shall be the latitude of that place as for
example. I find the Meridian altitude of Oculus Tauri to be 53. degrees, 50^
32^ and his declination Northward to be 15. degrees, 50^ 32^ which declination
being subtracted from the Meridian altitude, there remains 38. degrees, and
that is the elevation of the Equinoctial, which being subtracted from 90.
there remains 52. for the latitude of that place.

Hitherto I have set down the chiefest propositions that are to be done by the
Globe, touching the Sun and the fixed stars: and lastly, showed how to find
out the latitude of any place, wherefore now I think good to show you how to
find out the place of the Moon, and of every one of the rest of the Planets in
the Globe by help of the Ephemerides, and thereby to know when every planet
rises and sets, and first of the Moon.

A brief description of the diurnall table set down in Stadius his
Ephemerides, together with the use thereof. Proposition. 43.
But for as much as the diurnall Table of the Ephemerides showing the daily
motion of the Planets is very needful to serve diverse turns I think it not
amiss here briefly to describe the same, and specially that of Johannes
Stadius whose diurnall table or Almanacke beginning at the 202. page of his
book, and at the year of our Lord 1583. continues to the year 1606.

Of which table every page on the left hand is divided into 9. Collums. In the
first collum whereof on the left hand are set down the days of the month,
first the Gregorian days according to the Roman account, and next to that the
days of the month according to our English account, then in the front of
every other collum are set down the characters first of the Sun, and then of
other the six Planets that is to say, of the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, and last of all, the head of the Dragon figured thus And right
under these seven Planets, and also under the head of the Dragon are set down
the signs and degrees wherein every of these is every day of the month
throughout the year at noontyde, and in the foot of the said Table is set
down the latitude of every one of the 5. Planets, proceeding by the days of
the month divided into three parts. And in the margent of every left page are
set down the chiefest feasts and Saints days that fall in every month
throughout the year. Moreover, there is a Table on the right hand right
against the left Table, in which are set down first the days of the month,
and then what conjunction or any other aspect the Moon has with any of the
other six Planets, that is, with the Sun, with Saturn, with Jupiter, with
Mars, with Venus and with Mercury, which Planets are set down in the front of
the said Table, and under them the characters of such aspectes as the Moon
has that day with any of the other Planets. The characters of which aspects
are these here following.



Whereof the first signifies a conjunction: the second an opposition, the
third a trine aspect, the fourth a quadrat aspect, and the fifth a sextile
aspect.

Two Planets are said to be in a conjunction when they are both in one self
sign. And to be in an opposition when they are in two several signs opposite
one to another. For then they be distant one from another 6. signs. And they
are said to be in a trine aspect when they be distant one from another by
four signs. And to be in a quadrat aspect when they are distant one from
another by three signs. And to be in a sextile aspect when they are distant
but two signs one from another.

How to find out the place of any Planet by the Ephemerides. Proposition. 44.
NOw to find out the place of any Planet, or of the head of the Dragon by this
diurnall Table, you must first seek out the day of the month in the fist
collum of the left table, right against that on your right hand in the said
left Table, you shall find in the common angle right under the Planet or
Dragons head (which so ever of them you seek) the sign and degree wherein the
said Planet or Dragons head is the said day at noontyde.

And to find out the aspects which the Moon has with any of the Planets the
same day, you must resort to the other table on the right hand, observing like
order as before.

The example.
As for example the 21. of April 1592. which is the first of May, according to
the Romain account, I find by the table on the left hand, the Sun to be in
the 10. degree 50^ of Taurus, the Moon to be in the 30. degree, 47^ of
Capricorn, Saturn, to be in the 8. degree, 10^ of Cancer, Jupiter to be in
the 18. degree. 28^ of Sagittarius, Mars to be in the 12. degree, 6^ of Gemini,
Venus to be in the 2. degree, 0^ of Aries, and Mercury to be in the 6. degree,
20^ of Taurus, and the head of the Dragon to be in the 29. degree, 45^ of
Gemini,

And right against this in the Table on the right hand you shall find the
Moon to be in a trine aspect with the Sun, to be in an opposition with
Saturn, to be in a trine aspect with Mercury.

Thus having briefly showed you the use of the diurnall Table, I will show you
now how to find out the latitude of the Moon as well North as South, by help
of Stadius his Table, set down in the 112. page of his Ephemerides, and first I
will briefly describe the said Table.

A brief description of the Table of Stadius set down in the 112. page of his
Ephemerides to find out thereby the daily latitude of the Moon be it North or
South together with the Canon or rule thereof plainly declared by example.
Proposition. 45.
THis Table is divided into 8. collums, whereof the first on the left hand
contains the degrees of every sign set down in the front of the Table,
which degrees are to be counted descending from one to 30. for so many degrees
there be in every sign: and the last collum on the right hand contains the
like number of degrees belonging to the signs set down in the base or foot
of the said Table, and this number ascends upward from 1. to 30. and for that
purpose it would not have been amiss to have set over each head of those 2.
collums this word gradus, next under the word Signa. And of the other six
collums the first three on the left hand do contain the degrees, minutes and
seconds of the North latitude, and the other three toward the right hand do
contain the degrees, minutes, and seconds of South latitude. Moreover, the 12.
Signs are to be numbered in the front from the third collum on the left hand
from 1. to 5. forward toward the right hand, and at the foot from 6. to 11.
backward toward the left hand, set down in arithmeticall figures.

The rule or Canon together with a plain example showing the use of the Table.
FIrst knowing the day of the month, resort unto the diurnall Table of motion
of the Planets in the Ephemerides, and having there found out the motion or
place of the Moon, and also of the Dragons head answerable to the day wherein
you seek, subtract the place of the Dragons head from the place of the Moon,
which is easily done so often as the arc of the Moon is greater, that is to
say, contains more signs and degrees than the arc of the Dragons head,
beginning your account in both arkes from the first point of Aries. But if the
arc of the Moon be lesser than the ark of the Dragons head, so as you cannot
make your subtraction, then you must add to the place of the Moon 12. signs,
which is 360. degrees, and you must add also thereunto the number of so many
signs as are contained betwixt the first point of Aries, and the first point
of that sign wherein the Moon is at that present, which sign it self is not
to be numbered, and when you come to take out of that whole sum the place of
the Dragons head, you must first add to the said place of the Dragons head the
number of so many signs as are contained betwixt the first point of Aries, and
the first point of that sign wherein the Dragons head is at that instant, but
not the sign wherein it is, and then having made your subtraction, remember
always to take out of that remainder 90. degrees, which is three signs, so
often as you have need to add 12. signs to the place of the Moon, and not
otherwise, and with that remainder you must resort to the foresaid table of the
Moons latitude, as for example.

The Example.
Suppose that you would know what latitude the Moon had the first of November
1590. here resorting to the diurnall Table of the Ephemerides, you find
according to the day propounded, the place of the Moon to be in the 16. degree
49^ of Taurus, and the place of the Dragons head to be in the 28. degree 14^ of
Cancer. Now according to the rule before given, you must take the place of the
dragon here, which is 28. degrees, 14^ of Cancer out of the 16. degrees. 49^ of
Taurus, which is the place of the Moon, and because you cannot take the
greater sum out of the lesser, you must add to the lesser sum 12. signs,
which make 360. degrees, and also one sign, for Aries going next before
Taurus, in which sign the Moon is, so shall you make the whole sum to be 13.
signs 16 degrees 49^ out of which sum you must subtract the Dragons head,
which with the signs that go next before Cancer, counting from the first
point of Aries, do make 3. signs 28. degrees, 14^ which being subtracted out
of 13. signs, 16. degrees, 49 there remains 9. signs, 18 degrees. 35^ out of
which you must also subtract 90. degrees. which is 3. whole signs, and so you find
the remainder to be 6. signs, 18. degrees 35^ with which last remainder you
have to enter into the table of the Moons latitude, in the foot whereof you
shall find 6. signs, and in the last collum on the right hand 18. and in the
next collum toward the left hand, and in the common angle answerable as well to
the said 18. degree. as also to the 6 signs, you shall find the latitude of the
Moon to be 4. degrees. 45^ and 17^ (which seconds may be very well omitted) and her
latitude to be south. But now because there are 35^ more annexed to the 18.
degrees of the foresaid remainder, you must find out a proportional part
answerable to those minutes which is to be done thus.

Take out of the table the whole latitude answerable to 6 signs and 19. degrees.
which is one degree more, so as now the latitude of the Moon is 4. degrees. 43^
omitting the seconds. Then subtract 4. degrees. 43^ out of 4. degrees 45^ and there
remains 2^ Now to find out a proportional part answerable to the former 35^
you must say thus. If 60^ require 2^ what shall 35^ require? and the quotient
yields 1^ 10^ which being subtracted out of 4. degrees 45^ there will remain
4. degrees. 44^ and so much was the south latitude of the Moon at that present
day.

How to know the true place of the Sun or Moon, or of any other planet every
hour of the day throughout the year. Proposition. 46.
But now because that to find out the true place of the Moon or of any other
Planet in the Globe to work thereby certainly and truly, it is not enough to
know their places in the Zodiaque at noonetyde, unless you know the same at
the very hour in which you seek. Stadius teaches a brief rule to find out
the true place of any Planet at what hour so ever you desire by help of a
short Table set down in the 109. page of his Ephemerides, which rule and Table
he borrowed of Reinholdus. And this Table consists of 3. collums, in every
front whereof are set first degrees, minutes, seconds, and thirds, and under
them minutes, secondes, thirds, and fourths. And note that the first row of
numbers on the left hand signifies sometime degrees, and sometime minutes,
either of which do extend in this Table to 60. and to 61. right against which
row in every collum is set down on the right hand the proportional part for
one hour, the rule is thus.

The Rule.
First find out by the Ephemerides the place of the Planet wherein it is at
noontyde the same day that you seek, and also the place of the same Planet,
wherein it is the next day following at noone, and subtract the lesser out of
the greater, if the two places at noonetyde be still in one self sign, but if
the two places be in two several signs, then you must count how many degrees
of the Ecliptique the one place is distant from the other, and that shall be
the difference, with which difference you must resort to the Table, and right
against that on the right hand in the same collum wherein you found the
difference, you shall also find the proportional part for one hour, as by
this example you shall more plainly understand.

The Example.
Suppose then that you desire to know the true place of the Sun or of the
Moon, or of any other Planet at five of the clock in the after noone the 30.
of December 1591. at which day you find the Sun at noontyde to be in the 18.
degree, and 7. minutes of Capricorn, and the next day at noone to be in the
19. degree and 8^ of the same sign, the difference whereof you find by
subtraction to be one degree and one minute, with which difference you must
enter into the table, and seeking for one degree in the first collum on the
left hand, you find next unto that on the right hand 2^ 30^ then for one
minute which before was named one degree, you find next unto it 2^ 30^ which
being added to the former sum last found, makes 2^ 32^ 30^ which is the
proportional part for one hour. Then having multiplied that by 5. hours to
serve 5. of the clock in the afternoon, you shall find the product to be 12^
42^ 30^ which being added to the first Meridian place, which is 18. degrees and
7. minutes of Capricorn, makes in all 18. degrees 19^ 42^ 30^ And remember
that if your difference be only minutes, then the body of the Table does show
the proportional part. But if the difference does contain degrees, then the
fourths must be made thirdes, and the thirds secondes, the secondes minutes,
and the minutes degrees. And this table serves for the 7. Planets for ever.
Notwithstanding Stadius sets down another Table to find out thereby the
proportional moving of the Moon feruing as well for hours as for minutes of
hours, which table begins at the 144. page, and ends at the 184. page of
his book.

In the front of which table in every page are set down the differences of the
two places of the Planets which you have found by subtracting the lesser out of
the greater, if the planet be at both noonetydes in one self sign, but if she
be at the two noontides in two several signs, then such difference is to be
accounted upon the Ecliptique line, to know how many degrees the one place is
distant from the other, and as for the minutes, if there be any, you may know
the difference thereof by subtracting the lesser number out of the greater. And
in the outermost collum on the left hand are set down the hours and minutes
marked in the foot with the letter H. signifying hours, and under that with
the letter M signifying minutes, whereof the hours proceed but to 24. but the
minutes extend to 60. which make one hour proceeding by even numbers in this
sort. 1. 2. 4. 6. 8. etc. and therefore not finding that hour or minute which
you seek in the said collum, you must take the next number which is lesser by
one, and so make it up by adding the first and only odd one unto it, and in
each common angle you shall find the proportional part that is to be added to
the first place of the Planet answering to the day of the month wherein you
sought. All which things you shall more plainly understand by this one
example.

The example.
Suppose then that you would know the true place of the Moon at 5. of the
clock. 17^ in the afternoon the 28. of December 1591. and looking in the
Ephemerides you find the place of the Moon to be the same day at noonetide in
the 26. degree 12^ of Libra. and the next day at noontide to be in the 8. degrees.
17^ of Scorpio. here by numbering how many degrees are contained in the
Ecliptique line betwixt those two places, and by subtracting the lesser number
of minutes out of the greater, you shall find the difference to be 12. degrees
5^ with which difference you must resort to the table of proportional parts,
and there having found the said difference in the front of the 13. page of the
said table, look in the first collum on the left hand, for the hours and
minutes according to the rule before set down. As here in this example,
because you cannot find 5. hours, you take four, right against which on the
right hand in the common angle you shall find 2. degrees 0^ 50^ then for one
hour to make the 5. hours, you shall find in the common angle 30^ 12^ that
done, seek out the 17^ in the first collum, which number not being there you
must take 16. against which in the common angle you shall find 8^ 3^ 20^ and
for the one minute which is to be added to 16. you shall find in the common
angle against that one minute 30^ 12^ and by adding all these sums together,
you shall find the proportional part to be 2. degrees, 39^ 35^ 32^ which being
added to the place of the Moon at noontyde first found in the Ephemerides,
makes in all 28. degrees, 51^ 35^ 32^ of Libra, which is the true place of the
Moon for that hour. But you have to note that the denominations of the
numbers contained in the common angles of proportional parts be not always
like, for when they are to answer hours then the first number on the left hand
in every angle signifies degrees, and the rest minutes and seconds, but if
they have to answer minutes of hours, then the first numbers do signify
minutes, and the rest seconds and thirds, as you may easily perceive by
examining the former example. But now to return to my first intention, which
was to show you how to find out the true place of every Planet in the Globe,
you have to understand that having found out the true place of any Planet at
the day and hour wherein you seek, by such means as is before taught, then
resort to the celestial Globe, and having set the same at your latitude, and
also rectified the hour wheel according to the day wherein you seek. Suppose
that the 26. of May 1592. you would know in what part of the Globe the Moon
is to be found at 5. of the clock in the afternoon. Here first you must know
her place at noone the same day, which is the 14. degree, 28^ of Aries, and
also her place the next day at noone, which is the 29. degree 0^ of the same
sign, Now by taking 14. degrees 28^ out of 29. degrees, you shall find the
remainder to be 14. degrees, 32^ with which difference you must resort to the
table set down in the 109. page. And by working as before is taught, you shall
find her place or longitude to be at five of the clock in the 17. degree 23^
6^ 43^ of Aries, which being counted upon the Ecliptique line of the Globe, lay
your semicircle of longitude and latitude to that point, and having learned her
latitude by help of the Table of latitude before mentioned, by which you shall
find her latitude to be at that time 4. degrees. 46^ to the Southward, then having
counted that latitude upon the semicircle of lo^gitude and latitude, make there
a mark upon the Globe, for that is her very place at that instant that is to
say, at 5. of the clock in the afternoon the 26. day of May 1592

Now if you would know when she rises and sets, you have no more to do but
to bring her place before marked on the Globe unto the Horizon on the East
part, and the index of the hour wheel being rectifyed as is before said, will
show the hour of her rising above the Horizon, and by bringing her place to
the west part of the Horizon, the Index will show the hour of her setting, and
by bringing her place to the brazen Meridian, you shall know at what hour she
is full South. The like Tables you shall find also in Stadius to find out the
true place of every other Planet at any hour, as of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury, which Tables do begin at the 128. page, and end at the
143. page of his book, the order of working by which Tables is like in every
respect unto that of the Moon last taught. By which Tables you may find out
the true place of any other Planet in the Globe at any hour of the day or
night, and thereby to know the hour of his rising and setting, if you rightly
observe the rules before taught touching the use of the foresaid Tables. And
note that you may find out the place of the Moon by the Globe without the
help of any Ephemerides, by such ways as here do follow.

How to find out the place of the Moon by the Globe, when she is above the
Horizon, without the help of any Ephemerides or other Table what soever.
Proposition. 42.
Having set the Globe at your latitude, and placed it so as it may rightly
answer the four quarters of the world, take the altitude of the Moon with
your Astrolabe or quadrant, and mark therewith whether she be at that present
East, or West, that is to say, on this side of the Meridian, or beyond the
Meridian, that done, take the altitude of some fixed Star, which you know,
and is to be found in the Globe, and also at that time is above the Horizon,
marking therewith in what part of the firmament the said Star is, and with
your cross staff take the distance betwixt the moon and that star. Then
having these three things, that is, the altitude of the Moon, the altitude of
the Star, and also the distance betwixt the Moon and the known star.
Move the globe together with the quarter of altitude to and fro until you
have made the Moon to have the same altitude and like place in the Globe, that
you found it to have in the firmament, and there make a mark upon the Globe.
Then bring the quarter of altitude toward the Star, that the Star may have
the like altitude and like place in the Globe that it had in the firmament, and
there having stayed the Globe that it may not move, take with your Compass
upon the Equinoctial the distance betwixt the Moon and the star before
found by the cross staff, and keeping your compasses at that wydenesse, put
the firm foot of your Compasses in the fixed Star, and cease not to move the
other foot together with the quarter of altitude toward the mark of the Moons
altitude until you make them to meet, for there is the place of the moon.

Another way to find out the place of the Moon without taking the latitude of
any without. Proposition. 48.
Seek by your cross staff to know the distance betwixt the Moon and any
two stars that you know and are to be found in the globe. That done, draw upon
the globe on either star an obscure circle according to the distance of the
Moon from either of those two stars, which two circles will cut or cross one
another but in 2. points, the one whereof is the place of the Moon, and which
of those places it should be, your eye will easily tell you. And by this
means it were no hard thing (as Gemma Frisius satih) for our sea men in these
days to find out all the stars that be in the nether Hemispheare and were
unknown to Ptolomie and to the other ancient Astronomers, and to cause them
to be set down in the Globe, yea and by this art the places of the rest of the
Planets may be found out as well according to their Latitude as Longitude.

Moreover Gemma Frisius says, that by knowing the true place of the Moon in
the Zodiaque, you may also find out thereby the unknown Longitude of any
Region.

How to find out the Longitude of any Region. The 49. Proposition.
Having found out the place of the Moon in the Zodiaque, you must first know
the very hour of her being in that place, and then learn by some Ephemerides
or by the Tables of Alfonsus, at what hour the Moon does enter into the self
same degree of the Zodiaque in some other Region or Town whose Longitude you
already know, and having reduced the hours to 24. take the lesser number of
hours out of the greater, the remainder whereof must be reduced out of hours
and minutes into degrees thus: Multiply the hours by 15. and the minutes of
hours by 4. so shall you have the degrees of the Equator contained betwixt the
two Meridians. And such distance so intercepted is called the difference of
Longitude, which difference you must add to the known Longitude if the hours
in that place were more in number, but if the hours were less in number, then
you must subtract the foresaid difference from the known Longitude, so shall
you collect the unknown Longitude of that place or Region which you seek, and
how far it is distant from the fortunate Isles.

Another way to find out the unknown Longitude of any place by the Globe. The
50. Proposition.
Having set the Globe at your Latitude and rectified the houre-wheele by the
seventh Proposition, bring the place whose Longitude you know to the brazen
Meridian, and direct the Index of the houre-wheele to that hour in which the
Moon does occupy the former defined place in that Region or Town: that done,
leave not to turn the Globe until the Index of the houre-wheele come to that
hour in which you sought the unknown place of the Moon, and the degrees of
the Equator which the brazen Meridian cutteth, will show the unknown Longitude
of the place which you seek.

To the end of this Treatise I have thought good to add a brief description
of the two great Globes lately set forth first by M. Sanderson, and then by M.
Molineux, and therewith to set down a brief description of Sir Frances Drake
his first voyage into the West and East Indies, and also the voyage of M. Tho.
Candish both whose voyages and what course they held are to be seen by help
of two lines drawn on the terrestrial Globe, of which lines the one is read
showing the voyage of Sir Frances both outward and homeward. And the other line
is blew showing in like manner the voyage of M. Candish.

A brief description of the two great Globes lately set forth first by M.
Sanderson, and then by M. Molineux.
THese Globes do differ in a manner nothing at all from the Globes of Mercator
touching the circles before described, but only in the Horizon, for the Horizon
of these great Globes is divided into 13. spaces as follows.

Whereof the first narrow and innermost space next unto the body of the Globe,
contains the degrees of the Zodiaque.

The second contains the numbers of the said degrees proceeding from 10. to
30. in every sign.

In the third space are set down the names and the characters of the 12.
signs, and also the characters of the Planets that govern the said signs.

In the fourth space are set down the letters of the days of the week.

In the 5. and 6. are set down the numbers of the days and names of the
months according to the ancient Calender.

In the seventh the festival days.

In the 8. and 9. space the number of the days and names of the months
according to the new Romain Calender.

In the 10. and 11. are set down the numbers of the days and names of the
months according to the true Calendar lately calculated by a most excellent
Mathematician and mine old acquaintance M. Dee of Mortlake, as I conjecture by
the letters I. D. set down upon the said Horizon.

In the 12. are set down the English names of the 32. Rombes or winds of the
Mariners compass.

In the 13. and outermost space are set down the Latin names of the said 32.
winds.

But the Map which covers M. Molineux his Terrestrial Globe, differs
greatly from Mercator his terrestrial Globe by reason that there are found out
diverse new places as well toward the North pole, as in ye East and West Indies
which were unknown to Mercator. They differ also greatly in the names,
Longitudes, latitudes and dista^ces of such places as have bin heretofore set
down not only in Mercators Globe which was made many years since, but also in
diverse Maps more lately made, but who goes nighest the truth I dare not judge,
because I was never in those places. But as touching the Map of stars which
covers the celestial Globe of M. Molineux, I do not find it greatly to
differ from that of Mercator, saving that M. Molineux has added to his
celestial Globe certain Southern images, as the Cross, the southern
Triangle, and certain other stars, whereof some do signify Noes Dove, and
others do signify the image called Polophilax, the images whereof are not here
set down, but you shall find them described in Plancius his Map, made in the
year 1592. whose longitudes, latitudes, and declinations, how truly they are
set down in the said Globe or Map I am not able to judge. He sets down
also two clouds nigh unto the South pole, but not the use thereof. Moreover to
this brief description of M. Molineux his two Globes, I thought good to add
the first voyage of Sir Frances Drake, and of M. Thomas Candish, set forth by
two lines, the one read, and the other blew described in the Terrestrial
Globe of the said M. Molineux, and also how far Sir Martin Furbosher sailed
Northward as follows.

The first voyage of Sir Frances Drake by sea unto the West and East Indies
both outward and homeward.
IN the great terrestrial Globe lately put forth by M. Sanderson and by M.
Molineux, the voyage as well of Sir. Fr. Drake, as of M. Th. Candish is set
down, and showed by help of two lines, the one red, and the other blew,
whereof the red line proceeding first from Plymouth, does show what course Sir
Frances observed in all his voyage, as well outward as homeward, and the blewe
line proceeding also from Plymouth, shows in like manner the voyage of Master
Candish, and in that Globe is also set down how far Sir Martin Furbosher
discovered toward the North parts. But first I will describe unto you the
voyage of Sir Fr. Drake that wrothie Knight and most Noble Neptune, according
as that red line directs in ye said Globe.

First parting from Plymouth he sailed with a North Northeast wind to an I Will
called Mogodore, upon the coast of Maroccho, which place is not named in M.
Molineux his Globe, and that place having in North Latitude 32. degrees, is
distant from Plymouth according to that course, which the red line shows
780. leagues. In this I Will he built a little Pinnis or shallop, and from thence
he sailed to Cape Dalguere which is further Southward, and having in North
Latitude 30. degrees, is distant from Mogodore about 40. leagues, and from
thence he sailed to the Isles Canariae, which are somewhat more Westward, and
having 27. degrees in North Latitude, are distant from the Cape Dalguere about
100. leagues, and from thence he sailed to Capo Blanco, which is more
Westernly, and having in North Latitude 21. degrees, is distant from the
Canaries 120. leagues and somewhat more, and from thence he sailed to the Isles
of Capo Verde, which having in North Latitude about 14. degrees, are distant
from Capo Blanco about 140. leagues. And from thence to the great Cape of S.
Augustine, which having in South Latitude about 8. degrees. is distant from the
Canaries 500. leagues, and from thence he sailed more Westernly unto ye mouth
of the River called Rio de Platta, which having in South Latitude 36. degrees,
is distant from Cape Saint Augustine 740. leagues, and from thence to the Port
Saint Iuliano, having in South Latitude about 50. degrees, whereas one Doughtie
was executed for conspiracy, and this Port is distant from Rio de Platta 380.
leagues. And from thence he sailed to the Cape Virgin Maria, which having in
South Latitude 52. degrees 30^ is distant from Port S. Julian 50. leagues, and
from thence streeking in betwixt the I Will, whose Northeast Cape is called the
I Will of the name of Jesus, and the Port Famine, he entered into the straight
Magellane, which having in South Latitude 53. degrees 30^ is distant from the
Cape Virgin Maria 50. leagues, and from thence he passed through the Magellane
straights to the Cape de Sancto spirito, which is a Cape of the South land,
having in South Latitude 52. degrees 20^ and is distant from Cape Virgin Maria
about 150. leagues, from thence he sailed somewhat Westernly about 20. leagues,
and there fetching a turn about certain Islands called Las Anegadas, he took
his course Northward along the West coast of America unto ye I Will Lima, which
having in South Latitude 12. degrees, is distant from the Islands called Las
anegadas 800. leagues, and from thence he sailed still Northward unto Cape
Guija, which having in South Latitude 1. degree 30^ is distant from the I Will
Lima 160. leagues, from thence still Northward he sailed to Cape S. Francesco,
which having in North Latitude 1. degree 30. minutes, is distant from Cape
Guija 140. leagues, from thence he sailed still Northernly to the Cape
Mondecino, which is in the land called Quiuira, and this Cape having in North
Latitude 40. degrees is distant by that course from S. Francesco 1740. leagues,
from thence he sailed still Northward unto a certain Bay in the West part of
Quiuira, which he named Noua Albion (that is to say) new England having in
North Latitude 46. degrees. And this was the furthest part of his voyage
outward, in which voyage he sailed in all 6050. leagues, and from this Bay Sir
Frances himself (as I have heard) was of very good will to have sailed still
more Northward, hoping to find passage through the narrow sea Anian, which sea
is not set down by Master Molineux in his Terrestrial Globe as a straight,
but rather as a maine Sea, bearing in breadth 400. leagues, and so from thence
to have taken his course Northeast, and so to return by the Isles Crocklande
and Groynlande into England, but his Mariners finding the coast of Noua Albion
to be very cold, had no good will to sail any further Northward, wherefore Sir
Frances was feign to come back again Southward to Mondecino, which (as has
been said before) is distant from the foresaid Bay of Noua Albion 140.
leagues. From thence he sailed in a manner right Southeast to the Isles Moluccas
and touched at the Isles Terenate, Tidori, Machian, and Motill, which are nigh
unto the I Will Gilolo, which is right under the Equinoctial, amongst which Isles
he remained a certain time, of which Islands the I Will called Terenate having
about one degree of North Latitude, is distant by that course from the Cape
Mondecino 1180. leagues, and from thence he sailed Southwest until he came to
the West end of the I Will Iaua mayor, which having in South Latitude nine degrees
30. minutes, is distant from the I Will Terenate by that course 530. leagues, and
from thence he sailed still Southwest to the Cape di Buona Speranza, which
having in South Latitude 35. degrees, is distant from Iaua mayor 1630. leagues,
then from Capo di Buona Speranza he making his course Northwest, sailed to an
Island called Serra Liona, which is upon the coast of Afrique, and having in
North Latitude 7 degr. 30^ is distant from Capo di Buona Speranza 1090.
leagues, then from thence he sailed toward the Isles of Capo verde until he
came to the 12. degree of North Latitude right under the first Meridian, which
point is distant from the Island Serra Liona according to that course 300.
leagues, and from thence he sailed Northward nigh to the Isles called Azores on
the West side thereof, which having of North Latitude 40. degr. are distant by
that course from ye Isles of Capo verde 600. leagues from whence he directed his
course Northeast to Plymouth, which having in North Latitude 51. degr. is
distant by that course from the Azores 490. leagues, so as in his return from
Noua Albion to Plymouth he sailed in all 5960. leagues, which if you add to
the number of leagues of his outward voyage before set down, which is 6050.
leagues, you shall find the total sum of the leagues to be 12010. leagues,
which is almost twice so much as the compass of the whole world, which if you
measure upon the Globe by the Equinoctial line containing 360. degrees, and
do allow for every degree thereof 60. Italian miles, you shall find the
number of such miles to amount to 21600. miles, which by allowing three miles
to a league do make no more but 7200. leagues. But if it might please Sir
Frances to write a perfect Diarie of his whole voyage, showing home much he
sailed in a day, and what watring places he found, and where he touched, and
how long he rested in any place, and what good Ports and Havens he found, and
what anchorage good or badde, and what manner of people, what trade of living,
and what kind of building and government they used, in what air they lived,
and whether the ground were fertile or barren, dry or well watered with floods
and fountains, what mountains, what mines, what woods or forests, what
beasts, fowls, or fishes, fruits, herbs, plants, or other commodities he
found therein, and in what manner of seas he sailed, and what winds and
currents were most rife in every place: Also what rocks, sands, sholdes, and
all other places of danger and peril, and by what marks such places are to
be shunned. And finally what Moon does make a full sea in every Port where he
arrived, and what winds do alter any tide or Current, and all other necessary
accidents most meet for sea men to know. In thus doing the said Sir Frances
I say should greatly profit his country men, and thereby deserve immortal
fame, of all which things, I doubt not but that he has already written, and
will publish the same when he shall think most meet.

The voyage of M. Candish unto the West and East Indies, described on the
Terrestrial Globe by the blew line.
THis blew line as you see takes his beginning from Plymouth like as the red
line does, whereby you may plainly see, that M. Candish did not greatly differ
in his course from that which Sir Frances held, saving that Master Candish
having once passed the straight Magellane Westward, sailed not so far
Northward as Sir Frances did, for he sailed no further Northwarde but to the
Port Saint Lucas, which is almost under the Tropique of Cancer, for that Port
has in North Latitude 22. degrees 30^ keeping always a nigher course unto the
maine, then Sir Frances did, and from the Port S. Lucas he sailed in a manner
Southeast about 320. leagues, and then he directed his course Eastward toward
the Moluccas, and before he came to the Moluccas, he fetched about the I Will
Catana^^, which is more Northward then Sir Frances went in those parts, and
from thence he sailed full South to the Moluccas, from whence he directed his
course Southwest, and passed betwixt the Isles Iaua mayor and Iaua minor, which
two Isles in the said great Globe are made to have one self Latitude (that is
to say about 10. degr. of South Latitude, counting from the Equinoctial to the
Parallel which passes through both the Isles. But in all other Globes and Maps
Iaua minor stands 10. degrees more to the South, and is placed behind the
South promontorie called the land of Beach. Then having passed betwixt the
foresaid two Isles, he held in a manner the like course that Sir Frances did in
his return to Plymouth, which the blew line does show so plainly as it
needs none other description. Now as touching Sir Martin Furboshers voyage,
because his own description thereof is in print, nothing is set down in this
Globe, but only the outermost end of his voyage named here Furbushers
straights, having in North Latitude about 63. degrees, in the mouth of which
straights is a little Island called Hales Island on the right hand, and on the
left hand another little long Island called Lecesters point. Truly this knight
for his valourous venture, as well in this voyage as in diverse other his worthy
services done upon the sea deserves great commendation, and I wish with all my
heart that he and such like might be much made of, and rewarded according to
their desert. And thus I leave to speak any further of M. Molineux his Globes,
the use whereof is to be learned by those Propositions which I have heretofore
set down, showing the use of Mercator his two Globes, for the practice and
manner of working both by his Globes and by these Globes is all one.

A plain and full description of Petrus Plancius his universal Map, serving
both for sea and land, and by him lately put forth in the year of our Lord,
1592. In which Map are set down many more places, as well of both the Indies
as of Afrique, together with their true Longitudes and Latitudes then are to be
found either in Mercator his Map, or in any other modern Map whatsoever, and
this Map does show what riches, power or commodities, as what kinds of
beasts both wild and tame, what plants, fruits, or mines any Region has, and
what kinds of marchandizes do come from every Region. Also the diverse
qualities and manners of the people, and to whom they are subject. Also who be
the most Mighty and greatest Princes of the world: A Map meet to adorn the
house of any Gentleman or Merchant that delights in Geographie, and therewith
this Book is also meet to be bought, for that it plainly expounds every
thing contained in the said Map, Written in our mother tongue by M.
Blundeuill Anno Domini. 1594.

Imprinted at London by John Windet.

IN DOCTISSIMI VEREQVE GENEROSISSIMI THO. BLVNDEVILI, IN PETRI PLANCII TABVLAM
GEOGRAPHICAM ET HYDROGRAPHICAM ELVcidationes, Gualteri Hawghi (...).
PLancius in tabula terras descripsit and vndas,
Quaecunque and toto condidit orb Deus:
Multiplices horum parts, Regumque per illas
Sceptra superba, simul totius orbis opes.
Sed solis Gallis haec Plancius, atque Latinis
Inter and hos, Doctis scripserat, haud alijs,
Tu Generose tuis patrio haec Idiomate clare
Blundeuile refers, Cunctaque nota facis.
Tu simul haec auges, lucemque hijs addis, and horum
Vsum, multiplici non sine fruge doces.
Nec solum doctis, sed and omnibus haec Idiotis
Perspicua vt pateant, tu breuitate facis.
Plancius haec alijs, tu nobis omnia tradis,
Tuque tuis Anglis Plancius alter eris.
A plain and full description of Plancius his universal Map, set forth in
the year of our Lord, 1592. written in our mother tongue by M. Blundeuill.
IN this Map, as you see are drawn with read ink two lines or Diameters
crossing one an other with right Angles in the very midst of the Map,
whereof the perpendicular Diameter passing through the Isles Azores, and also
through the Isles of Capo verde, signifies the first Meridian and Axletree of
the world, at the upper end whereof is set the North pole, and at the nether
end the South pole. And the other overthwart Diameter signifies the
Equinoctial, and also the line of East and West, that is to say, East on the
right hand, and West on the left hand. And in this line are set down the
degrees of Longitude, which are to be counted from the foresaid first Meridian
upon the said Equinoctial toward your right hand from one degree to 180.
set down in Arithmeticall figures thus, 10. 20. 30. and so forth until you
come to 180. which is the East Longitude of the world, and the West Longitude
begins on your left hand whereas is set down 190. and then 200. and so
forth until you come to 360. degrees, which is the whole circuit of the
Equinoctial, and of the whole earth. And in the first Meridian are set down
the degrees of Latitude, which do proceed from the Equinoctial to either of
the Poles from one degree to 90. written in Arithmeticall figures thus, 5. 10.
15. and so forth to 90. which degrees do proceed with equal distances from
the Equinoctial to either Pole, and the like degrees of Latitude are also set
down upon the two outermost Meridians, as well on the right hand as on the
left. And on each side of the Equinoctial are drawn with read ink the two
Tropiques, that is to say, the Tropique of Cancer, and the Tropique of
Capricorn, each one being distant from the Equinoctial 23. degrees 28^ which
is the greatest declination of the sun, and toward each Pole are also drawn
with read ink the two Circles both Arctique and Antarctique, whereof the
circle Arctique passes through the Northernly part of Island, having in
Latitude 66. degrees 30^ and the Circle Antarctique passes through the like
degrees of Latitude toward the South pole, and the distance of each of those
Circles from either Pole is equal to the greatest declination of the sun.
And these four Circles are Parallels to the Equinoctial, bounding the 5. Zones
that is, the two cold, the two temperate, and the hot Zone which lies in the
midst of the world betwixt the two Tropiques. And on the left hand or West part
of the Map are set down from the Equinoctial upward toward the North pole,
what number of miles and secondes of miles do belong to every degree of the
North Latitude, proceeding from the Equinoctial toward the North pole: for
though that every degree of the Equinoctial being a great Circle contains
60. miles, yet the further that you go from the Equinoctial toward either of
the Poles, the lesser and lesser are your Parallel Circles in compass, and
therefore one degree of every such Parallel must needs contain the fewer
miles, but because the sea men do commonly make their account on the sea by
leagues, and not by miles: Plancius here right under the former Table of miles,
sets down the number of leagues incident to every degree or Parallel, in
descending from the Equinoctial to the South pole, appointing three miles to a
league, and therefore he sets down upon the very Equinoctial 20. leagues,
which is 60. miles, and next to that he sets down 19. leagues 59^ and so
proceeds forth diminishing still the quantity of the leagues, even till you
come to the very South pole, and on the right hand of the Map hard by the
outmost Meridian are set down the nine Climes, and the longest day in every
degree of Latitude, proceeding as well from the Equinoctial to the North pole,
as also from the Equinoctall to the South pole, from 12. hours to 187. days
and 7. hours, which makes the longest day to those that dwell right under the
North Pole to be half a year and the night as much. Besides the Circles and
lines before mentioned, there are set down in this Map certain flies of the
Mariners Compass, each one containing two and thirty lines, which do
signify the two and thirty rombes or winds of the Mariners Compass to know
thereby how one place bears from another, and by what wind the Mariner has
to sail to any place whereunto he would go: In every which fly the line of
North and South may serve in stead of a Meridian, and the line of East and West
may serve as a Parallel, by help whereof you may the more readily take with
your Compasses the Longitude and Latitude of any place contained in the Map
in such manner as is taught in my first Treatise of Universal Mappes. Also in
the very front of his Map he sets down the numbers of four and twenty
hours, every hour containing fifteen degrees of the Equinoctial, which
hours do begin on the right hand, and so proceed to the left, whereof the
twelfth hour is placed at the end of that Meridian which passes through the
Fortunate Isles. Now betwixt the 72. and 86. degrees of North Latitude he
sets down two long Islands extending from the West toward the East
somewhat beyond the first Meridian, and from the said Meridian more Eastwarde
he sets down other two long Islands, affirming that the North Ocean sea
breaking in betwixt these Islands with nineteen gates or entrances, makes
four straites and is continually carried under the North Pole, and there is
swallowed up into the bowels of the earth, and he says further that right
under the North pole there is a certain black and most high rock which has
in circuit thirty and three leagues, which is ninety and nine miles, and that
the long Island next to the Pole on the West is the best and most healthful of
all the North parts. Next to the foresaid Islands more Southward he sets
down the Islands of Crockland and Groynelande making them to have a far
longer and more slender shape then all other mappes do: At the East end of
the third long Island, is a strait having five gates or entrances, which by
reason of their narrowness and swift course of stream are never frozen, if
this be true, I marvel how any ship durst enter through any of those
straites to discover the North sides of any of those Islands, and how and where
it came out again. Moreover at the East end of the last Island somewhat to
the Southwarde, he places the Pole of the Lodestone which is called in Latin
Magnes, even as Mercator does in his Map who supposing the first Meridian to
pass through Saint Marie or Saint Machaell, which are two of the outermost
Islands of the Azores Eastwarde, places the Pole of the stone in the seventy
five degree of Latitude, but supposing the first Meridian to pass through the
I Will Coruo, which is the furthest I Will of the Azores Westwarde, he places the
Pole of the Lodestone in the seventy seven degree of Latitude, I thought good
to sever the Islands last before mentioned from the body of the Map as parts
belonging rather to the North pole, then to Europe, Asia, Africa, or America:
for if Virgill did not let to say that England was Penitus exclusa ab orb,
me thinks that I may much more rightly say the like of these Islands,
notwithstanding Plancius makes the first two long Islands, and also
Groynelande and Crockelande to be part of Mexicana, which me thinks is not
meet, sith they be divided by the North Sea, likewise he makes the land
which is under the South pole, and is not as yet discovered, to be part of
Magellanica, which (in mine opinion) ought not to be so, since it is not only
divided from Magellanica, by the straight Magellanicum, but also from Afrique,
and from the East Indies by the great Southern Ocean, and I believe that when
the South land shall be all discovered, it will contain twice so much land
as Magellanica does, and then I doubt not but that the Geographers will give it
some other name, and make many divisions thereof: In the mean time I will
follow Plancius his own division of the world, which greatly differs from
that of Mercator, and of all other modern Geographers, for they do divide the
whole earth but into four parts, that is to say, Europe, Afrique, Asia, and
America, but Plancius by dividing America into three parts that is, into
Mexicana, Peruana and Magellanica, deuideth the whole earth into six parts,
that is to say, Europe, Asia, Afrique, and into the three parts of America
last mentioned, according to which division, he describes the earth in the
french tongue in sixteen pages, set down at the foot of his Map, the four
last pages whereof do only contain the interpretation of the seventy one
little Tables or Inscriptions written in the Latin tongue, dispersed
throughout the whole Map, expressing therein such things as he thought most
meet to be noted in diverse parts of the world, all which Tables or
inscriptions, I have here also set down in our mother tongue: And although
that to the foresaid Tables or Inscriptions Plancius has attributed certain
numbers for the more easy finding out of the said inscriptions, yet not easy
enough by reason that one self number is set down in diverse Tables, and
therefore to the intent that you might the more readily find out every Table
that is proper to the matter whereof it makes mention, I have here following
joined to the number of every such Table, his proper Longitude and Latitude,
which with your Compass you may quickly find out, and more certainly, then
by his numbers, if you remember the order thereof set down in my Treatise of
universal Mappes. But now I will declare the contents of the foresaid
sixteen pages in order as follows.

The title of the first page is thus.
A brief declaration of the division, form or shape, and of the
particularities of the world.
The Contents of the first page.
THat the earth and the water do make both together one round body, which
the Cosmographers do inuiron with five Circles, that is the Equinoctial, the
two Tropiques, and the two Polar Circles, and thereby do divide the world
into five Zones, two cold, two temperate, and one extreme hot: and though
that the ancient Geographers do affirm that three of those Zones were
uninhabitable, the one for extremity of heat, and the other two for extremity
of cold, yet within these hundred years last past it is known by good
experience that those three Zones are well inhabited as the manifold Countries
therein placed and greatly replenished with people of sundry languages do well
testify, of all which things I have written at large in my Sphere. And
therefore I make this page the shorter.

The Contents of the second Page.
TO know the true situation of the Provinces and places contained in this
Map, it is necessary first to know their Longitudes and Latitudes. The
degrees of Latitude or of the elevation of the Pole, which is all one thing,
are counted from the Equinoctial to either Pole, which is 90. degrees, and the
degrees of Longitude are counted upon the Equinoctial from the Isles of Capo
Verde toward the East, and so round about the earth until you come to the
number of 360. degrees. The Provinces and Towns that are situated under one
degree of Longitude, have at one self time like hours of the day, but those
that are situate under diverse degrees of Longitude, do differ in number of
hours, for when it is in one Town noonetide, it is in an other Town that is
distant from thence toward the East 30. degrees two of the clock in the
afternoon, and so consequently for every 15. degree of distance they differ
one hour. Likewise they that dwell under one self degree of Latitude have
equal quantity of days and nights, but yet so as they which dwell on the
South side of the Equinoctial have the shortest day when we have the longest,
and have Winter when we have Summer. But those that are situate under diverse
degrees of Latitude, have inequality of days and nights, for the nigher that
any place is situate toward any of the Poles the more hours the longest day
of the year in that place contains. But those that dwell right under the
Equinoctial have always their days and nights of like quantity, and I
understand here by the day, the space betwixt the sun rise and the sun
set, and you shall find the quantity of the longest day of the year in every
degree of Latitude set down in the Northeast part of this Card. As for
example to those that have 30 degrees of latitude, the longest day is 13.
hours 57^ and so the nigher that you go to the Pole the longer is the day, in
so much as to those that dwell right under the Pole, the year is but a day and
a night, that is to say, they have 6. months day, and 6. months night.
Moreover the Geographers do divide the earth into 9. climes for to distinguish
thereby the provinces and regions by the quantity of the longest day, the
middlemost parallel of every clime increasing by half an hour, and you have
to consider that the degrees of latitude are in all places of like bigness every
degree containing 15. Almain leagues, or 60. Italian miles, but the degrees of
longitude proceeding from the Equinoctial toward any of the 2. Poles are
unequal, that is to say, every one containing fewer leagues or miles than
other, but the degrees of the Equinoctial it self are equal to the degrees
of latitude, every one containing 15. German leagues or 60. Italian miles,
as you may plainly see in the Table set down in the Northwest part of this
Map. And you have to note that one Almaine league does contain 4. Italian
miles, and we have described the degrees of longitude in the Southwest part of
this Card by the hours of the ships way, every one decreasing less than
other from the Equinoctial to the Pole, whereby you may conceive that two
ships being right under the Equinoctial 150. degrees distant one from another,
and are to sail with like gate toward the North pole: when they shall come to
the 60. degree of latitude, their distance shall be no more but 75. leagues.
And the further they go toward the Pole the less distant they shall be one
from another, in so much as when they be right under the Pole it self, they
shall both meet, as you may see in the 2. round figures containing the
description of the earth, and set down in the 2. nether corners of the Map.
This matter is to be considered of the Mariners that they may thereby the
better perceive the imperfections of their sea Cards. Moreover, in the second
page Plancius sets down the division of the earth as well according to the
ancient as modern Geographers, making first three general continents or firm
lands, whereof the first is so much as was known to Ptolomey and to the
ancient Astronomers, as Enrope, Afrique, and Asia, the second conti^ent is
called America, and the third continent is the South part of the world, not yet
fully discovered, called of Plancius Magellanica, and he divides the second
continent called America into three parts, that is, Mexicana, Pervana, and
Magellanica, and by adding those three parts to Europe, Afrique, and Asia, he
divides the earth into six parts, and first he sets down the description
of Europe together with her bounds or limittes, and then the commodities
thereof, as follows.

Of Europe.
EVrope is far less than all the rest, and yet exceeds all others in
nobleness, in magnificencie, in multitude of people, in might, puissance, and
renown, the which in times past has commanded both Asia and Afrique as
Queen, by reason of the Monarchies of the Greeks and of the Romans, and at
this day is of great force by the power of the Turks and Muscouites. Moreover
it commands many provinces in Mexicana and Pervana by the power of the
Spaniards and Portugals, and of other Christian Princes.

Europe is severed from Asia and Afrique by the sea Mediterraneun^, and by the
sea called Marmagior, and by the Marish or sea called Palus Meotis, and by the
Flood Tanais and Dwina. The chiefest provinces of Europe are these, Almanie,
Italy France, Spain, Denmark, Norway, Swethland, Muscouia, Polonia, Hungaria,
Sclavonia, and Greece. The chiefest Islands of Europe are these, England with
Scotland, Ireland, Sardinia, Corsica, Sicilia, Candia, Nigro Ponte sometime
called Euboia, and Stalimene sometime called Lemnos. And in this second page
he sets down also the description of Almanie thus.

Almanie is reputed to be the greatest province in all Europe, and is situated
in the midst thereof, which is bounded on the East with Polonia and Hungaria,
on the South with Dalmacia, and Italia, and on the West with France, and on the
North with the North Sea, and with the Sea called Mare Balticum. The
inhabitants of this Country warre^ in old time with the Romans for their
liberty, and since many hundred years past it has holden the imperial
Scepter. About the time of Christ his birth, it was a rude country, as
Cornelius Tacitus says, full of Wood, bushes, and marshes, but at this day it
is so adorned with great magnificent Towns and well fortified, and is
furnished with such a number of Castles, and Villages, and with such a number
of people, and with such pollitique government, as it is to be compared to
any province whatsoever in all the world. The soil thereof is very fruitful
both for corn and Wine, and has many nauigable Floods stored with plenty of
Fish. It has most excellent Fountains, and hot bathes, great mines of
Gold, of Silver, copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron. The inhabitants do exercise
as well now as they have done in times past the Art military, and it has
many learned men very skilful in all sciences, and in Mechanical arts, they
were the inuenters of Artillery, of Gunpowder, and of the noble Art of
printing, and of making artificial dials and horologies.

The chief merchandises that are transported out of Almanie into other
countries are these, Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, vitrioll, Alum,
Quickesiluer, Colors of diverse sorts, Slates to cover houses, Wheat, Wine,
Fish, woollen cloth, Linen cloth, Bombasine, Fustian, Suile, Armor, all
sorts of works made of Iron, or brass, and other merceries.

The Contents of the third page.
IN the third Page he describes the 17. Provinces of the low Countries,
also Italy, France, Spain and Denmark, as follows.

THe 17. Provinces of the low Countries are counted a part of Almanie, by
reason that the most part of the inhabitants have as well their original as
their language from the Almanes. But those of Artoys, of Henough Namures, and
part of the inhabitants of Brabant, Flaunders, Lymburgh, and Liezenburgh do
speak the French tongue. These provinces are situated partly within the
ancient limits of Almany, that is to say, beyond the Oriental part of the
Flood Rhenus, and partly in Gallia Belgica, as also are the provinces of the 4.
princes electors and of many other provinces of the Empire. In these provinces
are many nauigable Floods and rich in fish, namely the Rheane, Mosella, Mosa,
and the Escaut, and there is great abundance of all sorts of corn and cattle
meet for man's use, there is also a number of great Towns rich, mighty, and
well peoplished, also of fortresses well fortified, fair Villages, but
chiefly of brave and commodious ports and havens, and an incredible number of
ships, and the continual wars that they have had and have at this day do
witness to all the world their great force, might, and riches. The
inhabitants in time of the Roman Monarchy were and also are at this present
greatly renowned for their skill in the art military, and besides that, they
are most excellent and industrious in all sciences and mechanical arts, and
they have a great number of Mariners and Pilots well practiced in the art of
Navigations, and to these provinces is attributed the invention of the Mariners
Compass, according to the opinion of many learned men, which truly is one of
the noblest inventions that ever was found out since the world began. In the
town of Brughesse was invented the Art of Painting with Colors tempered
with Oil.

The Provinces of Belgia do send unto other Provinces all sorts of Clothes
made of Woolle and Flax, linen cloth of Cambria, Skarlettes interlaced with
gold, Silver, and Silk, Taffatas, Borattas, Grograines, single Buffin, Says
of Leyden, and Howscot, Worsteds, and half Worsteds, Fustianapes of Vellures,
and of Wool, Bays, silk, parchment lace, Sarcenet and inkle, all manner of
twisted thread silk ready dressed, purified Sugar, Buffe, Shamoyes, stryped
Marokines, painted Pictures, Books, Armor, Cables, Ropes, and other Munitions
belonging to Ships, Knives, Pinnes, and all sorts of Mercerie or Haberdash
ware, and Fish dried and salted.

Italy being the mother of eloquence and of al Latin erudition does extend
it self like an arm toward the Southeast, lying betwixt the Tuscane sea and
the gulf of Venice, and is bounded on the west part with France, and on the
north part with Almany being separated from the said two provinces by the Flood
Varo and the Alps, and all the rest is environed with the sea, at the time of
the nativity of Christ and since, she most flourished, being adorned with the
fourth Monarchy, and with the most mighty town of Rome, which at that time
was Queen of many provinces, of Europe, Asia, and Afrique, which city in the
time of the Emperor Vespasian, had in circuit 13. Italian miles and 200.
paces, as Pliny writes in his third book and fifth chapter, Flauius Vopiscus
recites that this town was enlarged by the Emperor Aurelius to 30. Italian
miles, which is 10. hours of way or gate, allowing three mile for an hour.
This Province has brought forth, as it does at this present, inhabitants of
great industry and wit, and it contains many noble cities and of great
renown, as Rome, which has been sometime the head of the world, Venice the
rich, Rauenna the ancient, Naples the gentle, Florence the beautiful, Genua
the proud, and Milaine the great. In a town called Amalphe situate upon the
sea, betwixt Naples and Salerno, the Mariners Compass was invented, in the
year 1300. according to the opinion of some, by one John Goia, citizen of the
same town: notwithstanding John Gorop Becanus does attribute that invention to
Flaunders which seems the more likely, for so much as all the Pilats and
Mariners of France and Spain and other places do name the 32. winds or rombes
of the Compass by the Belgicke names. The chief marchandizes that are sent
out of Italy into other countries are these, Rice, Silk, Velvet, Satin,
Taffatas, fine pieces of Linen, Grograines, Rash, Stamin, Bombasins, Fustians,
Feltes to make riding cloakes, plenty of rich armor, Wiar of gold and
silver, Alum, Galls, drinking glasses and looking glasses of Venice.

FRance has been always esteemed to be the chiefest realm of all Europe,
whose soil is most fertile, and brings forth all kind of Grain, and every
other thing that is necessary for man's sustenance, there is great store of
wine, and great plenty thereof is distributed to other Provinces nigh
adjoining. The Province does abound in oil Olive, and in Corrall, and in
many other noble fruits. In France are many great towns well walled, as
Paris, Roan, Amiens, Orliens, Tours, Nantes, Poicters, Burghes, Tholous, Lion,
Na^bona, and Marcelles. It has 15. Archbishoprickes, and 108. Bishoprics,
and a great number of towns and villages, and 132000 parishes, it is greatly
peopled, and has not such deserts or heathes as are in other provinces of
Europe, the French men have been, and are at this present renowned in the Art
militare, and there be many learned men in all faculties and sciences.

The chief Merchandises that are carried out of France into other provinces are
these, Wheat, Rye, Beefs, Hogs Swine, and other cattle, Salt, wines, wild
Olive, Chessnuts, Almonds, Prunes, Corrall, Diers wadde, Clothes, linen,
Canuas and Skins.

Spain is environed round about with the Sea, saving that on one side it is
separated from France by the mountains Perenei. This country was sometime
divided into three Provinces or kingdoms, that is, Taraconensis, Lusitania and
Betica, but now it is subdivided into many Realms, that is to say, Castilia,
Aragon, Portugal, Gallicea, Lion, Navarra, Toledo, Valentia, Murcia, Granado,
Cordoa, and Algarbia, the which Realms if they had been reduced to one body
of a Realm, as France is, and as they be at this hour subject to one only
king and Lord, it should be without doubt one of the most mighty and puissant
kingdoms of Europe. The inhabitants of Spain have been and are at this
present much renowned in the art militare, and in feats of war, and it has
brought forth in times past many great Clearkes, as Seneca, Quintilian, Lucan
and Martial, and in our time it had Johannes Lodovicus Viues, Johannes Osorius,
and Benedictus Arias Montanus. The provinces of Spain are become very rich
and mighty, by reason of their nauigatio^ into America, Africa, Arabia,
Persia, India, the Isles Moluecas and China, in which Provinces ( China
excepted) the king of Spain possesses many countries that be rich and of
great power, and many towns and fortresses in a manner round about the earth.

The chief Merchandises that grow in Spain, and are carried into other
Countries are these, wines, Oils, Rice, all sorts of fruits of Spain,
Liquoras, Silk, great quantity of wolle, Lamb skins, Cork, Rosin, Steel,
Iron and Armor.

Denmark and Norway are very great Regions, and are as large as the countries
of Almany, bordering upon Almany toward the South, they extend toward the
North to 71. degree 30^ of North latitude, and toward the East they border
upon Swethland, and on the west and North side they are environed with the sea.
These two Realms are at this day under the government of one only king, who
also is lord of Island and of the Isles of Fero, Hitland, and Gothland. Iuthland
was sometime the habitation of the Cimbres, who in times past made cruel
wars against the Romans.

The Merchandises sent from the two forsaid realms into other provinces are
these, Oxen, Barley, Malt, stockfish, tallowe, nuttes and Filberds, hydes of
Oxen, and Bucke skins, Mastes for ships, planckes, and the tops of
Wainscot, Soliues, and firewood to burn, pitch and tar, Sulphur and such other
things.

The Contents of the 4. page, wherein he describes Swethland. Polonia,
Hungaria, Sclauonia, Greece, England, and Scotland as follows.
SWethland is a great and mighty realm, bordering toward the East upon
Russia, and toward the South upon the East sea, called Mare Balticum,
dividing Swethland from Almany and Pomerania, and toward the west upon Norway
and Denmark, and toward the North upon Finmarke. Stockholme is the
Metropolitan city in this realm, wherein the king keeps his court. From
this realm is transported into other provinces these Merchandises, that is to
say, Copper, Iron, lead costly Furs, hydes or skins of Elkes, of Oxen, of
Buckes, of goats, tallow, tar, barley, malt, nuts and Filbirds, and such like.

The description of Muscouia which should follow next, is set down in the
third table or inscription, which stands in the very front of the table,
written in Latin, the interpretation whereof hereafter follows in his place.

THe kingdom of Polonia contains Lituania, Podolia, the lesser Russia,
Volhinia, Massouia, Samogitia, Prussia, and in a manner all Liuonia, which two
last Provinces did belong not long since to Almania. Polonia is bounded on the
East with Muscouia and with the Tartaries, Perocopsiques, and on the South with
Moldania, and Hungaria and toward the West with Almania, and toward the North
with the sea Baltique and Muscouia.

The chief merchandises that go out of this realm into other Provinces are
these, Wheat, Rye, and other grain, Spruse or Danske Bear, yellow Amber,
Wax honey, a certain drink made of Honey which we call Meade, hydes of Oxen
dried and salted, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, and Tar, Ashes, Clauellees, wood
Mazier, and of Cuvelier, and other such like merchandises.

HVngarie is a very fruitful Realm, rich and mighty, and it is bounded on
the East with Moldauia, and Valachia, and on the South with Bosnia and Croacia,
and on the West with Almania, and on the North with Polonia, it has many
nauigable rivers, wherein are great store of fish, that is to say, Danubius,
Dravus, Savus, and Tibistus. The chief towns are these, Buda, Gran,
Weissenburgh, Rab, Prezburgh, Agria, Colocza, and Belgrada. The inhabitants of
this country are warlike and hardy, and have been long time heretofore a most
faithful Rampyre and Bulwark to all Christendom, but in the end by reason of
their civil wars, the better part of them have been subdued in our time, and
are made most miserable slaves to the Turk.

The Merchandises which go out of Hungary into other Provinces are these,
Gold, Silver, Copper, and diverse sorts of Colors, Salt, Wine, Wheat, Beefs,
and fresh fish of the river salted.

SClauonie is bounded on the East with Bulgaria, and Greece, and on the South
side with the Gulf of Venice, and on the West, with the North part of Italy,
and on the North side with Almanie and Hungary. This Region contains many
particular Provinces as Liburnia, Croacia Bosnia, and Balmatia, the chief
towns whereof are these, Raguza, Salona, Sabenica, and Zara. Sclauonie at this
time is divided into many jurisdictions, for one great part thereof is subject
to the Turk, another part to the Emperor of Almany, and the rest situated
upon the sea coast is subject to the Seniorie of Venice. At this day there is
no tongue (the Arabie tongue excepted) that extends further than the
Sclauonie tongue, for as it is the Vulgar tongue of Sclauonie, so is it
familiar to them of Histria, Bohemia, Morauia, Sileucia, Polonia, and to the
large Provinces of the great Duke of Muscouia, Circassia, Perihoka, Georgiana,
Mengrelia, Moldauia, Valachia, Bulgaria, Russia, Seruia, Albania, and to part
of Hungary, that is also familiar in the Court of the great Turk, and among
his soldiers that serve in Asia and Afrique.

GReece sometime the mother of all science and erudition, is on the East, South
and West side environed with the sea, but on the North side it is bounded with
Seruia and Bulgaria, it has in times past valiantly fought with and beaten the
Monarchy of Persia for the liberty of their country, and finally by
Alexander the great has triumphed over the same, and thereby erected the third
Monarchy, by means whereof it came to pass that the Greek tongue was made
common throughout Asia, Syria, and Egypt, until such time as the Saracens and
the great Turk did corrupt and change the same. The Emperors did rule in
Greece from the time of Constantine the great unto the year 1542. in which
year Mahomet the great Turk forced the town of Constantinople, and abolished
the Empire of Greece in such sort, as ever since this magnificent and strong
imperial town of the Christians, has been the seat of the Emperor of
Turkey, and all the country made slaves to the Mahometanes.

The chief merchandises that come from this country to other Provinces are
these, Gold, Silver, Copper, Vitrioll, diverse sorts of colors, wines, Oil,
Veluets, Damasks, Grograins, Turquesques and Wood.

ENgland together with Scotland making both but one Island is the greatest and
mightiest of all Europe. And England is environed on all sides with the sea,
saving on the North side, which bordereth upon Scotland. The air according to
the situation is indifferent temperate, for though it be more Northward than
Flaunders, yet it is not subject to such hard frostes and cold winters. The
soil is very fruitful, bringing forth great plenty of wheat and of other
corn, it has great plenty of fruit trees, and there be many large and fair
woods, sweet fountains, floods and rivers full of fish, and a number of good
havens, also it has many rich Mines, as of Gold, Silver, Lead, Iron, and
chiefly of fine Tin, wherefore it may be worthily counted amongst the most
puissant and richest Islands of the world. This Island nourishes also a great
number of cattle meet for man's use, and chiefly of sheep, which yields fine
and good wool, in which partly consists the profit and riches of the
country, in such sort, as the golden Fleece ought to have been sought for in
this Island, and not at Cholcos. The inhabitants most commonly are tall of
stature, beautiful and white of visage, courageous and meet for the war,
also they are ingenious and studious in the Art of navigations, in so much as
in these days they have traffic into very far countries, as into Greece,
Natolia, Syria, Egypt, Barbary, Muscouia, and into many other provinces.
London being situated upon the Thames is the Metropolitan and chief town of
this Realm, and the Staple of the trade of Merchandises, and the Court
royal, but Cambridge and Oxford are Universities.

The Merchandises sent from England into other provinces are these, broad
Clothes, Carsies, Stamines, Bays, Says, Saffron, Tin, Lead, Wheat, Barley,
Malte, Bear, red Hearing, sea Cole and wood.

SCotland is the North part of this Island, and is likewise environed round about
with the sea, saving on that side with which it bordereth upon England. This
Country is not so fruitful as England, notwithstanding it is sufficiently
provided of all things that is needful for man's nutriment, it is watered with
diverse arms of the Sea, and is endued with many mountains full of grass,
which serves to feed their cattle. Edinburgh is the Metropolitan city of
this realm, wherein the keeps his court. The Scottishmen are good Soldiers,
which can endure scarsitie and the injuries of the air, and are very desirous
to win honor. The inhabitants of the South part thereof do speak the English
tongue: but those of the North, and those of the Isles Hebrides do use the
Irish tongue, and those of the Orcades do use the Norway tongue.

The Merchandises which Scotland sends to other countries are these, course
clothes, Karsies, Stamins, Freeses, Wool, Barlie, Malt, Fish, Hydes, leaden
Owre, and Smithes cole.

The contents of the fifth page.
IN this page he describes Ireland, the Isles Azores, Corsica, Sardinia,
Sicilia, Candia, nigro Ponte, Stalimene, all which Islands do belong to
Europe, and in the latter end of this page he begins to describe Asia.

IReland is nigh unto England and Scotland, and is very rich in meddow ground,
and has great plenty of cattle as well tame as wild, and fish as well of
the sea, as of fresh rivers, and great quantity of foul and birds, but it
has scarsitie of corn by reason of the great moistness of the air. This I Will
is free from all venomous beasts, the inhabitants are wild people, great and
strong, and swift in running, and by little and little they wax every day
tamer than other, under the government of the English men.

THe Isles of Azores are called of the Flemish Pilots and Mariners the Flemmish
Isles, because those of Burghes were the first that discovered those Islands, and
albeit that at this present the inhabitants thereof are Portugales, there is
yet a remnant of Flemmish families, as of the Bruines, of the Vltrickts and
others. These Isles are fruitful, and be 9. in number, that is to say, the I Will
of S. Marie, S. Michael, Tercera, Graciosa, S. George, Pico, Fayal, Flores, and
Coruo.

Tercera amongst all the rest is the strongest, and brings forth diers Wad.
The I Will of S. Michael brings forth Sugar, and great abundance of good Diers
Wad.

COrsica is situate in the sea Mediterraneum, and brings forth most
excellent wines, rough Horses, and great hunting dogs: and this I Will is
governed by the Genueses.

SArdinia is a very fruitful I Will, and chiefly of Wheat, which is transported
from thence into Italy and into Spain, likewise it has very good Wine, both
red and white, and very good Salt, it has also certain mines of silver, but
not of so profitable yield as in times past. The inhabitants are strong, and
able to endure great labor and travel. In great towns they speak the
Spanish tongue of Aragon, but in small towns they speak the vulgar tongue of
the I Will.

SIcilia has been always famous, and is called of Diodorus the Paragon of
Isles, also the Greeks and the Latins have greatly celebrated this I Will in
their writings. This Island has great abundance of Wheat and of al other
grain, also of wine, Sugar, wax, Honey, Saffron, Silk, and of all things else
appertaining to the use of man. Wherefore this I Will, together with Egypt was
sometime called the Grange of the Romans. In this Island is the hill Aetna,
which always burns, and in the sea of Sicill nigh unto Drepano, as Pliny
writes in his 32. book and second chapter, there grows very fair read
Coral, in shape like to such a tree or bush as is here figured, which while it
is under the water is green and tender, but so soon as it comes into the
air, it waxes hard like a stone, and is red, there is found thereof also nigh
unto the sea coast of Province, also in Italy nigh unto Monte Alto, and to
Naples, likewise in the red sea, and in the Gulf of Persia, and there be three
sorts of Corral, that is, red, black, and white.

CAndia sometime called Creta, was in old time enritched with the famous
Labyrinth, and with a hundred cities, it had also a great number of good ships
and expert Pilots, this I Will together with the others, as the I Will of Zante,
Cephalonia, Corfue, and diverse others, be at this present governed by the
Senate of Venice.

The Merchandises transported out of Candia into other provinces are these,
noble wines, as Malmsey, Muskadine, Corrants grain of Scarlet, Sugar,
Crystal of the mountain, Cotton, and Buckeskins.

NIgro Ponte, sometime called Euboia, is a very fruitful I Will in Wheat, Oil
and Wine.

STalimene sometime called Lemnos, is an I Will which has abundance of wheat,
and most excellent Wines. In this I Will they dig out in the month of August a
certain medicinable earth called of the Physicians Terra sigillata. There be
many other Isles besides these in Europe, as the Isles of Denmark, the Isles of
Zeland in Flanders, the I Will Frumentera, Iuica Maiorica and Minorica, and a
number of Isles that are in Sclauonie and Greece.

ASia is separated from Europe by the floods Tanais and Dwina and from Afrique
by the narrow part of land, which is nigh to Egypt, betwixt the Mediterrane
sea, and the red sea. Asia far exceeds in greatness both Europe, Afrique, and
Pervana, and also in riches, as in pearls of great price, and precious stones
and spyces it exceeds all the other countries of the world.

This region has been always renowned by the first and second Monarchy of
the world, obtained by the Syrians and the Persians, as also it is at this day
by the mighty Princes of China, and of Persia, and by the puissancie of the
Tartarians.

In this part of the world man was created of God, placed in Paradise, seduced
by Satan, and redeemed by our Savior Jesus Christ, and in this region, were
done in a manner all the histories and acts mentioned in the old Testament, and
a great part of those of the new Testament. The most celebrated provinces of
Asia are those that belong to the great Duke of Muscovia, also Tartaria and
China, the rich province of India, as Guzarette, Corasan, Sigistan, Chirmania,
Parthia, Persia, Media, Assyria, Armenia, Natolia Syria, and Arabia. The
principal Isles of Asia are these, Iapan, Luconia, Mindanao, Borneo, Sumatra,
Ceilan, and Cypres, for as for the Isles of Gilolo, Moluccas Banda and Celebes,
they belong to that part of the world which is called Magellanica.

The most mighty Potentates of Asia are these, the king of China, the king of
Persia, the great Turk, and the Emperor of Russia, otherwise called the great
Duke of Muscouia, according to which Seniories all Asia is divided into six
parts, that is to say, the Asiaticall provinces, belonging to the great Duke
of Muscouia 1. Tartaria 2. China 3. the Indies 4. the Provinces of the king of
Persia 5. and those of the great Turk 6. And as touching the Asiatical
Provinces of the Emperor of Russia, and of the provinces of Tartaria, we shall
make mention thereof hereafter, when we come to translate the Tables or
Inscriptions written in Latin, marked with the numbers 3. and 4.

The Contents of the 6. page, wherein he describes China, and the plant of
pepper there growing, with the shape thereof.
CHina or Sina is the third part of Asia, sometime called of Ptolomy Sinacum
regio, which on the East side is environed with the sea called of the ancient
Geographers Oceanns Sicicus, or the east Ocean, and on the West it is bounded
with the Indies and with Brumas, and on the North with Tartaria. This country
is for many causes esteemed to be the most ample, the richest and most mighty
Realm of all the world, for it extends from the 18. degree to the 55. degree
of North latitude, and it contains in longitude 450. leagues of Almanie, and
it is divided into 15. great provinces or Realms, that is, Quincii, otherwise
called Paquin, Xanton, Xiancii, Sancii, Suchuan, Honao, Nanquii, Chequiam,
Foquiem, Cantam, Quancii, Suinam, or Huinam, Quiecheu, Fuquam, or Hucquam, and
Quiancii. This Realm is adorned with many nauigable Floods, and full of Fish,
it is very fruitful, and brings forth great abundance of all kind of
grain and amongst the rest, of Rice, every year three or four times in a
year. It has goodly woods and forests, wherein do keep a number of wild
Boares, Foxes, Hares, Conies, Sables, and Martins. The monntaines are full of
grass, serving to feed infinite heardes or troops of Cattle, both great
and small. There be also many mines of precious stones, of Gold, silver,
Copper, Steel, and Iron, and a great number of pearls, but not very round,
and great abundance of silk. The towns there are very great, fortified, and
well peoplished, which is easily known by the greatness of Cantan, which is
one of the least Metropolitan cities of the Realm, and yet it contains in
circuit 12. Italian miles, and 350. Geometrical paces, which is more than
four hours journey, not reckoning the suburbs, which are very large and full
of people. The principal Metropolitan town where the King keeps his court,
is named Paquine, or Suntie, that is to say in their tongue, the celestial or
heavenly city, touching the greatness whereof, the Portugals and the
Castilians do write many incredible things, and according to the opinion of
many, that is the self same town which Marcus Paulus Venetus calls
Quinzay, as that which has diverse names in diverse languages. The like may be
said of a town in Flaunders, which the French men call Lile, the Fleminges
Russill, and in Latin it is called Insulae. In these provinces be many good
Ports and Havens upon the Sea, and a great number of ships: by reason
whereof the Inhabitants are moved to say, that amongst them, there are as
many that dwell in Ships upon the Sea, as be of them that dwell in houses
upon the land, and that their King might easily make a bridge to pass from
China to the town of Malaccha, which is distant from them 300. Almaine
leagues. But above all there is one thing worthy of great admiration, and that
is a wall which has in length 400. Spanish leagues, which the King of China
caused to be built, to defend the country against the invasion of the
Tartarians, of which thing if the ancient men had had any knowledge, they
would have counted this work amongst the seven woonders of the world. The
inhabitants are men of Spirit, and given to labor. There was also invented
by them such a kind of writing, that every man of what nation so ever he
were, being some what exercised therein might pronounce in his mother tongue,
even as it were ciphered: They invented also certain Charriots, wherein they
might sail by the Wind upon plain ground, as they do in ships upon the
sea. There are also men amongst them that are well learned in all Sciences and
especially in Architecture, wherein they excel all others, they are great
lovers of learning, and those that do excel others therein are promoted to
the most honorable estates: they have good municipall laws, and will suffer
no Stews, and they forbid that any man shall marry any woman with whom he
has lived before in adultery, and they greeuouslie punish all offenses, and
do forbid idleness as the mother of many evils, yea they constrain blind men to
get their living, by turning with their hands, milles made to grind corn, or
any other things, and in their wars against the Tartarians, they get the
victory more by fine policy and stratagems, and by multitude of people, than
by prowess or feats of Arms. The Portugals do report that the King brings
to the field 300/000. footmen, and 200/000. horsemen. Now as touching their
religion they be Paynims and superstitious Idolaters, saving that there are in
many places some Christians, as Marcus Paulus Venetus testifies.

The chiefest Merchandises transported out of China into other provinces are
these, Gold, precious stones, Pearls, Musk, Rubarbe, the medicinable root,
China, Purslane, abundance of silk, Sugar, Rice, and all sorts of grain. The
plant of Pepper is sown at the roots of other trees, but specially at the
root of that Indian tree, which is called Faufell, and at the root of the
Date tree, to the tops whereof it climeth up, much like as Iuie does upon a
tree, or like to that which is called in Latin Clematis in English Perwinkle,
which will wind about every herb that grows nigh it, the root is but
small, and his leaves thinlike unto Citron leaves, but somewhat less, and
sharp pointed, green and biting in the taste, the grains do grow nigh one
to another, like the long grape, and are always green until they be through
ripe and dry, there be two kinds thereof, that is, white and black, but the
plants of both are much like to our white and red Vines. Pepper grows in
places near the sea side of Malacha, and in the Isles of Sunda and Cuda,
situated nigh unto the I Will Iaua mayor, but the best kind of Pepper most
plentifully grows in the province of Malabar, betwixt the Cape Comori and the
cape Canonar, but long Pepper is found in the realm of Bengala, and is another
kind of plant, altogether unlike to this.

The Contents of the seventh page: wherein he first describes the red fig
tree of India, and sets down the shape thereof, then he describes the East
Indies, and last of all he shows the nature of the Elephant, whose shape he
sets down in the same page.
THe Indian fig tree grows round about Goa, the body thereof is high and
great, and extending his branches in a round form, which like yellow or
golden fillets do stoop down toward the earth, and so soon as it touches
the earth, it brings forth a new generation of trees, which differs
nothing at all from the mother but only in thickness, des Souches, and the
branches of those do bring forth new trees in like manner, in so much as the
mother with her offspring will in short time spread as much ground as
contains an Italian mile in circuit, the fruits are small Figs, and red as
blood, as well without as within.

India took his name from the Flood Indus, which bordereth toward the East
upon the Realm of China, and toward the South upon the great Ocean of India,
and toward the West upon the sea of Arabia, and also upon the Flood Indus,
and toward the North upon the sea Mare Euxinum, or Mar mayor, and upon Bramas.

This country is judged at this day, as it has been long since to be the
noblest and richest country in all the whole world, and it is divided by the
Flood Ganges into 2. parts, whereof the West part is called Indostan, or India
intra Gangem, and the East part is called India extra Gangem, and it contains
many provinces and Realms, as Cambaiar, Delli, Decan, Bisnagar, Malabar,
Narsingar, Orixa, Bengala, Sanga, Mogores, Tipura, Gouros, Aua, Pegua, Aurea,
Chersonesus, Sina, Camboia, and Campaa. These provinces are watered with a
number of goodly rivers, amongst the which Indus and Ganges are the most
renowned rivers of the world. Moreover, these provinces do abound in all things
that may grow either within the earth or upon the earth, except it be copper
and lead, as Pliny affirms, also al manner of Plants that grow there are
very great, brave and excellent good India exeedeth all other countries in
precious stones and in spices, furnishing therewith almost all the world. It
has many rich mines of Gold, and great store of fair pearl, also great
multitude of all manner of cattle, horses only excepted, which are brought
thither out of Persia and Arabia. It is not long since that Callicute was the
chief town of Merchandise in India, but at this present Goa is the chief:
there is also great trafique used at Dio, at Cananor, at Cochin, at Bengala, at
Pegu, at Malacha, and at Sian.

Of the Elephant.
THe Elephant amongst all other four footed beasts is the greatest save the
Dragon and the Crocodyle, he is very ingenious, in so much, as it is incredible
that which the ancient men write of him, and also the modern, which have
sought more diligently to know his nature and disposition, he is of force
incredible, and meet to draw ships and boats both out of the water and into
the water, and to draw artillery and ordinance, he is also meet for the
war, his teeth that shoot out of his mouth are Iuorie, there is great number
of them found in the Indies, and in Afrique, but the greatest and fittest for
war, are found in the I Will of Ceiland, nigh to Calicute.

The Contents of the 8. page, in which he describes the beast called
Rhinoceros, and sets down his shape, and he describes the Sinamon tree,
showing the shape of the trunk and of the leaf thereof, and also the Musk Cat,
with her shape, and in the latter end of the page he describes the Realm of
Persia.
THe beast called Rhinoceros, is as long and as large as the Elephant, but not
so high, for his legs are shorter, he is armed not like a Tortoise (as
Plancius says) for that is covered a^ over with one shell, whereas this beast
is armed with manifold strong, hard, and thick skales, which are yellow and
spotted with purple, he has a strong horn or bon^ upon his nose, whereof he
takes his name, and he has another little horn upon his back, and he is a
great enemy by nature unto the Elephant, he is found in the Realms of
Cambaia, and of Bengala.

The Sinamon tree.
THe Sinamon tree, is as big as the Olive tree, the branches and griftes
whereof are very right, his leaves in color are like to those of the Laurel
tree, but in shape like to those of the Citron, his Flowers are white, and the
fruits thereof are black and round, like a hazell Nut, the Sinamon it self
is no other but the bark of the said tree, which grows in the Province of
Malabar, and in the Isles of Iava and Mindanao, but the best is found in the I Will
of Ceiland.

The Musk Catte.
THe Musk Cat, is like in shape to a common Cat, but she is greater than
either Catte or Fox, her muzzell is somewhat long and armed with sharp teeth,
and with harsh hair, which hairs (being angry) she will set up as a Swine
does his bristles, she is in color like a Wolf, but that she is spotted with
black spots, the nether part of her Muzzel and the hairs of her beard are
white, her feet are black, her flanckes are whitish, and do wax whiter and
whiter toward her belly, and next to her genitories, she has a little
bag like to a bladder or purse, into the which does fall the precious grease
or humor, which they call Ciuet and Zibeth, which Ciuet is gathered out from
thence with a spoone, if she be in man's keeping, but when she is abroad and
at her own liberty, her bag being full, she will void that Ciuet of her
self, and it will yield such a sweet savor, as all they that sail by that
coast may smell it a far off, as I have heard. These musk Cattes are brought
from the Realms of Pegu and Tarnassary.

The description of Persia.
AS those in Persia have enjoyed in times past the second Monarchy of the
world, so at this present they be still very mighty, for the king of Persia is
one of the greatest Potentates in the whole world, as he which commands all
the great provinces that do border toward the East upon the Flood Indus, and
toward the South upon the sea called Mare Caspium, and upon the Flood Oxo,
within which limittes, are comprehended all the greatest Realms and lands,
which the ancient Geographers were wont to call by these names, Assyria,
Media, Susiana, Persia, Parthia, Hircania, Margiana, Bactriana, Pa^opanisa,
Aria, Drangiana, Arachosia, Caramania, and part of Armenia mayor, the which at
this present are called by other names as you may see in the Map.

The Persians are a hardy and warlike people, and thought to be the best
ryders or horsinen in all the world, they have very hard wars with the
Turks, they be of most free and gentle nature, lovers of ciuility, they make
great account of learning and Sciences, they honor Nobility, wherein they
greatly differ from the Turks. Now as touching their religion, they be
Mahometists, and yet in such sort, as both they and the Turks do count each
one the other as Heretics in that religion.

From the provinces of Persia are transported into other parts of the world
these Merchandises, stones called Turquesses, very fair and excellent pearls,
great quantity of silk, Velvet, Damask armor, and a great number of most
excellent horses.

The Contents of the 9. page.
IN this page he describes and sets down the shape of the precious stone
named Bezar, and the Dominions of the great Turk in Asia, and the city Aden in
Arabia, also he describes the beast called Cameleopardalis, and sets down
his shape, also he sets down the shape of three of the greatest Pyramides
that are in Egypt.

Of the stone Bezar.
THe stone Bezar or rather Pazar (for that is his right name) grows in Persia
in manner de Boucz, named Pazan, which are of diverse colors, but most
commonly read.

This stone Bezar grows in a concauitie in manner of a girdle about two
handful long and three inches broad, it is medicinable, and of great efficacy
against all manner of poisons and venoms, and many other maladies, there is to
be found of them in the entry of Malacha and also in Pegu, but the best of
them are in Persia.

Of the dominions which the great Turk has in Asia.
THe great Turk does possess in Asia, Natolia, sometime called Asia minor,
and almost all Armenia, Mesopotamia, called at this present Diarbech, or
Diarbekir, Syria, and a great part of Arabia, the most notable Merchant towns
of this country are these, Trapezunda, Alepp. and a port upon the sea called
Tripoli, also Aman, Damasco, with his port Barutti and Mecha.

The Merchandises that are sent from these Provinces into other countries are
these, great quantity of silk, Velvet, Damask Turkey Carpets, Cotton, and
grain of Skarlet.

The City Aden.
ADen is the chief Merchant town of the upper part of Arabia, which is
governed by diverse Kings, and this town sends into other Provinces of the
fairest Pearls, the true Baulme, Frankenscence, Mirrhe, and Horses.

The Beast called Camelopardalis.
THis beast is called of the Arabians, Gyraffa, but the name Camelopardalis is
compounded of Camel and Pardale, which is a Leoparde, he has a very long
neck like unto the Cammell, and is spotted with many spots, as is the Pardale
or Leopard, he is a fair beast, and of gentle nature, as the sheep, his head
is like unto the head of a Heart or Stag, but greater, his horns are small
topped, and covered with hair, and are about a handful and a half long, he
has ears tongue and feet like to an Ox, his forelegges are long and tall,
and his hinder legs are short, whereby he seems always to stand right up,
his head is somewhat higher than the Cammell, and this beast is to be found in
Arabia, Aethiopia, and India.

The Pyramides.
IN Egypt are many Pyramides, whereof the two greatest are counted amongst
the seven woonders of the world, the greatest of them (as witnesses Peter
Belon) who most diligently viewed the same, is at the foot four square, and
every square contains in length 324. paces, and in height 250. degrees or
steps, and every step has in breadth 45. inches, which is three foot and
9. inches, but he sets not down what depth every step has, which must
not be over deep: for then how can any man easily mount up to the top
thereof, for he says it is plain in the top, and so large as 50. persons
may stand thereon. It is found by writing that 360/000 men wrought 20. years
in building this Pyramides.

The second great Pyramides is somewhat less, and smooth on the outsides
without any degrees or steps, and the top thereof is sharp pointed.

The contents of the 10. page.
IN this page he describes the Crocodyle, and sets down the shape
thereof, secondly, he shows whereof the Mummie is bred. Thirdly, he
describes the Unicorn, and sets down his shape.

The Crocodyle.
THe Crocodyle is found in Egypt, in the flood Nilus, and in India in the
flood Ganges, and in the two Provinces Mexicana and Pervana in many rivers.
This is a four footed beast, which has a horrible head, sharp teeth, a very
small tongue, and a thick tail, and his skin is hard and armed with hard
scales, the nether part of his mouth is immooueable, and the upper part
mooueable, contrary to all beasts, he does devour both men and beasts, and
does keep more in the water than on the land, and that which is greatly to be
woondred at, he is engendered of an Egg, as great as a Goose egg, and he
grows by little and little until he come to the length of 18. cubits, or
as some say to 22. cubits, which makes 33. foot.

Of Mummie.
MVmmie is made of bodies embaulmed, which they bring from Egypt, whereas
many such embaulmed bodies were buried, about four hours journey beyond
Cayre, whereas was sometime the great city of Memphis, for before the
nativity of Jesus Christ the Egyptians being Paynims did spare no cost to
keep the bodies of their Parents from putrefaction, and therefore they are
great palpable lies, whereby fools are persuaded, that the Mummie proceeds
of those bodies which do perish in the sands that be in the deserts of Arabia,
as though it were possible that those bodies could be preserved in those sands
without stench or putrefaction.

Of the Unicorn.
THe Unicorn, as Jews Vartiman testifies, who saw two of them in the town
of Mecha, is of the height of a young horse or colt of 30. months old, which
is two years and a half old, he has the head of a Heart, and in his
forehead he has a sharp pointed horn three cubits long, he has a long
neck, and a mane hanging down on the one side of his neck, his legs are
slender, as the legs of a Goat, and his feet are cloven much like to the
Goat, his hinder feet are hairy, and his hair in color is like to a bay
horse. This beast in countenance is cruel and wild, and yet notwithstanding
mixed with a certain sweetness or amiablenes. His horn is of a merueilous
great force and virtue against Venom and poison. The Unicorn is found in
Aethiopia, like as the Indian Ass is found in India, which has likewise one
only horn in his forehead,

The Contents of the 11. Page, wherein he first describes Afrique, and then
certain fruits and spices, as Nutmegs, Mace, and cloves, and sets down
the shape of them, then he shows which be the mightiest Princes in Afrique,
and thirdly he describes Mexicana, which is the first north part of America.
AFrique being the third part of the World, is separated from Europe and Asia
by the sea Mediterraneum and the red Sea, and by the land straight which is
betwixt Egypt and Palestina. The chief Provinces of Afrique are these,
Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgarid, Sarra, Aethiopia, Nubia, the large Provinces of
the Abassines, falsely called the land of Prester John, and also Monomotopa.
The most renowned Isles belonging to Afrique are these, Socotora, Madagascar, S.
Thomas, the Isles of Capo Verde, and the Isles of Canarie and Madera.

The Nutmegge tree.
THe Nutmeg tree grows in the I Will of Bada, and differs not much from the
Peach tree, saving that the leaves of the Peach tree are shorter and rounder:
The fruit is covered with a thick bark or husk, which when it is ripe
cleaves in sunder, and shows the Nut together with the shell, which is
covered with Mace, the which at the first view is as red as Skarlet, and
pleasant to behold, but when the Nut waxes dry, the Mace do sever from the
Nut, and loosing by little and little their Skarlet color, do wax nigh unto
the color of an Orange.

Of the Cloue tree.
THe Cloue tree grows in the Isles of Moluccas, which in greatness and shape is
like unto the Laurel tree, saving that the leaf thereof is somewhat narrower.
It has many branches, and a great number of flowers, first white, afterward
green, and then red, but being dried, they become black. The cloves do grow
upon the outermost ends of the branches, one hard by another and whilst the
flowers are green they excel all other flowers in sweet odor.

The chiefest Princes of Africa
THe most puissant Princes of Afrique are these, the Emperor of the Moors or
Ethiopians, which of the Arabians and of the Mahometistes is called
Aticlabassi, and of his own subjects, he is called Acegue and Neguz of the
Abassines, that is to say, Emperor and King of the Abassines and Mores. Then
the king of Monomotapa, the king of Morocho, the king of Fez and Sus. The great
Turk also possesses many provinces in Afrique.

The chiefest Merchandises that come from Afrique into Europe are these, Gold,
Iuory, wood of Ebony, Aloes, Baulme of Egypt, Mummie, Mirrhe, Anil feathers,
Sugar, Ginger, Dates and wines of Madera, and of the I Will of Canarie.

Mexicana.
MExicana which is the fourth part of the world, is on all sides environed with
the sea, saving that nigh unto Nombre de Dios it is joined by a land strait to
Peruana. The chief provinces of Mexicana are these, the province of Mexico,
otherwise called nova Hispania, terra Florida, Norum Bega, nova Francia,
Estotiland, Saguenay, Chilaga, Toconteae, Marata, California, Tolm, Quivira,
Agama, and Anian. The chiefest Isles lying on the North and Northeast part of
Mexicana are these, Groynland, Crockland, Island, Freezland, Bacalaos, and Cuba.

The chief Merchandises that come from Mexicana into Europe are these, Gold,
Silver, Pearls, Cochenilles, to die with, Baulme, Salsaparillia, the root
Mechoicana, Brimston, hydes of Oxen and Molue.

The contents of the 12. page.
IN this Page he first describes the beast called in that tongue Aiotochli, in
Spanish Armadillio. Then he describes the 2. Provinces Peruana, and
Magellanica, then he shows which he the most mighty Princes of the world,
and finally the diverse qualities of the people inhabiting the world.

THe beast Armadillio is found in the Realm of Mexico, and he is no bigger
than a cat, he is headed like a Swine, and has the feet of a Herison, and a
long tail, he is armed with scales, whereof he takes his name, he keeps for
the most part within the ground, and as some suppose, does live by the earth,
by reason that he is never seen to eat abroad out of his den, the bones of his
tail are medicinable, and do remedy the pain and deaffnes of the ears.

Though Plancius says that this beast is armed with scales, yet my countryman
William Greenway, who is a proper seruiter both by sea and land, and has been
in the West Indies, and has eaten of this beast, affirms his flesh to be
white and very delicate, and that he has no scales, but that his skin is
white and smooth like to a pig new scalded, and that sometime he will shrink
up the skin upon his back into diverse plates, and specially toward his fore
parts and hinder parts, in such sort, as he will make them almost to meet,
and the former plates do hang down upon his shoulders like unto two Poldrons,
and his hair is white and short, growing thin here and there one, and he is
eared and tailed like a rat, even as he is here portraide, saving that he is
throughout of one self color, and without scales.

Peruana.
PErvana being the fifth part of the world, is also environed on all sides with
the sea, save whereas the foresaid landstrait does join the same to Mexicana,
and the chief provinces which it contains are these, Brasilia, Tisnada,
Caribana, Carthagena, Peru, Charchas, Chili, Chica, and the land of the
Patagones* The most renowned Isles are these, Hispaniola, otherwise called S.
Domingo, Boriquen, and Margarita, which is the I Will of pearls.

The Merchandises which are transported out of Pervana into Europe are these,
gold, silver, Emeralds, Pearls, the medicinable stone called Bezoar, Baulme,
Ginger, Sugar, wood of Brasill, wood of Guaicum, called Lignum vitae, long
Pepper, Pepper of Brasill, Cassia solutiva and hides of Oxen.

Magellanica.
THis is the sixth part of the world, which as yet is but little known, in
such sort as we cannot write any thing touching the provinces of the same,
notwithstanding it is thought the province of Beach is very rich, and has
abundance of Gold, the chief Isles of Magellanica are these, Iava mayor, and
Iava minor, Timor, Banda, the Molucques, Romeros, the Isles of Solomon.

From the I Will Timor does come into Europe, the white and pale medicinable
simple called Sandalum.

From the Isles Banda does come Nutmegs and Maces.

And from the Isles Molucques Cloves.

Which be the great Princes of the World?
THe most mighty Princes of the world are these five, that is, the King of
China, otherwise called the great Cham 1. the king of Persia 2. the great Turk
3. the Emperor of Aethiopia 4. the Emperor of Russia, otherwise called the
great Duke of Muscovia 5. amongst which the king of China is a Pagan or
Heathen: and the great Turk and the king of Persia are Mahometists: but the
Emperor of Aethiopia and the great Duke of Muscovia do make profession of the
Christian religion. Now as touching the king of Spain, his puissance should
be much greater than it is, if his provinces were not so separated, and so
far distant on from another.

The qualities of diverse people in the World.
AS touching the qualities of peoples, though God almighty has created al men
of one self blood, and that all do take their beginning from the Arc of Noah,
and that all men be of one self quality and shape of body, yet they differ in
greatness, in proportion of members, and in color: for the Patagones do
exceed all other creatures in greatness. Again, the men of China have most
commonly broad faces, little cies, flat noses, and little beards, and those
that have smallest feet, are counted amongst them to be most beautiful, those
of Africa have grosser and thicker lips than other people, the inhabitants of
Agysimba, and of Guinea, and specially of the lands that be nigh unto Cape de
bona esperanza, are black, from whom the Oriental Indians do not much differ.

The Abassines or Moors of Egypt, be of a duskish color like to the Oliffe,
the Inhabitants of Barbary, be called white Moors, and those that dwell
betwixt them and the Nigrites or black Moors be of a yellowish color, the
Spaniardes have not found either in Mexicana, or in Pervana any Nigrites or
Blackmoores, but only in certain villages nigh unto Carque, the other nations
under the hot Zone, be of color brown bay, like a chessenut, and the
nigher that they dwell to either of the Poles Arctique or Antarctique, the
whiter most commonly they be, and as touching the rest all are like in
qualities, shape, and fashion of body, as has been said before, wherefore they
are mere lies that are wont to be told of the Pigmeans, in that they should
be but a foot and a half high, and likewise that which has been spoken of
people, that should have their heads their noses, their mouths, and their eyes
in their breasts, or of those that are headed like a dog, or of those that
have but one eye, and that in their forehead, or of those that have but one
foot and that so great, as that it covers and shadoweth all their body, or
of those that have great ears hanging down to the ground. All these are
mere lies, invented by vain men to bring fools into admiration, for monsters
are as well borne in Europe, as in other parts of the world.

Now in the four pages following, he sets down an interpretation of the
Latin inscriptions dispersed throughout the Map, every which inscription
has his number added, which I do also hear set down in the same order,
joining to every number his longitude and latitude, to the intent you may the
more easily find out the said inscriptions, of which inscriptions there be in
all 71. divided into five parts, whereof the first part contains 21.
inscriptions, belonging partly to Europe, but most to Asia, the second part
contains 12. inscriptions belonging to Afrique, the third part contains
11. inscriptions, belonging to Mexicana, the fourth part contains 6.
inscriptions belonging to Peruana, and the fifth part contains 21
inscriptions, belonging to Magellanica.

The 21. inscriptions belonging to Europe, but most to Asia.
The number of inscrip. Longitude Latitude North or South. 1 5. 85.30^ North.
THis arm of the sea does take his course through 3. places running continually
toward the North pole, and is frozen 3. months of the year, and it
contains in breadth about 37. leagues.

2 38 0^ 86.30^ North. It is said that this Country is inhabited of Owarttes
called in Latin Pigmei, being in height four foot as those be of Groinland,
which are called Serelinges.

3 81. 0^ 77. 0^ North. Muscouia is bounded on the North side with the sea
Puzorique, called of the ancient Geographers Mare Glaciale, that is, the frozen
sea, and toward the East it bordereth upon Tartaria, and toward the South
upon the sea called Mare Caspium and also upon the Turks, and Tartaries
Perocopsiques, and toward the West, it bordereth upon Lituania, Livonia, and
upon the Realm of Swethland: as touching their religion they observe the Faith
and ceremonies of the Greek Church, all their Bishops called in their language
Vladiques, and also their Metropolitan are under the obedience of the
Patriarch of Constantinople. The people is wise and subtle, and yet loving
servitude more than liberty or freedom, and they all confess themselves to
be the sernants and slaves of the great Duke, having seldom or never peace,
for either they have wars with those of Lituania, or with those of Livonia,
or with those of Swethland, or with the Tartarians, or if they have no wars,
then they lie in garrison nigh unto the 2. floods Tanais and Dwina, to defend
their bounds from the depredations and invasions of the Tartaries, they sharply
punish robbers and stealers, and yet privy theft and murder is seldom
punished with death: their silver money is not round, but has the form of an
egg, their country is every where full of woods, and they have great
abundance of rich furs, they send into all countries of Europe very good
Flax and hemp to make Cables and ropes, and a great number of hides, as well
of Oxen as of Elkes, great balls of Wax, much salted Fish, and Whales grease.
The great Duke, called of his servants the Emperor of Russia, is rightly
accounted amongst the most mighty Monarchs of the world.

4 98. 0^ 82. 0^ North. This arm of the sea has 5. mouths or entries, and by
reason son that it is so straight and has so violent a course, it is never
frozen.

5. 123. 30^ 58. 0^ North. Under the name of Tartarie at this day are
comprehended all the provinces that border toward the East upon the sea of
China and toward the South, are limited with the provinces of China, of
India, with the flood Oxio, with the sea Mare Caspium, and with the lake or
marish called Palus Meotis, and toward the West they are bounded with the
flood Boristenes, and with the limits of Muscouia: for the Tartarians have
conquered all the countries which they possess at this present, so as Tartary
comprehends all that country which the ancient men were wont to call
Sarmasia, Asiatica, and also the Scythias, that is, intra Imaum and extra
Imaum, they began first to be renowned in Europe, in the year of Christ 1212.
The Tartarians are divided into certain commonalties, and Colonies, called of
them Hordes, but for so much as they dwell in diverse provinces, that do extend
far, and be far distant one from another, they differ also in their manners
and trade of life, they be men of a square stature, having broad and gross
faces, their eyes hollow sunk into their heads, and looking somewhat a squint,
and thick beards, they be strong of body and hardy, they eat horses and all
other beasts how so ever they are slain, saving hogs, from which they
abstain, they are able to endure hunger, thirst, watch, and all
discommodities, and when they are distressed in their voyages with hunger and
thirst, they let their horses blood, and with that blood quench their hunger
and thirst, which kind of meat they call in their language Besermannen, they
call their Emperor Cham, that is to say, Prince, and therefore Cambalu is
interpreted to be the seat or town of the prince.

6 125. 40^ 50. 0^ North. This round lake in the province of Sancii, took his
first original and beginning in the year 1557. by reason of an inundation or
flood, which carried away 7. towns, besides villages and other places nigh
adjoining, and a great multitude of people, whereof none were saved but only
one infant, sitting upon a tree.

7 124 0^ 37. 0^ North. The inhabitants of China, are of good spirit and
ingenious, insomuch as they have invented certain kind of carts, wherein they
may sail upon even ground, having wind, and sail as they do in ships upon
the sea.

8 171. 30^ 80. 30^ North. Plancius in this inscription sets down the
opinion of Mercator, touching the beginning of longitude, and touching the
Adamant stone, otherwise called the Lodestone, in Latin Magnes.

Frances of Diep, a most skillful Pilot, does witness that the needle of the
Mariners compass, does turn directly to the North Pole, being in the Islands
of Capo Verde, that is to say, the I Will of Sal, the I Will of Bonauista, and the
I Will of Mayo, whereunto those do agree very nigh, which do say that the needle
does the like in the Isles of Tercera, and of S. Marie, which are part of the
Flemmish Isles, otherwise called the Azores: but some others do affirm, that
the needle shows the North pole best, being in the I Will of Corvo, which is the
furthest I Will westward of the said Azores, and because the longitude of places
by most lively reasons, ought to take his beginning from the common Meridian of
the world, and from the rock or Pole of the Adamant stone, we here following
the opinion of those that are most skillful in this matter, have set down the
first Meridian betwixt the Isles of Capo Verde, and the Azores, and because the
needle in all other places, declineth either more or less from the Pole of the
world, there must needs be another Pole in some one place whereunto the needle
does incline from all coasts of the world, and I have found by the
declination of the needle observed at Ratisbone, otherwise called Regensberg,
that is the same place, which I have set down in the Map, and I have likewise
marked in this Card, the situation of the Pole of the stone, in respect of the
I Will Corvo, to the intent that according to the outermost places limited by the
first Meridian, the outermost bounds, betwixt which, this Pole ought to be
found, might be known, until the diligent and curious consideration of the
Pilots shall bring us something of more certainty. Thus far Mercator.

9 162. 0^ 71. 0^ North. These are the plain fields of Bargu, whereof the
inhabitants are called Mecriti.

10 154. 30^ 62. 0^ North. The Mount Askai, in which are to be seen the
sepulchers of the Kings of Tartary.

11 171. 30^ 70. 0^ North. Upon this Mountain are set by the Tartarians two
trumpetters of brass, for a perpetual memory of their freedom gotten.

12. 175. 0^ 67. 0^ North. The Province Vng, which of our men is called Gogg.

13 170.30^ 65. 20^ North. The Realm of Tendus, which in the time of Marcus
Paulus Venetus, which was in the year 1290. was governed by those Christians,
which descended from the king Vncham.

14 165. 30^ 65. 0^ North. The Castle of King Vncham was builded in this
place, against the invasion of the Tartarians.

15 157. 0^ 65. 30^ North. The Province Mongul, which of our men is called
Magogg.

16 159. 20^ 66. 0^ North. The desert Belgian, which is very great, all sandy
and barraine.

17 159. 0^ 61. 30^ North. In this Country of Cergutha, is found the best sort
of musk, which grows like as an impostume or bag, nigh unto the navel of
a certain beast.

18 165. 30^ 58. 0^ North. Campion is the Metropolitan Town of Tanguth,
whereas the inhabitants are partly Christians, partly Idolaters, and partly
Mahometists.

19 158 30^ 53 0^ North. This wall has in length 400. Spanish leagues, and was
built betwixt the mountains by the King of China, against the invasions and
excursions of the Tartarians.

20 176. 0^ 40. 0^ North. Iapan has three Islands much renowned, separated one
from another by a strait of the sea, whereof the first and greatest is divided
into 53. Provinces or Realms, of which Meaco is the Metropolitan city, the
second is called Xima, which has nine Provinces or Realms, the third is
called Xicoca which contains but four Provinces or Realms.

21 71 0^ 29. 0^ North. Medina Talnabi, is the town wherein is to be seen the
Sepulcher of Mahomet.



The 12. Inscriptions belonging to Afrique.
The number of inscrip. Longitude Latitude North or South. 1 67. 0^ 26. 0^
North. Coptos is a trim Merchant Town, whereto are brought the Marchandises of
India, and of Arabia, in which town are dwelling many Christians.

2 58. 0^ 21. 0^ North. The flood Nilus, which by his inundations does yearly
water and fat the Country of Egypt, and makes it marvelous fruitful.

3 55 0^ 17 0^ North. The flood Nubia, takes his original from the lake Nuba,
as Ptolomie says.

4 50. 0^ 15. 0^ North. The flood Niger, here takes his course, running under
the ground 50. leagues.

5 62 0^ 5. 0^ North. In this place is the ample jurisdiction of the Emperor
of Aethiopia, wrongfully called of those of Europe, the land of Prester John,
the Arabs and the Moors do call him Aticlabassi, but his own subjects do
call him Acegue, and Neguz, that is as much to say, as Emperor and King.

6 58 30^ 2. 30^ North. The mount Amara, whereas are most carefully kept with
continual watch and ward of soldiers, the children and Grandchildren of the
Emperors of Aethiopia.

7 53. 0^ 7. 0^ South. It is said that this country is inhabited of Amazones,
which are women that make war.

8 55. 40^ 15. 30^ South. In this place the King of Monomotopa, has his great
and ample jurisdictions.

9 42. 30^ 15. 40^ South. This South part of Afrique, unknown to the ancient
writers, is called by those of Persia and of Arabia, Zanzibar.

10 45. 30^ 1. 0^ South. Here is dug out of the Mines, great abundance of
gold.

11 30. 20^ 20. 0^ North. Libia or inward Afrique, is at this day called
Sarra, or the deserts.

12 19. 0^ 15. 30^ North. The people Azanagi, are of color black graye, and
they cover their mouths as a member of shame, and do never uncover them but
when they eat.



The 11. Inscriptions belonging to Mexicana.
The number of inscrip. Longitude. Latitude North or South. 1 301. 30^ 81. 0^
North. This I Will is thought to be the best and most wholesome of all the North
parts.

2 301. 0^ 74. 0^ North. The I Will of Crockland, the inhabitants whereof say that
they had their original from Swethland.

3 311. 0^ 61. 30^ North. In the year of our Lord, 1500. one Gaspar
Corteriale a Portingale, entered into these Regions, hoping to have found some
passage on the North toward the Isles Molucques, but arriving at the River,
which by means of the abundance of snow there falling, is called Rio Neuado,
which has in North Latitude 62. degrees, he did leave to sail any further
toward the North, by reason of the great cold there, and turning to the
South did fetch in all the sea coasts until he came to Capo Razo, which has
in North Latitude about 48. degrees: and in the year 1504. the Britains were
the first that discovered all the sea costs of new France in America, nigh
unto the Golfe of Saint Laurence, which has in North Latitude about 50.
degrees and in the year 1524. John Verazzan a Florentine, did part from the
Port of Diep, the 17. of March, in the behalf of Frances king of France, and
sailed toward the South sea coast of new France, whereas he arrived at the
34. degree of North Latitude, and from thence sailed toward the East, viewing
all the Sea costs until he came to Cape Britain, which has in North Latitude
about 46. degrees.

3 311. 0^ 61. 30^ North. And in the year 1534. new France was again visited
by the Admiral Jacques Cartier, and in the year next following, it was
conquered to the use of the King of France, also in the year 1577. Martin
Furbosher Englishman, arrived at ye north strait which is betwixt Groinland
and Estotiland, that place having by this Map in the North latitude 65. degrees.
seeking passage by the North unto Cathay, whereas he found certain Isles, and a
mine of gold, wherewith having laden his ships, he returned into England with
great hope of profit, but his success was not answerable to his hope.

4 275. 20^ 70. 0^ North. This dangerous beast is called Sucaratha, which
being chased of Hunters, does take her young ones upon her back, to save both
her self and them by flight.

5 271. 0^ 64. 30^ North. This is a great lake or sea of fresh water, the
limits whereof are unknown as they of Canada do say, and as they have heard
by relation of those of Saguenay.

6. 293. 30^ 52. 0^ North. Along this River a man may sail very
commodiously, toward the country of Saguenay.

7* 287. 0^ 47. 40^ North. All those that dwell betwixt Terra Florida, and
Terra de Laborador be called by one common name Canadois, but there be many
diverse Nations as those of Hochelada, Honqueda, and Corterealia, they are all
very courteous to strangers, they live commonly by fish, and they are clothed
with skins of wild beasts, as they be also that dwell further toward the
North, this country is also called new France, because the Britains which are
French men did first discover it in the year of our Lord 1504. the conquest
whereof was achieved by the Admiral Jacques Cartier in the year of our lord
1535. to the behoof and use of the French king. In the mountains toward the
South, do dwell many and diverse Nations, which be cruel people, living
without any law, and do seek by continual war, to vex and oppress one an
other, as the people Auanares, Albardi, Calicuares, Tag^^es, Apalcheni, Mocose,
Capaschi, Chilage, and many others, amongst which there be some of such
agilitie and swiftness, as they may contend with horses, who can run fastest,
they eat as those of Florida, certain kind of Spiders, Ants or Pismires,
Leazards, Adders and other venomous beasts. The land of Baccalaos, is so called
of the fish Baccalaos, which is there taken. Terra Florida is so called of
Easter day, because John Ponce of Lion did discover it on Easter day, in the
year 1512. the which day is called of the Spaniards Pasqua du flores: this is
a fertile country and rich in gold.

8 271. 0^ 39. 0^ North. Marcus Nizza testifies that this Province called the
seven Cities, is a very good country with whom Frances Vasker does not agree,
for he says they be places of no value, and like to Villages, and be under the
jurisdiction of Ceuola, which at this present is called of the Spaniards Noua
Granada.

9 211. 40^ 82. 0^ North. The North Ocean sea, entering with 19. mouths betwixt
the Isles of the North, does make four straites of the sea, and running floods,
which continually take their course toward ye North, and there are swallowed
into the bowels of the earth, like to springs of fountains and floods.

In mine opinion this Inscription would have been one of the first of
Mexicana, and not one of the last, since it is no small leap, to turn so
suddenly from the midst of America to the North pole.

10. 223. 0^ 55. 40^ North. This Country is desert and plain, in which are
many wild Horses, and Oxen with high backs like Camels, and wild sheep like
unto those which Boethius writes (in his description of Scotland) to be found
in one of the Isles of the Hebrides.

11 240. 20^ 40. 30^ North. New Spain was brought by force of arms under the
obedience of the Spaniard, in the year 1518. by their general, Ferdinando
Cortes who conquered the same with great loss of his soldiers, but with
greater ruin to the inhabitants, who fought for the liberty of their
Country, the soil is very fertile, and the Country is rich in gold and
silver, for in the floodes are found great sands of gold, and in the mountains
is drawn out of the mines great quantity of silver, and alongest the sea side
they take to their great profit an infinite number of Oysters, wherein are
found very fair pearls. In this Province there are many sault lakes, the
water whereof by force of the sun is turned into sault: there grows also
great abundance of Cassia fistula, and an other kind of fruit, which the
inhabitants call in their tongue Cacao, it is like to an Almonde, they have it
in great price, for of it they make a certain drink, which they love
marvelous well. The sea and floods which do wash this Province, do furnish
them with great plenty of fish, and in those floodes are many Crocodiles,
whose flesh the inhabitants do eat, and this beast will grow to be twenty
foot long and above. This Country is full of great mountains and high rocks,
there is great diversity of languages, in so much as one understands not an
other without an interpretor. Mexico is the Metropolitan and Royal town, or
rather the Queen of all the principal Towns in the world, it is situated
upon the side of a lake or marish, yea the very foundation of it is a very
marish, in such sort, as you can neither enter into it, nor come out of it, but
by bridges, and it is as well peoplished with inhabitants and Merchants, as any
renowned Merchant town in Europe, the town is very great, for it contains
in circuit 3. Spanish leagues.



The 6. Inscriptions belonging to Peruana.
The number of inscrip. Longitude. Latitude. North or South. 1 333. 0^ 3. 30^
South. This great flood Maragnon, is called of some Oreigliana, and also the
flood of the Amazones, it was discovered by Vincent John Pinsonio, in the year
1499. and was sailed in a manner from the head spring even unto the sea, by
Francisco Oreigiano in the year 1542. the which voyage he performed in eight
months, having sailed 1660. leagues. This river keeps his water still fresh
after it is entered certain leagues into the sea, by reason that his course is
so swift and violent.

2 330. 30 22. 0^ South. Peruana is the South part of America, and is divided
by the Spaniardes into five goodly Provinces, that is to say, Castiliador,
that is to say, the golden Castilia, Pompaiana, Peru, Chila, and Bresille: The
Province Peru (before the arrival of the Spaniardes) did extend a great deal
further, when as their Country was yet under the government of their natural
King, which then was called Ingas, as Giraua and others do write. At this
present it is limited on the North with the Town Quito, and toward the South
with the Town of Plata, that is to say, the silver Town, and it was called
Peruana as some write, of the flood and Port of the sea called Peru. It is at
this present divided (according to the situation of the Country) into three
parts, that is to say, Sie ras, Andes, and the flat or plain country.

The plain Country is that which lies alongest near to the Seacoast.

Sierras is that part which is full of mountains.

And Andes is that part of the Mountains which tends toward the East. Of
all the Provinces in the world this is the richest in gold, and in Emeraldes,
the Metropolitan Town of this Province, is the City Lyma, otherwise called
the Town of ^inges. Castillelledor took his name of the great abundance of
gold that is there. The Province Popaiana took his name of the renowned Town
Popaian, Chila is a cold country by reason that it is so nigh unto the South
pole. The Province Brasilia took his name of the wood called Brasill, which
grows there in great abundance. To these Provinces were meet to be joined
these other Provinces, that is to say, Caribana, Charcas, Chica, and the land
of the Patagones.

3 329. 0^ 28. 0^ South. This beast is called of some Haute, but of a certain
people of Brasill, it is called Hay, which beast was never seen to eat or
drink, as some write, and therefore some think that she lives without meat
or drink, only by the air.

4 328. 0^ 35. 20^ South. This kind of beast is found in the Province of
Parias, which in his fore parts is like to a Fox, and behind he is like to an
Ape, saving that he is footed like a man, and he has the ears of an Owl,
and under her ordinary belly, she has also another belly, which opens and
shuts, wherein she lodges her young ones, until they are able to get their
own living, and she never suffers them to go out but only to suck, Gesner
calls this beast an Ape-foxe, or a Foxe-ape.

5 325. 30^ 36. 30^ South. This is the land of the Patagones, the inhabitants
whereof are Giants nine or ten foot high, which do paint their visages with
diverse colors, made of herbs.

6 335. 0^ 51. 30^ South. In the year 1582. the king of Spain commanded here
to be built certain fortresses, at the entry or mouth of the straight called
Mare Magellanicum.



The 21. inscriptions belonging to Magellanica.
1 188. 30^ 17. 20. South. This land is new Guinea, so called of the Nauigants
and Pilots, because the sea coast and situation thereof, is like to that of
Guinea in Afrique, and it was called by Andrew Corsali the Florentine, the land
of Piccinacoli, and perhaps it is that which Ptolomy calls the I Will Labadia,
if it may be called an I Will, for it is not yet known whether it be any part of
the South firm land or no.

2 209. 0^ 31. 30^ South. It is not unknown to all those that are exercised in
Geography, that the degrees of Longitude do diminish and decrease from the
Equinoctial to either of the Poles, either North or South, whereby it falls
out, that the Provinces which are next unto the two Poles of the world, do
differ greatly from that natural shape which they have by the roundnes of the
earth, and for that cause we have briefly drawn a description of the whole
world in two round figures or Circles at the end of this Map, to the intent
that every man might see their natural situation so far as may be showed in
Plano, that is to say, in flat form.

3 231. 72. North. These Provinces at this present are little known, yet it is
said, that they are full of many kinds of wild beasts. You shall find this
inscription in the round figure on the left hand nigh to the North pole, which
indeed belongs to Mexicana, and not to Magellanica.

4 247. 20^ 14. 0^ South. These two unfortunate Islands were so called by
Magellane himself, because he could find in them neither men, nor any thing
else that was meet for man's sustenance.

5 283. 0 61. 20^ South. These Provinces were discovered by a Spaniarde, who
being separated by tempest of sea, from the fleet or army, ran wandering
here and there, through this great Southern sea.

6 350. 40^ 85. 20^ South. In the year 1493. when as the desire to sail into
far countries increased more and more amongst the Castilians and Portugales,
and that with great contention who should discover most, Pope Alexander
ordained, that the Meridian which is 100. leagues distant toward the West,
from every one of the Islands as well of Capo Verde, as of those which they call
Azores, should be the bounds and limits to either party, for their
navigations, determining their rightes in such sort, as the Castilians should
have the West part of the world, to find out unknown countries, and the
Portingales the East part, but there was such strife and contention betwixt
them afterward touching the bounds of Navigations, as this ordinance of Pope
Alexander, pleased neither party, and therefore in the year 1524. it was
fully determined, that the Meridian which is distant 370. leagues toward the
West from the I Will Saint Anthonio, being the most Western I Will of all the Isles
of Capo Verde, should by the common bound of Navigations to both parties.

7 19 0^ 54. 30^ South. Here under the Latitude 42. degrees, and distant 450.
leagues, from the Cape de bona speranza, and also 600. leagues distant from the
Cape Saint Augustine, was found the Promontorie of the South land, as Martin
Ferdinando Denciso has noted in the Epitome of some of his Geographie.

8 22. 0^ 65. 0^ South. In this our Geography, we have in such manner described
the circuit of the whole earth, as all the Countries are situated under their
proper Meridians, which could not have been done, without extending them more
or less from the West toward the East, notwithstanding being desirous to
satisfy those that are practiced in the art of Navigations, we have described
the North Provinces of Europe in this our Geographie, in such sort as their
situation wholly agrees with the particular Mariners Cards.

9 57. 20^ 54. 0. South. The 9. Inscription is entitled to the lovers of
Geographie.

We have in this Inscription of the whole earth, employed all diligence to
describe all the Seas and Provinces, in such sort as every place may have his
true Longitude and Latitude, in which matter, we have spared neither labor nor
cost, for we have diligently conferred together the Sea Cards, as well of the
Castilians as Portingales, which they use in their Nauigations to America and
to India, and amongst others we obtained from Portingale a Mariners Card,
describing the whole earth very correctly, and besides that 14. other
particular Cards, in the which likewise all the Seas and Provinces of the
whole world, with their situation were comprised, all which Cards being
compared together, we do here now set forth this new description of all
the Provinces and Seas in the whole world, and that as correctly as may be,
according to the consideration and observation which has been used by the most
expert Geographers and Pilots, even unto this present hour: for in this Card
we do describe all the sea coasts, Promontories, windinges in and out, Isles,
Ports deapthes, sands, showlds and rocks, also we have added thereunto in
place convenient, the Mariners compass, and the lines of the winds, which we
have set down as correctly as was possible for us to do, for the commodity
of Navigations: and for so much as the true Longitude of the places can not be
well observed, without extending or enlarging too far those Provinces that
are nigh unto the North or South pole of the world, we have therefore briefly
comprehended the same in this our description of the world, in two rondles or
circles, unto the which we have added another little Geographicall Card,
comprehending the north Provinces of Europe, to the intent that in them every
man may see with his eyes, the natural situation of those Provinces as well as
it may be done in plano, as is more amply declared in other inscriptions of
this Map. And this little Septentrionall Map last mentioned, is placed at the
foot of this map, in the very midst thereof comprehending all the North parts
that lie betwixt the 52. degree, and 72^ of Latitude.

10 79. 30^ 56. 0^ South. Here is a very strong current of the sea, which
ruuneth East and West, betwixt Madagascar and the I Will Romoros, in such sort as
Navigations there is very troublesome and laborious, as Marcus Paulus Venetus
testifies in his third book and 40. chap. whereof it must needs follow of
necessity, that the sea coasts of this country are not far distant from
Madagascar, in such sort as the great Oriental sea does ebb and flow through
this strait with great violence into the West Ocean sea, whereunto agrees the
letter missiue of a Candiot, who was Ambassador for the Venetians to the king
of Portingale. In which letter he writes that the men of this Country go
all naked.

11 91. 0^ 35. 0^ South. To this place arriueth a Portingale ship called S.
Paul.

12 212. 36 South. The South firm land, is called of some Magellanica, of
Ferdinando Magellanus, who first discovered the same.

This Inscription, together with the four next following, are to be found in
the rondle on the right hand.

13 146. 46 South. Marcus Paulus Venetus, and Jews Vartiman do testify in
their books of perigrination, that here be very great and ample deserts.

14 75 52 South. Betwixt the I Will of Saint Laurence and the Isles Romeros, do
fall a most violent flux and refluxe of the Sea, East and West.

15 46 55 South. This is the land of Popeniayes, so called of the Portingales,
because those birds in that Country are of incredible bigness.

16 15 46 South. This Promontory of the South land, is situate 450. Spanish
leagues from the Cape de bona speranza, and 600. leagues from the Cape of Saint
Augustine.

17 148. 0^ 34. 0^ South. As we have in the first rondle on the left hand set
down the description of that part of the world, which extends from the
Equinoctial to the North pole: so in this other rondle, we have set down a
description of that part of the world which extends from the Equinoctial to
the South pole, in such sort as this rondle contains all Magellanica, and
almost all Peruana together with a great part of Afrique, and a great number of
the most noble and renowned Isles of the world, and herein you may plainly see
with your eye, the natural situation of those Provinces that are nigh unto the
South pole.

18 148. 30 20. 30^ South. The Realm of Maletur, which abounds in all manner
of spices.

19 148 0^ 15. 40^ South. The Country of Beach is rich in gold, but little
frequented by Merchants of other Countries, by reason of the cruelty of the
people.

20 161. 0^ 20. 0^ South. Iaua minor, brings forth diverse spices which have
not yet been seen in Europe, as Marcus Paulus Venetus testifies in his third
book 13. chapter.

21 170. 40^ 3. 0^ North. The Isles Moluccas are much renoumed for the great
abundance of spices, which are sent from thence into all countries of the
world: The chiefest of those Isles are these, Ternarie, Tidoris, Motir, Machian,
and Bachian, unto which some do add Gilolo, Celebes, Burro, Amboino, and
Bandar.



Besides all these Inscriptions, Plancius at the four corners of his Map,
sets down four rondles, two above and other two beneath: and in that above
on the left hand, representing the Northern half of the celestial Globe, he
describes all the North stars that are already, and in the other rondle on ye
right hand representing the southern half of the celestial Globe, he does not
only set down such Southern stars as were known to the ancient Astronomers,
but also such Southern stars, as have been found out of latter days by
those that have traveled into the East and West Indies, as the Cross, the
Southern Triangle, Noes Dove or Pigeon, and an other in the shape of a man,
called Polophilax, and certain others, touching which stars he sets
down nigh unto the foresaid rondle, a certain inscription written in the
Latin tongue, which I have here interpreted word for word in our mother tongue
as follows.

We have here set down the fixed stars in their true places answerable to
the year 1592. and not 95. as the Printer has made it.

Of the South pole and of the stars that are about the same.
LEast the South part of this Hemispheare or half Globe, should remain void
and empty, I have taken these Southern stars out of the observations of
Andreas Corsalius Florentine, and have diligently compared the same with the
writings of Americus Vesputius, and of Petrus Medina, and have reduced the
said stars into this form or shape. But for so much as I have seen nothing
as yet to my satisfaction or contentment touching the Longitude, Latitude,
Magnitude or nature of the said stars, I heartily pray all those that have any
more certain knowledge of this matter then we, that they will inform us
thereof, to the common good of all men: As touching the pole Antarctique,
Corsalius writes that there be two cloudie stars of a mean bigness, which
with a circular motion do go about another star, that is distant from the
Pole almost 11. degrees, and are sometime above and sometime beneath the said
star. Hitherto Plancius. But now to the intent that you may the better
understand all the foresaid four rondles, I think it not amiss to describe
the same unto you, and to show the use thereof as follows. You have to note
then, that the two upper rondles: that which is on the left hand, signifies
the Northern half of the celestial Globe and the other rondle on the right
hand, signifies the Southern half of the said Globe as has been said
before, and each one of these rondles is traced with certain circles and
lines: The outtermost Circle whereof being divided into 360. degrees, and
containing the Characters of the 12. signs, signifies the Zodiaque, or rather
the very Ecliptique it self, the Center of which Circle, is the pole of the
Zodiaque, which by continual turning about, describes another lesser Circle
hard by it, signifying in the North rondle the circle Arctique, and in the
South rondle the circle Antarctique, the Center of which lesser circle in
either rondle, is the pole of the world, both which poles are distant from the
pole of the Zodiaque 23. degrees 28^ which is the greatest declination of the
sun. Moreover in either rondle are drawn upon each pole of the world, two
other circles, the largest whereof signifies in both rondles the Equinoctial,
and the lesser thereof in the North rondle, signifies the Tropique of Cancer,
and in the South rondle the Tropique of Capricorn: besides these circles each
rondle is traced with 12. right lines, signifying those six Meridians or lines
which passing through both the poles of the Zodiaque, do divide the Zodiaque
into 12. equal parts, every part containing 30. degrees: for so many degrees
do belong to the Longitude of every one of the 12. signs, whereby the
Zodiaque has in Longitude 360. degrees, which Longitude is to be counted from
the first point of Aries and so forth, according to the succession of the
signs, and by help of these lines, you may know under what sign any fixed
star is: I shall not need here to show you, how the said fixed stars are
situated, in either of the rondles, nor how they are named, because their
images or shapes together with their names, are apparent to your eye. But if
you would know the true place, the Longitude, Latitude, Magnitude and the
nature of any fixed star herein contained, then do thus: First to know the
place and Longitude of any star, lay a ruler or extend a threede, so as it
may pass through the Pole of the Zodiaque, and also through the body of the
star, whose place and Longitude you seek, even to the very Zodiaque, and
somewhat beyond, and thereby you shall know in what sign, and in what degree
thereof that star is, for that is his place, and you shall know his
Longitude by counting from the first point of Aries, unto that degree, for that
is his Longitude.

Now to know the Latitude of any star, you have to note that in each rondle
there is a certain right black line extending from the Zodiaque to the Pole,
divided by unequal spaces into 90. degrees, which line is called the skale of
the fixed stars Latitude, the use whereof is thus: Set the firm foot of your
Compasses in the very pole, and extend the other foot into the midst of the
body of that star whose Latitude you seek, and turn that foot standing at
that widenes to the skale, and the number of degrees written upon the skale, if
you count from the Zodiaque upward toward the Pole, will show you the Latitude
of that star. Again, to know the magnitude of any star, Plancius sets
down in the North rondle the self same mean which Mercator also uses in his
celestial Globe, that is to say, by making certain shapes of stars
representing the bigness of every star, according to his greatness, that by
marking and comparing those shapes together, you might find out, or rather
conjecture the greatness of the star which you seek. Lastly he shows the
nature of any star by setting down nigh unto the star, the characters of
those Planets, of whose nature that star does participate, all which things
you shall more plainly understand by this example here following.

Suppose that you would know the place, longitude, latitude, magnitude and
nature of the star called Arcturus: here because this is a North star, you
must therefore resort to the North rondle, and there seek out the image Boots,
betwixt whose legs is the star called Arcturus which you seek. And by
extending a thread which may pass through the pole, and also through the body
of that star even to the Zodiaque, and somewhat beyond, you shall find his
place to be in the 19. degree of the sign Libra, and his Longitude counting
from the first point of Aries, unto that degree to be 199. degrees, and by
observing the rule before given, touching the knowing of the Latitude of any
star, you shall with your Compass find the Latitude of this star to be
almost 32. degrees Northward, and by his shape you shall know that he is of
the first magnitude, and the characters of the two Planets Mars and Jupiter,
placed hard by him, do show that he is of their nature, that is to say, by
participating of Mars he is extremely hot and dry, and by participating of
Jupiter he is hot and moist, and look what order is to be observed in the
North rondle, touching the North stars, the same is likewise to be used in the
South rondle containing the Southern stars: Amongst which you may see the
Images called the Cross, whereby most Pilots in these days do chiefly
direct their course, being once past the Equinoctial toward the South pole,
which Cross, though Plancius does here make to consist of five stars, yet I
am sure that Martin Cortes and Peter Medina, and all other late writers do
appoint thereunto but four stars, the shape and use whereof, I have set
down in my Treatise of Navigations, according to the direction of Peter Medina.
And those that have travailed into the Indies, do all affirm that to the
Cross there do belong only four stars and no more, wherefore I marvel
much, that Plancius does set down five, whereunto perhaps he is induced by the
relation of some Spaniarde that never saw them. Thus having described unto you
the two upper rondles, representing together the celestial Globe, and also
showed the use thereof, I will now describe the two nether rondles, whereof
that on the left hand represents the North half of the Terrestrial Globe,
and that on the right hand the other half of the same Globe, toward the
South.

You have then to understand that the Center or middle point in each rondle,
signifies the Pole of the world, that is to say, the North pole in the North
rondle, and the South pole in the South rondle, and upon each pole are drawn
certain Circles, the outtermost whereof, and furthest distant from the Pole
signifies the Equinoctial, which is divided into 360. degrees, every degree
containing 60. miles, which is the whole Longitude of the earth, from which
circle at the end of every tenth degree, are drawn certain right lines to the
number of 18. which do meet in the very Pole, and do signify half
Meridians, whereof that which passes through the Isles Azores, and also the
Isles of Capo Verde, is the first Meridian, from whence the longitude of the
earth takes his beginning, and there also ends: which Meridian in the rondle
on the left hand, is divided into 90. parts, proceeding from the Equinoctial to
the Pole, signifying the North Latitude of the world, the like division and
number of degrees of Latitude, has also the first Meridian, in the rondle on
the right hand, saving that the said Meridian tends upward. Moreover you
have to understand, that in each of these rondles, are drawn nine Circles,
equally distant one from another, called Parallels, which together with the
Equinoctial, do make nine spaces, every space containing 10. degr. and
besides these circles, there are drawn in each rondle two other circles, the
one greater, and the other lesser, the greater in the rondle on the left hand
being distant from the Equinoctial 23. degrees 30^ which is the greatest
declination of the sun, is called the Tropique of Cancer, and the lesser
Circle being of like distance from the pole, is called the Circle Arctique, but
the greater circle being of like distance from the Equinoctial, in the rondle
on the right hand, is called the tropique of Capricorn, and the lesser circle
in the said rondle inuironing the Pole, is called the Circle Antarctique upon
which circles in each rondle you shall find their names written. The chiefest
uses of these two rondles are these: first to find out the Longitude of any
place, secondly the Latitude, and thirdly the distance betwixt any two places.

To find out the Longitude of any place, you must do thus: Extend a threede,
so as it may pass through the pole, and also through the place whose longitude
you seek, even to the very Equinoctial, and somewhat beyond, and holding the
thread straight, the numbers of the degrees written upon the Equinoctial will
show the longitude of the place.

And if you will know the latitude of that place, or of any other, do thus, Set
the one foot of your compass in the very pole, extending the other to the
place whose Latitude you seek, and keeping your compass at that wideness,
bring the mooueable foot to the first Meridian, whereon the degrees of
latitude are marked, and there staying it, the number of the degrees, counting
from the Equinoctial upward toward the pole, will show the latitude of the
place. As for example, suppose that you would know the longitude and latitude
of Lisbone, which is a famous town in Portingale, here having first found out
that town in Spain, which is nigh unto the West Ocean, extend your threede
from the pole through the midst of that Town to the Equinoctial and
somewhat beyond, and you shall find that the thread will cut the Equinoctial
in the 13. degree, which is the Longitude of Lisbone. Now if you would know
the Latitude of the same place, set the one foot of your compass in the Pole,
and extend the other foot to Lisbone, and keeping your compass at that
wideness, bring the mooueable foot to the skale of latitude, and so you shall
find that Lisbone has in North latitude 38. degrees and 30^ Now to know the
distance betwixt any two places do thus, Set the one foot of your compass in
the one place, and the other foot in the other place, and apply that wideness
to the Equinoctial, and look how many degrees of the Equinoctial that
wideness comprehends, and by allowing 60. Italian miles to every degree, you
shall have the distance by a right line, betwixt those two places, for by doing
thus, you shall find the distance betwixt Lisbone and Compostella to be 120.
miles. Thus I have sufficiently (I hope) expounded every thing contained in
Plancius his Map, his general skale made for the same only excepted, whereof I
come now to speak. In this skale are set down the miles of Russia, of Italy,
of England, of Scotland, the French leagues, the hour leagues, the Spanish
leagues, the German and Garscoyne miles, which two are all one, the miles of
Sweuia in Germany, of Scandia and of Swethland, which last three are likewise
all one, the use of which skale is thus. Take with your compass the distance
betwixt any 2. places which you desire to know, and apply the same to the skale
of such miles as you would know, and so many miles the two places shall be
distant one from another as the number of the skale does show: but if the
distance betwixt the two places be longer then the skale, then having first
taken the whole length of the skale with your compasses, look how many times
that widenes of your compass measuring by a right line is contained in the
distance betwixt the two places, and if there be any odd space left,
streighten your compass to that odd space, and apply that to the beginning of
the skale, and add the number of miles which you there find to the first great
number, so shall you have the total sum. And lo here for each an example:
first suppose that you would know the distance betwixt Cape S. Marie, and Cape
finis terrae, which are two Capes or headlands in the West side of Spain, both
having in a manner one self Longitude, and do differ only in latitude by 6.
degrees, for the one has 37. and the other 43. in latitude, which distance if
you take with your compass by setting the one foot in the one place, and the
other foot in the other place, and applying that widenes to the skale of
Italian miles, you shall find the distance to be 390. Italian miles, but if you
measure the same distance according to the Geographicall manner, which is to
allow for every degree of latitude 60. miles, you shall find ye distance to be
no more but 360. Italian miles. Let your other example be thus: Suppose that
you would know the distance betwixt Compostella in Spain and Constantinople,
which have all one Latitude and do differ only in Longitude, here because
the distance betwixt these two places is longer then the skale, you must take
with your compass the whole length of the skale, and then to look how many
times that widenes is comprehended (measuring by a right line) betwixt the two
said places, and you shall find that widenes to be comprehended in the distance
betwixt those two places three times, wherefore if you multiply 840. by 3. it
will make in all 2520. Italian miles. But if (according to the Geographicall
kind of measuring) you do multiply the difference of their Longitudes, which
is 43. degrees, by the number of miles, which is also 43. belonging to the
Latitude of both places, which Latitude is also very nigh 43. degr. you shall
find that the distance betwixt those two towns is no more but 1870. Italian
miles, which number of miles is not so great as that of the skale by 650.
Italian miles. And therefore I can not think but that there is some error in
the skale committed either by the Printer or else by the author through some
negligence, and not for lack of skill or knowledge how to make a true skale,
being so excellent a Geographer as the Author by this and other his Maps
heretofore made shows himself to be, or else there is some greater mystery
therein, then I perhaps do understand, for in seeking to know the distance
betwixt two places differing only in Latitude, I find the skale most times to
agree with the Geographicall kind of measuring, but if the two places do differ
either in longitude only, or else both in longitude and also in latitude, then
I find the skale to differ very much from the Geographicall kind of measuring,
wherefore I think it good briefly here to set down certain ready ways of
finding out the distance of two places, differing either in latitude only, in
longitude only, or in both, which I do show also at large in the second part
of my Sphere, Chap. 14.

How to find out the distance of two places differing only in Latitude.
IF the two places have both either North or South Latitude, then subtracte the
lesser Latitude out of the greater, so shall you have the difference: which
difference, if you multiply by sixetie, the product shall be the number of
miles, and if to the whole degrees of difference there be annexed any minutes,
then you must add to the product for every minute one mile. But if one of the
two places have North Latitude, and the other South Latitude, then you shall
find their difference by addition, and not by subtraction. As for example,
suppose that you would know the distance betwixt a town called Pasquali,
which is the outermost town in Moroa upon the sea toward the South, having in
North latitude 35. degrees 30^ and a certain town in Afrique called Debsan
standing nigh unto the lake Zembre, which has in South Latitude 12. degrees
30^ here by adding these two latitudes together, you shall find the sum to be
48. degrees, and that is the difference of their Latitudes, which difference if
you multiply by 60. the product will be 2880. and that is their distance.

How to find out the distance of two places differing only in Longitude.
IF both places have either East Longitude or West Longitude, then subtract the
lesser out of the greater, so shall you have the difference, which difference
you must multiply by the number of miles belonging to their Latitude, which you
shall find on the Northwest side of the Map, or by the Table of miles
answerable to one degree of every Latitude set down hereafter in the end of
this Treatise: and the product thereof shall be the number of miles whereby the
one place is distant from the other. As for example, I find Compostella in
Spain and Constantinople, having both almost 43. degrees of North Latitude, to
differ only in East longitude, for Compostella has in East longitude 13.
degrees 30^ and Constantinople has in East longitude 56. degrees, the
difference whereof by subtracting the lesser out of the greater you shall find
to be 42. degrees 30^ here if you multiply 42. by 43. miles belonging to one
degree of the foresaid Latitude 43. you shall find the product to be 1806.
then to find out the value of miles for the fraction 30, by the rule of
proportion, you must say thus: if 60. require 43. miles what shall 30. require,
and you shall find in the quotient 21. miles, which you must add to the
former sum 1806. and it will make in all 1827. miles and. which is the true
distance betwixt the two foresaid places. But if the one place have east
Longitude, and the other West Longitude, then you must find the difference
as well by Addition as by Subtraction. As for example, suppose that you would
know the distance betwixt S. Domingo in the I Will called Hispaniola, and a
certain place in Afrique called Septem montes, night unto the Ocean sea, both
places having 18. degrees of North latitude. And S. Domingo has in West
longitude 310. degrees 30^ and the place called Septem montes has in East
longitude seven degrees. Here you must first subtract 310. degrees 30^ out of
360. degrees, and there will remain 49. degree 30^ whereunto you must add the
East longitude of Septem montes, which is seven degrees, and it will make in
all 56. degrees 30^ which is the difference of their Longitude. Now if you
first multiply 56. degrees by 57. miles belonging to 18. degrees of latitude,
you shall find the product to be 3192. miles, and to find out the value of
miles for the fraction 30^ you must say thus: If 60. require 57. miles, what
shall 30^ require, and working by the common rule of three, you shall have in
the quotient 28. miles, and there remains 30/60. which is one half mile. Now
by adding 28. miles and. to 3192. it will make in all 3220. miles. and that is
the true distance betwixt S. Domingo and Septem montes, but by Plancius skale
you shall find the distance to be 3410. miles, which differs from the other
almost 200. miles.

(...). (...). degrees. degrees. London. 22. 0^ 51. 32^ The greater (...).
Jerusalem. 6^. 0. 32. 0. The lesser L^^. The difference of their Longitudes
47. 0.



How to find out the distance of two places differing both in Longitude and
Latitude by help of a semicircle divided into a 180. degrees, which I had
from my loving friend Master Wright of Cayes College in Cambridge, of whom I
make mention as well in my treatise of the Sphere as in that of Navigations.
FIrst draw a Semicircle upon a right Diameter, marked with the letters A. B.
C. D. whereof let D. be the Center like unto this here described, and the
greater that such semicircle is, the spaces of the degrees shall be the larger,
and thereby the more easy to find out the minutes. Then having drawn your
semicircle and divided the same accordingly, suppose that by help thereof you
would find out the distance betwixt London and Jerusalem, which two towns do
differ both in Longitude and also in Latitude so much as is here set down in
the front of the figure according to such Longitude and Latitude as Plancius
does allow to either town in his great Map. Now to find out the true distance
of these two towns you must first take the lesser Longitude out of the
greater, so shall you have the difference of their Longitudes, which is 47.
degrees, then count that difference upon the Semicircle beginning at A. and so
proceed to B. and at the end of that difference, make a prick marked with
the letter E. unto which prick draw a right line by your ruler from D. the
Center of the Demicircle: That done seek out the lesser Latitude which is 32.
degrees 0^ in the foresaid Demicircle, beginning to account the same from the
prick E. and so proceed toward the letter B. and at the end of the said
lesser latitude set down another prick marked with the letter G. from which
prick or point draw a perpendicular line, which by help of your squire or
compasses, may fall with right Angles upon the former right line drawn from D.
to E. and where it falls, there set down a prick marked with the letter H.
That done seek out the greater Latitude which is 51. degrees and 32^ in the
foresaid Demicircle, beginning to account the same from A. toward B. and at
the end of that Latitude set down another prick, marked with the letter I.
from whence draw another perpendicular line that may fall by help of your
squire or compasses, with right Angles upon the Diameter A. C. and there make a
prick marked with the letter K. That done take with your compass the distance
that is betwixt K. and H. which distance you must set down upon the said
Diameter A. C. setting the one foot of your Compass upon K. and the other
toward the Center D. and there make a prick marked with the letter L. then
take with your Compass the length of the shorter perpendicular line G. H. and
apply that wideness upon the longer perpendicular line I. K. setting the one
foot of your compass at I. which is the end of the greater Latitude, and
extend the other foot toward K. and there make a prick marked with the
letter M. That done take the distance betwixt L. and M. with your compass and
apply the same to the Demicircle setting the one foot of your compass in A.
and the other toward B. and there make a prick marked with the letter N. And
the number of degrees contained betwixt A. and N. will show the true distance
of the two places which you shall find to be 39. degrees, which being
multiplied by 60. makes in all 2340. miles, and whenever you have any minutes
besides the whole degrees, remember to add unto the sum of degrees for every
minute one mile. By Plancius skale you shall find the distance betwixt London
and Jerusalem to be 3040. miles which are 700. miles too many. But you have to
note by the way, that if the difference of the Longitudes does exceed the
number of 180. then you must subtract that exceeding difference out of 360. and
the remainder shall be the difference of the Longitudes, and then work in all
points as is before taught.

By this rule and the other two rules first declared, you shall easily try the
skale of any Map whether it be true or not, so as you first have the true
Longitude and Latitude of the two places whose distance you seek to know. And
thus I end with Plancius Map, hoping not to offend him with any thing that I
have added thereunto for the better instruction of those that have not been
exercised in such matters.

And yet I had almost forgotten one thing, which is this, I have here before as
you have read, made mention of drawing certain perpendicular lines in the
former figure of the Demicircle by help of your Compasses. Wherefore I think
it necessary here to set down the order thereof.

How to make with you Compasses, a perpendicular line to fall from any point
given upon another right line, making therewith right angles without the help
of any squire.
SEt the firm foot of your Compass in the point given, and extend the other
foot a little beyond the line right against the point given, and draw a secret
Arch or portion of a Circle that may cut the said live in two points, and
divide that part of the Arch which lies betwixt the two sections into two
equal parts, setting a prick in the very midst thereof: then having laid your
ruler to that prick, and also to the point given, draw a right line, and that
line will fall upon the other line with right Angles, as you may see by this
figure.



The Table of miles answerable to one degree of every several Latitude.
D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S 1 59 59 19 56 44 37 47 55 55 34 25 73 17 33 2 59
58 20 56 23 38 47 17 56 33 33 74 16 32 3 59 55 21 56 1 39 46 38 57 32 41 75 15
32 4 59 51 22 55 38 40 45 58 58 31 48 76 14 31 5 59 46 23 55 14 41 45 17 59 30
54 77 13 30 6 59 40 24 54 49 42 44 35 60 30 0 78 12 28 7 59 33 25 54 23 43 43
53 61 29 5 79 11 27 8 59 25 26 53 56 44 43 10 62 28 10 80 10 25 9 59 16 27 53
28 45 42 26 63 27 14 81 9 23 10 59 5 28 52 59 46 41 41 64 26 18 82 8 21 11 58
54 29 52 29 47 40 55 65 25 21 83 7 19 12 58 41 30 51 58 48 40 9 66 24 24 84 6
16 13 58 28 31 51 26 49 39 22 67 23 27 85 5 1^ 14 58 13 32 50 53 50 38 34 68 22
29 86 4 11 15 57 57 33 50 19 51 37 46 69 21 30 87 3 8 16 57 41 34 49 45 52 36
56 70 20 31 88 2 5 17 57 23 35 49 9 53 36 7 71 19 32 89 1 3 18 57 4 36 48 32 54
35 16 72 18 32 90 0 0

Though it be the common order of working to know by help of the former table,
the distance of two places differing only in Longitude, yet I think it a more
sure way to find it out per Tabulas Sinuum, the rule whereof is thus.

First take the difference of the two Longitudes, by subtracting the lesser out
of the greater, and the half of that shall be the Arch which you have to seek
in the front of the Tables, then multiply the sine of that Arch by the sine of
the complement of the common Latitude, and divide the product thereof by the
total sine, the quotient whereof you must seek out in the Tables amongst the
sines, and the Arch of that sine is the one half of the distance, which being
doubled shall be the whole distance containing degrees of the great Circle, and
every such degree contains of Italian miles 60. and of German miles 15. and
by working thus you shall find the distance betwixt Compostella and
Constantinople to be 1846. Italian miles, supposing the common latitude to be
43. degrees, and the difference of their longitudes to be 42. degrees 30^ And
by working by the common table you shall find the distance of those two places
to be 1827. Italian miles as before, because the common Table has no minutes
of miles but only seconds, which are not to be accounted of, and in working by
Appian his Table having minutes of miles, you shall find the said distance to be
2184. Italian miles, and by Mercator his Map to be 1980. Italian miles, in
whose Map the common Latitude of the said 2. places is 43. and the difference
of their longitudes is 44. 0^ And by the skale set down in Plancius his Map,
you shall find the distance to be 2520. Italian miles, in which Map the common
Latitude of the two foresaid places is 42. degrees. 30^ and the difference of their
Longitudes is also 42. degrees 30^ Truly I must needs confess that it is not
so easy to make a skale or trunk for a Map or a Card drawn in plano, as
for that which is drawn upon a round body or Globe: and therefore it is no
marvel though the skales of Mappes drawn in plano, and likewise the trunkes
set down in the Mariners Cards do not always show the true distance of
places, which I believe is to be done as truly and a great deal more readily
by my friend Master Wright his Semicircle before described, then by the rules
of Gasparus Peucerus in his book de dimensione terrae, which rules do depend
upon the knowledge of the quantity of the Angles and sides of Sphericall
Triangles, which kind of working is indeed more troublesome and tedious then
ready or pleasant. But if Master Wright would make his Demicircle an
universal instrument to find out thereby all the three kinds of distances as
he promised me to do, there were no way in mine opinion worthy to be compared
unto it, neither for the trueness, easiness, nor readiness of working
thereby.

A very brief and most plain description of Master Blagraue his Astrolabe,
which he calls the Mathematical Jewel. Together with diverse uses thereof,
and most necessary for sea men, written by Master Blundeuill.

NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO: Luke 4 Verbum Dei manet in aeternum: IW



Imprinted at London by John Windet.

To the Reader.
OF Astrolabes I have never seen but three sorts, First that of Stofflerus,
which for these hundred years past or there abouts, has been had in most
price and estimation, as an instrument containing all the uses, or at the least
the most part of all other Mathematical Instruments, which because it
requires almost for every several Latitude a several Table: Gemma Frisius
invented since another kind of Astrolabe, having but one Table to serve for all
Latitudes, and therefore he called it the Catholicon, that is to say, an
universal Astrolabe, which has also been most esteemed and used many years.
Since whose time, and of very late years, one of our own countriemen a
Gentleman of Reading besides London, called M. Blagraue, has greatly augmented
the said Catholicon, and has thereby as it were newly invented a third kind
of Astrolabe, which he calls the Mathematical Jewel, whereby are to be
wrought more conclusions then by any other one instrument whatsoever, for which
his most excellent invention used therein, he deserves great commendation. And
to the intent that others which have not been exercised in such things, might
the more easily attain to the better understanding of the said Jewel: I have
made a plain description of all the parts belonging to the said Jewel,
without committing any offense (I hope) to the Author thereof, to the intent
that every Gentleman might have the perfect knowledge and use of so worthy an
instrument: But broad Astrolabes though they be thereby the truer, yet for
that they are subject to the force of the wind, and thereby ever moving and
unstable, are nothing meet to take the altitude of any thing, and specially
upon the Sea, which thing to avoid, the Spaniards do commonly make their
Astrolabes or Rings narrow and weighty, which for the most part are not much
above five inches broad, and yet do weigh at the least four pound, and to
that end the lower part is made a great deal thicker then the upper part
toward the ring or handle: Notwithstanding most of our English Pilots that be
skillful, do make their sea Astrolabes or ringes six or seven inches broad,
and therewith very massiue and heavy, not easy to be moved with every wind,
in which the spaces of the degrees be the larger, and thereby the truer, of
which kind of Astrolabes or Rings, I shall speak hereafter in my Treatise of
Navigations, and also of the Mariners Cross staff. But whenever you have to
take the altitude of the Sun or of any other star be in wandering or fixed,
I would wish you to use the Mariners heavy and massiue Astrolabe, which in
mine opinion for that purpose, is the sit and most assured instrument of
all others and to find out all other conclusions by help of Master Blagraue
his Jewel, or rather by help of the Celestial Globe, which for Astronomicall
matters is the perfectest instrument of all, in which are contained all the
stars both southern and Northern that have been heretofore known, and
those that are lately known or shall be known hereafter may be easily placed
therein: which thing can not be so well performed in any Astrolabe were it
never so great. But because the Globe is combersome and not portable, and
therewith costly, and especially if it be of any greatness, (for the greater
the better) and also if it chance to be broken in any part of the body
thereof, it can never be made again perfectly whole, it is therefore no meet
instrument for every Mariner to have, but only for such as be of good
ability, in steed whereof to find out many necessary conclusions, Master
Blagraue his Mathematical Jewel may serve very well, and specially if it had
on the back part the like matter and Rete or Net, to serve the South
Latitude of the world as it has in the fore part to serve the North
latitude, for then I believe verily, that the chiefest Sotherne star, as the
Cross, the Southern Triangle, Noah's Dove or Pigeon, and another called
Polophilax, lately found out by such as have traveled by sea on the South
side of the Equinoctial, might easily be placed by Master Blagraue in that
Rete, having once learned of the skillful Seamen the true longitude, latitude,
and declination of the said Stars, so should his Jewel in mine opinion be
much more serviceable to the sea men, then now it is, by reason that those
few Southern Stars that be contained in his first Net, are nothing so nigh
unto the South pole, as the Northern Stars described in his first Net, are
unto the North pole, amongst which Northern Stars, it were very necessary
for the Sea men, that the seven principal Stars as well of the great Bear
as of the little Bear, were all duly placed in his first Net. Truly if
Master Blagraue his affairs would suffer him to take pain herein, I believe
that his Jewel should not be much inferior to the celestial Globe, which
indeed it represents, and in so doing he should greatly profit the sea men,
and deserve thereby great good will and commendations at their hands.

What this word Astrolabe signifies.
BEfore I begin to describe unto you the said Instrument and all other parts
thereof it shall not be amiss to show you what this word Astrolabe
signifies.

This word Astrolabe is as much to say as the handle or instrument of the
Stars, by help whereof the manifold motions and apparences of the heavens
and of the Stars therein contained are known, and it is called of some a
planispheare, because it is both flat and round, representing the Globe or
Sphere, having both his Poles flat both together, the shape or figure of
which Instrument I do not here set down because the Instrument it self is to
be had for a small price in diverse places of London, which if you lay before
you when you mind to read this my description thereof here following, I doubt
not but that you shall find every part thereof so plainly explaned as you
shall need no other teach to instruct you therein, or to help you to understand
any of these Conclusions that are to be wrought by that Instrument, and
specially those which I have here set down, such as the Table following
shows, and as I thought most meet for sea men to know, and being thoroughly
exercised in them, you shall the more easily understand the manifold and
necessary conclusions set down by Master Blagnaue himself in his own book,
which book I would wish you to buy, and earnestly to study the same. But now
I will first describe the said Instrument, and then show the use thereof by so
many conclusions as are contained in the table hereafter following.

The description of Master Blagraue his Astrolabe, otherwise called the
Mathematical Jewel.
TThis Astrolabe is divided into two parts, whereof the one is called the
forepart, and the other the backepart. The foreparte contains two principal
parts, that is, the Matter, which is immovable, and the Rete, which is
mooueable. Again, the Matter is environed with a great circle, called the
Meridian, passing through the 2. Poles of the world marked with the letters
A.B. and through the two Solsticiall points of Cancer, and Capricorn marked
with the characters belonging to those two Signs, and therefore may very well
be called the Collure of the 2. Solstices. And this circle is divided by two
cross Diameters iuto 4. quarters every quarter containing 90. degrees, so as
the whole circumference of the circle is 360. degrees, which degrees do
proceed from 90. to 90.

Now as touching the 2. cross Diameters, the one passing through the Center,
and also through the two Poles, The 2. cross Diameters in the Matter.
is the Axletree of the world, signifying sometime the first Meridian, and
sometime the right Horizon, and sometime the line of six hours as well for
the Morning as Evening, and then it is the line of East and West, and sometime
the line of North and South.

And the other cross Diameter drawn with red incke, signifies most commonly
the Equinoctial, The Equinoctial.
and sometime the line of East and West, and sometime the line of North, and
South, and especially when you have to find out the 12. houses of heaven, to
which end are set down in the outermost Meridian these four Latin words,
first at the North pole marked with the letter A. Oriens, which is as much to
say, as the East part: and at the south Pole marked with the letter B.
Occidens, which signifies the West part: and at the end of the overthwart
Diameter, drawn with red ink, and most commonly signifying the Equinoctial,
marked with the letter C. on the right hand is set down Culmen Coeli, the
highest part of heaven, which is the South, at which end the Ringle or handle
is fastened. And at the other end of the said Diameter, marked on the left
hand with the Letter D. is set down Imum Coeli, the lowest part of heaven,
which is the North. And by these two cross Diameters the whole Matter is
divided into four quarters, that is, Northeast, and Southeast, Northwest and
Southwest. The Northeast quarter lies betwixt Imum Coeli, and the upper end
of the Axletree, whereon is written Oriens. And the Southeast quarter lies
betwixt the same point and Culmen Coeli, and the Southwest quarter lies
betwixt Culmen Coeli, and the lower end: of the Axletree, whereon is written
Occidens, and the Northwest quarter lies betwixt the point Occidens and Imum
Coeli.

Besides these 2 cross Diameters the Matter is traced with 180 Meridians which
do pass through both the Poles, The Meridians and hour lines in the Matter.
whereofthe first passing through the center from Pole to Pole is the Collure
of the Equinoxes, because it passes through the first point of Aries, and the
first point of Libra, and is otherwise called the Axletree, and signifies
sometime the right Horizon, and sometime the first Meridian from which upon the
Equinoctial are counted the degrees of longitude both East and West. And all the foresaid Meridians are most commonly used as hour lines, for every 15th.
Meridan, counting from the Limb, does signify one hour, for 15. degrees do
make an hour, and 4. minutes do make a degree. And these hours at the end of
every 15th. Meridian are marked in the body of the Matter somewhat above the
Tropique of Cancer with Arithmeticall Figures, proceeding from 1. to 12.
forward toward the right hand, and again are marked somewhat beneath the
Tropique of Capricorn with like Figures, proceeding backward toward the left
hand. Whereof the upper numbers do signify the forenoone hours, and the
lower numbers the afternoon hours, and are placed so as one self hour line
does pass through both numbers: for the line of the eleventh hour in the
forenoone serves also to the first hour in the afternoon, and the forenoone
hour of 10. serves also to the hour of two in the afternoon, and the fore
noone of 9. serves to the hour of 3. in the afternoon: and the forenoone
hour of 8. serves to the hour of 4. in the after noone, and the forenoone
hour of 7. serves to the hour of 5. in the afternoon, and the forenoone
hour of 6. serves also to the 6. hour in the afternoon, and from thence
forth toward the left hand, 5. serves to 7. 4. to 8. 3. to 9. 2. to 10.
and 1. to 11. as before.

But when soever you have to find out any hour amongst the hour lines in
the Matter, remember that the Axletree which passes through the Center and also
through both the Poles is always the sixth hour both of the morning and
evening, from which you shall the more easily find out any hour that you
seek by allowing fifteen Meridians to every hour, as is before said. And
you have to note that all these Meridians do sometime signify every one a
several oblique Horizon, saving that the first Meridian or Axletree signifies
the right horizon as has been said before. How to find out the Horizon of
euey several latitude.
And to find out in the Matter the horizon of every latitude, reckon from the
axletree on both hands so many Meridians as may make up the number of degrees
of your latitude, and that Meridian shall be your Horizon. In counring of which
Meridians you shall find that every fifth Meridian is drawn with a greater
black line then the rest. Now overthwart these Meridians are drawn 180.
Parallels, The Parallels of the Matter.
which proceed from 1. to 90. whose nombers are set down in the dimbe of the
matter thus, 10. 20. 30. 40. and so forth both upward and downward, until you
come to 90. and these Paralle Is are otherwise called the circles of
declination as well of the Sun as of any star. Amongst which there be 2.
Parallels painted red, The two Tropiques.
where of that toward the North pole signifies the tropique of Cancer, and
the other toward the South pole the tropique of Capricorn. Then there is
another oblique overthwart read line, which passing through the center from
Tropique to Tropique, signifies the Ecliptique line, The Ecliptickline of the
Matter
night unto which on each side are set down the Characters of the twelve
Signs, whereof Aries and Libra are placed at the center, and Cancer at the one
end of the Ecliptique on your right hand, whereas it touches the said
Tropique, and Capricorn at the other end of the said Ecliptique, on your
left hand, whereas it touches the said Tropique of Capricorn, and the rest of
the signs are orderly placed betwixt the said Tropiques, every two Signs one
against another that have like declination, as Gemini and Leo, Taurus and
Virgo, which are placed betwixt the center and Cancer, then Pisces and Scorpio,
and Aquarius and Sagittarius are placed betwixt the Center and Capricorn. And
every Sign contained in the Ecliptique line is divided with slaunting black
streeks into 15. spaces, every space containing two degrees, which makes 180.
degrees, and being doubled, because the spaces are to be counted does forward
and backward, do make in all 360. degrees, which is the whole circuit or
longitude of the Ecliptique, and the degrees of the said Ecliptique are larger
toward the Limb than toward the Center, whereby the spaces betwixt Sign and
sign are not equal, but some larger than other some.

And note that upon the outermost Limb of the Matter are drawn three circles
making two reasonable spaces, The Limb of the Matter.
both which spaces are divided into 360. degr. both of them beginning at the
North pole. And the degrees in the outermost space of the Limb, beginning at
the North pole do proceed from 15. to 15. downward toward your left hand, and
so round about the instrument until you come to 360. which degrees do show the
hours of the Equinoctial. And at the North pole, whereas the division
begins, is set down the figure of 6. signifying the sixth hour of the
forenoone, then counting fifteen degrees downwarde toward your left hand is
set down in the foresaid space the figure of 5. then 4. 3. 2. and 1. And at the
end of the Equinoctial on the left hand is set down 12. from which
proceeding still downwards are set these numbers of hours, 11. 10. 9. 8. 7.
and 6. which 6. stands at the South pole, then from thence proceeding
vpwardes are set down these hours 5. 4. 3. 2. 1. and then 12. which stands
at the end of the Equinoctial on the right hand, from whence proceeding still
upwards toward the North pole, are set down these hours, 11. 10. 9. 8. and
7. and at the Pole it self is set down the figure of 6. as before has been
said, from whence you first began to count. And in the inner space of the same
Limb, the 360. degrees are to be counted by 90. in such sort as the first 90.
is placed at the North pole, the second 90. at the one end of the Equinoctial
marked with C. The third 90. at the South pole, marked with B. And the fourth
90 at the other end of the Equinoctial, marked with D. Every which quarter is
to be counted both upward and downwarde, according as you see the numbers
written with Arithmeticall figures, and are placed one above another in the
said space, whereof the upper figures are somewhat lesser than the nether
figures, both of them proceeding from 1. to 90. the greater figures from the
Equinoctial upward to the very Pole, and the lesser Figures from the Pole
downward to the Equinoctial, and are thus set down. 10. 20. 30. 40.

A Description of the Net, called in Latin Rete.
THis part is first environed round about with a great circle signifying most
commonly the Meridian or 90. Azimuth or Vertical circle, and sometime it
signifies the Equinoctial, and especially when the Center is taken from the
Pole, which Circle is divided by two cross Diameters into four quarters,
every quarter containing 90. degrees, which degrees are to be numbered in the
very Limb of the Rete both upward and downwarde, and of those two cross
Diameters, the one end marked with the letter A. signifies the Zenith, and
the other end marked with the letter B. signifies the Nadir or point opposite,
and the other cross Diameter marked with the letters C. D. signifies the
Horizon, which for distinctions cause is otherwise called the Finitor, because
the Meridians before described in the Matter are to be called and used sometimes
as Horizons and this Finitor is a pretty broad Ruler, the very edge whereof
is divided with small divisions into 180. degrees, which being doubled by
reckoning the same both forward and backwarde, (beginning at the Center) do
make up three hundred and three score degrees.

This Finitor signifies the Horizon of the Globe, The Finitor
the very edge whereof being divided by little short streekes into small
portions or degrees, is always to be applied to any several latitude when
need is. And the broader part thereof serves only to contain the numbers
that are set therein both beneath and above to know thereby the number of
every Azimuth hereafter described, which numbers do proceed from the Center
to the right hand thus, 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. and so forth to 90. Then backwarde
toward the Center are set down 100. 110. 120. 130. 140. and so forth until
you come to 180. which is placed at the very Center. Then from thence toward
the left hand are set down these numbers 190. 200. 210. and so forth until
you come to 270. and from thence turning again toward the center are set
down 280. 290. and so forth until you come to 360. placed at the Center.

And in the said Net are certain circles, The Almican teraths.
which are Parallels to the foresaid Finitor, proceeding toward the Zenith,
and are in every respect like unto the Parallels described in the Matter, and
these Parallels are called Almicanteraths, that is to say, circles of Altitude,
which beginning at the Finitor, do proceed to the Zenith, marked with the
letter A. from 1. to 90. And though there be out out in the Rete but 30.
Almicanteraths, yet for so much as every space contained betwixt every 2.
Almicanteraths do contain 3. degrees, they make in all 90. for 3. times 30.
makes 90. which degrees you may see set down in the Limb of the Rete on both
hands thus, 10. 20. 30. and so forth, till you come to 90. which stands at
the very Zenith.

And these Almicanteraths are crossed with other circles called Azimuthes, The
Azimuthes.
that is to say, Vertical circles, which passing from the Finitor, do meet all
in the Zenith, whereof though in this instrument there be set down but 12.
being 15. degrees distant one from another, yet you must imagine that there be
180. which the degrees set down in the Finitor, in such manner as is before
described do show. And you have to note that if the Sun be in the very
beginning of the Azimuthes, which is at the center, then is he full East, and
if he be in the 90. Azimuth, then he is full South, and when he is in the 180.
then he is full West, and when he is in the 270. Azimuth, then he is full
North.

And if you would have this account of the Azimuthes to answer the Mariners
compass, How to count the Azimuthes according to the Mariners Compass.
then divide the number of the Azimuthes wherein the Sun is by 11. degrees
and which is 15. minutes, and the quotient will show the rombe or wind of the
Mariners Compass, so as in your account you proceed from the first Azimuth
toward your right hand, that is, from East to South, and from South to West,
and from West to the North, and so from thence again to the East point whereas
you first began. Also you have to note by the way, that these Azimuthes do
sometime signify the circles of position, the use whereof you shall find set
down hereafter in the 31. position of this Treatise.

In the mean time I will proceed in describing the Zodiaque, of the Rete, which
in shape is like to an Egg, The description of the Zodiaque of the Rete
called in Latin Figura ovalis, the one half whereof extends toward the
Zenith, and the other toward the Nadir or point opposite to the said Zenith,
in which circle are placed the 12. Signs, whereof the 6. Northern signs, that
is, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo are placed in the nether
half toward the Nadir, and the other six Southern Signs, that is, Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, are placed in the
upper half of the Zodiaque toward the Zenith, and every one of these Signs
are divided into 30. degrees, which are set down with Arithmeticall Figures in
the said Zodiaque thus, 10. 20. 30.

Moreover, in the said Net are placed certain fixed Stars to Of Stars 71
contained in the Rete.
the number of 71. whose names here do follow. Caput Ophiuci, that is, the head
of Serpentarius, Aquila, the Eagle. Caput Engon, the head of Hercules. Cuspis
Sagittarii, the shaft of Sagittarius. Palma Ophiuci, the hand of Serpentarius.
Cauda Delphini, the tail of the Dolphin. Romboides Delphini, which is a star
in the Dolphins back. Cor Scorpionis, the heart of the Scorpion. Frons
Borealis, Media, and Australis Scorpionis, the Northern, Southern, and middle
front of Scorpio. Lucida Lyrae, the bright Star of Lyra, or Vultur cadens. Lanx
Chaele Borealis and Australis, the North and South star of the Balance.
Corona Gnosiae, the crown of Ariadna. Praecedens and sequens caudae
Capricorni, that is, the former and follower in the tail of Capricorn. Caput
Draconis, the head of the Dragon Hastile Bootis, the Borespeare of Arcturus.
Cauda Cigni, the tail of the Swanne. Fomahand, a star in the mouth of the
Southern Fish. Arcturus, a star betwixt the legs of Bubulcus or Boots.
Humerus Bootis, the shoulder of Bubulcus. Dexter Humerus Cephei, the right
shoulder of Cepheus. Crus Pegasi, the leg of the winged Horse. Spica
Virginis, the Wheat ear in the hand of Virgo. Tres stellae in cauda Vrsae
maioris, three stars in the tail of the great Bear. Previndemiatrix, that
is Virgo. Cauda Ceti, the tail of the Whale. Andromedae Scapulum, the shoulder
blade of Andromeda. Cingulum Andiomedae, the girdle of Andromeda. Humerus Vrse
maioris, the shoulder of the great Bear. Corvi rostrum, the beak of the
Crow. Corviala dextra, the right wing of the Crow. Cauda Leonis, the tail of
the Lion. Ceruix Leonis, the neck of the Lion. Cor Leonis, the heart of the
Lion, otherwise called Regulus. Lucida Hydrae, the bright Star of Hydra.
Capita Geminorum, the heads of the two Twins named Apollo and Hercules.
Cancer, the Crabbe. Canis minor, the little Dog. Canis mayor, the great Dog.
Canopus, a fair star in the left oar of the Ship Argus. Humerus dexter
Aurigae, the right shoulder of Auriga. Hircus, the Goat hanging at the back
of Auriga. Hedi, the two little Goats sucking behind at her paps. Humerus
dexter Orionis, the right shoulder of Orion. Tres stellae in cingulo Orionis,
three stars in the girdle of Orion. Humerus sinister Orionis, the left shoulder
of Orion. Pes sinister Orionis, the left foot of Orion. Oculus Tauri, the
Bulls eye. Pleiades, the seven little stars in the Bulls neck. Extremum
Eridani, the last end of the flood Eridanus. Caput Medusae, the head of Medusa.
Dextrum latus Persei, the right shoulder of Perseus. Cornu Arietis, the former
Star of the Rams horn. Venture Ceti the belly of the Whale. Iuba Ceti, the
mane of the Whale.

And note that all these Stars in the Net, How to know which stars be North
or South.
whose longest tippes or points do point from the center outward, toward the
Limb, are Northern Stars having North declination, and those whose longest
tippes do point inward from the limb toward the Center, are Southern
Stars, having Southern declination. All which Stars are set down in a
Table in the beginning of his third book, which does not only show their
names, but also their longitudes, latitudes, and declinations, their natures,
their right ascentions and magnitudes or greatness. And whereas both in the
Matter, and also in the Rete one self circle is made to have diverse
significations, the cause thereof shall plainly appear unto you by the use of
the Astrolabe, in seeking to find out thereby the propositions of the foresaid
book.

And besides the parts before described, A description of the Labell.
there is yet another part belonging to the forepart of the Instrument, called
the Labell, the one end whereof is fastened to the Center of the Astrolabe, so
as it may turn round about, and this Labell is divided into 90. degrees twice
set down therein with Arithmeticall Figures to be rekoned as well from the
Center to the point of the Labell, as from the point thereof to the Center
seruinge to diverse uses, yea the 90 degrees of the Label are sometimes to be
repeated 4 times to make up the number of 360. degrees, as shall hereafter
plainly appear by the 12. proposition, showing how to find out the right
ascension of any degree or portion of the Ecliptique line.

And remember that the right line drawn from the Center of the Labell along
the inward edge thereof is called the Fiduciall line, The fiducial line of ye
label.
and is divided into 90. small parts called degrees, which line or inward edge
is always to be used in any proposition, and not the outward edge or back
part of the Labell.

Thus much touching the fore part of M. Blagraue his Jewel with every
particular part, with which forepart I wish you to be thoroughly acquainted
before you deal with the propositions here following, or with any other
proposition contained in M. Blagraue his book.

A brief description of the back part of the said Jewel.
IN the Limb of the back part is described the Theorique of the Sun, to
know thereby in what Sign and degree the Sun is every day throughout the
year, by laying the Diopter thereto, M. Blagraue calls it a Ruler, which
Diopter is made with two Pinules or square Tablets, each one pierced with two
holes one greater than another, the lesser to take the height of the Sun by
his beam passing through the said lesser holes, and the greater holes do
serve to take the altitude of the Sun, being something darkened in the day
time, so as he casts no beam, or else the altitude of any Star in the
night season by looking with your one eye, the other being shut, through the
two greater holes of the Pinules or Tablettes. And the midst of this Diopter
is fastened with a pin to the center of the Astrolabe, so as the said Diopter
may turn round about, and the middle line of the said Diopter is called the
fiducial line, because it rightly directs the sight of the eye to the
foresaid holes, the degrees of the altitude of the Sun or of any Star are
set down in the outermost space of the Limb, divided by 2. crosie Diameters
into four quarters, every quarter containing 90. degrees, the number of which
degrees are set down in the outermost space of the Limb of the said back
part with arithmeticall figures right over the heads of the said degrees of
altitude. And you have to note, that the perpendicular Diameter signifies the
Meridian, that is, the line of South and North, that is to say, the South point
at the ring or handle, and the North at the point opposite, and the other
overthwart Diameter signifies the right Horizon, that is to say, the line of
East and West, the East being placed on the left hand, and the West on the
right hand. And under the Theorique of the Sun you may draw as many circles
of such reasonable distance one from another, as in the spaces thereof may be
set down, the years of our Lord, the Dominicall letter for the leap year,
and the Dominicall letter for the common years, the Prime or golden number,
the Epact, and on what day of March or of April Easter day every year
falls, in such order as M. Blagraue has himself described in a Table made
of purpose in the second book of his Jewel the 11. chapter.

Thus having described every particular thing as well in the forepart as in the
back part of the said instrument, I will now show you how to use the same,
and how to find out thereby all the conclusions contained in the Table here
next following.

The Table containing 32. necessary conclusions to be wrought by this
Astrolabe.
FIrst, how to find out the place of the Sun (that is to say) in what sign
and degree thereof the Sun is every day throughout the year, being not
leap year, and also the opposite point of that degree. Proposition. 1.

How to know the place of the Sun in the leap year, and how to find the
leap year. Prop. 2.

How to take the altitude of the Sun or of any star. Prop. 3.

How to take the Meridian altitude, that is to say, the highest or greatest
altitude of the Sun or of any star. Prop. 4.

How to know the altitude of the Sun at any hour without seeing the Sun.
Prop. 5.

How to know the Meridian altitude of the Sun or of any star in the Net
without seeing them. Prop. 6.

How to know the declination of the Sun, or of any star contained in the Net.
Prop. 7.

How to find out the latitude of any Region diverse ways. Prop. 8.

How to know the hour of the day by the Sun, and also in what part or coast
of heaven he is at that instant. Prop. 9.

How to find the rising and setting of the Sun every day in every
latitude, and thereby the length of the day, and also in what coast or part of
the Horizon he rises and sets. Prop. 10.

How to know every day at what hour the Moon rises and sets, and how
long she continues above the Horizon and also when she is full South. Prop. 11.

How to find out the right ascension of the Sun, or of any degree or portion
of the Ecliptique. Prop. 12.

Another more ready way to find out the right ascension of any degree or
portion of the Ecliptique by the Rete. Prop. 13.

How to find out the ascentionall difference of the Sun or of any degree or
point of the Ecliptique. Prop. 14.

How to find out the oblique ascension of the Sun, or of any point of the
Ecliptique. Prop. 15.

How to find out the right ascension of any Arc or portion of the Ecliptique,
and therewith to know what time it spends in rising in a right Sphere. Prop.
16.

How to find out the oblique ascension of any Arc of the Ecliptique in any
latitude, and what time it spends in his rising. Prop. 17.

How to find out the oblique descention of any point of the Ecliptique in any
latitude. Prop. 18.

How to find out the oblique descention of any Arc given of the Ecliptique,
and therewith to know the time which it spends in his setting. Prop. 19.

How to know the height of any star at any hour without seeing the star,
and thereby to find out in the firmament all the stars that be described in
the Net, and are to be seen with the eye* Prop. 20.

How to find out the ascentionall difference of any star, Prop. 21.

How to know the oblique ascension of any star. Prop. 22.

How to know what stars do never rise nor set in any latitude. Prop. 23.

How to know at what hour of the day or night any star rises or sets.
Prop. 24.

How to know how long any star continues above the horizon in every
latitude, Prop. 25.

How to find out the stars hour, and thereby to know the hour of the night.
Prop. 26.

How to find out the distance betwixt any two stars contained in the Net.
prop. 27.

Another way to know the distance of any two stars, theri longitudes and
latitudes being first known, and also by that means to find out the distance
betwixt any two places upon the earth. prop. 28.

How to find out the degree of Medium Coeli at any hour of the day, that is to
say, the degree of the Zodiaque that is in the Meridian at any hour that you
seek, and also the degree called Imum Coeli. prop. 29.

How to find out the horoscope or ascendent at any time of the day or night,
and thereby to have the four principal angles of heaven. Prop. 30.

How to find the circles of position, and to know how much the pole is elevated
above every such circle in any latitude, without the knowledge whereof you
cannot find out the 12. houses by this Astrolabe. prop. 31.

How to find out all the 12. houses of heaven, and thereby to erect a figure at
any hour of the day or night. prop. 32.

The uses of the Astrolabe, and first how to find out the place of the Sun
(that is to say) in what sign and degree thereof the Sun is every day
throughout the year, being not leap year, and also the opposite point of
that degree. The first. Proposition.
LAy the Diopter which is on the backside of the Astrolabe upon the day of the
month and that end of the Diopter with his fiduciall line will show you in
what sign and degree thereof the Sun is that day, and the other end of the
Diopter will show you the opposite point to that degree, as for example: I
would know the place of the Sun the 17. of July, here by laying the Diopter
upon that day, I find the Sun to be in the fourth degree of Leo, and the
opposite point thereof to be the fourth degree of Aquarius.

How to know the place of the Sun in the Leap year and how to find the
leap year. Proposition. 2.
WHen it is leap year, you must always add one degree more every day
during that year unto the place of the Sun found by the first proposition,
which leap year you shall know by dividing the year of the Lord by 4. for if
there be no remander left, then that year is leap year, so shall you find
the year of our Lord 1596. to be leap year.

How to take the altitude of the Sun, or of any star. Proposition. 3.
TO take the altitude in any time of the day when the Sun shines, you must
turn your face and also the left Tablet or Pinule of the Diopter toward the
Sun, holding the Astrolabe by the ring with your right forefinger or middle
finger being the somewhat bowed, in such sort as the Astrolabe may hang plumbe,
and then with your left hand lift the Diopter up and down until the Sun with
his beam due justly streeke through both the holes of each Pinule of the
Diopter, so as you may see the shadow of the two holes of the upper Pinule to
play upon the two holes of the nether Pinule, then mark upon what degree of
altitude the thinnest edge or fiduciall line of the Diopter falls in the
outermost skirt or border of the back of the Astrolabe, for that is the Suns
altitude for that present. But if the Sun be covered with a cloud, so as it
shines not clear mough to cast any shadow, and yet so as it may be seen with
the eye, then hang the Astrolabe by the ring upon your right thomb, and turning
your face toward the Sun* lift up your hand with the Astrolabe so high, as by
moving the Diopter with your left hand up and down, you may with your right
eye (the other being shut) see the Sun through the greater holes of both the
Pinules of the Diopter, and mark upon what degree of altitude the upper end
of the Diopter falls, and that is the altitude of the sun at the time, and
in this manner you must also take in the night season, the altitude of any
star.

How to take the Meridian altitude, that is to say, the highest or greatest
altitude of the Sun or of any star. The 4. Proposition.
Go into some open place whereas the sun shines somewhat before noonetide,
and there hanging the Astrolabe upon your right fore finger or middle finger,
take the altitude of the sun in such manner as is before taught, at diverse
times with some pawse betwixt every time to know thereby whether such altitude
increases or decreaseth, for if it increases, then the sun is not yet at
the Meridian, but if it decreaseth, then it is past the Meridian, and therefore
you must watch diligently to take him when he is at the highest. And you must
do the like to take in the night season, the Meridian altitude of any known
star, saving that then you must hang your Astrolabe upon your thumb before
your right eye, and to do as is taught in the last Proposition.

How to know the altitude of the sun, or of any star at any hour of the day
without seeing the sun or star. The 5. Proposition.
SEt the Finitor at your Latitude, and seek out amongst the hour lines or
Meridians of ye Matter in what point the Parallel or Circle of declination of
the sun crosses the hour line which you seek, and the Almicanterath and
Azimuth passing through that point do show both the altitude and also the coast
or part of heaven, wherein the sun or star is at that instant. This is a
very necessary Proposition, for by knowing the height of the sun at every
hour of the day in whatsoever sign the sun is you may make Tables for
particular dials, as Cylinders, hour Quadrants, and such like to serve any
latitude, yea rather this Instrument as M. Blagraue rightly says is a Table
of it self ready made to serve such purposes. Let the example of this
Proposition be thus, Suppose that at 8. of the clock in the morning the 21. of
April 1592. the sun being then in the tenth degree of Taurus, and his
declination 15. degrees Northward, you would know the altitude of the sun at
that hour, which by working as the rule teaches, you shall find to be almost
30. degrees, and that he is about 13. degrees distant from the East toward
the South.

How to know the Meridian altitude of the sun, or of any star every day
throughout the year, without seeing either sun or star. The 6. Proposition.
FIrst seek to know the declination of the sun or star either by the seventh
Proposition next following, or else by some Table, and whether it be North or
South. and knowing his declination, bring the Finitor to your Latitude, and
staying it there seek out in the limb of the matter on your right hand the
said declination, and there mark what Almicanterath touches that point, for
that Almicanterath being counted upon the limb of the Rete from the Finitor,
does by and by show the Meridian altitude of the sun or star for that day.
As for example, I would know the Meridian altitude of the sun the first of
July 1592. at which time his Parallel or declination is 22. degrees and
certain minutes Northward. Here having laid the Finitor to the Latitude 52. I
find that the 60. Almicanterath touches the Parallel, and that is the
Meridian altitude of the sun that day. Again suppose that I would know the
Meridian altitude of the star Oculus Tauri, in the Latitude 52. Here having
brought the Finitor to the said latitude, I find that the 53. Almicanterath
touches his Parallel or declination, which is 15. degrees 49^ Northward, so as
I find his Meridian altitude in that latitude to be 53. degrees. But you have
to note that if the sun or star have south declination, then you must count his
parallel from the Equinoctial downward toward the south Pole, so shall you
find the Meridian altitude of the great dog called Canis mayor, whose
Southern declination is 16. degrees to be 22. degr. and 30^ And by knowing the
Meridian altitude of any star, you may also know how far he is distant from
the Meridian or South line, if you subtract from his Meridian altitude his
altitude taken at any other time of the same night, for the remainder will show
his distance from the Meridian, and if the star at the time of taking his
altitude, be in the East part of the firmament, then he is so much short of the
Meridian, and if he be in the West, then he is so much past the Meridian. As
for example, knowing the Meridian altitude of Oculus Tauri to be 53 degrees,
and his other altitude newly taken to be 30. degrees. I find his distance from the
Meridian to be 23. degrees. as well by subtraction, as by counting upon the limb of
the Rete the degrees contained betwixt the two foresaid Almicanteraths. And
because the said star was in the East part of the firmament when I took his
altitude, I conclude that he wanted 25. degrees of arriving to the Meridian,
which makes one hour and a half, and a little more.

How to find the declination of the sun, or of any star described in the
net. The 7. Proposition.
THis may be done two manner of ways, first knowing the place of the sun,
seek his place in the Ecliptique line of the matter, and look what Parallel of
the matter passes through that degree, and the number of that Parallel will
show the declination (that is to say) how far the sun is distant from the
Equinoctial, counting from the Equinoctial upon the outermost Meridian or
inner limb of the matter, and according as the sign wherein the sun is be it
Northern or Southern, so is the declination of the sun, and must be
counted either upward or downewarde accordingly. The second way is thus,
bring the Fiduciall live of the labell to the degree of the sun in the
Zodiaque of the net, and the number of degrees counted upon the labell betwixt
the limb of the net, and the place of the sun which the labell touches upon
the outward edge of the said Zodiaque will show his declination. By either of
these two ways you shall find the declination of the Sun, being in the
tenth degree of Taurus to be 15. degrees Northward. And by this last way you
may know the declination of any star contained in the net thus. Having found
in the net the star whose declination you seek, lay the Fiduciall line of
the labell to the longest tippe of that star, then count upon the labell how
many degrees are contained betwixt the limb of the Rete, and that point
whereas the labell touches the longest tippe of the said star, and that
shall be his declination either Northern or Southern according as the said
tippe point either outward or inward: for if outward from the Center, then it
is Northern, if inward toward the Center, then it is Southern, as has
been said before in the description of the Net, and by doing thus you shall
find that the star called Canis mayor, that is the greater dog, has in
South declination 15. degrees 55^ Again you shall find the first star of
the Rams horn called Cornu Arietis to have in North declination 18. degrees.

How to find out the Latitude of any Region. The 8. Proposition.
FIrst you must know the place of the sun, and also his declination, and
having taken his Meridian altitude, reckon the same amongst the Almicanterathes
from the Finitor vpwardes, and turn about the Rete from the Pole arctique
toward the Equinoctial on your right hand, until it touches the Parallel
of the sun, for then look on your left hand and you shall find the Finitor
to stand at that Latitude which you seek. As for example, the 12. of April
1591. the sun being in the first degree 20. minutes of Taurus, and his
declination being then 12. degrees Northward, I find his Meridian altitude to
be 50. degrees, which I count upon the limb of the Rete proceeding from the
Finitor vpwardes toward the Zenith, and then I turn the Rete until I have
brought that Almicanterath to the Parallel of the Sun, which is 12. degrees,
counting the same from the Equinoctial on the right hand of the matter
toward the North Pole, and there staying the Rete, I find that on the left
hand the Finitor lies upon the 52. degree of Latitude counting from the North
pole down toward the Equinoctial. The common way of finding the Latitude is
thus, if it be in the day time, then take the Meridian altitude of the Sun,
and if the Sun be in any of the six Northern signs, then subtract the
declination of the sun out of his Meridian altitude, and the remainder shall
be the altitude of the Equinoctial above your Horizon, which being taken out
of 90. the remainder will show the altitude of the Pole, but if the sun be in
any of the six Southern signs, then you must add his declination to his
Meridian altitude, and the sum thereof shall be the altitude of the
Equinoctial, which being taken out of 90. the Remamder will show the Latitude
or elevation of the Pole. But to know the latitude of any place in the night
season, you must take the Meridian altitude of some known star which both
rises and sets, then after that you have taken his Meridian altitude with
your Astrolabe, you must learn to know his declination, and whether it be
Northern or Southern, for if the star have North declination, then you must
subtract his declination from his Meridian altitude, and the remainder shall be
the Altitude of the Equinoctial, which being taken out of 90. shall be the
latitude or elevation of the Pole, but if the declination of the star be
Southernly, then you must add his declination to his Meridian altitude, and
that sum shall be the altitude of the Equinoctial, which being taken out of
90. the remainder shall be the elevation of the Pole. And there be diverse other
ways of finding out the latitude of any place, which I have partly set down
in my Treatise of the two Globes about the latter end thereof, and partly in
my Treatise of Navigations, whereas I speak of the North star and of his
Guardes.

How to know the hour of the day by the Sun, and also in what part of heaven
he is at that instant. The 9. Proposition.
TAke the altitude of the Sun, and knowing the latitude of the place where
you are, bring the Finitor of the Rete to that Latitude, and having stayed it
there, look in what point the Almicanterath or altitude of the Sun crosses
the Suns Parallel or Circle of declination in the matter, and the hour line
passing through that point will show the true hour, and at that instant you
may also know in what Azimuth (that is to say) in what part of heaven, or as
the Mariners term it in what r^mbe or wind, as East, West, North, or South
etc. the Sun is at that instant, for that Azimuth which passes through the
foresaid point, is the Azimuth of the Sun. As for example, the 21. of April
1592. the sun being in the tenth degree of Taurus, and his declination being
then 15. degrees Northward, I find by the Astrolabe, Quadrant, or
Crosse-staffe, the altitude of the Sun in the forenoone to be 30. degrees.
Wherefore I having laid the Finitor to my Latitude which is 52. and stayed it
there, I mark in what point the Almicanterath cutteth the suns foresaid
Parallel in the matter, and I find that the hour line of eight in the
forenoone cutteth that point, which shows that it was then eight of the
clock in the morning, and that the sun was about 14. degrees distant from
the East toward the South.

How to find the rising and setting of the sun every day in every Latitude,
and thereby the length of the day, and in what coast or part of the Horizon be
rises and sets. The 10. Proposition.
BRing the Finitor to your Latitude, and staying it there, look in the matter
where the Parallel of the Sun does cut the Finitor, and the hour line which
crosses that point, will show the hour of his rising and setting, and the
number of hours betwixt his rising and setting is the length of the day, and
the number of the Azimuthes betwixt that point of the Finitor, and the Center
or first Azimuth will show you in what part or coast of the Horizon he both
rises and sets. As for example, seeking by this rule to know at what hour
the sun rises the 19. of June 1592. he being then in the sixth degree 39.
minutes of Cancer, and his declination then 23. degrees 19^ I find that he
rises 12. minutes before four, and goes down 12. minutes after 8. and
thereby I find the length of the day counting from sun rise to sun set to
be 16. hours and 24. minutes, and that he rises from the East toward North
40. degrees, which according to the Mariners reckoning is Northeast and by East
two quarters and somewhat more toward the North.

How to know every day at what hour the Moon rises and sets, and how
long she continues above the Horizon, and also when she is full South. The 11.
Proposition.
FIrst you must learn by some Almanacke or Ephemerides in what sign and
degree the Moon is, and whether it be a Northern sign or a Southern sign,
for if she be in a Northern sign, then bring her place to the Horizon of your
latitude in the Northeast part of the Astrolabe, but if she be in a Southern
sign bring her place to the said Horizon in the Southeast part of the
Astrolabe, and there having stayed the Rete bring the labell to the place of
the Sun for that day, and the labell will point to the hour of the Moons
rising in the limb of the matter: but because the Almanac or Ephemerides do
not set down ye true place of the Moon but only at noone, you must therefore
consider whether it be in the forenoone or in the afternoon that you seek,
for if it be in the afternoon you had need to know how many hours are run
from noone, and then for every hour to add half a degree to the place of the
Moon which you found at noonetide, but if it be in the forenoone, then you
must subtract from her place at noone, for every hour half a degree, so shall
you go very nigh to finds her true place in the Zodiaque for that hour, though
you know not her latitude which is but 5. degrees. at the most, and therefore can
cause no great error in this matter. Now to know when she sets you must do
thus, if the Moon be in any Northern sign, the^ you must bring her place to
the foresaid Horizon in the Northwest part of the Astrolabe, and by laying the
labell to the place of the sun, it will point to the hour of her setting,
but if she be in any Southern sign, you must bring her place to the Horizon
in the Southwesth part of the Astrolabe, and the labell being laid to the
place of the Sun will point to the hour of her setting. Now if you would
know how long time she is above the Horizon, and also at what hour she is
full South, then count the hours betwixt her rising and setting, and that
shall be the time of her continuance above the Horizon, and the very midst of
that is the true hour that she is full South: As for example, the fourth day
of September 1592. in the latitude 52. at nine of the clock at night the Sun
being in the 21. degrees 47^ of Virgo or there abouts, and the Moon being in
the 2. degree 30^ of Capricorn, I am desirous to know when the Moon did rise
that day, and by working according to the rule before set down, I found that
she did rise about three of the clock in the afternoon, and that she went
down at ten of the clock at night and half an hour past, and that she was
full South or at the Meridian a little before seven of the clock in the
afternoon. And as by this rule you may find out the time of the rising and
setting of the Moon, so may you find the time of the rising and setting of
the other five Planets, that is Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, any
day throughout the year, so as you know their places in the Zodiaque, which
the Ephemerides of Stadius does show, not only at noonetide, but also at any
other hour of the day by help of certain Tables made of purpose, the use of
which Tables I have set down in the latter end of my Treatise of the two
globes.

How to find out the right ascension of the sun, or of any degree or portion
of the Ecliptique. The 12. Proposition.
TAke the Rete and the label clean from the Astrolabe, and seek out in the
Ecliptique line of the matter the sign and degree whose right ascension you
would know, and mark what Meridian cutteth that point: that done, place the
labell upon the pin which stands in the very Center of the Jewel, and make
the fiduciall line thereof to lie right upon, and alongest the Equinoctial
line either toward your right hand or toward your left, according as the
sign and degree whose ascension you seek is placed in the matter. Then mark
where the foresaid Meridian cutteth through the labell, and also through the
Equinoctial line, and the number of degrees contained in the labell, betwixt
the Center and that point of the Equinoctial is the right ascension of that
degree of the Ecliptique which you seek, which number of degrees you must
count upon the labell in this manner. For if that sign and degree be contained
betwixt the first point of Aries and the first point of Cancer, then you must
begin to count upon the labell at the Center, and so proceed forward toward
Cancer, the right ascension of whose first point is 90. degrees, but if the
sign and degree which you seek, be betwixt the beginning of Cancer and the
beginning of Libra, which is at the very Center right against Aries, then you
must count upon the labell backward from 90. to 180. by adding to every tenth
space of the labell 10. degrees, so as the first number proceeding toward your
left hand shall be 100. and next to that 110. and so forth until you come to
130. which is the right ascension of the first point of Libra, and from Libra
you must count toward Capricorn 190. then 200. and so forth till you come to
270. which is the right ascension of the first point of Capricorn: and from
thence you must count 280. 290. then 300. and so forth toward the Center
until you come to 360. which is the right ascension of the last point of
Pisces, so as though there be set down in the labell but 90 degrees both
forward and backwarde, yet 90. being four times repeated, do make in all 360.
which is the whole Longitude of the Equinoctial. As for example, you would
know perhaps the right ascension of the tenth degree of Sagittarius, here by
seeking in the matter you shall find that the Meridian passing through that
degree will cut both the labell being laid toward your left hand, and also
the Equinoctial in the 248. degrees 21. minutes, which is the right ascension
of the tenth degree of Sagittarius, in counting whereof remember to begin
from 180. that is from the Center, and this ascension agrees with the Table of
right ascentions set down in Stadius his Ephemerides the 44. page of his
book. Again in seeking to know the right ascension of the 10. degree of
Taurus, if you begin to count upon the labell from the Center, which is the
first point of Aries, you shall find that the Meridian which passes through
the 10. degrees of Taurus will cut the labell, and the Equinoctial line in the
37. degree 35^

Another morereadie way to find out the right ascension of any degree or
portion of the Ecliptique by the Rete. The 13. Proposition.
LAy the Finitor eauen with the Axletree, signifying here the right Horizon, so
as the first point of Aries may meet with the East point of the said Horizon,
and lay the labell right upon and alongest the Equinoctial line, either
toward Cancer or toward Capricorn, according as the sign and degree which
you seek is placed in the Ecliptique of the Matter, and mark therewith what
Meridian passes through that degree, and follow the same until it cutteth the
Equinoctial, and also the labell lying thereon, and by counting upon the
labell the number of degrees to that point in such order as is before taught,
you shall have your desire. As for example, if you seek to know the right
ascension of the tenth degree of Leo, here having placed the Finitor as before
is taught, seek out in the Matter what Meridian passing through that degree
cutteth the said Equinoctial, and in what point, and lay the labell to the
said Equinoctial according as the sign requires, be it toward Cancer or
Capricorn, and by counting the degrees upon the labell as is before taught,
that is from 90. proceeding from the limb backward toward the Center you
shall find the right ascension of the 10. degree of Leo to be 132. degrees,
which differs from the foresaid Table but 27^ a thing of small moment
considering the narrow spaces of the Meridians in the Matter.

How to find out the ascentionall difference of the sun, or of any degree or
point of the Ecliptique. The 14. Proposition.
BRing the Finitor to your Latitude, and there staying it look amongst the
Meridians in the Matter in what point the Parallel of the Sun cutteth the
Finitor, and the number of the Meridians contained betwixt the Axletree, and
that point shall be the ascentionall difference. As for example, in the
Latitude 52. I would know the ascentionall difference of the Sun being in
the fourth degree of Cancer, at which time his Parallel of declination is 23.
degrees Northward, here by working according to the rule I find the
ascentionall difference to be 33. degrees 30^

How to find out the oblique ascension of the sun, or of any point of the
Ecliptique. The 15. Proposition.
Having found the right ascension and also the ascentionall difference by the
former Propositions, consider whether the declination of the sun or of any
other point of the Ecliptique be North or South, for if it be North, then
subtract the ascentionall difference out of the right ascension, and the
remainder shall be the oblique ascension. But if the declination be South, then
add the ascentionall difference to the right ascension, and the sum thereof
shall be the oblique ascension. As in the former example knowing the
declination of the sun to be 23. degrees Northwarde, I subtract the
ascentionall difference which was 33. degrees 30. minutes, out of the right
ascension of the sun, which was 94. degrees, and there remains 60. degrees
30^ which is the oblique ascension of the sun being in the fourth degree of
Cancer, and his declination being 23. degrees Northward as is before supposed.

How to find out the right ascension of any arc or portion of the Ecliptique,
and therewith to know what time it spends in rising in a right Sphere. The
16. Proposition.
BRing the end of the given arc found out in the Zodiaque of the Rete, unto
the left end of the Equinoctial marked with D. and there staying it, lay the
Fiduciall line of the labell upon the beginning of the said Arc, and the
number of degrees in the innermost limb of the matter contained betwixt the
left end of the Equinoctial, and the Fiduciall line of the labell shall be the
right ascension of that Arc, and the hour set down in the outermost limb
whereunto the labell points, shall be the time which the said arc spends in
his rising, so shall you find the arc of the whole sign Taurus to be 30.
degrees, and to spend in his rising two hours.

How to find out the oblique ascension of any arc of the Ecliptique in any
Latitude, and what time it spends in his rising. The 17. Proposition.
FInd* the oblique ascension both of the beginning and ending of the arc by
the 15. Proposition, then subtract the said ascension of the beginning of the
arc out of the ascension of the ending of the said arc, always remembering
that if the oblique ascension of the beginning be greater then the other, then
to add to the lesser 360. and out of that sum make your subtraction, for the
remainder shall be the oblique ascension of the whole arc, then count the
number of that ascension in the innermost limb of the matter beginning at the
left end of the Equinoctial marked with D* and so proceed upward toward
your right hand, and where the said ascension ends, there lay the labell,
and the hour whereunto the labell points shows the time which the said
arc spends in his rising in that Latitude. As for example, I would know the
oblique ascension of the whole arc of the sign of Taurus, and what time that
arc spends in his rising: first here having found the oblique ascension of
the first point of Taurus to be about 13. degrees in the Latitude 52. and the
oblique ascension of the last point of that sign to be about 30. here by
taking 13. out of 30. there remains 17. degrees, which is the oblique
ascension of the whole arc of the sign Taurus, which 17. degrees, I count in
the limb of the matter from the end of the Equinoctial marked with D. upward,
and there laying the labell, I find that it points to one hour and two
degrees, which makes 8^ so as I conclude thereby that the whole arc of the
sign Taurus, spends in his oblique ascension one hour and eight minutes.

How to find out the oblique descention of any point of the Ecliptique in any
Latitude. The 18. Proposition.
Having found out the oblique ascension of the point opposite to the point
given, add thereunto 180. degrees, and the sum thereof shall be the oblique
descention of the point given, always remembering if the sum of addition do
exceed 360 to subtract out of that sum 360. and the remainder shall be the
descention of the point given. As for example, you would know the oblique
descention of the first point of Taurus, whose point opposite is the first
point of Scorpio, and his oblique ascension according to Reynholdus his Tables
is 222. degrees 36. minutes, whereunto if you add 130. you shall make the
total sum to be 402. degrees 36. minutes, from which sum if you subtract
360. degrees according to the rule before given, there will remain 42. degree
36. minutes, which is the oblique descention of the first point of Taurus.

How to find out the oblique descention of any arc given of the Ecliptique,
and therewith to know the time which it spends in his setting. The 19.
Proposition.
Having found the oblique descention of the beginning, and also of the ending
of the given arc by the last Proposition subtract the descention of the
beginning out of the descention of the ending, and the remainder shall be the
oblique descention of the given arc, always remembering if the subtraction can
not be made to add thereunto 360. that done, divide that by 15. and the
quotient will show the number of hours which the given arc spends in his
setting: and remember that if in making that division there be any remainder
left, to multiply that remainder by four and so you shall have the minutes. By
working thus you shall find the oblique descention of the whole Arc of Gemini
to be 36. degrees 49. minutes, and in the Latitude 52. to spend in his going
down two hours and 24. minutes.

How to know the height of any star at any hour, without seeing the star,
and thereby to find out in the firmament all the stars that be described in
the net, and are to be seen with the eye. The 20. Proposition.
LAy the labell to the hour supposed upon the limb of the matter, and then
bring the place of the sun for that day to the Fiduciall line of the labell,
and there having stayed the Rete, bring the Fiduciall line of the labell to the
tippe of the star whose altitude you seek, and the labell will show you upon
the limb of the Matter how many degrees that star is distant from the South.
Again by counting upon the label, the degrees contained betwixt the point of
the labell, and the tippe of the said star you shall have his declination,
which is North or South according as the star is Northern or Southern. Then
bearing in mind, as well the stars distance from the South, as also his
declination, work thus, Bring the Finitor to your Latitude, and upon the stars
Parallel or Circle of declination in the Matter count from the limb of the
Matter, the distance of the star before found, and mark what Almicanterath
crosses that point, for there is the altitude of the star at that instant, and
the Azimuth which cutteth that point, shows in what part or coast of heaven
the star is at that present. And remember to seek the Parallel of the
star on that side of the Matter either on your right or left hand, so as it
may fall amongst the Almicanterathes, for otherwise you shall not find that
you seek. As for example the 26. of October 1591. at nine of the clock at
night, you would know the height of the first star of the Rams horn called
Cornu Arietis the Sun being then in the 12. degrees and 12. minutes of
Scorpio. Here after that you have laid the labell to the hour supposed, and
brought the degree of the Sun for that day to the Fiduciall line of the
labell, and stayed the Rete there, bring the labell to the tippe of the star
in the Rete, and the labell will show in the limb of the Matter how many
degrees the star is distant from the South, which you shall find to be 28.
degrees and 30. minutes, and the declination of the said star being counted
upon the said labell, to be 18. degrees, then keeping those two numbers in
mind, bring the Finitor to your Latitude supposing the same to be 52. degrees,
and there staying the Rete, seek for the Parallel of the star which is 18.
degrees on your right hand, and upon that Parallel count by the Meridians
from the limb inward, the stars distance from the South, which was 28.
degrees 30. minutes, and you shall find that the 49. Almicanterath cutteth
that point, so as you may conclude that the altitude of the star called Cornu
Arietis, was at that hour 49. degrees, and that the 47. Azimuth does also
pass through that point which shows that the star is 47. degrees from the
East toward the South, which according to the Mariners account is Southeast,
and somewhat more to the Southward. Now to find out the said star in the
firmament, if it be a star light, you have no more to do but to lay the
Diopter of your Astrolabe at that altitude, and to turn your face toward that
coast (that is to say) Southeast and somewhat more to the Southwarde, and the
next bright star which answers in that coast to that altitude is the star
which you seek.

How to find out the ascentionall difference of any star. The 21.
Proposition.
BRing the Finitor to your Latitude, and staying it there, look in what point
the Parallel of the stars declination cutteth the Finitor, and the number of
the Meridians contained betwixt that point and the Center, is the ascentionall
difference, so shall you find the ascentional difference of the Bulls eye called
Oculus Tauri, whose declination is 15. degrees 48^ to be 21. degrees.

How to know the oblique ascension of any star. The 22. Proposition.
IF the declination of the star be Northern, subtract the ascentionall
difference out of the right ascension, and the remainder shall be the oblique
ascension of the star, but if his declination be Southern you must add the
ascentionall difference to the right ascension, and that shall be the oblique
ascension of the star. As for example, because Oculus Tauri is a North
star, subtract his ascentional difference which is 21. degrees, out of his
right ascension which as the foresaid Table shows is 62. degrees 30^ and
there will remain 41. degrees 30^ which is the oblique ascension of the said
star. But if it were a South star as Spica Virginis, whose declination is
almost 9. degrees Southwarde, and her ascentionall difference is 11. degrees
30^ then you must add the ascentionall difference to her right ascension,
which is 195. degrees 51^ so shall you find her oblique ascension to be 207.
degrees 21^

How to know what stars do never rise nor set in any Latitude. The 23.
Proposition.
IF the star be a North star having a greater declination be it never so
little, then is the altitude of the Equinoctial answerable to your latitude:
As for example, suppose your latitude to be 52. which if you take out of 90.
then the remainder is 38. degrees, which is the altitude of the Equinoctial
answerable to that Latitude, otherwise called the complement, then that star
never sets in that Latitude: Again if it be a South star having greater
declination never so little then the complement of your Latitude, then that
star never rises above your Horizon. As for example, in the latitude 52. the
star called Hircus, that is the Goat, being a North star never sets in
that latitude because his North declination is 45. degrees, which is greater
then the complement of your Latitude by 7. degr. Also the star called Lyra,
whose declination is 38. degr. like unto the complement of your Latitude does
never set, but only touches your Horizon as well at his rising as setting, so
contrariwise the star called Canopus, being a South star having 51. degr. 38^
of South declination, never rises above your Horizon in the foresaid latitude
52. And by this rule you may judge in like manner of all the rest of the fixed
stars both North and South.

How to know at what hour of the day or night any star rises or sets.
The 24. Proposition.
FIrst mark by the outward or inward shooting of the longest tippe of the
star, whether it be North or South: for if it be North, then count amongst
the Meridians in the Matter so many Meridians as your Latitude amounts to,
beginning at the Axletree, and so proceeding toward the Northeast, which is
betwixt the North pole and the Equinoctial on your left hand, but if the
star be South, then count your Latitude proceeding from the said Axletree
toward the Southeast, which is betwixt the ringle and the North pole on the
right hand, and bring the tippe of the star to that Meridian which now
signifies your Horizon, and there staying the Rete, bring the labell to the
place or degree of the sun in the Zodiaque of the Rete, in which the sun is
that day you seek, and the hour in the limb whereto the labell points, is
the hour at which the star rises that day or night. Now to know when the
same star sets, you have no more to do but to work with the star in
the Northwest part in such order as you observed before in the Northeast part
of the Astrolabe. As for example, I would know at what hour the Bulls eye
called Oculus Tauri, does rise the last day of June the Sun being then in
the 17. degree and 40. minutes of Cancer. Here because this star is a North
star, I bring the longest tippe thereof to the 52. Meridian which is our
Latitude counting from the Axletree toward the Northeast part of the
Astrolabe which is on my left hand, for that Meridian is always the Horizon
serving the Latitude 52. and there staying the Rete, I bring the Fiduciall line
of the labell to the place of the sun which at that day is the 17. degree 40^
of Cancer as I said before, and I find that the label points to one of the
clock 30^ after midnight: wherefore I conclude that Oculus Tauri rises that
day at that present hour. Now to know at what hour that star goes down
the same day, I bring his longest tippe to the said Horizon toward the
Northwest, and staying the Rete there, I lay the labell to the 17. degree 40^
of Cancer as before, so that the labell points to four hours and 20.
minutes in the afternoon, at which time he goes down, so as he continues at
that time above the Horizon in the Latitude 52. 14. hours 48. minutes. And to
know the abode of any star above the Horizon, the next Proposition does also
show.

How to know how long any star continues above the Horizon in every
Latitude. The 25. Proposition.
BRing the Finitor to your Latitude, and look in what point the Parallel or
declination of the star cutteth the Finitor, and the number of the Meridians
in the Matter contained betwixt the limb* and that point do show the half time
of his abode above the Horizon, which being doubled is the whole time of his
abode above the Horizon. And in numbering the said Meridians whereof 15. do make
an hour, remember to begin to count from the right side of the Matter,
proceeding toward your left hand, and remember also that the middle Meridian
or Axletree, signifies always the sixth hour, so shall you not err in your
account. As for example, having brought the Finitor to the Latitude 52. look
in what point the Parallel of the foresaid star Oculus Tauri cutteth the
Finitor, and by numbering the Meridians proceeding from the limb on your right
hand toward the left, you shall find the Parallel of Oculus Tauri, being
15. degrees 49^ to cut the eleventh Meridian, which being doubled and then the
sum thereof divided by 15. makes 14. hours and 48^ as before.

How to find out the stars hour, and thereby to know the hour of the
night. The 26. Proposition.
FIrst having taken the stars altitude, set the Finitor to your Latitude, and
look at what houreline in the Matter that stars Almicanterath and the
Parallel of his declination do meet, and having sought out the same hour in
the limb right against that point, bring the labell thereunto, for that is the
stars hour, and there staying with your fingers end the very point of the
labell, bring the longest tippe of the star to the Fiduciall line of the
labell, and staying there the Rete, turn the labell to the degree of the
Zodiaque of the said Rete, wherein the sun is that day, and the labell will
point to the true hour of the night set down in the outward limb of the
Matter. As for example, I suppose that the seventh of October 1591. the sun
being then in the 23. degree 15^ of Libra, I took the altitude of the star
Hircus, that is the Goat, which I found to be 20. degrees, here having set the
Finitor to my Latitude 52. I look in the Matter at what hour line that
Almicanterath, and the Parallel of the same star which is 45. degrees
Northwarde do meet or cross one an other, and I find that they meet just
upon the fourth hour line of the forenoone, wherefore I seek right against
that point the same hour in the outermost limb of the Matter, for that is the
stars hour, and having placed the labell at that hour, I stay it there with
my finger until I have brought the longest tippe of the star Hircus unto the
Fiduciall line of the labell, and there staying the Rete, I turn the labell to
the degree of the sun which is 23. degrees 15. minutes of Libra, and I see
that the labell points to the seventh hour of the night set down in the
limb of the Matter and half an hour past. Master Blagraue says that the
sooner you take the altitude of the star whereby you seek to know the hour
of the night, you shall have the hour more truly.

How to find out the distance betwixt any two stars contained in the Net.
The 27. Proposition.
FIrst consider whether the declination of both stars be either South or North,
or that the one be South and the other North, for if both their declinations
be South or North, then you must not leave to turn the Rete to and fro until
you have brought the longest tippes of both stars to one self Meridian in
the Matter, that done count upon the said Meridian how many degrees are
contained betwixt the tippes of the said stars, for that is the distance
betwixt them. But if the one star have North declination and the other South
then turn the Rete to and fro until both stars do lie upon two such
several Meridians as each of them is equally distant on each hand from the
Axletree, then count how many degrees or Meridians are contained betwixt the
Axletree and either of those stars (which you will) and that is their distance,
so shall you find the distance betwixt Oculus Tauri and Canis minor being both
North stars to be 46. degrees 20^ and the distance betwixt Oculus Tauri and
Canis mayor, whereof the first is a North star, and the other a South star
to be just 46. degrees.

Another way to know the distance of any two stars, their Longitudes and
Latitudes being first known, and also by that means to find out the distance
betwixt any two places upon the earth. The 28. Proposition.
FIrst seek to know the difference of their Longitudes by subtracting the
lesser Longitude out of the greater, then count that difference from the
outermost Meridian of the Matter toward the Center, and mark well that
Meridian at which your account ends, then number upon the limb of the Matter
from the Equinoctial the greater Latitude either Northward or Southward
according as the Latitude is, and to that point bring the Zenith of the Rete,
then upon the self same Meridian before marked count from the Equinoctial the
lesser Latitude, and look what Azimuth passes through that point, for the
degrees which are contained betwixt that point and the Zenith shall be the
distance: and thus doing you shall find the distance betwixt Oculus Tauri and
Canis mayor to be 46. degrees and 15^ and the distance betwixt London and
Venice to be 12. degrees and 20^ which 12. degrees being multiplied by 60.
makes 720. miles, whereto if you add for the 20^ 20. miles, it will make in
all 740. miles.

How to find out the degree of Medium coeli at any hour, of the day (that is
to say) the degree of the Zodiaque that is in the Meridian at any hour that
you seek, and also the degree called Imum caeli. The 29. Proposition.
FIrst seek out the place of the sun for that day in the Zodiaque of the
Rete, and having laid the labell to the hour supposed upon the limb of the
Matter, bring the place of the sun to the Fiduciall line of the label, and
there staying the Rete, look what degree of the said Zodiaque cutteth the
noone line or Meridian at noonetide, which you shall easily find by laying the
labell to the hour of 12. at noone, for the Fiduciall line of the label
crossing the Zodiaque, will show the degree of mid heaven at that hour. As for
example, the 26. of June 1592. I would know the degree of Medium coeli, at
eight of the clock in the morning, the sun being that day in the 14. of
Cancer. Here by laying the labell to the said hour in the limb of the Matter,
I bring the place of the sun to the Fiducial line of the labell, and there
having stayde the Rete, I bring the labell to the twelfth hour at noone, and I
find that the labell cutteth the Zodiaque of the Rete in the 18. of Taurus,
which at that hour is the degree of Medium coeli, whose point opposite is the
18. degree of Scorpio, and that is at that hour Imum coeli* which the labell
being laid to the 12. hour of midnight will show.

How to find out the Horoscope or ascendent at any time of the day or night,
and thereby to have the four principal angles of heaven. The 30. Proposition.
Having laid the labell to the hour given upon the limb of the Matter, stay
it there with your finger until you have brought the place of the sun for
that day unto the Fiduciall line of the labell, and there staying the Rete,
look what degree of the Zodiaque thereof touches or crosses the Horizon
answerable to your Latitude, for that is the ascendent at that present hour.
As for example, I would know the ascendent at eight of the clock at night the
twelfth of October 1580. the sun being then in the 28. degree 14^ of Libra.
Here having laid the labell upon the said hour, I bring the 23. degree 10^ of
Libra to the Fiduciall line of the labell, and there staying the Rete, I find
by help of the labell that my Horizon which is the 51. 40^ Meridian, counting
on both hands from the Axletree, that the first degree of Cancer, does cross
my Horizon in the Northeast quarter, wherefore I affirm that to be the
ascendent or first house, whose point opposite being the first of Capricorn,
is the descendent or seventh house, then by bringing the Fiduciall line of the
labell to the South end of the Equinoctial at which the ringle hangs, I
find by help of the labell that the 24. degree 40^ of Aquarius cutteth the
Equinoctial, which is the tenth house or Culmen coeli, whose point opposite
being the 24. degree 40^ of Leo, is the fourth house, otherwise called Imum
coeli, and thus you have all the four principal houses of heaven for that
hour, as you may see in this figure here following.

A figure of the 4. Angles of heaven, made the 12. of October 1580. the sun
being then in the 28. degree 10^ of Libra, for the latitude 51. 40^


But the difficulty of finding out the true ascendent consists in knowing
whether it is to be sought in the Northeast quarter, or in the Southeast
quarter of the Jewel. The Northeast quarter is that which lies betwixt Imum
coeli, and the North pole or East end of the Axletree, because in this case the
Axletree signifies the line of East and West, and the Equinoctial signifies
the line of South and North, at the South end whereof is fastened the ringle or
handle. But in the former example you may plainly see that the North part of
the Zodiaque of the Rete does cut the Horizon, as well in the Northeast quarter
as in the Southeast quarter with two several degrees and signs, for in the
Northeast quarter the Zodiaque cutteth the Horizon with the first of Cancer
which is the ascendent, and in the Southeast quarter it cutteth the Horizon
with the eight of Taurus, which is not the ascendent: for you have to
understand that every degree of the Zodiaque does both rise and set either
toward the North or toward the South, the first point of Aries and of Libra
only excepted, both which do rise right East, and go down right West, even
as the Equinoctial does, whereof M. Blagraue does gather a rule how to find
out by his Jewel when the ascendent is to be sought either in the northeast
quarter of the Matter, or in the southeast quarter, which is thus: The ascension
of any of the six Northern signs is to be sought for in the Northeast part
of the Jewel, and the ascension of any of the six Southern signs is to be
sought for in the southeast part of the Jewel. For although that the North
part of the Zodiaque of the Rete containing the 6. Northern signs cutteth the
Horizon answerable to your Latitude, as well in the Northeast as in the Southeast
part of the Jewel, yet you must seek the ascendent in the Northeast part, and
not in the Southeast part of the Jewel, because that every degree of any of
the 6. Northern signs rises Northernly: so contrariwise if the South part of
the Zodiaque containing the six Southern signs do cut the Horizon, as well
in the Northeast part as in the Southeast part of the Jewel, yet you must seek
the ascendent in the Southeast part, and not in the Northeast part of the
Jewel. As for example, the second day of August 1592. the sun being in the 20.
of Leo, I would know the ascendent at four of the clock in the afternoon:
here having laid the labell to that hour, and brought the place of the sun to
the Fiduciall line thereof, I find that the 13. degree 30^ of Aquarius does cut
the Horizon serving to your latitude 52. in the Northeast part of the Jewel,
and that the 19. of Sagittarius cutteth the said Horizon in the Southeast part
of the Jewel, which must be the ascendent, because that every degree of any of
the southern signs rises Southernly, and not Northernly.

How to find the Circles of position, and to know how much the pole is elevated
above every such Circle in any Latitude, without the knowledge whereof you can
not find out the twelve houses by this Astrolabe. The 31. Proposition.
FIrst bring the Zenith of the Rete to your Latitude, so shall the Azimuthes
become circles of position, then upon the Parallel of declination of the point
given, according as the declination thereof is north or south: count from the
limb on your right hand, the number of ye hours given amongst the Meridians
in the Matter, and the Azimuth which the Meridian of that hour cutteth shall be
the Circle of position, which had, you shall find the elevation of the pole
above the Circle of position thus: Count your Latitude amongst the
Almicanteraths from the Zenith upon the Circle of position found, and to that
point whereas your Latitude ends, bring the Fiducial line of the label, and
reckon upon the label how many degrees are contained betwixt the limb of the
Rete and that point, for the number of those degrees is the elevation of the
Pole above the Circle of position. As for example used by M. Blagraue himself,
the 12. of October 1580. the sun being then in the 29. degree 10^ of Libra,
and his South declination 11. degrees. 10^ I would know at 8. of the clock at night
in what Circle of position the sun at that time was, here I bring the Zenith
to the Latitude of Reading, which is 51. degrees. 40^ then for 8. of the clock I
count 8. hours amongst the Meridians in the Matter, from the South part of the
Jewel upon the Parallel of the sun being then 11. degrees. 30^ and by
attributing to every hour 15. Meridians, I find that the Meridian whereas the
8. hour ends does cross the 28. and. Azimuth, counting the Azimuths from
the Zenith line, and that is the Circle of position wherein the sun was then
under the earth in the Northeast quarter. Now to know how much the Pole is
elevated above that circle of position I do count from the Zenith the foresaid
Latitude 51. degrees, 40^ upon the said Circle of position, and to the point
where that Latitude ends I bring the labell, and counting thereon from the
limb of the Rete the degrees contained betwixt the said limb, and the
foresaid point, I find the number of them to be 43. degrees 30^ wherefore I
conclude that the Pole is elevated above the said Circle of position 43.
degrees 30^

How to find out all the 12. houses of heaven, and thereby to erect a figure at
any hour of the day or night. The 32. Proposition.
YOu shall understand the order of this better by this one example given by M.
Blagraue himself, then by manifold rules which be also so plainly expressed
and observed in this example, as you need none other instruction to erect the
like figure in any Latitude, and at any hour of the day or night. Suppose then
that you would erect a figure for one that was borne the twelfth of October
1580. at eight of the clock at night in the Latitude 51. 40^ the sun being
then in the 28. degree 10^ of Libra, and his declination being at that time 11.
degrees 10^ Southward: Here first set down in your figure already drawn the
four Angles before found by the 30. Proposition answerable to the said day and
hour, then to find out the rest of the houses do thus, bring the Zenith of the
Rete to the latitude presupposed, which is 51. degrees 40^ and staying it
there, mark what number of Azimuthes or Circles of position does cut every 30.
degree of the Equinoctial, counting the degrees of the Equinoctial by help
of the Meridians from the limb toward the Center, but you must count the
number of the Azimuthes or Circles of position from the Zenith line toward
the limb, of which Circles of position there be no more but six at the most
(that is to say) three betwixt the limb and the Center on the one side, and as
many on the other side of the Center, the elevation or rather depression of
every one whereof you must seek to know by the last Proposition. But M.
Blagraue says that you need to know the elevation or rather depression, but
only of two Circles of position, that is of that which shows the eleventh and
third house, and of that which shows the twelfth and second house, and so
says Stadius also in the beginning of his Ephemerides, treating of the 12.
houses, for having them you have all the rest. The order of working according
to M. Blagraue his rule is thus: having brought the Zenith to the foresaid
Latitude, look what Circle of position cutteth the Equinoctial in the first
30. degrees next to the limb, and you shall find that the 47. Azimuth or
Circle of position (counting from ye Zenith line) cutteth that point of the
Equinoctial, and therewith serves to the eleventh house, and also to the
third house, and the elevation of this Circle is 32. degrees. then from thence tell
upon the Equinoctial 30. degrees more, which do make in all 60. degrees, and
through that point you shall find the 19. Azimuth or Circle of position to
pass, whose elevation is 47. degrees and this Circle serves to the twelfth
house and to the second house. Now keeping well in mind those two last
eleuations, that is, 47. and 32. work thus: Lay your labell to the eight hour
of the morning, which is 30. degrees distant from the right Horizon or
Axletree, and bring to the Fiduciall line thereof the Culmen coeli or 10. house
first set down in your figure which is the 24. of Aquarius, and staying it
there, look what degree of the Ecliptique cutteth the 32. Horizon which
serves to the 11. house counting from the right Horizon toward your left
hand. And by following that Horizon up toward the North pole, you shall find
that the 25. degree 30^ of Pisces cutteth the same Horizon very nigh unto the
Pole, but by my instrument I find it to be the 27. degree of Pisces, which
perhaps is not truly made, and therefore set down in the eleventh house of
your figure 25. degrees 30^ of Pisces. Then bring the foresaid Culmen coeli
together with the labell to the tenth hour of the morning, which is 30 degrees
further toward the South, and staying it there, look what degree of the
Ecliptique cutteth the 47. Horizon, serving to the twelfth house, and you shall
find that the 20. degree of Taurus cutteth that Horizon, wherefore set down
the 20. of Taurus in the twelfth house of your figure, then bring the Culmen
coeli together with the labell to the 12. hour at noone, and you shall see the
ascendent which is the first of Cancer to cut the oblique Horizon, which is 51.
degrees 40^ and from thence bring the label and culmen coeli to two of the
clock in the after noone, and staying it there you shall see the 21. degree of
Cancer to cut the 47. Horizon which shows the second house and also the
twelfth house as before, wherefore set down 21. of Cancer in the second house
of your figure, that done, remove the labell together with Culmen coeli to
four of the clock in the afternoon, and there staying it, you shall see the
seventh of Leo to cut the 32. Horizon which shows both the third house and
the eleventh house as before, wherefore set the seventh of Leo in the third
house of your figure, so have you eight of the houses, that is to say, the
first, the second, the third, the fourth, the seventh, the tenth called Culmen
coeli, the eleventh and the twelfth, so as there want only four, that is, the
fifth, the sixth, the eight and the ninth house. The fifth is opposite to the
eleventh, the sixth to the twelfth, the eight to the second, and the ninth to
the third, whose opposite signs each one having like number of degrees are to
be placed in the four houses of your figure that be wanting. As in the fifth
houses the 25. degree 30^ of Virgo, in the sixth house the 20. degree of
Scorpio in the eight house the 21. degree 30^ of Capricorn, and in the ninth
house the 7. degree 10^ of Aquarius, so have you all the twelve houses. And by
this means M. Blagraue says that you may make the places of the twelve houses
to serve for ever in any Latitude, so as you do distinguish from the rest with
some color those two Horizons whereof the one does show the eleventh and the
third house, and the other Horizon shows the twelfth and second house, yea
and by this means you may (as he says) make as true Tables to find out the
twelve houses in every Latitude as those that be calculated of purpose.

The figure of the foresaid twelve houses.

The figure of the heavens the twelfth day of October 1580. at eight of the
clock in the afternoon, for the Latitude 51. 40^


A new and necessary Treatise of Navigations containing all the chiefest
principles of that Art. Lately collected out of the best Modern writers
thereof by M. Blundiuile, and by him reduced into such a plain and orderly
form of teaching as every man of a mean capacity may easily understand the
same.



They that go down to the Sea in ships, and occupy their business in great
waters: These men see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep.
Psalm. 107. Of Navigations, what it is, and with what order the principles
thereof are here taught by Master Blundeuill, according to the rules of the
best modern writers of that Art.
NAVIGATION is an Art which teaches by true and infallible rules, how to
govern and direct a ship from one Port to another safely, rightly, and in
shortest time: I say here safely, so far as it lies in man's power to
perform. And in saying rightly, I mean not by a right line, but by the
shortest and most commodious way that may be found: And by saying in shortest
time, I mean thereby according as the ship is good of sail, and according as
both wind and tide shall serve.

The means to attain to this Art as to all other Arts are two parts,
whereof every Art consists, that is Method and Practice, which is as much
to say here as instruction and experience: For of the chief points of this
Art, some are to be learned by instruction, and some only by experience: for
what instruction I pray you will serve to make a good coaster, that is to say,
to know any Cape or Cliffe when he sees it, unless he has first seen it and
has before taken good marks thereof. Also to know the currents in all places,
the deapth and qualities of waters, sands, flats, or shoulds, and such like,
the perfect knowledge whereof consists chiefly in experience. Of which
experience I mind not here to treat, because I know that a Dutchman called
Wagoner or Aurigarius has lately written of these things notably well, and
especially for these our seas and the Northeast seas, whose book I doubt not
but that some of our learned sea men will set forth in our mother tongue, with
some augmentation of their own experience for the East and West Indies, for
the profit of their country and to their own praise and commendation. In the
mean time I will proceed with instruction, the chief points whereof are
these here following: first to know the uses of such instruments as every
skillful sea man ought to have with him that minds to sail any long voyage,
which are these here following: First a perfect Calendar or Ephemerides, the
Mariners ring or Astrolabe, the Crosse-staffe called of the Spaniardes Balla
stella, the two Globes both Celestial and Terrestrial: Of all which things I
have in a manner already written several Treatises. Item an universal
Horologe, to know thereby the hour of the day in every Latitude, and a
Nocturnlabe to know thereby the hour of the night. And it were necessary for
him that sayleth long voiages to carry with him a Topographicall instrument to
describe thereby those strange Coasts and Countries whereby he sayleth, the use
of which instrument is plainly taught by William Borne in his book called the
Treasure of Trauailers, and by Master Digges in his book called the
Pantometria, wherefore I shall not need to speak any further thereof: Also
the Mariners compass, whereof I do not only make a plain description and show
the uses thereof, but also how to find out the variation of the same,
according to the precepts of the best modern writers thereof. And lastly the
Mariners Card, whereof whilst I speak, I do not only show the making
thereof, and how to draw the Parallels in better sort then they are used to be
drawn in the common Cards, but I set down therewith the chiefest uses of the
Card, amongst which is taught how to know by help of the Card and certain
Tables made of purpose, what way your ship has made in sailing by any rombe
or wind, yea in sailing right East and West, which heretofore (as Cogniet
says) has been thought a thing impossible to be known, but only by
conjecture: And being out of your way how to know in what place you are, and to
mark the same in your Card that you may the more readily direct your ship
again to the place whereunto you would go. But all these instruments serve to
little purpose, unless you know also the North star with his guards, and
diverse other stars situated as well toward the North as toward the South
pole, together with their Longitudes, Latitudes, declinations, and greatness,
to know thereby the Latitude of any place, and the hour of the night: also
the course of the sun and his declination, by help whereof you may know the
Latitude of any place, the times and seasons of the year, the hour of the
day, and the length of the day and night in every latitude. And finally you
must know the course of the Moon, whereon depends the knowledge of the tides
in all places: Of all which things I mind here to treat in such order as the
Chapters hereafter following do show.

A general Calendar or Almanacke for ever, containing these 9. Chapters next
following.
HOw to find out the golden number every year. Chap. 1.

How to find out the Epact in every year. Chap. 2.

How to know the Epact by the Mariners rule upon your thombe. Chap. 3.

How to know the age of the Moon in every month throughout the year. Chap.
4.

How to know the change, full, and 4 quarters of the Moon, every Month
throughout the year. Chap. 5.

How to know in what sign and degree the moon is every day throughout the
year. Chap. 6.

How to find out the moouable feasts every year, only by knowing the day
of conjunction in the month of February. Chap. 7.

How to find out the circle of the Sun, called in Latin Cyclus Solaris, and
thereby the Dominicall Letter in every year. Chap. 8.

How to find out the number of indiction. Chap. 9.

A brief description together with the use of the diurnall Table or Almanacke
of Johannes Stadius. Chap. 10.

How to find out the place of any Planet by the Ephemerides.

Chap. 11.

Of the Mariners Ring or Astrolabe, and of his cross staff Chap. 12.

A brief description of M. Hood his cross staff, and of all the parts
thereof. Chap. 13.

How to set the parts of M. Hoods staff together to serve such Astronomicall
uses as do chiefly belong to the Mariner. Chap. 14.

The shape or figure of the foresaid staff, having all his parts set
together to serve for Astronomicall uses. Chap. 15.

How to take the altitude of the Sun at any hour that he is to be seen with
the eye by M. Hoods staff. Chap. 16.

How to take the altitude of any Star with M. Hoods staff. Chap. 17.

How to take the distance betwixt two stars with M. Hoods staff. Chap. 18

Of the Mariners Astrolabe. Chap. 19.

A brief description of the Mariners Astrolabe, and the use thereof. Chap. 20.

A brief description of the Mariners cross staff. Chap. 21

The uses of the Mariners cross staff. Chap. 22.

Of the Wind, what it is, and of the diverse kinds and names thereof. Chap. 23.

A brief description of the Mariners Compass, and use thereof. Chap. 24.

Of the Lodestone, and of the variation of the Compass in Northeasting and
Northwesting. Chap. 25.

How to find out the variation of the Compass in every latitude. Chap. 26.

Of the Mariners Card, and of the making thereof. Chap. 27*

The shape and figure of the first liniaments of the Mariners Card drawn
after the old manner, and how to set down the places of the land or sea
therein. Chap. 28

A Table to draw thereby the Parallels in the Mariners card, together with
the use thereof in truer sort than they have been drawn heretofore. Chap. 29.

The draught of the Meridians and Parallels of the Mariners Card or nauticall
Planispheare according to the former table. Chap. 30.

The four chiefest uses of the Mariners card. Chap. 31

How to know the way of your ship, and how many leagues are to be accounted
for one degree of latitude in every rombe whereby you sail. Chap. 32.

How to account the leagues in sailing directly East or west without changing
latitude or altitude of the Pole. chap. 33.

A Table to help you to know what way your ship has made in sailing right
East or West without changing your latitude together with a brief description
and use thereof. chap. 34.

An example of counting the way of your ship in sailing right West. chap. 35.

An other example of counting the way of your ship in sailing right East. chap.
36.

To know how much you go out of your way in sailing by one wrong rombe or by
more. chap. 37.

Of the North Star, otherwise called the Lodestarre, and of his guards, and
how to know the same. Chap. 38.

The uses of the North star and of his guards. chap. 39.

To know by help of a little Table made according to the Mariners rule
touching the 8. principal rombes, showing how much and when the Lodestarre is
either above or beneath the Pole, that you may know thereby the true altitude
of the Pole in taking the height of the Lodestarre with your Astrolabe or
cross staff. chap. 40.

How to make an Instrument which will show at any hour of the night how much
the Lodestar is either above or beneath the Pole in every other rombe as well
as in the 8. principal rombes, and also the true hour of the night. chap. 41.

How to know by the foresaid twofold instrument as well the mounting and
descending of the North star as the true hour of the night both at one instant
and also the elevation of the Pole, Chap. 42.

What stars are to be observed by those that sail beyond the Equinoctial
under the South pole. chap. 43

Of the Sun, and of his motion, and of the chiefest apparances belonging to
him. chap. 44

A Table showing the declination of the Sun every day throughout the year,
and the use thereof. Chap. 45.

Of the four seasons of the year, that is, Spring time, Summer, fall of the
lease, called otherwise Autumn, and winter. Chap. 46.

How to know when the Sun rises and sets in every latitude, and thereby
the length of the day and night, and also in what rombe or wind he rises and
sets, and how much he declineth every day from the Equinoctial either
Northward or Southward. Also how to know the elevation of the Pole, otherwise
called the latitude of any place, by knowing the Meridian altitude of the Sun,
and his declination. Chap. 47.

Of the shadow of the Sun, and how to know thereby the hour of the day in
any latitude by help of an universal dial. Chap. 48.

Of the Moon and of all her diverse motions. Chap. 49.

How to know in what sign the point Auge of the Moon is in any year. Chap.
50.

When the Moon is said to be in Conjunction with the Sun, or to be at the
full, and what her greatest latitude is as well from the Ecliptique line, as
from the Equinoctial. Chap. 51.

How to know in what part of the Zodiaque the head of the Dragon is every
year. Chap. 52.

How to know the tides in any place by the Moon. Chap. 53.

How to know by help of an instrument the tides at any place. Chap. 54.

How a general Rutter showing the tides in all places should be made. Chap. 55*

A general Calendar or Almanacke for ever.
WHat this word Kalends signifies, and from whence it is derived is before set
down in the first book of my Treatise of the Sphere the 45. chapter. But
because there be general rules to know the conjunction of the Moon with the
Sun, her full, and all her four quarters, and also the mooueable feasts and
Dominicall letter, and such like things easily to be learned without the help
of any particular Calendar, I thought good first to set down this general
Ralender, containing 9. propositions, as follows.

How to find out the Golden number every year. Chapter. 1.
THe Golden number is the number of 19. proceeding from 1. to 19. and so to
begin again at 1. And it is so called because it was sent in golden letters
from Alexandria in Egypt to Rome: For in 19. years the Moon does make all her
sundry motions and changes, and returns again to the place where she first
began. And to find the foresaid number the way is thus. Add 1. to the year
of the Lord whereof you inquire, and divide the same by 19. and the remainder
shall be the Golden number for that year, as for example, being desirous this
present year 1590. to know the Golden number, I add 1 to the said year, and
so make it 1591. which being divided by 19. there remains 14. which is the
Golden number of this present year.

But when there is no remainder, then 19 is the Golden number, and remember
that the Golden number begins always at the first of January, and the Epact
the first of March.

How to find out the Epact in every year. Chapter. 2.
THe Epact is a number not exceeding 30. because the Moon betwixt change and
change, never passes 30. days, and thereby the common Lunar years consisting
of twelve Moons is lesser than the Solar year by 11. days, for to every
Moon are attributed no more but 29. days and a half, which make in all 354.
days, so as the common Solar year consisting of 365. days exceeds the
Lunar year 11. days, from whence the Epact takes his original, which Epact
is found thus. Multiply the golden number of the year by 11. the product
whereof if it be under 30. then it is the Epact. But if the product be above
30. then divide the product by 30. and the remainder shall be the Epact. As for
example, to know the Epact in the year 1590. the golden number being 14. as
before: here having multiplied the same by 11. and divided the product thereof
by 30. I find the remainder to be 4. which is the Epact of the said year. Also
by knowing one former Epact you shall have it ever after, by adding thereunto
11. and if the number do exceed 30. then you must divide the same by 30. and
the remainder shall be the Epact, as by adding 11. to 4. I know the Epact shall
be the next year, which is 1591. the number of 15. and by adding 11. to 15.
the Epact in the year of our Lord 1592. shall be 26. and so forth.

How to know the Epact by the Mariners rule upon your thumb. Chapter. 3.
FIrst, you must suppose the inside of your left thumb to be divided into
three spaces, and the nethermost space to contain 10. the middle space 20. and
the highest space toward your thumbes end, to contain 30. and knowing first
the golden number, begin to tell the same at the nether space saying there 1.
at the middle space 2. at the third space 3. then begin again at the lowest
space, and there say 4, and so continue your account still after that manner,
until you have the full sum of the Golden number, and mark upon what space
the full sum falls, for the Golden number being added to the number of that
space, does show the Epact, so as the total sum does not exceed 30. for
then you must subtract 30. and the remainder shall be the Epact: as for
example, in the year 1591. the Golden number is 15. which being counted upon
your thombe in such order as is before taught, it will fall upon the highest
space, which is 30. to which if you add the Golden number, which is 15. it
will make in all 45. from which sum if you subtract 30. there will remain
15. which shall be the Epact for that year, so as the Epact and Golden number
in that year are like numbers. For every three years they are always like,
as when the Golden number is either 3. 6. 9. 12. 15. or 18. the Epact has also
like number.

How to know the age of the Moon in every month throughout the year.
Chapter. 4.
Add to the Epact the number of months from the beginning of March, together
with the month wherein you seek, and also the number of the days past of
that month, wherein you seek, and the sum of such addition will show you
the age of the Moon, as for example, I would know the age of the Moon the
sixth day of December in the year 1590. Here knowing the Epact of that year to
be 4. I add thereunto the number of the months from the beginning of March,
which are 10. months, and also the number of days of December, which are
six, and the sum thereof is the age of the Moon, if the sum be less than
30. But if the sum of such addition do exceed 30. then you must subtract 30.
and the remainder shall be the age of the Moon, so as the month wherein you
seek have 31. days, for if it has less than 31. days, then you must
subtract but 29. and the remainder shall be the age of the Moon, as for
example, suppose you seek the age of the Moon the 22. of November in the
year 1589. in which year the Epact was 23. here by adding to the Epact first
9. Months, and then twenty two days, it makes in all 54. out of which by
subtracting 29. because November has but 30. days, the remainder is 25. which
was the age of the Moon in that month, day, and year.

How to know the change, the full, and four quarters of the Moon every
month throughout the year. Chapter. 5.
MArtin Cortes in his book called the Art of Navigations teaches a rule to
find the day of the change, in every month by knowing the age of the moon
that day you seek, and then by reckoning from that day backward the number of
the days that went next before, or else by taking the age of the Moon out of
the days of the month that went next before, as for example, the last of
October 1592. I find by the fourth proposition the age of the Moon to be 5.
which being taken out of 31. (for so many days October has) there remains
26, which day by this means should be the day of the change, but the very day
indeed was the 25. of the said month, for the former rule to know the age of
the Moon is not so true it self, but that sometime it will fall a day either
over or under. But Gemma Frisius teaches to find out the day of the change in
every month thus. Add to the Epact the number of the months from the
beginning of March whereof that Month wherein you seek the change, must be
counted as one, and then subtract the product or sum of that addition from 30.
and the remainder will show the day of the change, which rule I find to be
true so long as the sum of the addition does not exceed 30. but when the sum
of the addition is more than 30. which will commonly chance when the Epact is
a great number, as 26. or 29. he teaches no rule for that, wherefore I think
it best to take such sum out of 59. and the remainder shall be the day of
change, or at the most but one day over or under, and having the day of the
change, you shall have the day of the full by adding 15. days more to the day
of change: And having the change and the full, you shall easily have all her
four quarters by adding or subtracting 7. days.

How to know in what sign and degree the Moon is every day throughout the
year. Chapter. 6.
SOme do set down rules to know in what sign and degree the Moon is every
day, but such as are not true. And to say the truth the Moon has so many
diverse motions as it cannot be done but by special Tables calculated of
purpose. And by what rule soever you work, you must first know the place of the
Sun, which the Ephemerides most truly shows, and in looking for that, you
shall also find hard by it the place of the Moon, that is to say, in what
sign and degree she is every day, and so orderly the place of any other
Planet, and therefore I leave to speak any further thereof.

How to find out the moouable Feasts every year, only by knowing the day of
conjunction in the month of February. Chapter. 7.
THe way to find out the Conjunction in every month is before taught in the
fifth proposition. And having the day of the conjunction in February, you may
assure your self that the next tuesday following is always Shrouetuesday, for
though the conjunction it self do fall upon a Tuesday, yet the next Tuesday
after that, shall be Shrouetuesday, and the next Sunday after that, is called
Quadragesima, which is the first Sunday in Lent, and six weeks next af-that
is Easter day, whereunto if you add five weeks more, that is to say, 35.
days, you shall have Rogation Sunday, and 4. days next after that is
Ascension day, and ten days next after Ascension day is Pentecoste or
Whitsunday, and seven days next after that is Trinity Sunday, and four days
next after that is the Feastiuall day called Corpus Christi. And you have to
note that the Sunday called Adventus Domini, which we call the first Sunday in
Aduent, is always the fourth Sunday before Christmasse day, and the Sunday
called Septuagesima is the third Sunday before Quadragesima, otherwise called
the first Sunday in Lent, and betwixt Septuagesima and Quadragesima there are
other two Sundays, whereof that which is next before Quadragesima is called
Quinquagesima, and the next Sunday before that is called Sexagesima.

How to find out the circle of the Sun, called in Latin by a Greekish name
Cyclus Solaris, and thereby the Dominicall Letter in every year. Chapter. 8.
THis Circle was invented more to find thereby the Dominicall Letter than to
show any great chaunges of the Suns motions therein: And because there be
seven days in the week, commonly signified by seven letters, A. B. C. D. E.
F. G. This Circle therefore is made to contain twenty eight years, for four
times seven do make twenty eight, by help whereof is known the true order
of the letters, whereof A. signifies always the first day of every year,
and for every leap year are appointed two Dominicall letters, whereof the one
continues from the beginning of that year until Saint Mathias even, and the
other from thence to that years end, as you shall more plainly perceive by
that which follows. And first I will show you how to find out the just
number of the circle of the Sun every year, which is done thus.

Add to the year of the Lord given or supposed 9. and divide that product by
28. and the remainder shall be the number of the foresaid Circle: As for
example, I would know the number of the said Circle in the year 1590.
whereunto by adding 9. I make the sum to be 1599. which being divided by
28. there remains 3. Now to find out the Dominicall letter by the number of
the said Circle, you must resort to the figure following, consisting of three
Circles, making two spaces, in the upper space whereof are set down the
aforesaid seven letters, and in the nether space the numbers of the Suns
Circle, in such sort as every number has his proper Dominicall letter
standing right over his head, and for every leap year there are set down
two Dominicall Letters. Al which letters are to be counted backward, and not
forward as they are placed in the Almanacks. As for example, having fouud the
number of the Suns circle for the year 1590. to be 3. in the lower space,
you shall find the letter D. standing over his head, which is the Dominicall
letter for that year. And note that when 28. is the number of the Suns
circle A. is always the Dominicall Letter, from which number you must begin
to count again at 1. and so proceed backward to 28.



How to find out the number of Indiction. Chapter. 9.
THis number consists of 15. years, and is commenly set down in all the
Charters of the Bishops of Rome, and in the instruments and writings of their
pronotaries, and therefore is called Indictio Romana, wherein they seem to
follow the ancient Romans, which used the like indiction of years, but to
other purposes, whereof I make mention in my Sphere: The way to find out this
number every year is thus. Add to the year of the Lord given 3. and divide
the product thereof by 15. and the remainder shall be the number of the said
indiction. But you have to understand that this Indiction is to be counted from
September, and not from March as is the Epact.

But the surest, and therewith the most general Calendar to serve in all places
is the Ephemerides or daily Almanac and especially that of Johannes Stadius,
which will serve for 14. years yet to come: And before those years be all
expired, I doubt not but that the like will be set forth by some one or other
of our learned Astronomers, amongst whom for many years past the Germans have
been most famous. I chose the Ephemerides of Stadius because he is more
portable, and of less price than that great Ephemerides of Leovitius. The
chiefest uses whereof, and most meet for Mariners, though I have already set
down in the latter end of my Treatise of the Globes, to the intent you might
by the help thereof find out in the Globe the true place of the Moon and of
every one of the other 5. Planets that has both longitude and latitude, yet I
think it good once again here in this place, most properly requiring the
same, briefly to show the use of the said Ephemerides, and specially of the
diurnall, Table which begins at the year of our Lord 1583. ends with the
year 1606.

A brief description together with the use of the diurnall Table or Almanacke
of Johannes Stadius. Chapter. 10.
THis Table begins at the 202. page of his book called the Ephemerides or
daily Almanacke. And every page of the said Table that is on the left hand is
divided into 9. collums. In the first collum whereof on the left hand are set
down the days of the month. First, the Gregorian days according to the
Roman account, and next to that the days of the month according to our
English account, and then in the front of every other collum are set down the
characters, first of the Sun, and then of the other six Planets, that is to
say, of the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and last of all,
the head of the Dragon figured thus. And right under these seven Planets, and
also under the head of the Dragon are set down the signs and degrees
whererein every of these is every day of the month throughout the year at
noonetyde. And in the foot of the said Table is set down the latitude of
every one of the five planets, proceeding by the days of the month divided
into three parts. And in the margent of every left page are set down the
chiefest feasts and Saints days that fall in every month throughout the year.

And moreover, in the Table on the right hand right against the left Table are
set down first the days of the month, and then what conjunction or any other
aspect the Moon has with any of the other six Planets, that is, with the
Sun, with Saturn, with Jupiter, with Mars, with Venus, and with Mercury,
which Planets are set down in the front of the said Table, and under them the
Characters of such aspectes as the Moon has that day with any of the other
Planets. The characters of which aspects are these here following.



Whereof the first signifies a Conjunction, the second an opposition, the
third a trine aspect, the fourth a quadrat aspect, and the fifth a sextile
aspect.

Two Planets are said to be in a conjunction when they are both in one self
sign.

And to be in an opposition when they are in two several signs distant one
from another, that is to say, 6 signs distant one from another.

And to be a trine aspect when they are distant one from another by four
signs:

And to be in a quadrat aspect when they are distant one from another by three
signs.

And to be in a sextile aspect when they are distant but 2 signs one from
another.

How to find out the place of any planet by the Ephemerides. Chapter. 11.
NOw to find out the place of any Planet, or of the head of the Dragon by this
diurnall Table, you must first seek out the day of the month in the first
Collum of the left Table, and right against that on your right hand in the said
left Table, you shall find in the common angle right under the Planet or
Dragons head, which so ever of them you seek, the sign and degree wherein the
said Planet or Dragons head is the said day at noontyde.

And to find out the aspectes which the Moon has with any of the Planets the
same day, you must resort to the other Table on the right hand, observing like
order as before.

The Example.
As for example, the 21 of April 1592 which is the first of May according to
the Roman account, I find by the Table on the left hand, the Sun to be in
the 10. degree, 15. minutes of Taurus, the Moon to be in the third degree 47
minutes of Capricorn, Saturn to be in the 8. degree 10 minutes of Cancer,
Jupiter to be in the 18. degree 28 minutes of Sagittarius, Mars to be in the 12
degrees. 6 minutes of Gemini, Venus to be in the 2 degree 0 minutes of Aries, and
Mercury to be in the 6. degree 20 minutes of Taurus, and the head of the
Dragon to be in the 29 degree 45 minutes of Gemini. And right against this in
the Table on the right hand, you shall find the Moon to be in a trine aspect
with the Sun, to be in an opposition with Saturn, to be in a trine aspect with
Mercury.

Thus much touching general Kalenders or Almanacks. Now as for particular
Kalenders I take that which Robert Norman has set down in his new Attractiue
to be the fittest for our country men, which contains many necessary
things, as the contents thereof together with the Table next following the same
does show, which Calendar I think it superfluous to be set down again here,
and the rather for that I wish every Mariner not to be without that book, and
especially containing besides the Calendar many other good precepts touching
navigations, to which book is also joined a very learned and Mathematical
discourse touching the variation of the Mariners Compass made by Master
William Borough controller of her Majesty's Navy, who in mine opinion is one
of the skifullest men in the Art of navigations that is in this Realm.

Of the Mariners Ring or Astrolabe, and of his cross staff. Chapter. 12
NOw according to the order set down in the beginning of this Treatise, I must
needs speak somewhat of the common Marmers Ring or Astrolabe, and of his cross
staff which serve not to so many purposes as that of Stofflerus or of M.
Blagraue before described, but only to take the altitude of the Sun, or of
any Star or Planet, neither are so many conclusions to be wrought by their
common cross staff as by that of Gemma Frisius, or by that which Master Hood
has lately invented. Since our Marmers for the most part do use their common
cross staff to none other end but either to take the altitude of the Sun or
of any fixed star or planet, or else to take the distance betwixt two stars, the
making of which staff is plainly set down by Martin Cortes in his art of
Navigations, and also the making of their Astrolabe.

But Cogniet and Wagoner do set down a new kind of Cross staff, having 3.
transoms or crosses every one longer and shorter than another by the one half,
affirming that so many conclusions may be wrought thereby as by that of Ge^ma
Frisius, but in mine opinion they are not to be compared in all respects to that
of Gemma Frisius which though by reason that the yard thereof is of so great a
length as it is not maniable in a ship, yet upon the land it is most
serviceable, nor yet to that of Master Hoods invention, which is most
maniable, and therewith very light of carriage, by whose staff I think
verily that as many things may be wrought as by any other kind of cross
staff whatsoever, and with less trouble, yea, and in matters of Astronomy
more truly by reason that the yard and transome be of one self length, and
thereby the degrees be larger throughout the whole quadrant than they be in
the common cross staves, for in them the degrees from 50. upwards to 90. are
very small and have narrower spaces than M. Hoods staff has. Again, whereas
in using the Mariners cross staff in such latitude, as the Suns beams be
of great force, they are feign to have glasses made of purpose to save their
sight, and in some places all too little. But in using M. Hoods staff they
shall not need to behold the Sun it self at all, but only to mark upon
what degree of the yard the shadow of the Vane streeketh. Moreover, when the
Sun or star is 50. or 60. degrees high, they are fain to use their
Astrolabe and not their staff, which Astrolabe in mine opinion, as I have said
before, is the best instrument of all others to take the altitude of the Sun
in the day, or of any star in the night, and because I have here commended
unto you M. Hoods staff, I will first set down a plain description thereof
together with those few Astronomicall uses which do chiefly belong to the
Mariner, without committing any offense I hope to the author thereof, and then
I will describe unto you the Mariners ring and his common staff together with
the uses of the same.

But as I was about to describe unto you M. Hoods staff, a friend of mine
coming in the mean time desired me that I would first set down the making
and use of the cross staff with three transomes, which Wagoner and Michaell
Cogniet do so much commend, and as I hear, is used of many sea men in these
days, whose request I could not well deny, and therefore lo here follows
both the making and use thereof.

Of the cross staff having three Transames or Cursours, commonly used in
these days, the use and making whereof does hereafter follow according to the
description of Wagoner and Michaell Cogniet.
FIrst prepare a right staff of firm wood that is square every way, bearing
in thicknes three quarters of an inch, and in length three or four foot, for
which you must also prepare three Transames or Cursours every one shorter then
another by the one half, for the longest would contain in length twelve
inches, the second six inches, and the shortest or least three inches. And
every one of these Transames or Cursours must be cut with a square hole in the
very midst, so as they may be made to run just upon the staff to and fro,
these things being prepared, you must divide three sides of the staff into
certain degrees to serve the three several cursours as follows.

First you must upon a smooth square Table somewhat longer every way then the
staff, and for want of one such Table you may join two Tables that may stand
eauen together, draw by help of a true long squire a right Triangle marked
with the letters A. B. C. and let A. be the right Angle, and the Center as you
see in the figure following, and let both the sides of the said Triangle be of
like length to your staff, then putting the one foot of your compass in the
Center A. and the other foot in B. or C. draw a quarter of a circle from C.
to B. and having divided that quarter into two equal parts, make a prick in
the midst marked with the letter D. and laying your ruler to that prick and
to the Center A. draw a right line which shall be A. D. then divide the half
Quadrant D. B. into nine equal parts making 90. equal degrees proceeding
from B. to D. so as the first degree may be at B. and the 90 at D. that done,
take with your compass the just half of the longest Transame, and keeping
your compass at that wideness, set the one foot in the Center A. and the
other foot in the line A. C. so far as that wideness will extend, and
there make a prick marked with the letter E. then from that point draw a
right line that may be a Parallel to the line A. B. which line shall be E. F.
then take with your compass the half of the middle Transame, and keeping your
compass at that wideness, set the one foot in A. and the other foot in the
line A. C. so far as that wideness does extend and there make a prick
marked with the letter G. and from that prick draw a right line that may be a
Parallel to A. B which line shall be G. H. Thirdly take the one half of the
least Transame with your compass and transfer that wideness to the line A.
C. setting the one foot of your compass in A. and make a prick with the
other foot in the line A. C. as before, marked with the letter I. and from
that prick draw another right line that may be a Parallel to the line A. B.
which shall be the line I. K. Now to graduate the first side of your staff to
serve the longest Transame, you must lay the ruler to the center A. and draw
right lines from thence to every degree of the circumference contained betwixt
90. and 30. and those lines shall divide the line E. F. into so many unequal
spaces as do belong to the first side of the staff, for you must lay the
first side of the staff to that line to be marked according to the division of
that line, the nether section whereof toward the lower end of the staff
must be marked with 90. and the upper section with 30. so is the first side of
your staff truly divided to serve the longest Transame, now to serve the
middle Transame you must divide the line G. H. by drawing right lines from the
Center A. to every degree of the circumference contained betwixt 30. and 10.
which lines will divide the line G. H. into unequal spaces, of which spaces
the lowest must be marked with 30. and the highest with ten, according to
which divisions you must mark the second side of your staff by laying the
side close to the line G. H. so shall that side be marked to serve the middle
Transame, then lay your ruler again to the Center A. and draw right lines to
every degree of the circumference contained betwixt 10. and the first or second
degree next to B. and those lines shall divide the line I. K. into unequal
spaces, the lowest whereof is to be marked with 10. and the highest with 2. or
5. according as your instrument will bear, and according to those sections you
must divide the third side of your staff by laying the same close to that
said line I. K. and remember to make your lines of division so finely as is
possible, so shall your staff be the more truly graduated. And noce that in
graduating your staff, you shall not need to draw right lines from the
Center to every degree of the circumference contained betwixt the 90. degree
and the 60. degree, for when the sun or any star is higher then 60.
degrees, you must use your Astrolabe and not your staff which will not serve
you to look so right up to take so great an altitude either of sun or star.

A figure of the foresaid Triangle.




The shape of the staff with his three Transames, together with the use
thereof.


Whenever you would take the Altitude of the Sun or of any star, you
have first to consider whether the sun or star be 30. degrees or more high:
for then you must place the longest Transame upon your Staff. And set the
lower end of your staff marked with ninety to your eye, which is always to
be done how high or low so ever the sun or star be, and you must move
the Transame either forward or backewarde until you may see by the upper end
of the Transame the body or midst of the sun or star, and with the
nether end of the Transame the Horizon, and then look in what degree the
Transame cutteth the staff, for that is the Altitude of the Sun and star
at that present, but if the sun be not 30. degrees high, then you must put on
the middle Transame, and if he be less then ten degrees high, you must put
on the shortest Transame, and the^ do as before. Thus much touching the Cross
staff with 3. Transames, now I will describe unto you Master Hood his
staff, and show you the use thereof.

A brief description of Master Hoode his cross staff, and of all the parts
thereof. Chap. 13.
The figure or shape of every part of the said staff.
The transome.

The yearde.



THis instrument as you see consists of four parts.

The cross sockett

The Vane.



First of 2. square rulers each one bearing in thick nesse three quarters of an
inch or there abouts every way square, and in length I would wish each ruler
not to contain above one yard, for then in some uses they would wax top
heavy.

Of which two rulers the one marked with the letters A. B. is called the
Transame, which is divided on the one side into 45. degrees beginning at one
and so forth to 45. And every degree is divided again into six lesser parts
making 60. minutes, for six times ten makes 60. which serves for
Astronomicall uses.

And on the opposite side to that, the said Transame is divided into 1000.
equal parts beginning at 25. and so increases by 25. until you come to 1000.
Every which 25. parts is divided into five lesser parts, and every one of
those again into five parts, which makes in all 25. for five times five is
25 and this serves for Geometrical uses.

The other square ruler called the yard and marked with the letters C. D. is
divided into degrees like to those of the Transame proceeding from 45. to 90.
which together with those degrees that be in the first side of the Transame do
make up the number of a just Quadrant to serve Astronomicall uses. And the
side opposite to that is divided into 1000. degrees proceeding from 25. to 25.
like in all respects unto the opposite side of the Transame to serve
Geometrical uses.

The third part belonging to this instrument is a double socket of brass
marked with this letter E. joined together with right Angles, and standing
cross one to another. And each socket has a skrewe to keep the same fast to
his staff at any degree that you list to set the same: And also a long notch
to the intent it may be laid close to any degree of the ruler whereto it
belongs.

The fourth part belonging to this instrument is a vane of brass marked with
the letter F. the upper edge whereof is pierced with a little round hole for
the beam of the sun to pass thorough the same. And this vane is made with a
socket, and with a skrew to hold it fast to that ruler whereon it is set. And
for certain Geometrical uses it were necessary (as some think) that there
were two such vanes.

Thus having described all the parts of the foresaid instrument, I will now
show you how to set those parts together: which to serve Astronomicall uses is
thus done.

How to set the parts of Master Hoodes staff together to serve such
Astronomicall uses as do chiefly belong to the Mariner. Chap. 14.
FIrst put the nether end of the Transame marked with the 45. degree into the
double socket, so as the Transame may stand right up, and that the notch of
the socket may meet even with the said 45. degree, and turn the skrewe that
the socket may stand fast at that degree, that done put the yard into the
cross socket, so as the notch of the said cross socket may lie just upon the
45. degree of the yard, and there make it fast by turning the skrewe: then put
on the vane, which to serve Astronomicall uses must be set at the highest end
of the Transame, in such sort as the upper edge of the vane pierced with the
hole may stand eauen with the first point or streeke of the said Transame,
and when the Transame stands on the left hand of the yard, then the vane
must be placed on the right side of the Transame: But if the Transame do
stand on the right hand of the yard, then the vane must be placed upon the
left side of the Transame: And the yard and Transame would be so set together
as the degrees of the Transame proceeding downward from one to 45. may look
toward you, that is to say, may stand right before your face: And the degrees
of the yard proceeding from 45. to 90. would lie upward, so as the end of
the yard marked with 90. may point to your breast or be set to your eye as
occasion shall require, for such Astronomicall uses as here do follow.

The shape or figure of the foresaid staff, having all his parts set
together to serve for Astronomicall uses. Chap. 15.


How to take the altitude of the funne at any hour that he is to be seen with
the eye by M. Hoods staff. Chap. 16.
THe Staff being set in such order as is before taught, go into some open
place whereas you may see the sun, and turning the end of the yard marked
with ninety toward your breast, hold the yard so level as you can, that it
may be a just Parallel to the Horizon, and turn both your face, and also the
vane of the transame toward the sun. Then you have to consider whether the
sun at that present be either just 45. degrees high, or more, or else less
then 45. degrees, which you shall easily know thus: For if he be just 45.
degrees high, then the shadow of the upper edge of the vane will streeke just
upon the 90. degree of the yard lying at your breast: But if he be more then
45. degrees high, then the shadow of the vane will streeke short of the 90.
degree: And if it be less it will cast no shadow at all upon the yard, but
streeke clean beyond it over your shoulder. Now knowing by this means
whether the altitude of the sun be more or less then 45. degrees, you shall
take his true altitude thus:

If his altitude be less then 45. degrees, then make the Transame to sink
down through his socket until the upper edge of the vane standing upon the
Transame do cast his shadow just upon the nintieth degree of the yard.
Then look at what degree the notch of the Socket wherein the Transome
stands, does cut the said Transame, for that is the true altitude of the
sun at that instant.

But if the altitude of the sun be more then 45. degrees, then draw the
double socket upon the yard nigher toward your breast, until you see the
shadow of the vane to fall just upon the ninetieth degree of the yard, that
done, look upon what degree of the yard the notch of the double socket
cutteth, and that is the true altitude of the sun at that instant.

How to take the altitude of any star with Master Hoodes staff. Chap. 17.
THere is no difference betwixt the order of the taking the altitude of the
sun and of any star, but only that in taking the altitude of any star,
you must set the end of the yard marked with the 90. degree to your eye,
staying the same upon the upper bone of your cheek, and that in such sort as
you may see the star by a right line passing from the end of the yard,
lying at your eye to the upper edge of the vane at one instant, being always
sure that the yard lie level, making a just Parallel to the Horizon, which
Horizon is more easy to be seen upon the sea, then upon the land, for on the
sea there be neither hills nor trees to hinder the sight thereof.

How to take the distance betwixt two stars with Master Hoodes staff. Chap.
18.
THe instrument being set in such order as was first taught: Set the end of
the yard marked with 90. at your eye: and let the other end of the yard
directly point to one of those stars whose distance you seek, and turn the
edge of the vane to the other star be it on the right hand or on the left,
according as you think good your self: Then you must consider whether the
distance of the two stars be just 45. degrees or more or else less, for if
it be just 45. degrees, then the outward edge of the vane, and the end of the
yard marked with 90. will be answerable in your sight to that distance without
any more adoo. But if the distance be less then 45. degrees, which you shall
easily perceive by your eye (for then the star that is on your right or left
hand, will appear within the vane and fall short thereof) then you must thrust
down the Transame in his socket until you may see the two stars by a right
line passing from the end of the yard marked with 90. and lying at your eye,
right forth to the outward edge of the vane, that done, look in what degree
the double socket cutteth the Transame, and that shall be the true distance of
the two stars. But if the distance of the two stars be more then 45.
degrees, which you may know also by your eye, because the star which is on
your left or right hand, will appear clean without the vane: then draw the
double socket together with the Transame toward your eye, until you may see
the two stars by a right line as before, and the degrees which the notch of
the double socket cutteth on the yard, shall be the true distance of the two
stars.

Thus much touching the Astronomicall uses of M. Hoodes staff meet for the
Mariner. Now as for setting of the said staff to serve Geometrical uses, and
to find out the manifold conclusions to be done thereby, I wholly refer you
to M. Hoodes own book, thinking it good now to speak somewhat of the
Mariners Astrolabe or Ringe, and of his usual Crosse-staffe.

Of the Mariners Astrolabe. Chap. 19.
MIchaell Cogniet sets down the making of a new kind of Astrolabe, which
he calls an universal Astrolabe, only because the declination of the sun
every day is added in manner of a Table to the one end of the Diopter of the
said Astrolabe, which is of no great importance since the suns declination
does alter in the space of 30. years and less, which being expired, the
declination is to be new calculated: In the mean time that Table which Norman
has set down in his Attractiue, and also that which is more lately calculated
set down by my self in the first part of my Sphere, and likewise in this
Treatise whereas I treat of the motion of the sun and of his declination, may
serve these 20. years and more without any greater error: Wherefore leaving to
speak any further of Cogniet his universal Astrolabe, I will describe here
the common Astrolabe and Crosse-staffe used by most Mariners, the shape or
figure of both which here follows.



A brief description of the Mariners Astrolabe, and the uses thereof. Chap. 20.
THe limb of the Mariners Astrolabe is traced as you see with three Circles,
making two spaces to contain therein the degrees and numbers of altitude: and
these Circles are divided by two cross lines called Diameters, and cutting one
another in the very Center of the Astrolabe into 4. equal parts, of which
quarters the uppermost on the left hand toward the Ringle is only marked with
degrees and numbers, as you may see in the figure: In which figure the
perpendicular Diameter signifies the Zenith, or the line of South and North,
at the upper end whereof is fastened the Ringle or handle. And the other
overthwart Diameter signifies the Horizon the one end whereof on the left
hand signifies the East point, and the other end on the right hand the West
point. And to this Astrolabe (as to all other) does belong a ruler or Diopter,
which as you see has at each end a square tablet pierced with two holes, the
one greater and the other lesser, the greater to look through with your eye,
to take the altitude of any star or of the sun being so darkened by some
cloud as though it casts no shadow, yet it may be seen with the eye: And
the lesser hole is for the suns beam to pass thorough when he shines
clear, and some Astrolabes are divided in like manner of the Zenith on both
sides, and have two Diopters, whereof the one is pierced with a great hole, and
the other with a smaller hole to serve to such purposes as is above said.

The use of this Astrolabe is only to take the altitude of the sun at any
time of the day, or of any fixed star or Planet in the night, in such sort as
is before taught in my description of Master Blagraue his Astrolabe, in the
third and fourth Proposition thereof.

A brief description of the Mariners Crosse-staffe. Chap. 21.
THis staff consists of two four square rulers of wood, whereof the one is
called the yard, and the other the Transame or Cross: And the yard containing
in length most commonly three quarters of a yard is the longer piece, and is
divided into 90. unequal degrees: for from 10. to 90. the degrees do grow
lesser and lesser, and the Transame containing for the most part but one third
part of the yard, is cut with a square hole in the midst, so as it may run
up and down upon the yard, and some Transames have two running vanes to be set
at what widenes you list, to take thereby the distance of any two stars.

The uses of the Mariners crosse-staffe. Chap. 22.
THe use of the Mariners staff chiefly consists in two points, that is, to
know thereby the altitude of the sun in the day time, or of any star in the
night season, and the other is to know thereby the distance betwixt any two
stars.

The first is thus done, having put the staff or yard through the square hole
of the Transame, set the end of the yard which is marked with 90. to your eye,
laying that end upon the upper point of your cheek bone keeping your legs
close together, and having directed the other end of the yard toward the sun
or star whose altitude you seek* move the Transame to and fro or up and
down, until you may see with the one eye (winking with the other) the one end
of the Transame to meet* just with the Center or midst of the sun or
star, and the other end to touch the Horizon both at one instant, and that
degree of the yard which the square edge of the Transame cutteth, will show how
high the sun or star is at that present: And in taking the altitude of the
sun or of any star, remember always to hold the yard so level as it may
be a just Parallel to the Horizon, for so shall you take the altitude the more
truly. Now as touching the second point, which is to know the true distance
betwixt any two stars you must do thus.

Set the end of the yard marked with ninety to your eye as before, and move
the Transame to and fro until you may see the one end of the Transame to
answer the one star, and the other end thereof to answer the other star,
for that degree of the yard which the Transame cutteth will show the distance
betwixt the two stars: And if the two stars be so nigh together, as they
will not conveniently answer the two ends of the Transame, then you may use the
two mooueable vanes, which (as I said before) you may set at what wideness
you list, but yet so as they may both stand equally distant from the Center of
the Transame or from both ends thereof.

Thus having showed the use of the Mariners Ring and cross staff, I will now
proceed to the other instruments, whereof the two Globes are part, which
Globes I have already described and showed the chiefest uses thereof in a
Treatise by it self, and as for the universal Horologe to know thereby the
equal hour of the day in every Latitude, and also the Nocturnlabe to know
the hour of the night, I shall speak of the one when I come to speak of the
sun, and of the other whereas I treat of the North star and of his guards,
for there I will set down the figure and shape of each instrument, and show
how to use the same: But the two chiefest instruments belonging to a Mariner,
are his compass and his Card, whereof I come now to speak.

But since the Fly of the Compass represents the 32. winds, I think good
first briefly to define what the wind is, and to show how many winds the
ancient Mariners did use, I say here briefly because I have already spoken
sufficiently thereof in the latter end of my Sphere.

Of the wind, what it is, and of the diverse kinds and names thereof. Chap. 23.
THe wind according to Aristotle, is an exhalation hot and dry, engendered in
the bowels of the earth, and being gotten out is carried sidelong upon the face
of the earth. And of winds there be four principal which do take their
names from the four quarters of the earth from whence they blow, that is
North, South, East and West: And though the Greeks and Latins divide every
quarter into three parts, and thereby make in all but twelve winds, whose
names both Greek and Latin are set down in the latter end of my Sphere,
yet our latter Sea men to be the more assured of their Rowtes and Courses, do
divide every quarter of the Horizon into eight winds, so as in all they make
32. winds, giving them such names as are set down in this figure here
following representing the Fly of the Mariners compass.



A brief description of the Mariners compass, and the use thereof. Chap. 24.
THe Mariners Compass may be very well divided into two essential parts,
that is, the Fly, and the wyars touched with the Lodestarre called in Latin
Magnes. And first you have to understand, that the fly is a round white Card
traced with 32. lines all passing thorough the Center of the Circle, which
lines do signify the 32. winds in such sort as the figure before set down
does show, of which lines that which is marked with the Flower-deluce
signifies the north, whose point opposite is the South, and that which is
marked with a Cross signifies the East, whose point opposite is the West, and
the outtermost Circle of the said Fly signifies the Horizon, which circle is
also divided into 360. degrees like unto those of the Equinoctial, so as every
space betwixt point and point contains 11. degrees and 15. minutes, which is
the fourth part of a degree. Moreover, this Circle is divided in 24. hours by
allowing to every point three quarters of an hour, which is 45. minutes, for
an hour contains 60. m and half an hour contains 30. m and the quarter
15 m. Moreover, the common Mariners do divide every point of the Compass into
four quarters to make the more exact account of their Routes or Rombes. But
now as touching the other essential part of the Mariners Compass which is the
wyars, you shall understand that they are of iron or steel, and made in this
form, and being touched at the one end with the Lodestone, they are fastened
to the back side of the Fly, either right under the line marked with the
Flowre-deluce, or else somewhat distant from the same, either toward the East
or else toward the West, for such cause as shall be declared in the next
Chapter, for those wyars being thus touched, do make that part of the Fly that
is marked with the Flowre-deluce, to stand always toward the North, and to
that end the Fly having in the Center a latten socket, is put into a turned
box, in the midst whereof is a sharp pointed Latten pin, upon which the
Fly turns about, and that turned box is covered with glass, partly to
keep the Fly clean, but chiefly that the wind should not move it to and
fro. And this turned box is hanged by two round narrow plates of Latten in
another square box of thin wainscot board, so as it may always hang level,
howsoever the ship swayeth or inclines on either side, and though of the
Mariners Compass there be diverse uses, as you shall perceive hereafter, yet
the chiefest end and use thereof is to show the North part of the world,
whereby the Shipmaister knowing what course he has to hold and how the port
or place to which he goes, bears from the place from which he departs,
may by looking always to his Compass, know how to direct his ship
accordingly.

Of the Lodestone, and of the variation of the Compass in Northeasting and
Northwesting. Chapter. 25
THe Lodestone or Adamant, called in Latin Magnes, and in Italian Calamita,
has two marvelous great and secret properteies or virtues, the one to draw
steel or Iron unto it, and the other to show the North and South part of the
world, of which stones some be of more force than others according to the
place from whence they come. For those are counted best which are found in the
East Indies upon the coaste of China and Bengala, which is no shell but a whole
stone of sanguine color like to Iron, and is firm, massy, and heavy, and
will draw or lift up the just weight of it self in Iron or steel. And as
Norman says in his new Attractiue, such stones are commonly sold for their
weight in Silver.

Next to this, Norman commends the red stone of Arabia, he commends also
the stone of Almaine, which is in color like to Iron, but spongeous, and
thereby lighter than the other. And as for the black and white stone of Elba,
which is an Island, not far from Piombino, he says that the virtue thereof
is but of small force, and of no long continuance. But the worste are those
that come from Norway, whose color is mixed with graie, I have heard that
there be of them here in England, but how good I know not, it is marvel
that Norman makes no mention thereof, whose Treatise called the new
Attractiue, together with Master Borough his addition I would wish all that be
studious in this Art to read most diligently, for truly in mine opinion
the secrets of this Stone and variation of the Compass, was never better
disciphered, nor by more experiences tried than it has been by these two men
last named. The book is most necessary for navigations and of an easy price,
meet for every poor man's purse, though perhaps in some points not meet for
every man's understanding. Now whenever the wyers are to be touched with this
stone, they must be made very clean and void of all rust, to the intent that
the Iron may the more firmly receive the virtue of the stone. And it is well
known by good experience, that by virtue of the Lodestone the North point of
the Compass declineth always from the true North, either to the East, or West
more or less according to the latitude of the place wherein you are unless
you be right under the Meridian of the Azores. And therefore, most men in these
parts of the world do use to set the North point of the wiers not right
under the Flower de Luce signifying the North part of the world, but rather
somewhat inclining toward the East half a point or thereabout to avoid the
Northeasting and Northwesting of the Compass, the cause of which declination
by diverse learned men has been diversely taught, but not rightly as Michaell
Cogniet says, until Mercator found out the true cause, who first learned by
the experience of one Francis of Deep, an excellent Pilot, that in sailing
under the Meridian which passes thorough the Isles called the Azores, the
needle does decline neither East nor West, whereupon Mercator by calculating
the variation of the Compass at Ratisbone, found that the Pole of the
Lodestone ought to be put in that Meridian which passes through the foresaid
Isles so as it may be distant from the Pole of the world sixteen degrees and or
rather as Master Borough says, sixteen degrees and twenty two minutes, and
by that calculation Cogniet has found the variation of the Compass at the
town of Antwerp to be 9. degrees. And Master Borough by the help of the new
instrument of variation first made by Robert Norman, and afterward perfected by
himself, has found the variation for London to be 11. degrees and fifteen
minutes, which is a whole point from North to East. But whenever you depart
from the foresaid Meridian of the Azores, be it never so little, either
toward the East or West, the needle will vary and decline accordingly. And
his greatest declination is when you come to a full quarter of that Parallel
wherein you sail, for from thence it declineth less and less until you come
again under the foresaid Meridian, which thing Cogniet does plainly
demonstrate by this Figure here made of purpose.



In which Figure the letter A. which is in the very center of the Circle
represents the north Pole, and the right line, marked with the letters C. B.
signifies the Meridian which passes through the Isles Azores, in which line is
a point or prick marked with the letter D. signifying the Pole of the
Lodestone, distant from the North Pole sixteen degrees and a half. Now, if
your ship be in the point B. then your needle declineth on neither side, but
points right to the North Pole, and also to the Pole of the Lodestone. But if
you sail Eastwarde and arrive to the point E. then the right line of the North
is E. A. but your needle declineth on the right hand toward his own Pole D.
which is to the East, so much as the angle A. E. D. does show. Likewise if you
sail from B. Westwarde to the point F. the right line of the North shall be
F. A. but your needle will decline to his own Pole D. toward the West, so
much as the angle A. F. D. does show. And to be short, the needle does never
show the right North, but only in C. or B. to either of which points the
nigher that you approach the less your needle declineth, and the more that you
go from any of these two points the more your needle declineth either East
or West, but the greatest declination thereof is in H. or G. for then you are a
just quarter from the foresaid Meridian. Also by this Figure he plainly
shows that of two sundry towns having one self Meridian, that which is
nearest to the Pole of the world has greatest declination. As for example,
suppose the letter I. in the foresaid Figure to signify that town which is
nigher to the Pole, and the letter E. to signify that town which is more
distant from the Pole, both towns being under one self Meridian E. A. Here
you see that the Needle being in E. does show the Pole of the Lodestone by the
line E. D. and being in I. it shows the Pole of the Lodestone by the line I.
D. Now according to the doctrine of Euclyde, the angle A. I. D. is greater
than the angle A. E. D. whereby it follows that the needle declineth more in
I. than in E. But whereas Mercator affirms that there should be a mine or
great rock of Adamant, whereunto all other lesser rocks or needles touched
with the Lodestone do incline as to their chief fountain, that opinion
seems to me very strange, for truly I rather believe with Robert Norman,
that the properties of the stone, as well in drawing steel, as in showing the
north Pole, are secret virtues given of God to that stone for man's necessary
use and behoof, of which secret virtues no man is able to show the true
cause.

How to find out the variation of the compass in every latitude. Chapter. 26.
WIlliam Boorne in his Regiment of the Sea teaches diverse ways how to find
out the variation of the Compass, as well by the Sun in the day time, as by
the North star in the night season. First, thus mark at what point of the
Compass the Sun rises and sets, for if he rises at the East point of
the Compass, and goes down at the West Northwest point, then the Compass is
varied one whole point, that is to say, the North point of the Compass
stands North and by East. But because the air is seldom clear at the rising
and setting of the Sun, you may do thus, take with your Astrolabe or cross
staff the altitude of the Sun in the forenoone, the sooner the better, at some
just point of the compass, and take again his altitude in the afternoon, when
he is in like degree of altitude, and mark therewith at what point of the
Compass the Sun has such altitude, and by the difference thereof you shall
know the variation of the Compass. As for example, you find by your Astrolabe
or cross staff, that the Sun is 20. degrees high at the Southeast point of
the Compass, and observing the same again in the afternoon you find his
height to be 20. degrees at the West Southwest point of the Compass, whereby you
see that the compass is varied one whole point, that is to say, that the North
point stands North and by East, and the South point is South and by West. He
teaches it also another way, which is thus.

Take with your cross staff or Astrolabe the height of the Sun at noontyde,
which is called the Meridian altitude of the Sun, and thereby you shall have
the true Meridian of the place where you are, with which Meridian if the South
point of your Compass does agree, then your Compass has no variation at al,
but if the south point thereof do swerve or incline on either side from the said
Meridian, mark how much it differs, and that difference will show you the
variation. Now to know the variation of the Compass by the North star, do
thus, set your Compass with the North star, and if you find them to agree,
then there is no variation, but note that this is to be done when the two
guardes or pointers of Charles waine are right over or right under the North
star, for if these two stars be West from the North star, then the North
star is a third part of a point unto the Eastward of the North Pole, and if the
said two stars be right East from the North star, then the North star is
a third part of a point unto the Westward of the north Pole.

The compass (as Bourne says) does vary most in sailing long voyages East
and West, and though it varieth two or three points, yet you may know what
course to hold without alteration of the Wiers any manner of way. As for
example, suppose the Northeast point to stand right North, and your course is
to go right West, here in this case you may use the Southwest point in stead
of the West point, whereby you may perceive that it makes no great matter
which point stands due North, so as you take that point of the Compass for
the North which directly points to the North. But Robert Norman and Master
Borough by the help of their new invented Instrument of variation, do show
how to find out the variation of the Compass much more exactlie than ever it
has been heretofore taught, which instrument together with the book, I would
wish all sea men to have, and thereby to learn the perfect use of the
instrument, which use that book teaches both plainly and learnedlie, in
which book is also proved by diverse demonstrations that there is no such
attractiue point as some have dreamed, but rather a respective point whereunto
the needle of your Compass will always turn in what part of the world soever
you sail. But of the place where that respective point should be, diverse
learned Pilottes have had diverse opinions, for some have imagined it to be in
the heavens, and some above the heavens, if it were in the heavens, then the
needle would daily turn about, and alter according to the motion of that
heaven, wherein the said point is, which is nothing so. And to be above the
heavens, it is contrary to the old rule of Philosophy, which says that Extra
Coelum non est locus, and therefore Norman and Master Borough have great
reason to say that it is in the body of the earth beneath the Horizon, for
they have tried by diverse lively experiments that the North part of the needle
of his own accord and nature would always decline downwarde if it be not
otherwise counterpoised or let, and by their demonstrations supposing the
Meridian of the Azores to be the first or common Meridian, and also knowing the
altitude of the Pole at London to be 51. degrees, 32. minutes, they find that
according to that latitude the Pole of the Lodestone, being in the upper face
of the earth, and right under the foresaid common Meridian is 25. degrees 44.
minutes distant from the Pole of the world. And the point respective to be
distant in a right line from under the Horizon of London 71. degrees, 50
minutes and the variation of the Compass to be as has been said before, 11.
degrees and 15. minutes, but to find out the true place of the respective point
in every latitude, they say that no certain rules can as yet be set down, by
reason that the compass does vary more suddenly in one place than in another,
for in some place it will vary more in sailing 200. leagues than in another
place in sailing 400. leagues. Again, it will sometimes be retrograde, for M.
Borough in sailing betwixt the North Cape and Vaigates, toward the Northeast,
and looking by his computation that the needle should have increased his
variation toward the East, he found that it was suddenly turned backward
toward the West, notwithstanding both Norman and M. Borough do affirm that
though the Compass has in several Horizons several variations, yet in any
one Horizon the needle always respects one only point without alteration,
and that in his declining it keeps the like order and that certainly in
every place. And although the needle of the Compass by reason of the
waightines of the Fly cannot decline downward according to his own property,
but only shows the point respective always upon the Horizon, which indeed,
as they say, is most necessary for navigations, yet by such means and
conclusions as are set down in the foresaid book, a diligent Pilot having with
him a perfect stone may by exact observations find out the increasing or
decreasing of the declnation of the needle, which declination you shall find,
as they think to be more or less according as the point respective is more
or less distant from the place whereas the trial is made, which being
diligently observed in sundry places, with the certain variation of the
needle from the Meridian, the true place of the point respective may be found
out as they think.

Of the Mariners Card, and of the making thereof. Chapter. 27.
THe Mariners Card, which some call a nautical Planisphear, is none other
thing, but a description made in plano upon paper or parchment of the places
that be in the sea, or on the land next adjoining to the sea, as points, Capes,
Bays, Ports, Floods, Islands, Rocks, Sands, and such like, And such Cards
are either universal or particular, the universal Cards are those wherein are
described the most parts of the world, such as is the universal Card or Map
of Mercator, or of Plancius. The particular are those wherein some special
parts of the sea and land are described. And both these kinds of Cards are
traced with certain lines, whereof some are called Meridians, some Parallels,
and some the Lines of the Mariners compass, showing the 32. winds before
described in the beginning of this Treatise. The order of making which cards
in times past was wont to be thus.

First draw with a pair of compasses a secret circle that may be put out, so
great as you shall think meet for your card, which circle shall signify the
Horizon, then divide that circle into four equal quarters, by drawing two
Diameters crossing one another, in the center of the foresaid circle with
right angles, whereof the perpendicular line is the line of North and South,
and the other crossing the same is the line of East and West, at the four ends
of which cross Diameters you must set down the four principal winds, that
is, East, West, North and South, marking the North part with a flower deluce in
the top, and the East part with a cross, as you may see in the figure
following. Then divide every quarter of the said circle with your compasses
into two equal parts, setting down pricks in the midst of every quarter,
through which pricks, and also through the center of the circle, draw two
other cross lines, which must extend somewhat beyond the circumference of the
Horizon, which two cross lines together with the first two cross lines shall
divide the circle into 8. parts, and thereby you shall have the eight
principal Winds. That done, divide every eight part of the said Horizon
into two equal parts by drawing other two cross lines through the center,
and extending somewhat beyond the circumference of the Horizon, as before*
whereby the whole circle shall be divided into 16. parts, which shall suffice
without making any more divisions, which would cause a confusion of lines,
and at the end of every one of these 16. lines you must draw a little circle,
whose center must stand upon the circumference of the Horizon, every one
whereof must be also divided into 16. parts by the help of 16. lines,
diversely drawn from the center of one little circle to another, in such order
as the figure here placed more plainly shows to the eye, than I can express
the same by mouth. And these little circles do signify 16 little Mariners
compasses, the lines whereof signifying the winds, do show how one place bears
from another, and by what wind the ship has to sail. But besides those
little circles there is wont to be drawn also another circle somewhat greater
than the rest upon the very center of the Horizon, which Circle by reason of
the 16. lines that were first drawn passing through the same, is divided into
16. parts, and the Mariners do call this circle the mother compass.

Here place the Mariners Card. mariners' card

The shape and figure of the first liniaments of the Mariners Card drawn
after the old manner, and how to set down the places of the land or sea
therein. Chapter. 28.
NOw the true setting down of the places in the Mariners card, as Points,
Capes, Bays, Floods, Islands, and such like is to be done by knowing what
latitude and longitude every place has, which is to be learned either by
modern tables made of purpose: for the ancient Tables make no mention of any
longitudes or latitudes of such places as are in the new found land, which land
to them was never known, or else by such Mariners cards already made as do
show the true longitudes and latitudes of those places which you would
describe in your Card, of which longitudes and latitudes, and especially the
longitudes of the places in the West Indies, few or none are as yet truly set
down,

Moreover, to know the distance of places, that is, how many leagues or miles
one place is distant from another there is wont to be set down in the
Mariners Card a scale, otherwise called by the Mariners a Tronke, the making
whereof is plainly taught by Martin Cortes in his art of Navigations, in the
second chapter of his third book, and also how to graduate the Cards, to show
what latitude every place has, and there also he teaches how to translate
one Card into another, and how to reduce a greater Card into a lesser, and
contrariwise. To which book I refer you, and the rather for that it is in
English, translated many years since out of Spanish by M. Richard Eden.

But for so much as the sea and the earth do make together one whole round
body, the lines of the 32. rombes in the Card being drawn right, and made to
signify great circles, can never show the true course that the ship has to
hold, which Michaell Cogniet proves by a Figure demonstratiue, and thereof
gathers three conclusions. First, that a man may sail right north and South
round about the world, if the Sea in all that course be nauigable, and so
return again to the Port from whence he first departed. Secondly, that
making the Equinoctial his Parallel he may sail East and West round about
the world, and so return to the port from whence he departed, Also if he
sail East and West in any other Parallel that is distant from the
Equinoctial, he may return by the same Parallel to the port from whence
he first departed, and yet not about the whole world, for that cannot be
done, but only when the Equinoctial is his Parallel, Thirdly, that
whosoever sayleth by any other rombe than by one of the four principal, he
by often changing his Meridian and Horizon must needs sail by a line Spirall,
which is neither perfectly right, nor perfectly round, and thereby he may
well approach the Pole, and also go round about it, but yet with unequal
distance, so as he shall be nigher beyond it than on this side, by means
whereof he cannot return to the place from whence he came, as you may
plainly perceive by this Figure demonstratiue here placed.



In which Figure the letter A. does signify the North Pole, and the letters
B. C. the Meridian passing through the Pole A. then suppose your ship to be in
Q. whereas the Pole is elevated 30. degrees. and Q. to be your Zenith, and the
right line G. Q. D to be your right line of East and West cutting the
foresaid Meridian with right angles, and let D. be the East point, and E. the
West point.

Now you may sail from Q. toward the North with a South wind, and from A.
you may sail again Southwarde with a North wind until you come to the South
Pole, and from thence you may sail again Northwarde with a South wind until
you come again to Q from whence you first departed, and so you shall have gone
round about the world under one self Meridian B. A. C. But in sailing East
or West, you shall continually change your Meridian, and thereby change your
East point, for in sailing from Q. toward D. you come immediately to the
Meridian A. F. whose right East point is G. and in sailing further Eastward,
you come to the Meridian A. H. whose right East point is I. and so forth from
one Meridian to another, notwithstanding in keeping still in one self
parallel marked with K. L. M. you may sail round about the Pole A. which is
the center, and so come again to the Port Q. from whence you first departed,
but not about the whole world: for that you cannot do unless the
Equinoctial were your Parallel, as has been said before, but if you sail
by any other rombe than by one of the four principal, that is, East, West,
North, or South, your course shall neither be by right line, nor yet by true
circle, but by a spirall line, which is partly right, and partly round, so as
you cannot with like course return to the place from which you departed, by
reason that you change so often both Meridian and Horizon, as by the Spirall
line Q. N. O. drawn in this Figure you may easily perceive, which approaches
nigher to the Pole beyond it than on this side. Moreover the sea men by making
the Meridians and parallels in their cards all of equal distance, they make
some countries far greater than they should be by the one half. Also by that
means he that sayleth East and West round about the Pole in the Parallel
whose latitude is 60. degrees, should make as long a voyage as he that sayleth
East and West along the Equinoctial, the voyage whereof is twice as long as
the other, for the redress and remedy of which faults, Cogniet hops to
find out some more perfect rule of making cards when opportunity of time
shall serve: in the mean time to reform the said faults, Mercator has in
his universal card or Map made the spaces of the Parallels of latitude to
be wider every one than other from the Equinoctial toward either of the
Poles, by what rule I know not, unless it be by such a Table, as my friend
M. Wright of Caius college in Cambridge at my request sent me (I thank him)
not long since for that purpose, which Table with his consent, I have here
plainly set down together with the use thereof as follows.

The Table follows on the other side of the leaf.

A Table to draw there by the parallelles in the Mariners Card together with
the use thereof in trewer sort than they have been drawn heretofore, and the
use thereof. Chapter. 29.
Degrees of the Meridian, beginning from the Equinoctial circle. Equal parts
of the Meridian in the Mariners Card* of which parts every degree of the
Equinoctial contains 60 miles. 1 60 2 120 3 180 4 240 5 300 6 361 7 421 8 482
9 542 10 603 11 664 12 725 13 787 14 849 15 911 16 973 17 1035 18 1098 19 1162
20 1225 21 1289 22 1354 23 1419 24 1484 25 1551 26 1617 27 1684 28 1752 29 1820
30 1889 31 1959 32 2029 33 2100 34 2173 35 2245 36 2319 37 2394 38 2470 39 3546
40 2624 41 2703 42 2783 43 2865 44 2948 45 3032 46 3118 47 3205 48 3294 49 3385
50 3477 51 3572 52 3668 53 3767 54 3868 55 3972 56 4078 57 4187 58 4299 59 4414
60 4532 61 4655 62 4781 63 4911 64 5046 65 5189 66 5331 67 5482 68 5639 69 5804
70 5976 71 6156 72 6346 73 6547 74 6759 75 6985 76 6226 77 7484 78 7764 79 8067
80 8399

THe use of this Table for making the sea Card is thus. Overthwart the midst
of the plain superficies wherein you would draw the lineamentes of the Card,
describe a right line marked with the letters A. B. C. whereof B. is the very
midst or center, and this line represents the Equinoctial, the end
whereof on the right hand, marked with the letter C. signifies the East, and
the other end on the left hand marked with the letter A. signifies the West,
which Equinoctial line must be divided into 36. degrees, then cross the same
squirewise with perpendicular lines, passing through every tenth or fifth
degree, as you see in the example following. Then take with your compasses the
length of half the Equinoctial, that is, 180. degrees, and set one foot of
your Compasses in the mutual intersection of the Equinoctial, and of that
perpendicular or Meridian which passes through the East end of the
Equinoctial line, marked with the letter C. and with the other foot make a
prick in the same perpendicular or Meridian, and mark that prick with the
letter D. that done, divide the space contained betwixt this prick and the
Equinoctial first into three equal parts, and every one of those into
other three equal parts, so have you 9. parts. And again, every one of
those into three, so have you twenty seven parts, and divide every one of
those parts into four parts, so shall you have a hundred and eight parts,
and if there be space enough, divide again every one of those into ten, so
shall you have a 1080. parts, and if it be possible, divide again every one
of those parts into other ten, so shall you have in all 10/800. parts, but
this can hardly be done, unless the Card be very large, wherein every
degree of the Equinoctial is near an inch long, which happens very
seldom, and therefore 1080. parts shall suffice.

And for the easier numbering of these parts, set to them Arithmeticall figures
with black lead, which may afterward be put out when your work is done,
beginning at the Equinoctial and so proceed from thence both Northward and
Southwarde, then look what number stands right against every degree in the
former Table, which degrees do extend from 1. to fourscore degrees, and
omitting always the first figure on the right hand of that number which you
find, for so you must always do when your division contains no more but
1080. parts, count that number which remains upon the line of division, and
there make one prick, and make another prick of the same distance from the
Equinoctial upon the outermost Meridian on the left hand, through which two
pricks draw a right line, and that shall be your first Parallel of latitude,
and so proceed with all the rest first Northwarde, and then Southward, if you
mind to make an universal Card. But the example following contains no more
but the one half of an universal Card proceeding from the Equinoctial line
Northwarde unto the 80. degrees of latitude: for further Northwarde than 80.
degrees is no land as yet discovered or known, nor yet all that, so far as
ever I could learn.

The draught of the Meridians and parallels of the Mariners Card or nauticall
Planispheare according to the former Table.


IN this last figure or Table is first drawn (as you see) the Equinoctial line
marked with the letters A. B. C. and that line is divided into 360. degrees,
and therein also are drawn perpendicular lines, as well thorough the beginning
and ending of the said Equinoctial line, as also through every tenth degree
thereof, which be the Meridians, and are every where equidistant each one from
other, then take half the length of the Equinoctial which is A. B. or B. C.
with your Compasses and setting one foot in the end of the Equinoctial marked
with C. make with the other foot a prick at D. in the Meridian or
perpendicular line marked with the letters C. D. E. then divide the space
contained betwixt C. and D. into 1080. parts in such sort as before has been
showed, and set the figures unto them as here you see, to the intent that you
may the more readily number the parts. Then look in the first Table what
number answers to every 10. degree of the Equinoctial, and casting away the
first figure of that number on the right hand, find out the parts answerable to
the number remaining in the line C. D. and at those parts set pricks in both
the outermost Meridians through which pricks you shall draw the Parallels. As
for example in the first Table you see that the number right against 10.
degrees is 60. (the first figure 3. toward the right hand being rejected)
therefore look 60. in the line C. D. and by that part draw the first Parallel
distant 10. degrees from the Equinoctial. And after this manner all the rest of
the Parallels are to be drawn.

Many do use to paint the vacant places in their Cards with over many flags,
and the compasses thereof with diverse and superfluous colors which William
Borne misliketh, wishing that in stead thereof they would show by letters or
other Characters what moon does make a full sea, in such places as are
necessary to be known, and also to draw the true shape and fashion of every
Cape or headlande that is needful about the coast, and at what point of the
compass the land rises of this or that fashion, for being near the land it
will seem to be of one fashion, and being far off to be of an other fashion,
and to mistake any place on the sea is very dangerous to the Mariner. But above
al things let him that saileth by Card and Compass be sure that the needle of
his compass have the like declinatio^ that his needle had which made the Card.
For Cogniet reports that certain Mariners being in the west Indies, and
seeing the North star to be Northeast, maruailed thereat very much not
knowing the cause of that error, which indeed was for that the needle of their
compass was made to decline Northeast, whereas it should rather have declined
Northwest, for the West Indies do stand Westernly from the Azores. It is
necessary also to set down in the Card such places as are dangerous, as
sands, flats, or shoulds, rocks, and such like things as are not always to be
seen with the eye, to the intent that the Mariner being advertised thereof may
shun the same. All which things before mentioned, Wagoner has in all places
contained in his book very well observed. Thus having spoken sufficiently of
making the Mariners Card, Now I think it good to show the most necessary and
chiefest uses thereof.

The chiefest uses of the Mariners Card. Chap. 31.
THe chiefest uses of the sea Card are these four here following:

The first is to know thereby how that place whereunto you would sail, bears
from the place or Port from whence you set off, or depart. And that is to be
known by the lines of the Mariners Compasses painted in the Card in this
manner following: Take a pair of Compasses and having opened them, set the one
foot thereof in the very place from whence you depart, and the other foot in
the next line of that Compass which is nearest unto your place of departing, I
mean such line as does most rightly direct you to the place to which you would
go, and your Compass being opened at the fit wideness to serve that line,
draw them from the place of your departing unto the place whereto you would go,
suffering that foot of the Compass which stands upon the line of the wind
whilst you draw it forward, not to swerue one jot from that line, and that
line will either rightly direct you to the place assigned or fall short
thereof, or else ouerrech the same, if it fall short, then take another line
nearer to the place from which you departed, and if it ouerreach, take some
line that is further off from the place of your departing, and having found a
line that points directly to the place, consider what wind or rombe it is,
for by that wind the place assigned bears from you, and the rombe or wind
opposite to that is the wind whereby you have to sail.

The second use is to know by the Card how far the place whereto you go is
distant from the place of your departing, which is done by help of the skale
or trunk set down in the Card thus: Take the just distance betwixt the two
places with your compasses by setting the one foot in the one place, and the
other foot in the other place, and apply that wideness of the compasses to
the skale or trunk, and the trunk will show how many leagues the one place is
distant from the other, and if the distance betwixt the places be longer then
the trunk, then take first the length of the trunk with your Compasses, and
look how many times that is contained in the space betwixt the two places, and
if there do remain any odd measure, then having taken that odd measure with
your compasses by setting the^ at such widenes as is answerable to that odd
measure, apply that wideness to the first part of the trunk, so shall you
know the just measure of the whole. And this rule serves to take the true
distance of any other two places whatsoever set down in the Card.

The third use is to know by the Card what Latitude or altitude of the Pole any
place set down in the Card has, which is done by help of the line of
degrees of Latitude, otherwise called the Graduation of the Card in this
manner following. Set the one foot of your compasses in the very place whereof
you would know the Latitude, and the other foot in the line of East and West,
which is next unto that place, and keeping that foot still upon that line,
draw your compasses forward until you come to the line of degrees, and mark
what degree of the said line the foot of the compass which was first set in
the place does cross or touch, for that is the degree of Latitude for that
place, numbering from the lowest degree of Graduation upward, so shall you
find the Latitude of Lisbone in Portingale by Mercator his universal Card,
and by the Card set down in Martin Cortes book, and also by Medina his Card
drawn in his book of Navigations to be 38. degrees 30. minutes and somewhat
more. But by the Tables of Ptolomie you shall find it to be 40. degrees 24.
minutes, and by Appian his Tables to be 39. degrees and 38. minutes.

The fourth use chances when you are driven out of your right course by
storms or tempest, which storms how to foresee and to prognosticate, is
plainly taught by Martin Cortes in the 19. Chap. of his second book. Also you
may be driven by force of contrary winds, by surging of the sea, or by
overthwart tides, currants, and such like impediments, so as you can not lay
your course right to the place assigned, for remedy whereof you must seek in
what place you are, and to note the same in your Card which as the Mariners
term it, is to make a prick in the Card, which to do truly in time of
need many things are to be known and well observed and kept in memory. First
to know what latitude the place from whence you first departed has, then to
keep in mind what way your ship did make good at every shift of wind, that
is to say, how many leagues, and in how long time you sailed by every several
wind: and then not knowing well where you are, nor how far you are distant
from the place whereto you would go, learn to know by help of your Astrolabe
or cross staff, in such sort as is before taught, the altitude of the Pole in
that place where you are, which if you find to be all one with the Latitude of
the place of your departure, then you may assure your self that you have
sailed by the line of East and West without altering your Latitude, but if you
find the Latitude of the place where you are, to be more or less then the
Latitude of the place from whence you departed, then resort to your Card, and
take two pair of Compasses opened at such widenes as the one foot of the one
Compass may stand in the place from which you departed, and the other foot of
the same Compass to stand in the line of the rombe whereby you sailed: and let
the one foot of the other Compass stand in that degree of Latitude which you
last found, and the other foot of the same Compass in the next line of East
and West, and holding the Compasses so ordered in each hand one pair: draw
them both so as they may meet together, taking good heed in drawing them,
that the foot of that compass which was placed in the line of the wind, may
at no time swerve from that line, nor the one foot of the other Compass to
swerve from the line of East and West, wherein it was first placed, and whereas
the two feet of those Compasses do meet, that is to say, that foot of the
one compass which was drawn from the place of your departing do meet with
that foot of the other compass which came from the degree of Latitude last
found, where these two feet (I say) do meet, there make a prick or mark in
your Card, for that is the place where you ship is at that instant: And from
thence you must take your right course again to the place whereunto you would
go. But because it is necessary as well at this time as at all other times, to
know what way your ship has made, and that the same is not in mine opinion,
so plainly nor so commodiously taught by any one that I have read, as by
Michaell Cogniet, I mind therefore in the two chapters next following to set
down his way not only how to find out the way of your ship when you sail
South and North under one self Meridian, or in any other place where you are
to change in your gate the latitude or altitude of the Pole, but also how to
find out the way of your ship in sailing right East and West, without
changing the altitude of the Pole, which way as he says, was never heretofore
known to any Pylot but to him self first author and inuentor thereof.

How to know the way of your ship, and how many leagues are to be counted for
one degree of Latitude in every Rombe whereby you sail. Chap. 32.
FIrst you have to understand that in saylinge just North and South, you do
always abide under one self great Circle called the Meridian, under the
which, when you have sailed so far as the altitude of the Pole is changed one
degree, then have you gone 17. Spanish leagues, and a half, and you have to
note that every Spanish league contains 2857. fathams, and that our English
league contains no more but 2500. fathams, so as the Spanish league is more
then our English league by 357. fathams, and every fatham contains vi. foot.
Again in sailing East and West, you do always remain under one self
Parallel, by means whereof the altitude of the Pole does never alter, and
therefore no true account can be made of the leagues, but by such means as
Cogniet teaches in the Chapter following. But if in sailing North and South,
you decline one rombe either toward the East or West, and go so far as the
altitude of the Pole is changed by one degree, then you have made somewhat more
then 17. Spanish leagues and a half, and to be short, the more rombes that you
decline toward the East or West, the more leagues in number do belong to one
degree of altitude, as you may plainly see by this figure demonstratiue here
following in which the letter A. signifies the place or point in the Card,
from which you depart situated in the Parallel A. B.

Then suppose C. D. to be another Parallel equally distant from A. B. by one
degree of altitude. Now if you sail right East or West, then you shall always
remain in the Parallel A. B. equally distant from the Pole. But if you sail
from A. right North so far as the altitude of the Pole is augmented one
degree, then your ship shall be in C. and if you sail by the first rombe
toward the East so far as the Pole does altar in altitude one degree, then
your ship shall be in E. and thereby your way must needs, be longer, and so
consequently the more rombes you decline from North to East, the longer is your
way, and the more leagues must be accounted to one degree of altitude, as the
lines drawn from A. to E. F. G. H. I. K. and D. do show. And what same ever is
said here of the quarter from North to East, the same is to be understood in
all the other three quarters, that is, from North to West, from South to East,
and from South to West. But if you will know how many leagues do belong to
every degree according to the rombe whereby you sail, then consider well this
Table here following.

The first Table.
Rombes. Leagues. 1 17 2 18 14/15 3 21 0 4 24 5 31 6 45 7 89

For in sailing from North or South toward East or West so far as you come
to change one degree of altitude of the Pole, the said degree does require for
the first rombe, etc.

Now then to know how much way you have made in sailing, you must first know
as well the Latitude of the place from which you departed as of that place
whereunto you be arrived: then by the foresaid Table seek to know how many
leagues do belong to a degree of that rombe whereby you have sailed, for in
multiplying the number of the leagues by the degrees of the difference of the
two Latitudes, the product thereof will show you how many leagues you have
sailed, notwithstanding since the way may be made longer or shorter by changing
or shifting of the wind, it is needful that the Pylot have consideration
thereof, who by skillful conjecture must sometime either add to, or take fro
according as need shall require. Moreover by the foresaid figure marked with
letters, you may also easily understand how much you change in Longitude, that
is to say, how much you are distant from the Meridian of that place from whence
you departed, be it either toward the East or West, for he that sayleth from
the point A. as is aforesaid right North or South, he remains always under
one self Meridian: but he that sayleth by the first rombe toward the East or
West so far as he changes one degree of Altitude, and arriueth to the point
E. is now distant from his first Meridian so much as is the space betwixt C.
and E. which we find by computation to be three leagues and a half for one
degree of Latitude, which amounts to twelve minutes of a degree, and so of
the rest of the rombes, as appears by this Table here following.

The second Table.
Rombes leagues Degrees and minutes or Longitude. first 3 0 12 second 7 0 25
third 11 0 40 fourth 17 1 0 fifth 26 1 30 sixth 42 2 25 seventh 880 5 2

For in sailing from North or Southe toward East or West so far as you
change one degree of altitude of the Pole you change also your Meridian, and
thereby your Longitude, the quantity whereof answerable to every rombe, is set
down on the right side of this Table.

And to make this more plain by example suppose that you sail from Lisbone,
which is a famous port in Portingale, by the wind Southwest and by west, which
is the fifth rombe from south to West, so far as you find the altitude of the
Pole to be 18. degrees less then at Lisbone. Now if you would know how many
leagues you have sailed, and also how much the Meridian of that place is more
westward then the Meridian of Lisbone, then do thus. Look in the first Table,
and you shall find that to one degree of the fifth Rombe do belong 31. leagues
and a half, which leagues being multiplied by 18. do make in all 582. leagues
and. which you have sailed. then look in the second Table, and you shall find
for the fifth rombe one degree and 30. minutes of Longitude, which being
multiplied by 18. and a half, do make 27. degrees and. of a degree, for by so
much is Lisbone more Eastward, then the place where you are. And whereas the
first Table is made according to the proportion of right lines such as are
commonly drawn in Mariners Cards, Cogniet makes another Table according to
the proportion of circular lines, which for that it differs very little or
nothing from the first Table, I omit here to set it down. But now because the
first Table does chiefly serve those that fail either East or West in any
Parallel betwixt the Equinoctial and the 60. degree of Latitude or Altitude
of the Pole: And that from thence forth by reason that they sail by more
oblique and spirall Circles do make the longer voyage, Cogniet thought good to
add a third Table showing how many leagues be answerable to one degree of
altitude to those that sail either East or West in any Parallel that is
betwixt the Pole and the 60. degree of altitude, which Table differs not much
from the others in the four first rombs, but in the three last, that is in the
5. 6. and seventh rombe it differs greatly, and most in the seventh as you
may easily perceive by comparing this and the first Table together.

The third Table.
Degrees M Leagues. The first rombe has 1 1 Which according to the proportion of
17. leagues and a half, for one degree do make for every rombe so many
leagues as this Table shows. 17 19/24 the second rombe 1 5 18 23/24 the third
rombe 1 12 21 0 the fourth rombe 1 26 25 1/12 the fifth rombe 1 50 32 3/12 the
sixth rombe 2 42 47 the seventh rombe 5 44 100 3/3

How to account the leagues in sailing directly East or West without changing
the latitude or altitude of the pole. Chap. 33.
IN sailing ritht East or West, you continue still in one self Parallel
without making any charge of Latitude of the Pole. Most men therefore think it
impossible for you to make any true account of the leagues but only by
conjecture, for remedy whereof Cogniet has invented a rule most certain, as
he says, the foundation whereof is thus: First you must suppose the Meridian
of that place from whence you depart to be a firm and fixed point, and to be
the very beginning of the Parallel wherein you sail, then you must know what
hour it is as well at the place from whence you first departed, as also at the
place whereunto you are arrived, and having the difference of the hours, you
must know how many leagues every hour yields, according to the Parallel
of that altitude of the Pole under which you sail, so shall you easily know
how many leagues you have sailed. This foundation being first laid, Cogniet
sets down his general rule in this manner following: When soever you have
to sail (says he) right East or West, you must first provide your self of
these two things, the one is of an Astronomicall ring that may justly show the
hour at any time: In steed whereof I think it better to have an universal
Dyall, such a one as is described by William Borne in the one and twentieth
Chapter of his Regiment: the other thing is to have a true hour glass that
will run continually four and twenty hours, and therefore had need to be
three times more long and large then common hour glasses be, whereof the
glass makers can quickly provide you, and because the ship leans sometime on
the one side, and sometime on the other, it shall be needful to hang the
said houre-glasse with rings of brass or latten, to the intent that it may
always hang level like as the Mariners Compasses are wont to be hanged in
their boxes. Now being thus provided of these two instruments, you must at your
departing prepare your hour glass, that is to say, you must set it a running
just at noone when the sun is right South, not forgetting to turn it in your
voyage once a day in the very instant that it is ready to run out. Then
having sailed certain days, and being arrived at the place where you would
know what way you have made, look to your houre-glasse, and tarry until it
be full run out, at which instant seek to know what hour it is by your
Astronomicall ringe, or rather by the universal Dyall, for if you sail East,
you shall find it to be past noone, but if you sail West, then it will want of
noone, and keep those hours in mind that you may know how much it is more or
less then noone, for those hours by showing the difference of the hours that
are betwixt the Meridian of the place from whence you departed, and the
Meridian of the place whereto you are arrived, will certify you with the help
of this Table here following, what quantity of way your ship has made.

A Table to help you to know what way your ship has made in sailing right East
or West without changing your Latitude, together with a brief description and
use thereof.
De. of Latit. leagues. 0 262 1 262 5/12 2 262 3 262 4 262 5 261 6 261 7 260 8
259 9 259 10 258 11 257 12 256 13 255 14 254 15 253 16 252 17 251 18 249 19 248
20 246 21 245 22 243 23 241 24 239 25 238 26 236 27 234 28 231 29 229 30 227 31
225 32 222 33 220 34 217 35 215 36 212 37 209 38 206 39 203 40 201 41 198 42
195 43 192 44 188 45 185 46 182 47 179 48 175 49 172 50 168 51 165 52 161 53
157 54 154 55 150 56 146 57 143 58 139 59 135 60 131 61 127 62 123 63 119 64
115 65 111 66 106 67 102 68 98 69 94 70 89 71 85 72 81 73 76 74 72 75 68 76 63
77 59 78 54 79 50 80 45 81 41 82 36 83 32 84 27 85 22 86 18 87 13 88 9 89 4 90

This Table as you see consists of four collums, in every one whereof are
set down on the left hand the degrees of altitude of the Pole, and next to
that on the right hand the leagues answerable to every degree, the use whereof
is thus: First seek out in the said Table the degree of altitude belonging to
that Parallel under which you sailed, and next to that on the right hand you
shall find the number of leagues incident to that degree: which number of
leagues, if you multiply by the number of hours before found, the product
thereof will show you how many leagues you have sailed. And if there be any
minutes annexed to the hours, then multiply also the number of the foresaid
leagues found in the Table, by those minutes, and divide the product thereof by
60. and the quotient shall be leagues, which you must add to the former
leagues, and the sum thereof will show how many leagues you have in all
sailed.

An example of counting the way of your ship in sailing right west. Chap. 35.
SVppose that you have to sail from the Cape Saint Vincent in Spain right
West, and therefore you prepare your hour glass as it may begin to run just
at noone, and having sailed 8. or 9. days, (not forgetting once every day to
turn your houre-glasse) you do arrive at one of the Isles of the Azores called
S. Mary, and there having tarried until your houre-glasse be clean run out,
and seeking to know at that instant by your Astronomicall ring, or by some
universal Dyall what hour it is, you find that it is a 11. of the clock and
10. minutes past, which wants 50. minutes of just noone, and that is the
difference betwixt the two Meridians, that is to say, the Meridian of Cape S.
Vincent, and the Meridian of the I Will S. Mary, both which places being in one
self Parallel must needs have one self Latitude or Altitude, which is 37.
degrees, which altitude being found in the Table in the second collum on the
left hand, you find there also hard by it on the right hand, 209. leagues
and. of a league, for every hour of that Parallel, which number of leagues,
if you multiply by the foresaid 50. minutes, the product shall be 10/487. which
if you divide by 60. you shall find in the quotient 174. leagues and 19/^4.
parts of a league, which is the just quantity of your whole voyage.

Another example of counting the way of your ship in sailing right East.
Chap. 36.
SVppose then that you have to sail from the new found land right East in
the Parallel of 50. degrees: and having caused your hour glass to begin to
run just at noone, you set forth and sail the space of 15. days, not
forgetting every day once to turn your hour glass. Now if at the 15. days
end, you would know how many leagues you have sailed, to find in your Card in
what place you are, you must first tarry until your houre-glasse be clean
run out, and at that instant seek by your Astronomicall ring, or by some
universal Dyall, to know what hour it is, which because you have sailed right
East, you find to be two hours and twelve minutes afternoon, then resorting
to the Table aforesaid, you find in the third colum the 50. degrees of
altitude, together with the number 168. leagues and a half, annexed to the
said degree for one hour of that Parallel, which sum being multiplied by
two hours, makes 337. leagues, then multiply once again 168. by the odd 12^
and divide the product thereof by 60. so shall you find in the quotient 33.
leagues and somewhat more, which being added to the former sum 337. leagues
will make in all 370. leagues and a little more, and that is the true quantity
of your voyage. And Cogniet says that by practizing this way of counting, you
may know every day, yea every hour, what way your ship makes in sailing
right East or West.

To know how much you go out of your way in sailing by one wrong rombe or by
more. Chap. 37.
IF in sailing to any place you direct your course either too high or too low
by one rombe you loose in every 100. leagues 19. leagues and. of a league, so
as you go out of your way almost the fifth part of your voyage. And if by two
rombes, then in every hundred leagues you loose 39. leagues, that is to say you
go so far out of the right way: And if you fall three rombes out of your right
course, then in every hundred leagues you loose 58. leagues: and if you fall
four rombes, then you loose in every hundred leagues 76. leagues, and the more
rombes that you mistake in your direction, the more you wander out of your
right course. Thus much touching the Mariners compass and his Card: now we
will speak of the North star, and of his guardes, and then of the sun and
of the Moon, and so end.

Of the North star, otherwise called the loadstarre, and of his guardes, and
how to know the same. Chap. 38.
THough every Mariner knows the North star so soon as he sees it in the
firmament, because it is his chief guide to direct thereby his ship in the
night season in all the North parts of the world: yet every man that is no
sayler knows him not, and therefore minding here to treat thereof, I think
it not amiss first to teach him how to know it, and in what part of the
heaven it is placed, and how far it is distant from the North Pole.

The Poets do faigne that of the 48. Images of the fixed stars that be in the
heaven, which are otherwise called Constellations, there be two Bears having
tails, whereof the one is called the great Bear, and the other the little
Bear, in every of which are seven principal stars: And that bright star
which is in the very tippe of the little Bears tail, is commonly called of
our English Mariners the Loadstar, of the Latins Stella polaris, of the
Greeks Cinosura, and of the Arabians Alrucuba. But to know this star, you must
first find out the seven stars of the great Bear by looking toward the North
part of the firmament, of which stars four being placed in his body, do make
(as it were) a 4. square, and the other three stars being placed in his tail,
which is somewhat rising in the midst, do represent the portion of a Circle,
the little Bear has also the like shape saving that her feet and belly do
turn upwards, so as the tippe of her tail is answerable to the two hindermost
stars of the great Bear, as you may see in these figures following.



Some do call the great bear great Charles Waine or Wagon, and the little
Bear little Charles wain, because in each figure the four square stars do
signify the four wheels, and the other three stars the 3. horses: Now to
find out the Loadstarre, imagine a right line to pass thorough the two
hindermost stars otherwise called the guardes or pointers of the great Bear,
as you see here in this figure, and that line will rightly direct your eye to
the Loadstarre which stands in the tippe of the little Bears tail, for
there is no bright star that can be seen betwixt the two gards of the great
Bear and the Loadstarre. Notwithstanding some do affirm that there is another
star nigher unto the Pole then the foresaid Loadstarre, and that star is as
they say no more but 50. minutes distant from the Pole: I have heard that there
is a Priest and Astrologer with the King of Demnarke, who is wont to find out
this star by the help of an instrument whereby he gets first the sight
of six other stars at one instant, which way I fear me is more troublesome
then profitable, and if there were any such star indeed, and therewith so
needful and meet to be used as is the Loadstarre, I doubt not but that some
of our learned Pilots would have found it out, and also have had some use
thereof long ere this time: But leaving this matter, I will return to the
description of our Mariners common Loadstarre, and show of what bigness it is:
also what Longitude, Latitude, declination, and motion it has, and finally the
chiefest and most necessary uses thereof.

This star according to the prutenicall Tables is of the third bigness, and
has in Longitude 53. degrees 30. minutes, counting from the first star of
the Rams horn, whose place in these our days is in the 27. degree 30. minutes
of Aries, and by this means the place or Longitude of the Loadstarre is in the
21. degree of Gemini, and his Latitude, counting from the Ecliptique line
toward the North Pole of the Zodiaque is 66. degrees 0. minutes, and his
declination counting from the Equinoctial toward the North pole of the
world is 86. so as he is in these days distant from the North pole 4.
degrees, some say 4. degrees and 9. minutes, but Cogniet says, that he is
distant from the pole but 3. degrees and a half, who finds by the
Astronomicall Tables that this star at the birth of Christ was 12. degrees
36. minutes distant from the Pole, and ever since has gone decreasing, and
shall decrease every day more then other, until it come to be but 26. minutes
distant from the Pole, which is as nigh as it can approach to the Pole, for then
his distance shall begin again to increase. This star makes his daily
revolution from East to West in 24. hours, as all other stars do by virtue
of the first mooueable, but his circuit is so small, and his gate so slow, as
in the space of 24. hours he goes not much more then 24. degrees of the
Equinoctial, and in his turning round about he makes as it were a little
Circle, in the midst whereof is the North pole it self, which is invisible
and can not be seen.

And though the image or constellation of the little Bear contains many
stars, yet the seven before mentioned and set forth in figure are most
observed, of which seven stars in the little bear, two stars called the
gards of the North star are to the Mariners most familiar, for diverse respects
hereafter declared. And of those gards the one is Northern and the other
Southern, and both are said to be of the second bigness, and yet the Southern
guard seems to the eye both lesser and darker then the other. Of which two
stars I think it not amiss to set down here the Longitude, Latitude, and
declination as I have done before of the Loadstarre.

The Longitude of the South guard is 100. degrees 30. minutes, whereby his
place is in the ninth degree of Leo. And his latitude is 72. degrees 40.
minutes, and his declination is 73. degrees, so as he is distant from the North
pole 17. degrees.

The longitude of the North guard is 109. degrees, 30. minutes, so as his place
is in the 20. degree of Leo, and his latitude is 74. degrees, 50, minutes, and
his declination is 76. degrees, so as his distance from the North Pole is 14.
degrees. Thus having showed the greatness, the longitude, the true place, the
latitude, and the declination as well of the Lodestarre, as of his two guardes,
I think good now to set down the chiefest uses that sea men have of them.

The uses of the North star, and of his guardes. Chapter. 39.
THe first use is to know thereby the variation of the Mariners Compass.

The second is to know by his guardes when the North star is above or beneath
the Pole.

The third is to know by the North star and his guardes with the help of an
instrument called a Nocturlabe the hour of the night.

The fourth is to know the elevation of the Pole. And you have to note that the
North star and his guardes are always above our Horizon, and do never go
down in any place whereas the North Pole has any elevation, be it never so
little. But besides these stars there be also in this our latitude diverse
other images of stars that are always above our Horizon, and do never go
down, as the Dragon, the great Bear, the image of Cepheus, of Cassiopeia, the
image of Auriga, having the Goat at his back which is a fair bright star of
the first bigness and many others, which I leave to name, because I have
heretofore described them all at large in my treatise of the Globes, by which
stars by reason that with us they never go down, the latitude of any place
and also the hour of the night may be known so well as by the Lodestarre.

But now as touching the^ uses of the foresaid stars before mentioned, the
first whereof showing how to find out by the Lodestarre the variation of the
Compass, is taught before in the 25. Chapter, according to William Boorne his
rule set down in his Regiment, and as for the other three uses they are
plainly taught in the two chapters next following.

To know by help of a little Table made according to the Mariners rule
touching the 8. principal rombes, showing how and when the Lodestarre is
either above or beneath the Pole, that you may know thereby the true altitude
of the Pole in taking the height of the Lodestarre with your Astrolabe or
cross staff. chap. 40. Chapter 40.
TO know this you must always have due consideration of the two guards of the
little Bear, for when those guards are just Southwest from the Lodestarre,
then is the Lodestarre at his highest in the very Meridian, and therefore it
is right above the Pole, and when those guards be just Northeast from the
Lodestar then the Lodestarre is again in the Meridian at his lowest, and
thereby right under the Pole, and in both places his distance from the Pole is
but three degrees and a half, as Cogniet says, according to which account he
sets down this Table following.

This Table is divided into two collums, whereof that on the left hand
contains the eight principal rombes or winds, and that on the right hand
contains the degrees and minutes of distance of the Lodestarre from the Pole,
being either above or beneath the Pole.

If the guards be The rombes or winds. The degrees and minutes of the
declination of the Lodestarre from the Pole. West. Southwest South Southeast.
Then the Lodestar is 1 3 3 0 1 0
Above the Pole. East Northeast North Northwest
1 3 3 0 1 0
Beneath the Pole.

This table differs in one point from the Mariners common rule set down as
well by Medina, and by Martin Cortes, as also by William Boorne touching the
guards, for they all appoint but half a degree of declination of the North
star from the Pole, the guardes being either in the rombe Southeast, or
Northwest, to both which rombes Cogniet appoints one whole degree of
declination. The use of which table in seeking to know, the elevation of the
Pole is thus. First, having taken with your Astrolabe the altitude of the
Lodestarre above your Horizon, observe immediately in which of the 8. former
rombes his guardes be. For if they be in any of the 4. upper rombes of the
Table, then you must subtract from the height of the Lodestarre taken with your
Astrolabe, so much as is set down for that rombe in the collum on the right
hand of the said table, and the remainder shall be the true altitude of the
Pole, but if the guardes be in any of the four nether rombes, then you must
add so much to (...) height of the Lodestar, and the sum thereof shall be
the altitude of the Pole. But because this table serves only for the 8.
principal winds and for no more. Cogniet therefore sets down the making of
a twofolde instrument, whereby you shall not only know (as he says) how much
the Lodestarre is above or beneath the Pole in every other rombe as well as in
the 8. principal rombes, but also you shall know thereby the true hour of the
night more exactlie than the Nocturlabe of Munster or Appian does show.

How to make an Instrument which will show at any hour of the night how much
the Lodestar is either above or beneath the Pole in every other rombe as well
as in the 8. principal rombes, which are only contained in the former Table,
and also the true hour of the night, the shape whereof follows. Chapter 41.
The shape or figure of the Rectifier of the North star.


COgniet calls this instrument Rectificatorium Stellae Polaris, that is to
say, the Rectifier of the North star, joining thereunto a Nocturlabe
differing nothing at all from the Nocturlabe of Munster and of others, but
only in placing the 21. of October in stead of the 28. of the same month
upon the line of North and South toward the handle of the instrument for such
cause as is hereafter declared.

The making of the rectifier of the Lodestarre, is thus: Upon a smooth piece of
board of firm wood, or upon a piece of polished plate of brass or Latten
being six or seven inches broad, having a handle, as you see in the former
figure, draw a circle divided into 4. quarters by help of two cross Diameters
cutting one another in the center with right angles, the perpendicular whereof
shall signify the Meridian line, that is to say, the line of North and South,
at whose upper end set North, and at the nether end South, and the other
overthwart Diameter shall be the line of East and West, having East marked on
the right hand and West on the left hand, and in every quarter of the
foresaid circle you may if you will place the like rombes that are in the Fly
of the Mariners Compass, as you may see done in the foresaid figure. Moreover,
you must divide the upper quarter on the left hand into three equal parts,
and having taken two of those parts with your Compasses, measuring from the
North point down toward the West, and there make a prick, marking the same
with a little black cross, and from that cross draw a right line that may
pass through the Center unto the circumference of the Circle, and there make
another little black cross, and this line shall divide the circle into two
equal parts, which line if you cross with another right line passing through
the center, and making thereby right angles, you shall divide the circle into
other four quarters differing from the first four quarters, though not in
quantity, yet in place, of which four last quarters you must divide that
which is on the left hand into 90. equal degrees, beginning your account at
the little black cross on the left hand, and so proceed downward toward the
South point of the circle.

Now to know how much the North star in every rombe mounteth or descends and
how to place the same upon the instrument so as you may know how much to ad to
the altitude of the Lodestarre, or to subtract from the same, you must use this
Table following, which Table consists The degrees and minutes of the
de^lination of the lodestarre from the pole. The degrees and minutes of the
Quadrant, divided by diverse portions of numbers into 90 degrees. Degrees. Min. 4 6
8 13 12 22 1 0 16 36 1 20 55 1 25 23 1 30 0 2 0 34 51 2 40 0 2 45 35 2 51 48 3
0 59 0 3 68 13 3 90 0 of two collums, whereof that on the left hand contains
the degrees and minutes of the declination of the Lodestarre, proceeding from
one quarter of a degree to another, until you come to 3. degrees. and a half,
which is (as Cogniet says) the greatest declination of the Lodestar, from the
Pole: and the other collum on the right hand contains the degrees and
minutes of a quarter or quadrant, divided by diverse and sundry proportions of
numbers into 90. degrees which proportional degrees and minutes are to be
reckoned in the first quadrant divided into 90 equal degrees, and next
descending from the first cross on the left hand thus. First, beginning at
the said cross, and descending downwarde, tell out 4. degrees, and 6. minutes,
and right against that set down. then tell in the same quadrant from the said
cross 8. degrees, and 13. minutes, and right against that set down and so
proceed according as the Table directs you, until you come to 90. against
which you must set down 3. degrees. and And as this quarter is divided, so you may
deal with the other 3. quarters, and in each of the 2 quarters which are
beneath the 2 crosses forget not to write this word Subtract, and in each of
the 2. quarters above the 2. crosses write this word Ad, as you see in the
former figure, Then there shall want nothing but only a ruler or index, which
must be fastened to the center of the instrument, so as it may be turned round
about a pin having a round hole in it, through which you may see the
Lodestar, and also at the same instant by lifting up and down the index you
may see on the outside of the instrument the foreguard of the said star
appearing even with the right edge of the index called Linea fiduciae, or the
fiducial line, drawn from the center of the instrument along the inward edge
of the index, and so is the instrument for that purpose fully perfected. But if
you would ad thereunto a nocturlabe, then you must draw upon the center thereof
diverse circles next to the space co^taining the winds: and the spaces betwixt
those circles must be some wider, and some narrower For the first upper space
must be narrow, containing the days of every month, and the next space
somewhat wider, containing the number of those days set down in Arithmeticall
figures, and the third space wider than that, containing the names of the
months then next to the lowest circle of the nethermost space place a little
rundle fastened to the instrument with the foresaid hoslow pin, so as it may
turn round about the saw. And this rundle must be divided into 24. hours,
that is to say, 12 for the day, and 12. for ye night, which rundle would be
made with teeth whereof one must be longer than al his fellows signifying
always ye 12. hour of the night, which is always to be laid upon the day of
the month wherein you seek to know the hour of the night. And remember in
distributing the days of the month, that you always set the 21 day of
October beneath toward the handle in the very line of North and South passing
right through the midst of the handle, so shall the instrument show the hour
of the night more truly than when the 28. day of October stands beneath upon
the line of South and North, as it does in the common Nocturlabes, the makers
whereof had respect to the Pole it self which is invisible, and not to the
North star which is apparent to the eye, by means whereof the guards of the
Lodestarre sometime do show sooner or latter by 7. degrees and 18. minutes, if
you count from the Pole, which is almost half an hour difference, and for
that cause also Cogniet makes his account in his foresaid rectifier to begin
at the little black cross, seven degrees more forward than it ought to do,
if he should count from the Pole, and not from the North star.

How to know by the foresaid twofold instrument as well the mounting and
descending of the North star as the true hour of the night both at one instant
and also the elevation of the Pole, Chapter 42.
FIrst then having laid and stayed the great tooth of the moouable rundle
marked with 12. upon the day of the month wherein you seek, and holding the
instrument by the handle with your one hand right before your face, leave not
to put that hand forward from you, or to bring it backwards toward you, until
you may see with the one eye, winking with the other, the North star through
the hole of the pin, which is in the center of the Instrument: and so soon as
you see the North star, lift with your other hand the index up and down until
you see also at that instant the North guard of the Lodestarre on the outside
of the instrument appearing even with the fiduciall line or inward edge of the
said index. Then staying the index there, look upon what hour it falls, for
that shall be the hour of the night. And look also at that instant upon what
degree of distance it falls in the outermost border of the instrument wherein
those degrees are set down together with these words add and subtract. For
from the point marked with a little black cross nigh unto the Northwest
descending through the nether moyetie or half deal of the instrument until
you come to the other black cross, placed nigh unto the Southeast, the North
star is always above the Pole so much as the index shows, which you must
always subtract from the height of the North star to know the elevation of
the Pole, having first taken with your Astrolabe the height of the North
star. But if the index do fall upon any degree or part of a degree in the
upper moyetie or half deal of the instrument then to know the elevation of
the Pole, you must add so much as the index shows unto the altitude of the
Lodestarre, as the words Add and Subtract written in the outermost border of
the instrument do plainly show.

But now if you would know at any hour of the day or night, in what rombe the
foresaid guardes be without seeing them and also how much the Lodestarre is
declined from the Pole, you need do no more but to lay the great tooth of the
mooueable rundle upon the day of the month, and then to bring the index unto
the hour which you require, and the said index will show in the border of the
instrument in what rombe the guardes be, and how much the North star is above
or beneath the Pole.

I have found by often trial that this instrument will show the true hour of
the night, and also in what rombe the guardes be, and thirdly, how much the
North star is at any time either above or beneath the Pole, and by adding the
degree of distance found in the limb of the instrument, or by subtracting the
same according to the rule before given from that altitude of the north star,
which I have before taken with my Astrolabe, I have found at all times the true
elevation of the Pole wheresoever I have made trial thereof. But since other
Stars may perhaps appear when the North Star with his guardes shall be
hidden, I would wish all careful Mariners to acquaint themselves with as
many bright Stars as they can, and especially with those which do both rise
and set, and also to learn by some Table the declination of every such Star
and whether it be Southernlie or Northernlie, for by taking the Meridian
altitude of any such star and by adding to, or by taking from the altitude
thereof, his declination according as the same declination is either
Northernlie or Southernlie (for if it be Northernlie, then you must subtract
his declination, and if it be Southernlie, you must add the same to the
altitude of the Star) you shall find thereby the altitude of the
Equinoctial, which being taken out of 90. the remainder will show the
elevation of the Pole. The meetest stars for this purpose in these our North
parts of the world are these, Hircus the Goat, Canis minor, the little
Dog, Canis mayor, the great Dog, Dexter humerus Orionis, the right shoulder
of Orion. Cingulum Orionis, the girdle of Orion. Cor Leonis, the Lions heart.
Bubulcus, the Bearward. Spica Virginis, the wheat ear in the hand of Virgo.
Aquila volans, the flying Eagle. Caput Andromedae, the head of Andromeda. Ras
Algol, the head of Medusa. Oculus Tauri, the Bulls eye, and diverse others,

And in any case consider whether the declination of the star be greater or
lesser than his Meridian altitude, for if his declination be greater then his
meridian altitude, as of those stars which are nigh the Pole, then you must
take his Meridian altitude with your Astrolabe at two several times, that is
to say, when he is at his highest in the meridian, and also when he is at the
lowest point of the same Meridian called the depression, and having added those
Meridian altitudes together take half thereof, and that half shall be the
elevation of the Pole, which way of finding out the elevation of the Pole is
nothing meet for a Mariner that is under sail. But now to proceed according
to Cogniet his direction in this matter, he says, that if in sailing you
approach so nigh unto the Equinoctial as the elevation of the Pole is not above
17. degrees, then the guardes are not so easily seen, wherefore it shall be
needful to take some other star whereby you may both know the hour of the
night, and also how much the Lodestarre is either above or beneath the Pole,
and Cogniet thinks none of the stars more meet for that purpose than one of
these two, that is, either the star called Caput Medusae, that is the head of
Medusa called of the Arabians, Ras Algol, or else the star called Hircus, that
is, the Goat, both which are fair bright stars and of the first bigness:
and the cause why he appoints the head of Medusa, is for that this star is
directly opposite to the former guard, in such sort as this star is always
above the Horizon, when both the guardes are under the Horizon. Wherefore
having prepared your instrument, that is to say, having laid the longest tooth
of the mooueable rundle upon the day of the month wherein you seek, and
having found out thereby in such order as is before taught, the north star and
also the star called the head of Medusa, both at one instant, mark where the
index falls, and immediately turn the index from that point to the point
opposite, abating twelve hours, and so the Index shall show you three things
at once. First, the rombe wherein the guardes are at that present. Secondly,
the hour of the night. And thirdly how much the North star is above or
beneath the Pole. But because this star is not known perhaps to all
Mariners, Cogniet would have you to take the other bright Star called Hircus,
which (as he says) goes 9. hours and before the guardes, in such sort, as
when the former guarde is East,, you shall find this Star, counting from the
North star, to be Northwest, and almost 45. degrees distant from the Pole,
with which star if you work, as you did before with the head of Medusa,
saving that you shall not need to turn the index unto the opposite point, but
only to rebate from the point on which it falls 9. hours and you shall
know all the three things last mentioned. And this rule (as he says) is so
general as you may have your desire by working in like manner with any other
star that is to you certainly known, and is at that time above the Horizon.

What stars are observed by those that sail beyond the Equinoctial under
the South Pole. Chapter. 43.
THe ancient Astronomers, as Ptolomey, Timochares, Hypparchus and others did
never describe any star to be more nigh unto the South pole, than that which is
called Canopus, which is a fair bright star of the first bigness, and
according to the Tables of Copernicus, is distant from the South Pole 38.
degrees, and. But those that have sailed in the South seas of later days, have
found out other stars unknown to the ancient Astronomers, which are much
nearer unto the said Pole. For Albericus Vesputius writes of three Stars,
making together a Triangle Orthogonall, that is to say, having one right angle,
now called the southern Triangle, the middle star whereof is distant from the
south Pole 9. degrees,.

There be also lately found out diverse images of other stars nigh unto the
South pole, as that which is called Noah his Dove, or Pigeon, and another
called Polophilax, made in the shape of a man, whose longitude and latitude
has not as yet been rightly set down by any that I have read.

But the sea men of these present days do most commonly observe four great
stars, which according to the shape and form thereof they call the Cross,
imagining the greatest star of the four to be the foot, and that which
stands right over him to be the head of the cross, and the other two to be
the 2 arms: and when they see that the head does directiie answer the foot,
then they say that the foot of the said cross is right above the Pole, and
distant from the same 30. degrees. Therefore, having taken the altitude or
height of that star above ye Horizon with their Astrolabe they subtract 30.
degrees from that altitude, and the remainder is the elevation of the Pole.
Medina in his fifth book and eleventh chapter sets down the shape of the
foresaid cross in this manner.

And he says that these stars are neither any of those stars that are
appointed to the twelve Signs in the Zodiaque, nor yet any of the 36. Images
or constellations that be in heaven. Moreover he says, that in taking the
altitude of the great Star called the foot being in his right place, that
is to say, when he is directly opposite to the head, and that you find his
altitude to be 30. degrees, then you may assure your self that you are right
upon the Equinoctial. And if you find his altitude to be more than 30.
degrees, then you are past the Equinoctial toward the South Pole. But if you
find it to be less than 30. degrees, then you are still on the North side of
the Equinoctial.

Besides the stars above mentioned, our Mariners in these North parts of the
world are wont to observe diverse other stars, to the number of 32. whose
longitude and declination together with their bigness and also when they rise
and set, and when they are mounted to the Meridian, that is to say, are just
South, is plainly set forth by Tables collected of purpose out of the
Astronomicall Tables by William Boorne, which Tables you shall find in the 20.
chapter of his book called the regiment of the sea, And Robert Norman does
also set down the like tables in his book called the Attractiue, and
therefore I think it superfluous to repeat the same again here, and
specially since I have described unto you all the stars that be in the
firmament that were known to the ancient Astronomers, and have showed you how
to find out by the Globe their longitudes, their latitudes, their declinations
their greatness and all other accidents belonging to the Stars in my treatise
of the Celestial Globe, which I wrote of purpose to further young sea men.

The knowledge of the Stars serves sea men chiefly to know thereby the
latitude of any place, and also to know the hour of the night: And thirdly,
to conicecture by their manner of rising and setting, and other their aspectes
what weather is like to follow, either foul or fair: the rules whereof to
teach truly bebelongeth to Astronomers, yet many sea men by diligent
observation do attain to right good judgment therein. Wherefore leaving to
speak any further of the Stars, I will now briefly speak of the Sun and
of his motions, of his rising and setting in every latitude, and of his
declination from the Equinoctial, and of other his like apparances. I say here
briefly, because I have already spoken of him at large in the 1. part of my
sphere whereas I treat of the Zodiaque.

Of the Sun, and of his motion, and of the chiefest apparances belonging to
him. Chapter 44.
THe Sun according to the moving of the first mooueable which is from East
to West makes his daily revolution in 24* hours, as all other Stars do,
but according to his own motion, which is from West to East in going through
the twelve Signs of the Zodiaque he spends a whole year, for his daily
moving upon his own center, called the excentrick, because it is out of the
center of the world, is little more then 59. minutes, 8. secondes, making
thereby the whole year to consist of 365. days, five hours 49. minutes, 8.
seconds, 19. thirdes, 37. fourths, 24. fiftes, and this is called of
Copernicus, the equal tropicall year, which takes his beginning from the
first point of Aries, otherwise called the Vernall Equinoxe, into which point
the Sun enters not every year at one self day of the month, for sometime
he enters into that point the tenth day, and sometime the eleventh day of
March, which day of his entering is always truly set down in every
Ephemerides, and because the beginning of the tropicall year is so uncertain,
the Astronomers do make their year called the syderal year, to begin at the
former star of the Rams horn, and thereby do make the year to consist of
365. days. 6 hours 9. minutes and 39. secondes, according to which year they
always rectify or bring to equality, as well the equal as the unequal
tropicall year, of both which I have spoken in the first part of my Sphere,
the 38. and 39. chapters.

Moreover, the Sun has three motions, that is, slow, swift and mean. His
slow motion is when he is in the point called Auge or Apogeon, which is a
point imagined to be nigh unto the outermost edge of the circle which carries
the body of the Sun called Deferens Solis, and is furthest distant from the
center of the world, which point in these our days is in the 9. degree of
Cancer, or there abouts. And being in that point, he goes little more than
57. minutes in 24. hours. Again, his swift motion is when he is in the
opposite point to the Auge, called Perigeon, which point in these days is in
the 9. degree of Capricorn, and being in this point, he goes one whole degree
and almost two minutes in 24 hours, which is almost five minutes more than he
makes in his slow motion. His mean motion is when he is in the midst betwixt
the two foresaid points, whereas in 24. hours he goes one whole degree and
somewhat more than two minutes. And these three sundry motions do cause the
Equinoctial points not to be of equal distance. For the Sun spends seven
days and somewhat more in going from the Equinoxe of March, to the Equinoxe of
September, than he does in going from the Equinoxe of September to the Equinoxe
of March. For if in this present year 1592. which is leap year, you count
the days from the Vexnall Equinoxe, which is the eleventh of March, unto the
Autumn Equinoxe, which is the 13. of September, you shall find the number of
the days to be 186. and the other number from the 13. of September to the
eleventh of March, to be but 180. which is less than the first number by 6
days, and if it were not leap year the difference would be seven days,
because that February in the leap year has 29. days.

It is necessary that sea men have some understanding of the three foresaid
motions to the intent that they may the better know the true place of the Sun
and thereby his true declination. And note that no calculation of his
declination can continue without error above twenty four years. For as
often as the leap year comes about, which is every four years, the Sun
is upon the Equinoctial sooner by half an hour. But as for the true place
of the Sun, and especially every day at noontide, the Ephemerides does most
truly show, and having his place, you shall easily find his declination by
this Table following, which will serve for these twenty years and more, the
like whereof, together with the use of the same is set down in the first part
of my Sphere the 13. chapter.

A Table showing the declination of the Sun every day throughout the year,
and the use thereof. Chapter 45.
Degrees of ^he Signs. Degrees of the Signs D M S D M S D M S 1 0 23 53 11 50
6^ 20 22 57 29 2 0 47 46 12 10 56 20 35 7 28 3 1 11 39 12 31 34 20 46 55 27 4 1
35 30 12 51 59 20 58 20 26 5 1 59 20 13 12 12 21 9 21 25 6 2 23 8 13 32 12 21
19 59 24 7 2 46 54 13 51 58 21 30 13 23 8 3 1^ 37 14 11 30 21 40 3 22 9 3 34 18
14 30 48 21 49 29 21 10 3 57 54 14 49 51 21 58 29 20 11 4 21 28 15 8 40 22 7 6
19 12 4 44 57 15 27 13 22 15 17 18 13 5 8 22 15 45 30 22 23 3 17 14 5 31 42 16
3 32 22 30 24 16 15 5 54 57 16 21 17 22 37 19 15 16 6 18 6 16 38 44 22 43 48 14
17 6 41 9 16 55 55 22 49 50 13 18 7 4 6 17 12 48 22 55 27 12 19 7 26 57 17 29
23 23 0 38 11 20 7 49 40 17 45 40 23 5 22 10 21 8 12 16 18 1 39 23 9 39 9 22 8
34 45 18 17 18 23 13 29 8 23 8 57 5 18 32 37 23 16 53 7 24 9 16 16 18 47 38 23
19 50 6 25 9 41 19 19 2 18 33 22 19 5 26 10 3 12 19 16 37 23 24 22 4 27 10 24
56 19 30 36 23 25 57 3 28 10 46 30 19 44 14 23 27 5 2 29 11 7 53 19 57 30 23 27
46 1 30 11 29 5 20 10 25 23 28 9 0

THe use of this Table is thus: If the sun be in any of the signs set down
in the front of the Table, then seek his degree (first found by the
Ephemerides) in the left collum, the degrees whereof do descend from one to 30.
and the square Angle answerable to the sign and degree will show his
declination. But if the sun be in any of the signs that are in the foot of
the Table, then seek his degree in the right collum, the degrees whereof do
ascend, and the square Angle answerable to that sign and degree will show his
declination.

There be other things also meet for Seamen to know, touching the sun as
these: First to know the four seasons of the year, secondly to know by his
declination, the length of both the day and the night in every latitude, and
how it does increase and decrease: Item to know in what rombe or wind, and at
what hour he rises and sets, and also his Meridian altitude, that is, when
he is right South every day, to find out by the help of that, and by knowing
his declination, the true Latitude of any place, and by his shadow to know the
hour of the day, which are two chief points that the Mariner has most need
to know. Of all which things I mind here to treat both plainly and
briefly.

Of the four seasons of the year, that is, Spring time, Summer, fall of the
leaf, called otherwise Autumn, and winter. Chap. 46.
IN this our Clime the spring is said to begin when the Sun enters into the
first point of Aries, which is about the xi. of March, and continues unto the
last point of Gemini, which time is said to be hot and moist, and therefore is
likened to childhoode: And summer begins when the Sun enters into the
first point of Cancer, which is about the 12. or 13. of June, and ends when
he is in the last degree of Virgo: and this time is said to be hot and dry,
and therefore is likened to Adolescencie. Then Autumn or fall of the leaf
begins when the Sun enters into the first point of Libra, which is about
the 13. or 14. of September, and ends when the Sun is in the last degree of
Sagittarius: and this time is said to be cold and dry, and therefore is
likened to manhood: Finally winter begins when the sun enters into the
first point of Capricorn, and ends when he is in the last degree of Pisces:
and this time is said to be cold and moist, and therefore is likened to old
age: notwithstanding Galen in his first book de Elementis, says that the
spring is temperately hot and moist, and therefore a most wholesome time: And
summer is more hot then cold, and more dry then moist, and therefore is said
to be hot and dry: And Autumn is also said to be dry because it is more dry
then moist, and yet neither hot nor cold, but unequally mixed, and thereby
infectiue and causing sickness. And winter is said to be cold and moist, not
because it is colder or moyster then any other season, but because that in
winter moisture exceeds dryness, and coldness exceeds heat. But you have
to understand that these four seasons have not like qualities in all the 5.
Zones: For in the burnt Zone, and specially to those that dwell right under the
Equinoctial the sun being in Aries or Libra causes greatest heat, and
thereby two summers because he is then right over their heads, and being in
either of the Solstices, that is in the beginning of Cancer or Capricorn he
causes two winters because he is then furthest from them as I have declared
unto you in the second part of my treatise of the Sphere the 20. Chapter,
whereas I treat of the seasons and shadows incident to diverse Climes and
Parallels whereunto I refer you, and so I end with this matter.

How to know when the Sun rises and sets in every latitude, and thereby
the length of the day and night, and also in what rombe or wind he rises and
sets, and how much he declineth every day from the Equinoctial either
Northward or Southward. Also how to know the elevation of the Pole, otherwise
called the latitude of any place, by knowing the Meridian altitude of the
Sun, and his declination. Chap. 47.
THe most part of all these things have been taught before in my Sphere, in
my Treatise of the Globes, and also in my treatise of the Astrolabes. And in
the first two Treatises I show also how to find out the Longitude of any
place, and therefore needs not here to be rehearsed: But if you would know
how to handle the declination of the sun being upon the sea, then read 7. 8.
9. and 10. chapters of William Borne his book called the Regiment of the Sea,
and you shall be fully instructed therein: The whole effect of all which
Chapters Robert Norman sets down in few words in his new Attractiue in this
manner as follows.

First learn whether the sun have South declination or North declination,
which you shall know by his being in any of the Northern or Southern signs:
Then mark what shadow he casts, and whether it strikes toward the Pole
whereunto he is nearest, or to the contrary. For if the sun casts his
shadow the same way that he is from the Equinoctial, he shall be betwixt you
and the Equinoctial, and then having taken his Meridian altitude subtract the
same from 90. and add unto the remainder the suns declination for that day,
and the sum thereof shall be the elevation of the Pole or the distance of your
Zenith from the Equinoctial otherwise called the Latitude which is always
equal to the elevation of the Pole: But if the sun casts his shadow to the
contrary side of the Equinoctial, that is to say, being in his North
declination casts his shadow Southward, or being in his south declination
casts his shadow Northward, then either the Equinoctial shall be betwixt you
and the sun, or you in the Equinoctial, or else you shall be betwixt the
Equinoctial and the sun, which you shall know thus: Add the declination of
the sun for that day wherein you seek unto his Meridian altitude, and if the
sum of the addition be lesser then 90. degrees, then so much as it wants of
90. degrees shall you be distant from the Equinoctial on that side on which
the shadow streeketh: but if it amounts just to 90. degrees, then you shall be
right under the Equinoctial. Again if it be more then 90. degrees, then so
much as is the overplus, so much shall you be from the Equinoctial toward the
sun, at which time you shall be also betwixt the Equinoctial and the sun.

And if you find the Meridian altitude of the sun to be eauen with your
Zenith, then look what declination the sun has at that instant, and so much
shall you be from the Equinoctial on that side wherein the sun is: But if
the sun have no declination, then shall you be right under the Equinoctial
line.

Of the shadow of the Sun, and how to know thereby the hour of the day in
any latitude by help of an universal dial. Chap. 48.
MY former order now requires that I should speak somewhat of the shadow of
the Sun, and of the diversity thereof, according to the Clime or Parallel under
which you sail. But for so much as I have showed you in the second part of my
Sphere from the 20. to the 27. chapter of the same, what diverse shadows the
Sun yields in diverse Climes and Parallels, and also have showed what Vmbra
recta and Vmbra versa is in the 40. Chapter of my Treatise of the Astrolabes: I
mind not here therefore to make a new recital thereof, but only to show how
you shall find by his shadow the true hour of the day in every Latitude by a
general Dyall, made to serve in all Latitudes, of which Dyals, though I have
seen diverse and of diverse shapes, yet none likes me better then that which
William Borne sets down in his Regiment the 21. Chapter, and calls it the
Equinoctial Dial, which serves not only to know the hour of the day by the
shadow of the sun, but also the hour of the night by the shadow of the
Moon when she shines clear, which Dial being of small charge, I would wish
all Mariners to have: The making and use whereof is so plainly set down by
himself in the foresaid Chapter as I think it superfluous to set it down
again here. And thus ending with the the sun, I will now turn my pen to the
Moon.

Of the Moon and of all her diverse motions. Chap. 49.
THe Moon is a round thick and dark body, having no light of her self, but
only such as she receives from the sun, and she makes her daily motion
from East to West as all other stars do in 24. hours, according to the
moving of the Primum mobile. But according to her own motion, which is from
West to East, the goes but 13. degrees 12. minutes in the space of 24. hours,
and that is according to her mean motion. And she passes thorough the twelve
signs of the Zodiaque in 27. days and eight hours: during which time the
sun by his natural motion which is also from West to East, is removed from
the place of conjunction almost 27. degrees, so as the Moon not finding the
Sun there spends two days four hours, and 44. minutes more in ouertaki^g
him, which being added to 27. days and 8. hours do make in all 29. days 12.
hours and 44. minutes. Notwithstanding by reason that the Moon has as well as
the Sun three motions, that is, swift, mean, and flow, she may change
sometime sooner and sometimes later then in 29. days 12. hours 44. minutes,
and yet one change counted with an other shall make up the self same sum.
And note that this her threefold motion depends upon two points, the one
called the Auge, and the other the point opposite to the Auge.

The point Auge of the Moon is when she is furthest distant from the earth,
and the point opposite to that is when she is nighest to the earth: For wheu
she is in the point Auge, she goes little more then twelve degrees in 24.
hours: but when she is in the opposite point she goes almost 15. degrees in
24. hours. And in her mean motion which is in the midst betwixt the two
foresaid points, she goes 13. degrees and 12. minutes in 24. hours. Now
because the Mariners do account the moving of the Moon by the points of
their Compasses, they may thereby understand that she goes not always in 24.
hours one point and three minutes as they reckon, but sometime more and
sometime less: For when she is in her slow motion she (...) more then 12.
degrees in 24. hours, in which time the (...) one degree, so as the Moon is
distant from the (...) degrees, which is but 44. minutes of an hour, which
wants 4. minutes of a whole point, whereto is attributed 48^ as has been
said before: and in her swift motion she goes 15. degrees, in which the sun
goes one degree, so as she is distant from the sun 14. degrees, which is
more then a point and 3. minutes of the compass. And you have to note that the
point Auge of the Moon is mooueable and passes through the Zodiaque in the
space of 19. years, and thereby sometime causes the full of the Moon to
happen sooner or later.

How to know in what sign the point Auge of the Moon is in any year. Chap.
50.
IF you would know in what sign the Auge of the Moon is in any year, then
you must consider the prime or golden number of that year for when the prime
or golden number is one, then her Auge is in Aries. And if the Moon be also
the^ in Aries, she is in her slow motion: and being in the point opposite
which is, she is in her swift motion. And since this Auge of the Moon goes
through the 12. signs in 19. years as has been said, it must needs fall
out that in 9. years and a half her Auge comes to be in Libra: And then the
Moon being there she is in her slow motion: And being in the point opposite
which is Aries, she is in her swift motion: Again when the prime is 5. then her
point Auge is in Cancer: and the Moon being there she is in her slow motion,
and when she comes to be in the point opposite which is Capricorn, she is in
her swift motion: And when the prime is 14. or 15. then her point Auge is in
Capricorn, where if the Moon be also, then she is in her slow motion: and
being in the point opposite which is Cancer, she is in her swift motion. And
note that when the Moon is in her swift motion she makes her change, or full,
or any other aspect the sooner: And contrariwise when she is in her slow motion
she makes her change, or full, or any other aspect the later. Moreover you shall
see her at the time of her change either sooner or later, according to the time
of the year, for from January to June you shall see her within 24. hours after
her change, because she has during those months North declination from the
sun, and makes a greater arch then the sun does. But from July to December
you shall not see the Moon scant three days after the change. But you may see
her within 24. hours before her change, because that during those months she
has South declination from the sun: And note that when the Moon is three
days and 18. hours, which is the half quarter of the Moon, the sea men do
call that time the prime day, because the Moon is then 4. points to the
Eastward of the Sun, which is three hours, for to every point is attributed
three quarters of an hour as has been said before. Moreover it is necessary
for sea men to know when the Moon rises and sets, and in what part of the
Horizon in every Latitude: and how long she shines and when she is full South,
and also what Latitude she has, and whether it be South or North every day and
hour thoroughout the year. All which things are most easy to be found by
the Globe, and by help of the Ephemerides in such sort as is before taught in
my Treatise of the Globes, and also by help of M. Blagraue his Astrolabe, her
true place in the Zodiaque being first known by the Ephemerides. It is meet
also to know when she is in conjunction with the sun, or at the full, and the
rest of her quarters, which is easily known by the Ephemerides.

When the Moon is said to be in Conjunction with the Sun, or to be at the
full, and what her greatest latitude is as well from the Ecliptique line, as
from the Equinoctial. Chap. 51.
SHe is said to be in conjunction with the sun when the sun and she be both
in one self sign and like degree: But when she is at the full, then she is
opposite to the sun, and distant from him 6. signs, which is the one half
of the Zodiaque, containing 180. degrees: And in every quarter she is distant
from the sun three signs which is 90. degrees: Moreover the Moon is said to
have Latitude both Northern and Southern from the Ecliptique line, which line
ye deferent of the Moon crosses in 2. points, and thereby makes two
intersections, whereof the one tending toward the North is called the head of
the Dragon, and the other intersection toward the South is called the tail
of the Dragon, so as when the Moon is passed 90. degrees from the Dragons head
toward the North, then her Latitude is 5. degrees Northward: And when she is
distant 90. degrees from the tail of the Dragon toward the South, then her
Latitude is also 5. degrees Southward, which is the greatest Latitude that she
has on either side of the Ecliptique line, whereof I have written more at
large in the first part of my Sphere the 25. chap. in which you shall find a
figure representing the said Dragon both head and tail: But her Latitude is
to be considered in two respects, that is not only from the Ecliptique line,
but also from the Equinoctial, for from the Ecliptique line her greatest
Latitude is but 5. degrees on either side of the Ecliptique, as has bin said
before. But from the Equinoctial her greatest Latitude is 28. degrees and a
half on either side of the Equinoctial, which in mine opinion might be more
rightly called her greatest declination, which exceeds by 5. degrees the
declination of the sun, for that is but 23. degrees and a half, or rather
28^ on either side of the Equinoctial. But this great Latitude of the Moon is
only to be understood when the prime is one, and that her Auge is in Aries:
For when the prime is betwixt 9. or 10. years or more, the Moon declineth not
from the Equinoctial on either side above 18. degrees and a half at the most.

How to know in what part of the Zodiaque the head of the Dragon is every
year. Chap. 52.
IF you would know in what part of the Zodiaque the head of the Dragon is, then
you must consider the prime, for when the prime is one then the Dragons head is
in the first point of Aries, even as the point Auge is. And in 19. years it
passes thorough the twelve signs as well as the point Auge of the Moon, but
with contrary course for the point Auge of the Moon moves according to the
succession of the signs, that is, from Aries to Taurus, Gemini and so forth:
But the head of the Dragon has a contrary motion, that is, from Aries to
Pisces, and so into Aquarius and so forth, so as in 9. years and a half it
meets just with the point Auge of the Moon in the sign Libra. Thus you see
that by knowing the prime, you learn also to know in what sign the Auge of
the Moon, and also the Dragons head is, and what Latitude the Moon has,
as well from the Ecliptique line as from the Equinoctial. But one of the
chiefest points to be had by the Moon, is to know thereby the tides, that is
when the sea flows and ebbeth in any place: whereof we come now to speak.

How to know the tides in any place by the Moon. Chap. 53.
BEfore that you enter into any Haven or River, it is necessary to know the
true tides of that place, which tides are subject to the motion of the Moon,
for she causes at one place or other always in one certain rombe full Sea.
As for example it is always full sea at Antwerp when the Moon is either right
East or West: and it is ebb or low water there when she is North or South,
and because the Moon does pass through all the rombes of the Mariners
Compass in 24. hours, they allow to every rombe. of an hour, which is 45.
minutes, and that being multiplied by 32. do make just 24. hours, wherefore if
the two rombes, North and South do yield each of them 12. hours, then the first
rombe must needs yield. of an hour, the second one hour and. and the third
two hours and. and so forth of the rest: For by adding to every rombe. you
shall find that the East and West do yield always 6. hours: but then you
must note that according to the age of the Moon the tides do fall every day
later and later, wherefore to know the true time of the tide in any place, you
must first learn by some Rutter or by the relation of others that can tell in
what rombe the Moon causes full sea in that place, and then at what hour it
is full sea, the Moon being either in the change or at the full, which you
shall know by allowing to every rombe. of an hour in such manner as is before
set down. But if you would know at what hour it is full sea in that place
every day, then you must first understand that the Moon in 30. days slacketh
24. hours, which amounts to. of an hour which is 48. minutes for every day,
for so much she declineth every day from the sun, then look how many days
the Moon is old, and having multiplied the same by. that is to say by 48.
minutes, add the product thereof to those hours at which it is full sea, and
you shall have the true time of full sea every day. As for example, suppose th
at it was full sea at the last new Moon at some place here in England at three
of the clock in the afternoon, and now I would know at what a clock it
shall be full sea 5. days after the new Moon. Now if you multiply 5. being
the age of the Moon by 48. minutes, and add to the product thereof three
hours, which was the time of the last change, the full sea shall be at that
place at seven of the clock. But if the sum of such addition be above 12.
hours, then you must cast away the 12. and the remainder shall show you the
true hour of full sea.

How to know by help of an instrument the tides at any place. Chap. 54.
THere is also an easier way to know the tides every day in any place by the
help of an instrument set down by Cogniet, whereof both the making and use
here follows. First upon some board well playned and made smooth, draw a
Circle, and divide the same into 30. parts signifying the days or age of the
Moon, setting the number of 30. above in the top of the instrument, and
place all the other numbers as 1. 2. 3. and so forth toward your right hand,
that done, make a mooueable roundle which may turn about within the verdge of
the first Circle, and divide that into 24. hours, and also into 32. rombes,
setting the North point marked with the Flower deluce at the twelfth hour
above, and the South point at the twelfth hour beneath, and the East point at
the sixth hour on your right hand, and the West point at the sixth hour on
your left hand, and so shall your instrument be perfect, the use whereof is
thus:

First you must know what rombe of the Moon in that place which you seek
makes a full sea, and also the age of the Moon by some Almanacke or some
other rule before taught, then having these two things turn the inward rondle
of the hours and rombes until the foresaid known rombe does justly answer
to the 30. day of the great rondle, and there staying it firm with your
finger, seek in the outermost border of the greater rondle the age of the
Moon, and that will show you in the rondle of hours the very hour of full
sea that day in that place.



But one chief thing touching the knowing of the tides is to be noted as Borne
says, which is that the sea will flow more by one point of the Compass in the
spring tides, then in any of the quarters of the Moon called Nep tides in
every river that has any indraft, and is of some reasonable distance from the
sea: As for example, it flows at Graves end at the change or full of the
Moon when she is South Southwest: but in any of her quarters it skant flows
when she is South and by West, and this rule as he says is general for ever.

The Sexagenarie Table whereby the products in Multiplication, the quotients in
Division, and the square Roots are found Astronomicall Fractions.
59 58 57 56 55 54 53 52 51 50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34
33 32 31 58 1 57 2 56 3 55 4 54 5 53 6 52 7 51 8 50 9 49 10 48 11 47 12 46 13
45 14 44 5 43 16 42 17 41 18 40 19 39 20 38 21 37 22 36 23 35 24 34 25 33 26 32
27 31 28 30 29 59 54 4 55 6 54 8 53 10 52 12 51 14 50 16 49 18 48 20 47 22 46
24 45 26 44 28 43 30 42 32 41 34 40 36 39 38 38 40 37 42 36 44 35 46 34 48 33
50 32 52 31 54 30 56 29 58 58 54 9 53 12 52 15 51 18 50 21 49 24 48 27 47 30 46
33 45 36 44 39 43 42 42 45 41 48 40 51 39 54 38 57 38 0 37 3 36 6 35 9 34 12 33
15 32 18 31 21 30 24 29 27 57 1 0 1 52 16 51 20 50 24 49 28 48 32 47 36 46 40
45 44 44 48 43 52 42 56 42 0 41 4 40 8 39 12 38 16 37 20 36 24 35 28 34 32 33
36 32 40 31 44 30 48 29 52 28 56 56 2 0 2 0 4 50 25 49 30 48 35 47 40 46 45 45
50 44 55 44 0 43 5 42 10 41 15 40 20 39 25 38 30 37 35 36 40 35 45 34 50 33 55
33 0 32 5 31 10 30 15 29 20 28 25 55 3 0 3 0 6 0 9 48 36 47 42 46 48 45 54 45 0
44 6 43 12 42 18 41 24 40 30 39 36 38 42 37 48 36 54 36 0 35 6 34 12 33 18 32
24 31 30 30 36 29 42 28 48 27 54 54 4 0 4 0 8 0 12 0 16 46 49 45 56 45 3 44 10
43 17 42 24 41 31 40 38 39 45 38 52 37 59 37 6 36 13 35 20 34 27 33 34 32 41 31
48 30 55 30 2 29 9 28 16 27 23 53 5 0 5 0 10 0 15 0 20 0 25 45 4 44 12 43 20 42
28 41 36 40 44 39 52 39 0 38 8 37 16 36 24 35 32 34 40 33 48 32 56 32 4 31 12
30 20 29 28 28 36 27 44 26 52 52 6 0 6 0 12 0 18 0 24 0 30 0 36 43 21 42 30 41
39 40 48 39 57 39 6 38 15 37 24 36 33 35 42 34 51 34 0 33 9 32 18 31 27 30 36
29 45 28 54 28 3 27 12 26 21 51 7 0 7 0 14 0 21 0 28 0 35 0 42 0 49 41 40 40 50
40 0 39 10 38 20 37 30 36 40 35 50 35 0 34 10 33 20 32 30 31 40 30 50 30 0 29
10 28 20 27 30 26 40 25 50 50 8 0 8 0 16 0 24 0 32 0 40 0 48 0 56 1 4 40 1 39
12 38 23 37 34 36 45 35 56 35 7 34 18 33 29 32 40 31 51 31 2 30 13 29 24 28 35
27 46 26 57 126 8 25 19 49 9 0 9 0 18 0 27 0 36 0 45 0 54 1 3 1 12 1 21 38 24
37 36 36 48 36 0 35 12 34 24 33 36 32 48 32 0 31 12 30 24 29 36 28 48 28 0 27
12 26 24 25 36 24 48 48 10 0 10 0 20 0 30 0 400 0 50 1 0 1 10 1 20 1 30 1 40 36
49 36 2 35 15 34 28 33 41 32 54 32 7 31 20 30 33 29 46 28 59 28 12 27 25 26 38
25 51 25 4 24 17 47 11 0 11 0 22 0 33 0 44 0 55 1 6 1 17 1 28 1 39 1 50 2 1 35
16 34 30 33 44 32 58 32 12 31 26 30 40 29 54 29 8 28 22 27 36 26 50 26 4 25 18
24 32 23 46 46 12 0 12 0 24 0 36 0 48 1 0 1 12 1 24 1 36 1 48 2 0 2 12 2 24 33
45 33 0 32 15 31 30 30 45 30 0 29 15 28 30 27 45 27 0 26 15 25 30 24 45 24 0 23
15 45 13 0 13 0 26 0 39 0 52 1 5 1 18 1 31 1 44 1 57 2 10 2 23 2 36 2 49 32 16
31 32 30 48 30 4 29 20 28 36 27 52 27 8 26 24 25 40 24 56 24 12 23 28 22 44 44
14 0 14 0 28 0 42 0 56 1 10 1 24 1 38 1 52 2 6 2 20 2 34 2 48 3 2 3 16 30 49 30
6 29 23 28 40 27 57 27 14 26 31 25 48 25 5 24 22 23 39 22 56 22 13 43 15 0 15 0
30 0 45 1 0 1 15 1 30 1 45 2 0 2 15 2 30 2 45 3 0 3 15 3 30 3 45 29 24 28 42 28
0 27 18 26 36 25 54 25 12 24 30 23 48 23 6 22 24 21 42 42 16 0 16 0 32 0 48 1 4
1 20 1 36 1 52 2 8 2 24 2 40 2 56 3 12 3 28 3 44 4 0 4 16 28 1 27 20 26 39 25
58 25 17 24 36 23 55 23 14 22 33 21 52 21 11 41 17 0 17 0 34 0 51 1 8 1 25 1 42
1 59 2 16 2 33 2 50 3 7 3 24 3 41 3 58 4 15 4 32 4 49 26 40 26 0 25 20 24 40 24
0 23 20 22 40 22 0 21 20 20 40 40 18 0 18 0 36 0 54 1 12 1 30 1 48 2 6 2 24 2
42 3 0 3 18 3 36 3 54 4 12 4 30 4 48 5 6 5 24 25 21 24 42 24 3 23 24 22 45 22 6
21 27 20 48 20 9 39 19 0 19 0 38 0 57 1 16 1 35 1 54 2 13 2 32 2 51 3 10 3 29 3
48 4 7 4 26 4 45 5 4 5 23 5 42 6 1 24 4 23 26 22 48 22 10 21 32 20 54 20 16 19
38 38 20 0 20 0 40 1 0 1 20 1 40 2 0 2 20 2 40 3 0 3 20 3 40 4 0 4 20 4 40 5 0
5 20 5 40 6 0 6 20 6 40 22 49 22 12 21 35 20 58 20 21 19 44 19 7 37 21 0 21 0
42 1 3 1 24 1 45 2 6 2 27 2 48 3 9 3 30 3 51 4 12 4 33 4 54 5 15 5 36 5 57 6 18
6 39 7 0 7 21 21 36 21 0 20 24 19 48 19 12 18 36 36 22 0 22 0 44 1 6 1 28 1 50
2 12 2 34 2 56 3 18 3 40 4 2 4 29 4 46 5 8 5 30 5 52 6 14 6 36 6 58 7 20 7 42 8
4 20 25 19 50 19 15 18 40 18 5 35 23 0 23 0 46 1 9 1 32 1 55 2 18 2 41 3 4 3 27
3 50 4 13 4 36 4 59 5 22 5 45 6 8 6 31 6 54 7 17 7 40 8 3 8 26 8 49 19 16 18 42
18 8 17 34 34 24 0 24 0 48 1 12 1 36 2 0 2 24 2 48 3 12 3 36 4 0 4 24 4 48 5 12
5 36 6 0 6 24 6 48 7 12 7 36 8 0 8 24 8 48 9 12 9 36 18 9 17 36 17 3 33 25 0 25
0 50 1 15 1 40 2 5 2 30 2 55 3 20 3 45 4 10 4 35 5 0 5 25 5 50 6 15 6 40 7 5 7
30 7 55 8 20 8 45 9 10 9 35 10 0 10 25 17 4 16 32 32 26 0 26 0 52 1 18 1 44 2
10 2 36 3 2 3 28 3 54 4 20 4 46 5 12 5 38 6 4 6 30 6 56 7 22 7 48 8 14 8 40 9 6
9 32 9 58 10 24 10 50 11 16 16 1 31 27 0 27 0 54 1 21 1 48 2 15 2 42 3 9 3 36 4
3 4 30 4 57 5 24 5 51 6 18 6 45 7 12 7 39 8 6 8 33 9 0 9 27 9 54 10 21 10 48 11
15 11 42 12 9 28 0 28 0 56 1 24 1 52 2 20 2 48 3 16 3 44 4 12 4 40 5 8 5 36 6 4
6 32 7 0 7 28 7 56 8 24 8 52 9 20 9 48 10 16 10 44 11 12 11 40 12 8 12 36 13 4
29 0 29 0 58 1 27 1 56 2 25 2 54 3 23 3 52 4 21 4 50 5 19 5 48 6 17 6 46 7 15 7
44 8 13 8 42 9 11 9 40 10 9 10 38 11 7 11 36 12 5 12 34 13 3 13 32 14 1 30 0 30
1 0 1 30 2 0 2 30 3 0 3 30 4 0 4 30 5 0 5 30 6 0 6 30 7 0 7 30 8 0 8 30 9 0 9
30 10 0 10 30 11 0 11 30 12 0 12 30 13 0 13 30 14 0 14 30 15 0 30 31 0 31 1 2 1
33 2 4 2 35 3 6 3 37 4 8 4 39 5 10 5 41 6 12 6 43 7 14 7 45 8 16 8 47 9 18 9 49
10 20 10 51 11 22 11 53 12 24 12 55 13 26 13 57 14 28 14 59 15 30 31 32 0 32 1
4 1 36 2 8 2 40 3 12 3 44 4 16 4 48 5 20 5 52 6 24 6 56 7 28 8 0 8 32 9 4 9 36
10 8 10 40 11 12 11 44 12 16 12 48 13 201 3 52 14 24 14 56 15 28 16 0 32 33 0
33 1 6 1 39 2 12 2 45 3 18 3 51 4 24 4 57 5 30 6 3 6 36 7 9 7 42 8 15 8 48 9 21
9 54 10 27 11 0 11 33 12 6 12 39 13 12 13 45 14 18 14 51 15 24 15 57 16 30 33
34 0 34 1 8 1 42 2 16 2 50 3 25 3 58 4 32 5 6 5 40 6 14 6 48 7 22 7 56 8 30 9 4
9 38 10 12 10 46 11 20 11 54 12 28 13 2 13 36 14 10 14 44 15 18 15 52 16 26 17
0 34 35 0 35 1 10 1 45 2 20 2 55 3 30 4 5 4 40 5 15 5 50 6 25 7 0 7 35 8 10 8
45 9 20 9 55 10 30 11 5 11 40 12 15 12 50 13 25 14 0 14 35 15 10 15 45 16 20 16
55 17 30 35 36 0 36 1 12 1 48 2 24 3 0 3 36 4 12 4 48 5 24 6 0 6 36 7 12 7 48 8
24 9 0 9 36 10 12 10 48 11 24 12 0 12 36 13 12 13 48 14 24 15 0 15 36 16 12 16
48 17 24 18 0 36 37 0 37 1 14 1 51 2 28 3 5 3 42 4 19 4 56 5 33 6 10 6 47 7 24
8 1 8 38 9 15 9 52 10 29 11 6 11 43 12 20 12 57 13 34 14 11 14 48 15 25 16 2 16
39 17 16 17 53 18 30 37 38 0 38 1 16 1 54 2 32 3 10 3 48 4 26 5 4 5 42 6 20 6
58 7 36 8 14 8 52 9 30 10 8 10 46 11 24 12 1 12 40 13 18 13 96 14 34 15 12 15
50 16 28 17 6 17 44 18 22 19 0 38 39 0 39 1 18 1 57 2 36 3 15 3 54 4 33 5 12 5
51 6 30 7 9 7 48 8 27 9 6 9 45 10 24 11 3 11 42 12 21 13 0 13 39 14 18 14 57 15
36 16 15 16 54 17 33 18 12 18 51 19 30 39 40 0 40 1 20 2 0 2 40 3 20 4 0 4 40 5
20 6 0 6 40 7 20 8 0 8 40 9 20 10 0 10 40 11 20 12 0 12 40 13 20 14 0 14 40 15
20 16 0 16 40 17 20 18 0 18 40 19 20 20 0 40 41 0 41 1 22 2 3 2 44 3 25 4 6 4
47 5 28 6 9 6 50 7 31 8 12 8 53 9 34 10 15 10 56 11 37 12 18 12 59 13 40 14 21
15 2 15 43 16 24 17 5 17 46 18 27 19 8 19 49 20 30 41 42 0 42 1 24 2 6 2 48 3
30 4 12 4 54 5 36 6 18 7 0 7 42 8 24 9 6 9 48 10 30 11 12 11 54 12 36 13 18 14
0 14 42 15 24 16 6 16 48 17 30 18 12 18 54 19 36 20 18 21 0 42 43 0 43 1 26 2 9
2 52 3 35 4 18 5 1 5 44 6 27 7 10 7 53 8 36 9 19 10 2 10 45 11 28 12 11 12 54
13 37 14 20 15 3 15 46 16 29 17 12 17 55 18 38 19 21 20 4 20 47 21 30 43 44 0
44 1 28 2 12 2 56 3 40 4 24 5 8 5 52 6 36 7 20 8 4 8 48 9 32 10 16 11 0 11 44
12 28 13 12 13 56 14 40 15 24 16 8 16 52 17 36 18 20 19 4 19 48 20 32 21 16 22
0 44 45 0 45 1 30 2 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11
15 12 0 12 45 13 30 14 15 15 0 15 45 16 30 17 15 18 0 18 45 19 30 20 15 21 0 21
45 22 30 45 46 0 46 1 32 2 18 3 4 3 50 4 36 5 22 6 8 6 54 7 40 8 26 9 12 9 58
10 44 11 30 12 16 13 2 13 48 14 34 15 20 16 6 16 52 17 38 18 24 19 10 19 56 20
42 21 28 22 14 23 0 46 47 0 47 1 34 2 21 3 8 3 55 4 42 5 29 6 16 7 3 7 50 8 37
9 24 10 11 10 58 11 45 12 32 13 19 14 6 14 53 15 40 10 27 17 14 18 1 18 48 19
35 20 22 21 9 21 56 22 43 23 30 47 48 0 48 1 36 2 24 3 12 4 0 4 48 5 36 6 24 7
12 8 0 8 48 9 36 10 24 11 12 12 0 12 48 13 36 14 24 15 12 16 0 16 48 17 36 18
24 19 12 20 0 20 48 21 36 22 24 23 12 24 0 48 49 0 49 1 38 2 27 3 16 4 5 4 54 5
43 6 32 7 21 8 10 8 59 9 48 10 37 11 26 12 15 13 4 13 53 14 42 15 31 16 20 17 9
17 58 18 47 19 36 20 25 21 14 22 3 22 52 23 41 24 30 49 50 0 50 1 40 2 30 3 20
4 10 5 0 5 50 6 40 7 30 8 20 9 10 10 0 10 50 11 40 12 30 13 20 14 10 15 0 15 50
16 40 17 30 18 20 19 10 20 0 20 50 21 40 22 30 23 20 24 10 25 0 50 51 0 51 1 42
2 33 3 24 4 15 5 6 5 57 6 48 7 39 8 30 9 21 10 12 11 3 11 54 12 45 13 36 14 27
15 18 16 9 17 0 17 51 18 42 19 33 20 24 21 15 22 6 22 57 23 48 24 39 25 30 51
52 0 52 1 44 2 36 3 28 4 20 5 12 6 4 6 56 7 48 8 40 9 23 10 24 11 16 12 8 13 0
13 52 14 44 15 36 16 28 17 20 18 12 19 4 19 56 20 48 21 40 22 32 23 24 24 16 25
8 26 0 52 53 0 53 1 46 2 39 3 32 4 25 5 18 6 11 7 4 7 57 8 50 9 43 10 36 11 29
12 22 13 15 14 8 15 1 15 54 16 47 17 40 18 33 19 26 20 19 21 12 22 5 22 58 23
51 24 44 25 37 26 30 53 54 0 54 1 48 2 43 3 36 4 30 5 24 6 18 7 12 8 6 9 0 9 54
10 48 11 42 12 36 13 30 14 24 15 18 16 12 17 6 18 0 18 54 19 48 20 42 21 36 22
30 23 24 24 18 25 12 26 6 27 0 54 55 0 55 1 50 2 45 3 40 4 35 5 30 6 25 7 20 8
15 9 10 10 5 11 0 11 55 12 50 13 45 14 40 15 35 16 30 17 25 18 20 19 15 20 10
21 5 22 0 22 55 23 50 24 45 25 40 26 35 27 30 55 56 0 56 1 52 2 48 3 44 4 40 5
36 6 32 7 28 8 24 9 20 10 16 11 12 12 8 13 4 14 0 14 56 15 52 16 48 17 44 18 40
19 36 20 32 21 28 22 24 23 20 24 16 25 12 26 8 27 4 28 0 56 57 0 57 1 54 2 51 3
48 4 45 5 42 6 39 7 36 8 33 9 30 10 27 11 24 12 21 13 18 14 15 15 12 16 9 17 6
18 3 19 0 19 57 20 54 21 51 22 48 23 45 24 42 25 39 26 36 27 33 28 30 57 58 0
58 1 56 2 54 3 52 4 50 5 48 6 46 7 44 8 42 9 40 10 38 11 36 12 34 13 32 14 30
15 28 16 26 17 24 18 22 19 20 20 18 21 16 22 14 23 12 24 10 25 8 26 6 27 4 28 2
29 0 58 59 0 59 1 58 2 57 3 56 4 55 5 54 6 53 7 52 8 51 9 50 10 49 11 48 12 47
13 46 14 45 15 44 16 43 17 42 18 41 19 40 20 39 21 38 22 37 23 36 24 35 25 34
26 33 27 32 28 31 29 30 59 60 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

How a general Rutter showing the tides in all places should be made. Chap. 55.
WIlliam Borne does set down what Moon does make a full sea, as well here in
the most parts of our English coasts as in some other parts of France and
Spain, and so do many others whose Tables touching the tides are called
Rutters, whereof some are truly set down and some are false: But since such
Rutters do serve but for a few particular places, I would wish that some
learned Pilot that has sailed many and sundry long voyages, to make a general
Rutter that might serve for all places if it were possible, or at ye least for
so many places as are known in these days: And I would wish such general
Rutter to be made in manner of an Alphabet: and that every place might have his
true Longitude and Latitude added thereunto, to the intent that every place
might be the more easily found out in any Map or Card that is graduated with
degrees of Longitude and Latitude: And then to show what Moon does make a
full sea in every such place, which thing who soever would perform, he should
in mine opinion deserve great commendation. And thus I end this Treatise,
praying all the learned Seamen not to be offended or grieved with me for that
I do make young Gentlemen our own Countrymen partakers of their most worthy
knowledge, whereof the ignorant are not able to judge, nor to yield them that
praise which they deserve: yea rather I hope that they will help to perfect
what so ever I have herein left unperfected, to make the young Gentlemen the
more skillful, and thereby the more serviceable to their Country, and in so
doing they shall procure to them selves great good will and infinite thanks.

FINIS.

