Thirtene most pleasant and delectable Questions, entitled A disport of diverse
noble personages Written in Italian by M. JOHN BOCACE, Florentine and Poet
Laureate, in his Book named PHILOCOPO.

Englished by H. G.

These books are to be sold at the Corner shop, at the North-weast door of
Paul's. ()

To the right worshipful M. William Rice Esquier, H. G. wishes a happy long
life, with increase of much worship.
IN HOW MVCHE the thankful sort are desirous (as reason wills, and
experience daily teaches) to gratify such their dear friends, as to whom for
sundry good turns and received benefits they are not a little beholding, the
sundry dealing of thousands daily in use and apparent to the world, to the
great praise and commendation both of the one and the other, gives a
sufficient testimony: So that, taking occasion thereby to show the good will
I have, to pay in part the debt many years due, for that your bounty toward
me (the least spark whereof I am unable to satisfy:) I do give unto you this
ITLLIAN Disport, the which I have turned out of his native attire into this
our ENGLISH habit, to the end the same may be no less familiar to you, and
to such other (for your sake) as shall vouchsafe thereof, than it is either to
the ITALIAN or the FRENCH: and desire that the same may march abroad under
your charge: to whom I recount the protection thereof. Not douting but as the
reding thereof shall bring pleasure and delight: so the matter being
therevvithall duly considered, shall give sundry profitable lessons mete to be
followed. And because the name of the author (being of no small credit with the
learned, for those his sundry well written works) is of it self sufficient to
carry greater commendation therewith, than my pen is able to write, I leave to
labor therein, lest my lack may be an occasion to the leesing of his due praise.
And until Fortune (the only hope of the unhappy) shall make me better able, I
shall desire you thankfully to accept this as a token and pledge of the good
vvil I have to perform that whereunto mine ability is unable to stretch. Thus
taking my leave, I betake you to the tuitio^ of almighty god, who preserve
you in health to his pleasure, and after this life make you possessor of those
joys, whereof we all hope to be partakers. 6. Martij. 1566.

The Book to the Reader.
Look ere thou leap, dome not by view of face,
Least have make vvast, in misdoming the case,
For I teach not to love, ne yet his lore,
Ne with what salve is cured such a sore.
But I the carke with cares that thereby haps,
The bliss with joys, the storms with thunderclaps,
The courtesies, where most his force is shevvde,
The choice of best, be it of good or lewd,
Compare them so, as doomed is the doubt
Thereof, and ay the truth well fifted out:
The which to read such pleasure thou shall find
As may content a well disposed mind.
The argument to the.xiij Questions, composed in Italian, by M. John Bocace,
Florentine, and Poet Laureat: And now turned into English by H. G.
FLORIO surnamed Philocopo, accompanied with the Duke Montorio, Ascalion,
Menedon, and Massalino, in sailing to seek his friend Biancofiore, was through a
very obscure and dark night, by the fierce winds, driven into great dangers,
but the perilles being once passed, they were cast into the Port of the
ancient PARTHENOP^, whereas the Mariners (espying them selves in Haven) he
rereiued comfort, not knowing into what coast Fortune had forced him, yielded
thanks to his Gods. And so tarried the new day, the which after it once
appeared, the place was of the Mariners descried, so that they al glad of
surety, and of so acceptable arrival, came a shore. Philocopo with his
companions, who rather seemed to come forth new risen again out of their
sepultures, than disbarked from ship, looked back toward the waywarde
waters, and repeating in them selves the passed perils of the spent night,
could yet scarcely think themselves in surety. They all then with one voice
praised their gods, that had guided them safe out of so crooked a course,
offered their pitiful Sacrifices, and began to receive comfort, and were by a
friend of Ascalions honorably received into the City, whereas they caused
their ship to be all new repaired and decked, of Mast, sail, and better
stern, than were the others which they had lost: and so tarying time for
their further voyage, the which was much longer lengthened than they looked
for: by occasion whereof Philocopo would many times have taken his journey by
land, but discouraged therein by Ascalion, stayde, in tarrying a more
prosperous hour in the aforesaid place, where he and his companions saw
Phebea five times round, and as many times horned, before that Notus did
abandon his violent forces. And in so long a while, they never almost saw time
to be merry, whereupon Philocopo, who was very desirous to perform his
deferred journey, one day called his companions unto him, and said: Let us go
take the pleasant air, and pass the time upon the salt sea shore, in
reasoning and providing for our future voyage. Thus he, with the duke
Parmenion, and the rest of his companions, directed their walk with a mild
pace (discoursing diverse matters) toward that place where rest the reverend
ashes of the most renoumed Poet Maro. They all thus talking a good space, were
not gone far from the City, but that they came to the side of a Gardeyn,
wherein they heard gracious and joyous feasting of young Gentlemen, dames, and
damsels: There the air did all resounde with the noise of sundry instruments,
and as it were of Angelical voices, entering with sweet delighte into the
hearts of them, to whose ears it came: the which noise it pleased Philocopo
to stay a while to hear, to the end his former Melancholy thoroughe the
sweetness thereof, might by little and little depart away. Then Ascalion
restrained their talk. And whylest Fortune held thus Philocopo and his
companions without the garden intentiuely listening, a young gentleman coming
forth thereof, espied them, and forthwith by sight, port and visage, knew
them to be noble gentlemen, and worthy to be reverenced. Wherefore he without
tariaunce, returned to his company, and said: Come, let us go welcome
certain young men, seeming to be gentlemen of great calling, the which perhaps
bashful to enter herein, not being bidden, stay without, giving ear to our
dysporte. The companions then of this Gentleman left their Ladies at their
pastime, and went forth of the Garden, and came to Philocopo, whom by sight
they knew too be chief of all the rest, to whom they spoke with that
reverence their reason could devise, and that was most convenient for the
welcoming of such a guest, praying him that in honor and increase of this
their Feast, it would please him and his companions to enter with them the
garden, constrayning him through many requests, that he should in no wise deny
them this curtesy. These sweet prayers so pierced the gentle heart of
Philocopo, and no less the hearts of his companions, that he answered the
intreators in this sort: Friends, of truth such a Feast was of us neither
sought for, nor fled from, but like weather beaten mates cast into your port,
we to the end to flee drouste thoughts, which spring of idleness, did in
reciting our adversities, pass by these sea banks: But how fortune has
allured us to give ear unto you I know not, unless as we think, desirous to
remove from us all pensiveness, she has of you, in whom I know to be infinite
courtesy, made us this offer: and therefore we will satisfy your desire, though
peradventure in part we become somewhat lauesse of the courtesy which otherwise
toward others ought to proceed from us. And thus talking, they entered
together into the Garden, whereas they found many fair Gentlewomen, of whom
they were very graciously received, and by them welcomed to their feast. After
Philocopo had a good while beheld this their feasting, and likewise had
feasted with them, he thought it good to depart, and willing to take his leave
of the young Gentlemen, and to give them thanks for the honor he had received,
one Lady more honorable than the rest, endued with marvelous beauty and
virtue, came forth where he stood, and thus said unto him: Most noble Sir, ye
have this morning through this your great courtesy, showed no small pleasure to
these young Gentlemen, for the which they shall be always beholding unto you,
that is to wit, in that you have vouchesafed to come to honor this our feast.
May it please you then, not to refuse to show unto me, and to these other
Dames, that favor that I am secondarily to entreat you for: To whom Philocopo
with a sweet voice answered: Most gentle Lady, nothing may justly be denied
you, command therefore, for both I and these my companions are all pressed at
your will: To whom the Lady said in this wise: Forasmuch as this your coming
has increased this our feasting, with a most noble and goodly company, I shall
desire you that you will not with departure lessen the same, but rather help
us here to spend this day even to the last hour, to that end we have
already begone the same. Philocopo beheld her in the face as she thus spoke,
and seeing her eyes replete with burning rays to twinkle like unto the morning
star, and her face exceading pleasant and fair, thought never to had seen
(his Biancofiore excepted) so fair a creature: to whose demand he thus made
answer: Madame I shall dispose my self to satisfy rather your desire than
mine own, wherefore so long as it shall please you, so long will I abide with
you, and these my companions also: The Lady gave him great thanks, and
retourning to the others, began togethers with them all to be very merry.
Philocopo abiding with them in this sort, entered great familiarity with a
young Gentleman named Galeone, adorned with good qualities, and of a singular
eloquence, to whom in talking he said thus: Oh, how much are you more than
any others beholding to the immortal Gods, the which preserve you quiet in
one will in this your mirth making. We acknowledge us to be greatly bounden
unto them, answered Galeone. But what occasion moves you to say this?
Philocopo answered: Truly none other occasion, but that I see you all here
assembled in one will. Oh, said Galeone, maruayle not at all thereat, for this
Lady in whom all excellency does rest, both moves us hereunto, and holds
us herein. Then demanded Philocopo: And this Lady, who is she? Galeone
answered: It is she that made request unto you that ye would tarry here, when
as a while since ye would have departed. By sight she seems unto unto me
(said Philocopo) exceeding fair, and of a surmounting worthiness: but yet if
my demand be not vnleefull, manifest her name unto me, of whence she is, and
of what Parents descended. To whom Galeone answered: No ways may your
request be unjust, besides there is none publicly talking of her, which does
not vouchsafe to publish the renoume of so worthy a Lady, and therefore I shall
fully satisfy your demand. Her name is of us here called Fiametta, howbeit
the greatest part of the people call her by the name of her, through whom that
wound is shut up, that the preuarication of the first mother opened. She is
the daughter of a most high Prince, under whose scepter these countries are
quietly governed, she is also Lady to us all: and briefly, there is no virtue
that ought to be in a noble heart, that is not in hirs. And as I think, in
tarying this day with us, you shall have good experience thereof. That which you
say (said Philocopo) can not be hidden in her semblance. The gods guide her to
that end that her singular gifts do merit, for assuredly I believe both that
and much more than you have affirmed. But these other dames, who are they?
These Gentlewomen (said Galeone) some of them are of Parthenope, and other
some of places else where, commen as are you your selves, hither into her
company. And after they had thus held talk a good space, Galeone said: Ah my
sweet friend, if it might not displease you, it should be very acceptable
unto me to know further of your state and condition, than your outward
appearance represents, to the end that by knowing you, we may do you that
honor you worthily merit, because sometimes want of knowledge brings lack of
duty, to them that honor others in not doing their due reverence. To whom
Philocopo answered: no lack in doing me reverence could any ways happen on
your behalf, but rather ye have therein so far exceeded, as with excess ye
have passed the bounds and limits thereof. But since you desire to know further
of my condition, it should be unjust not to satisfy your desire therein. And
therefore (in how much it is lawful for me to discover) I shall tell you: I am
a poor Pilgrim of Love, and go seeking as ye see, a Lady of mine, taken away
from me by subtle cautele by my Parents* and these Gentlemen whom ye see with
me, of their courtesy keep me company in this my Pilgrimage: and my name is
Philocopo, of Nation a Spaniard, driven through tempestuous wether (seeking for
the Island of Cicilia) into your Ports. But he knew not so covertly to talk,
as that the young Gentleman understood not more of his condition, than he
willingly desired he should: and having compassion of those his hard happes,
somewhat comforted him with words, which promised him hereafter a more
luckie life, and from that time forwards to increase his honor, willed that he
should be honored of them all, not as a Pilgrim, or as a bidden guest, but
rather as the chief and principal patron of the feast. The Lady, who
understood his state and condition, through the report of Galeone, esteeming
derely of such an hap, commanded specially that so it should be. Apollo was
now with his Chariot of light mounted to the Meridian circle, and did scarcely
behold with leueled eye the new apparelled earth, when as these Dames, Damsels,
and young gentlemen being thus assembled together in that place, (setting their
feasting aparte) seeking forth by sundry quarters of the garden the delightful
shade, and fleing the noisome heat that might offend their delicate bodies,
took by diverse companies, diverse delights. And the Lady accompanied with
four others, took Philocopo by the hand, saying: Sir, the heat does constrain
us to seek out the fresh air, let us therefore go to yonder meadow you see here
before us, and there with sundry discourses, pass over the heat of the day.
Philocopo then greatly praised the Ladies devise, and followed her motion, and
with him his companions. Galeone also with two others, went with them to the
appointed meadow, which was exceeding fair of grass and flowers, and filled
with a sweet suauitie of smells, about ye which grew store of young trees very
fair and thick of green leaves, wherewith the place was defended from the
parching beams of the great planet. There was in the midst of that medowe a
propre Fountain, very fair and clear like Crystal, about the which they all
sat them down, where some gasing in ye water, and other some gathering
flowers, they began to talk of sundry matters. But because sometimes at
unawares, the one did interrupt the others Tale, the fair Lady said unto them
thus: To the end that this our discourse may proceed in a more better order,
and so continue until the fresh cool hours, the which we attend for our
further feasting. Let us ordain one of us in place of our king, to whom each
one shall propound a question of Love, and shall receive from hint an apt
resolution thereof: and truly (as I think) we shall no sooner have made an end
of our Questions, but yt the heat (we not knowing how) shall be past, and the
time spent to our profit and delight. This devise pleased them al, and among
them it was said: Let there be a king: and with one voice they all chose
Aschalion to their king, for that he was somewhat more grown in years, than
was any of the rest: To whom he made answer, to be altogether insufficient for
so great an office, because he had spent more years in the service of Mars,
than of Venus. But yet he prayed them all to leave unto him the Election of
such a King. They that thought him to be such a one (knowing so well before
hand the qualities of them all) as would constitute one such, as should yield
true answer to all their demaundes, did then wholly consent that the Election
should freely be remitted unto him, since he would not take such a dignity
upon himself. Fiametta chosen Queen to define the questions propounded.
Ascalion the^ rose him up, and gathered certain twigges of a green Laurel,
the shade whereof did ouerspread the fresh fountain, and thereof made a rich
Coronet, the which he brought in presence of them all, and said in this wise:
from the time that I in my most youthful years began to have understanding, I
swear by those gods who^ I worship, that I do not remember to have leen or hard
named, a woman of like worthiness to Fiametta, of who^ love holds us al here
in her presence inflamed, and by who^ we have this day bin honored i^ such
sort, as we ought never to forget ye same. And because she (as without dout I
know) is plentifully endued with every good grace, adorned both with beauty
and good qualities, and endued with a flowing eloquence, I therefore make
choice of her to be our Queen. For assuredly it is convenient that the
imperial crown be bestowed upon her magnificence, being descended from a
stirpe royal, to whom the secret ways of love, being (as they are all) open,
it shall be an easy matter for her to content us in these our Questions. And
this said, he humbly kneeled before this noble Lady, saying: Most courteous
Lady vouchsafe to deck your head with this Crown, the which is no less
dearly to be esteemed of them, that are worthy through their virtues to cover
their heads with the like, than if it were of Gold. The Lady with a new red
bepainted her white visage, and said: Truly ye have not in due sort provided
a Queen for this amorous people, (yt have more need of a most able king) for
that of all you that are present, I am the most simple and of least virtue,
neither is there any one of you that is not more meet to be invested of such a
croun than am I. But since it thus pleseth you, I can not withstand this your
election: and to the end I be not found contrary to our made promise, I will
receive it, and as I hope, shall eke receive from the Gods with it, ye stomach
due to such an office: and through the help of him to whom these leaves were
always acceptable, I shall answer you all, according to my small knowledge:
Nevertheless, I devoutly pray him that he will enter into my breast, and renew
my voice with that sound wherewith he caused the valiant vanquished man Marsia,
to deserve to be drawn forth of the sheath of his members. I by way of mirthe
shall give you light answers without sifting to the depthe of your propounded
Questions, the going about to search forth the which, should rather bring
tediousness than delight to your minds. And having thus said, she took with
her delicate hand the offered Garland, and therwithal crouned her head, and
commanded that each one upon pain to be deprived of the amorous joys,
should prepare to put forth some question, the which might be apt and
convenient to the purpose whereof they did intend to entreat, and such a one as
should rather be an increaser of their mirth, than through too great subtilty,
or otherwise, a destroyer of the same.

The first Question, proposed by PHILOCOPO.
ON the right hand of the Queen sat Philocopo, to whom she said: Noble
Sir, you shall begin to propou^d your Question, The Queen commands Philocopo
to propound.
to the end that ye rest orderly, as we are here placed, may after you with
more surety propound theirs also. To who^ Philocopo thus made answer: Most
noble Lady, without any forslowing, I shall obey your commandment, and thus
said: I remember that in the city, wherein I was borne, there was one day made
a bountiful great feast, whereat, to honor the same, were many gentlemen and
Gentlewomen: Two Gentlemen enamored of one Gentlevvoman.
And I that was likewise there roming about, and beholding them that were in
the place, espied among the rest, two young me^ very gracious to behold, that
ernestly eyed an exceeding fair woman. Neither was I any ways able to
discern whither of them her beauty had most inflamed. And as she in like sort
had a good space beheld them, not making greater semblance to the one, than to
the other, they between themselves, began to reason of her: and among the
other words that I understood of their talk, was yt each one said, that he
was her best beloved: and for proof thereof, either of them alleged in the
furtherance of himself, diverse gestures then before done by the young woman.
And they thus remaining in this contention a long time, being now through many
words at daggers drawing, they acknowledged that heerin they did very evil,
because in thus doing, they wrought hurt and shame to themselves, and
displeasure to the woman. Wherefore (moved of an equal agreement) both two
went to the mother of the maid, who was also at the same feast, and thus said
unto her: That for so much as above all other women of the world, either of them
best liked her daughter, and that they were at contention whether of them was
best liked of her, it would therefore please her to grant them this favor,
to the end no greater inconvenience might spring thereof, as to will her
daughter, that she either by word or deed, would show whether of them she best
loved. The entreated gentlewoman smiling, thus answered: willingly. And so
calling her daughter to her, said: My fair daughter, each one of these
prefers the love of thee, above the love of him self, and in this
contention they are: whether of them is best beloved of thee: and they seek of
me this savor, that thou either by signs or words, resolve them herein.
Whereas love is, there peace ought to be.
And therefore to the end that love, from whom all peace and goodness ought
always to spring, bread not now the contrary, content them in this, and with
semblable courtesy, show toward which of the^ thy mind is most bent. The
loved gives cause of argument to her lovers.
The young damsel said: It likes me right well. And so beholding them both a
while, she saw the one of the^ to have upon his head a fair garlande of fresh
flowers, and the other to stand without any garlande at all. Then she that had
likewise upon her head a garlande of green leaves, first took the same from
her head, and set it upon his, that stood before her without a garlande. And
after she took that which the other young man had upon his head, and set the
same upon hirs: and so leaving them, she returned to the feast, saying that she
had both performed the commandment of her mother, and eke their desire. The
young men being thus left, returned also to their former contention, each one
affirming that she loved him best. And he whose garland she took and set upon
her head, said: Assuredly she loves me best, because she has taken my
garlande to none other end, but for that what mine is, pleases her, and to
give occasion to be beholding unto me. But to thee, she has given hirs, as it
were in place of her last farewell: unwilling that (like a country girl) the
love which thou bear her, be without requital, and therefore lastly she
gives thee that garlande thou had merited. The other replying with the
contrary, thus answered: Truly she loves that thine is, better than thee, and
that may be seen in taking thereof. And me she loves better than what mine is,
in as much as she has given me of hirs: And therefore it is no token of her
last deserved gift, as thou affirmest, but rather a beginning of amity and
love. A gift makes the receiver a subject to the giver: and because she
peradventure vncertane of me, to the end she might be more certain to have me
her subject, will bind me (if perhaps I were not bound unto her before) to be
hirs by gift. But how may thou think, if she at the first take away from
thee, that ever she may vouchsafe to give thee. And thus they abode a long time
contending, and in the end departed without any definition at all. Now say I,
most puissant Queen, if you should be demanded of the last sentence of
such a contention, what would ye judge? The fair Lady somewhat smiling,
turned toward Philocopo, (her eyes sparkling with an amorous light) and after
a soft sigh, thus made answer: Most noble youth, The queens judgment upon
the question.
proper is your Question: And truly, as very wisely the young woman behaved
her self, so each one of the young men right well defended his cause. But
because ye require what we lastly will judge thereof, thus we make you answer:
It seems unto us, and so it ought to seem to each one that takes good
heed, that the woman had in hate neither the one nor the other: but to keep
her intent covert did two contrary acts, as appears, and not without
occasion. And to the end she might get more assured the love of him whom she
loved, as not to lose the love of the other, whom she hated not, it was but
wisely done. But to come to our Question, which is, to whether of the two,
greatest love was showed. We say: that she loved him best, and he chiefest in
her favor, to whom she gave her garland: and this seems to be the reason:
Whatsoever man or woman that loves any person, each one through force of the
love they bear, is so strongly bound to the person loved, that about all other
things they desire to please the same, neither to bind him or her more
strongly that thus loves, needs either gifts or services, and this is
manifest. And yet we see, yt who so loves, though he endeavor him self sundry
ways, is not able to make the person loved, in any sort benign and subject
unto him, whereby he may bring it to his pleasure, and so with a more bold face
demand his desire. And that this is in such sort as we say, Dido.
the inflamed Dido with her doings, does very well manifest the same unto us,
who burning in the love of Aeneas so long, Aeneas.
as it seemed her neither with honors nor with gifts able to win him, had
not the courage to attempt the doubtful way of asking the question: So that
then the young woman sought to make him most beholding unto her, whom she best
loved. And thus we say, that he that received the gift of the garlande, was
her best beloved. As the queen became silent, Philocopo answered: Discrete
Lady, Philocopo replieth to the Queen.
greatly is your answer to be commended: but for all that, you do bring me
into a great admiration of that ye have defined, touching the propounded
question, because I would have judged rather the contrary. For so much as
generally among lovers, this was the wonted custom, that is, to desire to
bear upon them some jewel, or some other thing of the persons loved, to the
end that most times they might glory them selves more therein, than in all the
remnant they had, and perceiving the same about them, therewith to glad their
minds, Paris.
as ye have heard. Paris seldom times or never entered into the bloody
battles against the Greeks, without bearing some token upon him, that had
been given him by his Helene, Helene.
believing better to prevail therewith, than if he had gone without the same.
And truly in mine opinion, his thought was not vain: therefore I should thus
say, (that as you said) the young woman did very wisely, not defining it for
all that as you have don, but in this manner: She knowing that she was very well
loved of two young men, and that she could not love mo than one; for that love
is an indivisible thing, she would reward the one for the love he bare her, to
the end that such good will should not be unrewarded, and so gave him her
garlande in requital thereof. To the other whom she loved, she thought she
would give courage and assured hope of her love, taking his garlande, and
decking her self therewith, in token whereof, she plainly showed to be
beholding unto him for the same. And therefore in my judgment she loved better
him from whom she took, than him to whom she gave. To whom the Queen thus made
answer: The queens solution of this first question.
Your argument should have pleased us right well, if your self in your tale
had not condemned the same See how pillage and perfect love can agree together?
How can ye show me, that we love him whom we spoil, better than him to whom we
give? According to the Question propounded, to the one she gave a garlande, and
from the other she took a garlande: neither had she too whom she gave, ought
given her: and that which we see every day for example may here suffice, as is
commonly said: They are of gentlemen far better loved, on whom they bestow
favor and gifts, than those that are by them deprived of them. And for that
cause we lastly hold opinion, concluding, that he is better loved, to whom is
given, than he from whom is taken. We know very well, that in these our
reasonings much might be objected against this our definition, and much also
answered to the contrary reasons: But lastly such determination shall remain
true. And because time now serves not, to stay with this our talk upon one
matter only without more, we will give ear to the rest if it please you. To
whom Philocopo said: That it pleased him right well, and that very well suffised
such a resolution to his demanded question: and so held his peace.

The second Question, proposed by LONGANO.
Next to Philocopo was placed a courteous young man, and gracious to behold,
whose name was Longano, who no sooner than Philocopo had left, thus began:
Most excellent Queen, so trim has been the first question, that in my
conceipte, mine shall bring no delight at al. Yet to the end not to be severed
from so noble a company, forth it shall: and thus he followed, saying: It is
not many days past, that I abiding all solitary in my chamber, wrapped in a
heap of troublesome thoughts, sprung from an amorous desire, the which with a
fierce battle had assaulted my heart, Two sisters complain them of being in
love.
by hap heard a piteous plaint, whereunto (because I judged it by estimation
near unto me) intentiuely I laid mine ear, and thereby knew that they were
women: by occasion whereof, I suddenly rose to see who, and where they were:
and loking forth at my chamber window, I heard over against the same, in one
other chamber, two young women, the same being sisters, adorned with an
inestimable beauty, there abiding without any other company, whom as I saw
making this sorrowful plaint, I withdrew my self into a secret place, without
being of them espied, and so beheld them a long while, neither was I able for
all that, to understand all the words that they through grief vttred in
tears, but that the effect of such plaint (according to that I could
comprehend) seemed to me to be for love: wherefore I through pity, and so
sweet an occasion offered (being thus close as I was) began to shead my
trickling teres. And after that I had in their grief perseuered in the same a
good space (for so much as I was their very familiar, and also their kinsman) I
purposed to understand more certain the occasion of their sorrow, and so went
unto them, who had no sooner espied me, but all bashful they withhelde them
from tears, endeavoring them selves to do me reverence. To whom I said:
Gentlewomen, trouble not your selves, neither let this my coming move you to
restrain your inward grief, for your tears have bin now a good space apparent
unto me. It shall be therefore needelesse to hide you, either yet through
bashfulnesse to hide from me the cause of this your plaint. For I am come
hither to understand the same. And be you assured, that ye shall not receive by
me either in word or deed any evil requital, but rather help and comfort in
what I may. The women greatly excused themselves, saying, that they sorrowed
for nothing: but yet after I had coniured them, and they seeing me desirous to
understand ye same, the elder thus began to say: It is the pleasure of the
Gods, that to thee our secrets be discovered: thou therefore shall understand,
that we, above al other women have always resisted the sharp darts of Cupide,
who of a long season in casting the same, was never yet able to faste^ any one
of them in our hearts. But now lastly being further inflamed, and having
determined to overcome that his childishe enterprise, took of new with his
young arm, of his best and dearest shaftes, and with so great force wounded the
hearts so sore infeebled through the sundry blows before received, as the
heads thereof pierced deep, so as they made a far greater wound, than if
resistance had not been made (to the other former) had like to have been. And
thus for the pleasure of two most noble young Gentlemen, we are become subjects
to his deity, following his pleasure with more perfect faith, and seruent will,
than ever any other women have done. Now has Fortune, and the love of them (as
I shall declare unto you) left us both comfortless. First I, The first
lame^teth the lost of her enjoyed lover.
before my sister here, was in love, and through mine endeavor, believing
wisely to end my desire, so wrought as I got the loved young Gentleman at my
pleasure, whom I found as greatly enamored of me, as I of him. But truly now
has not the amorous flame through such effect ceased, neither has the
desire lessened, but each one more vehemently increases: and more than ever,
I do now burn in his fire. And what time, seeing how I might best mitigate
and assuage the kindled flame thereof, holding it inwardly secret, it after
happened, that the horned Moon was no sooner come to her perfect roundnesse, but
that he at unawares committed a fault, for the which was adjudged him perpetual
exile from this city, whereupon he dreading death, is departed hence without
hope ever to return. I sorrowful woman above all others, more now enflamed
tha^ ever, am without him, left both doleful and desperate. By occasion
whereof I sorrow me, and that thing that most increases my sorrow is, that on
every side I see the way barde from being able to follow him. Think therefore
now, whether I have cause to plain me or no. Then said I: and this other, why
sorroweth she? And she answered: The second hindered by jealousy, sorovveth
her hap.
This my sister likewise (as I) is enamoured of an other, and of him again
loved above measure. And to the end her desires should not pass the amorous
paths, without taking some part of delight, many times she has endeavored
her self to bring them to effect, and contrary to her devise, jealousy has
always occupied and broken the way, and because she could never attain
thereunto neither saw how to be able so to do, she thus distressed, is thorough
fervent love consumed, as ye may well think if ever ye were in love. Seeing we
were the^ here al alone, we began to reason of our misfortunes, and knowing the
same far greater than these of other women, we could not withholde from
tears, but with weeping sorowed our luckle^^e lottes, as ye might well
perceive. To hear this of them it grieved me greatly, so that I encountered
them with such words as seemed me most profitable for their comfort, and so
departed from them. Many times after reuoluing in mind their griefs, and
sometimes bethinking me whether of the same should be the greater, at one time
I agreed to that of the one, and at another time, I yielded to that of the
other: and the sundry reasons wherewith as it seems me, each one has to lament
her, will not suffer me to stay upon any one, whereupon I remayn here in doubt.
May it therefore please you, that by you may be opened this error, in telling
me whether of these two unfortunate lovers seemed to sustain the greatest
grief. Great was the sorrow of either of them, The Queen decideth the question.
answered the Queen: But considering adversity to be most grievous to her that
has tasted prosperity, we esteem that she that has lost her love, feels
the greatest grief, and is of Fortune greatliest offended. Fabritius.
Fabritius never bewept the chances of fortune: Pompey.
But that Pompey did, is a thing very manifest. If sweet things were not tasted,
the sour should be yet unknown. Medea.
Medea never knew (according to her own saying) what manner a thing prosperity
was, whilst she was in love, Jason.
but being forsaken of Jason, bewailed her adversity. Who will ever lament for
that he has not had: not one but will rather desire it. It is demed therefore,
that of the two women, the one wept for grief, the other for desire. It is
very hard for me (gracious Lady) to Longano of contrary opinion to the Queen.
think that which you affirm (said the young Gentleman) forsomuche as who that
has his desire of any desired thing, ought much more to content his mind,
tha^ who that desires, and can not fulfill his desire. Further, nothing is more
light to lose, than what hope promyseth not hereafter to yield. There ought
to be unmeasurable grief, whereas the not being able to bring egall wills to
effect does hinder. From thence lamentations take place, from thence thoughts
and troubles do spring, because if the wills were not egall, of force the
desire should want. But when as lovers see them selves in presence of that they
desire, and can not attain thereunto, then do they kindle and sorrow them
much more, than if that they would have, were far from them. And who I pray
you torments Tantalus in Hell? Tantalus.
but only the apples, and the water, for that how much more near they bend
and swell to his mouth, so much the more (afterward in fleeing the same) they
increase his hunger. Truly I believe, that who hops for a thing possible to
be had and can not attain thereunto, through contrary resisting impediments,
feels more grief, than who that bewaileth a thing lost and irrecuperable.
The Queens solution or the ij. question.
Then said the Queen, your answer would have followed very well, where your
demand should have been of an old grief, although to that also might be
said: thus to be possible through forgetting the grief, to shorten the desire
in the desired things, where as continual impediment is sens not to be able to
attayn them, as in those lost, wherein Hope does not show us, that we should
ever have them again. But we do reason whether of them sorrowed most, whe^n
you saw them sorrowing: wherefore following the propounded case, we will give
judgment, that she felt greater grief that had lost her lover, without hope
to have him again, (putting the case that it be an easy matter to lose a thing
impossible to have again: nevertheless it was to be said: who loves well,
forgets never) than the other, who if we look well, might hope to fulfill
that hereafter, that heretofore she was unable to perform. For a great
lessener of grief is hope. It had force to keep chaste and to diminish the
sorrows of the lingering long life of Penelope.

The third Question, proposed by a young Gentlevvoman.
ON the right side of Longano, sat an excellent fair Gentlewoman, and very
pleasant, who as she perceived that Question by the Queen determined, thus
began with a sweet talk to say: Most renoumed queen, your ears grant
hearing to my words: And first by those Gods whom you worship, and next by
the power of our pastime, I pray you that ye will give to my demand profitable
counsel. I, as you know, being descended of noble Parents, was borne in this
City, and was named with a very gracious name, although my surname (being
Cara) presents me grateful to the hearers, and as by my face it may appear,
I have received from the Gods and Nature a singular gift of beauty, the
which (in following my proper name more than my surname) I have adorned with
an infinite pleasantness, showing my self benign to whom that is delighted
to behold the same: by occasion whereof, many have endeavored themselves for
their pleasure to occupy my eyes, against all whom I have withscode with
strong resistaunce, holding a stable heart against their assaults: but because
it seems to me vnleefull that I only should pretermit the laws kept and
observed of all others, that is, not to love being loved of many, I have
determined to become enamored, and setting apart many seekers of such love,
whereof some do excel Midas in richesse, some other pass Absalon in beauty,
and other some in courtesy (according to the common report of all) are more
splendent than any other. I have of all these chosen three: Of whom each one
pleases me alike. The gentlevvoman prays to be resolved whether ought
sonest to be loved, either the strong, the liberal, or the wise.
Of the which three, the one of bodily force (as I believe) would excel the
good Hector, he is at every proof so vigorous and strong. The courtesy and
liberality of the second is such, that (as I think) his fame does sound
through each pole. The third is all full of wisdom, so that he surmounteth all
other wise men above measure. But for that (as ye have heard) their qualities
are diverse, I doubt whether of them to take, finding in the antique age each
one of these to have diversely the courages of women, and of yelding men: as of
Dianira, Hercules, of our Clitemnestra, Aegistus, and of Lucretia, Sextus.
Counsel me therefore, to whether of them soonest with least blame, and greatest
surety, I ought to give my self. The pleasant Queen having heard the purpose
of this Gentlewoman, The queens answer.
thus made answer. There is never a one of the three, that does not worthily
merit the love of a fair and gracious Lady: but because in this case I am not
to fight against castles, or to give away the kingdoms of great Alexander, or
the treasures of Ptholome, but that only that Love and honor are with
discretion a long time to be kept, the which are mainteyned neither by force
nor curtesy, but only by wisdom: we say, that both you, and every other woman
ought rather to give her love to a wise man, than to any of the rest. The reply
of the Gentlewoman.
Oh how diverse is my judgment from yours, answered the propounding
Gentlewoman. To me it seems, that each one of the others were sooner to be
taken than the wise, and this seems to be the reason: Love as we see) is of
that nature, as multiplying his force in one heart, every other thing he
banisheth out thence, retayning that for his seat, and moving it after
according to his pleasure, whereunto no foresight is able to resist, but that
it is convenient for them to follow him, by whom it is (as I have said)
governed. And who doubts that Biblis knew it not to be evil to love her
brother? Biblys.
Who will gaynesay, that it was not manifest to Leander, Leander.
that he might drown in Helespont, in his fortunate time, if he cast him
self therein? And none will deny that Pasiphe knew not a man to be more fair
than a Bull? Pasiphe.
and yet they and each one overcome with an amorous pleasure, rejecting all
knowledge, followed the same. Then if it have power to take knowledge from the
learned, taking away the wit from the wise, they shall have nothing left: but
if from the strong and courteous, it shall take away the little wit they have,
it shall yet increase them in their virtues, and so they shall become more than
the wise enamoured. Further, love has this property, it is a thing that can
not long be hid: and in reueling him self, he is wont oftentimes to bring
grievous perils, whereunto what remedy shall the wise give that has now lost
his wit? He shall give none at all, but the strong that uses his force can
help in a peril both him self, and others. The courteous through his
courtesy, shall with grateful benevolence win the minds of many, whereby he
may be both helped and considered, and others also for his sake. See now what
it is to be of your judgment. She was by the Queen answered unto, thus: The
queens last sentence to the third question.
If there were such a one as you speak of, who should than be wise? not one.
But if he, whom you propound wise, and enamored of you, should be made a fool,
he is not to be taken. The Gods forbid, that that whereof you speak, should
come to pass. And yet we will not deny, but that the wise know the evil, and
do it: but for all that we will say, that they thereby lose not their wit,
forasmuch as what time it pleases them with the reason they have to dridle
their wills, they will reduce them selves to their accustomed wit, guyding
their motions in a due and straight order. And in this manner their love shall
be altogether, or at the least, a long time kept secret, and that without
any doubtful diligence, the which shall not happen to one of little wit,
be he never so strong or courteous. And yet if perhaps it do hap, that
such love be discovered, a wise manne will with a hundred foresightes, shut
up the eyes and understanding of the tatlers thereof, and shall provide a
safety both for his own honor, as for the honor of his loved Lady? And if
need of safety be, the help of the wise can not fail. That of the strong
comes less. And the friends that are gotten by Liberality, are accustomed
in adversity to shrink away. What is she of so little discretion, that is
brought to such a iumpe, as has need of manyfeste help? or that if her love
be disclosed, seeks fame in having loved a strong or Liberal man? I believe
there is none such. Let the wise then be soonest loved, hoping that he must
be in each cause more profitable than any of the rest.

The fourth Question, proposed by MENEDON.
THe Gentlewoman by her countenance seemed content when Menedon sitting next
unto her said: Most high and noble Queen, now is it come to my turn to
propounde my question here in your presence. First Menedon tells a tale.
Wherefore by your lisence, if in my talk I shall wade very long, yet during
the same I shall first of all of you, and next of the standers about, pray
pardon: Because ye can not be made fully to understand that, which I intend
to propounde, unless a tale, that peradventure shall not be short, do precede
the same: and after these words thus she began to say: In the country where I
was borne, I remember the^re was a noble knight, surmounting rich, the which
loved in most loyal love, a noble gentlewoman, borne likewise there, whom he
took to wife: Of whom being as she was, exceeding fair: Tarolfo a knight was
enamored of a Lady.
an other knight called Tarolfo was after enamoured, and with so great good will
loved her, as he saw nothing he more desired than her: And in sundry sorts,
now with passing before her house, now iusting, now at the barriers, now with
the often sending her messangers, peradventure promising her great gifts,
whereby she might know his intent, and now with other like feats he endeavored
him self to purchase her love. All which things the Lady closely supported,
without giving sign or good answer to the knight, saying to her self: When
as this knight shall epsy, that he can have neither answer, ne yet good
countenance of me, perhaps he will forbear any further, either to love me, or
to give me these allurements. Now for all this, Tarolfo surcessed not,
following the precepts of O^^d, who says, that a man must not through the
hardness of a woman leave to persevere, because with continuance the soft
water pierces the imbrued with Romayne blood: and having travailed a long
while upon the same, Tarolfo found an old manne called Theban.
he suddenly espied before him, at the foot of a mountayn, a man not young, nor
of to many years, bearded, small and very spare of person, whose attire showed
him to be but poor, who romed hither and thither gathering herbs, and with a
little knife dug up sundry roots, whereof he had filled one of the skirts of
his cote: whom as Tarolfo saw, he marvelled not a little, and doubted greatly
least it had been some other thing, but after that his aim did certainly assure
him to be a man, he drew nere unto him, saluted him, and after asked him who he
was, of whence, and what he made there at so timely an hour. To whom the old
man answered: I am of Thebes, and Thebane is my name, and I go up and down
this plain, gathering of these herbs, to the end that with the juice thereof,
I make diverse necessary and profitable things for diverse infirmities, whereby I
may have wherwithal to live: And to come at this hour, it is need and not
delight that constrayneth me. But who are you, that in countenance resembles
noble, and walk here al alone solitary. To whom Tarolfo answered: I am of the
extremes of the west, very rich, and vanquished of my conceits, pricked
forwards to an enterprise, not being able hitherto to atchieue the same, and
therefore to be the better able without impediment to sorrow my hap, I go thus
all alone wandering. To whom Thebane said: Do you not know the quality of the
place, and what it is? Wherefore have you rather taken your way on the one side?
You might easily here be rebuked with furious spirits. Tarolfo answered: God
can do here, as else where, it is he that has my life and honor in his
hands: let him do with me according to his pleasure: for assuredlye death
should be to me a rich treasure. Then said Thebane: What is that your
enterprise, for the which (not being able to perform it) you abide thus
sorrowful? To whom Tarolfo answered: It is such as seems unto me impossible
to be able ever to attain, since hitherto I have here found no counsel. Then
said Thebane: Dare ye utter it? Tarolfo answered: Yea. But what profits it?
Peradventure nothing said Thebane, but what does it hurt? Tarolfo recites to
Thebane his promis made too his Lady, of a Garden full of flowers in the month
of January.
Then said Tarolfo: I seek counsel how may be had in the coldest month, a
Gardeyn full of flowers, fruits, and herbs, as fair as if it were in the
month of May, neither do I find who can therein either help me, or give me
encouragement that it is possible to be had. Thebane stayde a while in a muse
without answer, and after said: You and many others do judge the skill and
virtue of men according to their garments. If my goods were such as are yours,
you would not have lingered so long in discovering your lack: or if
peradventure you had found me near to some rich Prince, as you have in
gathering of herbs. But many times under the vylest vesture are hidden the
greatest treasures of science: and therefore no one concealeth his lack, to
whom is proffered counsel or help: And if therefore he open the same, it can
not prejudice him at all. But what would ye give him that should come, he saw
the horns of the Moon gathered into a perfect roundnesse, and to shine upon
the freque^ted earth. Then he went him all alone forth of the city, leaving
his apparel apart, bare legged, and his dissheueled locks hanging upon his
naked shoulders. The restless degrees of the night did pass: birds, wild
beasts, and men, without any noise did take their rest: the vnfalle^ leaves
without moving did hang upon the trees, and the moist air abode in mild
peace: Only the stars did shine, when as he oftentimes went about the
grounds, and came to a place on a rivers side, which it pleased him to chose
for his Garden. There he stretched forth his arm three times toward the
stars, and turning him self unto them, he as often bathed his white locks in
the running stream, craving as many times with a most high voice their help,
and after setting his knees to the hard earth, The invocation magical of Thebane
began thus to say: Oh night, most faithful secreser of high things, and you,
oh ye stars, the which together with the Moon, do succeed the splendent day:
and thou oh singular Hecates, become an helper to this my begone enterprise, and
thou on holy Ceres, ye renuer of ye ample face of the earth: And you whatsoever
verses either arts, or herbs, and thou whatsoever earth bringing forth
virtuous pla^ts, and thou oh atre, winds, mountains, rivers and lakes, and
each God of the woods, and of the secret night, by whose help I have
heretofore made the running streams to recule, enforcing them to return to
their springs, and things running, to become firm, and things firm to become
running, and that have also given power to my verses to dry up the seas, that
I at my pleasure might search the bottom thereof, and to make the cloudie times
clear, and (at my will) to fill the clear heavens with obscure clouds, to
make the winds to cease, and to turn as it seemed me best: breaking therewith
the hard jaws of the fearful dragons, making also the standing woods to move,
and the hault mountains to tremble, and to return to their bodies out of the
lake Stix those their shadows, and alive to come forth of their sepultures:
and sometimes thee O Moon to draw to thy perfect roundnesse: the attaining
whereunto a ring of Basins was wont to be an help, making also the clear face
of the Sun many times to become pale, be ye all present, and aid me with your
help. I have at this instant need of the sap and juice of herbs, through
the which I may make in part, the dry earth fastened through Autumn, and after
through the withering cold Winter, spoiled of his Flowers, Fruits, and herbs,
to become flouring, and to spring before the due term. And having thus said,
he said after, many other things softely, which he added to his Prayers. And
those being ended, and he a while silent, the Stars gave not their light in
vain. Theban was carried in the air in a chariot led by two Dragons.
For more swifter than the flight of the wyghtest bird, there appeared before
him a Chariot drawn by two dragons, whereupon he mounted, and taking the
raines of the bridles of the two brideled Dragons in his hand, was carried into
the air. He then leaving Spain, and all Africa, took his journey by other
Regions, and first sought for the I Will of Crete, and from thence after with a
short course he sought Pelion, Othrys, and Ossa, the mount Nerium, Pachynus,
Pelorus and Appaennine. Upon them al plucking up, and with a sharp sickle
cutting down such roots and herbs as best liked him, neither forgate he those
which he had before gathered when as he was found by Tarolfo in Thessalia. He
took stones also upon the mount Causacus, and of the sands of Ganges: and out
of Libia he brought to^gs of venomous serpents. He searched the watery ba^ks of
Rodanus of Senna at Paris, of the great Po, of Arnus, of the imperial Tyber, of
Niseus, of Tana, and of Danuby: upon those eke gathering such herbs as seemed
to him most necessary for his purpose, putting these together with the others,
gathered on the tops of ye savage mountains. He also sought the Islands of
Lesbos and Pathmos, and every other, wherein he perceived any profitable thing
to be had for his attempt: With all the which things he came (the third day
being not yet past) to that place from whence he departed, and the Dragons,
that only had felt the odor of the gathered herbs, did cast of their old
hides of many years, and were with new renewed and become young. The ceremonies
used in making the garden.
There he dismounted from his chariot, and of the green earth he made two
altares: on his right hand that of Hecates: and on the left that of the running
goddess: Ceres.
that being done, and devout fires kindled thereupon, with locks disperpled upon
his old shulders, he began with a murmuring noise to go about the same, and
with reached blood oftentimes he bespre^t the blasing brands. After he placed
the same blood upon the altars, sometimes softning therwithall the ground,
appointed for his garden: and after that, he softened again ye self same three
times, with fire, water, and Sulpher, setting after a great vessel full of
blood, milk, and water, upon the burning brandes, which he caused to boil a
good space, and put thereto the herbs and roots, gathered in strange places,
mingling therewith also diverse seeds and flours of unknown herbs, he added
thereunto stones, sought in the extreme parts of the east, and dew gathered the
nights past, together with the flesh of infamous witches, the stones of a
Wolf, the hinder part of a fat Cinyphis, and the skin of a Chilinder. And
lastly a liver, with the whole lungs of an exceeding old Heart: and herewithall
a thousand other things, both without name, and so strange, as my memory can
not again tell them. After he took a dry bough of an Olive tree, and therewith
began to mingle al these things together. In doing whereof, ye dry bough began
to wax green, and within a while after to bear leaves, and not long after
the new apparelling thereof, it was lade^ with black Olives. As Thebane saw
this, he took the boiling licoures, and began therwithal to sprinkle and water
in every place the chosen soil, wherein he had set slippes of so many woods,
as he would have trees, and of as many sorts as could be found. The which
licour the earth had no sooner tasted, but that it began to spring: yelding
flowers and new herbs, and the dry settes became to become all green and
fruitful plants. All this being done, Theban entering the city, returned to
Tarolfo, whom he found all in a muse, fearing to be scorned through his long
abode, to whom he said, Tarolfo, yt thing (thou requiredst) is done to thy
liking. Tarolfe offers his lady the Garden which she demanded.
These news pleased Tarolfo not a little, and happening the day following to be a
great solemnity in the City, he went into the presence of his loved Lady, yt
had not now seen him of a long time past: and thus he said unto her: Madame,
after a long and tedious travail, I have performed that which you have
commanded, and when as it shall please you to see it, or to take it, it is
ready at your pleasure. She in seeing him, marvelled much, and the more,
hearing what he said, and not believing the same to be true, made him this
answer: It pleases me right well, ye shall let me see it to morrow. The second
day was come, and Tarolfo went again to his Lady, and said: Madame, may it
please you to walk to the Garden, the which you required to have this cold
month. The Lady goes to see the garden.
She then being accompanied with many others, was moved to see the same. And
they al being come to the Garden, entered therein by a fair portal: whereas they
felt not the like cold as abroad, but the same to have a of the Lady, thus
said unto her: Go and covertly keep thine oath, and liberally perform to
Tarolfo what thou have promised. For he has with his great toil of right
descrued the same. And having thus said, the Lady began to weep, and to say
unto him: The Gods sever me far from such a fault. In no wise will I so do: I
will rather rid my self of life, than do any thing displeasant to you, or
dishonor to your person. To who^e the knight replied, saying: Wife, for this
matter I will that ye do no injury to your self, neither yet conceive any
grief therefore, for in no wise shall it displease me, go therefore, and
perform what ye have promised: for ye shall be never a whitte the less dear
to me: But as ye have performed this your promise, so take ye better heed
hereafter of such like, although a demanded gift may seem unto you
impossible to be had. As the Lady perceived the will of her husband, she decked
and trimmed her and made her self very fair, took company with her, and so went
to Tarolfos lodging, and bepainted with bashfulnesse, presented her self unto
him. Tarolfo as soon as he saw her, The Lady presents her self to Tarolfo.
all maruelling, rose from Thebane and encountered her with great gladness, and
very honorably received her, demaundyng the cause of her coming. To whom
she answered, I am come to be wholly at your will, do with me as it pleases
you. Then said Tarolfo, ye make me to muse above measure, considering the
time and the company wherewith ye are come: This can not be without some great
alteration between you and your husband, tell me therefore I pray you, how
the matter goes. The Lady then showed Tarolfo fully in order the whole matter
and how it went: the which Tarolfo hearing, The liberality of Tarolfo
toward the Lady in releasing her of her promise.
he began then to enter into a far greater admiration than he had ever done
before, and greatly to bethink him hereof, and so in the end to conceive the
great Liberality of the Husband, that had sent his Wife unto him: whereupon
he said to himself: Whatsoever he be, that should so much as but think
villainy toward such a Knight, were surely worthy of great blame: and so
taking and talking with the Lady, he thus said unto her: Madam, like a worthy
Lady, ye have performed that to me due is: For the which cause I account that
received of your hands, that I have of you desired, and therefore when it shall
please you, you may return to your Husband, and thank him (I pray you) on my
behalf, for this his so great a pleasure done unto me, and excuse me of the
folly I have heretofore committed toward him, assuring him, that hereafter
I shall never put the like in practice. The Lady giving great thanks to
Tarolfo for that his so great courtesy, merrily departed thence and returned to
her husband, to whom she recited in order all that had been happened. But Theban,
now coming to Tarolfo demanded how the case stood. Tarolfo declared unto him
the whole discourse. To whom Theban then said: and I, shall I then lose yt which
thou haste promised me? Tarolfo answered: no, but when it pleases thee, take
thou half of all the castles and treasures I have in sort heertofore promised
thee. For I acknowledge, that thou haste fully served my turn. To whom Theban
answered: Liberality of Thebane toward Tarolfo.
It may never please the Gods, since the Knight was so liberal to thee of his
wife, and thou again wast not a villain to him in that his offer, that I
become less than courteous. For above all things in the world it contenteth me,
in that I have served thy turn: and therefore I will, that all that I ought to
receive in guerdon of my travail remain all thine, in such sort as it has
ever been heertofore: neither would he take of that was Tarolfos any thing at
all. The conclusion of the proposer.
It is now douted, in whether of these was the greatest liberality, either in
the knight that had given liberty to his wife to go to Tarolfo, either in
Tarolfo, who sent the Lady (whom he had always desired, and for whose he had
done so much, to come to that iumpe, whereunto he was commen, when as she
came unto him) back to her husband free: or in Thebane, who having abandoned
his Country (being now old) for to gain the promised rewards, and being
come thither, toyled him self to bring that to an end, which he had
promised, whereby he justly deserved the same, did now remit the whole to
Tarolfo, and remained poor as he was ar the first. The judgment of the Queen
upon the fourth question.
Very excellent is both the tale and the demand, said the Queen. Of troth
each one was very liberal, considering the first of his honor, the second of
his lascivious desire, and the third that of his rewarded riches, was very
courteous. Now if we will know which of them used the greatest liberality or
courtesy: It is meet we consider whether of the three deeds is most
acceptable, the which being well wayed, we shall manifestly know the most
liberal, because who most gives, is to be held most liberal: of the which
three, the one is dear, that is Honor, the which Paulus Aemilius vanquishyng
Perses, king of Maycedonia, rather desired than the gained treasures. The
second is to be fled, that is, the wanton delights of Venus, according to the
sentence of Sophocles, and of Xenocrates, saying: That lust is to be fled as
a furious government. The third is not to be desired, that is riches:
forsomuche as the most times they are noisome to a virtuous life, and to such
a one as can virtuously live with moderate poverty, Diverse Romans in times
past pore, and yet virtuous.
as lived Marcus Curtius, Attilius Regulus, and Valerius Publicola, as by their
works is manifest. If then of these three, only Honor is to be held dear,
and the others not, he used the greatest liberality that gave his wife to
another, although he did less than wisely therein. He was also the cheifest
in liberality, wherein the others followed him: therefore according to our
judgment he that gave his wife in whom consisted his honor, was above the
rest, the most liberal. I (said Menedon) agree, The reply of Menedon.
that in as much as ye have thus said, it be as you say: but yet each one of
the other seems to me, to be more liberal, and ye shall hear how. It is
very true, that the first granted his wife, but he used therein not so great a
liberality as ye speak of, because if he would have denied her, he might not
justly have done it, by reason of the oath she made, the which was convenient
for her to keep^: and therefore who gives that he may not deny, does but
well in making himself liberal thereof, and it was but a trifle he gave: and
therefore (as I have said) each one of the other was more courteous. And for
that (as it is already said) Tarolfo had now a long time desired this Lady,
and loved her far above all others, he for to attain her, had of long time
abode great troubles, offering himself for to satisfy her request, to seek
forth things almost impossible to be had, the which now obtained, he deserved
(through her promised faith) to obtain her also, whom (as we say) being
obtained, there is no doubt but that the honor of the Husband, and the relese
of that she had promised (the which he released) was in his hand. Then was he,
to conclude, liberal both of the honor of the husband, of the oath of his
Lady, and of his own long desire. It is a great matter to have endured long
thirst, and to come to a pleasant fountain, and not to drink, but to suffer
others to drink. The third was also very liberal, considering that poverty
is one of the most loathsome things of the world to bear, for so much as it is
the chaser away both of mirthe and rest, a flyer of honors, a frequenter of
virtue, and the inducer of crabbed care, so that every one naturally endeavor
themselves with a fiery desire to fly the same the which desire is so kindled
in many, Every one flies poverty.
to the end to live very splendantly in rest, as they give them selves no
less to dishonest gain, than to disordinate spences, peradventure not
knowing, or not otherwise being able to feed that their desire: which is
cause many times either of death or exile. How much then ought the riches to
please and to be acceptable to them that in due sort do both gain and
possess them? And who will doubt that Thebane was not most poor if he behold
how he abandoning his nyghtes rest, went gathering of herbs, and digging up of
roots in doubtful places for the better suste^tation of his pore life. And yt
this poverty did occupy his virtue, may be also believed, in hearing how
Tarolfo did deem to be by him disceiued, when he beheld him apparelled in vile
vesture, and seeing him desirous to shake of yt misery to become rich, knowing
how he came as far as from Thessalia into Spain, hasarding himself to
perilous chances through doubtful iourneys, and uncertain air, to the end
to perform the promise he had made, and to receive the like from an other
Also it may be evidently seen, that without doubt who gives him selfe-to such
and so many miseries, to the end to flee poverty, knows the same to be full
of all grief and troubles. And how much the more he has shaken off the
greatest poverty, and is entered a rich life, so much the more is the same
life acceptable unto him. Then who that is become of poor, rich, if therewith
his life does delight him, how great, and what manner of liberality does he
use, if he give the same away, and consents to return to that state, the
which he has with so many troubles fled? Assuredly he does a thing exceeding
great and liberal. And this seems far greater than the rest, Old folks
commonly couerous.
considering also of the age of the giver, that was now old: forasmuch as
avarice was wont to be continually of greter force in old men than in young,
whereupon I gather, that each one of the two following, has used a greater
liberality than has the first, so much commended by you, and the third far
more than either of the others. In how much your reason might be well by any
one defended, so well is the same defended by you (said the Queen) but we
mind to show unto you briefly how our judgment rather than yours ought to
take place. The queens solution to the fourth question.
Ye will say, that he showed no Liberality at all, granting the use of his
wife to an other, because of reason it was convenient through the oath made by
the lady, that he should so do, ye which ought to be in deed if the oath
might hold. But the wife for so much as she is a member of her husband, or
rather one body with him, could not justly make such an oath without the will
of her husband: and yet if she did make such an oath, it was nothing, because
the first oath lawfully made, could not with reason be derogate by any
following, chiefly not by those that are not duly made for a necessary cause.
And the manner is in matrimonicall vnitings the man to swear to be content with
the woman, and the woman with the man, and never to change the one the other
for an other. Now then, the woman can not swear, and if she do swear (as we
have said) she swears for a thing unlawful, and so contrary to the former
oath, it ought not to prevail, and not preuayling otherwise than for his
pleasure, he ought not to commit his wife to Tarolfo, and if he do commit her
to him, then is he liberal of his honor, and not Tarolfo, as you hold
opinion. Neither could he be liberal of his oath in releasing it, for as much
as the oath was nothing. Then only remained Tarolfo liberal of his wanton
desire: the which thing of proper duty is convenient for every man to do,
because we all through reason are bound to banishe vice, and to follow virtue.
And who that does that, whereunto he is of reason bound, is (as ye have said)
nothing at al liberal, Flee vice, and follow virtue.
but that which is done more than duty requires, may well and justly be
termed liberality. But because you peradventure with silence argue in your
mind, what honor may that be of a chaste woman to her husband, which ought to
be so dear: we will prolong somewhat our talk in showing you, to the end that
ye may the more clearly see, that Tarolfo and Thebane, of whom we intend next
to speak, used no liberality at all in respect of the knight. Ye shall know
that chastity together with the other virtues, Chastity a virtue most
excellent.
yield none other reward to the possessours thereof, than honor, the which
honor among virtuous men, makes the least virtuous, the most excellent. This
honor if men with humility seek to support it, it makes them friends to
god, and so by consequent to live, and after death, to possess the goods
eternal: The joy of a man is to have a good wife.
the which if the woman conserueth for her husband, he may live merrily, and
certain of his offspring, and frequent in open sight among the people content
to see her for such her virtues honored among the most high and chiefest
dames, and in his mind it is a manifest token that she is good, fears God,
and loves him, which is no small pleasure, seeing she is given him for an
everlasting companion indivisible, saving by death: He through this obtained
favor is seen continually to increase, both in spiritual and worldly
wealth. The grief of a man having an evil wife.
And so on the contrary, he whose wife has default of such virtues, can never
pass one hour with true consolation, nothing is acceptable unto him, and
continually the one desires the death of the other, he perceives him self
through this disordred vice to be carried in the mouths of the veriest misers,
neither seems it unto him, that such a fault should not be believed, of whom
soever it is heard: And if she were largely endowed with all other virtues,
yet this vice seems to have such a force as to bring her in contempt, and to
utter ruin. Then is this honor that makes the woman both chaste and good to
her husband, a most great gift, and so is to be held most dearly. Blessed
may he be called to who^ through grace is granted such a gift, although we
believe they are but few, toward whom is borne envy for so great a benefit.
But to return to our purpose, it is to be seen how much the knight did give.
It is not fled our memory when as ye said, that Theban was of the rest most
liberal, who being with trouble enriched, has not doubted to return into the
misery of poor estate, in giving away that which he had gotten. It
apparently appears, that ye are evil acquaynted with poverty, who if she
come unto us merry, surmounteth all richesse. Theban now peradventure through
the attained wealth, The care which riches bring.
felt him self replete of sundry sour cares. He did now imagine, that it
seemed Tarolfo to have done very evil, and therefore would practice by murdring
him, to recover again his Castles. He abode in fear to be peradventure
betrayed of his tenaunts. He was entered into care touching the government of
his lands. He now knew all the prepared guiles to be done unto his coparteners.
He saw him self greatly envied for his riches, and doubted lest thieves should
secretly spoil him thereof. He was stuffed with so many such and sundry
thoughts and cares, as all quietness was fled from him. Through the which
occasions, calling to mind his former life, and that without so many cares he
passed the same merrily, said to him self: I desired to grow rich, to the
end to attain quiet rest, but I see it is the increaser of troubles and
cogitations: so is it the flier of quietness: And therefore desirous to be in
his former estate, he rendered them all to him by whom they were given. Poverty
highly esteemed in times past.
Poverty is the refused richesse, a goodness unknown, a fire of
prouocations, the which was of Diogenes fully understood. As much suffiseth
poverty, as Nature requires. He lives safe from every disceite that
patiently approaches therewith, neither is he disabled to attain to great
honors, that (as we have said) virtuously lives therewith: and therefore as
Theban rejected this allurement he was not liberal, but wise. So gracious he
was to Tarolfo, in that it pleased him to give the same rather to him than to
an other, whereas he might have bestowed the same upon many others. Then to
conclude, the Knighte was more liberal that granted his honor, than any of
the others: And think this one thing, that the honor he gave was not to be
again recovered, the which happens not in many other things, as of
battayls, prowess, and others like: For if they are at one time lost, they are
recovered at an other, and the same is possible. Therefore this may suffice for
answer unto your demand.

The fyfth Question, proposed by CLONICO.
AFter the Queen became silent, and Menedon satisfied, a worthy young gentleman
called Clonico, that sat next to Menedon, thus began to say: Most mighty
queen, this Gentlewomans tale has been so excellent, and therwithall so long,
as I in what I may, shall briefly show unto you this my conceit, to the end
the rest may the better at their more leisure say theirs. Then for as much as
I, although very young, know the life of the subjects of our lord Love, to be
replete with many cares and sundry pining prouocations, yet with small delight I
have long time as I was able, fled the like, rather eschuing than commending
them which follow him: And although I was sundry times tempted, yet with a
valiant mind leaving the pitched snares I always resisted: But because I
being not strong enough, could no ways resist that force, whereunto Phoebu was
unable to gainstande, Cupide having taken heart to bring me into the number of
his thrals, was taken before I knew how. For one day being allured abroad
through the fresh renewed time, walking all merry, and for my delight gathering
of shel fish upon the salt sea banks, it happened as I turned mine eyes
toward the glittering waves, I suddenly saw a little Bark coming toward me,
Four young damsels to a bark upon the sea.
wherein, with one only mariner, were four young Gentlewomen, so fair, as it
was a marvelous thing to behold the beauty they seemed to have. They now
being approached somewhat near unto me, and I not having as yet turned mine
eye from them, saw in the midst of them an exceeding great light, wherein, as
my estimation gave me, me thought I saw the figure of an Angel, very young, and
so fair, as I never beheld thing more fairer: Clonico at taynted of Love.
who^ as I thus eyed, me thought he said unto me with a voice far discrepant
from ours: O young fool, persecuter of our power (and being therewith arrived) I
am come hither with four young damsels, let thy eye make choice of her for thy
maistresse, that best likes thee. I when I heard this voice, abode all
appalled, and devised both with eye and heart to avoid that which heretofore I
had many times fled: but al was bootelesse, for the strength of my legs
failed me, and byside, he had bow and wings to overtake me quickly: whereupon
I in gazing among them, espied one so fair, so benign of cheer, and so
piteous of semblaunce, as I imagined to make choice of her, as of a singular
maistresse, saying to my self: This damsel presents her self so humble to
my eyes, as assuredly she will never become enemy to my desires, as many others
have been to them, who^ I have in beholding full of troubles always scorned, but
she shall rather be a chaser away of my annoys: and having thus thought, I
forth with answered: The gracious beauty of that young damsel, that (O my lord)
sits on your right hand, makes me me desire to be both to you and her, a
most faithful servant. I am therefore ready to obey your will, do with me as
shall best like you. I had not ended my tale, but that I felt my left side
wounded with a shining shafte shot from the bow which he bare, The.ij. shafts
of love are different.
as me thought ye same was of gold. And assuredly, I saw him as he turned
toward her, to strike her with an other of lead. And thus I being in this
sort taken, abode in the snares I had of long time fled. This young damsel has
and does so much content mine eye, as all other pleasure is very scarce in
comparison of this. Which she espying, of long time showed her self content:
but after that she knew me to be so taken with this delight, as not to love her
was a thing impossible, incontinent she discovered her guile toward me, with
an undeserved disdain, showing her self in appearance a most cruel enemy,
always turning her eye the contrary way, as she happened to espy me and with
words, on my part undeserved, always dispraysing me, by occasion whereof, I
have in sundry sorts endeavored my self both with prayers and humility to
appease her cruelty: but being unable, I oftentimes beweepe and lament this my
hard fortune, Clonico an vnbeloued lover.
neither can I any ways withdraw me from loving her, but rather how much the
more I find her cruel, so much the more me thinks the flame of her
pleasure does set my sorrowful heart on fire. As I through these occasions, one
day being all solitary in a garden, bewailed my hap with infinite sighs,
accompanied with many tears, there came upon me a singular friend of mine, to
who^ part of my griefs were discovered, who with pitiful words began to
comfort me the best he could, but I giving thereunto no ear at all, answered
him, that my misery exceeded all others. Whereunto he made me this answer: A
man is so much the more miserable (said he) as he either makes or reputeth
himself a miser: but assured I have greater cause to lament than have thou. I
then at angry turned toward him with a disdainful look, saying: And how? who
can have greater cause than I? Do not I for good service receive evil
recompense? Is not my faithful love rewarded with hatred? So that any may be
as sorrowful as I, but more he can not be. A lover infected with jealousy
recites to Clonico the good entertainment of his Lady.
Truly said my friend) I have greater cause of grief than have thou, and
hear how. It is not unknown to thee, but that I have of long time, and yet us
love a Gentlewoman as thou know: neither was there ever any thing that I
thought might pleasure her, which I gave not my self with all my wit and
power to bring to effect. And truly when she understood the sum of that I
desired, she made me a gracious gift, the which as I had received, and
receiving it at what time it pleased me, me thought none by a great way to have
a life comparable to mine in gladness: only one thing pricked me, that I could
not make her believe how perfectly I loved her. Further than this, she
perceiving me to love her (as I said) passed lightly for me. But the gods that
will grant no worldly good turn without some bitterness, A godly sentence.
to the end that the heavenly may be the better known, and by consequent the
more desired, to this they gave me an other corsey without comparison noisome,
that is, that it happened one day, as I abode with her al alone, in a secret
place, seeing (without being again seen) who passed by, espied a proper young
man, and of a pleasant countenance to come along by us, whom she beheld as I
perceived, with a fixed eye, and being past, she fette a pityfull sighe, the
which I espying, said: Alas, do you so soon repent, as that ye now sighe for
the love of an other? She, whose face was through this occasion painted with a
new rudde, swearing by the power of the high gods, began with many excuses to
endeavor her self to make me believe the contrary of that which I had conceived
through the sighe, but all was to no purpose, because she kindled my heart with
an anger so exceeding fierce, as she made me then almost ready to chide with
her, but yet I withhelde me therefrom: And certainly it will never out of my
mind, but that she loves him or some other better than me: and all those
persuasions, the which at other times heretofore she used for my help, that
was, that she loved me better than she did any other, I now esteem them all in
contrary, imagining that she has fainedly said, and done all that she has
heretofore wrought, whereby I endure intolerable grief, neither does any
comfort at all prevail therein: but because shame oftentimes does bridle the
will, I have rather to sorrow me than glad me, I do not continue my bitter
grief, so as I make any apparaunce thereof: but brieflye I am never without
cares and cogitations, the which bring me far greater annoy than I willingly
would. Learn then to bear the less griefs, since thou see the gretest with
a valiant mind borne of me. To whom I answered, that as it seemed to me, his
grief although it were great, was no ways to be compared to mine. He answered me
the contrary, and thus we abode in a long contention, and in the end parted
without any diffinition. Wherefore I pray you yt you will say your judgment
hereof. The queens judgment upon the fifte question.
Young Gentleman, said the Queen, great is that pain of yours, and great
wrong does the damsel commit in not loving you. But yet at all times your
grief may by hope be eased, the which happens not to your companion,
because that since he is once entered in suspecte, nothing is able to draw it
away. Therefore continually whilst love lasts, he soroweth without comfort:
So that in our judgment greater seems the grief of the jealous, than that
of the vnloued lover. The contrary opinion of Clonico.
Then said Clonico: Oh noble queen, since you say so, it plainly appears
that you have always ben loved again, of him whom you have loved, by occasion
whereof, ye hardely know what my pain is. How may it appear that jealousy
brings greater grief than is that I feel, forsomuche as the jealous
possesses that he desires, and may in holding the same, take more delight
thereof in one hour, than in a long time after to feel any pain through want
thereof: and nevertheless he may (through experience) abandon such jealousy,
if it happen that this judgment be found false: but I being kindled with a fiery
desire, how much the more I see my self far off from the attaining the
same, so much the more I burn and consume my self assaulted of a thousand
instigations, neither is any experience able to help me therein, because through
the often reproving her, and finding her every hour more sharp, I live
desperate. Wherefore your answer seems contrary to the truth, because I
doubt not but that it is much better to hold with suspicion, than to desire
with tears. That amorous flame that does shine in our eyes, and that every
hour does adorn our sight with the greater beauty, The Queen replieth.
does never consent (replied the Queen) that we love in vain, as you affirm:
but for all that it is not unknown to us, how great and what manner of pain
that is, both of the one and the other: and therefore as our answer has been
confirmable to the truth, one thing we will show to you. It is manifest that
those things which most do hinder the quiet of the mind, are cares, the
which are some of them come to a merry end, so some we see to end with great
sorrow, whereof, how much more the mind is repleat, so much the more has it of
grief, and chiefliest, when as the same are noisome: and that ye jealous have
more store thereof tha^ have you, is manifest, because you heed nothing else
but only to get the good will of the da^sel whom ye love, the which not being
able to attain, is to you a grief most grievous: but yet it is certain, that
it may easly come to pass to attain the same at one instant, not thinking
thereof (for so much as women's hearts are inconstant) bisides peradventure she
loves you not withstanding (to prove if you also love her) she shows the
contrary, and so perhaps will show until such time as she shall be well assured
of your love, so that with these thoughts, hope can mitigate unfeigned grief:
but the jealous has his mind full fraught of infinite ears, against the which
neither hope nor other delight can bring comfort, or ease the pain. The
effects of jealousy.
For he stands intentive to give a law to the wandering eyes, the which his
possessor can not give. He will and does endeavor himself to give a law to the
feet, to the hands, and to every other act of his Mistress. He will be a
circu^spect knower both of her thoughts, and of her mirth, interpreting every
thing in evil part toward himself, believing that each one desires and
loves her whom he loves. Likewise he imagines every word that she
speaks to be twain, and full of disceit. And if he ever committed any
detraction toward her, it is death to him to remember it, imagining to be by
the like means deceived. He will with conjectures shut up the ways of the air,
and of the earth. And briefly the heavens, the earth, birds, beasts, and
every other creature that he thinks does hinder his devises. And to remove
him from this, hope has no place, because in this doing, if he find the woman
faithful, he thinks that she espyeth that which he does, and is therefore
heedefull therein. If he finds that he seeks for, and that he would not
finds, who is more dolorous than he? If peradventure ye think that the
embracing her in his arms be so great a delighte unto him as should mitigate
these pangs, your judgment is then false, because such manner of colling
brings him in choler, in thinking that others as well as he has embraced her
in the like sort: and if the woman peradventure do lovingly entertain him, he
demeth that she does it to the end to remove him from such his imaginations,
and not for the true love she bears him. If he find her maliciously
disposed, he thinks that she then loves an other, and is not content with
him. And thus we can show you an infinite number of other suspicions and cares
that are harbored in a jealous person. What shall we then say of his life, but
that it is far more grievous than that of any other living creature? The
misery of a jealous life.
He lives believing, and not believing, and still alluring the woman: and most
times it happens, that these jealous persons do end their lives through the
self same malice, whereof they live fearful, and not without cause, for that
with their reprehensions, they show the way to their own harms. The
conclusion of the Queen upon the fifth question.
Considering then the aforesaid reasons, more cause has your friend that is
jealous to sorrow, than have you, because you may hope to get, and he lives in
fear to lose that which he scarsly holds for his own. And therefore if he
have more cause of grief than you, and yet comforts him self the best he ca^,
much more ought you to comfort your self, and to set aside bewailings that are
meet for faint hearts: and hope, that the assured love which you bear
toward your Lady, shall not lose his due desert: For though she show her
self sharp toward you at this present, it can not be but that she loves
you, because that love never pardoned any loved to love: and ye shall know, that
with the fierce vehement winds, are sooner broken the stubburne Oaks, than the
consenting reeds.

The sixth Question, proposed by a young Gentlevvoman.
NExt unto Clonico sat a fair Gentlewoman apparelled in black vesture under
an honest veyle, who as she perceived the Queen to have made an end of her
words, thus began to say: Most gracious Queen I remember, that being a
little girl, how one day I with my brother, who was a propre young man and of
ripe years, abode all alone in a garden, without other company: and in tarying
there together, it happened that two young Damselles of noble blood, Two
da^sels amorous of a gentleman he not knovving thereof: and that which
happened.
abounding in riches, and borne in this our City, who loved this my Brother
very well, and perceiuyng him to be in the said Garden, came thither, and
began a far off to behold him that was altogether ignorant of their
purpose. And after a while, seeing him al alone, saving for me of whom they
reckened not, because I was but a little one, thus the one began to say to the
other. We love this young Gentleman above all others, neither do know whether
he loves us or no, yet is it meet that he love us both: so that now it is
leefull for us to satisfy our desire: and to know whether he love either of
us, or whether of us he best loves, to the end that she, whom he shall best
like of, may after remain his, without being hindered of the other: wherefore
since he is all alone, and that we have a meet time offered, let us run unto
him, and each one embrace and kiss him, that done, he shall take whether of us
best pleases him. These two young gentlewomen being thus determined upon this
resolution, began to run their race toward my said brother. Whereat he
marvelled greatly, espying them, and seeing in what sort they came: but the one
of them or ever she came at us, by a good way, stayed all bathful, and almost
weeping ripe: the other run through, and came unto him, whom she embraced and
kissed, and so sat her down by him, recommending her self unto him. And he,
after y^ admiration conceived of her boldness, was somewhat ceased, prayed
her as ever she loved him, to tell him truly what moved them thus to do? She
concealed nothing from him, the which he hearing, and examining well in his
mind yt which ye one and other had done, knew not how to persuade himself,
whether of the^ best loved him, neither yet whether of them he might best love.
And so happening at that time to depart from them, he after prayed counsel of
many of his friends touching this matter: neither has any one ever satisfied
his desire touching that demand. For the which cause (I pray you) from whom
I assuredly believe to have a true definition of this my question, that ye will
tell me whether of these two damsels ought soonest to be leued of the young
man. The answer of the Queen
To this Gentlewoman the Queen thus made answer: Truly of the two young women,
she as it seems loved your brother best, and soonest ought to be loved of
him again, that doubting) bashfully abode without embracing him, and why I thus
think, this is the reason: love (as we know) makes those alwais fearful in
whom he does abide: Love is accompanied with fear.
and where he is of greatest force, there is like wise the greatest fear: and
this happens, because the intent or consent of the person loved can not be
fully known. And if it could be known, many things should be done, that in
fearing to offend are left undone, because the one knows that in displeasing,
is taken away every occasion to be loved: And with this fear and love,
shamefastness is always accompanied, and not without reason. Returning then
to our question. We say, yt it was an act of one unfeignedly enamored, that of
the Gentlewomans, whereby she showed her self both fearful and bashful: And
that of the other, was rather ye part of one both loud and licencious. And
therefore he being of her best beloved, ought the rather (according to our
judgment) to love her best. The^ answered the gentlewoman: Most courteous
Queen, The Gentlevvoman replyeth to the Queen.
it is true, that where love abides with moderation, there fear and
bashfulnesse does altogether frequent, but where he does abound in such
quantity as he takes away the sight from the most wise (as is already said) I
say, that fear has there no place, but that the motions of him yt feels
the same, are according to him that urges them forwards, and therefore that
Gentlewoman seeing her desire before her eyes, was so hotly kindled, as all
shamfastnesse abandoned, she ran straight to him, by whom she was so
vehemently pricked forwards, as till then unable to abide. The other not so
much inflamed, observed the amerous terms, being bashful and remaining
behind, as you say. So that then she that ran, loved most, and most ought to
be loved again. Discrete gentlewoma^ (said the Queen) true it is, The Queen
to the Gentlevvoman makes answer.
yt excessive love takes away the sight, and every other due perseuera^ce in
things that are ought of his nature, but not in those that belong unto him, the
which as he increases, so grow they. Then how greater quantity of Love is
found in any one, so much the more fear (as we said at the first) is there also
found. And that this is true, the cruel heart of Biblis does manifest the
same unto us, Biblis:
who how much she loved, was seen by the sequel thereof. For she seeing her
self abandoned and refused, had not the audacitie to discover her self with
her propre words, but writing she disclosed her unfitting desire. Phedra and
Hippolito.
Likewise Phedra many times gave the attempt to go to Hippolito, to whom she
thought boldly to speak, and to tell how much she loved him: but the words
she had to utter, no sooner came into her mouth, but they stayed upon her
tongue and there died. Oh how fearful is the person that loves? Who has been
more mighty than Alcides, Alcides
to whom satisfied not the victory of humain things, but also he gave himself
to bear up the heavens, and not wythstanding was lastly so enamoured, not of a
woman, but of a young wench, a slave, which he had gained, as fearing her
commandments, did like an humble subject or servant, even the very basest
things. Also Paris in what he durst not attempt neither with eye nor tongue,
Paris.
with his finger in the presence of his love, writing first her name with wine
that had been spilt, wrote after, I love thee. How far passing all these does
Pasiphe Pasiphe
bring us a due example of fear, the which without any reasonable intendeme^t,
yea and without understanding, durst not so much as express her desire to a
beast, but with her propre hands, gathering the soft grass, endeavored her self
to make him benign unto her, oftentimes decking her self at the glass for to
plese him, and to kindle him in the like desire yt she was in, to the end he
might attempt to seek that which she durst not demand. It is not meet for a
woman enamored, Shame prescribes the honor of Ladies.
neither for any other, to be prompt and ready, forasmuch as y^ great shame
fastness only which ought to be in us, does remain as the guarder of our
honor. We have the voice among men, (and the troth is so) to know better how
to hide the amorous flame than they do, and nothing else engenders this in
us, but the great fear, the which does rather occupy our forces than those of
men. How many has there ben of them (and peradventure we have known some)
which many times have caused themselves, to have been bidden, to the end
thereby they might have atcheeued to the amorous effects, the which willingly
would rather have bidden the bidder, before he them, if due bashfulnesse and
fear had not detained them: and not only yt, but every time that No is escaped
their mouth, they have had in their minds a thousand repentings, saying from
their hearts a thousand times Yea. There remains then the like scelerate fire
on ye behalf of Semiramis, and Cleopatra, Semiramis and Cleopatra.
the which loved not, but sought to quiet the rage of their wanton wills, and
the same being quieted, they after remembered not them selves the one of the
other. Wise marchaunts unwillingly do adventure at one time all their treasures
to the hazard of Fortune, and yet notwithstanding, they care not to grant her
some small portion, the which if they happen to lose, yet do they feel no
grief of mind at all for the same. The young woman therefore that embraced your
brother, The conclusion of the Queen upon the sixth question.
loved him but a little, and that little she committed to Fortune, saying: This
gentleman if I may hereby get him, it is well: but if he refuse me, there
shall be no more but let him take an other. The other that abode all bashful,
forasmuch as she loved him above all others, she doubted to put so great love
in adventure, imagining least this peradventure should displease her, and he so
refuse her, that her grief should be then such and so much, as she should die
thereof. Let therefore the second be loved before the first.

The seventh Question, proposed by GALEONE.
A Clear Sun beam^ piercing through amongst the green leaves, did strike
upon the aforesaid Fountain, and did rebound the light thereof upon the fair
face of the adorned Queen, who was thereby apparelled with that color, whereof
the heavens makes show, when as both the children of Latona (from us hidden)
with their stars only gives us light: and besides the splendoure it brought
to her face, it did so lighten the place, as among the fresh shade it yielded a
marvelous luster to the whole company. Further what time the reflected raye
did extend even to that place where the Laurel crown on her head on the one
side, and the golden tresses on the other, did determine: It so entermingled
there among with twinings not artificial, as at the first fight one would have
said, that there had issued forth among the green leaves a clear flame of a
burning fire, which did spread in such sort, as the aburn hairs were easily
seen to the flanders about. Galeone that was peradventure sooner or better
awares of this marvelous sight than any of the rest (being set in circle over
against the Queen divided only with the water) did very intentiuely behold the
same almost as though he cared for nothing else: so yt he moved not his mouth
to the question yt was now come to his turn: To whom the Queen therefore
(having now both kept silence a good space, as eke contented the witty
gentlewoman) thus said: The only desire peradventure of the thing which thou
beholdest, stays thee: Tell what is the occasion yt holds thee thus
appalled, as in following the order of the rest thou spekest not? It is only (as
we believe) the gazing at our head, as if ye had never seen ye same before: Tell
us first, and after as the other have propounded, even so propou^d you. At this
sudden voice Galeone lift up his mind replete with sweet thoughts, somewhat
coming to him self, at what time he is wont to do, that through a sudden fear
does break his golden sleep, and thus said: Most noble and renoumed Queen,
whose worthynesse it should be impossible for me to declare, my mind was so
wrapped in gracious thoughts (when as I did so firmly look at your head) as in
beholding the bright ray, streming into the fresh fountain, and rebounding
upon your face, me thought there issued forth of the water, a little sprite so
gentle and gracious to see unto, as he plucked my mind back, to behold that
which he did, and perceiving peradventure, my eyes altogether insufficient to
behold so great a joy, he mounted by the clear ray into your eyes, and there
for a good space made marvelous mirth, adorning the same with a new
clearenesse: And after mou^ting more high, I saw how he ascended by this light
(leaving his footesteppes in your eyes) upon your crown, whereas he together
with the ray, kindled (as it seemed unto me) a new flame, such a one as was of
yore seen by Tanaquil, to apeere to Seruius Tullus a little boy whilst he
slept, and so went about your crown, leaping from sprigge to sprigge, like a
little amorous bird, that finging does visit many leaves, moving your heart
with sundry iestures, sometimes wrapping and hiding himself therein, being more
merrier every time he came forth thereof, and therewith (as it seemed unto me)
so iocunde in him self, as nothing more, and that singing, or with a sweet
voice he uttered these words:

Of the third rolling Sky, the benign babe divine
I am, enamoured so, to neast in these two eyne,
That doubtless dye I should, were I of mortal routs
From twig to twig I twine to feed this my delight.
These golden Tresses whirling in and out:
My self, inflaming my self, right
So as with flame I show, theffect, the potent might,
Of my darts divine, piercing where I go,
Each one wounding, that with sweet sight,
Does gaze her in the eyes: whereas each hour lo,
If such her pleasure be, I there descend adowne,
For of my kingdoms she, queen is of great renown.
And herewith he said much more, going about as at what time ye called me,
and ye had no sooner spoken, but that he suddenly retired into your eyes, the
which sparkling like to the morning star gave a new light that made all the
place to shine: ye have now heard with what joy new thoughts have stayed me for
a time. Philocopo and the rest marvelled not a little hereat, and turning their
eyes toward their Queen, saw that, which to hear seemed to them impossible.
And she that was attyred with humility, listued to the words that were truly
reported of her, and abode with a stable countenance, making no answer at
all. And therefore Galeone speaking in this wise, followed with his question:
Most gracious Queen, I desire to know whether a man ought to be enamoured for
his delyght or no? And to demand this, many things move me, both seen,
heard, and held, through the sundry opinions of many. The Queen beheld
Galeone a good while in the face, and afterward, after a certain sigh, thus
made answer. It is convenient we speak against that which with desire we
seek to follow. And truly that which you in asking, do propounde in doubt,
ought to be manifest unto you. In answering you therefore there shall be kept the
begone order. And he whose subjects we are, pardon us the words, that we, as
co^st rained through force of Judgment, shall (more sooner than willing) say
against his divine majesty, least thereby his indignation do fall upon us. And
you that likewise as well as we are his subject, with a bold mind give ear
unto them, neither do you for all that change your purpose at all. And to the
end that so much the better, and with a more apparent intendment our words may
be received, we will somewhat digress from our matter, returning again
thereunto as briefly as possible we may, and thus we say: Love is of three
sorts, through which three al other things are loved, some through the virtue of
one, and some throw the power of an other, according as is the thing loved, and
likewise the lover: The first of the which.iij. is called honest love: This is
the good, upright, and loyal love, the which of all persons ought to be
received: This, the high and first creator holds, linked to his creatures,
and them h^tieth therewith unto him. Through this, the heavens, the world,
realms, provinces, and cities do remain in their state: through this we do
merit to be eternal possessors of the celestial kingdom: and without this
is lost all that we have in power of well doing. The second is called love for
delight: And this is he, whose subjects we are: This is our god, him we do
worship, him we do pray unto, in him do we trust, that he may be our
contentation, and that he may fully bring our desire to pass: Of this is put
the question, whereunto we shall duly answer. The third is love for utility,
of this love the world is replenished more than of any of the other things.
This is coupled with Fortune, whilst she tarieth, he likewise abides: but if
they part, he is then the waster of many goods. And to speak reasonably, he
ought to be deemed rather hate than love. Now as touching the propounded
question, we need to speak neither of the first, nor of the last: we will
speak of the second, that is, of love for delight, to whom truly, no person
that desires to lead a virtuous life, ought to submit him self, because he
is the depriuer of honors, the bringer of troubles, the reueler of vices, the
copious giver of vain cares, and the unworthy occupier of the liberty of
others, a thing above al things to be held most dear. What is he then
regarding his own wealth (being wise) that will not flee such a government?
Let him that may, live free, following those things that do every way increase
his liberty, and let vicious governors govern vicious vassals. I did not
think, said Galeone then, to give occasion through these my words to the
lessening of this our disport, nor to disquiet the regiment of our lord love,
neither yet to trouble the minds of any others, but did rather imagine (you
defining it according to the intent of me and many others) that ye might
thereby confirm those that are his subjects with a valiant mind, and inuit
those which are not, with a greedy appetite: but I see that your intent is all
contrary to mine, because you with your words do show to be three sorts of
love, of the which three, the first and the last I consent they be as you say.
But the second, which answers to my demand, ye say it is as much to be
fled, as I hold opinion, it is (as the increaser of virtue) to be followed of
him that desires a glorious end, as I believe to make apparent unto you by this
that follows. This Love, of whom we reason (as it may be manifest to all the
world, because we prove it) does work this property in humayne hearts, that
after that it has disposed the mind to a thing which pleases, it spoyleth the
same of all pride and of al fierceness, making them humble in each doing, as
it is manifest unto us by Mars, whom we find, that in loving Venus, became of
a fierce and sharp Duke in battle, a most humble and pleasant Lover. It
makes the greedy and covetous, liberal and courteous. Medea the most careful
hider of her art, after she felt his flames, liberally yielded her self, her
honor, and her arts to Jason. Who makes men more diligent to high attempts
than he? And what he can do, behold by Paris and Menelaus. Who furthereth
forward the angry fires more than does he? He shows us how oftentimes the
anger of Achilles was quieted through the sweet prayer of Polixena.

He above all others makes men courageous and strong. Neither know I what
greater example may be given us, than that of Perseus, who for Andromaca made a
marvelous proof of his virtuous force. He decketh all them that are by him
aparelled, with excellent qualities, with ornate talk, with magnificence, and
with pleasantness. He I say bestows upon al his subjects finenesse and
gentleness. Oh how many are the good things which proceed from him? Who
moved Virgill? who Ovid? who the other Poets to leave of them selves eternal
fame in those their holy verses, the which (if he had not ben) should never have
comen to our ears, but he? What shall we say further of his virtues? but that
he was able to give such a sweetness to Orpheus harp, as after that he had
called to that sound all the woods, standers about, and made the running
streams to stay, and to come into his presence in mild peace the fierce Lions
togithers, with the faint hearted Hearts, and all other beasts: he made
likewise the infernal furies quiet, and gave rest, and sweetness to the
troubled souls, and after all this the sound was of such virtue, as he
attained to have again his lost wise. Then is he not the chaser away of honor
as you say, neither the giver of unsitting troubles, nor the prouoker of vices,
nor the disposer of vayn cares, nor the unworthy vser of the liberty of
others. So that every one of whom he makes none account, and is not as yet his
servant, ought with all their wit and diligence, to endeavor and to occupy
them selves in the attayning the favor of such a Lord, and to become his
subject, since throw him he becomes virtuous. That which pleases the Gods,
and men of greatest strength, ought likewise to please us. Let such a Lord
therefore be loved, served, and live always in our minds. Greatly deceyueth
thee thine opinion, said the queen, and it is no marvel, because as far as
we understand, thou art so far enamoured, as none the like, and without
doubt the judgment of the enamoured is merely false, because as they have
lost the sight of the eyes of their mind, so have they banished reason as
their utter enemy. And for this cause it shall be convenient, that we against
our will speak of love, the which greeueth us, since we be his subjects. But
yet to pluck thee from thine error, we shall turn our silence to a true
report, and will therefore that thou know, that this love is nothing else, than
an unreasonable will sprung of a passion entered the heart through a wanton
pleasure, that is opened to the eyes, nourished with idleness, by the memory
and thoughts of foolish minds: and many times in how much it multiplieth, so
much it takes away the intent of him in whom it abides, from things
necessary, and disposes the same to things unprofitable. But because that
thou through example giving do endeavor thy self to show, that all goodness
and all virtue does proceed from him, we will proceed to the disprofes of thy
prooufes. It is no part of humility unjustly to bring to a man's self, that
which belongs to an other, but rather an arrogancy and an unsitting
presumption: The which thing Mars (whom thou make through love to become
humble) assuredly used in taking away from Vulcan, Venus his most lawful
wife. And without doubt this humility that appears in the face of lovers
does not proceed of a benign heart, but takes root from guile and deceit,
neither makes this love the covetous liberal, but when as such abundance as
thou laiest to have been in Medea, does abound in the heart, and does deprive
the same of the sight of the mind, and most foolishly is become prodigal of
things heretofore duly esteemed dear, and not giving the same with measure, but
unprofitably casting them away, believes to please, and displeases. Medea
nothing wise of her prodigality, in short time repented very much without
utility, and knew that if she had modestly used those her dear gifts, she
should not have comen to so vile an end. And that soliciting that purchases
or works hurt to the soliciters, as it seems to us, ought not any ways to
be sought for: for must better it is to stand idle, than work harm, although
that neither the one nor the other is to be praised. Paris was a solicitour to
his own destruction, if he beheld the end of his soliciting. Menelaus as reason
was, became diligent, not for love, but to recover his honor lost, as each
discrete person ought to do. Neither yet is this love a mean to mitigate
anger, but the benignity of mind, the brunt being paste that induces it,
makes it to become nothing, and remitteth the offense against whom it is angry.
And yet lovers and discrete persons were wont at the prayers of the person
loved, or of some friend to forgive offenses, to show them selves courteous of
that which cost the^ nothing, and to make the crauers thereof beholding unto
them. And in this sort Achilles, many times showed himself to expel from him
this congeled anger. Likewise it seems that this makes men courageous and
worthy: But thereof I can show you the contrary. Who was a man of greater valor
than Hercules, and yet being enamoured, became vile and forgetful of his
force, so that he did spin threede with the women of Iole? Assuredly in things,
wherein occurreth no danger, a most hardy people are the enamoured, and wherein
danger happens, they show themselves in apparaunce hardy, and put themselves
forward, neither does love, but little wit allure them so to do, to the end
they may after have glory in the sight of their loves, although it happens very
seldom, because they doubt so much the losing of the person loved, that they
are rather content to be held vile and of little courage, than to give
themselves to peril. And yet we doubt not, but this love reposeth all
sweetness in Orpheus harp. We agree that it is true that thou have showed,
that truly in general love ladeth the tongs of his subjects with such a
sweetness, and with so many enticements, as they many times would thereby make
the stones turn up side down, so that to entice is not only the property of
wavering and inconstant men, but of vile men. How shall we say, that such a
lord ought to be followed, through the good property of the follower?
Assuredly he (in whom he abides) makes wise and profitable counsels to be
despised. For it was evil with the Trojans that those of Cassandra, were not
heard of Paris. He makes likewise his subjects to forget and despise their
good fame, the which ought to remain to us all on earth after our deaths, as
an eternal heir of our memory. And how much these aforesaid did contemn,
the same Egistus may suffice for an example: Although Scylla wrought no less
hurt than Pasiphe. Is not he the occasion that breaks sacred bonds of the
promised pure faith? Yet truly what had Ariadna done to duke Theseus, whereby
contaminating the matrimonical bands, and giving himself, and his promised
faith to the winds, he should abandon her poor miser among the desert rocks?
A little pleasure in gasing in the eyes of Phedra, was occasion to celerate so
much evil, and of such requital for the received honor. In him also is found
no law: and that it is true, may be seen by the doings of Tereus, who having
received Philomena, from her pitiful father, and carnally known her, made no
stay to contaminate the most holy laws matrimonially contracted between him
and Progne, the sister of Philomena This also calling and causing himself to
be called a God, occupies the reasons of the gods. Who could ever fully with
words show the iniquity of him? He to speak briefly, leads them that follow
him to all euilles: and if by hap his followers do any virtuous act (which
happens very seldom) with a vicious beginning they begin it, desiring
thereby to come very quickly to the desired end of their loathsome wills, the
which may be rather said vices, than virtues, forsomuche as that is not to be
heeded only which man does, but with what mind it is done, and so
according to the will of the worker, to repute the same vicious or virtuous,
because that never of an evil root sprang a good tree, nor from an evil tree
good fruit. This love then is leude and naught: and if he be naught, he is to
be fled. And who that flees things evil, of consequent follows the good,
and so is both good and virtuous. The beginning of this love is none other
thing, than fear, the sequels is sin, and the end is grief and noy, it
ought then to be fled, and to be reproved, and to fear you to have him in you,
because he is violent, neither knows he in any of his doings to keep measure,
and is altogether void of reason. He is without all doubt the destroyer of the
minds, the shame, anguishe, passion, grief, and plaint of the same, never
consents that the heart of whom that lodges him be without bitterness,
who will than praise that he is to be followed, but fools. Truly if it were
lawful we would willingly live without him, but of such an harm we are to
late awares, and therefore it is convenient for us, since we are caught in his
nets to follow his life until what time as that light which guided Aeneas out
of the dark ways, fleeing the perilous fires, may appear to us, and guide us
to his pleasures.

The eight Question, proposed by a fair Gentlevvoman named POLA.
ON the right hand of Galeone, was set a fair gentlewoman, whose name was
Pola, pleasant, and yet under an honest couerture, who after the Queen blent,
thus began to say: O noble Queen, ye have domed at this present, that no
person ought to follow this our lord Love, and I for my part consent thereunto:
but yet since it seems to me impossible, that the youthful race both of men
and women should be run over without this benign Love: I gather, at this
present, setting apart (by your leave) your sentence, that to be enamoured is
lefull, taking the evil doing for due working: And in following the same, Of
what degrees one should chose his lover.
I desire to know of you, whether of these two women ought rather to be loved
of a young man, both two pleasing him alike, either she that is of noble blood,
and of able kinsfolk, and copious of having much more than the young man, or
the other that is nether noble nor rich, nor of kinsfolks so abounding as is
the young man? To whom the Queen thus made answer: Fair Gentlewoman, The
Queen's answer.
admitting the case that both man and woman ought to follow Love as you have
before affirmed, we give judgment, that in how much the woman is richer,
greater, and more noble than the young man, of whatsoever degree or dignity he
be of, even so she ought to be rather preferred to the love of a young man, than
ought she that has any thing less tha^ he: because man's mind was created to
follow high things. And therefore he must seek rather to advance, than any ways
to imbace himself. Further there is a common Proverb, which says: The good to
covet better it is,
Than to possess that bad is.
Wherefore in our judgment, thou art better to love the most noble, and with
good reason to refuse the less noble. The^ said pleasant Pola: noble Queen, The
contrary opinion of Pola with her reasons.
I would have given an other judgment (if it had been to me) of this Question,
as ye shall hear. We all naturally do rather desire short and brief, than
long and tedyous troubles, and that it is a less and more brief trouble to
get the love of the less noble, tha^ of the more noble, is manifest. Then the
less ought to be followed: for as much as the love of the less may be said
to be already won, the which of the more is yet to get. Further, many perils may
follow to a man loving a woman of a greater condition, than him self is of,
nether has he lastly thereby any greater delight, than of the lesser. For we
see a great woman to have many kinsfolks, and a great family, and them all as
diligent heeders of her honor, to have an eye unto her, so that if any one of
them happen to epsy this love, thereof may follow (as we have already said)
great peril to the lover, the which of the less noble ca^ not so lightly com
to pass: and these perils each one (as he is able) ought to flee, for as much
as who y^ receives harm is sure thereof, and who that has done it, laugheth
him after to scorn, saying he speedeth well, where he likes, there let him
love: yet dies he more than once. But how that once happens, where, and for
what occasion, besides each one ought to take good heed: it is very credible
that a Gentlewoman will lightly esteem of him, for that she will desire to
love one more Noble or greater than her self, and not one inferioure to her
self: whereby soldome or never, he shall attain his desire. But of the lesser
shall happen the contrary, because that she will glory to be loved of such a
Lover, and will endeavor her self to please him, to the end to nourishe Love,
and yet if this were not, the power of the Lover only might be able without
fear to bring to pass to fulfill his desire. Wherefore I gather, that the
less Noble ought to be preferred in love before the more noble. Your
judgment deceives you (said the Queen) to the fair Gentlewoman, The Que^^^
solution upon the eight question.
because Love is of this nature, that how much the more one Loves, so much
the more he desires to love: And this may be seen by them, that through love
feel ye greater grief, the which although it trouble the^ not a little, yet
love they continually the more: Neither does any one from his heart, although
he make great appearance in words, desire thereof a speedy end. Then as small
troubles are sought for of the slothful, of the wise, things that are
attained with most trouble, are held most dear and delightful. And therefore
in loving the less woman, to get her, should be (as you say) little trouble,
and the love both little and short, and should be followed as though one in
loving, would desire to love less and less, which is contrary to the nature
of Love, as we have said. But in loving the greater, that is gotten with
trouble, happens the contrary: because, that as in a thing dearly gotten,
with travail, is reposed all diligence to the well heeding of the gained Love,
even so is she every hour the more loved, and the longer does continue the
delight and pleasure thereof. And yet if ye will say that all the doubt is of
their kinsmen, we will not deny it, for this is one of the occasions.
Wherefore, it is a trouble to have the love of one of these great women: but
not withstanding the discrete in such cases proceed by a secret way. And we
dout not but that the honor both of the greatest and meanest woman is by some
of their kinsfolks according to their power looked unto, in such sort, as a
fool may come to an evil adventure, loving as well in a base, as in a noble
stock. But what shall he be that will pass Pisistrato in cruelty, having
offended them which loved his The cruelty of Pisistratus.
without forethinking yt which he should afterward have done to those that
had had the same in heart? In saying also, that loving a greater woman than
himself, he shall never be able to come to the end of his desire, because the
woman coueteth to love one greater than her self, and therefore will make of
him no estimation at all: ye show your self to be ignorant that the meanest man
(in what belongs to natural virtues) is of greater and better condition, The
meanest man of better condition than the noblest woman.
tha^ the noblest woman of the world. Whatsoever man she then desires, she
desires him that is of greater and better condition than her self, because
the virtuous or vicious life makes many times ye mean great, and the great
mean. In as much therefore as any woman shall be solicited by any man in due
sort, even so without doubt she shall yield to his desire, though the great with
more trouble tha^ the mean. For we see the soft water with a continual fall
to break and pierce the hard stone: and therefore let none despair to love.
The Queen concludes that we should rather love the more noble woman than
the less noble.
For so much goodness shall follow him that loves a greater woman than
himself, as he shall endeavor him self to please her, to have decent
qualities, the company of noble personages, to be ornate of sweet talk, bold
in enterprises, and splendant in apparel, and if he shall attain to greater
glory, the greater delight shall he have of mind, likewise he shall be exalted
with the good report of the people, and reputed of a noble mind. Let him
therefore follow the most noble, as we have already said.

The ninthe Question, proposed by FERAMONTE. Duke of Montorio.
Next unto pleasante Pola, sat Feramonte Duke of Montorio, who after the
Queen had said, thus began: I consent that it be conuenyent to love, that ye
have already fully answered this Gentlewoman to her Question. And that a man
ought to love rather a more noble woman than a less noble than himself, may
very well be yielded unto, through the sundry resons by you showed touching the
same. Whether is to be chosen in loving, either the wife, the widow, or the
maid.
But forasmuch as there are sundry Gentlewomen of sundry sorts attired with
diversities of habites, that (as it is thought) do diversely love, some more,
some less, some more hotly, and some others more luke warm. I desire to
understand of you, whether of these three, a young man to bring his desire to a
most happy end, ought soonest to be enamoured of, either of her yt is married,
or of the maid, or of the widow? To whom the Queen made this answers: Of
the three, The Queen's answer.
the one, that is the married woman, ought in no wise to be desired, because she
is not her own, neither has liberty to give her self to any: and therefore
either to desire her, or to take her, is both to commit an offense against the
divine laws, as also against the laws natural and positive, the offending
whereof, is to heap upon our selves, the divine anger, and by consequent, heavy
judgment. Howbeit, who that gropeth not his conscience so far inwardly,
does oftentimes speed better in loving her, than of any of the other two,
either maid or widow, in as much as he (although such love sometimes be with
great peril) is to have the effect of his desire. And why this love may diverse
times bring the lover to his desire, sooner tha^ the love of the others, this
is the reason: It is manifest, that in how much more the fire is blown, so much
the more it flameth, and without blowing, it becomes dead. And as all other
things through much use do decay, so contrariwise lust ye more it is used, the
more it increseth. The widow in that she has been a long time without the
like effect, does feel the same almost as though it had never been, and so is
rather kindled with the memory thereof, than with any concupiscence at all.
The maid that yet has no skill thereof, neither knows the same but by
imagination, desires as it were one luke warm: and therefore the married woman
kindled in such passions, does more than any of the others desire such
effects. What time the married are wont to receive from their husbands
outragyous words or deeds, whereof willingly they would take revenge if they
might, there is no way left more readier unto them, than in despite of their
husbands to give their love to him, by whom they are allured to receive the
like. And although it be expedient that such manner of revenge be very
secret, yt no shame grow thereby, nethelesse are they yet content in their
minds. Further the always using of one kind of meat is tedious: and we have
oftentimes seen the delycate meats left for the gross, turning afterward
unto the same again, what time the appetite has been satisfied of the others.
But because (as we have said) it is not lawful through any unjust occasion to
desire yt which is an other man's, we will leave the married to their husbands,
and take of the others, whereof a copious number our City does set before
our eyes. The widow is to be loved before the maid.
And we would in bestowing our love, rather seek the widows than the rude
maids, gross for such a mystery, and that are not without great trouble
(the which in widows needs not) made able to a man's desire. Further if
mayds love, they know not what they desire, and therefore they do not follow
with an intentive mind, the steps of the lover as do the widows, in whom
now the antique fire takes force, and makes them to desire that which
through long abuse they had forgotten: so that to come to such effect, they
(to late) beweepe the lost times, and the solitary long nights, the which
they have passed in their widowish beds. These are therefore (as it seems
unto us) rather to be loved of them in whom is the liberty to submit them
selves to others, than any of the rest. Then answered Faramonte: The contrary
opinion of Feramonte.
Most excellent Queen, what ye have said of the married, I had determined
in my mind that so it ought to be: and now hearing the same from you, I am
the rather assured thereof. But touching the Maids and Widows, I am of the
contrary opinion, because (setting the married aparte, for the reasons by you
alleged) it seems unto me very good, that the Maid rather than the Widow,
ought to be desired: For as much as the love of the Maid seems more firm
and assured than that of the Widow. For the Widow without doubt has
already loved one other time before, and has seen and felt many things of
love, and knows what shame may follow thereof: and therefore knowing these
things better than the Maid, loves fair and softely: and doubting and not
loving firmly, desires now this and now that, and knows not to whether for
her most delight and greatest honor to link her self, for sometimes she will
neither the one, nor the other: so that deliberation does waver in her mind,
neither is the amorous passion able to take there stabilitie: but to the maid
these things are altogether unknown. The constancy of maids in love.
And therefore as she persuadeth her self with good aduisement, that of many
young men she greatly pleases one, so without further examination she makes
choice of him as of her lover, and to him only disposes her love, not knowing
how for her pleasure to show any contrary act, neither is there for the more
sure tying of the Lover, any new deliberation by her sought for the, touching
her love, so that she is then pure at the will and pleasure of him that simply
pleases her, and quickly disposes her wounded heart, him only to serve as
Lord. The which thing (as I have already said) happens not of the widow,
and therefore is the other, the rather to be followed. Further, with more
efficacy the maid taryeth those things that never any one of her sort has
seen, heard or proved. And yet she desires more to see, hear and prove them
than who that ha the many times both seen, heard and proved them, and this is
manifest. Among the other occasions for the which our life does greatly
delight us, and is desired to be long, is for to see new things, such as we
have yet never seen before. And also for to see things most new we have a
great delight to run with a dilygent pace to that, which we above all other
things do endeavor our selves to flee, that is Death, the last end of our
bodies. The maid knows not that delyghtfull conjunction, through the which
we come into the world, and yet is it natural to every creature through a
desire to be drawn thereunto. Further, she many times has heard from them,
that know what manner a thing it is, how much sweetness does consist
therein, the which with words have given fire to the desire, and therefore
drawn of nature, and of a desire to prove the thing, of her not as yet proved,
does through the words which she has heard, desire boldly with a kindled
heart this concourse. And with whom is it presumed to be had but only with
him, whom she has already made Lord of her mind? This heat shall not be in
the widow, because having once proved and felt what manner a thing it was,
she is thereby provoked thereunto: So that the Maid then shall love more, and
be more diligent (through the reasons aforesaid) to the pleasure of her Lover,
than the widow. To what end shall we then wade any further in seeking that
the Maid ought not rather to be loved than the Widow? You, said the Queen
reason well, The Queens solution upon the nynthe question.
and very well you defend your judgment: But yet we will show you with
apparent reason, how you likewise ought to hold the same opinion, that we
hold of this contention, if with a straight eye ye look to the nature of
Love. Thus in the Maid as in the Widow, and so in the Widow as in the Maid
we see him to be firm, strong, and constant, and that this is true, Dido and
Adriana with their doings have left us an example. And where as this Love is
neither in the one nor the other, none of the aforesaid operations will
thereof follow. Then is it convenient that each one of them do love, if we
will have that to follow, whereof both you and I have already talked. And
therefore in loving either maid or widow, without going about to seek whether
of them is most discretely enamored (as we are certain of the widow) we shall
show you how the widow is more diligent to the pleasure of the lover, than is
the maid. Maids ought not to love, but in respect of marriage.
For doubtless among those things, that a woman esteems dear above the
rest, is her virginity: and this is the reason, because therein consists all
the honor of her following life. And without doubt she shall never be so
much urged forwards to love, as she shall not willingly be courteous thereof,
but yet to him only, to whom she believes to be coupled as wife through the
matrimonial Law. And therefore we go not about seking for this: for there is
no doubt but that who will love to marry, ought rather to love the maid than
the widow, because she shall be slow and negligent in giving her self to him
that loves her not (if she know it) to that effect. Further, maids are
generally fearful, neither are they subtle enoughe to find the ways and
means, whereby they may take the stolen delights: But the widow of these
things makes no doubt at all, because that she already has honorably given
that which the other taryeth to give, and being without the same, doubts not
in giving her self to an other, that token which may accuse: Whereby
afterward, she becomes the more aduenturous, because (as is said) the
cheifest occasion that brings doubt, is not in her: besides she knows
better the secret ways, and so puts them in effect. In that which you say,
that ye maid as desirous of a thing which she never proved, may be made more
diligent to this tha^ the widow, that knows what manner a thing it is, thereof
the contrary. Maids do not at the first time for their delight, run to such
effect (although the thing ye delights, the oftener it is seen, heard, or
felt, the more it pleases, and the more careful is every one to follow the
same (because it is then more noisome tha^ pleasant unto the^. This thing whereof
we reason, does not follow the order of many other things, that once or twice
being seen, are afterward no more desired, but rather the oftener it is put
in effect, with so much the more affection it coueteth to return, and more
desires he the thing whom it pleases, than does he whom it ought to please,
and has not as yet tasted thereof. Wherefore the widow, forasmuch as she
gives least, and is best able to give, she shall be the most liberal, and the
more sooner than the maid, that must give the dearest thing she has. Also the
widow shall be sooner drawn (as we have showed) than the maid to such
effects. For the which occasion, let the widow be rather loved than the maid.
()

The tenth Question, proposed by ASCALIONE.
IT was convenient that that Ascalione, who in circle sat next unto the duke
Feramonte, should now propound: and therefore thus he said: Most excellent
queen, I remember that there was heretofore in this our city a fair and
noble gentlewoman left the widow of a worthy husband, the which for that
her marvelous beauty, was of many a noble young Gentleman beloved. And of
those many, there were two gentlemen coragious knights, each one in what he
could did endeavor him self to attain her love. And whilst this continued, by
chance it happened, that an unjust accusation was brought against her, by
certain of her kinsfolks, before the Magistrate, and after by false evidence
proved, through which untrue process she was condemned to the fire. But
because the conscience of the Judge was perplexed, for that it seemed him, as
it were to know the unjust proof, he was willing to commit her life to the
Gods, and to Fortunes hap, and so tied such a condition to his given
sentence, as after the Gentlewoman should be led to the fire, if any knight
could be found the which would combat in the defense of her honor, against
him that would maintain the contrary, and should hap to overcome, she
should then be free, and if the contrary, to be burned according to the domed
sentence. As the condition was understood of her two lovers, Two knights
amorous of one gentle woman, did in sundry wise shevve their love.
and by chance sooner known to the one than to the other: He which knew the
same soonest, forthwith took him to his armor, mounted on horseback, and
came into the field, gainsaying him that would come and maintain the death of
the Gentlewoman. The other that somewhat later than the first understood of this
sentence, and hearing how that the knight was already in field in her defense,
neither that there was then place for any other to go thither in that
enterprise, and therefore not knowing herein what to do, became very sorrowful,
imagining that through his stackenesse he had lost the love of the loved
Gentlewoman, and that the other justly had deserved the same: and whilst he
thus sorowed his missehap, he bethought him, that if he before any other
should go armed into the field, saying that the Gentlewoman ought to dye, and
so suffer him self to be overcome, he might thereby cause her to escape, and
so according to his device, he put the same in effect. The gentlewoman hereby
escaped, and was delivered from peril. So that then after certain days, the
first knight went unto her, and recommended him self unto her, putting her in
remembrance how that he, to preserve her from death, had a few days paste
offered him self to the peril of death, and thanks be to the Gods, and to his
forces, he had delivered both her and him self from so hard an hap:
Whereupon it would please her, according to his desert to give her love, the
which above all things he had always desired. Afterward with the like prayers
came the second knight, saying that for your sake I have hazarded my life, and
because you should not dye, suffered my self to be overcome, whereupon I have
purchased to my self eternal infamy: whereas I contrariwise with incountring
your surety, and willing to use my force, might have been able to have gotten
the honor of the victory. The Gentlewoman thanked each one of them very
benignely, promising them both due recompense for the received service. And
now they being departed, she abode in great doubt to whether of them she should
the rather give her love, to ye first, or to the second, and thereof prays
counsel of you, on whether of them ye would say, that she ought soonest to
bestow the same. The queens judgment upon the contrary doings of the two
knights.
We deem (said the Queen) that the first is to be loved, and the last to be
left: because the first used force, and showed his assured love in diligent
sort, giving him self to every peril, that might happen through the future
battle, even unto the death, whereby it might very well have followed,
forasmuch as if such a battle to be done against him, had been as lefull to
any of the enemies of the Gentlewoman, as it was to the lover, he had been in
peril of death for his defense: neither was it manifest to him, that one
should come against him, that would suffer him self to be ouercomen, as it
happened. The last truly went well advised not to dye, neither to suffer the
Gentlewoman to dye. Then, forasmuch as he put least in adventure, he meriteth
to gayn the less. Let the first then have the love of the fair gentlewoman,
as the just deseruer thereof. Ascalion contrarieth the queen.
Ascaleone said: Omost prudent Queen, what is that you say? Does not not one
time suffize to be rewarded for well doing, without craving further desert?
Truly yes. The first is well requited, with being of every one honored for the
received victory: and what greater reward needs he than honor the reward
of virtue? the received honor did suffice for a greater matter than he did.
And he that with all his wit came well advised, ought he to be unrecompensed?
and further, he to be of every one evil spoken of, having nothing less than
the first helped the Gentlewoman to escape? Is not the wit to to foresee
every bodyly force? How so? If this man with all his wit came for the safety
of the Gentlewoman, ought he for his desert to be rejected? God forbid it
should so be. If he knew not the same so soon as the other, this was not
through negligence: for if perhaps he had known it before the other, he would
have run to that, which he took discretely for the last remedy: whereof
reward justly ought to follow, the which reward ought to be the love of the
Gentlewoman, if rightly she see unto him: and yet you say the contrary. The
queens solution of the tenth question.
God defend from your mind (answered the Queen) that vice come to a good
end, merit the same reward that virtue done to the like end meriteth: But
rather in as much as vice deserves correction, so no worldly deserte can
justly satisfy virtue. Who shall deny us to believe (although we can not
manifest the same with apparent reason) but that the last knight as envious of
the good turn he saw prepared for the other, was moved to such an enterprise,
to the end to disturb the same, and not for the love he bare to the
Gentlewoman, and yet his device failed him. He is a fool, that under the
color of an enemy, does endeavor himself (to the end to receive recompense)
to help an other. Infinite are the ways whereby it is possible enough for us to
show at the first with open friendship, the love that one of us bears toward
the other, without showing our selves as enemies, and after with colored words
to make show to have profited. That which we have said may now suffice you for
answer, whom old age more than any thing else, ought to make discrete. And we
believe, that when your mind shall have duly digested these things, ye shall
not find our judgment guilefull, but true, and to be followed. And so she held
her peace.

The eleventh Question, proposed by a Gentlevvoman, named GARCE.
THere followed after him a gentlewoman of cheer very mild, whose name was
Grace, and assuredly the name was consonant to her nature, who with an humble
and modest voice began these words: It is come to my turn, O most virtuous
queen, to propound this my question, the which to the end the time (that now
approaches to our last festing, may be swetened with the new beginning thereof)
be only spent in talk, I shall briefly propound that which willingly (if it
were lefull for me) I would pass over, but yet not to pretermit the limits of
your obedience, neither the order of the rest, Whether is greter pleasure to a
lover to see the present, or to think on the absent.
I shall propound this: Whether is it great delight to the lover to see his love
present, or not seeing her, to think amorously on her? My gracious Grace, said
the queen, we believe that much more delight is taken in thinking than in
beholding: because in thinking on the thing loved, all the sensitive spirits
do then graciously feel a marvelous joy, and as it were, do content their
inflamed desires, with the delight only of the thought. But this happens not
in the beholding, because that only the visible spirit feels joy, and the
others ar kindled with such a desire that they are not able to endure, and so
remain vanquished: and that visible spirit sometime takes so great pleasure,
The judgment of the queen.
that of force he is constrained to withdraw himself back, remaining vile and
altogether vanquished. Then do we gather hereof, that greater delighte is to
think than to behold. That thing which is loved, answered the Gentlewoman,
how much the more it is seen, so much the more it delights: and therefore I
believe, that greater delight brings the beholding, than does the thinking,
because every beauty at the first, pleases through the sight thereof: and so
after through the continual sight, such pleasure is confirmed in the mind, as
thereof is engendered love, and those pleasures that spring from him. No beauty
is so much loved, neither for any other occasion than to please the eyes, and
to content the same. Then in seeing they are contented, and in thinking to see,
the desire increases: so that more delight feels he that is contented, than
does he that desires to content himself. Laodomia and Prothesilaus.
We may see and know by Laodomia how much more the present sight than the
absent thought does delight, because we are to think that her Prothesilaus
never departed from her thought, neither yet was she ever seen disposed to
other than to melancholy, refusing to deck and apparel her self with her
costly garments: The which thing in seeing him never happened: For what time
she abode in his presence, she was merry, gracious, and always joyful, and
trimly attired. What more manifest testimony will we have than this, that the
gladness is not greater of the sight than of the thought? Because that through
the exterior doings, that may be comprehended, which in the heart is hidden?
The queens solution of the xj. question, defining that the thought is to be
preferred before the look.
The Queen then, thus made answer: Those things, both delightful and
noisome, that approach most near to the mind, bring more annoye, and more
joy, than do those far off from the same. And who doubts, but that the
thought abides in the mind, and that the mind is not from the eye? although
through the particular virtue of the mind they have their fight, and that it
is convenient for them by sundry means to render their proportio^s to the
animate understanding. Having then in the mind a sweet thought of the loved,
in that act which the thought brings, in that together with the thing loved,
it seems the lover to be. Then he sees the same with those eyes, to whom
nothing, no not of a long distance may be hidden. Then he speaks with her
who^ he loves, and peradventure with piteous style tells the annoys
sustained for her sake. Then it is lauful for him without fear to embrace her.
Then does he according to his desire maruelously glad himself with her. Then
does he hold her wholly at his pleasure, the which in beholding happens not,
because that sight only at first takes pleasure without passing further. And
as we say, Love is timorous and fearful, and in beholding does make the
heart tremble in such sort, as it leaves neither thought nor spirit in his
place. For many with the long beholding of their ladies, The effects of fond
amorous looks.
lose those their natural forcas, and remain vanquished: and many not being
able to move, stand like posts, other some, in tangling and traversing their
legs, fall to the ground. Others thereby lose their speech: and by sight we
know many other like things to have happened, the which all should have been
very acceptable to them, to whom (as we have said) they have happened, if they
had not happened at all: how then brings that thing delight, that shall
willingly be fled? We confess, that if it were possible to behold without
fear, it should be a great delight. But yet little or nothing without the
thought, the which without the bodily sight, pleseth very much. And that that
whereof we have may spoken come to pass through the thought, it is manifest,
that, yea, and much more. For we find that men with thought have passed the
heavens, and tasted of the eternal peace. Then more delights the thought than
the sight. And if ye say that Laodomia was melancholy with thinking, we do
not deny it, but yet it was rather a dolorouse than an amorouse thought, that
did trouble her: She as it were a diuiner to her own harm, always doubted
the death of Prothesilaus, and still was thinking thereon, contrary to those
thoughts whereof we reason, which through that doubt could not enter into her,
but rather sorowing through this occasion as reason was, she showed a
troublesome and heavy look.

The twelfth Question, proposed by PARMENIO.
PArmenio sat next to this gentlewoman, and without attending further, as the
Queen had left, thus began: Most mighty Queen, I was of long time
companion with a young gentleman, to whom that happened which I intend to show.
He as much as any man could love a woman, loved a fair young gentlewoman of our
city, gracious, gentle, and very rich, both of wealth and parents, and she eke
loved him for ought that I (to whom his love was discovered) could understand.
This gentleman the^ loving her in most secret sort, fearing that if it should
be bewrayd, that he should no ways be able to speak unto her: to the end
therefore yt he might discover his intent, and be certified likewise of hirs, he
trusted no one that should attempt to speak of this matter: yet his desire
enforcing him, he purposed since yt he could not bewray him self unto her, to
make her understand by some other, that which he suffered for her sake. And
bethinking him many days, by whom he might most closely signify unto her that
his intent, he saw one day a poor old woman, wrinkled, and of an Orange
tawnie color, so despitefull to behold as none the like, the which being
entered the house of the young woman to ask her alms, followed her forth
of the door, and many times after in like sort, and for like occasion he saw
her return thither. In this woman his heart gave him to repose his whole
trust, imagining that he should never be had in suspicion, and that she might
fully bring his desire to effect: therefore calling her to him, he promised her
great gifts, if she would help him in that which he should demand of her:
She swear to do her endeavor, to whom this gentleman then discovered his mind.
The old woman departed, and after a while having certified the young woman of
the love that my companion bare her, and him likewise* how that she above al
other things of the world did love him, she devised how this young man should
be secretly one evening with the desired woman: and so he going before her, A
gentleman, a gentlevvoman, and an old woman were taken by the brethren of the
gentlevvoman.
as she had appointed* she guided him to this young Gentlewomans house, wherein
he was no sooner entered, than through his misfortune, the young woman, the old,
and he, were all three found, and taken togithers, by the brethren of the young
woman, and compelled to tell the truth of that they made there, who confessed
the whole matter as it was. These brethren, for that they were the friends of
this young gentleman, and knowing that he as yet had attained nothing that might
redound to their shame would not do him any harm as they might have done,
but laughing said unto him in this sort: The gentleman condemned to lie with
the young and old woman either of them a year.
Thou art now in our hands, and have sought to dishonor us, and for that we
may punish thee, if we will, of these two ways see that thou take the one,
either that thou will we take thy life from thee, or else that thou lie with
this old woman, and this our sister, either of them one year, swearing
faithfully, that if thou shall take upon thee to lie with either of them a
year, and the first year with the young woman, that as many times as thou
shall kiss or have to do with her, as many times shall thou kiss and have to
do with the old woman the second year. And if thou shall take the first year
the old woman, look how many times thou shall kiss and touch her, so many
times likewise, and neither more nor less shall thou do the like to the young
woman the second year. The young man listening to the sentence, and desirous
to live, said, that he would lie with these two, two years. It was granted
him. But he remained in dout with which of them he should first begin, either
with the young, or with the old. Whether of them would you give counsel he
should first, for his most consolation begin withal? The Queen decideth the
xij. question.
The Queen, and likewise the whole company somewhat smiled at this tale, and
after, she thus made answer: According to our judgment the young gentleman
ought rather to take the fair young woman, than the foul old, because no
present good turn ought to be left for the future, neither the evil to be
taken for the future good, because we know that we are uncertain of things to
come: and in doing the contrary hereof, many have already sorowed to late, and
if any have praised him self herein, not duty, but fortune has therein helped
him. Let the fair therefore be first taken. The contrary opinion of Parmenio.
Ye make me greatly to marvel (said Parmenio) seeing ye the present good ought
not to be left for ye future, to what end then is it convenient for us with a
valiant mind to follow and bear worldly troubles, whereas we may flee them, if
it were not through the future eternal kingdoms promised to us through hope? It
is a marvelous thing that such a shocke of people as are in the world, al
moyling to the end at one time to taste of rest, and being able to rest
before trouble, should remain so long while in such an error, as trouble
after rest were better than before. It is a thing very just (as it seems to
me) after troubles to seek rest, but to desire to rest without trouble in my
judgment ought not to be, neither can it bring delight. Who then will give
counsel to any, that he lie first with a fair Gentlewoman one year, the
which is the only rest and joy of him that must lie with her, in showing him
after that there must follow so great annoy and unpleasant life, as he must
in every act wherein he abode with the young woman, have to do as long with a
loathsome old woman? Nothing is so noisome to a delightful life, as to
remember, that after death we shall be found spotted. This death returning to
our memory as enime contrary to our being, does disturb us of al goodness and
pleasure: and whilst this is remembered, there can never be joy tasted in worldly
things. Likewise no delight can be had with the young woman, that is not
troubled or destroyed in thinking and remembering that it behooves him to do as
much with a most vile old woman, who shall alwais be remaining before the eyes
of his mind. The time that flies with an inestimable wing, shall seem unto
him to ouerflie, lesning each day a great quantity of the due hours: and this
mirth is not tasted, where as infallible future sorrow is tarried for. Wherefore
I would judge, that the contrary were better counsel, that is, that all
trouble, whereof gracious rest is hoped for, is more delightful, tha^ the
delight, whereof anoy is tarried for. The cold waters seemed warm, and the
dreadful time of the dark night seemed clear and sound day, and turmoils
rest to Leander, at what time he went to Hero, swimming with the force of his
arms, through the salt sourges between Sesto and Abido, for the delight that he
conceived to have of her tarrying his coming. God forbid then, that a man
should covet rest before travail, or reward before the doing his service, or
delight, before he has tasted tribulation: forasmuch as if that way (as we
have already said) should be taken, the future annoy should so much hinder the
present joy, that not joy, but rather annoy it might be said. What delight
could the delicate meats, and the instruments sounded with cunning hand, and
the other marvelous joys made to Dionysius the tyra^t bring, Dionysius.
when as he saw a sharp pointed sword hang by a fine threede over his head?
Let then sorrowful occasions be first fled, that afterward with pleasure, and
that without suspicion, gracious delights may be followed. The Queen's solution
of the.xij. question, defining that the yo^g is to be lain with before the
old.
The Queen made him answer, saying: You answer in part as though we did reason
of eternal joys, for the purchasing whereof, there is no doubt but that all
troubles ought to be taken in hand, and all worldly wealth and delight to be
left aparte: but at this instant we do not speak of them, but do move a
Question of worldly delights, and of worldly annoyes. Whereunto we answer as
we said before, that every worldly delight, that is followed with worldly anoy,
ought rather to be taken, than the worldly annoye that taryeth worldly delight:
because who that has time, and tarieth time, loses time. Fortune grants
her goodness with sundry mutations, the which is rather to be taken when as
she gives, than to moile to the end after turmoyles to get the same. If her
wheel stood firm and stable, until that a man had toyled so much as he
should need to toil no more, we would then say, that it were to be granted to
take pains first: but who is certain that after the evil, may not follow the
worse, as well as the better that is tarried for? The times together with
worldly things are al transitory, and therefore in taking the old woman, before
the year be complete, the which shall never seem to wax less, the young
woman may dye, and her brethren repent them of this they have don, either elfe
she may be given to some other, or peradventure stolen away, so that after one
evil, there shall follow a worse to the taker. But co^trarywise, if the young
woman shall be taken, the taker shall thereby have his desire so long time of him
desired, neither shall there after follow that annoy of thought, that you say
must follow thereby, because that we must dye is infallible, but to lie with an
old woman is a hap able enough with many remedies to be of a wise man avoided,
and worldly things ar to be taken of the discret with this condition, that each
one whiist he holds and enjoys them, he dispose himself with a liberal
mind, when he shall be required to restore or leave them. Who that busieth
himself to the end to rest, brings a manifest example, that without that he
can not have rest: and since he therefore takes troubles to the end to have
rest, how much more is it to be presumed, ye if rest were as ready as if
trouble, but that he would sooner take that tha^ this? Neither is it to be
thought that Leander, if he had been able to have had Hero without passing the
tempestuous arm of the sea, wherein after he perished would not rather have
taken her, tha^ have swom the same. It is convenient to take fortunes happes
what time she gives them. A small gift^ in hand is better than a promised
greater.
For no gift is so small, that is not better than a promised greater. And as
for future things, let remedies be taken, and the present governed according to
their qualities. It is a natural thing to desire rather the good than the
evil, when as equally they concur, and who that does the contrary follows
not natural reason, but his own folly. We confess, that after troubles
quietness is more gracious and better known than before, but yet not that it
is rather to be taken than the other. It is possible for wise men and fools to
use the Counsels both of fools and wisemen according to their liking: but for
all that the infallible verity is not altered, the which does give us leave to
see that rather the fair young woman than the loathsome old is to be taken of
him, to whom was made such a choice.

The thirtenth question, proposed by MASSALINE.
MAssaline the which sat on the right hand of the Queen, and next to
Parmenio, performing the circle, said in this wise: It is meet that I lastly
propound my question: And therefore to the end that I may make the pleasant
told tales, and the before propouned Questions to seem more sweet, I shall
tell you a short tale worth the hearing, wherein there falls a Question very
propre to make an end withal. I have heretofore heard say that there was in
this our City a Gentleman, who was very rich, that had to wife an exceeding
fair young Gentlewoman, A Gentlevvoma^ was loved of a Knight.
whom he loved above al worldly things. This gentlewoman was intierly beloved
of a Knight of the fame City, but she loved him not at all, neither cared for
him, by occasion whereof, the Knight was never able to get from her, either good
words or courteous countenance: and while he thus lived comfortless of such
love, It happened that he was called to the regiment of a City not far
distante from this of ours: And accordingly he went thither, having honorably
governed the same all the time of his abode there: during the which it
happened, that there came a messanger unto him, The Knight advertised of the
death of her whom he loved.
who after other news thus said: Sir ye shall understand, that the Gentlewoman
of our City, whom you so intierly loved above all others, this morning
laboring with great grief to be delivered of child died, not being delivered,
and was in my presence, of her parents honorably buried. The knight not
without great sorrow, gave ^are to this tale, and with a strong heart endured
the telling thereof, without showing any alteration of countenance at all, and
to himself thus said: Hawretched death, cursed be thy power, thou have depryued
me of her, whom I loved above all others, and whom I desired more to serve,
although I knew her cruel unto me, than any other worldly wight. But since it
is thus come to pass that which love in her life time would not vouchsafe to
grant me, now that she is dead, he can not deny me: That assuredly if I
should dye therefore, I will now kiss the face of her being dead, that living
I loved so well. And so staying upon this determination, he tarried until it
was night, and then took one of his servants, The knighte seeks his loved
gentlevvoman in her grave.
whom he best trusted with him, and trauayled the dreadful dark ways, till
at the last he came to the City: And being entered the same, he went straight
to the sepulture, wherein the gentlewoman was buried: and after he had
comforted his servant, that he without any fear should attend him there, he
opened the same, and went thereinto, whereas lamenting with a piteous plaint, he
kissed the gentlewoman, and took her in his arms, and not satisfied therewith,
he began to feel her here and there, and to put his hand into her frozen breast
among the cold dugs. But afterward (being become more bold than was meet)
to seek out under the rich attire which she had on, the secret parts of the
body, going and feeling with a fearful hand hither and thither, til at the
last he spread the same upon her stomach, where as with a feeble motion he felt
the weak pulses somewhat to move. He then became very fearful, but yet love
made him bold, and therefore trying further with a more assured heed, he knew
that she was not dead: and first of all with a sweet mutation he drew her out
of that place, and after wrapping her in a great mantell (leaving the sepulture
open) he and his servant carried her secretly to his mothers house, whereas he
coniured his said Mother, The Knight caryeth his Lady to his mothers house.
through the power of the Gods, that she, neither this, nor any thing else
should manifest to any person living. He caused great fires to be made, to the
end to comfort the cold members, whereunto the lost forces did not thereby
return in due sort: by occasion whereof, as one peradventure discrete in such
a case, willed a solemn hot house to be prepared, wherein he caused first to
be strowed many virtuous herbs, and after placed the Gentlewoman therein,
causing her as it was meet for one in that plight, to be tenderly looked unto.
In the which h^tehouse, after she had for a time made her abode there, the
blood coagulate about the heart, began through the received heat to disperse by
the cold veins, and the spirits half dead began to return to their places:
whereupon the Gentlewoman (no sooner feeling the same) began to call to her
mother, and after to ask where she was: to whom the Knight in steed of her
mother made answer, ye she was in a very good place, and that she should
comfort her self: she abiding in this sort, calling upon the woman Lucina
for help, Lucina, the goddess of child bearing.
was as it plesed the Gods (above all expectation) delivered of a fair son,
and therewith of great trouble and peril: whereof remaining disburdened, The
Gentlevvoman abiding with the Knight, was delivered of child.
and being joyful of her new born child, there were out of hand provided
nourses, both for the charge of her, as also of her son. The Gentlewoman now
after all these heavy troubles, returned to her perfect understanding, and
the new son was also borne to the world, before she saw either the Knight
that thus loved her, or his mother who was pressed to do her service, neither
did she see any one of her parents or kinsfolks about her, for to look unto
her: whereupon being come into a cogitable admiration as it were all amazed,
said: Where am I? what a wonder is this? Who has brought me hither, whereas I
was never before? To whom the Knight answered: The Knight declares to the
gentlevvoman how she was brought into his house.
Gentlewoman, marvel not, comfort your self, for that which you see, has
been the pleasure of the Gods, and I shall tell you how, and so declaring from
the beginning to the end all that which was happened her, concluded, that
through him, she and her son were alive: By occasion whereof they were
always bounden to be at his pleasure. The Gentlewoman perceiving this to be
true, knowing assuredly that she could not by any other means, but only by
this which he showed her, be come to the hands of the knight: first of all with
a devout voice, rendered thanks to the immortal gods, and after to him,
offering her self to be always at his pleasure and service. Then said the
knight: gentlewoman since you know your self to be beholding unto me* I will
that in guerdon of my well doing, ye comfort your self here in this place,
until I return from mine office, whereunto it is now so long since that I was
chosen, as the date hereof is almost at an end. Besides ye shall promise me
faithfully, never to bewray your self without my license, either to your
husband, or any other person. To whom the Gentlewoman answered, that she was
unable to deny him either this, or any other request, and that assuredly she
would comfort her self: and so by oath made unto him, she affirmed never to
cause her self be known without his pleasure. The knight seeing the
Gentlewoman out of all peril to receive comfort, after he had abode two days
in her service, recommended her and her child to his mothers charge, and so
departed, returning to the government of his said office, the which after a
little while he honorably ended, and returned home to his own house and
possessions: where as of the Gentlewoman he was graciously received. The
knighte bids the husband of the gentlevvoman to a banquet.
Certain days after his return, he caused to be prepared a great banquet,
whereunto he invited the husband of this Gentlewoman, whom he loved, her
brethren, and many others of her friends and his: and the bydden guestes
being set down at the table, the Gentlewoman according to the pleasure of
the knight, came apparelled in those garments, and decked with that crown,
ring, and other precious ornaments (as the use was then) wherewith she was
buried. And by the commandment of the knighte placed her self on the one
side by her husband, and on the other side by himself, where as she sedde
that morning, without speaking any word at all. This Gentlewoman was
oftentimes beheld of her husband, and her attire and ornaments also: and as it
seemed unto him, he knew her to be his wife, and those to be the garments
wherein she was buried: But yet for that he thought he had buried her dead
into her sepulture, and not believing that she was risen again, durst not
once give her a word, doubting least she had been some other that did resemble
his wife, imagining that it were more easy to find one woman, in attire and
ornaments like to an other, than to raise up a dead body. But yet for all
this, he turned many times toward the Knighte, and asked him who she was.
To whom the knight answered: Ask of her, whom she is, for I can not tell,
out of so unpleasant a place I have brought her. Then the husband asked ye wife
who she was, to whom she answered: I was brought by this Knight by unknown
ways inte this place, to that gracious life that is of every one desired. At
these words there wanted no admiration in the husband, but rather the same
increased, and so they remained until the banquet was ended. Then the knight
led the husband of this gentlewoman into a chamber, and with him the
Gentlewoman, and the other likewise that banketted with them, where as they
found the Gentlewomans fair and gracious son in the neurses arms, whom the
knighte delivered into the fathers hands, The knight restores the
gentlevvoman to her husband.
saying: This is thy son, and giving him the right hand of his wife, said:
This is thy wife, and mother of this child: showing to him and to the rest,
how it happened that she was brought thither. They al after great wonder, made
great joy, and chiefly the husband of his wife, and the wife with her
husband, of their son. And so both two thanking the knight, returned merrily
home to their house, many days after making marvelous joy. This knight
entreated this gentlewoman with that tenderness and that pure faith, as if she
had been his sister, and therefore it is doubted which of these two was the
greter: The question is whether the loyaltye of the knighte, or the joy of
the husband was the greater.
either the loyalty of the knight, The queens judgment.
or the joy of the husband, that had now gotten again his lost wife, whom he
reputed as dead. I pray you to say your opinion, and what you would judge
hereof? Most great (as we believe) answered the Queen) was the joy of the
again gotten wife, and of her child: and likewise noble and very great was
the loyalty of the knight. But for that it is a natural thing to be glad of
the getting again of things lost (neither could it otherwise be because it
would an other) and specially in the getting again of a thing before so
greatly loved, with a child, whereof there could not be made so great joy as was
convenient. We do not repute it to be so great a matter as to do that whereunto
a man is of his proper virtue constrained to do, the which in being loyal
comes to pass, because the being and not being loyal, is a thing possible.
We say then, that from whom proceeds the being loyal in a thing so greatly
loved, that he does a most great and noble thing in keeping loyalty, and that
in a far greater quantity layaltie does increase in him, than does joy in the
other, The contrary opinion of Massani^^e.
and thus we judge. Truly said Massaline: Most renoumed queen, I believe it
be as you say: but yet it semes unto me a great matter to think, that with so
great joy as was in him that had gotten again his wife, there could be made
comparison of greatness in an other thing: forasmuch as greater grief is not
supported, than when as through death a thing loved is lost. Further, if the
knight were faithful, as is already said, he did therein but his duty, because
we are all bounden to the working of virtue: and he that does that, whereunto
he is of duty bounden, does but well, but yet it is not to be reputed for so
great a matter. Therefore I imagine, that there may be judged greater joy than
loyalty. The queens solution upon the last question.
You with your words do contrary your self (said the queen) because man ought
as well to rejoice in the goodness of god in taking him away as through the
working of virtue: but if the one could be in the one case, as sorrowful as the
other could be in the other case disloyal, it might be consented to your
judgment. To follow the laws of nature, which can not be fled, is no great
matter, but to obey the positive laws, is a virtue of the mind, and the
virtues of the mind both for greatness as for every other respect, are to
be preferred before bodily works. And if virtuous works (making due
recompense) do surmount in greatness every other working, it may be said, that
the having ben loyal, dureth always in being. Joy may be turned into sodayn
sorrow, either else in a short space of time become little or nothing, losing
ye thing through the which it is become merry. And therefore let it be said of
him, that uprightly will judge, the knight to have been more loyal, than the
other merry. Not one there was that followed Massaline, that had any thing more
to say, for that they all had now propounded their Questions. The sun now in
setting, left the place replete with a temperate air. By reason whereof,
Fiametta, most reuerente queen of this amorous people, raised her on foot,
and thus fayd: Gentlemen and gentlewomen, your questions are finished: whereunto
(the Gods be thanked) we have according to our small knowledge, made answer,
following rather pleasant reasoning, than matter of contention. And we know,
that much more might have been answered unto the same, yea and in far better
sort than we have done: But yet that which we have said may suffize to our
pastime: and for the rest, let it remain to the Philosophers of Athens. We see
Phoebus now not to behold us with a straight aspect, we feel the air
refreshed, and know this Feast, which we at our coming hither left through
the excessive heat, to be again begone by our companions. And therefore it
seems us good, that we return to the same: and this being said, she took
with her delicate hand, the laurel crown from her head, and in the place
where she sat, she laid it down, saying: I leave here the crown of my
honor and yours, until that we shall return hither to the like reasoning.
And having thus said, she took Philocopo by the hand, that now with the rest
was risen, and so returned with them al to their Feast. Thence was heard of all
sides the pleasant instruments, and the air resounding of amorous songs, no
part of the Garden was without banketting: wherein they all abode merrily all
that day, even to the last hour: but night being come upon them, and the
stars showing forth their light, it seemed good to the lady, and to them
all, to depart, and to return to the city, wherein bring entered, Philocopo
taking his leave, thus said unto her: Most noble Fiametta, if the Gods should
ever grant me, that I were mine own, as I am an others, without doubt I
should be presently yours, but because mine own I am not, I can not give my
self to an other: How be it for so much as the miserable heart could
receive strange fire, so much the more it feels through your inestimable
worthynesse to be kindeled, and shall feel always and incessantly, with more
effect shall desire never to be forgetful of your worthiness. She thanked
Philocopo greatly of this courtesy at his departure, adding that it would
please the Gods quickly to bring a gracious peace to his desire. ()

FINIS*
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, for Richard Smyth.

Anno. 1571.

JAMES POOLE
OMNIA TEMPUS HABENT.



