A pleasant disport of diverse Noble Personages. Written in Italian by M. JOHN
BOCACE Florentine and Poet Laureat: in his Book which is entitled PHILOCOPO.

And now Englished by H. G.

OMNIA TEMPUS HABENT
BE

blazon with a picture of a mermaid

Imprinted at London, in Pater Noster Row, at the sign of the Marmayd, by H.
Bynneman, for Richard Smyth and Nicholas England. ANNO DOMINI. 1567.

To the right worshipful M. William Rice Esquire, H. G. wishes a happy long
life, with increase of much Worship.
IN HOW MVCH THE thankful sort are desirous (as reason wills and experience
daily teaches) to gratify such their dear friends, as to whom for
sundry good tournes and received benefits they are not a little beholding, the
sundry dealing of thousa^des daily in use and apparent to the world, to the
great praise and commendation both of the one and the other gives a sufficient
testimony: So that, taking occasion thereby to show the good vvil I have, to
pay in part the debt many years due, for that your bou^tie toward me (the
least spark whereof I am unable to satisfy:) I do give unto you this ITALIAN
Disporte, the which I have turned out of his native attire into this our
ENGLISH habit, to the end the same may b^ no less familiar to you and to
such others (for your sake) as shall vouchsafe thereof, than it is either to
the ITALIAN or the FRENCH: and desire that the same may march abroad under your
charge: to whom I recoumpt the protection thereof. Not doubting but as the
reading thereof shall bring pleasure and delight: so the matter being
thervvithall duly considered shall give sundry profitable Lessons meet to be
follovved. And because the name of the Author (being of no small credit with
the Learned, for those his sundry well written works) is of it self
sufficient to carry greater commendation therevvyth than my Pen is able to
write, I leave to labor therein, least my lack may be an occasion to the
loosing of his due praise. And until Portune (the only hope of the unhappy)
shall make me better able, I shall desire you thankfully to accept this as a
toke^ and pledge of the good will I have to perform that whereunto mine
ability is unable to stretch. Thus taking my leave, I betake you to the tuitio^
of almighty God, who preserve you in health to his pleasure, and after this
life make you possessor of those joys whereof we all hope to be partakers,
^. Martij. 1566.

The Book to the Reader.
LOk^ ^^ thou leap, dome not by view of face
Least have make wast, in myssedoming the case*
For I teac^ n^^ to Love, ne yet his lore,
Ne with what s^lue is cured such a sore:
But I the carke with ^ares that thereby happs,
The bliss with joys, the storms with thunder clapps,
The courtesies, where most his force is shewde,
The choice of best, be it of good or ^^^de,
Compare them so, as domed is the doubt
Thereof, and aye the truth well sifted ou^*
The which to read such pleasure thou shall find
As may content a well dysposed mind.
The Prologue to the.xiii. Questions, composed in Italian, by M. John Bocace,
Florentine, and Poet Laureat: And now turned into English by H. G.
FLORIO surnamed Philocopo, accompanied with ye Duke Montorio, Ascalion,
Menedo^ and Massalino, in sailing to seek his Friend Biancofiore, was through
a very obscure and dark night, by the fierce winds, driven into great dangers,
but the perilles being once passed, they were cast into the Port of the
ancient PARTHENOPE. whereas, of the Mariners (espying themselves in Haven) he
received comfort, not knowing into what coast Fortune had forced him, yealded
thanks to his Gods. And so tarried the new day, the which after it once
appeared, the place was of the Mariners discried, so that they all glad of
surety and of so acceptable arrival, came a shore. Philocopo with his
companions, who rather seemed to come forth new risen again out of their
Sepultures, than dysbarked from ship, looked back toward the waywarde waters,
and repeating in themselves the passed perilles of the spente night, could yet
scarcely think themselves in surety. They all then with one voice praised
their Gods, that had guided them safe out of so crooked a course, offered
their pitiful Sacrifices, and began to receive comfort, and were by a
friend of Ascalions honorably received into the City, whereas they caused
their Ship to be all new repaired and decked, of Mast, Sail, and better
Stern than were the others which they had lost: and so tarrying time for their
further voyage, y^ which was much longer lengthened than they looked for: by
occasion whereof Philocopo would many times have taken his journey by land, but
dyscouraged therein by Ascalion, stayed in tarrying a more prosperous hour in
the aforesaid place, where he and his companions saw Phebea five times round
and as many times ho^ned, before that Notus did abanden his violent forces. And
in so long a while, they never almost saw time to be merry, whervppon
Philocopo, who was very desirous to perform his deferred journey, one day
called his companio^s unto him, and said: Let us go take the pleasant air, and
pass the time upon the salt sea shore in reasoning and providing for our
future voyage. Thus he, with the Duke Parmenion, and the rest of his
companions, dire^ted their walk with a mild pace (discoursing diverse matters)
toward that place where rest the reverend Ashes of the most renoumed Peet
Maro. They al thus talking a good space, were not gone far from the City, but
that they came to the side of a Garden, wherein they heard gracious and joyous
feasting of young Gentlemen, Dames, and Damsels: There the air did al resounde
with the noise of sundry instruments, and as it were of angelical voices,
entering with sweet delight into the hearts of them, to whose ears it came:
the which noise it pleased Philocopo to stay a while to hear, to the end his
former melancholy through the sweetness thereof, might by little and little
depart away. Then Ascalion restrained their talk. And whilst Fortune held
thus Philocopo and his companions without the garden intentiuely listening, a
young ge^tleman coming forth thereof, espied them, and forthwith by sight,
port and visage, knew them to be noble Gentlemen, and worthy to be
reverenced. Wherefore he without tariaunce returned to his company and said:
Come, let us go welcome certain young men seeming to be Gentlemen of great
calling, the which perhaps bashful to enter herein not being bidde^, stay
without, giving ear to our dysport. The companio^s then of this Gentleman left
their Ladies at their pastime, and went forth of the Garden, and came to
Philocopo, whom by sight they knew to be chief of all the rest, to whom they
spoke with that reverence their reason could devise and that was most
convenient for the welcomming of such a guest, praying him that in honor and
increase of this their Feast, it would please him and his companio^s to enter
with them the Garden, constrayning him through many requests, that he should
in no wise deny them this courtesy. These sweet prayers so pierced the gentle
heart of Philocopo, and no less the hearts of his companions, that he
answered the intreators in this sort: Friends, of truth such a Feast, was of
us neither sought for nor fled from, but like weather beaten mates cast into
your Port, we to the end to fly drousie thoughts which spring of idleness,
did in recyting our adversities, pass by these sea banks: But how Fortune
has allured us to give ear unto you I know not, unless as we think, desirous
to remove from us all pensiveness, she has of you, in whom I know to be
infinite curtesy, made us this offer: and therefore we will satisfy your
desire, though peradventure in part we become somewhat lauesse of the courtesy
which otherwise toward others ought to proceed from us. And thus talking,
they entered together into the Garden, whereas they found many fair
Gentlewomen, of whom they were very graciously received, and by the^ welcomed
to their feast. After Philocopo had a good while beheld this their Feasting
and likewise had feasted with them, he thought it good to depart, and willing
to take his leave of the young Gentlemen, and to give them th^nkes for the honor
he had received, one Lady more honorable tha^ the rest, endued with marvelous
beauty and virtue, came forth where he stood, and thus said unto him: Most
noble Sir* ye have this morning through this your great courtesy, showed no
small pleasure to these young Gentlemen, for the which they shall be always
beholding unto you, that is to wit, in that you have vouchsafed to come to
honor this our Feast. May it please you then not to refuse to show unto me and
to these other Dames, that favor that I am secondarily to entreat you for: To
whom Philocopo with a sweet voice answered: Most gentle Lady, nothing may
justly be deuied you, command therefore, for both I and these my companions
are all pressed at your will: To whom the Lady said in this wise: Forasmuch as
this your coming has increased this our Feasting, with a most noble and
goodly company, I shall desire you that you will not with departure lessen the
same, but rather help us here to spend this day even to the last hour, to
that end we have already begone the same. Philocopo beheld her in the face as
she thus spoke, and seeing her eyes replete with burning rays to twinckle like
unto ye morning star, and her face exceeding pleasant and fair, thought never
to had seen (his Biancofiore excepted) so fair a creature: to whose demand
he thus made answer: Madame I shall dispose my self to satisfy rather your
desire than mine own, wherefore, so long as it shall please you, so long will
I abide with you, and these my companions also: The Lady gave him great
thanks, and retourning to the others, began togethers with them all to be
very merry. Philocopo abiding with them in this sort, entered great familiarity
with a young Gentleman named Galione, adorned with good qualities, and of a
singular eloquence, to whom in talking he said thus: Oh, how much are you
more than any others beholding to the immortal Gods, the which preserve you
quiet in one will in this your mirth making. We acknowledge us to be greatly
bounden unto them, answered Galeone. But what occasion moves you to say this?
Philocopo answered: Truly none other occasion, but that I see you all here
assembled in one will. Oh, said Galeone, marvel not at all thereat, for this
Lady in whom al excellency does rest, both moves us hereunto, and holds us
herein. Then demanded Philocopo. And this Lady, who is she? Galeone answered:
It is she that made request unto you that ye would tarry here, when as a while
since ye would have departed. By sight she seems unto me (said Philocopo)
exceeding fair, and of a surmounting worthiness: but yet if my demand be not
vnleeful, manifest her name unto me, of whence she is, and of what parents
descended. To whom Galeone answered: No ways may your request be unjust,
bysides there is none publicly talking of her, which does not vouchsafe to
publish the renoume of so worthy a Lady, and therefore I shall fully satisfy
your demand. Her name is of us here called Fiametta, howbeit the greatest part
of the people call her by the name of her, through whom that wound is shut
up, that the preuarication of the first mother opened. She is the daughter of a
most high Prince, under whose Scepter these Countries are quietly governed,
she is also Lady to us all, and briefly, there is no virtue that ought to be in
a noble heart, that is not in hirs. And as I think, in tarying this day with
us, you shall have good experience thereof. That which you say (said Philocopo)
can not be hidden in her semblance. The Gods guide her, to that end that her
singular gifts do merit, for assuredly I believe both that and much more than
you have affirmed. But these other dames, who are they? These Gentlewomen
(said Galeone) some of them are of Parthenope, and other some of places
elsewhere, comen as are you your selves, hither into her company. And after
they had thus held talk a good space, Galeone said: Ah my sweet friend, if it
might not dysplease you, it should be very acceptable unto me to know further
of your state and condition, tha^ your outward appearance represents, to the
end that by knowing you, we may do you that honor you worthily merit, because
sometimes want of knoweledge brings lack of duty to them that honor
others in not doing their due reverence. To whom Philocopo answered: No lack
in doing me reverence could any ways happen on your behalf, but rather ye
have therein so far exceded, as with excess ye have passed the bounds and
limits thereof. But since you desire to know further of my condition, it
should be unjust not to satisfy your desire therein. And therefore (in how
much it is leefull for me to dyscouer) I shall tell you: I am a poor Pilgrim of
Love, and go seeking as ye see, a Lady of mine, taken away from me by subtle
cautele by my Parents: and these Gentlemen whom ye see with me, of their
courtesy keep me company in this my Pilgrimage: and my name is Philocopo of
Nation a Spaniarde, driven through tempestuous weather (seeking for the Island
of Cicilia) into your Ports. But he knew not so covertly to talk, as that the
young Gentleman understood not more of his condition, than he willingly desired
he should: and having compassion of th^se his hard happes* somewhat comforted
him with words which promised him hereafter a more luckie life, and from that
time forwards, to increase his honor, willed that he should be honored of
them all, not as a Pilgrim or as a bydden gueste, but rather as the chief and
principal Patron of the Feast. The Lady, who understood his state and
condition, through the report of Galeone, esteming dearly of such an hap,
commanded specially that so it should be. Apollo was now with his Chariot of
light mounted to the Meridian circle, and did scarcely behold with leueled
eye, the new apparelled earth, when as as these Dames, Damsels, and young
Gentlemen being thus assembled together in that place, (setting their feasting
apart) seking forth by sundry quarters of the Garden the delightful shade, and
flying the noisome heat that might offend their delicate bodies, took by
diverse companies, diverse delights. And the Lady accompanied with four others,
took Philocopo by the hand, saying: Sir, the heat does constrain us to seek
out the fresh air, let us therefore go to yonder meadow you see here before
us, and there with sundry discourses pass over the heat of y^ day. Philocopo
then greatly praised the Ladies devise, and followed her motion, and with him
his companions. Galeone also with two others, went with them to y^ appointed
meadow, which was exceeding fair of grass and flowers, and filled with a sweet
suauitie of smells, about the which grew store of young trees very fair and
thick of green leaves, wherewith the place was defended from the parching
beams of the great Plannet. There was in the midst of that meddow a proper
Fountain, very fair and clear like Crystal, about the which they all sat
them down, where some gazing in the water, and other some gathering flowers,
they began to talk of sundry matters. But because sometimes at unawares the
one did interrupt y^ others tale, the fair Lady said unto them thus: To the
rude that this our discourse may proceed in a more better order, and so
continue until the fresh cool hours, the which we attend for our further
feasting. Let us ordain one of us in place of our King, to whom each one
shall propound a Question of Love, and shall receive from him an apt resolution
thereof: and truly (as I think) we shall no sooner have made an end of our
Questions, but that the heat (we not knowing how) shall be paste, and the
time spent to our profit and delight. This devise pleased them all, and among
them it was said: Let there be a King: and with one voice they al chose
Ascalion to their King, for that he was some what more grown in years than
was any of the rest: To whom he made answer, to be altogether
insufficiente for so great an office, because he had spent moeyeres in the
service of Mars, than of Venus. But yet he prayed the^ al to leave unto him she
Election of such a King. They that thought him to be such a ^ne (knowing so
well before hand the qualities of them all) as would constitute one such, as
should yield true answer to al their demaundes, did then wholly consent that
the Election should freely be remitted unto him, since he would not take such a
dignity upon himself. Ascalion then rose him up, and gathered certain
twigs Fiametta chosen queen to define the questions propounded*
of a green Laurel, the shade whereof did ouerspread the fresh Fountain,
and thereof made a rich Coronet, y^ which he brought in presence of them all,
and said in this wise: From the time that I in my most youth full years began
to have understanding, I swear by those Gods whom I worship, that I do not
remember to have seen or heard named, a woman of like worthiness to Fiametta,
of whom Love holds us all here in her presence inflamed, and by whom we
have this day been honored in such sort, as we ought never to forgette the
same. And because she (as without doubt I know) is plentifully endued with
every good grace, adorned both with beauty and good qualities, and endued with a
flowing eloquence, I therefore make choice of her to be our Queen. For
assuredly it is convenient that the Imperial Crown be bestowed upon her
magnifice^ce, being descended from a stirpe royal, to whom the secret ways
of Love, being (as they are al) open, it shall be an easy matter for her to
content us in these our Questions. And this said, he humbly kneeled before
this noble Lady saying: Most courteous Lady vouchsafe to deck your head with
this Crown, the which is no less dearly to be esteemed of them, that are
worthy through their virtues to cover their heads with the like, than if it
were of Gold. The Lady with a new r^^ be painted her white visage, and said:
Truly ye have not in due sort provided a Queen for this amorous people, (that
have more need of a most able King) for y^ of al you that are present, I am
the most simple and of least virtue, neither is there any one of you y^ is not
more mete to be invested of such a crown than am I. But since it thus pleases
you, I can not withstand this your Election: and to the end I be not found
contrary to our made promise, I will receive it, and as I hope shall eke
receive from the Gods with it, y^ stomach due to such an office: and through
the help of him to whom these leaves were always acceptable, I shall answer
you all, according to my small knowledge: Nevertheless, I deuoutely pray him
that he will enter into my breast, and renew my voice with that sound
wherewith be caused the valiante vanquished man Marsia, to deserve to be drawn
forth of the sheath of his members. I by way of mirth shall give you light
aunsweres without syfting to the depth of your propounded Questions, the going
about to search forth the which, ^^uld rather bring tediousness than delight
to your minds. And having thus said, she took with her delicate hand the
offered Garlande, and therewithal crowned her head, and commanded that each
one upon pain to be deprived of the amorous joys, should prepare to put forth
some question the which might be apt and convenient to the purpose whereof
they did intend to entreat, and such a one as should rather be an increaser
of their mirth than thorough too great subtlety, or otherwise, a destroyer of
the same.

The first Question, proposed by PHILOCOPO.
ON the right hand of she Queen sat Philocopo, The Queen commands
Philocopo to propound.
to whom she said: Noble Sir, you shall begin to propounde your Question, to
the end that the rest orderly, as we are here placed, may after you, with
more suertie propounde theirs also. To whom Philocopo thus made answer: Most
noble Lady, without my forslowing, I shall obey your commandment, and thus
said: I remember that in the City, wherein I was borne, there was one day made
a bountiful great Feast, whera^, to honor the same, were many Gentlemen ^
Gentlewomen: And I that was likewise there roming about, and beholding Two
Gentlemen enamored of one Gentlewoma^
them that were in the place, espied among y^ rest. ^. young men very gracious
to behold, y^ earnestly eyed an exceeding fair young woman. Neither was I any
ways able to discern whether of them her beauty had most inflamed. And as she
in like sort had a good space beheld them, not making greater sembla^ce to the
one than to the other, they between themselves began to reason of her: and
among the other words that I understood of their talk, was that each one
said, that he was her best beloved: and for proof thereof, either of them
alleged in the furtherance of himself, diverse gestures then before done by the
young woman. And they thus remaining in this contention a long time, being now
through many words at daggers drawing, they acknowledged, y^ herein they did
very evil, because in thus doing, they wrought hurt and shame to them selves,
and displeasure to the woman. Wherefore (moved of an equal agreement) both two
went to the mother of the maid, who was also at the same Feast, and thus said
unto her: That for so much as above all other women of the world, either of them
best liked her daughter, and that they were at contention whether of them was
best liked of her, it would therefore please her to grant them this favor* to
the end no greater inconuenie^ce might spring thereof, as to will her daughter,
that she either by word or deed, would show whether of them shes best loved.
The entreated Gentlewoma^ s^^ling, thus answered: Willingly. And so calling
her daughter to her, said* My (...) daughter, each one of these prefers the
love of thee above the love of himself, and in this contention they are:
whether of them is best beloved of thee: and they seek of me this favor, that
thou either by signs or words, resolve them herein. Where as love is, there
peace ought to be.
And therefore to the end that Love, from whom all peace and goodness ought
always to spring, breed not now the contrary, content them in this, and with
semblable courtesy, show toward which of them thy mind is most bent. The
young damsel said: It likes me right well. And so beholding them both a
while, she saw the one of them to have upon his head The Loved gives cause of
argument to her lovers.
a fair garlande of fresh flowers, and y^ other to stand without any garlande
at all. Then she that had likewise upon her head a garlande of green leaves,
first took the same from her head, and set it upon his, that stood before her
without a garland. And after she took that which y^ other young man had upon his
head, and set the same upon hirs: and so leaving them, she returned to the
Feast, saying that she had both performed the commandment of her mother, as
eke their desire. The young men being thus left, returned also to their former
contention, each one affirming that she loved him best. And he whose garlande
she took and set upon her head, said: Assuredly she loves me best, because
she has taken my garland to none other end, but for that what mine is,
pleases her, and to give occasion to be beholding unto me. But to thee, she
has given hirs, as it were in place of her last fare well* unwilling that
(like a country girl) the love which thou bea(...) her, be without requital,
and therefore lastly she gives thee that garlande thou had ^^eri^^d The ^^
her replying with the contrary, thus answered: Truly sheloweth that ^hine is,
better than thee, and that may be seen in taking thereof. And me she loves
better than what mine is, in as much as she has given me of hirs* And
therefore it is no to(...) of her last deserved gift, as thou affirmest* but
rather a beginning of amity ^^d love* A gift makes the receiver a subject
to the giver: and because she p^^aduenture uncertain of me, to the end she
might be more certain to have me her subject, will bind me (i^ perhap^ ^ were
not bound unto her before) to be hirs by gift. But how may thou think, if
^he at the first ^ake away from th^^ that ^uer she may vouchesafe to give thee
and thus they abode a long time co^tending, and in the end departed without any
definition at all. Now say I most puissant Queen, if you should be demanded
of the last sentence of such a contention, what would ye judge. The fair
Lady somewhat smiling, turned toward Philocopo, (her eyes spark^ing with an
amorous light) and after a soft sigh, thus made answer: Most noble youth; The
Queens judgment upon the question.
proper is your question: And truly, as very wisely the young woman behaved her
self, so each one of the young men right well defended his cause* But because
ye require what we lastly will judge thereof, thus we make you answer: It
seems unto us, and so it ought to seem to each one that takes good heed,
that the woman had in hate neither y^ one nor the other: but to keep her
intent covert did two contrary acts, as apeareth, and not without occasion.
And to y^ end she might get more assured the love of him whom she loved, as not
to lose the love of the other, whom she hated not, it was but wisely done. But
to come to our Question, which is, to whether of the two greatest love was
showed. We say: that she loved him best and he chiefest in her favor, to
whom she gave her garlande: and this seems to be the reason: What so ever
man or woman that loves any person* each one through force of the love they
hear, is so strongly bound to the person loved, that above al other things
they desire to please the same, neither to bind him or her more strongly that
thus loves, needs either gifts or services, and this is manifest. And yet we
see, that who so loves, though he endeavor him self sundry ways, is not able
to make the person loved, in any sort benign and subject unto him, whereby he
may bring it to his pleasure, and so with a more hold face demand his desire.
And that this is in such sort as we say, the inflamed Dido with her doings,
does Dido.
very well manifest the same unto us, who burning in the love of Aeneas so long
as it seemed her neither Aeneas.
with honors nor with gifts able to win him, had not the courage to attempt
the doubtful way of asking the question: So that then the young woman sought
to make him most beholding unto her, whom she best loved. And thus we say, that
he that re^^yned the gift of the Garlande, was her best beloved. As the Queen
become silent, Philocopo answered: Discrete Lady, greatly is your answer to be
commended: Philocopo replieth to the Quene^.
but for all that, you do bring me into a great admiration of that ye have
defined, touching the propounded question, because I would have judged rather
the contrary. For so much as generally among lovers, this was the wont^d
custom, that is, to desire to (...) upon them (...) Jewel, or some other
thing of the persons loved, to the end that most times they might glory
themselves more therein, than in all the remnant they had, and perceiving the
same about them, therewith to glad their minds, as ye Paris.
have hear^. Paris seldom times or never entered into the bloud^e battles
against the Greeks, without bearing some token upon him, that had been given
h^^ by his Helene, believing better to prevail Helen.
therewith, than if he had gone without the same. And truly in my opinion, his
thought was not vain: therefore I should thus say, that (as you said) the
young woman did very wisely, not defining it for all that as you have done, but
in this manner: She knowing ^ha^ she was very well loved of two yongmen, and that
she could not love more than one, for that Love is an indeu(...)e thing, she
would reward the one for ^he love he bare her, to the end that such good will
should not be unrewarded, and so gave him her Garland in requital thereof. To
the other whom she loved, she thought she would give courage and assured hope
of her love, taking his Garlande, and decking her self therewith, in token
whereof, she plainly showed to be beholding unto him for the same* And therefore
in my Judgment she loved better him from The Queen's solution of this first
question.
whom she took, than him to whom she gave* to whom the (...)us made answer:
Your argument should have pleased us right well, if your self in your tale had
no^ condemned the same. See how pillage and perfect love can agree together?
How can ye show me, that we love him whom we spoil, better than him, to whom
we give? According to the Question propounded, to the one she gave a Garland,
and from the other she took a Garland: neither had she from whom she gave,
ought given her: and that which we see every day for example may here suffice,
as is commonly said. They are of Gentlemen far better loved, on whom they
bestow favor and gifts, than those that are by them deprived of them. And for
that cause we lastely hold opinion, concluding that he is better loved, to
whom is given, than he from whom is taken. We know very well, that in these
our reasonings much might be objected against this our definition, and much
also answered to the contrary reasons: But lastly such determination shall
remain true. And because time now serves not, to stay with this our talk
upon one matter only without more, we will give ear to the rest if it please
you. To whom Philocopo said: That it pleased him right well, and that very
well suffised such a resolution to his demanded question: and so held his
peace.

The second Question, proposed by LONGANO.
NExt to Philocopo was placed a courteous young man, and gracious to behold,
whose Name was Longano, who no sooner than Philocopo had left, thus began: Most
excellent Queen, so trim has been the first question, that in my conceit,
mine shall bring no delight at all. Yet to the end not to be severed from so
noble a company, forth it shall: and thus he followed, saying: It is not many
days past, that I abiding all solitary in my chaumber, wrapte in a heap of
troublesome thoughts, sprung from an amorous desire, the which with a fierce
battle had assaulted my heart, by hap heard a pitious plaint, Two sisters
complain them of being in love.
whereunto (because I judged it by estimation near unto me) intentiuely I
laid mine ear, and thereby knew that they were women: by occasion whereof, I
suddenly rose to see who, and where they were: and loking forth at my chaumber
window, I heard o^eragainst the same, in one other chaumber, two young women,
the same being sisters, adorned with an inestimable beauty, there abiding
without any other company, whom as I saw making this sorrowful plaint, I
withdrew my self into a secret place, without being of them espied, and so
beheld them a long while, neither was I able for all that, to understand all
the words that they through grief uttered in tears, but that the effect of
such plaint (according to that I could comprehend) seemed to me to be for
Love: wherefore I through pity, and so sweet an occasion offered (being thus
close as I was) began to ^heade my trickeling tears. And after that I had in
their grief perseuered in the same a good space (for so much as I was their
very familiar and also their near kinsman) I purposed to understand more
certain the occasion of their sorrow, and so went unto the^, who had no
sooner espied me, but al basheful they withheld them from tears, endeavoring
themselves to do me reverence. To whom I said: Gentlewomen, trouble not your
selves, neither let this my coming move you to restrain your inward grief,
for your tears have been now a good space apparent unto me. It shall be
therefore needelesse to hide you, either yet through bashefulnesse to hide from
me the cause of this your plaint. For I am come hither to understand the same.
And be you assured, that ye shall not receive by me either in word or deed any
evil requital. But rather help and comfort in what I may. The women greatly
excused them selves, saying, that they sorrowed for nothing: but yet after I
had coniured them, and they seeing me desirous to understand the same, the
elder thus began to say: It is the pleasure of the Gods, that to thee our
secrets be discovered: thou therefore shall understand, that we, above all
other women have always resisted the sharp darts of Cupide, who of a long
season in casting y^ same, was never yet able to faste^ any one of the^ in
^nrhertes. But now lastly being further inflamed, and having determined to
overcome that his childish enterprise, took of new with his young arm, of his
best and dearest shafts, and with so great force wounded y^ hearts so sore
infeebled through the sundry blows before received, as the heads thereof
pierced deep, so as they made a far greatter wound, than if resistance had
not ben made (to the other former) had like to have been. And thus for the
pleasure of two most noble young Gentlemen, we are become subjects to his
deity, following his pleasure with more perfect faith, and fervent will, than
ever any other women have done. Now has Fortune, and the love of them (as I
shall declare unto you) left us both comfortless. First I, before The first
lamenteth the loss of her enioied lover
my sister here, was in love, and through mine endeavor believing wisely to end
my desire, so wrought as I got the loved young Gentleman at my pleasure, who^ I
found as greatly enamoured of me as I of him. But truly now has not the
amorous flame through such effect cessed, neither has the desire lessned, but
each one more vehemently increases: and more tha^ ever, I do now burn in his
fire. And what time, seeing how I might best mitigate the flame thereof, holding
it inwardly secret, it after happened, that the horned Moon was no sooner
come to her perfect round nesse, but that he at unawares committed a fault, for
the which was adjudged him perpetual exile from this City, whereupon he
dreading death, is departed he^re without hope ever to return. I sorrowful
woman above all others, more now inflamed than ever, am without him, left both
doleful and desperate. By occasion whereof I sorrow me, and that thing that
most increases my sorrow is, that on every side I see the way hard from being
able to follow him. Think therefore now, whether I have cause to plain me or no.
Then said I: and this other, why sorroweth she? The second hindered by
jealousy, soroweth her hap
and she answered: This my sister likewise (as I) is enamoured of an other, and
of him again loved above measure. And to the end her desires should not pass
the amorous paths, without tasting some part of delight, many times she has
endeavored her self to bring them to effect, and contrary to her devise,
Iealousy has alwais occupied and broken the way, and because she could never
attain thereunto, neither saw how to be able so to do, she thus distressed,
is through fervent love consumed, as ye may well think if ever ye were in love.
Seeing we were then here all alone, we began to reason of our misfortunes, and
knowing the same far greater than these of other women, we could not withhold
from tears, but with weeping sorowed our lucklesse lots, as ye might well
perceive. To hear this of them it grieved me greatly, so that I encountered
them with such words, as seemed me most profitable for their comfort, and so
departed from the^. Many times after, reuoluing in mind their griefs, and
sometimes bethinkyng me whether of the same should be the greater, at one time I
agreed to y^ of the one, and at another time I yielded to y^ of the other: and
the sundry reasons, wherewith as it seems me, each one has to lamente her,
will not suffer me to stay upon any one, whereupon I remain here in doubt. May
it therefore please you, that by you may be opened this error, in telling me
whether of these two unfortunate lovers seemed to sustain the greatest grief.
Great was the sorrow of either of them, The Queen decideth the question.
answered the Queen: But considering adversity to be most grievous to her
that has tasted prosperity, we esteem that she that has lost her love,
feels the greatest grief, and is of Fortune greatliest offended. Fabritius
never bewept the chau^ces of Fortune: Fabritius. Pompey. Medea. Jason.
But that Pompey did is a thing very manifest. If sweet things were not
tasted, the sour should be yet unknown. Medea never knew (according to her
own saying) what manner a thing prosperity was, whilst she was in love, but
being forsaken of Jason bewailed her adversity. Who will ever lament for that
he has not had? not one but will rather desire Longano of contrary opinion to
the Queen.
it. It is deemed therefore, that of the two women, the one wept for grief,
the other for desire. It is very hard for me (gracious Lady) to think that
which you affirm (said the young Gentleman) for so much as who y^ has his
desire of any desired thing, ought much more to content his mind, than who
that desires, and can not fulfill his desire. Further, nothing is more light
to lose, than what hope promises not hereafter to yield. There ought to be
unmeasurable grief, where as y^ not being able to bring egal wills to effect
does hinder. From thence lamentatio^s take place, from thence thoughts and
troubles do spring, because if the wills were not egall, of force the desire
should want. But when as lovers see them selves in presence of that they
desire, and can not attain thereunto, then do they kindle and sorrow them much
more, than if that they would have, were far from them. Tantalus.
And who I pray you torments Tantalus in Hell? but only the Apples, and the
Water, for that how much more near they bend and swell to his mouth, so much
the more (afterward in flying the same) they increase his hunger. Truly I
believe, that who hops for a thing possible to be had, and can not attain
thereunto, through contrary resisting impedimentes, feels more grief, than
who that bewaileth a thing lost and irrecuperable. Then said the Queen, The
Queen's solutio^ of the i^. question.
your answer would have followed very well, where your demand should have
been of an old grief, although to that also might be said: thus to be
possible through forgetting the grief, to shorten the desire in the desired
things, where as continual impediment is seen not to be able to attain them,
as in those lost, wherein Hope does not show us, that we should ever have
them again. But we do reason whether of them sorrowed most, when you saw
them sorrowing: wherefore following the propounded case, we will give judgment,
that she felt greater grief that had lost her lover, without hope to have him
again, (putting the case that it be an easy matter to lose a thing impossible
to have again: nevertheless it was to be said: who loves well, forgets
never) than the other, who if we look well, might hope to fulfill that
hereafter, that heretofore she was unable to perform. For a great lessner of
grief is hope. It had force to keep chaste and to diminish the sorrows of the
lingryng long life of Penelope.

The third Question, proposed by a young Gentlewoman.
ON the right side of Longano sat an excellent fair Gentlewoman and very
pleasant, who as she perceived that Question by the Queen determined, thus
began with a sweet talk to say: Most renoumed Queen, your ears grant
hearing to my words: And first by those Gods whom you worship, and next by
the power of our pastime, I pray you that ye will give to my demand profitable
counsel. I as you know, being descended of noble Parents, was borne in this
City, and was named with a very gracious name, although my surname (being Cara)
presents me grateful to the hearers, and as by my face it may appear, I have
received from the Gods and Nature a singular gift of beauty, the which (in
following my propre name more tha^ my surname) I have adorned with an infinite
pleasantness, showing my self benign to whom that is delighted to behold
the same: by occasion whereof many have endeavored themselves for their
pleasure to occupy my eyes, against al whom I have withstode with strong
resistance holding a stable heart against their assaults: but because it
seems to me vnleefull that I only should pretermit the laws kept and
observed of all others, The Gentlewoman prays to be resolved whether ought
sonest to be loved, either the Strong* the Liberal, or the Wise.
that is, not to love being loved of many, I have determined to become
enamored, and setting apart many seekers of such love, whereof some do excel
Midas in riches, some other pass Absalo^ in beauty, and other some in courtesy
(according to the common report of all) are more splendent than any other. I
have of al these chosen three: Of whom each one pleases me alike. Of the which
three, the one of bodily force (as I believe) would excel the good Hector, he
is at every proof so vigorous and strong. The courtesy and liberality of the
second is such, that (as I think) his fame does sound through each pole. The
third is al full of wisdom, so y^ he surmounteth all other wise men above
measure. But for that (as ye have heard) their qualities are diverse* I doubt
whether of them to take, finding in the antique age each one of these to have
diversely the courages of women, and of yelding men: as of Dianira, Hercules, of
our Clitemnestra, Aegistus, and of Lucretia, Sextus* Counsel me therefore, to
whether of them sonest with least blame, and greatest surety I ought to give
my self. The pleasant Queen having heard the purpose of this Ge^tlewoman, The
queens answer.
thus made answer. There is never a one of the three, that does not worthily
merit the love of a fair and gracious Lady: but because in this case I am not
to fight against Castles, or to give away the kingdoms of great Alexander, or
the treasures of Ptholome, but that only that Leave and Honor are with
discretion a long time to be kept, the which are maintained neither by force
nor curtesy, but only by wisdom: We say, that both you, and every other
woman ought rather to give her love to a wise man, The reply of the Gentlewoman.
than to any of the rest. Oh how diverse is my judgment from yours, answered
the propou^ding Gentlewoman. To me it seems, that each one of the others were
sooner to be taken than the wise, and this seems to be the reason: Love (as
we see) is of that nature, as multiplying his force in one heart, every other
thing he banisheth out thence, retaining that for his seat, and moving it
after according to his pleasure, whereunto no foresight is able to resist, but
that it is convenient for them to follow him, by whom it is (as I have said)
governed. And who doubts that Biblis Biblys.
knew it not to be evil to love her brother? Who will gain say that it was not
manifest to Leander, that Leander.
he might drown in Helespont, in his fortunate time, if he cast him self
therein? And none will deny that Pasiphe knew not a man to be more fair tha^ a
Pasiphe.
Bull? and yet they and each one overcome with an amorous pleasure, r^^^^ting all
knowledge, followed the same. Then if it have power to take knowledge from she
learned, taking away the witt^ from the wise, they shall have nothing lest: but
if from the strong and courteous, it shall take away the little wit they have,
it shall yet increase them in their virtues, and so they shall become more than
the wise enamoured. Further, Love has this propretie, it is a thing that can
not long be hid: and in reueling himself, he is wont oftentimes to bring
grievous perils, whereunto what remedy shall the wise give that has now lost
his wit? He shall give none at all, but the strong that uses his force can
help in a peril both himself and others. The courteous through his courtesy
shall with grateful benevolence win the minds of many, whereby he may be
both helped and considered, and others also for his sake. See now what it is to
be of your judgment. She was by the Queen answered The queen's last sentence*
to the third question.
unto, thus: If there were such a one as you speak of, who should then be
wise? not one. But if he, whom you propounde wise, and enamoured of you,
should be made a fool, he is not to be taken. The Gods forbid, that that whereof
you speak, should come to pass. And yet we will not deny but that the wy^e
know the evil, and do it: but for all that we will say, that they thereby lose
not their wit, forasmuch as what time it pleases them with the reason they
have to bridle their wills, they will reduce them selves to their accustomed
wit, guiding their motions in a due and straight order. And in this manner
their love shall be altogether, or at the least, a long time kept secret, and
that without any doubtful diligence, the which shall not happen to one of
little wit, be he never so strong or courteous. And yet if perhaps it do
hap, that such love be discovered, a wise man will with a hundred
foresightes, shut up the eyes and understanding of the tattlers thereof, and
shall provide a safety both for his own honor, as for the honor ^f his loved
Lady* And if need of safety be, the help of the wi^e can not fail. That of
the strong becomes less. And the friends that are gotten by Liberality,
are accustomed in adversity to sh^^ke away. What is she of so little
discretion, that is brought to such a iumpe as has need of manifest help?
o^ that if her love be disclosed, seeks fame in having loved a Strong or
Liberal man? I believe there is none Rich. Let the wise then be soonest loved,
^oping that he must be in each cause more profitable than any of the rest.

The fourth Question, proposed by MENEDON.
The Gentlewoma^ by her countenance seemed content, when Menedon, syttyng next
unto her, said* Most high and noble Queen, now is it come to my turn to
propound my question here in your presence* First Menedon tells a tale.
Wherefore by your license, if in my talk I shall wade very long, yet during the
same, I shall first of all of you, and next of the standers about, pray pardon:
Because ye can not be made fully to understand that, which I intend is
propounde, unless a tale, that peradventure shall not be short, do precede
the same: and after those words thus she began to say: In the country where I
was borne, I remember there was a noble knight, s^nnou^ting rich, the which
loved in most loyal love, a noble Gentlewoman, borne likewise there, whom he
took to wise: Of whom, being as she was, exceeding fair: an other knight
called Tarolfo a Knight was enamored of a Lady.
Tarolfo was after enamored, and with so great good will loved her, as he saw
nothing he more desired than her: And in sundry sorts, now with passing by
before her house, now iusting, now at the barriers, now with the often sending
her messangers, peradventure promising her great gifts, whereby she might
know his intent, and now with other like feats he endeavored him self to
purchase her love. All which things the Lady closely supported, without giving
sign or good answer to the knight, saying to her self: When as this knight
shall epsy, that he can have neither answer ne yet good countenance of me,
perhaps he will forbear any further, either to love me, or to give me these
allurementes. Now for all this, Tarolfo surcessed not, following the precepts
of Ovid, who says, that a man must not through the hardness of a woman leave
to persevere, because with continuance the soft water pierces the hard stone.
The Lady doubting least these things should come to the ears of her husband,
and that he should conceive that the same happened through her good will,
purposed to let him understand the same. But yet after being persuaded through
better aduiseme^t she said, I might (if I tell him) move such a broile betwirte
The gift required by the Lady of Tarolfo, to withdraw him from loving her*
them, as I should never after live a merry life, and therefore he would be
shaken of by some other means, and so she imagined a tri^^e guile. She sent to
Tarolfo, saying, that if he loved her so well as he made show of, she would
require one thing at his hands, the which if she received, she swear by her
Gods, and by that loyalty that ought to be in a Gentlewoma^, that she would
accomplish all his desire. And if he would not give her that she required, he
should then content him self no further to allure her hereafter, but in what
he would be willing she should reveal to her husband. The gift she required was
this. She said she would have in that country in the month of January, a
very fair Garden, and large, replenished with herbs, flowers, and blossomed
trees and fruits, as if it were in the month of May: saying to her self:
This is an impossible thing, so that in Tarolfo to perform his promis sought
strange cou^treyes.
this sort I shall rid him from me. Tarolfo hearing this demand, and
although it seemed unto him impossible to be done, and that he knew very well to
what end she required the same, answered, that he would never rest, neither
yet return into her presence, until such time he might give her the demanded
gift: And so forthwith departed his country with such a conueniente company
as pleased him to take with him. He sought all the west parts for counsel how
to attain to his desire, but not finding there that he looked for, sought the
most hot regions, and so came into Thessalia, as he had been sent by a
discrete man for that purpose. And having made his above there many days, not
yet finding that he sought for: it happened, that being now almost desperate of
his desire, Tarolfo found an old man called Thebane.
and rising one morning before the sun prepared to enter the dawning day, he
al alone began to wander y^ miserable plains, that were now: al imbrued with
Roman blood: and having travailed a long while upon the same, he suddenly
espied before him at the foot of a mountain, a man not young, nor of to many
yores, bearded, small and very spare of person, whose attire showed him to be
but poor, who romed hither and thither gathering herbs, and with a little
knife dug up sundry roots, whereof he had filled one of the skirts of his
cote: who^ as Tarolfo saw, he meruelled not a little, and doubted greatly least
it had been some other thing, but after that his aim did certainly assure him to
be a man, he drew nere unto him, saluted him, and after asked him who he was,
of whence, and what he made there at so timely an hour. To whom the old man
answered: I am of Thebes, and Thebane is my name, and I go up and down this
plain, gathering of these herbs, to the end y^ with the juice thereof, I
make diverse necessary and profitable things for diverse in^^mities, whereby I
may have where withal to live: And to come at this hour, it is need and not
delight that constrains me. But who are you, that in countenance resembles
noble, and walk here al alone solitary. To whom Tarolfo answered: I am of the
extremes of the west, very rich, and vanquished of my conceits, pricked
forwards to an enterprise, not being able hitherto to atchieue the same, and
therefore to be the better able without impediment to sorrow my hap, I go
thus all alone wandering. To whom Thebane said: Do you not know the quality
of the place, and what it is? Wherefore have you rather taken your way on the
other side? You might easily here be rebuked with furious spirits. Tarolfo
answered: God can do here, as else where, it is he that has my life and
honor in his hands: let him do with me according to his pleasure: for
assuredly death should be to me a rich treasure. Then said Thebane: What is
that your enterprise, for the which not being able to perform it) you abide
thus sorrowful? To whom Tarolfo answered: It is such as seems unto me
impossible to be able ever to attain, since hitherto I have here found no
counsel. Then said Thebane: Dare ye utter it? Tarolfo answered: Yea. But what
profits it? Peradventure nothing said Thebane, but what does it hurt? Then
said Tarolfo. I seek counsel how Tarolpho recites to Thebane his promis
made to his Lady of a garden full of flowers in the month of January.
may be had in the coldest month, a garden full of flowers, fruits, and
herbs, as far as if it were in the month of May, neither do I find who
can therein either help me, or give me encouragement that it is possible to be
had. Thebane stayde a while in a muse without answer, and after said: You
and many others do judge the skill and virtue of men according to their
garments. If my goods were such as are yours, you would not have lingered so
long in discouoring your lack: or if peradventure you had found me near to
some rich Prince as you have in gathering of herbs. But many times under the
vilest vesture are hidden* the greatest treasures of science: and therefore no
one concealeth his lack, to whom is proffered counsel or help: And if
therefore he open the same, it can not prejudice him at al. But what would ye
give to him that should bring to effect that which you go about thus seeking
for? Taralfo beheld him in the face, as he vttred these words, and doubted lest
he went about to deride him, for y^ it seemed to him incredible, that he should
be able to bring y^ same to pass unless he were a God: notwtstanding he
answered him thus: I have under my rule in my country many ca^tles, and there
withal great treasures, all the which I would participate in the midst Theban
promises Tarolpho to make him the garden.
with him that would do me so great a pleasure. Truly said Thebane, if ye would
do so much for me, I should no more need to go thus about, in gathering of
herbs. Assuredly said Tarolfo, if thou be able to give true effect to that
thou promisest, and give me it in deed, thou shalt never need to carke ne
yet to trouble thy self to become rich: but how and when can thou bring me
this to pass? Then said Thebane, the time when, shall be at your choice, but
for the manner how, trouble not your self. And I will go with you, trusting to
the words and promises ye have made me, and when we shall be there, where it
pleases you to be, command what you would have done, and I shall without
fail perform the sanie.

Of this fortunate hap Tarolfo was so well contented in him self, as little
more gladness could he have received, if he had then held his Lady embraced
in his arms, and said: Friend, to me it seems long, until thou have
performed, that thou have promised, wherefore let us depart without further
tariance, and go thither where this is to be done. Thebane cast away his
herbs, and took his books and other things necessary to his science, and
with Tarolfo took his journey: and in short time they both came unto the
desired City, very near unto the month in the which the Garden had been
required to be made. Where as all secret and close they reposed them selves
until the wished time. And now the month being entered, Tarolfo commanded the
Garden to be made, to the end he might give the same to his loved lady. So
soon as Thebane had received this commandment, he tarried the night ensuyng,
the which being once come, he saw the horns of the Moon gathered into a
perfect roundnesse, and to shine upon the frequented earth. Then he went him
all alone forth of the city, leaving his apparel apart, bare legged, and his
dissheueled locks hanging upon his naked shoulders. The restless degrees of
the night did pass: birds, wild beasts, and men, without any noise did take
their rest: the vnfallen leaves without moving did hang upon the trees, and the
moist air abode in mylde peace: Only the stars did shine, when as he
oftentimes went about the grou^des, and came to a place on a rivers side, which
it pleased him to chose for his Garden. There he stretched forth his arm three
times toward the stars, and turning him self unto them, he as often bathed
his white locks in the running stream, craving as many times with a most high
voice their help: and after setting his knees to the hard earth, began thus to
say: Oh night, most, faithful secreser of high The invocation Magical of
Thebane.
things, and you, oh ye stars, the which together with the Moon, do succeed
the splendant day: and thou oh singular Hecates, become an helper to this my
begone enterprise, and thou oh holy Ceres, the renuer of the ample face of the
earth: And you what soever verses, either arts, or herbs, and thou what
soever earth bringing forth virtuous plants, and thou oh air, winds,
mountains, rivers and lakes, and each God of the woddes, and of the secret
night, by whose help I have heretofore made the runnyng streams to recule,
enforcing the^ to return to their springs, and things running, to become
firm, and things firm to become running, and that have also given power to my
verses to dry up the Seas, that I at my pleasure might search the bottom
thereof, and to make the cloudie times clear, and (at my will) to fill the
clear heavens with obscure clouds, to make the winds to cease, and to turn
as it seemed me best: breaking therewith the hard jaws of the fearful
dragons, making also the standing woddes to move, and the hault mountains to
tremble, and to return to their dead bodies out of the Lake Stix those their
shadows, and alive to come forth of their sepultures: and sometimes thee O*
Moon to draw to thy perfect roundnesse: the attaining whereunto a ring of
Basins was wont to be an help, making also the clear face of the su^ne many
times to become pale, be ye all present, and aid me with your help. I have at
this instant need of the sap and juice of herbs, through the which I may
make in part, the dry earth fastened through Autumn, and after through the
withering cold Winter, spoiled of his flowers, fruits, and herbs, to become
flouring, and to spring before the due term. And having thus said he said
after, many other things softely, which he added to his prayers. And those
being ended, and he a while silent, the stars gave not their light in vain.
For more swifter than y^ flight of the wightest bird, Theban was carried in the
air in a chariot led by. ij Dragons.
there appeared before him a Chariot drawn by two dragons, whereupon he
mounted, and taking the raines of the bridles of the two bridled dragons in his
hand, was carried into the air. He then leaving Spain, and all Africa, took
his journey by other Regions, and first sought for the I Will of Crete, and from
thence after with a short course he sought Pelion, Othrys, and Ossa, the mount
Neriu^, Pachynus, Pelorus and Appaennine. Upon them all plucking up, and with a
sharp sickle cutting down such roots and herbs as best liked him, neither
forgot he those which he had before gathered when as he was found by Tarolfo in
Thessalia. He took stones also upon the mount Causacus, and of the sands
of Ganges: and out of Libia, he brought tongs of venomous serpe^ts. He serched
the watrie banks of Rodanus, of Senna at Paris, of the great Po, of Arnus, of
the imperial Tyber, of Nifeus, of Tana, and of Danuby: upon those eke
gathering such herbs as seemed to him most necessary for his purpose, putting
these together with the others, gathered on the tops of the savage
mountains. He also sought the Islands of Lesbos and Pathmos, and every other,
wherein he perceived any profitable thing to be had for his attempt: With all
the which things he came (the third day being not yet past) to that place from
whence he departed, and the drago^s, that only had felt the odor of the
gathered herbs, did cast of their old hides of many years, and were with new
renewed and become young. The ceremonies used in making the garden. Ceres.
There he dismounted from his chariot, and of the green earth he made two
altares* on his right hand that of Hecates: and on the left that of the renewing
goddess: that being done, and devout fires kindled thereupon, with locks
disperpled upon the old shulders, he began with a murmuring noise to go about
the same, and with gathered blood oftentimes he besprent the blasing brandes.
After he placed the same blood upon the altars, sometimes softning therwithall
the ground, appointed for his Garden: and after that, he softened again the
self same three times, with fire, water, and Sulpher, setting after a great
vessel full of blood, milk, and water, upon the burning brandes, which he
caused to boil a good space, and put thereto the herbs and roots, gathered
in strange places, minglyng therewith also diverse seeds and flowers of
unknown herbs, he added thereunto stones, sought in the extreme parts of
the east, and deawe gathered the nights paste, together with the flesh of
infamous Witches, the stones of a Wolf, the hinder part of a fat Cinyphis, and
the skin of a Chilinder. And lastly a Liver, with the whole lunges of an
exceeding old Heart: and herewithal a thousand other things, both without
name, and so strange, as my memory can not again tell them. After he took a
dry bough of an Olive tree, and therewith began to mingle all these things
together. In doing whereof, the dry bough began to wax green, and within a
while after to bear leaves, and not long after the new apparelling thereof, it
was laden with black Olives. As Thebane saw this, he took the boiling
licours, and began therewithal to sprinkle and water in every place the chosen
soil, wherein he had set slippes of so many woddes, as he would have trees,
and of as many sorts as could be found. The which licour the earth had no
sooner tasted, but that it began to spring: yelding flowers and new herbs, and
the dry settes began to become all green and fruitful plants. All this being
done, Theban entering the City, returned to Tarolfo, whom he found all in a
muse, fearing to be scorned through his long abode, to whom he said. Tarolfo,
the thing (thou requiredst) Tarolfo offers his Lady the garden which she
demanded.
is done to thy liking. These news pleased Tarolfo not a little, and happening
the day following to be a great solemnity in the City, he went into the
presence of his loved Lady, that had not now seen him of a long time past: and
thus he said unto her: Madame, after a long and tedious travail, I have
performed that which you have commanded, and when as it shall please you to see
it, or to take it, it is ready at your pleasure. She in seeing him, marvelled
much, and the more, hearing what he said, and not believing the same to be true,
made him this answer: It pleases me right well, ye shall let me see it to
morrow. The second day was come, and Tarolfo went again* to his lady, and
said: Madame, may it please you to walk to the Garden, the which you
required to have this cold month. She then being accompanied The Lady goes
to see the garden.
with many others, was moved to see the same. And they al being come to the
garden, entered therein by a fair portall: whereas they felt not the like cold as
abroad, but y^ same to have a sweet te^perats air. The lady went about y^
same, and into every corner thereof, gathering both herbs and flowers, whereof
she saw it very plentiful. And thus much more also had the virtue of the
spersed licours wroughte, that the fruits which August was accustomed to bring
forth, the trees there in this savage time, did yield them very fair, whereof
sundry did eat, that accompanied the lady thither. This Garden seemed to the
Lady exceeding fair and admirable, neither did she think to have ever seen
the like: and since she sundry ways knew it to be a true Garden, and the knight
to have performed her request, she turned toward The Lady grants the
amorous demand of Tarolfo.
him, and said: Without doubt sir Knight, ye have deserved my love, and I am
ready to stand to my promise. But I would pray you of this favor, that it
would please you to tarry the tune or ever ye require me to your desire, that my
Knight be gone a hunting or into some other place out of the City, to the end
ye may the more safely, and without any suspicion, take your delight. This
contented Tarolfo, who left her the Garden, and so departed. This Garden was
manifest to the whole country, although never a one knew of a long time, how
it came to pass. And the Lady that had now received it, al sorrowful departed
from the same, returning to her chamber, full of noisome care and grief,
bethinking her in what sort she might return back according to her promise:
and as not finding any leeful excuse, so much the more increased her care. The
which thing her husband espying, he began many times and often to marvel
thereat, and to ask the cause of y^ her grief, to whom she answered, y^ she
ailed nothing, being bashful to discover to him her given promise for her
craved gift, doubting lest in so doing, he should account her for leude.
Lastly, she being unable to withstand the continual instigatio^s of her
husband, y^ now still importunatly desired to know y^ cause of her annoy,
discoursed the same unto him, from the beginning to the end, and that therefore
she abode thus pensive. The husband hearing this, of long time suspected no
less, and thereby knowing in his conceit, y^ purity of the lady, thus said
unto her: Go and covertly keep thine oath, and liberally perform to Tarolfo
what thou have promised. For he has with his great toil of right deserved the
same. And having thus said, the lady began to weep, and to say unto him: The
Gods sever me far from such a ^ault. In no wise will I so do: I will rather
rid my self of life than do any thing displeasant to you, or dishonor to
your person. To whom the knight replied, saying: Wife, for this matter I will
that ye do no injury to your self, neither yet conceive any grief therefore,
for in no wise shall it displease me, go therefore, and perform what ye have
promised: for ye shall be never a whit the less dear to me: But as ye have
performed this your promise, so take ye better head hereafter of such like,
although y^ demanded gift may seem unto you impossible to be had. As the lady
perceived the will of her husband, she decked and trimmed her and made her
self very fair, took company The Lady presents ^ir self to Tarolfo.
with her, and so went to Tarolfos lodging, and all bepainted with
bashefulnesse presented her self unto him. Tarolfo as soon as he saw her, all
merua^ling, rose from Thebane, and encountered her with great gladness, and
very honorably received her, demandyng the cause of her coming. To whom she
answered, I am come to be wholly at your will, do with me as it pleases you.
Then said Tarolfo, ye make me to muse above measure, considering the time and
the company wherewith ye are come: This can not be without some great alteration
between you and your husband, tell me therefore I pray you, how the matter
goth. The lady then showed Tarolfo fully in order the whole matter and how it
went: the which Tarolfo hearing, he began then to enter into a far greater
admiration than he had ever done before, and greatly to bethink him hereof,
and so in the end to The liberality of Tarolfo toward the Lady in releasing
her of her promis*
conceive the great liberality of the husband, that had sent his wife unto
him; whereupon he said to himself: Whatsoever he be* that should so much as but
think villainy toward such a knight, were surely worthy of great blame: and
so taking and talking with the Lady, he thus said unto her: Madame, like a
worthy Lady, ye have performed that to me due is: for the which cause I account
that received of your hands, that I have of you desired, and therefore when it
shall please you, ye may return to your husband, and thank him (I pray you)
on my behalf, for this his so great a pleasure done unto me, and excuse me of
the solie I have heretofore committed toward him, assuring him, that hereafter
I shall never put the like in practice. The lady giving great thanks to Tarolfo
for that his so great courtesy, merrily departed the^^e and returned to her
husband, to whom she recited in order all that had been happened. But Theban,
now coming to Tarolfo demanded how the case stood. Tarolfo declared unto him
the whole discourse. To whom Theban then said: and I, shall I the^ lose that
which you have promised me? Tarolfo answered: no, but when it pleases thee,
take thou half of all the castles and treasures I have in sort heretofore
promised thee. For I acknowledge, that thou have fully served my turn. To
whom Theban answered: It may Liberality of Thebane toward Tarolfo.
never please ye Gods, since the knight was so liberal to thee of his wife, and
thou again wast not a villain to him in that his offer, that I become less
than courteous. For above all things in the world it contenteth me, in that I
have served thy turn: and therefore I will, that all that I ought to receive
in guerdon of my travail remain all thine, in such sort as it has ever been
heretofore: neither would he take of that was Tarolfos any thing at all. It is
now doubted, The conclusion of the proposer.
in whether of these was the greatest liberality, either in the knight y^ had
given liberty to his wife to go to Tarolfo, either in Tarolfo, who sent the
lady (whom he had always desired, and for whose sake he had done so much, to
come to that iumpe, whereunto he was common, when as she came unto him) back to
her husband free: or in Thebane, who having abandoned his country (being now
old) for to gain the promised rewards, and being come thither, toiled him
self to bring that to an end, which he had promised, whereby he justly
deserved y^ same, did now remit the whole to Tarolfo, and remained poor as he
was of the first. Very excellent is both the tale and The judgment of the
Queen upon the fourth question.
the demand, said the Queen. Of troth each one was very liberal,
considering the first of his honor, the second of his lascivious desire, and
the third that of his rewarded riches; was very courteous. Now if we will know
which of them used the greatest liberality or courtesy: It is meet we
consider whether of the three deeds is most acceptable, the which being well
wayed, we shall manifestly know the most liberal, b^ause who most gives, is
to be held most liberal: of the which three, the one is dear, that is
Honor, the which Paulus Aemilius vanquishyng Perses, king of Macedonia, rather
desired than the gained treasures. The second is to be fled, that is, the
wanton delights of Venus, according to the sentence of Sophocles, and of
Xenocrates, saying: That lust is to be fled as a furious government. The third
is not to be desired, that is Riches: for so much as the most times they are
noisome to a virtuous life, and to such a one as can virtuously live with
moderate Diverse Romans in times past pore, and yet virtuous.
poverty, as lived Marcus Curtius, Attilius Regulus, and Valerius Publicola,
as by their works is manifest. If then of these three, only Honor is to be
held dear, and the others not, he used the greatest liberality that gave his
wife to another, although he did less than wisely therein. He was also the
chiefest in liberality, wherein the others followed him: therefore according to
our judgment he that gave his wife in whom consisted his honor, was above
the rest, the most liberal. I (said Menedon) agree, that in The reply of
Men^d^^
as much as ye have thus said, it be as you say: but yet each one of y^ other
seems to me, to be more liberal, and ye shall hear how. It is very true,
that the first granted his wife, but he used therein not so great a liberality
as ye speak of, because if he would have denied her, he might not justly have
done it, by reason of the oath she made, the which was convenient for her to
keep: and therefore who gives that he may not deny, does but well in making
himself liberal thereof* and it was but a trifle he gave: and therefore (as I
have said) each one of the other was more courteous. And for that (as it is
already said) Tarolfo had now a long time desired this lady, and loved her
far above all others, he for to attain her, had of long time abode great
troubles, offering himself for to satisfy her request, to seek forth things
almost impossible to be had, the which now obtained, he deserved (through her
promised faith) to obtain her also, whom (as we say) being obtained, there is
no doubt but that the honor of the the husband, and the release of that she had
promised (the which he released) was in his hand. Then was he, to conclude,
liberal both of the honor of the husband, of the oath of his lady, and of his
own long desire. It is a great matter to have endured long thirst, and to
come to a pleasant fountain, and not to drink, but to suffer others to
drink. The third was also very liberal, considering that poverty is one of
the most loathsome things of the world to bear, for so much as it is the
chaser away both of mirth and rest, a flier of honors, a frequenter of virtue,
and the inducer of crabbed Every one f^ieth poverty.
care, so that every one naturally endeavor them selves with a fiery desire to
fly the same, the which desire is so kyndled in many, to the end to live very
splendantly in rest, as they give them selves no less to dishonest gain,
than to disordinate spences, peradventure not knowing, or not otherwise being
able to feed that their desire: which is cause many times either of death or
exile. How much then ought the riches to please and to be acceptable to them
that in due sort do both gain and possess them? And who will doubt that
Theban was not most poor if he behold how he abandoning his nights rest,
went gathering of herbs, and digging up of roots, in doubtful places for
the better sustentation of his poor life. And that this poverty did occupy
his virtue, may be also believed, in hearing how Tarolfo did deem to be by him
disceiued, when he beheld him apparelled in vile vesture, and seeing him
desirous to shake of that misery to become rich, knowing how he came as
far as from Thessalia, into Spain, hasarding him self to perilous chances
through doubtful iourneys and uncertain air, to the end to perform the
promise he had* made, and to receive the like from an other. Also it may be
evidently seen, that without doubt who gives him self to such and so many
miseries to the end to fly poverty, knows the same to be full of all grief
and troubles. And how much the more he has shaken of the greatest poverty,
and is entered a rich life, so much the more is the same life acceptable unto
him. Then who that is become of poor, rich, if therewith his life does delight
him, how great, and what manner of liberality does he use, if he give the same
away, and co^senteth to return to that state, the which he has with so many
troubles fled? Assuredly he does a thing exceeding great and liberal. And this
seems far greater than the rest, considering Old folks commonly covetous.
also of the age of the giver, that was now old: forasmuch as Avarice was wont
to be continually of greater force in old men than in young, whereupon I gather,
that each one of the two following, has used a greater liberality than has
the first, so much commended by you, and the third far more than either of
the others. In how much your reason might be well by any one defended, so
well is the same defended by you (said the Queen) but we mind to show unto
you briefly how our judgment rather tha^ yours ought to take place. Ye will
say, that he showed no The queen's solution to the fourth question.
Liberality at all, granting the use of his wife to an other, because of
reason it was convenient through the oath made by the Lady, that he should so
do, y^ which ought to be in deed if the oath might hold. But the wife
for so much as she is a membre of her husband, or rather one body with him, could
not justly make such an oath without the will of her husband: and yet if she
did make such an oath, it was nothing, because y^ first oath lawfully made,
could not with reason be derogate by any following, chiefly not by those that
are not duly made for a necessary cause. And the manner is in matrimonial
vnitings the man to swear to be content with the woman, and the woman with
the man, and never to change the one the other for an other. Now then, the
woman can not swear, and if she do swear (as we have said) she swears for
a thing unlawful, and so contrary to the former oath it ought not to prevail,
and not prevailing otherwise than for his pleasure, he ought not to commit his
wife to Tarolfo, and if he do commit her to him, then is he Liberal of his
honor, and not Tarolfo, as you hold opinion. Neither could he be liberal
of his oath in releasing it, for as much as the oath was nothing. Then only
remained Tarolfo liberal of his wanton desire: the which thing of propre
duty is convenient for every man to do, because we all through reason are
bound to banish vice, and to follow virtue. And who that does that, whereunto
he is of reason bound is (as ye have said) nothing at all liberal, Fly vice
and follow virtue.
but that which is done more than duty requires, may well and justly be
termed Liberality. But because you peradventure with silence argue in your
mind, what honor may that be of a chaste woman to her husband, which ought
to be so dear: we will prolong somewhat our talk in showing you, to the end
that ye may the more clearly see, that Tarolfo and Thebane, of whom we
intend next to speak, used no liberality at all in respect of the Knight. Ye
shall know that chastity together with the other virtues, yield none other
reward to the possessours thereof, Chastity a virtue most excellent.
than honor, the which honor among virtuous men, makes the least virtuous,
the most excellent. This honor if men with humility seek to support it, it
makes them friends to God, and so by consequent to live, and after death, to
possess the goods The joy of a man is to have a good wife.
eternal: the which if the woman conserueth for her husband, he may live
merrily, and certain of his offspring, and frequent in open sight among the
people content to see her for such her virtues honored among the most high and
chiefest dames, and in his mind it is a manifest token that she is good,
fears God, and loves him, which is no small pleasure, seeing she is given
him for an everlasting companion indivisible, saving by death: He through this
obtained favor is seen continually to increase, both in spiritual and The
grief of a man having an evil life.
wordly wealth. And so on the contrary, he whose wife has defaulte of such
virtues, can never pass one hour with true consolation, nothing is acceptable
unto him, and continually the one desires the death of the other, he
perceives him self through this disordred vice to be carried in the mouths
of the veriest misers, neither seems it unto him, that such a fault should
not be believed, of whom so ever it is heard: And if she were largely endowed
with all other virtues, yet this vice seems to have such a force as to bring
her in contempt, and to utter ruin. Then is this honor that makes the woman
both chaste and good to her husband, a most great gift, and so is to be held
most dearly. Blessed may he be called to whom through grace is granted such a
gift, although we believe they are but few, toward whom is borne envy for so
great a benefit. But to return to our purpose, it is to be seen how much the
Knight did give. It is not fled our memory when as ye said, that Theban was of
the rest most liberal, who being with trouble enriched, has not doubted to
return into the misery of poor estate, in gyuing away that which he had
gotten. It apparently appears, that ye are evil acquainted with poverty,
who if she come unto us merry, surmounteth all riches. Thebane now peradventure
The care which riches bring.
through the attained wealth, felt him self replete of sundry sour cares. He
did now imagine that it seemed Tarolfo to have done very evil, and therefore
would practice by murdring him, to recover again his Castles. He abode in
fear to be peradventure betrayed of his tenantes. He was entered into care
touching the government of his lands. He now knew all the prepared guiles to
be done unto his coparteners. He saw him self greatly envied for his riches,
and doubted least thieves should secretly spoil him thereof. He was stuffed
with so many such and sundry thoughts and cares, as all quietness was fled
from him. Through the which occasions, calling to mind his former life, and
that without so many cares he passed the same merrily, said to him self: I
desired to grow rich, to the end to attain quiet rest* but I see it is the
increaser of troubles and cogitations: so is it the flier of quietness: And
therefore desirous to be in his former estate, he rendered them all to him by
wh^me they were given. Poverty is the refused rich, sa goodness unknown, a
flier of prouocations, Poverty highly esteemed in times past.
the which was of Diogenes fully understood. As much suffiseth poverty, as
Nature requires. He lives safe from every disceite that pacie^tly approaches
therewith, neither is he disabled to attain to great honors, that (as we
have said) virtuously lives therewith: and therefore as Thebane rejected this
allurement he was not liberal, but wise. So gracious he was to Tarolfo, in
that it pleased him to give the same rather to him than to an other, where as
he might have bestowed the same upon many others. Then to conclude, the
Knight was more liberal that granted his honor, than any of the others: And
think this one thing, that the honor he gave was not to be again recovered,
the which happens not in many other things, as of battles, prowess, and
others like: For if they are at one time lost, they are recovered at an other,
and the same is possible* Therefore this may suffice for answer unto your
demand.

The fifth Question, proposed by CLONICO.
AFter the Queen became silent, and Menedon satisfied, a worthy young gentleman
called Clonico, that fat next to Menedon, thus began to say: Most mighty
Queen, this gentlewomans tale has been so excellent, and therwithall so long,
as I in what I may, shall briefly show unto you this my ^onceipt, to the end
the rest may the better at their more leisure say theirs. Then for as much as
I, although very young, knew the life of the subjects of our Lord Love, to be
replete with many cares and sundry pyning prouocations, yet with small delight
I have long time as I was able, fled the like, rather eschewing than commending
them which follow him: And although I was sundry times tempted, yet with a
valiant mind (leaving the pitched snares) I always resisted: But because I
being not strong enough, could no ways resist that force, whereunto Phoebus
was unable to gainstand, Cupide having taken heart to bring me into the number
of his thralles, was taken before I knew how. For one day being allured
abroad through the fresh renewed time,, walking all merry, and for my delight
gathering of shell fysh upon the salt Sea banks, it happened as I turned
mine eyes toward Four young damsels in a Bark upon the Sea.
the glittering waves, I soddaynely saw a little Bark coming toward me;
wherein, with one only marined, were four young Gentlewomen so fair, as i^ was
a marvelous thing to behold y^ beauty they seemed to have. They now being
approached somewhat near unto me, and I not having as yet turned mine eye from
them, saw in the midst of them an exceeding great light, wherein, as my
estimation gave me, me thought I saw the figure of an Angel, very young, and
so fair, as I never beheld thing more fairer: whom as I thus eyed, me
thought he said unto Clonico attanited of Love.
me with a voice far discrepant from ours: O young fool, persecuter of our
power (and being therewith arrived) I am come hither with four young damsels,
let thy eye make* choice of her for thy maistresse, that best likes thee. I
when I heard this voice, abode all appalled, and devised both with eye and
heart to avoid that which heretofore I had many times fled: but all was
bootelesse, for the strength of my legs sailed me, and byside, he had bow and
wyngs to overtake me quickly: whereupon I in gazing among them, espied one so
fair, so benign of cheer, and so piteous of semblaunce, as I imagined to
make choice of her, as of a singular maystresse, saying to my self: This
damsel presents hirselfe so humble to my eyes, as assuredly she will never
become enemy to my desires, as many others have been to the^, whom I have in
beholding full of troubles always scorned, but she shall rather be a chaser
away of my annoyes: and having thus thought, I forthwith answered: The
gracious beauty of that young damsel, that (O my Lord) sits on your right
hand, makes me desire to be both to you, and her, a most faithful servant. I
am therefore ready to obey your will, do with me as shall best like you. I had
not ended my tale, but y^ I felt my left side wounded The. ij. shaftes of Love
are different
with a shining shaft shot from the bow which he bare, as me thought y^ same
was of gold. And assuredly, I saw him as he turned toward her, to strike her
with an other of lead. And thus I being in this sort taken, abode in y^ snares
I had of long time fled. This young damsel has and does so much content mine
eye as all other pleasure is very scarce in comparison of this. The which she
espying, of long time showed her self content: but after that she knew me to
be so taken with this delight, as no^ to love her was a thing impossible,
incontinent she discovered her guile toward me* with an undeserved disdain,
showing her self in appearance a most cruel enemy, always turning hi^ eye
the contrary way, as she happened to epsy me* and with words, on my part
undeserved, always dispraising me, by oc^asion whereof, I have in sin^^ry
sorts endeavored my self both with prayers and humility to appease her
cruelty* but being unable, I oftentimes beweepe and lament this my hard
fortune, neither can I any ways withdraw me from Clonico an vnbeloued Lover.
loving her, but rather how much the more I find her cruel, so much the more
me thinks the flame of her pleasure does set my sorrowful heart on fire* As I
through th^se occasions, one day being all solitary in a garden, bewailed my
hap with infinite sighs, accompanied with many tears, there came upon me a
singular friend of mine, to wh^m part of my griefs were discovered, who with
pitiful words began to comfort me y^ best he could, but I giving thereunto no
ear at all, answered him, that my misery exceded all others. Whereunto he made
me this answer: A man is so much y^ more miserable (said he) as he either
malieth or reputeth himself a miser: but assuredly I have greater cause to
lament than have thou. I then al angry turned toward him with a disdainful
look, saying: And how? Who can have greter cause tha^ I? Do not I for good
service receive evil recompense? Is not my faithful love rewarded with hatred?
So that any may be as sorrowful as I, but more he can not be. Truly (said my
friend) I have greater cause of grief A Lover infected with jealousy recites
to Clonico the good entertainment of his Lady.
than have thou, and hear how. It is not unknown to thee, but y^ I have of
long time, and yet do love a Gentlewoman as thou know: neither was there
ever any thing that I thought might pleasure her, which I ga^e not my self
with all my wit and power to bring to effect. And truly when she understood
the same, of that I desired, she made me a gracious gift, the which as I had
received, and receiving it at what time it pleased me, me thought none by a
great way to have a life comparable to mine in gladness: only one thing
pricked me, that I could not make her believe how perfectly I loved her.
Further than this, she perceiving me to love her (as I said) passed lightly for
me. But the Gods that will grant no worldly good turn without some
bitterness, to the end that the A goodly sentence.
heavenly may be the better known, and by consequent the more desired, to this
they gave me an other corsey without comparison noisome, that is, that it
happened one day, as I abode with her all alone, in a secret place, seeing
(without being again seen) who passed by, espied a propre young man, and of a
pleasant countenance to come along by us, whom she beheld as I perceived, with
a fixed eye, and being past, she fette a pitiful sigh, the which I espying,
said: Alas, do you so soon repent, as that ye now sigh for the love of an
other? She, whose face was through this occasion painted with a new rudde,
swearing by the power of the high Gods, began with many excuses to endeavor her
self to make me believe the contrary of that which I had conceived through the
sigh, but all was to no purpose, because she kindled my heart with an anger so
exceeding fierce, as she made me then almost ready to chide with her, but yet I
withhelde me therfrom: And certainly it will never out of my mind but that she
loves him or some other better than me: and all those persuasio^s, the which
at other times heretofore she used for my help, that was, that she loved me
better than she did any other, I now esteem them all in contrary, imagining
that she has fainedly said, and done all that she has heretofore wrought,
whereby I endure intolerable grief, neither does any comfort at all prevail
therein: but because shame often times does bridle the will I have rather to
sorrow me than glad me, I do not continue my bitter grief, so as I make any
apparaunce thereof: but briefly I am never without cares and cogitations, the
which bring me far greater annoy than I willingly would. Learn then to bear
the less griefs, since thou see the greatest with a valiant mind borne of
me. To whom I answered, that as it seemed to me, his grief although it were
great, was no ways to be compared to mine. He answered me the contrary, and
thus we abode in a long contention, and in the end parted without any The
queen's judgment upon this fifth question.
diffinition. Wherefore, I pray you that ye will say your judgment hereof.
Young Gentleman, said the Queen, great is that pain of yours, and great wrong
does the damsel commit in not loving you. But yet at al times your grief may
by hope be eased, the which happens not to your companion, because that since
he is once entered in suspect, nothing is able to draw it away. Therefore
continually whilst Love lasts he sorroweth without comfort: So that in our
judgment greater seems the grief of the jealous, than that of the vnloued
Lover. Then said Clonico, The contrary opinion of Clonico.
Oh noble Queen, since you say so, it plainly appears that you have
always been loved again, of him whom you have loved, by occasion whereof, ye
hardely know what my pain is. How may it appear, that jealousy brings
greater grief than is that I feel, for so much as the jealous possesses that
he desires, and may in holding the same, take more delight thereof in one
hour, than in a long time after to feel any pain through want thereof: and
neuerthethelesse he may (through experience) abandon such jealousy, if it happen
that this judgment be found false: But I being kindled with a fiery desire,
how much y^ more I see my self far off from the attaining the same, so much
the more I burn and consume my self assaulted of a thousand instigations,
neither is any ^^perience able to help me therein, because through the often
reproving her, and finding her every hour more sharp, I live desperate.
Wherefore your answer seems contrary to the truth, because I doubt not but
that it is much better to hold with suspicion, than to desire with tears. That
amorous flame that does shine in our eyes, and that every hour does adorn our
sight with the greater beauty, does never consent (replied the Queen) that
we love in vain, as The Queen replieth.
you affirm: but for all that it is not unknown to us, how great and what
manner of pain that is, both of the one and the other: and therefore as our
answer has been confirmable to the truth* one thing we will show to you. It
is manifest that those things which most do hinder the quiet of the mind, are
cares, the which are some of them come to a merry end, so some we see to
end with great sorrow, whereof, how much more the mind is repleate, so much
the more has it of grief, and chiefliest, when as the same are noisome: and
that the jealous have more store thereof than have you, is manifest, because you
heed nothing else but only to get the good will of the damsel whom ye love,
the which not being able to attain, is to you a grief most grievous: but yet
it is certain that it may easly come to pass to attain the same at one
instant, not thinking thereof (for so much as women's hearts are inconstant)
bysides peradventure she loves you not withstanding (to prove if you also love
her) she shows the contrary, and so perhaps will show until such time as
she shall be well assured of your love, so that with these thoughts, hope can
mitigate unfeigned grief: but y^ jealous has his mind full fraught of infinite
cares, against the which neither hope nor other delyght can bring comfort, or
ease the pain. For he stands intentive to give a Law The effects of
Jealousy.
to the wandering eyes, the which his possessor can not give. He will and does
endeavor himself to give a Law to the feet, to the hands, and to every other
act of his Mistress. He will be a circu^spect knower both of her thoughts, and
of her mirth, interpreting every thing in evil part toward him self,
believing that each one desires and loves her whom he loves. Likewise he
imagines every word that she speaks to be twain, and full of disceite. And
if he ever committed any detractio^ toward her, it is death to him to remember
it, imagining to be by y^ like means deceived. He will with conjectures shut up
the ways of the air, and of the earth. And briefly the heavens, y^ earth,
birds, beasts, and every other creature that he thinks does hinder his
devises. And to remove him from this, hope has no place, because in this
doing, if he find the woman faithful, he thinks that she espieth that which
he does, and is therefore hedefull therein. If he finds that he seeks for,
and that he would not find, who is more dolorous than he? If peradventure ye
think that the embracing her in his arms be so great a delight unto him as
should mitigate these pangs, your judgment is then false, because such manner
of colling brings him in choler, in thinking y^ others as well as he, has
embraced her in y^ like sort: and if the woman peradventure do lovingly
entertain him, he demeth that she does it to the end to remove him from such
his imaginations, and not for the true love she bears him. If he find her
maliciously disposed, he thinks that she then loves an other, and is not
content with him. And thus we can show you an infinite nu^bre of other
suspicions and cares that are harbored in a jealous person. What shall we then
say of his life, but y^ it is far more grievous than that of any other living
creature. He lives believing, and not believing, The misery of a jealous life.
and still alluring the woman: and most times it happens, that these jealous
persons do end their lives through the self same malice, whereof they live
fearful, and not without cause, for that with their reprehensions, they show
the way to their own harms. Considering then the aforesaid reasons, more
cause has your friend that is jealous to sorrow, tha^ have The conclusion of
the Queen upon the fifth question.
you, because you may hope to get, and he lives in fear to lose that which he
scarsly holds for his own. And therefore if he have more cause of grief than
you, and yet comfortes him self the best he can, much more ought you to
comfort your self, and to set aside bewailings that are more meet for faint
hearts: and hope, that the assured love which you bear toward your Lady,
shall not lose his due desert: For though she show her self sharp toward you
at this present, it can not be but that she loves you, because that love
never pardoned any loved to love: and ye shall know, that with the fierce
vehement winds are sooner broken the stubbourne oaks, than the consenting
reeds.

The sixth Question, proposed by a young Gentlewoman.
NExt unto Clonico sat a fair Gentlewoma^ apparelled in black vesture under
an honest veil, who as she perceived the Queen to have made an end of her
words, thus began to say: Most gracious queen I remember, that being a little
girl, how one day I with my brother, who was a propre young man and of ripe
years, abode all alone in a garden, without other company: and in tarying
there together, it happened that two Two da^sels amorous of a Gentleman he not
knowing thereof: and that which happened.
young damsels of noble blood, abounding in riches, and borne in this our City,
who loved this my brother very well, and perceiving him to be in the said
garden, came thither, and began a far off to behold him that was altogether
ignorant of their purpose. And after a while, seeing him all alone, saving for
me of whom they reckned not, because I was but a little one, thus the one began
to say to the other. We love this young Gentleman above all others, neither do
know whether he loves us or no, yet is it meet that he love us both: so that
now it is leeful for us to satisfy our desire: and to know whether he love
either of us, or whether of us he best loves, to the end that she, whom he
shall best like of, may after remain his, without being hindered of y^ other:
wherefore since he is all alone, and that we have a meet time offered, let us
run unto him, and each one embrace and kiss him, that done, he shall take
whether of us best pleases him. These two young Gentlewomen being thus
determined upon this resolution, began to run their race toward my said
brother. Whereat he marvelled greatly, espying them, and seeing in what sort
they came: but the one of them or ever she came at us, by a good way, stayed
all bashful, and almost weeping ripe: the other run through, and came unto
him, whom she embraced and kissed, and so sat her down by him, recommending
her self unto him. And he, after the admiration conceived of her boldness,
was somewhat ceased, prayed her as ever she loved him, to tell him truly what
moved them thus to do? She concealed nothing from him, the which he hearing,
and examining well in his mind that which the one and other had done, knew
not how to persuade him self, whether of them best loved him, neither yet
whether of them he might best love. And so hapnyng at that time to depart from
them, he after prayed counsel of many of his friends touching this matter:
neither has any one ever satisfied his desire touching y^ demand. For the
which cause (I pray you) from whom I assuredly believe to have a true
definition of this my question, that ye will tell me whether of these two
damsels ought soonest to be loved of the young man. To this Gentlewoman the
Queen thus made answer: The answer of the Queen.
Truly of the two young women, she as it seems loved your brother best, and
soonest ought to be loved of him again, y^ (doubting) bashfully abode without
embracing him, and why I thus think, this ^^ the reason: Love (as we know)
makes those always Love is accompanied with fear.
fearful in whom he d^eth abide: and where he is of greatest force, there is
likewise the greatest fear: and this happens, because the intent or consent of
the person loved can not be fully known. And if it could be known, many
things should be done, that in fearing to offend, are left undone, because
the one knows that in displeasing, is taken away every occasion to be loved:
And with this fear and love shamfastnesse is always accompanied, and not
without reason. Rereturning then to our question. We say, that it was an act
of one unfeignedly enamoured, that of the Gentlewomans, whereby she showed her
self both fearful and bashful: And that of the other, was rather the part
of one both leude and licencious. And therefore he being of her best beloved,
ought the rather (according to our judgment) to love her best. Then answered
the Gentlewoman: Most courteous Queen, The Gentlewoman replieth to the Queen.
it is true, that where love abides with moderation there fear and
bashfulnesse does altogether frequent, but where he does abound in such
quantity as he takes away the sight from the most wise (as is already said) I
say, that fear has there no place, but that the motions of him that feels
the same, are according to him that urges them forwards, and therefore that
Gentlewoma^ seeing her desire before her eyes, was so hotly kindled, as al
shamfastnesse aba^doned, she ra^ne straight to him, by whom she was so
vehemently pricked forwards, as till then unable to abide. The other not so
much inflamed, observed the amorous terms, being bashefull and remaining
behind, as you ^^^. So that then she that ran, loved most, and most ought^o be
loved again. Discrete Gentlewoman, The Queen to the Ge^tlewoman makes answer.
(said the Queen) true it is, that excessive love takes away the sight, and
every other due perseverance in things that are ought of his nature, but not in
those that belong unto him, the which as he increases, so grow they. Then how
greater quantity of love is found in any one, so much the more fear (as we
said at the first) is there also found. And that this is true the cruel heart
of Biblis does manifest the same unto Biblis.
us, who how much she loved, was seen by the sequel thereof. For she seeing
her self abandoned and refused, had not the audacitie to discover her self
with her propre words, but writing she disclosed her unsitting desire.
Likewise Phedra many times gave ye attempt Phedra and Hippolito.
to go to Hippolito, to whom she thought boldly to speak, and to tell how much
she loved him: but the words she had to utter, no sooner came into her mouth,
but they stayed upon her tongue and there died. Oh how fearful is the person
that loves? Who Alcides.
has been more mighty than Alcides, to whom satisfied not y^ victory of
human things, but also he gave him self to bear up the heavens, and not
withstanding was lastly so enamoured, not of a woman, but of a young wenche, a
slave, which he had gained, as fearing her commaundeme^ts, did like an humble
subject or servant, even the very basest things. Also Paris in Paris.
what he durst not attempt neither with eye nor tongue, with his finger in the
presence of his love, writing first her name with wine that had been spilt,
wrote after, I love thee. How far passing all these does Pasiphe bring us a
due exaumple of fear, the which Pasiphe.
without any reasonable intendement, yea and without understanding, durst not
so much as express her desire to a beast, but with her propre hands,
gathering the soft grass, endeavored her self to make him benign unto her,
oftentimes decking her self at the glass for to please him, and to kindle him
in the like desire that she was in, to the end he might attempt to seek that
which she durst not demand. It is not meet for a Shame prescribes the
honor of Ladies.
woman enamoured, neither for any other, to be pro^pt and ready, forasmuch as
the great shamfastnesse only which ought to be in us, does remain as the
guarder of our honor. We have the voice among men, (and the troth is so) to
know better how to hide the amorous flame than they do, and nothing else
engenders this in us, but the great fear, the which does rather occupy our
forces than those of men. How many has there ben of them (and peradventure we
have known some) which many times have caused themselves, to have been bidden,
to the end thereby they might have achieved to the amorous effects, ye which
willingly would rather have bidden the bidder, before he them, if due
bashefulnesse and fear had not detained them: and not only that, but every
time that No, is escaped their mouth, they have had in their minds a thousand
repentyngs, saying from their hearts a thousand times Yea. There remains then
the like scelerate fire on the behalf of Semiramis, and Semiramis and
Cleopatra.
Cleopatra, the which loved not, but sought to quiet the rage of their wanton
wills, and the same being quieted, they after remembered not them selves the
one of the other. Wise merchants unwillingly do adventure at one time all
their treasures to the hasard of Fortune, and yet notwithstanding, they care
not to grant her some small portion, the which if they happen to lose, yet do
they feel no grief of mind at all The conclusion of the Queen upon the sixth
question.
for the same. The young woman therefore that embraced your brother, loved him
but a little, and that little she committed to Fortune, saying: This Gentleman
if I may hereby get him, it is well: but if he refuse me there shall be no more
but let him take an other. The other that abode all bashefull, forasmuch as she
loved him above all others, she doubted to put so great love in adventure,
imagining lest this peradventure should displease him, and he so refuse her,
that her grief should be then such and so much, as she should die thereof. Let
therefore the second be loved before the first.

The seventh Question, proposed by GALEONE.
A Clear Sun beam piercing through amongst the green leaves, did strike
upon the aforesaid Fountain, and did rebound the light thereof upon the fair
face of the adorned Queen who was thereby apparelled with that color, whereof
the heavens makes show when as both the children of Latona (from us hidden)
with their stars only gives us light: and besides the splendor it brought
to her face, it did so lighten the place, as among the fresh shade it yielded a
marvelous luster to the whole company. Further what time the reflected raye
did extend even to that place where the Laurel crown on her head on the one
side, and the golden tresses on the other, did determine: It so entermingled
there among with twinings, not artificial as at the first sight one would have
said, that there had issued forth among the green leaves a clear flame of a
burning fire, which did spread in such sort, as the aburne hairs were easily
seen to the standers about. Galeone that was peradventure sooner or better
awares of this marvelous sight tha^ any of the rest (being set in circle over
against the Queen divided only with the water) did very intentiuely behold the
same almost as though he cared for nothing else: so that he moved not his mouth
to the question that was now come to his turn: To whom the Queen therefore
(having now both kept silence a good space, as eke contented the witty
Gentlewoman) thus said: The only desire peradventure of the thing which thou
beholdest, stays thee: Tell what is the occasion that holds thee thus
appalled, as in following the order of the rest thou speak not? It is only
(as we believe) y^ gazing at our head, as if ye had never seen ye same before:
Tell us first, and after as the other have propounded, even so propound you. At
this sudden voice Galeone lift up his mind replete with sweet thoughts,
somewhat coming to him self, as what time he is wont to do, that through a
sudden fear does break his golden sleep, and thus said: Most noble and
renoumed Queen, whose worthiness it should be impossible for me to declare,
my mind was so wrapped in gracious thoughts (when as I did so firmly look at
your head, as in beholding the bright raye, streaming into the fresh
fountain, and rebounding upon your face, me thought there issued forth of the
water, a little sprite so gentle and gracious to see unto, as he plucked my
mind back, to behold that which he did, and perceiving peradventure, my eyes
altogether insufficient to behold so great a joy, he mounted by the clear
raye into your eyes, and there for a good space made marvelous myrthe,
adorning the same with a new clearenesse: And after mounting more high, I saw
how he ascended by this light (leaving his footesteppes in your eyes) upon your
crown, where as he together with the raye, kindled (as it seemed unto me) a
new flame, such a one as was of yore seen by Tanaquil to appear to Seruius
Tullus a little boy, whilst he slept, and so went about your crown, leaping
from sprigge to sprig, like a little amorous bird, that singing does visit
many leaves, moving your hearts with sundry iestures, sometimes wrappyng and
hiding him self therein, being more merrier every time he came forth thereof,
and therewith (as it seemed unto me) so iocund in him self, as nothing more,
and that singing, or with a sweet voice he vttred these words:

Of the third rolling Sky, the benign babe divine
I am: enamoured so, to neast in these two eyes,
That doubtless die I should, were I of mortal route:
From twig to twig I twine to feed this my delight,
These golden Tresses whirling in and out:
My self, inflaming my self, right
So as with flame I show, theffect, the potent might*
Of my darts divine, piercing where I go,
Each one wounding, that with sweet sight,
Does gaze her in the eyes: whereas each hour lo,
If such her pleasure be, I there descend adowne,
For of my kingdoms she, Queen is of great renown.
And herewith he said much more, going about as at what time ye called me, and
ye had no sooner spoken, but that he suddenly retired into your eyes, the which
sparklyng like to the morning star gave a new light that made all the place
to shine: ye have now heard with what joy new thoughts have stayed me for a
time. Philocopo and the rest marvelled not a little hereat, and turnyng their
eyes toward their Queen, saw that, which to hear seemed to them impossible.
And she that was attired with humility, listened to the words that were truly
reported of her, and abode with a stable countenance making no answer at all.
And therefore Galeone speaking in this wise, followed with his Question: Most
gracious Queen, I desire to know whether a man ought to be enamoured for his
delight or no? And to demand this, many things move me, both seen, heard,
and held, through the sundry opinions of many. The Queen beheld Galeone a
good while in the face, and afterward, after a certain sigh, thus made
answer. It is convenient we speak against that which with desire we seek to
follow. And truly that which you in askyng, do propound in doubt, ought to be
very manifest unto you. In answering you therefore there shall be kept y^ begone
order. And he whose subjects we are, pardon us the words, that we, as
constrained through force of Judgment, shall (more sooner than willing) say
against his divine majesty, least thereby his indignation do fall upon us. And
you that likewise as well as we are his subject, with a bold mind give ear
unto them, neither do you for all that change your purpose at all. And to the
end that so much the better, and with a more apparent intendine^t our words
may be received, we will somewhat digress from our matter, returning again
thereunto as briefly as possible we may, and thus we say: Love is of three
sorts, through y^ which three all other things ar loved, some through y^ virtue
of one, and some through the power of an other, according as is y^ thing loved,
and likewise the lover: The first of the which three is called honest love:
This is the good, upright, and loyal Love, the which of all persons ought to
be received: This, the high and first creator holds, linked to his creatures,
and them he tieth therewith unto him. Through this, the heavens, the world,
Realms, Provinces, and Cities do remain in their state: Through this we do
merit to be eternal possessors of the celestial kingdom: And without this is
lost all that we have, in power of well doing. The second is called Love for
delight: And this is he, whose subjects we are: This is our God, him we do
worship, him we do pray unto, in him do we trust, that he may be our
conte^tation, and that he fully may bring our desire to pass: Of this is put
the question, whereunto we shall duly answer. The third is Love for utility,
of this love the world is ^eplenished more than of any of the other things.
This is coupled with Fortune, whilst she tarieth, he likewise abides: but if
they part, he is then the waster of many goods. And to speak reasonably, he
ought to be deemed rather hate than love. Now as touching the propounded
question, we need to speak neither of the first, nor of the last: we will
speak of the second, that is, of Love for delight, to whom truly, no
person that desires to lead a virtuous life, ought to submit him self,
because he is the depriuer of honors, the bringer of troubles, the reueler of
vices, the copious giver of vain cares, and the unworthy occupier of the
liberty of others, a thing above all things to be held most dear. What is he
then regarding his own wealth (being wise) that will not fly such a
government? Let him that may live free, following those things that do every
way increase his liberty, and let vicious governors govern vicious vassals.
I did not think, said Galeone then, to give occasion through these my words
to the lessning of this our disport, nor to disquiet the regiment of our Lord
Love, neither yet to trouble the minds of any others, but did rather imagine
(you defining it according to the intent of me and many others) that ye might
thereby confirm those that are his subjects with a valiant mind, and inuit
those which are not, with as greedy appetite: but I see that your intent is
all contrary to mine, because you with your words do show to be iij. sorts of
Love, of the which three, the first and the last I consent they us (as you say)
but the second, the which answers to my demand, ye say it is as much ^o be
fled: As I hold opinion, it is as the increaser of virtue to be followed of
him that desires a glorious end, as I believe to make apparaunt unto you by
this that follows. This Love, of whom we reason (as i* may be manifest to
all the world, because we prove it) does work this propretie in human
hearts, that after it has disposed the mind to a thing which pleases, it
spoileth the same of all pride and of all fierceness, making them humble in
each doing, as it is manifest unto us by Mars, whom we find, that in loving
Venus, became of a fierce and sharp Duke in battle, a most humble and
pleasant Lover. It makes the greedy and covetous, liberal and courteous. Medea
the most careful hider of her art, after she felt his flames, liberally
yielded her self, her honor and her arts to Jason. Who makes men more
diligent to high attemptes than he? And what he can do, behold by Paris and
Menelaus. Who furthereth forwards the angry fires more tha^ does he? He
shows us how oftentimes the anger of Achilles, was quieted through the sweet
prayer of Polixena, He above all others makes men courageous and strong.
Neither know I what greater example may be given us, than that of Parseus, who
for Andromaca made a marvelous proof of his virtuous force. He dec^eth al them
that are by him apparelled, with excellent qualities, with ornate talk, with
magnificence, and with pleasantness. He I say bestows upon all his
subjects finenesse, and gentleness. Oh how many are the good things which
proceed from him? Who moved Virgill? Who O^^de? Who the other Poets to leave of
themselves eternal fame in those their holy verses, the which (if he had not
been) should never have comen to our ears, but he? What shall we say further of
his virtues? but that he was able to give such a sweetness to Orpheus harp,
as after that he had called to that sound all the woods, standers about, and
made the running streams to stay, and to come into his presence in mild peace
the fierce Lions togethers, with the faint hearted Hearts, and all other
beasts: he made likewise the infernal furies quiet, and gave rest and
sweetness to the troubled souls, and after all this the sound was of such
virtue, as he attained to have again his lost wife. Then is he not the chaser
away of honor as you say, neither the giver of unsitting troubles, nor the
prouoker of vices, nor the disposer of vain cares, nor the unworthy vser of
the liberty of others. So y^ every one of whom he makes none account, and is
not as yet his servant, ought with all their wit and diligence, to endeavor
and to occupy themselves in the attaining the favor of such a Lord, and to
become his subject, since through him he becomes virtuous. That which
pleases the Gods, and men of greatest strength, ought likewise to please us.
Let such a Lord therefore be loved, served, and live always in our minds.
Greatly deceives thee thine opinion said the Queen, and it is no marvel,
because as far as we understand, thou art so far enamoured, as none the like,
and without doubt the judgment of the enamoured is merely false, because as
they have lost the sight of the eyes of their mind, so have they banished
reason as their utter enemy. And for this cause it shall be convenient that we
against our will speak of Love, the which greueth us, since we be his subjects.
But yet to pluck thee from thine error we shall turn our silence to a true
report, and will therefore that thou know, that this Love is nothing else, than
an unreasonable will sprung of a passion through wanton pleasure, that is
opened to the eyes, nourished with idleness, by the memory and thoughts of
foolish minds: and many times in how much it multiplieth, it takes away the
in^e^t of him in whom it abides, from things necessary, and disposes y^ same
to things unprofitable. But because y^ thou through example giving do endeavor
thy self to show y^ all goodness and all virtue does proceed from him, we
will proceed to y^ disproufes of thy proof. It is no part of humility
unjustly to bring to a man's self, that which belongs to an other, but rather
an arrogan^ie and an unsitting presumption: The which thing Mars (whom thou
make through love to become humble) assuredly used in taking away from
Vulcan, Venus his most lauful wife. And without doubt this humility that
appears in the face of lovers does not proceed of a benign heart, but takes
root from guile and deceit, neither makes this love the covetous liberal,
but when as such abundance as thou layest to have been in Medea, does abound
in the heart, and does deprive the same of the sight of mind, and most
foolishly is become prodigal of things heretofore dul^ est^^ed dear, and not
giving the same with measure, but unprofitably casting them away, believes to
please* and displeases. Medea nothing wise of her prodigality, in short time
repented very much without utility, and knew that if she had modestly* used
those ^ir dear gifts, she should not have comen to so vile an end. And that
soliciting that purchases or works hurt to the soliciters, as it seems to
us, ought not any ways to be sought for* for much better it is to stand idle,
than work harm, although that neither the one nor the other is to be praised.
Paris was a solicitour to his own destruction, if he beheld the end of his
soliciting. Menelaus as reason was, became diligent, not for love, but to
recover his honor lost, as each discrete person ought to do. Neither yet is
this love a mean to mitigate anger, but the benignity of mind, the br^nt
being past that induces it, makes it to become nothing, and remitteth the
offense against whom it is angry. And yet lovers and discrete persons were
wont at the prayers of the person loved, or of some friend, to forgive
offenses, to show them selves courteous of that which cost them nothing, and to
make the crauers thereof beholding unto them. And in this sort Achilles, many
times showed him self to expel from him this co^geled anger. Likewise it
seems that this makes men courageous and worthy: But thereof I can show you the
contrary. Who was a man of greter valor than Hercules, and yet being enamoured
became vile and forgetful of his force, so that he did spin threede with the
women of Iole? Assuredly in things, wherein occurreth no danger, a most hardy
people are the enamoured, and wherein danger happens they show them selves in
apparaunce hardy, and put them selves forward, neither does love, but little
wit allure them so to do, to the end they may after have glory in the sight of
their loves, although it happens very seldom, because they doubt so much the
losyng of the person loved, that they are rather content to be held ^^le and
of little courage, than to give them selves to peril. And yet we doubt not,
but this Love reposeth all sweetness in Orpheus harp. We agree that it is
true that thou haste showed, that truly in general love ladeth the tongs of
his subjects with such a sweetness, and with so many enti^ements* as they
many times would thereby make the stones turn up side down, so y^ to entice is
not only the propretie of wavering and inconstant men, but of vile men. How
shall we say, that such a lord ought to be followed, through the good
propretie of the follower? Assuredly he (in whom he abides) makes wise and
profitable counsels to be despised. For it was evil with the Trojans that
those of Cassandra* were not heard of Paris. He makes likewise his subjects to
forget and despise their good fame, the which ought to remain to us all on
earth after our deaths, as an eternal heir of our memory. And how much
these aforsaid did contemn, the same Aegistus may suffice for an example:
Although Scylla wrought no less hurt tha^ Pasiphe. Is not he the occasion that
breaks sacred bonds of the promised pure faith? Yes truly what had Ariadna
done to Duke Theseus, whereby contaminating the matrimonial bands, and giving
himself and his promised faith to the winds, he should abandon her poor
miser among the desert rocks? A little pleasure in gasing in y^ eyes of
Phedra, was occasion to celerate so much evil, and of such requital for the
received honor. In him also is found no law: and that it is true, may be seen
by the doings of Tereus, who having received Philomena* from her pitiful
father, and carnally known her, made no stay to contaminate the most holy
laws matrimonially co^tracted between him and Progne, the sister of Philomena.
This also calling and causing himself to be called a God, occupies the reasons
of the gods. Who could ever fully with words show the iniquity of him? He to
speak briefly, leads them that follow him to all evils: and if by hap his
followers do any virtuous act (which happens very feldome) with a vicious
beginning they begin it, desiring thereby to come very quickly to the desired
end of their loths^m wills, the which may be rather said vices, than virtues,
for so much as that is not to be heeded only which man does, but with what mind
it is done, and so according to the will of the worker, to repute the same
vicious or virtuous, because that never of an evil root sprang a good tree,
nor from an evil tree good fruit. This Love then is leude and naught: and if
he be naught, he is to be fled. And who y^ flies things evil, of consequent
follows ^he good, and so is both good and virtuous. The beginning of this love
is none other thing than fear, the sequel is sin, and the end is grief
and noy, it ought then to be fled, and to be reproved, and to fear you to have
him in you, because he is violent, neither knows he in any of his doings to
use measure, and is altogether void of reason. He is without al doubt y^
destroyer of the minds, y^ shame, anguish, passion, grief, and plaint of y^
same, never co^senteth that the heart of whom that lodges him be without
bitterness, who will then praise that he is to be followed, but fools. Truly
if it were lauful we would willingly live without him, but of such an harm we
are to late awares, and therefore it is convenient for us, since we are caught
in his nets; to follow his life until what time as that light which guided
Aeneas out of y^ dark ways flying y^ perilous fires, may appear to us, and
guide us to his pleasures.

The eight Question proposed by a fair Gentlewoman named POLA.
ON the right hand of Galeone, was set a fair Gentlewoman, whose name was
Pola, pleasant, and yet under an honest couerture, who after ye Queen ble^t,
thus began to say: O noble Queen, ye have domed at this present, that no
person ought to follow this our Lord Love, and I for my part consent thereunto:
but yet since it seems to me impossible, that the youthful race both of men
and women should be run over without this benign Love: I gather, at this
present, setting apart (by your leave) your sentence, that to be enamoured is
leefull, taking the evil doing for due working: And in following the same, I
desire to know of you, whether of these two women Of what degree one should
chose his lover.
ought rather to be loved of a young man, both two pleasing him alike, either
she that is of noble blood, and of able kinsefolke, and copious of having much
more than the young man, or the other that is neither noble nor rich, nor of
kin^folkes so abounding as is the young man? To whom the Queen thus made
answer: Fair Gentlewoma^, admitting the case that The Queens answer.
both man and woman ought to follow Love as you have before affirmed, we give
judgment; that in how much the woman is richer, greater, and more noble than
the young man, of whatsoever degree or dignity he be of, even so she ought to
be rather preferred to the love of a young man, than ought she that has any
thing less than he: because man's mind was created to follow high things. And
therefore he must seek rather to advance than any ways to imbace him self.
Further there is a common proverb, which says:

The good to covet better it is,
Than to possess that bad is.
Wherefore in our judgment thou art better to love y^ most noble, and with good
reason to refuse the less noble. The^ said pleasant Pola* Noble Queen, I
would have given an other judgment (if it had been to me) The contrary opinion
of Pola with her reasons.
of this question, as ye shall hear. We all naturally do rather desire short
and brief, than long and tedious troubles, and that it is a less and more
brief trouble to get the love of the less noble, than of the more noble, is
manifest. Then the less ought to be followed: for as much as the love of the
less may be said to be already won, the which of the more is yet to get.
Further, many perils may follow to a man loving a woman of a greater condition,
than him self is of, neither has he lastly thereby any greater delight, than of
the lesser. For we see a great woman to have many kinsfolks, and a great
family, and them all as diligent heeders of her honor, to have an eye unto
her, so that if any one of them happen to epsy this love, thereof may follow (as
we have already said) great peril to the lover, the which of the less noble
can not so lightly come to pass: and these perils each one (as he is able)
ought to fly, for as much as who that receives harm is sure thereof, and who
that has done it, la^gheth him after to scorn, saying he sp^edeth well, where
he likes, there let him love: yet dies he more than once. But how* that once
happens, where, and for what occasion, besides each one ought to take good
heed: it is very credible that a Gentlewoman will lightly esteem of him, for
that she will desire to ^^^e one more noble or greater than her self and not
one inferior to her self: whereby seldom or never, he shall attain his desire.
But of the lesser shall happen the contrary, because that she will glory to be
loved of such a lover, and will endeavor her self to please him, to the end
to nourishe Love, and yet if this were not* the power of the lover only might
be able without fear to being to pass to fulfill his desire. Wherefore I
gather, that the less noble ought to be preferred in love before the more
noble. Your judgment deceives you (said the Queen) to the fair
Gentlewoman, because Love is of this nature that how much y^ more one loves,
so much the more he desires to love: And this may be seen by them, The
Queen's olution upon the eight question.
that through Love feel the greater grief, the which although it trouble them
not a little, yet love they continually the more: Neither does any one from
his heart, although he make great appearance in words, desire thereof a speedy
end. Then as small troubles are sought for of the slouthefull, of the wise,
things that are attained with most trouble, are held most dear and
delightful. And therefore in loving the less woman, to get her, should be (as
you say) little trouble, and the love both little and short, and should be
followed as though one in loving would desire to love less and less, which is
contrary to the nature of Love, as we have said. But in loving the greater,
that is gotten with trouble, happens the contrary: because* that as in a
thing dearly gotten, with travail is reposed all diligence to the well
heeding of the gained Love, even so is she every hour the more loved, and the
longer does continue the delight and pleasure thereof. And yet if ye will say
that all the doubt is of their kinsmen, we will not deny it, for this is one of
the occasions. Wherefore, it is a trouble to have the love of one of these great
women: But notwithstanding ye discrete in such cases proceed by a secret way.
And we doubt not but that the honor both of the greatest and meanest woman is
by some of their kinsfolks according to their power looked unto, in such sort,
as a fool may come to an evil adventure, loving as well in a base, as in a noble
stock: But what shall he be ye The cruelty of Pisistratus.
will pass Pisistrato in cruelty, having offended the^ which loved his
without forethinking that which he should afterward have done to those that
had had the same in heart* In saying also, that loving a greter woman then
himself, he shall never be able to come to the end of his desire, because
the woman coueteth to love one greater than her self, and therefore will make
of him no estimation at all, ye show your self to be ignorant that the
meanest man (in The meanest man of better condition than the noblest woman.
what belongs to natural virtues) is of greater and better condition, than
the noblest woman of ye world. Whatsoever man she then desires, she desires
him y^ is of greater and better condition than her self, because the virtuous
or vicious life makes many times the mean great, and the great mean. In as
much therefore as any woman shall be solicited by any man in ^ue sort, even so
without doubt she shall yield to his desire, though the great with more trouble,
than the mean. For we see the soft water with a continual fall to break and
pierce the hard stone: and therefore let none despair to love. For so much
goodness shall follow him that loves a greater woman than himself, The Queen
concludes that we should rather love the more noble woman than the less noble.
as he shall endeavor him self to please her, to have decent qualities, the
company of noble personages, to be ornate of sweet talk, bold in enterprises,
and splendant in apparel, and if he shall attain to greater glory, the
greater delight shall he have of mind, likewise he shall be exalted with the
good report of the people, and reputed of a noble mind. Let him therefore
follow the most noble, as we have already said.

The ninth Question proposed by FERAMONTE, Duke of Montorio.
Next unto pleasant Pola sat Feramo^te duke of Montorio, who after the Queen
had said, thus began: I consent that it be convenient to love, ye ye have
already fully answered this Gentlewoma^ to her question. And that a man ought to
love rather a more noble woman than a less noble than himself, may very well be
yielded unto through y^ sundry resons by you showed touching the same. But
forasmuch as there are sundry Gentlewome^ of sundry sorts attired Whether is to
be chosen in loving either the wife, the widow, or the maid.
with diversities of habites, that (as it is thought) do diversely love, some
more, some less, some more hotly, and some others more luke warm. I desire to
understand of you, whether of these three, a young man to bring his desire to a
most happy end, ought soonest to be enamoured of, either of her that is
married, or of the maid or of the widow? To whom the Queen made this answer:
Of the three, the one, that is the The Queens answer.
married woman, ought in no wise to be desired, because she is not her own,
neither has liberty to give her self to any: and therefore either to desire
her, or to take her; is both to commit an offense against the divine laws, as
also against the laws natural and positive, the offending whereof, is to heap
upon our selves, the divine anger, and by consequent, heavy Judgment.
Howbeit, who that gropeth not his conscience so far inwardly, does oftentimes
speed better in loving her, than of any of the other two, either maid or
widow, in as much as he (although such love sometimes be with great peril)
is to have the effect of his desire. And why this love may diverse times bring
the lover to his desire, sooner than the love of the others, this is the
reason: It is manifest, that in how much more the fire is blown, so much the
more it flameth, and without blowing, it becomes dead. And as all other
things through much use do decay, so contrariwise lust the more it is used, y^
more it increases. The widow in that she has been a long time without the like
effect, does feel the same almost as though it had never ben, and so is rather
kindled with the memory thereof, than with any concupisce^ce at all: The maid
that yet has no skill thereof, neither knows the same but by imagination,
desires as it were one luke warm: and therefore the married woman kindled in
such passions does more than any of the others desire such effects. What time
the married are wont to receive from their husbands oultragious words or deeds,
whereof willingly they would take revenge if they might, there is no way left
more redier unto them, than in despite of their husbands to give their love to
him, by whom they are allured to receive the like. And although it be
expedient that such manner of revenge be very secret, that no shame grow
thereby, nevertheless are they yet content in their minds. Further the always
using of one kind of meat is tedious: and we have oftentimes seen the
delicate meats left for the gross, turning afterward unto the same again,
what time the appetite has been satisfied of the others. But because (as we
have said) it is not lawful through any unjust occasion to desire that which
is an other man's, we w^ll leave the married to their husbands, and take of the
others, whereof a copious number our City does set The widow is to be loved
before the maid.
before our eyes. And we would in bestowing our love rather seek the widows
than the rude maids, gross for such a mystery, and that are not without
great trouble (the which in widows needs not) made able to a man's desire.
Further if maids love, they know not what they desire, and therefore they do
not follow with an intentive mind, the steps of the lover as do the widows,
in whom now the antique fire takes force, and makes them to desire that which
through long abuse they had forgotten: so that to come to such effect, they (to
late) beweepe the loft times, and the solitary long nights, the which they
have passed in their widowish beds. These are therefore (as it seems unto us)
rather to be loved of them in whom is the liberty to submit them selves to
others, than any of the rest. Then answered Faramonte: The contrary opinion
of Faramonte:
Most Excellent Queen, what ye have said of the married, I had determined in
my mind that so it ought to be: and now hearing the same from you, I am the
rather assured thereof. But touching the maids and widows, I am of the
contrary opinion, because (setting the married aparte, for the reasons by you
alleged) it seems unto me, that the maid rather than the widow ought to be
desired: for as much as the love of the maid seems more firm and assured
than that of the widow. For the widow without doubt has already loved one
other time before, and has seen and felt many things of Love, and knows
what shame may follow thereof: and therefore knowing these things better than
the maid, loves fair and softly: and doubting and not loving firmly,
desires now this and now that, and knows not to whether for her most delight
and greatest honor to link her self, for sometimes she will neither the one,
nor the other: so that deliberation does waver in her mind, neither is the
amorous passion able to take there stabilitie: but to the maid these things
are altogether unknown. And therefore as ^he persuadeth The constancy of
maids in love.
her self with good aduisement, that of many young men she greatly pleases
one, so without further examination she makes choice of him as of her lover,
and to him only disposes her love, not knowing how for his pleasure to show
any contrary act, neither is there for the more sure tying of the lover, any
new deliberation by her sought forth, touching her love, so that she is then
pure at the will and pleasure of him that simply pleases her, and quickly
disposes her wounded heart him only to serve as lord. The which thing (as I
have already said) happens not of the widow, and therefore is the other, the
rather to be followed. Further, with more efficacy y^ maid tarieth those
things that never any one of her sort has seen, heard, or proved. And yet
she desires more to see, hear and prove them, than who that has many times
both seen, heard and proved them, and this is manifest. Among the other
occasions for the which our life does greatly delight us, and is desired to be
long, is for to see new things, such as we have yet never seen before. And
also for to see things most new we have a great delight to run with a
dilligent pace to that, which we above all other things do endeavor our selves
to fly, that is death, the last end of our bodies. The maid knows not that
delightful conjunction, through the which we come into the world, and yet is
it natural to every creature through a desire to be drawn thereunto. Further
she many times has heard from them, that know what manner a thing it is, how
much sweetness does consist therein, the which with words have given fire to
the desire, and therefore drawn of nature, and of a desire to prove the thing,
of her not as yet proved, does through the words which she has heard, desire
boldly with a kindled heart this concourse. And with whom is it presumed to be
had but only with him, whom she has already made lord of her mind? This
heat shall not be in the widow, because having once proved and felt what
manner a thing it was, she is thereby provoked thereunto: So that the maid then
shall love more, and be more diligent (through the reasons aforesaid) to the
pleasure of her Lover, than the widow. To what end shall we then wade any
further in seeking that the maid ought not rather The Queen's solution upon the
nynth question.
to be loved than the widow? You, said y^ Queen reason well, and very well you
defend your judgment: But yet we will show you with apparent reason, how you
likewise ought to hold the same opinion, that we hold of this contention, if
with a straight eye ye look to the nature of Love. Thus in the Maid as in the
widow, and so in the widow as in the Maid we see him to be firm, strong, and
constant, and that this is true. Dido and Adriana with their doings have left
us an e^aumple. And where as this love is neither in the one nor the other,
none of the aforsaid operations will thereof follow. Then is it convenient that
each one of them do love, if we will have that to follow, whereof both you and
I have already talked. And therefore in loving either maid or widow, without
going about to seek whether of them does most discretely enamour (as we are
certain of the widow) Maids ought not to love, but in respect of marriage.
we shall show you how the widow is more diligent to the pleasure of the
lover, than is the maid. For doubtless among those things, that a woman
esteems dear above the rest, is her virginity: and this is the reason,
because therein consists all the honor of her following life. And without
doubt she shall never be so much urged forwards to love, as she shall not
willingly be courteous thereof, but yet to him only, to whom she believes to be
coupled* as wife, through the matrimonial law. And therefore we go not about
seeking for this: for there is no doubt but that who will love to marry, ought
rather to love the maid than the widow, because she shall be slow and
negligent in giving her self to him that loves her not (if she know it) to
that effect. Further, maids are generally fearful, neither are they subtle
enough to find the ways and means, whereby they may take the stolen
delights: But the widow of these things makes no doubt at all, because that
she already has honorably given that which the other tarieth to give, and
being without the same, doubts not in giving her self to an other, that
token which may accuse: Whereby afterward, she becomes the more
aduenturous, because (as is said) the chiefest occasion that brings doubt is
not in her: besides she knows better the secret ways, and so puts them
in effect. In that which you say, that the maid as desirous of a thing which
she never proved, may be made more diligent to this than the widow, that
knows what manner a thing it is, thereof the contrary. Maids do not at the
first time for their delight, run to such effect (although the thing that
delights, the oftener it is seen, heard, or felt, the more it pleases, and
the more careful is every one to follow the same (because it is then more
noysom than pleasant to the^. This thing whereof we reason, does not follow the
order of many other things, y^ once or twice being seen, are afterward no
more desired, but rather the oftener it is put in effect, with so much the
more affection it coueteth to return, and more desires he y^ thing whom it
pleases, than does he whom it ought to please, and has not as yet tasted
thereof. Wherefore the widow forasmuch as she gives least, and is best able to
give, she shall be the most liberal, and y^ more sooner tha^ the maid, that
must give the dearest thing she has. Also the widow shall be sooner drawn (as
we have showed) than the maid to such effects. For the which occasion, let
the widow be rather loved than the Maid.

The tenth Question, proposed by ASCALIONE.
IT was convenient that Ascalione, who in circle sat next unto the Duke
Feramonte, should now propound: and therefore thus he said: Most excellent
Queen I remember that there was heretofore in this our city a fair and noble
Ge^tlewoman left the widow of a worthy husband, the which for that her
marvelous beauty, was of many a noble young Gentleman beloved. And of those
many, there were two Gentlemen courageous knights, each one in what he could
did endeavor him self to attain her love. And whilst this continued, by
chance it happened, that an unjust accusation was brought against her, by
certain of her kinsfolks, before the Magistrate, and after by false evidence
proved, through the which untrue process she was condemned to the fire. But
because the conscience of the Judge was perplexed, for that it seemed him, as
it were, to know the unjust proof, he was willing to commit her life to the
Gods, and to Fortunes hap, and so tied such a condition to his given
sentence, as after the Gentlewoman should be led to the fire, if any knight
could be found the which would combat in the defense of her honor, against
him that would maintain the contrary, and should hap to overcome, she
should then be free, and if the contrary, to be burned according to the domed
sentence. Two Knights amorous of one Gentlewoman, did in sundry wise show
their love.
As the condition was understood of her two Lovers, and by chance sooner
known to the one than to the other: He which knew the same soonest, forthwith
took him to his armor, mounted on horsbacke, and came into the field,
gainsaying him that would come and maintain the death of the Gentlewoman. The
other, that somewhat later than the first understood of this sentence, and
hearing how that the knight was already in field in her defense, neither that
there was th^n place for any other to go thither in that enterprise, and
therefore not knowing herein what to do, became very sorrowful, imaginyng that
through his slacknesse he had lost the love of the loved Gentlewoma^, and that
the other justly had deserved the same: and whilst he thus sorowed his
missehap, he bethought him, that if he before any other should go armed into
the field, saying that the Gentlewoman ought to dye* and so suffer him self
to be overcome, he might thereby cause her to escape, and so according to his
device, he put the same in effect. The Gentlewoman hereby escaped, and was
delivered from peril. So that then after certain days, the first knight went
unto her, and recommended him self unto her, putting her in remembrance, how
that he, to preserve her from death, had a few days past, offered him self to
the peril of death, and thanks be to the Gods, and to his forces, he had
delivered both her and him self from so hard an hap: Whereupon it would
please her, according to his desert to give her love, the which above all
things he had always desired. Afterward with the like prayers came the
second Knight, saying that for your sake I have hasarded my life, and because
you should not die, suffered my self to be overcome, whereupon I have purchased
to my self eternal infamy: whereas I contrariwise with incountring your
surety, and willing to use my force, might have been able to have gotten the
honor of the victory. The Gentlewoman thanked each one of them very benignely,
promising them both due recompense for the received service. And now they being
departed, she abode in great doubt to whether of them she should the rather
give her love, to the first, or to the second, and thereof prays counsel of
you, on whether of them ye would say, that she ought soonest to bestow the
same. We The Queens judgment upon the contrary doings of the ^^ Knights.
deem (said the Queen) that the first is to be loved, and the last to be
left: because the first used force, and showed his assured love in diligent
sort, gyuing him self to every peril, that might happen through the future
battle, even unto the death, whereby it might very well have followed,
forasmuch as if such a battle to be done against him, had been as lefull to any
of the enemies of the Gentlewoman as it was to the lover, he had been in peril
of death for her defense: neither was it manifest to him, that one should come
against him, that would suffer him self to be ouercomen, as it happened. The
last truly went well advised not to die, neither to suffer the Gentlewoman to
die. Then, forasmuch as he put least in adventure, he meriteth to gain the
less. Let the first then have the love of the fair Gentlewoman, as the just
deseruer thereof. Ascalione said: O most prudent Queen, what is that you say?
Does not one time suffice to be rewarded Ascalion contrarieth the Queen*
for well doing, without craving further deserte? Truly yes. The first is well
requi^ed, with being of every one honored for the received victory: and what
greater reward needs he than honor the reward of virtue? the received
honor did suffice for a greater matter than he did. And he that with all his
wit came well advised, ought he to be unrecompensed? and further he to be of
every one evil spoken of, having nothing less than the first helped the
gentlewoman to escape? Is not the wit to foresee every bodily force? How so?
If this man with all his wit came for the safety of the Gentlewoman, ought he
for his desert to be rejected? God forbid it should so be. If he knew not the
same so soon as the other, this was not through negligence: for if perhaps he
had known it before the other, he would have ru^ne to that, which he took
discretely for the last remedy: whereof, reward justly ought to follow, the
which reward ought to be the love of the Gentlewoman, if rightly she see unto
him: and yet you say the contrary. God defend from your mind (answered the
Queen) that vice come to a good end, merit the The (...) solution ^^ the x.
question.
same reward that virtue done to the like end meriteth: but rather in as much
as vice deserves correction, so no worldly deserte can justly satisfy virtue.
Who shall deny us to believe (although we can not manifest the same with
apparent reason) but that the last Knight as envious of the good turn he saw
prepared for the other, was moved to such an enterprise, to the end to
disturb the same, and not for the love he bare to the Gentlewoman, and yet his
device failed him. He is a fool that under the color of an enemy does
endeavor him self (to the end to receive recompense) to help an other.
Infinite are the ways whereby it is possible enough for us to show at the
first with open friendship, the love, that one of us bears toward the other,
without showing our selves as enemies, and after with colored words to make
show to have profited. That which we have said may now suffice you for
answer, whom old age more than any thing else, ought to make discrete. And
we believe, y^ when your mind shall have duly disgested these things, ye shall
not find our judgment guileful, but true, and to be followed. And so she held
her peace.

The eleventh Question, proposed by a Gentlewoman, named GRACE.
THere followed after him a Ge^tlewoman of cheer very mylde, whose name was
Grace, and assuredly the name was consonant to her nature, wh^e with an humble
and modest voice began these words: It is come to my turn, Oh most
virtuous Queen, to propounde this my Question, the which to the end the time
(that now approaches to our las^ feasting, may be swetened with the new
beginning thereof) be only spente in talk, I shall briefly propou^d y^ which
willingly (if it were leful for me) I would pass over* but yet not to pretermit
the limits of your obedience, neither the order of the rest, I shall propounde
this: Whether is it great delight to the lover to see his love present, or not
seeing her, to think amorously on her? My gracious Grace said y^ Queen, we
believe that much more delight is taken in thinking, Whether is greater
pleasure to a Lover to see the present, or to think on the absent.
than in beholding: because in thinking on the thing loved, all y^ sensitive
spirits do then graciously feel a marvelous joy, and as it were do content
their inflamed desires, with the delight only of y^ thought. But this happens
not in the beholding, because y^ only the visible spirit feels joy, and the
others are kindled with such a desire that they are not able to endure, and so
remain vanquished: and that visible spirit sometime takes so great pleasure,
that of force The judgment of the Queen.
he is constrained to withdraw him self back, remaining vile and altogether
vanquished. Then do we gather hereof, that greater delight is to think than
to behold. That thing which is loved, answered the Gentlewoman, how much y^
more it is seen, so much the more it delights: and therefore I believe, that
greater delight brings the beholding, than does the thynking, because every
beauty at the first, pleases through the sight thereof: and so after through
the continual sight, such pleasure is confirmed in the mind, as thereof is
engendered Love, and those pleasures that spring from him. No beauty is so much
loved, neither for any other occasion than to please the ^yes, and to content
the same. Then in seeing they are contented, and in thinking to see, the desire
increases: so that more delight foeleth he that is contented, than does he
that desires to content him self. We may see and know by Laodomia how
much more the present sight tha^ the absent thought does delight, Laodomia and
Prothesilaus.
because we are to think that her Prothesilaus never departed from her
thought, neither yet was she ever seen disposed to other than to melancholy,
refusyng to deck and apparel her self with her costlye garments: The which
thing in seeing him never happened: For what time she abode in his presence,
she was merry, gracious, and always joyful, and trimly attired. What more
manifest testimony will we have than this, that the gladness is not greater of
ye sight than of the thought? Because that through the exterior doings, that
may be comprehended, which in the heart is hidden? The Queen then, thus made
answer, The queen's solution of the.xi. question, defining that the thought is
to be preferred before the look.
Those things, both delightful and noisome, that approach most nere to the
mind, bring more annoye, and more joy, than do those far off from the same.
And who doubts but that the thought abides in y^ mind, and that the mind
is not from the eye? although through the particular virtue of the mind, they
have their sight, and that it is convenient for them by sundry means to render
their proportions to the animate understanding. Having then in the mind a
sweet thought of the loved, in that act which the thought brings, in that
together with the thing loved, it seems the lover to be. Then he sees the
same with those eyes, to whom nothing, no not of a long distance may be
hidden. Then he speaks with her who^ he loves, and peradventure with piteous
style tells the annoyes sustained for her sake. Then it is lawful for him
without fear to embrace her. Then does he according to his desire maruelously
glad himself with her. Then does he hold her wholly at his pleasure, the
which in beholding happens not, because y^ sight only at first takes
pleasure without passing further. And as we say, Love is timorous and fearful,
and in beholding, does make the heart tremble in such sort, as it leaves
neither thought nor spirit in his place. For many with ye long beholding of
their ladies, lose those their natural forces, and remain vanquished: and many
not being able to move, stand like posts, The effecies of fond amorous looks.
other some, in tangling and traversing their legs, fall to the ground*
Others thereby lose their speech: and by sight we know many other like things
to have happened, the which all should have been very acceptable to them, to
whom (as we have said) they have happened, if they had not happened at all,
how then brings that thing delight, that shall willingly be fled? We
confess, that if it were possible to behold without fear, it should be a
great delight. But yet little or nothing without the thought, the which without
the bodily sight, pleases very much. And that that whereof we have spoken
may come to pass through the thought, it is manifest, that, yea, and much
more. For we find that men with thought have passed the heavens, and tasted of
the eternal peace. Than more delights the thought than the sight. And if ye
say that Laodomia was melancholy with thinking, we do not deny it, but yet it
was rather a dolorous than an amorous thought, that did trouble her: She as it
were a diuiner to her own harm, always doubted the death of Prothesilaus,
and still was thinking thereon, contrary to those thoughts whereof we reason,
which through that doubt could not enter into her, but rather sorowing through
this occasion as reason was, she showed a troublesome and heavy look.

The twelfth Question proposed by PARMENIO.
PArmenio sat next to this Gentlewoman, and without attendyng further, as the
Queen had left, thus began* Most mighty queen I was of long time companyon
with a young Gentleman, to whom that happened which I intend to show. He as much
as any man could love a woman, loved a fair young Gentlewoman of our city,
gracious, gentle, and very rich, both of wealth and parents, and she eke loved
him for ought that I (to whom his love was discovered) could understand. This
Gentleman th^n loving her in most secret sort, fearing that if it should be
bewrayed, that he should no ways be able to speak unto her: to the end
therefore that he might discover his intent, and be certified likewise of hirs,
he trusted no one that should attempt to speak of this matter: yet his desire
enforcing him, he purposed since that he could not bewray him self unto her,
to make her understand by some other, that which he suffered for her sake. And
bethynkyng him many days by whom he might most closely signify unto her that
his intent, he saw one day a poor old woman, wrinkled, and of an orange
tawnie color, so despiteful to behold as none the like, the which being
entered the house of the young woman to ask her alms, followed her forth of
the door, and many times after in like sort, and for like occasion, he saw
her return thither. In this woman his heart gave him to repose his whole
trust, imagining that she should never be had in suspicion, and that she might
fully bring his desire to effect: therefore calling her to him, he promised her
most great gifts, if she would help him in that which he should demand of
her: She swear to do her endeavor, to whom this Gentleman then discovered his
mind. The old woman departed, and after a while having certified the young
woman of the love that my companion bare her, and him likewise, how that she
above all other things of the world did love A gentleman a gentlewoman and an
old woman were taken by the brethren of the gentlewoma^.
him, she devised how this young man should be secretly one evening with y^
desired woman: and so he going before her, as she had appointed, she guided him
to this young gentlewoma^s house, wherein he was no sooner entered than through his
misfortune, y^ young woman, y^ old, and he, were all three found, and taken
togithers, by the brethren of the young woman, and compelled to tell the truth
of that they made there, who confessed the whole matter as it was. These
brethren, for that they were the friends of this young Gentleman, and knowing
that he as yet had attained nothing that might redou^de to their shame, would
not do him any harm as they might have done, but laughing said unto him in this
sort: Thou art now in our hands, and have sought to dishonor us, and for that
we may punish thee, if The Gentleman condemned to lie with the yo^g and old
woman either of them a year.
we will, of these two ways see that thou take the one, either that thou will
we take thy life from thee, or else that thou lie with this old woman, and
this our sister, either of them one year, swearing faithfully, that if thou
shall take upon thee to lie with either of them a year, and the first year
with the young woman, that as many times as thou shall kiss, or have to do with
her, as many times shall thou kiss and have to do with the old woman the
second year. And if thou shall take the first year y^ old woman, look how
many times thou shalt kiss and touch her, so many times likewise, and
neither more nor less shall thou do the like to the young woman the second
year. The young man listening to the sentence, and desirous to live, said,
that he would lie with these two, two years. It was granted him. But he
remained in doubt, with which of them he should first begin, either with
the young, or with the old. Whether of them would you give counsel he should
first, for his most consolation begin withal? The Queen, and The Queen
decideth the xij. question
likewise the whole company somewhat smiled at this tale, and after, she thus
made answer: According to our judgment the young Gentleman ought rather to
take the fair young woman, than the foul old, because no present good turn
ought to be left for the future, neither y^ evil to be taken for the future
good, because we know that we are uncertain of things to come: and in doing
the contrary hereof, many have already sorowed to late: and if any have praised
himself herein, not Duty but Fortune has therein helped him. Let the fair
therefore be first taken. Ye The contrary opinion of Parmenio.
make me greatly to marvel (said Parmenio,) seeing that the present good
ought not to be left for the future, to what end then is it convenient for us
with a valiant mind to follow and bear worldly troubles, where as we may
fly them, if it were not through the future eternal kingdoms promised to us
through hope? It is a marvelous thing that such a shocke of people as are in
the world, all moyling to the end at one time to taste of rest, and being
able to rest before trouble, should remain so long while in such an error, as
trouble after rest were better than before. It is a thing very just (as it
seems to me) after troubles to seek rest, but to desire to rest without
trouble in my judgment ought not to be, neither can it bring delight. Who then
will give counsel to any, that he lie first with a fair Gentlewoman one
year, the which is the only rest and joy of him that must lie with her, in
showing him after that there must follow so great anoy and unpleasant life, as
he must in every act wherein he abode with the young woman, have to do as long
with a loathsome old woman? Nothing is so noisome to a delightful life, as to
remember, that after death we shall be found spotted. This death returning to
our memory as enemy contrary to our being does disturb us of all goodness
and pleasure, and whilst this is remembered, there can never be joy tasted in
worldly things. Likewise no delight can be had with the young woman, that is
not troubled or destroyed in thinking and remembryng that it behooves him to do
as much with a most vile old woman, who shall always be remaining before the
eyes of his mind. The time that flies with an inestimable wing, shall seem
unto him to ouerflie, lesning each day a great quantity of the due hours: and
this mirthe is not tasted, where as infallible future sorrow is tarried for.
Wherefore I would judge, that the contrary were better counsel, that is, that
all trouble, whereof gracious rest is hoped for, is more delightful, than the
delight, whereof anoy is tarried for. The cold waters seemed warm, and the
dreadful time of the dark night seemed clear and sound day, and turmoiles
rest to Leander, at what time he went to Hero, swimming with the force of his
arms, through the salt sourges between Sesto and Abido, for y^ delight that he
conceived to have of her tarrying his coming. God forbid then, that a man
should co^et rest before travail, or reward before the doing his service, or
delight, before he has tasted tribulation: forasmuch as if that way (as we
have already said) should be taken, the future annoy should so much hinder the
present joy, that not joy, but rather annoy, it might be said. What delighte
could the delicate meats, and the instruments founded with cunning hand,
and the other marvelous joys made to Dionysius the tyrant bring, when as he
saw a sharp Dionysius.
pointed sword hang by a fine threede over his head? Let then sorrowful
occasions be first fled, that afterward with pleasure, and that without
suspicion, gracious delights may be followed. The Queen made him answer,
saying: You answer in part as The Queens solution of the.xij. question,
defining that the young is to be lain with before the old.
though we did reason of eternal joys, for the purchasing whereof, there is no
doubt but that all troubles ought to be taken in hand, and all worldly wealth
and delight to be left aparte: but at this instant we do not speak of them,
but do move a Question of worldly delights, and of worldly annoyes. Whereunto
we answer as we said before, that every worldly delight, that is followed with
worldly anoy, ought rather to be taken, than the worldly annoy that tarieth
worldly delight: because who that has time, and tarieth time, loses time.
Fortune grants her goodness with sundry mutations, the which is rather to
be taken* when as she gives, than to moyle to the end after turmoiles to get
the same. If her wheel stood firm and stable, until that a man had toiled
so much as he should need to toil no more, we would then say, that it were to
be granted to take pains first: but who is certain that after the evil may
not follow the worsse, as well as the better that is tarried for? The times
together with worldly things are all transitory, and therefore in taking the old
woman, before the year be complete, the which shall never seem to wax less,
the young woman may die, and her brethren repent them of this they have done,
either else she may be given to some other, or peradventure stolen away, so
that after one evil, there shall follow a worse to the taker. But
contrariwise, if y^ young woman shall be taken, the taker shall thereby have his
desire so long time of him desired, neither shall there after follow that annoy
of thought, that you say must follow thereby, because that we must dye is
infallible, but to lie with an old woman is a hap able enough with many remedies
to be of a wise man avoided, and worldly things are to be taken of the discrete
with this condition, that each one whilst he holds, and enjoys them, he
dispose himself with a liberal mind, when he shall be required to restore
or leave them. Who that busieth himself to the end to rest, brings a
manifest example that without that he cannot have rest: and since he therefore
takes troubles to the end to have rest, how much more is it to be presumed,
that if rest were as ready as is trouble, but that he would sooner take that
than this? Neither is it to be thought that Leander if he had been able to
have had Hero without passing the tempestious arm of y^ sea, wherein after he
perished, would not rather have taken her, than have swo^^e the same. It is
convenient to take Fortunes happes what time she gives them. For no gift is so
small, that is not better than a promised A small gift in hand is better tha^
a promised greater.
greater. And as for Future things, let remedies be taken, and the present
governed according to their qualities. It is a natural thing to desire rather
the good than the evil, when as equally they concur, and who that does the
contrary follows not natural reason, but his own folly. We confess, that
after troubles quietness is more gracious and better known than before, but
yet not that it is rather to be taken than the other. It is possible for wise
me^ and fools to use the Counsels both of fools and wisemen according to
their liking: but for all that the infallible verity is not altered, the which
does give us leave to see that rather the fair young woman than the loathsome
old is to be taken of him, to whom was made such a choice.

The thirtenth Question, proposed by MASSALINE.
MAssaline the which sat on the right hand of the Queen, and next to
Parmenio, performing the circle, said in this wise: It is mete that I lastly
propounde my question: And therefore to the end that I may make the pleasant
told tales, and the before propouned Questions to seem more sweet, I shall tell
you a short tale worth the hearing, wherein there falls a question very propre
to make an end withal. I have heretofore heard say that there was in this
our City a gentleman, who was very rich, that had to wife an exceedyng fair
A Gentlewoman was loved of a Knight.
young Gentlewoman, whom he loved above al worldly things. This gentlewoman was
intierly beloved of a Knight of the same City, but she loved him not at all,
neither cared for him, by occasion whereof, the Knight was never able to get
from her, either good words or courteous countenance: and while he thus lived
comfortless of such love* It happened that h^ was called to the regiment of a
city not far distant from this of ours. And accordingly he went thither,
having honorably governed the same all the time of his abode there: during the
which it happened, that there came a messanger unto him, who after other The
Knight advertised of the death of her whom he loved.
news thus said: Sir ye shall understand, that the Gentlewoman of our City,
whom you so entierly loved above all others, this morning laboring with great
grief to be delivered of child dyed, not being delivered, and was in my
presence, of her parents honorably buried. The Knight not without great
sorrow, gave ear to this tale, and with a strong heart endured y^ telling
thereof, without showing any alteration of countenance at all, and to him self
thus said: Ha wretched death, cursed be thy power, thou have deprived me of
her, whom I loved above all others, and whom I desired more to serve,
although I knew her cruel unto me, than any other worldly wight. But since it
is ^hus come to pass, that which Love in her life time would not vouchsafe to
grant me, now^ that she is dead, he can not deny me: That assuredly if I
should die therefore, I will now kiss the face of her being dead, that living
I loved so well. And so staying upon this determination he tarried until it
was night, and then took one of his servants, whom he best trusted with him,
and travailed the dreadful The Knight seeks his loved Gentlewoman in her
grave.
dark ways till at the last he came to the City: And being entered the same,
he went straight to the sepulture, wherein the Gentlewoman was buried: And after
he had comforted his servant, that he without any fear should attend him
there, he opened the same, and went therinto, where as lamenting with a piteous
plaint he kissed the Gentlewoman, and took her in his arms, and not satisfied
therewith, he began to feel her here and there, and to put his hand* into her
frosen breast among the cold dugs. But afterward (being become more bold
than was meet) to seek out under the rich attire which she had on, the
secret parts of the body, going and feeling with a fearful hand hither and
thither till at the last he spread the same upon her stomach, where as with a
feeble motion he felt the weak pulses somewhat to move. He then became very
fearful, but yet love made him bold, and therefore trying further with a more
assured head, he knew that she was not dead: and first of all with a sweet
mutation he drew her out of that place, and after wrapping her in a great
mantel (leaving the sepulture open) he and his servant carried The knight
carries hi^ lady to hi^ mothers house.
her secretly to his mothers house, where as he coniured his said mother,
through the power of the gods, that she, neither this, nor any thing else
should manifest to any person living. He caused great fires to be made, to the
end to comfort the cold members* whereunto y^ lost forces did not thereby
return in due sort: by occasion whereof, as one peradventure discrete in such a
case, willed a solemn hot house to be prepared, wherein he caused first to be
strowed many virtuous herbs, and after placed the Gentlewoman therein, causing
her as it was mete for one in that plight, to be tenderly looked unto. In the
which hotehouse, after she had for a time made her abode there, y^ blood
coagulate about the heart, began through the received heat to disperse by the
cold veins, and the spirits half dead began to return^ to their places:
whereupon the Gentlewoman (no sooner feeling the same) began to call to her
mother, and after to ask where she was: to whom the Knight instead of her
mother made answer, that she was in a very good place, and Lucina, the
goddess of child bearing.
that she should comfort her self: She abiding in this sort, calling upon the
woman Lucina for help, was as it pleased the Gods (above all expectation)
delivered of a fair son, and therewith of great trouble and peril: whereof
remaining disburdened, and being joyful of her new borne child, there were
out of The Gentlewoman abiding with the Knight, was delivered of child.
hand provided nourses, both for the charge of her, as also of her son. The
Gentlewoman now after all these heavy troubles, returned to her perfect
understanding, and the new son was also borne to the world, before she saw
either the Knight that thus loved her, or his mother who was pressed to do her
service, neither did she see any one of her parents or kinsfolks about her,
for to look unto her: whereupon being come into a cogitable admiration as it
were all amassed, said: Where am I? what a wonder is this? Who has brought me
hither, whereas I was never before? To whom the Knight answered: Gentlewoman,
The knight declares to the Gentlewoman how she was brought into his house.
marvel not, comfort your self, for that which you see, has been the pleasure
of the gods, and I shall tell you how, and so declaryng from the beginning to
the end all that which was happened her, concluded that through him, she and
her son were alive: By occasion whereof they were always bounden to be at his
pleasure. The Gentlewoman perceiving this to be true, knowing assuredly that
she could not by any other means but only by this which he showed her, be
come to the hands of the knight: first of al with a devout voice, rendered
thanks to the immortal Gods, and after to him, offering her self to be always at
his pleasure and service. Then said the knight: Gentlewoman, since ye know your
self to be beholding unto me, I will that in guerdon of my well doing, ye
comfort your self here in this place, until I return from my office,
whereunto it is now so long since that I was chosen, as the date thereof is
almost at an end. Besides ye shall promise me faithfully never to bewraye
your self without my license, either to your husband, or to any other person.
To whom the Gentlewoman answered, that she was unable to deny him either
this, or any other request, and that assuredly she would comfort her self:
and so by oath made unto him, she affirmed never to cause her self be known
without his pleasure. The Knight seeing the Gentlewoman out of all peril to
receive comfort, after he had abode.ij. days in her service, recommended her
and her child to his mothers charge, and so departed, returning to the
government of his said office, the which after a little while he honorably
ended, and returned home to his own house and possessions: where as of the
Gentlewoman he was graciously The knight bids the husband of the
Gentlewoman to ^ banquet,
received. Certain days after his return, he caused to be prepared a great
banquet, whereunto he invited the husband of this Gentlewoman, whom he loved,
her brethren, and many others of her friends and his: and the bidden guestes
being set down at the table, the Gentlewoman according to the pleasure of the
Knight, came apparelled in those garments, and decked with that crown, ring,
and other precious orna^^nts (as the use was then) wherewith she was buried. And
by the commandment of the knight placed her self on the one side by her
husband, and on the other side by him self, where as she fed that morning,
without speaking any word at all. This Gentlewoman was oftentimes beheld of
her husband, and her attire and ornaments also: and as it seemed unto him, he
knew her to be his wife, and those to be the garments wherein she was buried:
but yet for that he thought he had buried her dead into her sepulture* and not
beleuyng that she was risen again, durs^e not once give her a word, doubting
least she had been some other that did resemble his wife, imagining that it were
more easy to find one woman, in attire and ornaments like to an other, than to
raise up a dead body. But yet for all this* he turned many times toward the
knight, and asked him who she was. To whom the knight answered: Ask of her*
whom she is, sor I can not tell, out of so unpleasant a place I have brought
her. Then the husband asked the wife who she was, to whom she answered: I was
brought by this Knight by unknown ways in to this place, to that gracious
life, that is of every one desired. At these words there wanted no admiration
in the husband, but rather the same increased, and so they remained until the
banquet was ended. Then The knight restores the gentlewoma^ to her husband.
the Knight l^dde the husband of this Gentlewoma^ into a chamber, and with him
the Gentlewoman, and the others likewise that banketted with them, where as
they found the Gentlewoma^n fair and gracious son in the nourses arms*
whom the knight delivered into the fathers hands, saying: This is thy son,
and giving him the right hand of his wife, said: This is thy wife, and mother
of this child: showing to him and to the rest, how it happened that she was
brought thither. They all after great wonder, made great joy, and chiefly the
husband of his wife, and the wife with her husband, of their son. And so
both two thanking the Knight, returned merrily home to their house, many days
after making marvelous joy. This Knight entreated this Gentlewoman with that
tenderness and that pure faith, as if she had been his sister, and therefore
it is doubted which of these two was the greater: either the loyalty The
Question is whether ^he loyalty of the Knight, or the joy of the husband was
the greater. The Queen's judgment.
of the Knight, or the joy of the husband, that had now gotten again his
lost wife, whom he reputed as dead. I pray you to say your opinion, and what
you would judge hereof? Most great (as we believe) (answered the Queen) was the
joy of the again gotten wife, and of her child: and likewise noble and very
great was the loyalty of the Knight. But for that it is a natural thing to be
glad of the getting again of things lost (neither could it otherwise be
because it would an other) and specially in the gettyng again of a thing
before so greatly loved, with a child, whereof there could not be made so
great joy, as was convenient. We do not repute it to be so great a matter
as ^o do that whereunto a man is of his propre virtue constrained to do, the
which in being loyal comes to pass, because the being and not being loyal,
is a thing possible. We say then, that from whom proceeds the being loyal in a
thing so greatly loved, that he does a most great and noble thing in keeping
loyalty, and that in a far greater quantity loyalty does increase in him,
than does joy in the other, and thus we judge. Truly said Massaline* most
renoun^ed Queen, I believe it be as you say: but yet The contrary opinion of
Massaline.
it semes unto me a great matter to think, that with so great joy as was in
him that had gotten again his wife, there could be made comparison of
greatness in an other thing: forasmuch as greater grief is not supported,
than when as through death a thing loved is lost. Further, if the knight were
faithful, as is already said, he did therein but his duty, because we all are
bounde^ to the working of virtue: and he that does that, whereunto he is of
duty bounden, does but well, but yet it is not to be reputed for so great a
matter. Therefore I imagine, y^ there may be judged greater The Queen's solution
upon the last Question.
joy than loyalty. You with your words do contrary your self (said the
Queen) because man ought as well to rejoice in the goodness of God in taking
him away, as through the working of virtue: but if the one could be in the one
case, as sorrowful as the other could be in the other case disloyal, it might
be consented to your judgment. To follow the laws of nature, which can not
be fled* is no great matter, but to obey the positive laws, is a virtue of y^
mind, and the virtues of the mind, both for greatness as for every other
respect are to be preferred before bodily works. And if virtuous works
(making due recompense) do surmount in greatness every other working, it may
be said, y^ the having ben loyal, dureth always in being. Joy may be turned
into sudden sorrow, either else in a short space of time become little or
nothing, losing the thing through ^he which it is become merry. And therefore let
it be said of him, that uprightly will judge, the Knight to have been more
loyal, than the other merry. Not one there was that followed Massaline, that had
any thing more to say, for that they all had now propouned their Questions. The
Sun now in setting, left the place replete with a temperate air. By reason
whereof, Fiametta, most reverent Queen of this amorous people, raised her on
foot, and thus said: Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, your Questions are finished:
whereunto (the Gods be thanked) we have according to our small knowledge, made
answer, following rather pleasant reasoning, than matter of contention. And we
know, that much more might have been answered unto the same, yea and in far
better sort than we have done: But yet that which we have said may suffice to
our pastime: and for the rest, let it remain to the Philosophers of Athens.
We see Phoebus now not to behold us with a straight aspect, we feel the air
refreshed, and know this Feast, which we at our coming hither left through the
excessiu^ heat, to be again begone by our companions. And therefore it seems
us good, that we return to y^ same: and this being said, she took with her
delicate hand, the Laurel crown from her head, and in the place where she
sat, she laid it down, saying: I leave here the crown of my honor and
yours, until that we shall return hither to the like reasoning. And having
thus said: she took Philocopo by the hand, that now with the rest was risen,
and so returned with them all to their Feast. Thence was heard of al sides the
pleasant instruments, and the air resounding of amorous songs, no part of the
Garden was without banketting: wherein they all abode merrily all that day, even
to the last hour: but night being come upon them, and the stars showing
forth their light* it seemed good to the Lady, and to them al, to depart and to
return to the city, wherein being entered, Philocopo taking his leave, thus
said unto her: Most noble Fiametta, if the Gods should ever grant me, that I
were mine own, as I am an others, without doubt I should be presently youres,
but because mine own I am not, I can not give my self to an other: How be it
for so much as the miserable heart could receive strange fire, so much the more
it feels through your inestimable worthiness to be kindled, and shall feel
always and incessauntly, with more effect shall desire never to be forgetful
of your worthiness. She thanked Philocopo greatly of this curtesy at his
departure, adding that it would please the Gods quickly to bring a gracious
peace to his desires.

FINIS.

