THE Decameron CONTAINING An hundred pleasant Nouels.

Wittily discoursed, between seven Honorable Ladies, and three Noble
Gentlemen.

London, printed by Isaac Iaggard, 1620.



TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight of the Bath at the
Coronation of our Sovereign Lord King James, Lord Baron of Sherland, Earl of
Montgomery, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc. (*)
THE Philosopher Zeno ( Right Honorable, and my most worthily esteemed Lord)
being demanded on a time by what means a man might attain to happiness;
made answer: By resorting to the dead, and having familiar conversation with
them. Intimating thereby: The reading of ancient and modern Histories, and
endeavoring to learn such good instructions, as have been observed in our
Predecessors. A Question also was moved by great King Ptolomy, to one of the
learned wise Interpreters. In what occasions a King should exercise himself,
whereto thus he replied: To know those things which formerly have bin done:
And to read Books of those matters which offer themselves daily, or are
fittest for our instant affairs. And lastly, in seeking those things
whatsoever, that make for a Kingdoms preservation, and the correction of evil
manners or examples.

Upon these good and warrantable grounds (most Noble Lord) beside many more of
the same Nature, which I omit, to avoid prolixity, I dare boldly affirm, that
such as are exercised in the reading of Histories, although they seem to be
but young in years, and slenderly instructed in worldly matters: yet gravity
and gray headed age speaks maturely in them, to the no mean admiration of
common and vulgar judgment. As contrariwise, such as are ignorant of things
done and past, before themselves had any being: continue still in the estate of
children, able to speak or behave themselves no otherwise; and, even within
the bounds of their Native Countries (in respect of knowledge or manly
capacity) they are no more then well-seeming dumb Images.

In due consideration of the precedent allegations, and upon the command, as
also most Noble encouragement of your Honor from time to time; this volume of
singular and exquisite Histories, varied into so many and exact natures,
appears in the worlds view, under your Noble patronage and defense, to be
safely sheelded from foul mouthed slander and detraction, which is too easily
thrown upon the very best deserving labors.

I know (most worthy Lord) that many of them have (long since) been published
before, as stolen from the first original Author, and yet not beautified with
his sweet style and elocution of phrases, neither sauouring of his singular
moral applications. For, as it was his full scope and aim, by discovering all
vices in their ugly deformities, to make their mortal enemies (the sacred
Virtues) to shine the clearer, being set down by them, and compared with them:
so every true and upright judgment, in observing the course of these
well-carried Nouels, shall plainly perceive, that there is no spare made of
reproof in any degree whatsoever, where sin is embraced, and grace neglected;
but the just deserving shame and punishment thereon inflticted, that others may
be warned by their example. In imitation of witty Aesope; who recites not a
Fable, but graceth it with a judicious moral application; as many other worthy
Writers have done the like.

For instance, let me here insert one. A poor man, having a pike staff on
his shoulder, and travailing through a Country Village, a great Mastiue Curre
ran mainly at him, so that hardly he could defend himself from him. At the
length, it was his chance to kill the Dog: for which, the Owner immediately
apprehending him, and bringing him before the Judge, alleged, that he had
slain his servant, which defended his life, house, and goods, and therefore
challenged satisfaction. The Judge leaning more in favor to the Plaintiff, as
being his friend, neighbor, and familiar, then to the justice and equity of the
cause; reproved the poor fellow somewhat sharply, and peremptorily commanded
him, to make satisfaction, or else he would commit him to prison. That were
injustice replied the poor man, because I kilde the dog in defense of mine
own life, which deserves much better respect then a million of such Curres.
Sir, sir, said the Judge, then you should have turned the other end of
your staff, and not the pike, so the dogs life had been saved, and your
own in no danger. True Sir (quoth the fellow) if the dog would have turned his
tail, and bit me with that, and not his teeth, then we both had parted
quietly.

I know your Honor to be so truly judicious, that your self can make the
moral allusion, both in defense of my poor pains, and acceptance of the
same into your protection: with most humble submission of my self, and all my
uttermost endeauours, to be always ready at your service.

The Authors Prologue, to the Lords, Ladies, and Gentlewomen.
IT is a matter of humanity, to take compassion on the afflicted, and although
it be fitting toward all in general, yet to such as are most tied by bond of
duty, who having already stood in need of comfort, do therefore most needfully
deserve to enjoy it. Among whom, if ever any were in necessity, found it most
precious, and thereby received no small contentment, I am one of them; because
from my very youngest years, even until this instant: mine affections becam
extraordinarily enflamed, in a place high and Noble, more (perhaps) then
beseemed my humble condition, albeit no way distasted in the judgment of such
as were discreet, when it came truly to their knowledge and understanding. Yet
(indeed) it was very painful for me to endure, not in regard of her cruelty,
whom I so dearly loved; as for want of better government in mine own
carriage; being altogether swayed by rash and peevish passions, which made my
afflictions more offensive to me, then either wisdom allowed, or suited with
my private particular.

But, as counsel in misery is no mean comfort, so the good advice of a worthy
friend, by many sound and singular persuasions, wrought such a deliberate
alteration; as not only preserved my life (which was before in extreme
peril) but also gave conclusion to my inconsiderate love, which in my
precedent refractarie carriage, no deliberation, counsel, evident shame, or
whatsoever peril should ensue thereon, could in any manner contradict; began
to assuage of it self in time, bestowing not only on me my former freedom,
but delivering me likewise from infinite perplexities.

And because the acknowledgement of good turns or courtesies received (in my
poor opinion) is a virtue among all other highly to be commended, and the
contrary also to be condemned: to show my self not ungrateful, I determined
(so soon as I saw my self in absolute liberty) in exchange of so great a
benefit bestowne on me, to minister some mitigation, I will not say to such as
relieved me, because their own better understanding, or blessedness in
Fortune, may defend them from any such necessity; but rather to them which
truly stand in need. And although that my comfort, may some way or other avail
the common needy, yet (methinkes) where grief is greatest, and calamity most
insulteth; there ought to be our pains soundly employed, and our grauest
instructions and advise wholly administered.

And who can deny, but that it is much more convenient, to commisserate the
distress of Ladies and Gentlewomen, then the more able condition of men? They,
as being naturally bashful and timorous, have their soft and gentle souls,
often enflamed with amorous afflictions, which lie there closely concealed, as
they can best relate the power of them, that have bin subject to the greatest
proof. Moreover, they being restrained from their wills and desires, by the
severity of Fathers, Mothers, Brethren, and Husbands, are shut up (most part
of their time) in their Chambers, where constrainedly sitting idle, diversity
of strange cogitations wheel up and down their brains, forging as many
several imaginations, which cannot be always pleasant and contenting. If
melancholy, incited by some amorous or lovely apprehension, oppress their
weak and vnresisting hearts: they must be glad to bear it patiently (til by
better Fortune) such occasions happen, as may overcome so proud an usurpation.

Moreover, we cannot but confess, that they are less able, then men, to
support such oppressions: for if men grow affectionate, we plainly perceive,
when any melancholy troublesome thoughts, or what greefes else can any way
concern them, their souls are not subject to the like sufferings. But admit
they should fall into such necessity, they can come and go whither they will,
hear and see many singular sights, hawk, hunt, fish, foul, ride, or sail on
the Seas, all which exercises have a particular power in themselves, to
withdraw amorous passions, and appropriate the will to the pleasing appetite,
either by alteration of air, distance of place, or protraction of time, to
kill sorrow, and quicken delight.

Wherefore, somewhat to amend this error in humane condition, and where least
strength is, as we see to be in you most gracious Ladies and Gentlewomen,
further off (then men) from all frail felicities: for such as feel the
weighty insultations of proud and imprious love, and thereby are most in need
of comfort (and not they that can handle the Needle, Wheel, and Distaffe) I
have provided an hundred Nouelles, Tales, Fables, or Histories, with judicious
moralles belonging to them, for your more delight, and queinter exercise. In a
fair and worthy assembly, of seven Honorable Ladies, and three Noble
Gentlemen, they were recounted within the compass of ten days, during the
woeful time of our so late dangerous sickness, with apt Sonnets or Canzons,
for the conclusion of each several day.

In which pleasing Nouels, may be observed many strange accidents of Love, and
other notable adventures, happening as well in our times, as those of grauer
antiquity: by reading whereof, you may receive both pleasure and profitable
counsel, because in them you shall perceive, both the sin to be shunned, and
the virtue to be embraced; which as I wholly hate the one, so I do (and ever
will) honor the others advancement.

The Table.
The First Day, Governed by Madam Pampinea.
MEssire Chappelet du Prat, by making a false confession, beguiled an holy
religious man, and after dyed. And having during his life time, been a very bad
man, at his death was reputed to be a Saint, and called S. Chappelet. 2.
Novel. ABraham a Jew, being admonished or advised by a friend of his, named
Iehannot de Cheuigny, travailed from Paris unto Rome: And beholding there, the
wicked behavior of men in the Church, returned to Paris again, where
(nevertheless) he became a Christian. 3. Novel. MElchisedech a Jew, by
recounting a tale of three Rings, to the great Sultan, named Saladine,
prevented a great danger which was prepared for him. 4. Novel. A Monk having
committed an offense deserving to be very grievously punished; freed himself
from the pain to be inflicted on him, by wittily reprehending his Abbot, with
the very same fault. 5. Novel. LAdy Marquess of Montferrat, with a Banquet of
Hens, and diverse other gracious speeches beside, repressed the fond love of the
King of France. 6. Novel. AN honest plain meaning man (simply and
conscionably) reprehended the malignity, hypocrisy, and misdemeanor of many
religious persons. 7. Novel. BErgamino, by telling a Tale of a skillful man,
named Primasso, and of an Abbot of Clugni; honestly checked a new kind of
covetousness, in Master Can de la Scala. 8. Novel. GVillaume Boursieur, with
a few quaint and familiar word:, checked the miserable covetousness of Signior
Herminio de Grimaldi. 9. Novel. HOw the King of Cyprus was wittily
reprehended, by the words of a Gentlewoman of Gascoignie, and became virtuously
altered from his vicious disposition. 10. Novel. MAster Albert of Bullen,
honestly made a Lady to blush, that thought to have done as much to him, because
she perceived him to be amorously affected toward her.
The second Day, governed by Madam Philomena.
1. Novel. MArtellino counterfetting to be lame of his members, caused
himself to be set on the body of Saint Arriguo, where he made show of his
sudden recovery (...) but when his dissi^ulation was discovered, he was well
beaten, being afterward taken prisoner, and in great (...) of being hanged and
strangled by the neck, and yet escaped in the end. 2. Novel. RInaldo de Este,
after he was rolled by thieves arrived at Chasteau (...) where he was friendly
lodged by a fair Widow, and recompensed likewise for all his losses; returning
afterward safe and well home unto his own house* 3. Novel. OF three young
Gentlemen, being Brethren, and having spent all their Lands and possession^
vainly, became poor. A Nephew of theirs (falling almost into as desperate a
condition) became acquainted with an Abbot, whom he afterward found to be the
King of Englands Daughter, and made him her Husband in marriage, recompencing
all his Uncles losses, and seating them again in good estate. 4. Novel.
LAndolpho Ruffolo, falling into poverty, became a Pirate on the Seas, and
being taken by the Genewayes, hardly escaped drowning: Which yet
(nevertheless) he did, upon a little chest or coffer full of very rich Jewels,
being carried thereon to Corfu, where he was well entertained by a good woman:
and afterward, returned richly home to his own house. 5. Novel. ANdrea de
Piero, traveling from Perouse unto Naples to buy Horses, was (in the space of
one night) surprised by three admirable accidents, out of all which he
fortunately escaped, and with a rich Ring, returned home to his own house. 6.
Novel. MAdame Beritola Caracalla, was found in an Island with two Goats,
having lost her two sons, and thence travailed into Lunigiana^ where one of her
Sons became servant to the Lord thereof, and was ^ound somewhat ouer-familiar
with his Masters daughter, who therefore caused him to be imprisoned.
Afterward when the Country of Sicily rebelled against King Charles, the
aforesaid Son chanced to be known by his Mother, and was married to his
Masters daughter. And his brother being found likewise, they both returned to
great estate and credit. 7. Novel. THe Soldane of Babylon sent one of his
Daughters, to be joined in marriage with the King of Cholcos; who by diverse
accidents (in the space of four years) happened into the custody of nine
men, and in sundry places. At length, being restored back to her Father, she
went to the said king of Cholcos, as a Maid, and as at first she was intended
to be his Wife. 8. Novel. COunt D'Angiers being falsely accused, was banished
out of France, and left his two children in England in diverse places. Returning
afterward (unknown) thorough Scotland, he found them advanced unto great
dignity: Then, repairing in the habit of a Seruitor, into the King of France
his army, and his innocence made publicly known, he was reseated in his
former honorable degree. 9. Novel. BErnardo, a Merchant of Geneway, being
deceived by another Merchant, named Ambrosio, lost a great part of his goods:
and commanding his innocent wife to be murdered, she escaped, and in the habit
of a man, became servant to the Sultan. The deceiuer being found at last she
compassed such means, that her husband Bernardo came into Alexandria, and there
after due punishment inflicted on the false deceiuer, she resumed the garments
again of a woman, and returned home with her Husband to Geneway. 10. Novel.
PAgamino da Monaco, a rouing Pyrate on the feas, carried away the fair Wife of
Signieur Ricciardo di Chi^zica, who understanding where she was, went th^ther*
and falling into friendship with Pagamino, demanded his wife of him; whereto be
yielded, provided, that she would willingly go away with him: she denied to
part thence with her husband and (...) Ricciardo dying, she became the wife of
Pagamino.
The third day, governed by Madame Neiphila.
1. Novel. MAssetto di Lamporechio, by counterfetting himself dumb, became a
Gardener in a Monastery of Nuns, where he had familiar conversation with them
all. 2. Novel. A Querry of the stable belonging to Agilulffo, K* of the
Lombards, found the means of access to the Queens bed, without any
knowledge or consent in her. This being secretly discovered by the King, and
the party known, he gave him a mark, by shearing the hair of his head.
Whereupon, he that was so shorn* sheared likewise the heads of all his
fellows in the lodging, and so escaped the punishment intended toward him. 3.
Novel. Under color of confession and of a most pure conscience, a fair young
Gentlewoman, being amorously affected to an honest man; induced a devout and
solemn religious Friar, to advise her in the means (without his suspicion or
perceiving) how to enjoy the benefit of her friend, and bring her desires to
their full effect. 4. Novel. A Young scholar named Felice, enstructed Puccio
di Rinieri, how to become rich in a very short time. While Puccio made
experience of the instructions taught him; Felice obtained the favor of his
daughter. 5. Novel. RIcciardo, surnamed the Magnifico, gave a horse to signior
Francesco Vergillisi, upon condition; that by his leave and license, he might
speak to his wife in his presence; which he did, and she not returning him any
answer, made answer to himself on her behalf, and according to his answer, so
the effect followed. 6. Novel. RIcciardo Minutolo fell in love with the Wife of
Philippello Fighinolfi, and knowing her to be very jealous of her husband,
gave her to understand, that he was greatly enamored of his Wife, and had
appointed to meet her privately in a bathing house, on the next day following:
where she hoping to take him tardy with his close compacted Mistress, found
her self to be deceived by the said Ricciardo. 7. Nouel^. THebaldo Elisei,
having received an unkind repulse by his beloved, departed from Florence, and
returning thither again (a long while after) in the habit of a pilgrim, he
spoke with her, and made his wrongs known unto her. He delivered her husband
from the danger of death, because it was proved that he had slain Thebaldo* he
made peace with his brethren, and in the end, wisely enjoyed his hearts desire.
8. Novel. FErando, by drinking a certain kind of powder, was buried for dead*
and by the Abbot who was enamored of his wife, was taken out of his grave, and
put into a dark prison, where they made him believe that he was in purgatory:
afterward when time came that he should be raised to life again, he was made
to keep a child, which the Abbot had got by his wife. 9. Novel. IVliet of
Narbona, cured the King of France of a dangerous Fistula* in recompense whereof,
she requested to enjoy as her husband in marriage, Bertrand the Count of
Roussilion. He having married her against his will, as utterly despising her,
went to Florence, where he made love to a young Gentlewoman. Juliet, by a queint
and cunning policy, compassed the means (insted of his chosen friend) to lie
with her own husband, by whom she had two sons; which being afterward made
known unto the Count, he accepted her into his favor again, and loved her as
his loyal and honorable wife. 10. Novel. THe wonderful and chaste resolved
continency of fair Serictha, daughter to Siwalde King of Denmark, who being
sought and sued unto by many worthy persons, that did affect her dearly, would
not look any man in the face, until such time as she was married.
The Fourth Day, governed by Philostratus.
1. Novel. TAncrede, Prince of Salern, caused the amorous friend of his
daughter to be slain, and sent her his heart in a cup of Gold: which
afterward she steeped in an impoysoned water, and then drinking it, so dyed. 2.
Novel. FRiar Albert made a young Venetian Gentlewoman believe, that God Cupid
was fallen in love with her, and he resorted oftentimes unto her, in disguise of
the same God: afterward, being frighted by the Gentlewomans kindred and
friends, he cast himself out of her chamber window, and was hidden in a poor
man's house. On the day following in the shape of a wild or savage man, he was
brought upon the Rialto of S. Mark and being there publicly known by the
Brethren of his Order, he was committed to prison. 3. Novel. THree young
Gentlemen affecting three Sisters, fled with them into Can^^e. The eldest of
them (through jealousy) becomes the death of her Lover. The second, by
consenting to the Duke of (...) request, is the means of saving her life.
Afterward, her own friend kills her, and thence flies away with the elder
sister. The third couple, both man and woman are charged with her death, and
being committed to prison, they confess the fact: and fearing death, by
corruption of money they prevail with their ^eepers, escaping from thence to
Rhodes, where they died in great poverty. 4. Novel. GErbino, contrary to the
former plighted faith of his Grandfather King Gulielmo, fought with a ship at
sea belonging to the King of Thunis to take away hi daughter, who was then in
the same ship. She being slain by them that had the possession of her, he
likewise slew them; and afterwar^ had his own head smitten off. 5. Novel. THe
three Brethren to Isabella, slew a Gentleman that secretly loved her. His ghost
appeared to her in her sleep, and showed her in what place they had buried his
body She (in silent manner) brought away his head, and putting it into a put of
earth such as Flowers, Basile, or other sweet herbs are usually set in, she
watered it (a long while) with her tears: whereof her Brethren having
intelligence; soon after she died, with mere conceit of sorrow. 6. Novel. A
Beautiful young virgin, named Andreana, became enamored of a young Gentleman,
called Gabriello. In conference together, she declared a dream of hers to
him* and he another of his unto her; whereupon Gabriello fell down suddenly
dead She and her Chambermaid were apprehended by the Officers be o^ging unto
the Seigneury, as they were carrying Gabriello, to lay them before his own
door. The Potestate offering violence to the virgin, and she resisting him
virtuously: it came to the understanding of her Father, who approved the
innocence of his daughter, and compassed her deliverance. But she afterward,
being weary of all worldly felicities, entered into Religion, and became a Nun.
7. Novel. Fair Simonida affecting Pasquino, and walking with him in a
pleasant garden, it fortuned that Pasquino rubbed his teeth with a leaf of
Sage, and immediately fell down dead. Simonida being brought before the bench
of Justice, and charged with the death of Pasquino: she rubbed her teeth
likewise, with one of the leaves of the same Sage, as declaring what she saw
him do, and thereon she dyed also in the same manner. 8. Novel. IEronimo
affecting a young Maiden named Syluestra was constrained by the earnest
importunity of his Mother, to take a journey to Paris At his return home from
thence again, he found his love Siluestra married. By secret means he got
entrance into her house, and dyed upon the bed lying by her. Afterward, his
body being carried unto the Church to receive burial, she likewise died there
instantly upon his coarse. 9. Novel. MEsser Guiglielmo of Rossiglione having
slain Messer Guiglielmo Guardastagno, whom he imagined to love his wife, gave
her his heart to eat. Which she knowing afterward; threw her self out of an high
window to the ground: and being dead, was then buried with her friend. 10.
Novel. A Physicians wife laid a Lover of her maids, supposing him to be dead
in a chest by reason that he had drunk water which usually was given to
procure a sleepy entrancing. Two Lombard Usurers, stealing the chest, in hope
of a rich booty carried it into their own house, where afterward the man
awaking, was apprehended for a Thief. The Chambermaid to the Physicians wife,
going before the bench of Justice, accuses her self for putting the imagined
dead body into the chest, whereby he escaped hanging: and the Thieves which
stole away the chest, were condemned to pay a very great sum of money.
The Fifth day, Governed by Madame Fiammetta.
1. Novel. CHynon, by falling in love, became wise, and by force of Arms,
winning his fair Lady Iphigema on the seas, was afterward imprisoned at
Rhodes Being delivered by one name Lisimachus with him he recovered his
Iphigenia again, and fair Cassandra, even in the midst of their marriage
They fled with them into Candye, where after they had married them, they were
called home to their own dwelling. 2. Novel. Fair Constance of Liparis, fell
in Love with Martuccio Gon^^to: and hearing that he was dead, d^sperately she
entered into a Bark, which being transported by the winds to Susa in Barbary,
from thence she went to Thunis, where she found him to be living. There she
made her self known to him, and he being in great authority as a privy
Counselor to the King* he married the said Constance, and returned richly home
to her, to the Island of Liparis. 3. Novel. PEdro Bocamazzo, escaping away
with a young Damosel which he loved, named Angelina, met with Thieves in his
journey The Damose^ flying fearfully into a Forest, by chance comes to a
Castle. Pedro being taken by the thieves, and happening afterward to escape from
them, accidentally came to the same Castle where Angelina wa^: and marying her,
they then returned home to Rome. 4. Novel. RIcciardo Manardy, was found by
Messer Lizio da Valbonna, as he sat fast asleep at his daughters chamber
window, having his hand fast in hirs and sleeping in the same manner. Whereupon,
they were joined together in marriage, and their long loyal love mutually
recompensed. 5. Novel. GVidotto of Cremona, departing out of this mortal
life, left a daughter of his with Iacomino of Pauia. Giouanni di Seuerino, and
Menghino da Minghole, fell both in love with the young Maiden, and fought for
her; who being afterward known to be the sister to Giouanni, she was given in
marriage to Menghino. 6. Novel. GVion di Procida, being found familiarly
conuersing with a young Damosel which he loved, and had been given formerly to
Frederigo King of Sicily: was bound to a stake to be consumed with fire. From
which danger (nevertheless) he escaped; being known by Don Rogiero de Oria,
Lord Admiral of Sicily, and afterward married the Damosel. 7. Nouel^.
THeodoro falling in love with Violenta, the daughter to his Master, named
Amarige, and she conceyuing with child by him, was condemnd to be hanged. As
they were leading him unto the gallows, beating and misusing him all the way:
he happened to be known by his own Father, whereupon he was released, and
afterward inioyed Violent a in marriage. 8. Novel. ANastasio, a Gentleman of
the Family of the Honesti by loving the daughter to signior Pau^o Trauersario,
lauishly wasted a great part of his substance, without receiving any love from
her again. By persuasion of some of his kindred and friends, he went to a
country dwelling of his called Chiasso, where he saw a Knight desperately
pursue a young Damsel, whom he slew, and afterward gave her to be devoured by
his hounds. A tastasio invited his friends, and her^ also whom he so ^e^^rly
loved, to take part of a dinner with him, who likewise saw the s^^e Damsel
so torn in pieces: which his unkind love perceiving, and fearing least the
like ill fortune should happen to her* she accepted Anastasio to be her
husband. 9. Novel. FRederigo, of the Alberighi Family, loved a Gentlewoman,
and was not requited with like love again. By bountiful expenses, and over
liberal inuitations, he wasted and consumed all his lands and goods, having
nothing left him, but a Hawke or Faulcon. His unkind Mistress, happens to
come visit him, and he not having any other food for her dinner, made a dainty
dish of his Faulcon for her to feed on. Being conquered by this his exceeding
kind courtesy, she changed her former hatred toward him, accepting him as
her husband in marriage, and made him a man of wealthy possessions. 10. Novel.
PEdro di Vinciolo, went to sup at a friends house in the City His wife (in the
mean while) had a young man whom she loved, at supper with her. Pedro returning
home upon a sudden, the young man was hidden under a Coope for Hens. Pedro, in
excuse of his so soon coming home, declares; how in the house of Herculano
(with whom he should have supt) a friend of his wives was found, which was
the reason of the suppers breaking off. Pedroes wise reproving the error of
Herculanoes wife: an Ass (by chance) treades on the youngmans fingers that lay
hidden under the Henne-Coope. Upon his crying out, Pedro steppeth thither, sees
him, knows him, and finds the fallacy of his wife: with whom
(nevertheless) he grows to agreement, in regard of some imperfections in
himself.
The End of the Table.
THE DECAMERON, Containing, an Hundred pleasant NOVELLES.
Wherein, after demonstration made by the Author, upon what occasion it happened,
that the persons (of whom we shall speak hereafter) should thus meet
together, to make so queint a Narration of Nouels: He declares unto you, that
they first begin to devise and confer, under the government of Madam
Pampinea, and of such matters as may be most pleasing to them all.

The Induction of the Author, to the following Discourses.
GRacious Ladies, so often as I consider with my self, and observe
respectively, how naturally you are inclined to compassion; as many times do I
acknowledge, that this present work of mine, will (in your judgment) appear
to have but a harsh and offensive b^ginning, in regard of the mournful
remembrance it bears at the very entrance of the last Pestilentiall
mortality, universally hurtful to all that beheld it, or otherwise came to
knowledge of it. But for all that, I desire it may not be so dreadful to you,
to hinder your further proceeding in reading, as if none were to look thereon,
but with sighs and tears. For, I could rather with, that so fearful a
beginning, should seem but as an high and steepy hill appears to them, that
attempt to travel far on foot, and ascending the same with some difficulty,
come afterward to walk upon a goodly even plain, which causes the more
contentment in them, because the attaining thereto was hard and painful. For,
even as pleasures are cut off by grief and anguish; so sorrows cease by joys
most sweet and happy arriving.

After this brief mollestation, brief I say, because it is contained within
small compass of Writing; immediately follows the most sweet and pleasant
taste of pleasure, whereof (before) I made promise to you. Which (peradventure)
could not be expected by such a beginning, if promise stood not thereunto
engaged. And indeed, if I could well have conveyed you to the center of my
desire, by any other way, then so rude and rocky a passage as this is, I would
gladly have done it. But because without this Narration, we could not
demonstrate the occasion how and wherefore the matters happened, which you shall
read in the ensuing Discourses: I must set them down (even as constrained
thereto by mere necessity) in writing after this manner.

The year of our blessed Saviors incarnation, 1348. that memorable mortality
happened in the excellent City, far beyond all the rest in Italy; which
plague, by operation of the superior bodies, or rather for our enormous
iniquities, by the just anger of God was sent upon us mortals. Some few years
before, it took beginning in the Eastern parts, sweeping thence an
innumerable quantity of living souls: extending it self afterward from place
to place Westward, until it seized on the said City. Where neither humane
skill or providence, could use any prevention, notwithstanding it was cleansed
of many annoyances, by diligent Officers thereto deputed: besides prohibition
of all sickly persons entrance, and all possible provision daily used for
conservation of such as were in health, with incessant prayers and
supplications of devout people, for the asswaging of so dangerous a sickness.

About the beginning of the year, it also began in very strange manner, as
appeared by diverse admirable effects; yet not as it had done in the East
Countries, where Lord or Lady being touched therewith, manifest signs of
incuitable death followed thereon, by bleeding at the nose. But here it began
with young children, male and female, either under the armpits, or in the groine
by certain swellings, in some to the bigness of an Apple, in others like an
Egg, and so in diverse greater or lesser, which (in their vulgar Language) they
termed to be a Botch or Byle. In very short time after, those two infected
parts were grown mortiferous, and would disperse abroad indifferently, to all
parts of the body; whereupon, such was the quality of the disease, to show it
self by black or blew spots, which would appear on the arms of many,
others on their thighs, and every part else of the body: in some great and
few, in others small and thick.

Now, as the Byle (at the beginning) was an assured sign of near approaching
death; so proved the spots likewise to such as had them: for the curing of
which sickness it seemed, that the Physicians counsel, the virtue of
Medicines, or any application else, could not yield any remedy: but rather it
plainly appeared, that either the nature of the disease would not endure it,
or ignorance in the Physicians could not comprehend, from whence the cause
prooceeded, and so by consequent, no resolution was to be determined. Moreover,
beside the number of such as were skillful in Art, many more both women and
men, without ever having any knowledge in Physic, became Physicians: so that
not only few were healed, but (well-neere) all dyed, within three days after
the said signs were seen; some sooner, and others later, commonly without
either Fever, or any other accident.

And this pestilence was yet of far greater power or violence; for, not only
healthful persons speaking to the sick, coming to see them, or ayring
clothes in kindness to comfort them, was an occasion of ensuing death: but
touching their garments, or any food whereon the sick person fed, or any
thing else used in his service, seemed to transfer the disease from the sick
to the sound, in very rare and miraculous manner. Among which matter of
marvel, let me tell you one thing, which if the eyes of many (as well as mine
own) had not seen, hardly could I be persuaded to write it, much less to
believe it, albeit a man of good credit should report it. I say, that the
quality of this contagious pestilence was not only of such efficacy, in taking
and catching it one of another, either men or women: but it extended further,
even in the apparent view of many, that the clothes, or any thing else,
wherein one died of that disease, being touched, or lain on by any beast, far
from the kind or quality of man, they did not only contaminate and infect the
said beast, were it Dog, Cat, or any other; but also it died very soon after.

Mine own eyes (as formerly I have said) among diverse other, one day had
evident experience hereof, for some poor ragged clothes of linen and woollen,
torn from a wretched body dead of that disease, and hurled in the open
street; two Swine going by, and (according to their natural inclination)
seeking for food on every dunghill, tossed and tumbled the clothes with
their snouts, rubbing their heads likewise upon them; and immediately, each
turning twice or thrice about, they both fell down dead on the said clothes,
as being fully infected with the contagion of them: which accident, and other
the like, if not far greater, begat diverse fears and imaginations in them that
beheld them, all tending to a most inhumane and uncharitable end; namely, to
fly thence from the sick, and touching any thing of theirs, by which means
they thought their health should be safely warranted.

Some there were, who considered with themselves, that living soberly, with
abstinence from all superfluity; it would be a sufficient resistance against
all hurtful accidents. So combining themselves in a sociable manner, they
lived as separatists from all other company, being shut up in such houses,
where no sick body should be near them. And there, for their more security,
they used delicate viands and excellent wines, avoiding luxury, and refusing
speech to one another, not looking forth at the windows, to hear no cries of
dying people, or see any coarses carried to burial; but having musical
instruments, lived there in all possible pleasure. Others were of a contrary
opinion, who avouched, that there was no other physic more certain, for a
disease so desperate, then to drink hard, be merry among themselves, singing
continually, walking every where, and satisfying their appetites with
whatsoever they desired, laughing, and mocking at every mournful accident,
and so they vowed to spend day and night: for now they would go to one
Tavern, then to another, living without any rule or measure; which they might
very easily do, because every one of them, (as if he were to live no longer
in this World) had even forsaken all things that he had. By means whereof the
most part of the houses were become common, and all strangers, might do the
like (if they pleased to adventure it) even as boldly as the Lord or owner,
without any let or contradiction.

Yet in all this their beastly behavior, they were wise enough, to shun (so
much as they might) the weak and sickly: In which misery and affliction of our
City, the venerable authority of the Laws, as well divine as humane, was even
destroyed, as it were, through want of the awefull Ministers of them. For they
being all dead, or lying sick with the rest, or else lived so solitary, in
such great necessity of servants and attendants, as they could not execute any
office, whereby it was lawful for every one to do as he listed.

Between these two rehearsed extremities of life, there were other of a more
moderate temper, not being so daintily dieted as the first, nor drinking so
dissolutely as the second; but used all things sufficient for their appetites,
and without shutting up themselves, walked abroad, some carrying sweet
nose-gayes of flowers in their hands; others odoriferous herbs, and others
diverse kinds of spiceries, holding them to their noses, and thinking them most
comfortable for the brain, because the air seemed to be much infected, by the
noisome smell of dead carkases, and other hurtful savors. Some other there
were also of more inhumane mind (howbeit peradventure it might be the surest)
saying, that there was no better physic against the pestilence, nor yet so
good; as to fly away from it, which argument mainely moving them, and caring
for no body but themselves, very many, both men and women, forsook the City,
their own houses, their Parents, kindred, friends, and goods, flying to other
men's dwellings elsewhere. As if the wrath of God, in punishing the sins of
men with this plague, would fall heavily upon none, but such as were enclosed
within the City walls; or else persuading themselves, that not any one should
there be left alive, but that the final ending of all things was come.

Now albeit these persons in their diversity of opinions died not all, so
undoubtedly they did not all escape; but many among them becoming sick, and
making a general example of their flight and folly, among them that could not
stir out of their beds, they languished more perplexedly then the other did.
Let us omit, that one Citizen fled after another, and one neighbor had not any
care of another, Parents nor kindred never visiting them, but utterly they were
forsaken on all sides: this tribulation pierced into the hearts of men, and
with such a dreadful terror, that one Brother forsook another; the Uncle the
Nephew, the Sister the Brother, and the Wife her Husband: nay, a matter much
greater, and almost incredible; Fathers and Mothers fled away from their own
Children* even as if they had no way appertained to them. In regard whereof, it
could be no otherwise, but that a countlesse multitude of men and women fell
sick; finding no charity among their friends, except a very few, and subjected
to the avarice of servants, who attended them constrainedly, for great and
unreasonable wages) yet few of those attendants to be found any where too. And
they were men or women but of base condition, as also of groser understanding,
who never before had served in any such necessities, nor indeed were any way
else to be employed, but to give the sick person such things as he called for,
or to awaite the hour of his death; in the performance of which services,
oftentimes for gain, they lost their own lives.

In this extreme calamity, the sick being thus forsaken of neighbors, kindred,
and friends, standing also in such need of servants; a custom came up among
them, never heard of before, that there was not any woman, how noble, young, or
fair soever she was, but falling sick, she must of necessity have a man to
attend her, were he young or otherwise, respect of shame or modesty no way
prevailing, but all parts of her body must be discovered to him, which (in the
like vrgency) was not to be seen by any but women: whereon ensued afterward,
that upon the parties healing and recovery, it was the occasion of further
dishonesty, which many being more modestly curious of, refused such
disgraceful attending, choosing rather to die, then by such help to be healed.
In regard whereof, as well through the want of convenient remedies, (which the
sick by no means could attain unto) as also the violence of the contagion,
the multitude of them that died night and day, was so great, that it was a
dreadful sight to behold, and as much to hear spoken of. So that mere
necessity (among them that remained living) begat new behauiours, quite
contrary to all which had been in former times, and frequently used among the
City Inhabitants.

The custom of precedent days (as now again it is) was, that women, kindred,
neighbors, and friends, would meet together at the deceased parties house,
and there, with them that were of nearest alliance, express their hearts
sorrow for their friends loss. If not thus, they would assemble before the
door, with many of the best Citizens and kindred, and (according to the
quality of the deceased) the Clergy met there likewise, and the dead body was
carried (in comely manner) on men's shoulders, with funeral pomp of
Torch-light, and singing, to the Church appointed by the deceased. But these
seemly orders, after that the fury of the pestilence began to increase, they
in like manner altogether ceased, and other new customs came in their place;
because not only people died, without having any women about them, but
infinites also past out of this life, not having any witness, how, when, or in
what manner they departed. So that few or none there were, to deliver outward
show of sorrow and grieuing: but instead thereof, diverse declared idle joy and
rejoicing, a use soon learned of immodest women, having put off al feminine
compassion, yea, or regard of their own welfare.

Very few also would accompany the body to the grave, and they not any of the
Neighbors, although it had been an honorable Citizen, but only the meanest
kind of people, such as were graue-makers, coffin-bearers, or the like, that
did these services only for money, and the beer being mounted on their
shoulders, in all haste they would run away with it, not perhaps to the
Church appointed by the dead, but to the nearest at hand, having some four or
six poor Priests following, with lights or no lights, and those of the
silliest; short service being said at the burial, and the body irreverently
thrown into the first open grave they found. Such was the pitiful misery of
poor people, and diverse, who were of better condition, as it was most
lamentable to behold; because the greater number of them, under hope of
healing, or compelled by poverty, kept still within their houses weak and
faint, thousands falling sick daily, and having no help, or being succored
any way with food or physic, all of them died, few or none escaping.

Great store there were, that died in the streets by day or night, and many
more beside, although they died in their houses; yet first they made it known
to their neighbors, that their lives perished, rather by the noisome smell of
dead and putrified bodies, then by any violence of the disease in themselves.
So that of these and the rest, dying in this manner every where, the neighbors
observed one course of behavior, (moved thereto no less by fear, that the
smell and corruption of dead bodies should harm them, then charitable respect
of the dead) that themselves when they could, or being assisted by some bearers
of coarses, when they were able to procure the^, would hale the bodies (already
dead) out of their houses, laying them before their doors, where such as
passed by, especially in the mornings, might see them lying in no mean
numbers. Afterward, Bieres were brought thither, and such as might not have the
help of Bieres, were glad to lay them on tables; and Bieres have bin observed,
not only to be charged with two or three dead bodies at once, but many times
it was seen also, that the wife with the husband, two or three Brethren
together; yea, the Father and the mother, have thus been carried along to the
grave upon one Biere.

Moreover, oftentimes it has been seen, that when two Priests went with one
Cross to fetch the body; there would follow (behind) three or four bearers
with their Bieres, and when the Priests intended the burial but of one body,
six or eight more have made up the advantage, and yet none of them being
attended by any seemly company, lights, tears, or the very least decency, but
it plainly appeared, that the very like account was then made of men or Women,
as if they had been Dogs or Swine. Wherein might manifestly be noted, that
that which the natural course of things could not show to the wise, with rare
and little loss, to wit, the patient support of miseries and misfortunes, even
in their greatest height: not only the wise might now learn, but also the
very simplest people; and in such sort, that they should always be prepared
against all infelicities whatsoever.

Hallowed ground could not now suffice, for the great multitude of dead bodies,
which were daily brought to every Church in the City, and every hour in the
day; neither could the bodies have proper place of burial, according to our
ancient custom: wherefore, after that the churches and Churchyards were
filled, they were constrained to make use of great deep ditches, wherein they
were buried by hundreds at once, ranking dead bodies along in graves, as
Merchandises are laid along in ships, covering each after other with a small
quantity of earth, and so they filled at last up the whole ditch to the brim.

Now, because I would wander no further in every particularity, concerning the
miseries happening in our City: I tell you, that extremities running on in
such manner as you have heard; little less spare was made in the Villages
round about; wherein (setting aside enclosed Castles, which were now filled
like to small Cities) poor Laborers and Husbandmen, with their whole
Families, dyed most miserably in outhouses, yea, and in the open fields also;
without any assistance of physic, or help of servants; and likewise in the
highways, or their ploughed lands, by day or night indifferently, yet not as
men, but like brute beasts.

By means whereof, they became lazy and slothful in their daily endeavors,
even like to our Citizens; not minding or meddling with their wonted affairs:
but, as awaiting for death every hour, employed all their pains, not in
caring any way for themselves, their cattle, or gathering the fruits of the
earth, or any of their accustomed labors; but rather wasted and consumed, even
such as were for their instant sustenance. Whereupon, it fell so out, that
their Oxen, Asses, Sheep, and Goats, their Swine, Pullen, yea their very
Dogs, the truest and faithfullest servants to men, being beaten and banished
from their houses, went wildly wandering abroad in the fields, where the Corn
grew still on the ground without gathering, or being so much as reapt or cut.
Many of the foresaid beasts (as endued with reason) after they had pastured
themselves in the day time, would return full fed at night home to their
houses, without any government of Heardsmen, or any other.

How many fair Palaces! How many goodly Houses! How many noble habitations,
filled before with families of Lords and Ladies, were then to be seen empty,
without any one there dwelling, except some silly servant? How many Kindreds,
worthy of memory! How many great inheritances! And what plenty of riches, were
left without any true successors? How many good men! How many worthy Women!
How many valiant and comely young men, whom none but Galen, H^ppocrates, and
Aesculapius (if they were living) could have been reputed any way unhealthful;
were seen to dine at morning, with their Parents, Friends, and familiar
confederates, and went to sup in another world with their Predecessors?

It is no mean breach to my brain, to make repetition of so many miseries;
wherefore, being willing to part with them as easily as I may: I say that our
City being in this case, void of inhabitants, it came to pass (as afterward
I understood by some of good credit) that in the venerable Church of S. Marie
la Neufue, on a Tuesday morning, there being then no other person, after the
hearing of divine Service, in mourning habits (as the season required) returned
thence seven discreet young Gentlewomen, all allied together, either by
friendship, neighbor-hood, or parentage. She among them that was most entered
into years, exceeded not eight and twenty; and the youngest was no less then
eighteen; being of Noble descent, fair form, adorned with exquisite
behavior, and gracious modesty.

Their names I could report, if just occasion did not forbid it, in regard of
the occasions following by them related, and because times hereafter shall not
tax them with reproof; the laws of pleasure being more straited now adays
(for the matters before reucaled) then at that time they were, not only to
their years, but to many much riper. Neither will I likewise minister matter
to rash heads (ouer-readie in censuring commendable life) any way to impair
the honesty of Ladies, by their idle detracting speeches. And therefore, to
the end that what each of the^ says, may be comprehended without confusion; I
purpose to style them by names, wholly agreeing, or (in part) conformable to
their qualities. The first and most aged, we will name Pampinea; the second
Fiametta; the third Philamena; the fourth Aemilia; the fifth Lauretta; the sixth
Neiphila; and the last we term (not without occasion) Elissa, or Eliza. All of
them being assembled at a corner of the Church, not by any deliberation
formerly appointed, but merely by accident, and sitting as it were in a round
ring: after diverse sighs severally delivered, they conferred on sundry matters
answerable to the sad quality of the time, and within a while after, Madam
Pampinea began in this manner.

Fair Ladies, you may (no doubt as well as I) have often heard, that no injury
is offered to any one, by such as make use but of their own right. It is a
thing natural for every one which is borne in this World, to aid, conserve,
and defend her life so long as she can; and this right has been so powerfully
permitted, that although it has sometimes happened, that (to defend
themselves) men have been slain without any offense: yet Laws have allowed
it to be so, in whose solicitude lies the best living of all mortals. How much
more honest and just is it then for us, and for every other well-disposed
person, to seek for (without wronging any) and to practice all remedies that
we can, for the conservation of our lives? When I well consider, what we have
here done this morning, and many other already past; remembering (withal) what
likewise is proper and convenient for us: I conceive (as all you may do the
like) that every one of us has a due respect of her self, and then I
marvel not, but rather am much amazed (knowing none of us to be deprived of a
Woman's best judgment) that we seek not after some remedies for our selves,
against that, which every one among us, ought (in reason) to fear.

Here we meet and remain (as it seems to me) in no other manner, then as
if we would or should be witnesses, to all the dead bodies at rest in their
graves; or else to listen, when the religious Sisters here dwelling (whose
number now are well-neere come to be none at all) sing Service at such hours
as they ought to do; or else to acquaint all comers hither (by our mourning
habites) with the quality and quantity of our hearts miseries. And when we
part hence, we meet with none but dead bodies; or sick persons transported
from one place to another; or else we see running through the City (in most
offensive fury) such as (by authority of public Laws) were banished hence,
only for their bad and bru^^sh behavior in contempt of those Laws, because
now they know, that the executors of them are dead and sick. And if not these,
more lamentable spectacles present themselves to us, by the base rascality of
the City; who being fatted with our blood, term themselves Graue-makers, and
in mere contemptible mockery of us, are mounted on horseback, gallopping
every where, reproaching us with our losses and misfortunes, with lewd and
dishonest songs: so that we can hear nothing else but such and such are dead,
and such and such lie a dying; here hands wringing, and every where most
pitiful complaining.

If we return home to our houses (I know not whether your case be answerable
to mine) when I can find none of all my Family, but only my poor waiting
Chamber-maide; so great are my fears, that the very hair on my head
declares my amazement, and wheresoever I go or sit down, me thinks I see the
ghostes and shadows of deceased friends, not with such lovely looks as I was
wont to behold them, but with most horrid and dreadful regards, newly stolen
upon them I know not how. In these respects, both here, elsewhere, and at
home in my house, methinkes I am always ill, and much more (in mine own
opinion) then any other body, not having means or place of retirement, as all
we have, and none to remain here but only we.

Moreover, I have often heard it said, that in tarrying or departing, no
distinction is made in things honest or dishonest; only appetite will be
served; and be they alone or in company, by day or night, they do whatsoever
their appetite desires: not secular persons only, but such as are recluses,
and shut up within Monasteries, breaking the Laws of obedience, and being
addicted to pleasures of the flesh, are become lascivious and dissolute, making
the world believe, that whatsoever is convenient for other women, is no way
unbeseeming them, as thinking in that manner to escape.

If it be so, as manifestly it makes show of it self; What do we here? What
stay we for? And whereon do we dream? Why are we more respectlesse of our
health, then all the rest of the Citizens? Repute we our selves less precious
then all the other? Or do we believe, that life is linked to our bodies with
stronger chains, then to others, and that therefore we should not fear any
thing that has power to offend us? We err therein, and are deceived. What
brutishness were it in us, if we should urge any such belief? So often as
we call to mind, what, and how many gallant young men and women, have been
devoured by this cruel pestilence; we may evidently observe a contrary
argument.

Wherefore, to the end, that by being ouer-scrupulous and careless, we fall
not into such danger, whence when we would (perhaps) we cannot recover our
selves by any means: I think it meet (if your judgment therein shall iumpe
with mine) that all of us as we are (at least, if we will do as diverse before
us have done, and yet daily endeavor to do) shunning death by the honest
example of other, make our retreat to our Country houses, wherewith all of us
are sufficiently furnished, and thereto delight our selves as best we may, yet
without transgressing (in any act) the limits of reason. There shall we hear
the pretty birds sweetly singing, see the hills and plains verdantly
flourishing; the Corn twaning in the field like the billows of the Sea;
infinite store of goodly trees, and the Heavens more fairly open to us, then
here we can behold them: And although they are justly displeased, yet will they
not there deny us better beauties to gaze on, then the walls in our City
(emptied of Inhabitants) can offoord us.

Moreover, the Air is much fresh and clear, and generally, there is far
greater abundance of all things whatsoever, needful at this time for
preservation of our health, and less offense or mollestation then we find
here.

And although Country people die, as well as here our Citizens do, the
grief notwithstanding is so much the less, as the houses and dwellers there
are rare, in comparison of them in our City. And beside, if we well observe it,
here we forsake no particular person, but rather we may term our selves
forsaken; in regard that our Husbands, Kindred, and Friends, either dying, or
flying from the dead, have left us alone in this great affliction, even as if
we were no way belonging unto them. And therefore, by following this counsel,
we cannot fall into any reprehension; whereas if we neglect and refuse it,
danger, distress, and death, (perhaps) may ensue thereon.

Wherefore, if you think good, I would allow it for well done, to take our
waiting women, with all such things as are needful for us, and (as this day)
betake our selves to one place, to morrow to another, taking there such
pleasure and recreation, as so sweet a season liberally bestows on us. In
which manner we may remain, till we see (if death otherwise prevent us not)
what end the gracious Heavens have reserved for us. I would have you also to
consider, that it is no less seemly for us to part hence honestly, then a
great number of other Women to remain here immodestly.

The other Ladies and Gentlewomen, having heard Madam Pampinea, not only
commended her counsel, but desiring also to put it in execution; had already
particularly consulted with themselves, by what means they might instantly
depart from thence. Nevertheless, Madam Philomena, who was very wise, spoke
thus.

Albeit fair Ladies, the case propounded by Madam Pampinea has been very well
delivered; yet (for all that) it is against reason for us to rush on, as we are
ouer-ready to do. Remember that we are all women, and no one among us is so
childish, but may consider, that when we shall be so assembled together,
without providence or conduct of some man, we can hardly govern our selves. We
are frail, offensive, suspicious, weak spirited, and fearful: in regard of
which imperfections, I greatly doubt (if we have no better direction then our
own) this society will sooner dissolve it self, and (perchance) with less
honor to us, then if we never had begun it. And therefore it shall be
expedient for us, to provide before we proceed any further. Madam Elissa
hereon thus replied.

Most true it is, that men are the chief or head of women, and without their
order, sildome times do any matters of ours sort to commendable end. But what
means shall we make for men? we all know well enough, that the most part of our
friends are dead, and such as are living, some be dispearsed here, others
there, into diverse places and companies, where we have no knowledge of their
being. And to accept of strangers, would seem very inconvenient; wherefore as
we have such care of our health, so should we be as respective (withal) in
ordering our intention: that wheresoever we aim at our pleasure and
contentment, reproof and scandal may by no means pursue us.

While this discourse thus held among the Ladies, three young Gentlemen came
forth of the Church (yet not so young, but the youngest had attained to five
and twenty years) in whom, neither malice of the time, loss of friends or
kindred, nor any fearful conceit in themselves, had the power to quench
affection; but (perhaps) might a little cool it, in regard of the queazy
season. One of them called himself Pamphilus, the second Philostratus, and the
last Dioneus. Each of them was very affable and well conditioned, and walked
abroad (for their greater comfort in such a time of tribulation) to try if
they could meet with their fair friends, who (happily) might all three be
among these seven, and the rest kin unto them in one degree or other. No
sooner were these Ladies espied by them, but they met with them also in the
same advantage; whereupon Madam Pampinea (amiably smiling) said.

See how graciously Fortune is favorable to our beginning, by presenting our
eyes with three so wise and worthy young Gentlemen, who will gladly be our
guides and servants, if we do not disdain them the office. Madam Neiphila
began immediately to blush, because one of them had a love in the company, and
said; Good Madam Pampinea take heed what you say, because (of mine own
knowledge) nothing can be spoken but good of them all; and I think them all to
be absolutely sufficient, for a far greater employment then is here intended:
as being well worthy to keep company, not only with us, but them of more
fair and precious esteem then we are. But because it appears plainly
enough, that they bear affection to some here among us: I fear, if we should
make the motion, that some dishonor or reproof may ensue thereby, and yet
without blame either in us or them. That is nothing at all, answered Madam
Philomena, let me live honestly, and my conscience not check me with any
crime; speak then who can to the contrary, God and truth shall enter arms for
me. I wish that they were as willing to come, as all we are to bid them
welcome: for truly (as Madam Pampinea said) we may very well hope that
Fortune will be furtherous to our purposed journey.

The other Ladies hearing them speak in such manner, not only were silent to
themselves, but all with one accord and consent said, that it were well done
to call them, and to acquaint them with their intention, entreating their
company in so pleasant a voyage. Whereupon, without any more words, Madam
Pampinea mounting on her feet (because one of the three was her Kinsman) went
toward the^, as they stood respectively observing them; and (with a pleasing
countenance) giving them a gracious salutation, declared to them their
deliberation, desiring (in behalf of all the rest) that with a brotherly and
modest mind, they would vouchsafe to bear them company.

The Gentlemen imagined at the first apprehension, that this was spoken in
mockage of them, but when they better perceived, that her words tended to
solemn earnest; they made answer, that they were all heartily ready to do
them any service. And without any further delaying, before they parted thence,
took order for their aptest furnishing withal convenient necessaries, and
sent word to the place of their first appointment. On the morrow, being
Wednesday, about break of day, the Ladies, with certain of their attending
Gentlewomen, and the three Gentlemen, having three servants to wait on them;
left the City to begin their journey, and having traveled about a leagues
distance, arrived at the place of their first purpose of stay; which was seated
on a little hill, distant (on all sides) from any high way, plentifully stored
with fair spreading Trees, affoording no mean delight to the eye. On the top
of all stood a stately Palace, having a large and spacious Court in the
midst, round engirt with galleries, hals and chambers, every one separate
alone by themselves, and beautified with pictures of admirable cunning. Nor was
there any want of Gardens, Meadows, and other pleasant walks, with wells and
springs of fair running waters, all encompassed with branching vines, fitter
for curious and quaffing bibbers, then women sober and singularly modest.

This Palace the company found fully fitted and prepared, the beds in the
Chambers made and daintily ordered, thickly strewed with variety of flowers,
which could not but give them the greater contentment. Dioneus, who (above the
other) was a pleasant young gallant, and full of infinite witty conceits,
said; Your wit (fair Ladies) has better guided us hither, then our
providence. I know not how you have determined to dispose of your cares; as for
mine own, I left them at the City gate, when I came thence with you: and
therefore let your resolution be, to spend the time here in smiles and singing
(I mean, as may fittest agree with your dignity) or else give me leave to go
seek my sorrows again, and so to remain discontented in our desolate City.
Madam Pampinea having in like manner shaken off her sorrows, delivering a
modest and bashful smile, replied in this manner.

Dioneus, well have you spoken, it is fit to live merrily, and no other
occasion made us forsake the sick and sad City. But, because such things as
are without mean or measure, are subject to no long continuance. I, who began
the motion, whereby this society is thus assembled, and aim at the long
lasting thereof: do hold it very convenient, that we should all agree, to
have one chief commander among us, in whom the care and providence should
consist, for direction of our merriment, performing honor and obedience to the
party, as to our Patron and sole Governor. And because every one may feel
the burden of solicitude, as also the pleasure of commanding, and
consequently have a sensible taste of both, whereby no envy may arise on any
side: I could wish, that each one of us (for a day only) should feel both the
burden and honor, and the person so to be advanced, shall receive it from the
election of us all. As for such as are to succeed, after him or her that has
had the days of dominion: the party thought fit for succession, must be named
so soon as night approaches. And being in this eminency (according as he or
she shall please) he may order and dispose, how long the time of his rule
shall last, as also of the place and manner, where best we may continue our
delight.

These words were highly pleasing to them all, and, by general voice, Madame
Pampinea was chosen Queen for the first day. Whereupon, Madame Philomena ran
presently to a Bay Tree, because she had often heard, what honor belonged to
those branches, and how worthy of honor they were, that rightfully were
crowned with them, plucking off diverse branches, she made of them an apparent
and honorable Chaplet, placing it (by general consent) upon her head, and
this, so long as their company continued, manifested to all the rest, the
signal of dominion and Royal greatness.

After that Madame Pampinea was thus made Queen, she commanded public
silence, and causing the Gentlemen's three servants, and the waiting women also
(being four in number) to be brought before her, thus she began. Because I am
to give the first example to you all, whereby (proceeding on from good to
better) our company may live in order and pleasure, acceptable to all, and
without shame to any: I create Parmeno (servant to Dioneus) Master of the
Household, he taking the care and charge of all our t^ayne, and for whatsoever
appertains to our Hall service. I appoint also that Silisco (servant to
Pamphilus) shall be our Dispencer and Treasurer, performing that which Parmeno
shall command him. And that Tindaro serve as Groom of the Chamber, to
Philostratus his Master, and the other two, when his fellows (impeached by
their offices) cannot be present. Misia my Chambermaid, and Licisca (belonging
to Philomena) shall serve continually in the Kitchen) and diligently make ready
such vyands, as shall be delivered them by Parmeno* Chimera, wayting-woman to
Lauretta, and Stratilia (appertaining to Fiammetta) shall have the charge and
government of the Ladies Chambers, and preparing all places where we shall be
present. Moreover, we will and command every one of them (as they desire to
deserve our grace) that wheresoever they go or come, or whatsoever they hear
or see: they especially respect to bring us tidings of them. After she had
summarily delivered them these orders, very much commended of every one; she
arose fearfully, saying. Here we have Gardens, Orchards, Meadows, and other
places of sufficient pleasure, where every one may sport and recreate
themselves: but so soon as the ninth hour strikes, then all to meet here
again, to dine in the cool shade.

This iocund company having received license from their Queen to disport
themselves, the Gentlemen walked with the Ladies into a goodly Garden, making
Chaplets and Nosegayes of diverse flowers, and singing silently to themselves.
When they had spent the time limited by the Queen, they returned into the
house, where they found that Parmeno had effectually executed his office. For,
when they entered into the Hall, they saw the Tables covered with delicate white
naperie, and the Glasses looking like silver, they were so transparantly
clear, all the room beside streamed with flames of Juniper. When the Queen
and all the rest had washed; according as Parmeno gave order, so every one was
seated at the Table: the vyands (delicately dressed) were served in, and
excellent wines plentifully delivered, none attending but the three servants,
and little or no loud table-talke passing among them.

Dinner being ended, and the tables withdrawn (all the Ladies, and the
Gentlemen likewise, being skillful both in singing and dancing, and playing on
instruments artificially) the Queen commanded, that diverse instruments should
be brought, and (as she gave charge) Dioneus took a Lute, and Fiammetta a
Violl de gamba, and began to play an excellent dance. Whereupon the Queen,
with the rest of the Ladies, and the other two young Gentlemen (having sent
their attending servants to dinner) paced forth a dance very maiestically.
And when the dance was ended, they sung sundry excellent Canzonets,
out-wearing so the time, until the Queen commanded them all to rest, because
the hour did necessarily require it. The Gentlemen having their Chambers far
severed from the Ladies, curiously strewed with flowers, and their beds adorned
in exquisite manner, as those of the Ladies were not a jot inferior to them:
the silence of the night bestowed sweet rest on them all. In the morning, the
Queen and all the rest being risen, accounting overmuch sleep to be very
hurtful: they walked abroad into a goodly Meadowe, where the grass grew
verdantly, and the beams of the Sun heated not ouer-violently, because the
shades of fair spreading trees gave a temperate calmness, cool and gentle
winds fanning their sweet breath pleasingly among them. All of them being there
set down in a round ring, and the Queen in the midst, as being the
appointed place of eminency, she spoke in this manner.

You see (fair company) that the Sun is highly mounted, the heat
(elsewhere) too extreme for us, and therefore here is our fittest refuge, the
air being so cool, delicate, and acceptable, and our folly well worthy
reprehension, if we should walk further, and speed worse. Here are Tables,
Cards, and Chesse, as your dispositions may be addicted. But if mine advice
might pass for current, I would admit none of those exercises, because they
are too troublesome both to them that play, and such as look on. I could
rather wish, that some quaint discourse might pass among us, a tale or fable
related by some one, to urge the attention of all the rest. And so wearing out
the warmth of the day, one pretty Novel will draw on another, until the Sun be
lower declined, and the heates extremity more diminished, to solace our selves
in some other place, as to our minds shall seem convenient. If therefore what I
have said be acceptable to you (I purposing to follow in the same course of
pleasure,) let it appear by your immediate answer; for, til the Evening, I
think we can devise no exercise more commodious for us.

The Ladies and Gentlemen allowed of the motion, to spend the time in telling
pleasant tales; whereupon the Queen said: Seeing you have approved mine
advice, I grant free permission for this first day, that every one shall
relate, what to him or her is best pleasing. And turning her self to Pamphilus
(who was seated on her right hand) gave him favor, with one of his Nouels, to
begin the recreation: which he not daring to deny, and perceiving general
attention prepared for him, thus he began.

Messire Chappelet du Prat, by making a false confession, beguyled an holy
Religious man, and after dyed. And having (during his life time) been a very
bad man, at his death was reputed to be a Saint, and called S. Chappelet.

The first Novel.
Wherein is contained, how hard a thing it is, to distinguish goodness from
hypocrisy; and how (under the shadow of holiness) the wickedness of one man,
may deceive many.

IT is a matter most convenient (dear Ladies) that a man ought to begin
whatsoever he does, in the great and glorious name of him, who was the Creator
of all things. Wherefore, seeing that I am the man appointed, to begin this
your invention of discoursing Novelties: I intend to begin also with one of his
wonderful works. To the end, that this being heard, our hope may remain on
him, as the thing only permanent, and his name for ever to be praised by us.
Now, as there is nothing more certain, but that even as temporal things are
mortal and transitory, so are they both in and out of themselves, full of
sorrow, pain, and anguish, and subjected to infinite dangers: So in the same
manner, we live mingled among them, seeming as part of them, and cannot
(without some error) continue or defend our selves, if God by his especial
grace and favor, give us not strength and good understanding. Which power we
may not believe, that either it descends to us, or lives in us, by any
merits of our own; but of his only most gracious benignity. Moved
nevertheless, and entreated by the intercessions of them, who were (as we are)
mortals; and having diligently observed his commandments, are now with him in
eternal blessedness. To whom (as to advocates and procurators, informed by the
experience of our frailty) we are not to present our prayers in the presence
of so great a Judge; but only to himself, for the obtaining of all such things
as his wisdom knows to be most expedient for us. And well may we credit,
that his goodness is more fully inclined toward us, in his continual bounty
and liberality; then the subtilty of any mortal eye, can reach into the secret
of so divine a thought: and sometimes therefore we may be beguiled in opinion,
by electing such and such as our intercessors before his high Majesty, who
perhaps are far off from him, or driven into perpetual exile, as unworthy to
appear in so glorious a presence. For he, from whom nothing can be hidden,
more regards the sincerity of him that prays, then ignorant devotion,
committed to the trust of a heedlesse intercessor; and such prayers have
always gracious acceptance in his sight. As manifestly will appear, by the
Novel which I intend to relate; manifestly (I say) not as in the judgment of
God, but according to the ahprehension of men.



There was one named, Musciatto Francesi, who from being a most rich and great
merchant in France, was become a Knight, and preparing to go into Tuscany, with
Monsieur Charles without Land, Brother to the King of France (who was desired
and incited to come thither by Pope Boniface) found his affairs greatly
intricated here and there (as oftentimes the matters of Merchants fall out to
be) and that very hardly he should suddenly vnintangle them, without
referring the charge of them to diverse persons. And for all he took
indifferent good order, only he remained doubtful, whom he might sufficiently
leave, to recover his debts among many Burgundians. And the rather was his care
the more herein, because he knew the Burgundians to be people of badde nature,
rioters, brablers, full of calumny, and without any faithfulness: so that he
could not bethink himself of any man (how wicked soever he was) in whom he
might repose trust to meet with their lewdness. Having a long while examined
his thoughts upon this point, at last he remembered one master Chappelet du
Prat, who ofttimes had resorted to his house in Paris. And because he was a man
of little stature, yet handsome enough, the French not knowing what this word
Chappelet might mean, esteeming he should be called rather (in their tongue)
Chapel; imagined, that in regard of his small stature, they termed him
Chappelet, and not Chapel, and so by the name of Chappelet he was every where
known, and by few or none acknowledged for Chapel.

This master Chappelet, was of so good and commendable life; that, being a
Notarie, he held it in high disdain, that any of his Contractes (although he
made but few) should be found without falshoode. And look how many soever he
dealt withal, he would be urged and required thereto, offering them his pains
and travail for nothing, but to be requited otherwise then by money; which
proved to be his much larger recompencing, and returned to him the far
greater benefit. He took the only pleasure of the world, to bear false
witness, if he were thereto entreated, and (oftentimes) when he was not
requested at all. Likewise, because in those times, great trust and belief was
given to an oath, he making no care or conscience to be perjured: greatly
aduantaged himself by Law suites, in regard that many matters relied upon his
oath, and delivering the truth according to his knowledge.

He delighted (beyond measure) and addicted his best studies, to cause enmities
and scandals between kindred and friends, or any other persons, agreeing well
together; and the more mischief he could procure in this kind, so much the
more pleasure and delight took he therein. If he were called to kill any one,
or to do any other villainous deed, he never would make denial, but go to it
very willingly; and diverse times it was well known, that many were cruelly
beaten, ye slainc by his hands. He was a most horrible blasphemer of God and
his Saints, upon the very least occasion, as being more addicted to choler,
then any other man could be. Never would he frequent the Church, but basely
contemned it, with the Sacraments and religious rites therein administered,
accounting them for vile and unprofitable things: but very voluntarily would
visit Tauernes, and other places of dishonest access, which were continually
pleasing unto him, to satisfy his lust and inordinate lubricitie. He would
steal both in public and private, even with such a conscience, as if it were
given to him by nature so to do. He was a great glutton and a drunkarde, even
till he was not able to take any more: being also a continual gamester, and
carrier of false Dice, to cheat with them the very best Friends he had.

But why do I waste time in such extent of words? When it may suffice to say,
that never was there a worse man borne; whose wickedness was for long time
supported, by the favor, power, and Authority of Monsieur Musciatto, for
whose s^ke many wrongs and injuries were patiently endured, as well by private
persons (whom he would abuse notoriously) as others of the Court, beeweene
whom he made no difference at all in his vile dealing. This Master Chappelet,
being thus remembered by Musciatto (who very well knew his life and behavior)
he perfectly persuaded himself, that this was a man apt in all respects, to
meet with the treachery of the Burgundians: whereupon, having sent for him,
thus he began.

Chappelet, thou know how I am wholly to retreat my self from hence, and
having some affairs among the Burgundians, men full of wickedness and
deceit; I can bethink my self of no meeter a man then Chappelet, to recover
such debts as are due to me among them. And because it falls out so well,
that thou art not now hindered by any other business; if thou will undergo
this office for me, I will procure thee favorable Letters from the Court, and
give thee a reasonable portion in all thou recouerest. Master Chappelet, seeing
himself idle, and greedy after worldly goods, considering that Mounsieur
Musciatto (who had been always his best buckler) was now to depart from
thence, without any dreaming on the matter, and constrained thereto (as it
were) by necessity, set down his resolution, and answered that he would
gladly do it.

Having made their agreement together, and received from Musciatto his express
procuration, as also the Kings gracious Letters; after that Musciatto was gone
on his journey, To Borgogna says the Italian.
Master Chappelet went to Dijon, where he was unknown (well near) of any. And
there (quite from his natural disposition) he began benignely and
graciously, in recovering the debts due; which course he took the rather,
because they should have a further feeling of him in the end. Being lodged in
the house of two Florentine brethren, that lived on their moneys vsance; and
(for Mounsieur Musciattoes sake) using him with honor and respect: It fortuned
that he fell sick, and the two brethren sent for Physicions to attend him,
allowing their servants to be diligent about him, making no spare of any thing,
which gave the best likelihood of restoring his health. But all their pains
proved to no purpose, because he (honest man) being now grown aged, and having
lived all his life time very disordredly, fell day by day (according to the
Physicions judgment) from bad to worse, as no other way appeared but death,
whereat the brethren greatly grieved.

Upon a day, near to the Chamber where the sick man lay, they entered into
this communication. What shall we do (quoth the one to the other) with this
man? We are much hindered by him; for to send him away (sick as he is) we
shall be greatly blamed thereby, and it will be a manifest note of our weak
wisdom: the people knowing that first of all we gave him entertainment, and
have allowed him honest physical attendance, and he not having any way iniuried
or offended us, to let him be suddenly expulsed our house (sick to death as he
is) it can be no way for our credit.

On the other side, we are to consider also, that he has bin so badde a man,
as he will not now make any confession thereof, neither receive the blessed
Sacrament of the Church, and dying so without confession; there is no Church
that will accept his body, but it must be buried in profane ground, like to a
Dog. And yet if he would confess himself, his sins are so many and
monstrous; as the like case also may happen, because there is not any Priest or
Religious person, that can or will absolve him. And being not absolved, he must
be cast into some ditch or pit, and then the people of the Town, as well in
regard of the account we carry here, (which to them appears so little
pleasing, as we are daily pursued with their worst words) as also coveting our
spoil and overthrow; upon this accident will cry out and mutiny against us;
Behold these Lombard dogs, which are not to be received into the Church, why
should we suffer them to live here among us? In furious madness will they come
upon us, and our house, where (peradventure) not contented with robbing us of
our goods, our lives will remain in their mercy and danger; so that, in what
sort soever it happen, this man's dying here, must needs be banefull to us.

Master Chappelet, who (as we have formerly said) was lodged near to the
place where they thus conferred, having a subtle attention (as oftentimes we
see sick persons to be possessed withal) heard all these speeches spoken of
him, and causing them to be called unto him, thus he spoke.

I would not have you to be any way doubtful of me; neither that you should
receive the least damage by me: I have heard what you have said, and am
certain, that it will happen according to your words, if matters should fall
out as you conceit; but I am minded to deal otherwise. I have committed so
many offenses against our Lord God, in the whole current of my life; that now
I intend one action at the hour of my death, which I trust will make amends for
all. Procure therefore, I pray you, that the most holy and religious man that
is to be found (if there be any one at all) may come unto me, and refer the
case then to me, for I will deal in such sort for you and my self, that all
shall be well, and you no way discontented.

The two Brethren, although they had no great hope in his speeches, went yet to
a Monastery of Gray-Friars, and requested; that some one holy and learned man,
might come to hear the confession of a Lombard, that lay very weak and sick
in their house. And one was granted unto them, being an aged religious Friar,
a great read master in the sacred Scriptures, a very venerable person, who
being of good and sanctified life, all the Citizens held him in great respect
and esteem, and on he went with the^ to their house. When he was come up into
the Chamber where Master Chappelet lay, and being there seated down by him; he
began first to comfort him very lovingly, demanding also of him, how many
times he had bin at confession? Whereto master Chappelet (who never had bin
shriuen in all his life time) thus replied.

Holy Father, I always used (as a common custom) to be confessed once (at
the least) every week, albeit sometimes much more often) but true it is, that
being fallen into this sickness, now eight days since; I have not been confessed,
so violent has been the extremity of my weakness. My son (answered the good
old man) thou have done well, and so keep thee still hereafter in that mind:
but I plainly perceive, seeing thou have so often confessed thy self, that I
shall take the less labor in urging questions to thee.

Master Chappelet replied: Say not so good Father, for albeit I have been so
oftentimes confessed, yet am I willing now to make a general confession, even
of all sins coming to my remembrance, from the very day of my birth, until
this instant hour of my shrift. And therefore I entreat you (holy Father) to
make a particular demand of every thing, even as if I had never been confessed
at al, and to make no respect of my sickness: for I had rather be offensive to
mine own flesh, then by favoring or allowing it ease, to hazard the perdition
of my soul, which my Redeemer bought with so precious a price.

These words were highly pleasing to the holy Friar, and seemed to him as an
argument of a good conscience: Wherefore, after he had much commended this
forwardness in him, he began to demand of him if he had never offended with
any Woman? Whereunto master Chappelet (breathing forth a great sigh) answered.

Holy Father, I am half ashamed to tell you the truth in this case, as fearing
least I should sin in vainglory. Whereto the Confessor replied: Speak
boldly Son, and fear not; for in telling the truth, be it in confession or
otherwise, a man can never sin. Then said Master Chappelet, Father, seeing
you give me so good an assurance, I will resolve you faithfully herein. I am so
true a Virgin-man in this matter, even as when I issued forth of my Mothers
womb. O Son (quoth the Friar) how happy and blessed of God art thou? Well
have thou lived, and therein have not meanly merited: having had so much
liberty to do the contrary if thou would, wherein very few of us can so
answer for our selves.

Afterward, he demanded of him, how much displeasing to God he had been in
the sin of Gluttony? When (sighing again greatly) he answered: Too much, and
too often, good Father. For, over and beside the Fasts of our Lent season,
which every year ought to be duly observed by devout people, I brought my
self to such a customarie use, that I could fast three days in every Week,
with Bread and Water. But indeed (holy Father) I confess, that I have drunk
water with such a pleasing appetite and delight (especially in praying, or
walking on pilgrimages) even as greedy drunkards do, in drinking good Wine. And
many times I have desired such Sallades of small herbs, as Women gather
abroad in the open fields, and feeding only upon them, without coveting after
any other kind of sustenance; has seemed much more pleasing to me, then I
thought to agree with the nature of Fasting, especially, when as it swerueth
from devotion, or is not done as it ought to be.

Son, Son, replied the Confessor, these sins are natural, and very
light, and therefore I would not have thee to charge thy conscience with them,
more then is needful. It happens to every man (how holy soever he be) that
after he has fasted ouer-long, feeding will be welcome to him, and drinking
good drink after his travail. O Sir (said Master Chappelet) never tell me
this to comfort me, for well you know, and I am not ignorant therein, that such
things as are done for the service of God, ought all to be performed purely,
and without any blemish of the mind; what otherwise is done, sauoureth of
sin. The Friar being well contented with his words, said: It is not amiss
that thou understand it in this manner, and thy conscience thus purely
cleared, is no little comfort to me. But tell me now concerning Avarice, have
thou sinned therein? by desiring more then was reasonable, or withholding from
others, such things as thou oughtst not to detain? whereto Master Chappelet
answered. Good Father, I would not have you to imagine, because you see me
lodged here in the house of two usurers, that therefore I am of any such
disposition. No truly Sir, I came hither to no other end, but only to chastise
and admonish them in friendly manner, to cleanse their minds from such
abominable profit: And assuredly, I should have prevailed therein, had not
this violently sickness hindered mine intention. But understand (holy Father)
that my parents left me a rich man, and immediately after my fathers death, the
greater part of his goods I gave away for Gods sake, and then, to sustain mine
ownelife, and to help the poor members of Jesus Christ, I betook my self to
a mean estate of Merchandise, desiring none other then honest gain thereby,
and evermore whatsoever benefit came to me; I imparted half thereof to the
poor, converting mine own small portion about my necessary affairs, which
that other part would scarsely serve to supply: yet always God gave thereto
such a merciful blessing, that my business daily thriued more and more,
arising still from good to better.

Well have thou done therein good Son, said the Confessor: but how often
times have thou been angry? Oh Sir (said Master Chappelet) therein I assure
ye, I have often transgressed. And what man is able to forbear it, beholding
the daily actions of men to be so dishonest? No care of keeping Gods
commandments, nor any fear of his dreadful judgments. Many times in a day,
I have rather wished my self dead then living, beholding youth pursuing idle
vanities, to swear and forswear themselves, tippling in Tauernes, and never
haunting Churches; but rather affecting the worlds follies, then any such
duties as they owe to God. Alas Son (quoth the Friar) this is a good and holy
anger, and I can impose no penance on thee for it. But tell me, has not rage
or fury at any time so ouer-ruled thee, as to commit murder or manslaughter,
or to speak evil of any man, or to do any other such kind of injury? Oh
Father (answered Master Chappelet) you that seem to be a man of God, how dare
you use any such vile words? If I had had the very least thought, to do any
such act as you speak, do you think that God would have suffered me to live?
These are deeds of darkness, fit for villains and wicked livers, of which
hellish crew, when at any time I have happened to meet with some one of them;
I have said, Go, God convert thee.

Worthy, and charitable words, replied the Friar; but tell me Son, Did thou
ever bear false witness against any man, or have spoken falsely, or taken
ought from any one, contrary to the will of the owner? Yes indeed Father, said
Master Chappelet, I have spoken ill of another, because I have sometime seen
one of my neighbors, who with no mean shame of the world, would do nothing
else but beat his wife: and of him once I complained to the poor man's
parents, saying, that he never did it, but when he was overcome with drink.
Those were no ill words, quoth the Friar; but I remember, you said that you
were a Merchant: Did you ever deceive any, as some Merchants use to do? Truly
Father, answered Master Chappelet, I think not any, except one man, who one
day brought me money which he owed me, for a certain piece of cloth I sold
him, and I put it into a purse without accounting it: about a month afterward,
I found that there were four small pence more then was due to me. And never
happening to meet with the man again, after I had kept them the space of a
whole year, I then gave them away to four poor people for Gods sake.

A small matter, said the Friar, and truly paid back again to the owner, in
bestowing them upon the poor. Many other questions he demanded of him,
whereto still he answered in the same manner: but before he proceeded to
absolution, Master Chappelet spoke thus. I have yet one sin more, which I
have not revealed to you: when being urged by the Friar to confess it, he
said. I remember, that I should afford one day in the week, to cleanse the
house of my soul, for better entertainment to my Lord and Savior, and yet I
have done no such reverence to the Sunday or Sabbath, as I ought to have done.
A small fault Son, replied the Friar. O no (quoth Master Chappelet) do not
term it a small fault, because Sunday being a holy day, is highly to be
reverenced: for, as on that day, our blessed Lord arose from death to life. But
(quoth the Confessor) have thou done nothing else on that day? Yes, said he,
being forgetful of my self, once I did spet in Gods Church. The Friar
smiling, said: Alas Son, that is a matter of no moment, for we that are
Religious persons, do use to spet there every day. The more is your shame,
answered Master Chappelet, for no place ought to be kept more pure and clean
then the sacred Temple, wherein our daily sacrifices are offered up to God,

In this manner he held on an hour and more, uttering the like transgressions
as these; and at last began to sigh very passionately, and to shed a few
tears, as one that was skillful enough in such dissembling prankes; whereat
the Confessor being much moved, said: Alas Son, what aylest thou? Oh Father
(quoth Chappelet) there remains yet one sin more upon my conscience,
whereof I never at any time made confession, so shameful it appears to me to
disclose it; and I am partly persuaded, that God will never pardon me for that
sin. How now Son? said the Friar, never say so; for if all the sins that
ever were committed by men, or shall be committed so long as the World
endures, were only in one man, and he repenting them, and being so contrite
for them, as I see thou art; the grace and mercy of God is so great, that upon
penitent confession, he will freely pardon him, and therefore spare not to
speak it boldly. Alas Father (said Chappelet, still in pretended weeping) this
sin of mine is so great, that I can hardly believe (if your earnest prayers
do not assist me) that ever I shall obtain remission for it. Speak it Son,
said the Friar, and fear not, I promise that I will pray to God for thee.

Master Chappelet still wept and sighed, and continued silent, notwithstanding
all the Confessors comfortable persuasions; but after he had held him a long
while in suspense, breathing forth a sighe, even as if his very heart would
have broken, he said; Holy Father, seeing you promise to pray to God for me, I
will reveal it to you: Know then, that when I was a little boy, I did once
curse my Mother; which he had no sooner spoken, but he wrung his hands, and
grieved extraordinarily. Oh good Son, said the Friar, does that seem so great
a sin to thee? Why, men do daily blaspheme our Lord God, and yet
nevertheless, upon their hearty repentance, he is always ready to forgive
them; and wilt not thou believe to obtain remission, for a sin so ignorantly
committed? Weep no more dear Son, but comfort thy self, and rest resolved,
that if thou were one of them, who nailed our blessed Savior to his Cross;
yet being so truly repentant, as I see thou art, he would freely forgive thee.
Say you so Father? quoth Chappelet. What? mine own dear Mother? that bare me
in her womb nine months, day and night, and afterward fed me with her
breasts a thousand times, can I be pardoned for cursing her? Oh no, it is too
heinous a sin, and except you pray to God very instantly for me, he will not
forgive me.

When the religious man perceived, that nothing more was to be confessed by
Master Chappelet; he gave him absolution, and his own benediction beside,
reputing him to be a most holy man, as verily believing all that he had said.
And who would not have done the like, hearing a man to speak in that manner,
and being upon the very point of death? Afterward, he said unto him; Master
Chappelet, by Gods grace you may be soon restored to health, but if it so come
to pass, that God do take your blessed and well disposed soul to his mercy,
will it please you to have your body buried in our Convent? Whereto Master
Chappelet answered; I thank you Father for your good motion, and sorry should
I be, if my friends did bury me any where else, because you have promised, to
pray to God for me; and beside, I have always carried a religious devotion to
your Order. Wherefore, I beseech you, so soon as you are come home to your
Convent, prevail so much by your good means, that the holy Eucharist,
consecrated this morning on your high Altar, may be brought unto me: for
although I confess my self utterly unworthy, yet I purpose (by your reverend
permission) to receive it, as also your holy and latest unction; to this end,
that having lived a grievous sinner, I may yet (at the last) die a Christian.
These words were pleasing to the good old man, and he caused every thing to be
performed, according as Master Chappelet had requested.

The two Brethren, who much doubted the dissembling of Chappelet, being both in
a small partition, which sundered the sick man's Chamber from theirs, heard and
understood the passage of all, between him and the ghostly Father, being many
times scarcely able to refrain from laughter, at the fraudulent course of his
confession. And often they said within themselves; what manner of man is this,
whom neither age, sickness, nor terror of death so near approaching, and
sensible to his own soul, nor that which is much more, God, before whose
judgment he knows not how soon he shall appear, or else be sent to a more
fearful place; none of these can alter his wicked disposition, but that he
will needs die according as he has lived? Notwithstanding, seeing he had so
ordered the matter, that he had burial freely allowed him, they cared for no
more.

After that Chappelet had received the Communion, and the other ceremonies
appointed for him; weakness increasing on him more and more, the very same day
of his goodly confession, he died (not long after) toward the evening.
Whereupon the two Brethren took order, that all needful things should be in
a readiness, to have him buried honorably; sending to acquaint the Fathers of
the Convent therewith, that they might come to say their Nigilles, according to
precedent custom, and then on the morrow to fetch the body. The honest Friar
that had confessed him, hearing he was dead, went to the Prior of the Convent,
and by sound of the house Bell, caused all the Brethren to assemble together,
giving them credibly to understand, that Master Chappelet was a very holy man,
as appeared by all the parts of his confession, and made no doubt, but that
many miracles would be wrought by his sanctified body, persuading them to fetch
it thither with all devout solemnity and reverence; whereto the Prior, and all
the credulous Brethren presently condiscended very gladly.

When night was come, they went all to visit the dead body of Master Chappelet,
where they used an especial and solemn Nigill; and on the morrow, apparrelled
in their richest Coapes and Vestiments, with books in their hands, and the
Cross borne before them, singing in the form of a very devout procession,
they brought the body pompeously into their Church, accompanied with all the
people of the Town, both men and women. The Father Confessor, ascending up
into the Pulpit, preached wonderful things of him, and the rare holiness of
his life; his fastes, his virginity, simplicity, innocence, and true sanctity,
recounting also (among other especial observations) what Chappelet had
confessed, as this most great and grievous sin, and how hardly he could be
persuaded, that God would grant him pardon for it. Whereby he took occasion to
reprove the people then present, saying; And you (accursed of God) for very
least and trifling matter happening, will not spare to blaspheme God, his blessed
Mother, and the whole Court of heavenly Paradise: Oh, take example by this
singular man, this Saint-like man, nay, a very Saint indeed.

Many additions more he made, concerning his faithfulness, truth, and
integrity; so that, by the vehement asseueration of his words (whereto all the
people there present gave credible belief) he provoked them unto such zeal
and earnest devotion; that the Sermon was no sooner ended, but (in mighty
crowds and throngs) they pressed about the Biere, kissing his hands and feet,
and all the garments about him were torn in pieces, as precious Relics of so
holy a person, and happy they thought themselves, that could get the smallest
piece or shred of any thing that came near to his body, and thus they
continued all the day, the body lying still open, to be visited in this manner.

When night was come, they buried him in a goodly Marble tomb, erected in a
fair Chapel purposely; and for many days after following, it was most
strange to see, how the people of the country came thither on heaps, with holy
Candles and other offerings, with Images of wax fastened to the Tomb, in
sign of Sacred and solemn Vows, to this new created Saint. And so far was
spread the fame and renown of his sanctity, devotion, and integrity of life,
maintained constantly by the Fathers of the Convent; that if any one fell sick
in need, distress, or adversity, they would make their Vows to no other
Saint but him: naming him (as yet to this day they do) Saint Chappelet,
affirming upon their Oaths, that infinite miracles were there daily performed
by him, and especially on such, as came in devotion to visit his shrine.

In this manner lived and died Master Chappelet du Prat, who before he became a
Saint, was as you have heard: and I will not deny it to be impossible, but that
he may be at rest among other blessed bodies. For, although he lived lewdly and
wickedly, yet such might be his contrition in the latest extremity, that
(questionless) he might find mercy. But, because such things remain
unknown to us, and speaking by outward appearance, vulgar judgment will
censure otherwise of him, and think him to be rather in perdition, then in so
blessed a place as Paradise. But referring that to the Omnipotent appointment,
whose clemency has always been so great to us, that he regards not our
errors, but the integrity of our Faith, making (by means of our continual
Mediator) of an open enemy, a converted son and servant. And as I began in
his name, so will I conclude, desiring that it may evermore be had in due
reverence, and refer we our selves thereto in all our necessities, with this
settled assurance, that he is always ready to hear us. And so he ceased.

Abraham a Jew, being admonished or advised by a friend of his, named Iehannot
de Cheuigny, travailed from Paris unto Rome: And beholding there the wicked
behavior of men in the Church, returned back to Paris again, where yet
(nevertheless) he became a Christian.

The Second Novel.
Wherein is contained and expressed, the liberality and goodness of God,
extended to the Christian Faith.

THE Novel recited by Pamphilus, was highly pleasing to the company, and much
commended by the Ladies: and after it had been diligently observed among them,
the Queen commanded Madam Neiphila (who was seated nearest to Pamphilus) that,
in relating another of hers, she should follow on in the pastime thus begun.
She being no less gracious in countenance, then merrily disposed; made answer,
that she would obey her charge, and began in this manner.



Pamphilus has declared to us by his Tale, how the goodness of God regards
not our errors, when they proceed from things which we cannot discern. And
I intend to approve by mine, what argument of infallible truth, the same
benignity delivers of it self, by enduring patiently the faults of them,
that (both in word and work) should declare unfeigned testimony of such
gracious goodness, and not to live so dissolutely as they do. To the end,
that others illumined by their light of life, may believe with the stronger
constancy of mind.

As I have heretofore heard (Gracious Ladies) there lived a wealthy Merchant
in Paris, being a Mercer, or seller of Silks, named Iehannot de Cheuigny, a
man of faithful, honest, and upright dealing; who held great affection and
friendship with a very rich Jew, named Abraham, that was a Merchant also, and a
man of very direct conversation. Iehannot well noting the honesty and loyal
dealing of this Jew, began to have a Religious kind of compassion in his soul,
much pitying, that a man so good in behavior, so wise and discreet in all
his actions, should be in danger of perdition through want of Faith. In which
regard, lovingly he began to entreat him, that he would leave the errors of
his Jewish belief, and follow the truth of Christianity, which he evidently
saw (as being good and holy) daily to prosper and enlarge it self, whereas (on
the contrary) his profession decreased, and grew to nothing.

The Jew made answer, that he believed nothing to be so good and holy, as the
Jewish Religion, and having been borne therein, therein also he purposed to
live and dye, no matter whatsoever, being able to remove him from that
resolution. For all this stiff denial, Iehannot would not so give him over;
but pursued him still day by day, reitterating continually his former speeches
to him: delivering infinite excellent and pregnant reasons, that Merchants
themselves were not ignorant, how far the Christian faith excelled the Jewish
falsehoods. And albeit the Jew was a very learned man in his own law, yet
notwithstanding, the entire amity he bare to Iehannot, or (perhaps) his words
fortified by the blessed Spirit, were so preualent with him: that the Jew felt
a pleasing apprehension in them, though his obstinacy stood (as yet) far off
from conversion. But as he thus continued strong in opinion, so Iehannot left
not hourly to labor him: in so much that the Jew, being conquered by such
earnest and continual importunity, one day spoke to Iehannot thus.

My worthy friend Iehannot, thou art extremely desirous, that I should convert
to Christianity, and I am well contended to do it, only upon this condition.
That first I will journey to Rome, to see him (whom thou say) is Gods
general vicar here on earth, and to consider on the course of his life and
manners, and likewise of his College of Cardinals. If he and they do appear
such men to me, as thy speeches affirms them to be, and thereby I may
comprehend, that thy faith and Religion is better then mine, as (with no mean
pains) thou endeuourest to persuade me: I will become a Christian as thou art,
but if I find it otherwise, I will continue a Jew as I am.

When Iehannot heard these words, he became exceeding sorrowful, within
himself. I have lost all the pains, which I did think to be well employed,
as hoping to have this man converted here: For, if he go to the Court of Rome,
and behold there the wickedness of the Priests lives; farewell all hope in me,
of ever seeing him to become a Christian. But rather, were he already a
Christian, without all question, he would turn Jew: And so (going nearer to
Abraham) he said. Alas my loving friend, why should thou undertake such a
tedious travel, and so great a charge, as thy journey from hence to Rome will
cost thee? Consider, that to a rich man (as thou art) travail by land or sea
is full of infinite dangers. Do thou not think, that here are Religious men
enough, who will gladly bestow Baptism upon thee. To me therefore it plainly
appears, that such a voyage is to no purpose. If thou stand upon any doubt
or scruple, concerning the faith whereto I wish thee; where can thou desire
conference with greater Doctors, or men more learned in all respects, then
this famous City does afford thee, to resolve thee in any questionable case?
Thou must think, that the Prelates are such there, as here thou see them to
be, and yet they must needs be in much better condition at Rome, because they
are near to the principal Pastor. And therefore, if thou will credit my
counsel, reserve this journey to some time more convenient, when the Iubilee
of general pardon happens, and then (perchance) I will bear thee company,
and go along with thee as in vowed pilgrimage.

Whereto the Jew replied. I believe Iehannot, that all which thou have said may
be so. But, to make short with thee, I am fully determined (if thou would
have me a Christian, as thou instantly vrgest me to be) to go thither, for
otherwise, I will continue as I am. Iehannot perceiving his settled purpose,
said: Go then in Gods name. But persuaded himself, that he would never
become a Christian, after he had once seen the Court of Rome: nevertheless,
he counted his labor not altogether lost, in regard he bestowed it to a good
end, and honest intentions are to be commended.

The Jew mounted on horseback, and made no lingering in his journey to Rome,
where being arrived, he was very honorably entertained by other Jews dwelling
in Rome. And during the time of his abiding there (without revealing to any
one, the reason of his coming thither) very heedfully he observed, the manner
of the Popes life, of the Cardinals, Prelates, and all the Courtiers. And being
a man very discreet and judicious, he apparently perceived, both by his own
eye, and further information of friends; that from the highest to the lowest
(without any restraint, remorse of conscience, shame, or fear of punishment)
all sinned in abominable luxury, and not naturally only, but in foul
Sodomie, so that the credit of Strumpets and Boys was not small, and yet might
be too easily obtained. Moreover, drunkards, belly-Gods, and servants of the
paunch, more then of any thing else (even like brutish beasts after their
luxury) were every where to be met withal. And, upon further observation, he
saw all men so covetous and greedy of coin, that every thing was bought and
sold for ready money, not only the blood of men, but (in plain terms) the
faith of Christians, yea, and matters of diuinest qualities, how, or to
whomsoever appertaining, were it for sacrifices or benefices, whereof was made
no mean Merchandise, and more Brokers were there to be found (then in Paris
attending upon all Trades) of manifest Symonie, under the nice name of
Negotiation, and for gluttony, not sustentation: even as if God had not known
the signification of vocables, nor the intentions of wicked hearts, but would
suffer himself to be deceived by the outward names of things, as wretched men
commonly use to do.

These things, and many more (fitter for silence, then publication) were so
deeply displeasing to the Jew, being a most sober and modest man; that he had
soon seen enough, resolving on his return to Paris, which very speedily he
performed. And when Iehannot heard of his arrival, crediting much rather other
news from him, then ever to see him a converted Christian; he went to welcome
him, and kindly they feasted one another. After some few days of resting,
Iehannot demanded of him; what he thought of our holy father the Pope and his
Cardinals, and generally of all the other Courtiers? Whereto the Jew readily
answered; It is strange Iehannot, that God should give them so much as he does.
For I will truly tell thee, that if I had been able to consider all those
things, which there I have both heard and seen: I could then have resolved my
self, never to have found in any Priest, either sanctity, devotion, good
work, example of honest life, or any good thing else beside. But if a man
desire to see luxury, avarice, gluttony, and such wicked things, yea, worse, if
worse may be, and held in general estimation of all men; let him but go to
Rome, which I think rather to be the forge of damnable actions, then any way
leaning to grace or goodness. And, for ought I could perceive, me thinks your
chief Pastor, and (consequently) all the rest of his dependants, do strive
so much as they may (with all their engine art and endeavor) to bring to
nothing, or else to banish quite out of the world, Christian Religion, whereof
they should be the support and foundation.

But because I perceive, that their wicked intent will never come to pass, but
contrariwise, that your faith enlarges it self, shining every day much more
clear and splendant: I gather thereby evidently, that the blessed Spirit is
the true ground and defense thereof, as being more true and holy then any
other. In which respect, whereas I stood stiff and obstinate against the good
admonitions, and never minded to become a Christian: now I freely open my heart
unto thee, that nothing in the world can or shall hinder me, but I will be a
Christian, as thou art. Let us therefore presently go to the Church, and there
(according to the true custom of your holy faith) help me to be baptized.

Iehannot, who expected a far contrary conclusion, then this, hearing him
speak it with such constancy; was the very gladdest man in the world, and went
with him to the Church of Nostre Dame in Paris, where he requested the Priests
there abiding, to bestow baptism on Abraham, which they joyfully did, hearing
him so earnestly to desire it. Iehannot was his Godfather, and named him Iobn,
and afterward, by learned Divines he was more fully instructed in the grounds
of our faith; wherein he grew of greatly understanding, and led a very virtuous
life.

Melchisedech a Jew, by recounting a Tale of three Rings, to the great Soldam,
named Saladine, prevented a great danger which was prepared for him.

The third Novel.
Whereby the Author, approving the Christian Faith, shows, how beneficial a
sudden and ingenious answer may fall out to be, especially when a man finds
himself in some evident danger.

MAdame Neiphila having ended her Discourse, which was well allowed of by all
the company; it pleased the Queen, that Madam Philomena should next succeed
in order, who thus began.



The Tale delivered by Neiphila, makes me remember a doubtful case, which
sometime happened to another Jew. And because that God, and the truth of his holy
Faith, has been already very well discoursed on: it shall not seem unfitting
(in my poor opinion) to descend now into the accidents of men. Wherefore, I
will relate a matter unto you, which being attentively heard and considered;
may make you much more circumspect, in answering to diverse questions and
demands, then (perhaps) otherwise you would be. Consider then (most worthy
assembly) that like as folly or dullness, many times has overthrown some men
from place of eminency, into most great and grievous miseries: even so,
discrect sense and good understanding, has delivered many out of irksome
perils, and seated them in safest security. And to prove it true, that folly
has made many fall from high authority, into poor and despised calamity; may
be avouched by infinite examples, which now were needelesse to remember: But,
that good sense and able understanding, may prove to be the occasion of great
desolation, without happy prevention, I will declare unto you in very few
words, and make it good according to my promise.

Saladine, was a man so powerful and valiant, as not only his very valor
made him Sultan of Babylon, but also gave him many signal victories, over
Kings of the Sarrazens, and of Christians likewise. Having in diverse Wars,
and other magnificent employments of his own, wasted all his treasure, and (by
reason of some sudden accident happening to him) standing in need to use some
great sum of money, yet not readily knowing where, or how to procure it; he
remembered a rich Jew named Melchisedech, that lent out money to use or interest
in the City of Alexandria. This man he imagined best able to furnish him, if he
could be won to do it willingly: but he was known to be so gripple and
miserable, that hardly any means would draw him to it. In the end,
constrained by necessity, and laboring his wits for some apt device whereby he
might have it: he concluded, though he might not compel him to do it, yet by
a practice shadowed with good reason to ensnare him. And having sent for him,
entertained him very familiarly in his Court, and sitting down by him, thus
began.

Honest man, I have often heard it reported by many, that thou art very
skillful, and in cases concerning God, thou go beyond all other of these
times: wherefore, I would gladly be informed by thee, which of those three
Laws or Religions, thou take to be truest; that of the Jew, the other of the
Sarazen, or that of the Christian? The Jew, being a very wise man, plainly
perceived, that Saladine sought to entrap him in his answer, and so to raise
some quarrel against him. For, if he commended any one of those Laws above
the other, he knew that Saladine had what he aimed at. Wherefore, bethinking
himself to shape such an answer, as might no way trouble or entangle him:
summoning all his senses together, and considering, that dallying with the
Soldane might redound to his no mean danger, thus he replied.

My Lord, the question propounded by you, is fair and worthy, and to answer
mine opinion truly threof, does necessarily require some time of consideration,
if it might stand with your liking to allow it: but if not, let me first make
entrance to my reply, with a pretty tale, and well worth the hearing. I have
oftentimes heard it reported, that (long since) there was a very wealthy man,
who (among other precious Jewels of his own) had a goodly Ring of great value;
the beauty and estimation whereof, made him earnestly desirous to leave it as a
perpetual memory and honor to his successors. Whereupon, he willed and
ordained, that he among his male children, with whom this Ring (being left by
the Father) should be found in custody after his death; he and none other was
to be reputed his heir, and to be honored and reverenced by all the rest, as
being the prime and worthiest person. That Son, to whom this Ring was left by
him, kept the same course to his posterity, dealing (in all respects) as his
predecessor had done; so that (in short time) the Ring (from hand to hand) had
many owners by Legacy.

At length, it came to the hand of one, who had three sons, all of them
goodly and virtuous persons, and very obedient to their Father: in which
regard, he affected them all equally, without any difference or partial
respect. The custom of this ring being known to them, each one of them
(coveting to bear esteem above the other) desired (as he could best make his
means) his father, that in regard he was now grown very old, he would leave
that Ring to him, whereby he should be acknowledged for his heir. The good
man, who loved no one of them more then the other, knew not how to make his
choice, nor to which of them he should leave the Ring: yet having past his
promise to them severally, he studied by what means to satisfy them all
three. Wherefore, secretly having conferred with a curious and excellent
Goldsmith, he caused two other Rings to be made, so really resembling the
first made Ring, that himself (when he had them in his hand) could not
distinguish which was the right one.

Lying upon his deathbed, and his Sons then plying him by their best
opportunities, he gave to each of them a Ring And they (after his death)
presuming severally upon their right to the inheritance and honor, grew to
great contradiction and square: each man producing then his Ring, which were so
truly all alike in resemblance, as no one could know the right Ring from the
other. And therefore, suite in Law, to distinguish the true heir to his
Father; continued long time, and so it does yet to this very day. In like
manner my good Lord, concerning those three Laws given by God the Father, to
three such people as you have propounded: each of them do imagine that they
have the heritage of God, and his true Law, and also duly to perform his
Commandments; but which of them do so indeed, the question (as of the three
Ringes) is yet remaining.

Saladine well perceiving, that the Jew was too cunning to be caught in his
snare, and had answered so well, that to do him further violence, would
redound unto his perpetual dishonor; (...) to reveal his need and
extremity, and try if he would therein friendly sted him. Having disclosed the
matter, and how he purposed to have dealt with him, if he had not returned so
wise an answer; the Jew lent him so great a sum of money as he demanded, and
Saladine repayed it again to him justly, giving him other great gifts beside:
respecting him as his especial friend, and maintaining him in very honorable
condition, near unto his own person.

A Monk having committed an offense, deserving to be very grievously punished;
freede himself from the pain to be inflicted on him, by wittily reprehending
his Abbot, with the very same fault.

The fourth Novel.
Wherein may be noted, that such men as will reprove those errors in others,
which remain in themselves, commonly are the Authors of their own
reprehension.

SO ceased Madam Philomena, after the conclusion of her Tale, when Dioneus
sitting next unto her, (without tarrying for any other command from the Queen,
knowing by the order formerly begun, that he was to follow in the same
course) spoke in this manner.



Gracious Ladies, if I fail not in understanding your general intention; we
are purposely assembled here to tell Tales, and especially such as may please
our selves. In whith respect, because nothing should be done disorderly, I hold
it lawful for every one (as our Queen decreed before her dignity) to relate
such a nouelty, as (in their own judgment) may cause most contentment.
Wherefore having heard, that by the good admonitions of Iehannot de Cheuigny,
Abraham the Jew was advised to the salvation of his soul, and Melchisedech (by
his witty understanding) defended his riches from the trains of Saladine: I
now purpose to tell you in a few plain words, (without fear of receiving any
reprehension) how cunningly a Monk compassed his deliverance, from a
punishment intended toward him.

There was in the Country of Lunigiana (which is not far distant from our
own) a Monastery, which sometime was better furnished with holiness and
Religion, then now adays they are; wherein lived (among diverse other) a young
nouice Monk, whose hot and lusty disposition (being in the vigor of his
years) was such, as neither fastes nor prayers had any great power over him.
It chanced on a fasting day about high noone, when all the other Monks were
asleep in their Dormitaries or Dorters, this frolic Friar was walking alone
in their Church, which stood in a very solitary place, where ruminating on many
matters by himself, he espied a pretty hansome wench (some Husbandmans
daughter in the Country, that had been gathering roots and herbs in the
field) upon her knees before an Altar, whom he had no sooner seen, but
immediately he felt effeminate temptations, and such as ill fitted with his
profession.

Lascivious desire, and no religious devotion, made him draw near her, and
whether under shift (the only cloak to compass carnal affections) or some
other as close conference, to as pernicious and vile a purpose, I know not: but
so far he prevailed upon her frailety, and such a bargain passed between
them, that (from the Church) he won her to his Chamber, before any person
could perceive it. Now, while this young lusty Monk (transported with ouer-fond
affection) was more careless of his dalliance, then he should have been; the
Lord Abbot, being newly arisen from sleep, and walking softly about the
Cloister, came to the Monks Daughters door, where hearing what noise was made
between them, and a feminine voice, more strange then he was wont to hear; he
laid his ear close to the Chamber door, and plainly perceived, that a woman
was within. Wherewith being much moved, he intended suddenly to make him open
the door; but (upon better consideration) he conceived it far more fitting
for him, to return back to his own chamber, and tarry until the Monk should
come forth.

The Monk, though his delight with the Damosel was extraordinary, yet fear
and suspicion followed upon it: for, in the very height of all his wantonness,
he heard a soft treading about the door. And prying through a small creuice in
the same door, perceived apparently, that the Abbot himself stood listening
there, and could not be ignorant, but that the Maid was with him in the
Chamber. As after pleasure ensues pain, so the venial Monk knew well enough
(though wanton heat would not let him heed it before) that most grievous
punishment must be inflicted on him; which made him sad beyond all measure.
Nevertheless, without disclosing his dismay to the young Maiden, he began to
consider with himself on many means, whereby to find out one that might best
fit his turn. And suddenly conceited an apt stratagem, which sorted to such
effect as he would have it: whereupon seeming satisfied for that season, he
told the Damsel, that (being careful of her credit) as he had brought her
in unseen of any, so he would free her from thence again, desiring her to
tarry there (without making any noise at all) until such time as he returned
to her.

Going forth of the Chamber, and locking it fast with the key, he went directly
to the Lord Abbots lodging, and delivering him the said key (as every Monk
used to do the like, when he went abroad out of the Convent) setting a good
countenance on the matter, boldly said; My Lord, I have not yet brought in all
my part of the wood, which lies ready cut down in the Forest; and having now
convenient time to do it, if you please to give me leave, I will go and fetch
it. The Abbot persuading himself, that he had not been discovered by the
Monk, and to be resolved more assuredly in the offense committed; being not a
little iocund of so happy an accident, gladly took the key, and gave him leave
to fetch the wood.

No sooner was he gone, but the Abbot began to consider with himself, what
he were best to do in this case, either (in the presence of all the other
Monks) to open the Chamber door, that so the offense being known to them
all, they might have no occasion of murmuring against him, when he proceeded in
the Monks punishment; or rather should first understand of the Damsel her
self, how, and in what manner she was brought thither. Furthermore, he
considered, that she might be a woman of respect, or some such man's daughter,
as would not take it well, to have her disgraced before all the Monks.
Wherefore he concluded, first to see (himself) what she was, and then
(afterward) to resolve upon the rest. So going very softly to the Chamber, and
entering in, locked the door fast with the key, when the poor Damsel
thinking it had been the gallant young Monk; but finding it to be the Lord
Abbot, she fell on her knees weeping, as fearing now to receive public shame,
by being betrayed in this unkind manner.

My Lord Abbot looking demurely on the Maid, and perceiving her to be fair,
feate, and lovely; felt immediately (although he was old) no less spurring on
to fleshly desires, then the young Monk before had done; whereupon he began
to confer thus privately with himself. Why should I not take pleasure, when
I may freely have it? Cares and molestations I endure every day, but sildome
find such delights prepared for me. This is a delicate sweet young Damsel,
and here is no eye that can discover me. If I can enduce her to do as I would
have her, I know no reason why I should gainsay it. No man can know it, or
any tongue blaze it abroad; and sin so concealed, is half pardoned. Such a
fair fortune as this is, perhaps hereafter will never befall me; and therefore
I hold it wisdom, to take such a benefit when a man may enjoy it.

Upon this immodest meditation, and his purpose quite altered which he came
for; he went nearer to her, and very kindly began to comfort her, desiring her
to forbear weeping, and (by further insinuating speeches) acquainted her with
his amorous intention. The Maid, who was made neither of iron nor diamond, and
seeking to prevent one shame by another, was easily won to the Abbots will,
which caused him to embrace and kiss her often.

Our lusty young nouice Monk, whom the Abbot imagined to be gone for wood, had
hid himself aloft upon the roof of the Dorter, where, when he saw the Abbot
enter alone into the Chamber, he lost a great part of his former fear,
promising to himself a kind of persuasion, that somewhat would ensue to his
better comfort; but when he beheld him locked into the Chamber, then his hope
grew to undoubted certainty. A little chincke or creuice favored him, whereat
he could both hear and see, whatsoever was done or spoken by them: so, when
the Abbot thought he had staide long enough with the Damsel, leaving her
still there, and locking the door fast again, he returned thence to his own
Chamber.

Within some short while after, the Abbot knowing the Monk to be in the
Convent, and supposing him to be lately returned with the wood, determined to
reprove him sharply, and to have him closely imprisoned, that the Damsel
might remain solie to himself. And causing him to be called presently before
him, with a very stearne and angry countenance giving him many harsh and bitter
speeches, commanded, that he should be clapped in prison.

The Monk very readily answered, saying. My good Lord, I have not yet been so
long in the order of Saint Benedict, as to learn all the particularities
thereto belonging. And beside Sir, you never showed me or any of my brethren,
in what manner we young Monks ought to use women, as you have otherwise done
for our custom of prayer and fasting. But seeing you have so lately therein
instructed me, and by your own example how to do it: I here solemnly
promise you, if you please to pardon me but this one error, I will never fail
therein again, but daily follow what I have seen you do.

The Abbot, being a man of quick apprehension, perceived instantly by this
answer; that the Monk not only knew as much as he did, but also had seen
(what was intended) that he should not. Wherefore, finding himself to be as
faulty as the Monk, and that he could not shame him, but worthily had
deserved as much himself; pardoning him, and imposing silence on eithers
offense: they conuayed the poor abused Damsel forth of their doors, she
purposing (never after) to transgress in the like manner.

The Lady Marquess of Montferrat, with a Banquet of Hens, and diverse other
gracious speeches beside, repressed the fond love of the King of France.

The fifth Novel.
Declaring, that wise and virtuous Ladies, ought to hold their chastity in
more esteem, then the greatness and treasures of Princes: and that a
discreet Lord should not offer modesty violence.

THE Tale reported by Dioneus, at the first hearing of the Ladies, began to
relish of some immodestie, as the bashful blood mounting up into their faces,
delivered by apparent testimony. And beholding one another with
scarse-pleasing looks, during all the time it was in discoursing, no sooner
had he concluded: but with a few mild and gentle speeches, they gave him a
modest reprehension, and meaning to let him know, that such tales ought not to
be told among women. Afterward, the Queen commanded Madame Fiammetta,
(sitting on a bank of flowers before her) to take her turn as next in order:
and she, smiling with such a virginblush, as very beautifully became her, began
in this manner.



It is no little joy to me, that we understand so well (by the discourses
already past) what power consists in the delivery of wise and ready answers;
And because it is a great part of sense and judgment in men, to affect women
of great birth and quality, then themselves, as also an admirable foresight in
women, to keep off from being surprised in love, by Lords going beyond them in
degree; a matter offers it self to my memory, well deserving my speech and
your attention, how a Gentlewoman (both in word and deed) should defend her
honor in that kind, when importunity labors to betray it.

The Marquess of Montferrat was a worthy and valiant Knight, who being
Captain General for the Church, the necessary service required his company on
the Seas, in a goodly Army of the Christians against the Turks. Upon a day, in
the Court of King Philip, surnamed the one eyed King (who likewise made
preparation in France, for a royal assistance to that expedition) as many
speeches were delivered, concerning the valor and manhood of this Marquess:
it fortuned, that a Knight was then present, who knew him very familiarly, and
he gave an addition to the former commendation, than the whole world contained
not a more equal couple in marriage, then the Marquess and his Lady. For, as
among all Knights, the Marquess could hardly be paraleld for Arms and honor;
even so his wife, in comparison of all other Ladies, was scarcely matchable for
beauty and virtue. Which words were so weighty in the apprehension of King
Philip, that suddenly (having as yet never seen her) he began to affect her
very earnestly, concluding to embarque himself at Gennes or Genoua, there to
set forward on the intended voyage, and iourneying thither by land: he would
shape some honest excuse to see the Lady Marquess, whose Lord being then from
home, opinion persuaded him ouer-fondly, that he should easily obtain the
issue of his amorous desire.

When he was come within a days journey, where the Lady Marquess then lay;
he sent her word, that she should expect his company on the morrow at dinner.
The Lady, being singularly wise and judicious; answered the Messenger, that she
reputed the Kings coming to her, as an extraordinary grace and favor, and
that he should be most heartily welcome. Afterward, entering into further
consideration with her self, what the King might mean by this private
visitation, knowing her husband to be from home, and it to be no mean bar to
his apter entertainment: at last she discreetly conceited (and therein was not
deceived) that babbling report of her beauty and perfections, might thus
occasion the Kings coming thither, his iourny lying else a quite contrary way.
Notwithstanding, being a Princely Lady, and so loyal a wife as ever lived,
she intended to give him her best entertainment: summoning the chiefest
Gentlemen in the Country together, to take due order (by their advise) for
giving the King a gracious welcome. But concerning the dinner, and diet for
service to his table; that remained only at her own disposing.

Sending presently abroad, and buying all the Hens that the Country
afforded; she commanded her Cooks, that only of them (without any other
provision beside) they should prepare all the services that they could devise.
On the morrow, the King came according to his promise, and was most honorable
welcomed by the Lady, who seemed in his eye (far beyond the Knights speeches
of her) the fairest creature that ever he had seen before; whereat he
meruailed not a little, extolling her perfections to be peerless, which much
the more enflamed his affections, and (almost) made his desires impatient. The
King being withdrawn into such Chambers, as orderly were prepared for him, and
as beseemed so great a Prince: the hour of dinner drawing on, the King and the
Lady Marquess were seated at one Table, and his attendants placed at other
tables, answerable to their degrees of honor.

Plenty of dishes being served in, and the rarest wines that the Country
yielded, the King had more mind to the fair Lady Marquess, then any meat
that stood on the Table. Nevertheless, observing each service after other, and
that all the Viands (though variously cooked, and in diverse kinds) were
nothing else but Hens only; he began to wonder, and so much the rather,
because he knew the Country to be of such quality, that it affoorded all
plenty both of Fowls and Venyson: beside, after the time of his coming was
heard, they had respite enough, both for hawking and hunting; and therefore it
increased his marvel the more, that nothing was provided for him, but Hens
only: wherein to be the better resolved, turning a merry countenance to the
Lady, thus he spoke. Madam, are Hens only bred in this Country, and no
Cocks? The Lady Marquess, very well understanding his demand, which fitted
her with an apt opportunity, to thwart his idle hope, and defend her own
honor; boldly returned the King this answer. Not so my Lord, but women and
wives, howsoever they differ in garments and graces one from another; yet
notwithstanding, they are all here as they be in other places.

When the King heard this reply, he knew well enough the occasion of his Hen
dinner, as also, what virtue lay couched under her answer; perceiving
apparently, that wanton words would prove but in vain, and such a woman was
not easily to be seduced; wherefore, as he grew enamored on her
inconsiderately, so he found it best fitting for his honor, to quench this
heat with wisdom discreetely. And so, without any more words, or further
hope of speeding in so unkingly a purpose, dinner being ended, by a sudden
departing, he smoothly shadowed the cause of his coming, and thanking her for
the honor she had done him, commended her to her chaste disposition, and
posted away with speed to Gennes.

An honest plain meaning man, (simply and conscionably) reprehended the
malignity, hypocrisy, and misdemeanour of many Religious persons.

The sixth Novel.
Declaring, that in few, discreet, and well placed words, the covered craft of
Churchmen may be justly reproved, and their hypocrisy honestly discovered.

MAdam Aemilia sitting next to the gentle Lady Fiammetta, perceiving the modest
chastisement, which the virtuous Lady Marquess had given to the King of
France, was generally graced by the whole Assembly; began (after the Queen had
thereto appointed her) in these words. Nor will I conceal the deserved
reprehension, which an honest simple layman, gave to a covetous holy Father,
in very few words; yet more to be commended, then derided.

Not long since (worthy Ladies) there dwelt in our own native City, a Friar
Minor, an Inquisitor after matters of Faith, who, although he labored greatly
to seem a sanctified man, and an earnest affecter of Christian Religion, (as
all of them appear to be in outward show;) yet he was a much better Inquisitor
after them, that had their purses plenteously stored with money, then of such
as were slenderly grounded in Faith. By which diligent continued care in him,
he found out a man, more rich in purse, then understanding; and yet not so
defective in matters of faith, as misguided by his own simple speaking, and
(perhaps) when his brain was well warmed with wine, words fell more foolishly
from him, then in better judgment they could have done.



Being on a day in company, (very little differing in quality from himself) he
chanced to say; that he had been at such good wine, as God himself did never
drink better. Which words (by some Sicophant then in presence) being carried
to this curious Inquisitor, and he well knowing, that the man's faculties were
great, and his bags swollen up full with no mean abundance: Cum gladijs and
fustibus; With Book, Bell, and Candle, he raised an host of execrations
against him, and the Sumner cited him with a solemn Process to appear before
him, understanding sufficiently, that this course would sooner fetch money from
him, then amend any misbeliefe in the man; for no further reformation did he
seek after.

The man coming before him, he demanded, if the accusation intimated against
him, was true or no? Whereto the honest man answered, that he could not deny
the speaking of such words, and declared in what manner they were uttered.
Presently the Inquisitor, most devoutly addicted to Saint John with the golden
beard, said; What? Do thou make our Lord a drinker, and a curious quaffer
of wines, as if he were a glutton, belly-god, or a Tavern haunter, as thou,
and other drunkards are. Being an hypocrite, as thou art, thou think this to
be but a light matter, because it may seem so in thine own opinion: but I
tell thee plainly, that it deserves fire and faggor, if I should proceed in
Justice to inflict it on thee: with these, and other such like threatening
words, as also a very stearn and angry countenance, he made the man believe
himself to be an Epicure, and that he denied the eternity of the soul;
whereby he fell into such a trembling fear, as doubting indeed, least he
should be burned, that, to be more mercifully dealt withal, he rounded him in
the care, and (by secret means) so anointed his hands with Saint John's golden
grease, (a very singular remedy against the disease pestilentiall in covetous
Priests, especially Friars Minors, that dare touch no money) as the case became
very quickly altered.

This sovereign unction was of such virtue (though Galen speaks not a word
thereof among all his chiefest medicines) and so far prevailed; that the
terrible threatening words of fire and faggot, became merely frozen up, and
gracious language blew a more gentle and calmer air; the Inquisitor delivering
him an hallowed Crucifixe, creating him a Soldier of the Cross (because he
had payred Crosses good store for it) and even as if he were to travel under
that Standard to the holy Land; so did he appoint him a home-paying penance,
namely, to visit him thrice every week in his Chamber, and to anoint his
hands with the selfsame yellow unguent, and afterward, to hear a Mass of
the holy Cross, visiting him also at dinner time, which being ended, to do
nothing all the rest of the day, but according as he directed him.

The simple man, yet not so simple, but seeing that this weekly greasing the
Inquisitors hands, would (in time) graspe away all his gold; grew weary of this
anointing, and began to consider with himself, how to stay the course of
this chargeable penance: And coming one morning, (according to his iniunction)
to hear Mass, in the Gospel he observed these words; You shall receive an
hundred for one, and so possess eternal life; which saying he kept perfectly
in his memory, and, as he was commanded, at dinner time, he came to the
Inquisitor, finding him (among his fellows) seated at the Table. The
Inquisitor presently demanded of him, whether he had heard Mass that morning,
or no? Yes Sir, replied the man very readily. Have thou heard any thing therein
(quoth the Inquisitor) whereof thou art doubtful, or desire to be further
informed? Surely Sir, answered the plain meaning man, I make no doubt of any
thing I have heard, but do believe all constantly; only one thing troubles
me much, and makes me very compassionate of you, and of all these holy Fathers
your brethren, perceiving in what woeful and wretched estate you will be, when
you shall come into another World. What words are these, quoth the Inquisitor?
And why art thou moved to such compassion of us? O good Sir, said the man, do
you remember the words in the Gospel this morning? you shall receive an
hundred for one. That is very true, replied the Inquisitor, but what moves
thee to urge those words?

I will tell you Sir, answered the plain fellow, so it might please you to be
not offended. Since the time of my resorting hither, I have daily seen many
poor people at your door, and (out of your abundance) when you and your
brethren have fed sufficiently, every one has had a good mess of pottage: now
Sir, if for every dishfull given, you are sure to receive an hundred again,
you will all be merely drowned in pottage. Although though the rest (sitting
at the Table with the Inquisitor) laughed heartily at this jest; yet he found
himself touched in another nature, having (hypocritically) received for one
poor offense, above three hundred pieces of gold, and not a mite to be
restored again. But fearing to be further disclosed, yet threatening him with
another Process in Law, for abusing the words of the Gospel; he was content
to dismiss him for altogether, without any more golden greasing in the hand.

Bergamino, by telling a Tale of a skillful man, named Primasso, and of an
Abbot of Clugni; honestly checked a new kind of covetousness, in Master Can
de la Scala.

The seventh Novel.
Approving, that it is much unfitting for a Prince, or great person, to be
covetous; but rather to be liberal to all men.

THe courteous demeanor of Madam Aemilia, and the quaintness of her discourse,
caused both the Queen, and the rest of the company, to commend the invention
of carrying the Cross, and the golden ointment appointed for penance.
Afterward, Philostratus, who was in order to speak next, began in this manner.



It is a commendable thing (fair Ladies) to hit a But that never stirs out
of his place: but it is a matter much more admirable, to see a thing (suddenly
appearing, and sildome or never frequented before) to be as suddenly hit by an
ordinary Archer. The vicious and polluted lives of Priests, yields matter of
it self in many things, deserving speech and reprehension, as a true But of
wickedness, and well worthy to be sharply shot at. And therefore, though that
honest meaning man did wisely, in touching Master Inquisitor to the quick,
with the hypocritical charity of Monks and Friars, in giving such things to
the poor, as were more meet for swine, or to be worse thrown away; yet I
hold him more to be commended, who (by occasion of a former tale, and which I
purpose to relate) pleasantly reproved Master Can de la Scala, a Magnifico and
mighty Lord, for a sudden and unaccustomed covetousness appearing in him,
figuring by other men, that which he intended to say of him, in manner
following.

Master Can de la Scala, as fame ran abroad of him in all places, was
(beyond the infinite favors of Fortune toward him) one of the most notable
and magnificent Lords that ever lived in Italy, since the days of Frederick
the second Emperor. He determining to procure a very solemn assembly at
Verona, and many people being met there from diverse places, especially
Gentlemen of all degrees; suddenly (upon what occasion I know not) his mind
altered, and he would not go forward with his intention. Most of them he
partly recompensed which were come thither, and they dismissed to depart at
their pleasure, one only man remained unrespected, or in any kind sort sent
away, whose name was Bergamino, a man very pleasantly disposed, and so wittily
ready in speaking and answering, as none could easily credit it, but such as
heard him; and although his recompense seemed over long delayed, yet he made
no doubt of a beneficial ending.

By some enemies of his, Master Can de la Scala was incensed, that whatsoever
he gave or bestowed on him; was as ill employed and utterly lost, as if it were
thrown into the fire, and therefore he neither did or spoke any thing to him.
Some few days being passed over, and Bergamino perceiving, that he was
neither called, nor any account made of, notwithstanding many manly good parts
in him; observing beside, that he found a shrewd consumption in his purse, his
Inn, horses, and servants being chargeable to him: he beg^n to grow extremely
melancholy, and yet he attended in expectation day by day, as thinking it
far unfitting for him, to depart before he was bidden farewell.

Having brought with him thither three goodly rich garments, which had been
given him by sundry Lords, for his more sightly appearance at this great
meeting: the importunate Host being greedy of payment, first he delivered him
one of them, and yet not half the score being wiped off, the second must
needs follow, and beside, except he meant to leave his lodging, he must live
upon the third so long as it would last, till he saw what end his hopes would
sort to. It fortuned, during the time of living thus upon his latest refuge,
that he met with Master Can one day at dinner, where he presented himself
before him, with a discontented countenance: which Master Can well observing,
more to distaste him, then take delight in any thing that could come from him,
he said. Bergamino, how chearest thou? Thou art very melancholy, I pray thee
tell us why? Bergamino suddenly, without any premeditation, yet seeming as if
he had long considered thereon, reported this Tale.

Sir, I have heard of a certain man, named Primasso, one skilfully learned in
the Grammar, and (beyond all other) a very witty and ready versifier: in regard
whereof, he was so much admired, and far renowned, that such as never saw
him, but only heard of him, could easily say, this is Primasso. It came to
pass, that being once at Paris, in poor estate, as commonly he could light
on no better fortune (because virtue is slenderly rewarded, by such as have the
greatest possessions) he heard much fame of the Abbot of Clugni, a man reputed
(next to the Pope) to be the richest Prelate of the Church. Of him he heard
wonderful and magnificent matters, that he always kept an open and hospitable
Court, and never made refusal of any (from whence so ever he came or went)
but they did eat and drink freely there; provided, that they came when the
Abbot was set at the Table. Primasso hearing this, and being an earnest
desirer, to see magnificent and virtuous men; he resolved to go see this rare
bounty of the Abbot, demanding how far he dwelt from Paris. Being answered,
about some three leagues thence; Primasso made account, that if he went on
betimes in the morning, he should easily reach thither before the hour for
dinner.

Being instructed in the way, and not finding any to walk along with him;
fearing, if he went without some furnishment, and should stay long there for
his dinner, he might (perhaps) complain of hunger: he therefore carried three
loaves of bread with him, knowing that he could meet with water every where,
albeit he used to drink but little. Having aptly conuayed his bread about him,
he went on his journey, and arrived at the Lord Abbots Court, an indifferent
while before dinner time: wherefore, entering into the great Hall, and so from
place to place, beholding the great multitude of Tables, bountiful preparation
in the Kitchen, and what admirable provision there was for dinner; he said to
himself, Truly this man is more magnificent, then Fame has made him, because
she speaks too sparingly of him.

While thus he went about, considering on all these things, he saw the Master
of the Abbots household (because then it was the hour of dinner) command water
to be brought for washing hands, and every one sitting down at the Table: it
fell to the lot of Primasso, to sit directly against the door, whereat the
Abbot must enter into the Hall. The custom in this Court was such, that no
food should be served to any, of the Tables, until the Lord Abbot was
himself first set: whereupon, every thing being fit and ready, the
Master of the household, went to tell his Lord, that nothing now wanted but his
presence only.

The Abbot coming from his Chamber to enter the Hall, looking about him, as
he was wont to do; the first man he saw was Primasso, who being but in
homely habit, and he having not seen him before to his remembrance; a present
bad conceit possessed his brain, that he never saw an vnworthier person,
saying within himself: See how I give my goods away to be devoured. So
returning back to his Chamber again, commanded the door to be made fast,
demanding of every man near about him, if they knew the base Knave that sat
before his entrance into the Hall, and all his servants answered no. Primasso
being extremely hungry, with travailing on foot so far, and never used to
fast so long; expecting still when meat would be served in, and that the Abbot
came not at all: drew out one of his loaves which he brought with him, and
very heartily fell to feeding.

My Lord Abbot, after he had stayed within an indifferent while, sent forth one
of his men, to see if the poor fellow was gone, or no. The servant told him,
that he still stayed there, and fed upon dry bread, which it seemed he had
brought thither with him. Let him feed on his own (replied the Abbot) for he
shall taste of none of mine this day. Gladly would the Abbot, that Primasso
should have gone thence of himself, and yet held it scarsely honest in his
Lordship, to dismiss him by his own command. Primasso having eaten one of his
Loaves, and yet the Abbot was not come; began to feed upon the second: the
Abbot still sending to expect his absence, and answered as he was before. At
length, the Abbot not coming, and Primasso having eaten up his second loaf,
hunger compeld him to begin with the third.

When these news were carried to the Abbot, suddenly he brake forth and said.
What new kind of needy trick has my brain begotte this day? Why do I grow
disdainful against any man whatsoever? I have long time allowed my meat to be
eaten by all comers that did please to visit me, without exception against any
person, Gentleman, Yeoman, poor or rich, Merchant or Minstrill, honest man or
knave, never refraining my presence in the Hall, by basely contemning one poor
man. Believe me, covetousness of one man's meat, does ill agree with mine
estate and calling. What though he appears a wretched fellow to me? He may
be of greater merit then I can imagine, and deserve more honor then I am able
to give him.

Having thus discoursed with himself, he would needs understand of whence and
what he was, and finding him to be Primasso, come only to see the magnificence
which he had reported of him, knowing also (by the general fame noysed every
whereof him) that he was reputed to be a learned, honest, and ingenious man:
he grew greatly ashamed of his own folly, and being desirous to make him an
amends, strove many ways how to do him honor, When dinner was ended, the Abbot
bestowed honorable garments on him, such as beseemed his degree and merit, and
putting good store of money in his purse, as also giving him a good horse to
ride on, left it at his own free election, whether he would stay there still
with him, or depart at his pleasure. Wherewith Primasso being highly contented,
yielding him the heartiest thanks he could devise to do, returned to Paris on
horseback, albeit he came poorly thither on foot.

Master Can de la Scala, who was a man of good understanding, perceived
immediately (without any further interpretation) what Bergamino meant by this
moral, and smiling on him, said: Bergamino, thou have honestly expressed thy
virtue and necessities, and justly reproved mine avarice, niggardnesse, and
base folly. And trust me Bergamino, I never felt such a fit of covetousness
come upon me, as this which I have dishonestly declared to thee: and which I
will now banish from me, with the same correction as thou have taught me. So,
having paid the Host all his charges, redeeming also his robes or garments,
mounting him on a good Gelding, and putting plenty of Crowns in his purse, he
referd it to his own choice to depart, or dwell there still with him.

Guillaume Boursier, with a few quaint and familiar words, checked the miserable
covetousness of Signior Herminio de Grimaldi.

The eight Novel.
Which plainly declares, that a covetous Gentleman, is not worthy of any honor
or respect.

MAdam Lauretta, sitting next to Philostratus, when she had heard the witty
conceit of Bergamino; knowing, that she was to say somewhat, without
iniunction or command, pleasantly thus began.



This last discourse (fair and virtuous company) induces me to tell you, how
an honest Courtier reprehended in like manner (and nothing unprofitably) base
covetousness in a Merchant of extraordinary wealth. Which Tale, although (in
effect) it may seem to resemble the former; yet perhaps, it will prove no
less pleasing to you, in regard it sorted to as good an end.

It is no long time since, that there lived in Genes or Geneway, a Gentleman
named Signior Herminio de Grimaldi, who (as every one well knew) was more rich
in inheritances, and ready sums of current money, then any other known
Citizen in Italy. And as he surpassed other men in wealth, so did he likewise
excel them in wretched Avarice, being so miserably greedy and covetous, as no
man in the world could be more wicked that way; because, not only he kept his
purse locked up from pleasuring any, but denied needful things to himself,
enduring many miseries and distresses, only to avoid expenses, contrary to
the Genewayes general custom, who always delighted to be decently clothed,
and to have their diet of the best. By reason of which most miserable
baseness, they took from him the surname of Grimaldi, whereof he was in
right descended: and called him master Herminio the covetous Mizer, a nickname
very notably agreeing with his gripple nature.

It came to pass, that in this time of his spending nothing, but multiplying
daily by infinite means, that a civil honest Gentleman (a Courtier, of ready
wit, and discoursiue in Languages) came to Geneway, being named Guillaume
Boursier. A man very far differing from diverse Courtiers in these days, who
for soothing shameful and graceless manners, in such as allow them
maintenance, are called and reputed to be Gentlemen, yea especial favorites:
whereas much more worthily, they should be accounted as knaves and villains,
being borne and bred in all filthiness, and skillful in every kind of basest
behavior, not fit to come in Princes Courts. For, whereas in passed times,
they spent their days and pains in making peace, when Gentlemen were at war
or dissension, or treating on honest marriages, between friends and familiars,
and (with loving speeches) would recreate disturbed minds, desiring none but
commendable exercises in Court, and sharply reproouing (like fathers)
disordred life, or ill actions in any, albeit with recompense little, or none
at all: these vpstarts now adays, employ all their pains in detractions,
sowing questions and quarrels between one another, making no spare of lies and
falsehoods. Nay which is worse, they will do this in the presence of any man,
vpbraiding him with injuries, shames, and scandals (true or not true) upon the
very least occasion. And by false and deceitful flatteries and villainies of
their own inuenting, they make Gentlemen to become as vile as themselves. For
which detestable qualities, they are better beloved and respected of their
misdemeanor'd Lords, and recompensed in more bountiful manner, then men of
virtuous carriage and desert. Which is an argument sufficient, that goodness
is gone up to heaven, and has quite forsaken these loathed lower Regions,
where men are drowned in the mud of all abominable vices.

But returning where I left (being led out of my way by a just and religious
anger against such deformity) this Gentleman, Master Guillaume Boursier, was
willingly seen, and gladly welcomed by all the best men in Geneway. Having
remained some few days in the City, and (among other matters, heard much talk
of the miserable covetousness of master Herminio, he grew very desirous to have
a sight of him. Master Herminio had already understood, that this Gentleman,
Master Guillaume Boursier, was virtuously disposed, and (how couetously soever
he was inclined) having in him some sparks of noble nature; gave him very good
words, and gracious entertainment, discoursing with him on diverse occasions.

In company of other Genewayes with him, h^ brought him to a new erected house
of his, a building of great cost and beauty, where, after he had shown him all
the variable rarities, he began thus. Master Guillaume, no doubt but you have
heard and seen many things, and you can instruct me in some quaint conceit or
devise, to be fairly figured in painting, at the entrance into the great Hall
of my House. Master Guillaume hearing him speak so simply, returned him this
answer; Sir, I cannot advise you in any thing, so rare or unseen as you talk
of: but how to sneeze (after a new manner) upon a full and ouercloyed stomach,
to avoid base humors that stupifie the brain, or other matters of the like
quality. But if you would be taught a good one indeed, and had a disposition
to see it fairly effected; I could instruct you in an excellent Emblem,
wherewith (as yet) you never came acquainted.

Master Herminio hearing him say so, and expecting no such answer as he had
said; Good Master Guillaume, tell me what it is, and on my faith I will have
it fairly painted. Whereto Master Guillaume suddenly replied: Do nothing but
this Sir; Paint over the Portall at your Halles entrance, the lively picture of
Liberality, to bid all your friends better welcome, then hitherto they have
been. When Master Herminio heard these words, he became possessed with such a
sudden shame, that his complexion changed from the former palenesse, and
answered thus. Master Guillaume, I will have your advice so truly figured over
my gate, and she shall give so good welcome to all my guests, that both you,
and all these Gentlemen shall say; I have both seen her, and am become
reasonably acquainted with her. From that time forward, the words of Master
Guillaume were so effectual with Signior Herminio, that he became the most
bountiful and best housekeeper, which lived in his time in Geneway; no man
more honoring and friendly welcoming both strangers and Citizens, then he
continually used to do.

The King of Cyprus was wittily reprehended, by the words of a Gentlewoman of
Gascoignie, and became virtuously altered from his vicious disposition.

The ninth Novel.
Giving all men to understand, that Justice is necessary in a King, above all
things else whatsoever.

THe last command of the Queen, remained upon Madam Elissa, or Eliza, who
without any delaying, thus began. Young Ladies, it has often been seen,
that much pain has been bestowed, and many reprehensions spent in vain,
till a word happening at adventure, and perhaps not purposely determined, has
effectually done the deed: as appears by the Tale of Madam Lauretta, and
another of mine own, wherewith I intend briefly to acquaint you, approving,
that when good words are discreetly observed, they are of sovereign power and
virtue.



In the days of the first King of Cyprus, after the Conquest made in the holy
Land by Godfrey of Bullen, it fortuned, that a Gentlewoman of Gascoignie,
traveling in pilgrimage, to visit the sacred Sepulcher in Jerusalem, returning
home again, arrived at Cyprus, where she was villanously abused by certain
base wretches. Complaining thereof, without any comfort or redress, she
intended to make her moan to the King of the Country. Whereupon it was told
her, that therein she should but loose her labor, because he was so
womanish, and faint-hearted; that not only he refused to punish with justice
the offenses of others, but also suffered shameful injuries done to himself.
And therefore, such as were displeased by his negligence, might easily
discharge their spleen against him, and do him what dishonor they would.

When the Gentlewoman heard this, despairing of any consolation, or revenge for
her wrongs, she resolved to check the Kings denial of justice, and coming
before him weeping, spoke in this manner. Sir, I presume not into your
presence, as hoping to have redress by you, for diverse dishonorable injuries
done unto me; but, as a full satisfaction for them, do but teach me how you
suffer such vile abuses, as daily are offered to your self. To the end, that
being therein instructed by you, I may the more patiently bear mine own;
which (as God knows) I would bestow on you very gladly, because you know so
well how to endure them.

The King, who (till then) had been very bad, dull, and slothful, even as
sleeping out his time of government; began to revenge the wrongs done to
this Gentlewoman very severely, and (thence forward) became a most sharp
Iusticer, for the least offense offered against the honor of his Crown, or to
any of his subjects beside.

Master Albert of Bullen, honestly made a Lady to blush, that thought to have
done as much to him, because she perceived him, to be amorously affected
toward her.

The tenth Novel.
Wherein is declared, that honest love agrees with people of all ages.

AFter that Madam Eliza sat silent, the last charge and labor of the like
employment, remained to the Queen her self; whereupon she began thus to
speak: Honest and virtuous young Ladies, like as the



Sta^res (when the Air is fair and clear) are the adorning and beauty of
Heaven, and flowers (while the Spring time lasts) do graciously embellish
the Meadows; even so sweet speeches and pleasing conferences, to pass the
time with commendable discourses, are the best habit of the mind, and an
outward beauty to the body: which ornament of words, when they appear to be
short and sweet, are much more seemly in women, then in men; because long and
tedious talking (when it may be done in lesser time) is a greater blemish in
women, then in men.

Among us women, this day, I think few or none have therein offended, but as
readily have understood short and pithy speeches, as they have been quick and
quaintly delivered. But when answering suteth not with understanding, it is
generally a shame in us, and all such as live; because our modern times have
converted that virtue, which was within them who lived before us, into garments
of the body, and show whose habites were noted to be most gaudie, fullest of
imbroyderies and fantastic fashions: she was reputed to have most matter in
her, and therefore to be more honored and esteemed. Never considering, that
whosoever loadeth the back of an Ass, or puts upon him the richest bravery;
he becomes not thereby a jot the wiser, or merriteth any more honor then an
Ass should have. I am ashamed to speak it, because in detecting other, I may
(perhaps) as justly tax my self.

Such imbroydered bodies, tricked and trimmed in such boasting bravery, are
they any thing else but as Marble Statues, dumb, dull, and utterly insensible?
Or if (perchance) they make an answer, when some question is demanded of
them; it were much better for them to be silent. For defense of honest devise
and conference among men and women, they would have the world to think, that
it proceeds but from simplicity and precise opinion, covering their own
folly with the name of honesty: as if there were no other honest woman, but
she that conferres only with her Chamber-maide, Laundresse, or Kitchin-woman,
as if nature had allowed them (in their own idle conceit) no other kind of
talking.

Most true it is, that as there is a respect to be used in the action of other
things; so, time and place are necessarily to be considered, and also whom we
converse withal; because sometimes it happens, that a man or woman,
intending (by a word of jest and merriment) to make another body blush or be
ashamed: not knowing what strength of wit remains in the opposite, do
convert the same disgrace upon themselves. Therefore, that we may the more
advisedly stand upon our own guard, and to prevent the common proverb, That
Women (in all things) make choice of the woorst: I desire that this days last
tale, which is to come from my self, may make us all wise. To the end, that as
in gentleness of mind we confer with other; so by excellency in good
manners, we may show our selves not inferior to them.

It is not many years since (worthy assembly) that in Bulloigne there dwelt a
learned Physician, a man famous for skill, and far renowned, whose name was
Master Albert, and being grown aged, to the estimate of threescore and ten
years: he had yet such a sprightly disposition, that though natural heat
and vigor had quite shaken hands with him, yet amorous flames and desires had
not wholly forsaken him. Having seen (at a Banquet) a very beautiful woman,
being then in the estate of widdowhood, named (as some say) Madame Margaret de
Chisolieri, she appeared so pleasing in his eye; that his senses became no
less disturbed, then as if he had been of far younger temper, and no night
could any quietness possess his soul, except (the day before) he had seen
the sweet countenance of this lovely widow. In regard whereof, his daily
passage was by her door, one while on horseback, and then again on foot; as
best might declare his plain purpose to see her.

Both she and other Gentlewomen, perceiving the occasion of his passing and
repassing; would privately jest thereat together, to see a man of such years
and discretion, to be amorously addicted, or ouer-swayed by effeminate
passions. For they were partly persuaded, that such wanton Ague fits of Love,
were fit for none but youthful apprehensions, as best agreeing with their
cheerful complexion. Master Albert continuing his daily walks by the
widows lodging, it chanced upon a Feastiuall day, that she (accompanied
with diverse other women of great account) being sitting at her door; espied
Master Albert (far off) coming thitherward, and a resolved determination
among themselves was set down, to allow him favorable entertainment, and to
jest (in some merry manner) at his loving folly, as afterward they did indeed.

No sooner was he come near, but they all arose, and courteously invited him
to enter with them, conducting him into a goodly Garden, where readily was
prepared choice of delicate wines and banqueting. At length, among other
pleasant and delightful discourses, they demanded of him: how it was possible
for him, to be amorously affected toward so beautiful a woman, both knowing
and seeing, how earnestly she was solicited by many gracious, gallant, and
youthful spirits, ap^ly suting with her years and desires? Master Albert
perceiving, that they had drawn him in among them, only to scoff and make a
mockery of him; set a merry countenance on the matter, and honestly thus
answered.

Believe me Gentlewoman (speaking to the widdowe her self) it should not
appear strange to any of wisdom and discretion, that I am amorously
inclined, and especially to you, because you are well worthy of it. And
although those powers, which naturally appertain to the exercises of Love, are
bereft and gone from aged people; yet good will thereto cannot be taken from
them, neither judgment to know such as deserve to be affected: for, by how
much they exceed youth in knowledge and experience, by so much the more has
nature made them meet for respect and reverence. The hope which incited me
(being aged) to love you, that are affected of so many youthful Gallants, grew
thus. I have often chanced into diverse places, where I have seen Ladies and
Gentlewomen, being disposed to a Collation or rere-banquet after dinner, to
feed on Lupines, and young Onions or Leekes, and although it may be so, that
there is little or no goodness at all in them; yet the heads of them are least
hurtful, and most pleasing in the mouth. And you Gentlewomen generally (guided
by unreasonable appetite) will hold the heads of them in your hands, and feed
upon the blades or stalks: which not only are not good for any thing, but
also are of very bad savor. And what know I (Lady) whether among the choice of
friends, it may fit your fancy to do the like? For, if you did so, it were no
fault of mine to be chosen of you, but thereby were all the rest of your suitors
the sooner answered.

The widdowed Gentlewoman, and all the rest in her company, being bashfully
ashamed of her own and their folly, presently said. Master Albert, you have
both well and worthily chastised our ouer-bold presumption, and believe me
Sir, I repute your love and kindness of no mean merit, coming from a man so
wise and virtuous: And therefore (mine honor reserved) command my uttermost,
as always ready to do you any honest service. Master Albert, arising from his
seat, thanking the fair widow for her gentle offer; took leave of her and
all the company, and she blushing, as all the rest were therein in not much
behind her, thinking to check him, became chidden her self, whereby (if we
be wise) let us all take warning.

The Sun was now somewhat far declined, and the heates extremity well worn
away, when the Tales of the seven Ladies and three Gentlemen were thus
finished, whereupon their Queen pleasantly said. For this day (fair company)
there remains nothing more to be done under my regiment, but only to bestow
a new Queen upon you, who (according to her judgment) must take her turn,
and dispose what next is to be done, for continuing our time in honest
pleasure. And although the day should endure till dark night; in regard, that
when some time is taken before, the better preparation may be made for
occasions to follow, to the end also, that whatsoever the new Queen shall
please to appoint, may be the better fitted for the morrow: I am of opinion,
that at the same hour as we now cease, the following days shall severally
begin. And therefore, in reverence to him that gives life to all things, and
in hope of comfort by our second day; Madame Philomena, a most wise young Lady,
shall govern as Queen this our Kingdom.

So soon as she had thus spoken, arising from her seat of dignity, and taking
the Laurel Crown from off her own head; she reverently placed it upon Madame
Philomenaes, she first of all humbly saluting her, and then all the rest,
openly confessing her to be their Queen, made gracious offer to obey
whatsoever she commanded. Philomena, her cheeks delivering a scarlet
tincture, to see her self thus honored as their Queen, and well remembering
the words, so lately uttered by Madame Pampinea; that dullness or neglect might
not be noted in her, took cheerful courage to her, and first of all, she
confirmed the officers, which Pampinea had appointed the day before, then she
ordained for the morrowes provision, as also for the supper so near
approaching, before they departed away from thence, and then thus began.

Lovely Companions, although that Madam Pampinea, more in her own courtesy,
then any matter of merit remaining in me, has made me your Queen: I am not
determined, to alter the form of our intended life, nor to be guided by mine
own judgment, but to associate the same with your assistance. And because you
may know what I intend to do, and so (consequently) add or diminish at your
pleasure; in very few words, you shall plainly understand my meaning. If you
have well considered on the course, which this day has been kept by Madam
Pampinea, me thinks it has been very pleasing and commendable; in which
regard, until by ouer-tedious continuation, or other occasions of irksome
offense, it shall seem injurious, I am of the mind, not to alter it. Holding
on the order then as we have begun to do, we will depart from hence to recreate
our selves awhile, and when the Sun grows toward setting, we will sup in the
fresh and open air: afterward, with Canzonets and other pastimes, we will
out-weare the hours till bed time. To morrow morning, in the fresh and gentle
breath thereof, we will rise and walk to such places, as every one shall find
fittest for them, even as already this day we have done; until due time shall
summon us hither again, to continue our discoursiue Tales, wherein (me
thinks) consists both pleasure and profit, especially by discreet
observation.

Very true it is, that some things which Madam Pampinea could not accomplish,
by reason of her so small time of authority, I will begin to undergo, to wit,
in restraining some matters whereon we are to speak, that better premeditation
may pass upon them. For, when respite and a little leisure goes before them,
each discourse will savor of the more formality; and if it might so please
you, thus would I direct the order. As since the beginning of the world, all
men have been guided (by Fortune) through diverse accidents and occasions: so
beyond all hope and expectation, the issue and success has bin good and
succesfull, and accordingly should every one of our arguments be chosen.

The Ladies, and the young Gentlemen likewise, commended her advice, and
promised to imitate it; only Dioneus excepted, who when every one was silent,
spoke thus. Madam, I say as all the rest have done, that the order by you
appointed, is most pleasing and worthy to be allowed. But I entreat one
special favor for my self, and to have it confirmed to me, so long as our
company continues; namely, that I may not be constrained to this Law of
direction, but to tell my Tale at liberty, after mine own mind, and according
to the freedom first instituted. And because no one shall imagine, that I urge
this grace of you, as being unfurnished of discourses in this kind, I am well
contented to be the last in every days exercise.

The Queen, knowing him to be a man full of mirth and matter, began to
consider very advisedly, that he would not have moved this request, but only
to the end, that if the company grew wearied by any of the Tales re-counted,
he would shut up the days disport with some mirthfull accident. Wherefore
willingly, and with consent of all the rest he had his suite granted. So,
arising all, they walked to a Crystal river, descending down a little hill
into a valley, graciously shaded with goodly Trees; where washing both their
hands and feet, much pretty pleasure passed among them; till supper time
drawing nere, made them return home to the Palace. When supper was ended, and
books and instruments being laid before them, the Queen commanded a dance,
and that Madam Aemilia, assisted by Madam Lauretta and Dioneus, should sing a
sweet ditty. At which command, Lauretta undertook the dance, and led it,
Aemilia singing this song ensuing.

The Song.
SO much delight my beauty yields to me,
That any other Love,
To wish or prove;
Can never suit it self with my desire.
Therein I see, upon good observation,
What sweet content due understanding lends:
Old or new thoughts cannot in any fashion
Rob me of that, which mine own soul commends.
What object then,
(among infinites of men)
Can I ever find
to dipossesse my mind,
And plant therein another new desire?
So much delight. etc.
But were it so, the bliss that I would choose,
Is, by continual sight to comfort me:
So rare a presence never to refuse,
Which mortal tongue or thought, what ere it be;
Must still conceal,
not able to reveal,
Such a sacred sweet,
for none other meet,
But hearts enflamed with the same desire.
So much delight, etc.
The Song being ended, the Chorus whereof was answered by them all, it passed
with general applause: and after a few other daunces, the night being well run
on, the Queen gave ending to this first days Recreation. So, lights being
brought, they departed to their several Lodgings, to take their rest till the
next morning.

The End of the first Day.
The Second Day.
Wherein, all the Discourses are under the government of Madam Philomena:
Concerning such men or women, as (in diverse accidents) have been much
mollested by Fortune, and yet afterward (contrary to their hope and
expectation, have had a happy and successful deliverance.

ALready had the bright Sun renewed the day every where with his splendant
beams, and the Birds sat merrily singing on the blooming branches, yielding
testimony thereof to the ears of all hearers; when the seven Ladies, and the
three Gentlemen (after they were risen) entered the Gardens, and there spent
some time in walking, as also making of Nose-gayes and Chaplets of Flowers. And
even as they had done the day before, so did they now follow the same course;
for, after they had dined, in a cool and pleasing air they fell to dancing,
and then went to sleep awhile, from which being awaked, they took their
places (according as it pleased the Queen to appoint) in the same fair Meadow
about her. And she, being a goodly creature, and highly pleasing to behold,
having put on her Crown of Laurel, and giving a gracious countenance to the
whole company; commanding Madam Neiphila that her Tale should begin this days
delight. Whereupon she, without returning any excuse or denial, began in this
manner.

Martellino counterfetting to be lame of his members, caused himself to be set
on the body of Saint Arriguo, where he made show of his sudden recovery; but
when his dissimulation was discovered, he was well beaten, being afterward
taken prisoner, and in great danger of being hanged and strangled by the neck,
and yet he escaped in the end.

The first Novel.
Wherein is signified, how easy a thing it is, for wicked men to deceive the
world, under the shadow and color of miracles: and that such treachery
(oftentimes) redoundeth to the harm of the deviser.

Fair Ladies, it has happened many times, that he who strives to scorn and
floute other men, and especially in occasions deserving to be respected,
proves to mock himself with the selfsame matter, yea, and to his no mean
danger beside. As you shall perceive by a Tale, which I intend to tell you,
obeying therein the command of our Queen, and according to the subject by her
enjoined. In which discourse, you may first observe, what great mischance
happened to one of our Citizens; and yet afterward, how (beyond all hope) he
happily escaped.

Not long since there lived in the City of Treuers, Or Arrigo.
an Almaine or German, named Arriguo, who being a poor man, served as a
Porter, or burden-bearer for money, when any man pleased to employ him. And
yet, notwithstanding his poor and mean condition, he was generally reputed,
to be of good and sanctified life. In which regard (whether it were true or no,
I know not) it happened, that when he died (at least, as the men of Treuers
themselves affirmed) in the very instant hour of his departing, all the Belles
in the great Church of Treuers, (not being pulled by the help of any hand)
began to ring: which being accounted for a miracle, every one said; that
this Arriguo had been, and was a Saint. And presently all the people of the
City ran to the house where the dead body lay, and carried it (as a sanctified
body) into the great Church, where people, halt, lame, and blind, or troubled
with any other diseases, were brought about it, even as if every one should
forthwith be helped, only by their touching the body.

It came to pass; that in so great a concourse of people, as resorted thither
from all parts; three of our Citizens went to Treuers, one of them being named
Stechio, the second Martellino, and the third Marquiso, all being men of such
condition, as frequented Princes Courts, to give them delight by pleasant and
counterfeited qualities. None of these men having ever been at Treuers before,
seeing how the people crowded through the streets, wondered greatly thereat: but
when they knew the reason, why the throngs ran on heaps in such sort
together, they grew as desirous to see the Shrine, as any of the rest. Having
ordered all affairs at their lodging, Marquiso said; It is fit for us to see
this Saint, but I know not how we shall attain thereto, because (as I have
heard) the place is guarded by Germane Soldiers, and other warlike men,
commanded thither by the Governors of this City, least any outrage should be
there committed: And beside, the Church is so full of people, as we shall
never compass to get near. Martellino being also as forward in desire to see
it, presently replied: All this difficulty cannot dismay me, but I will go to
the very body of the Saint it self. But how? quoth Marquiso. I will tell thee,
answered Martellino. I purpose to go in the disguise of an impotent lame
person, supported on the one side by thy self, and on the other by Stechio, as
if I were not able to walk of my self: And you two thus sustaining me,
desiring to come near the Saint to cure me; every one will make way, and
freely give you leave to go on.

This devise was very pleasing to Marquiso and Stechio, so that (without any
further delaying) they all three left their lodging, and resorting into a
secret corner aside, Martellino so writhed and mishaped his hands, fingers, and
arms, his legs, mouth, eyes, and whole countenance, that it was a dreadful
sight to look upon him, and whosoever beheld him, would verily have imagined,
that he was utterly lame of his limbs, and greatly deformed in his body.
Marquiso and Stechio, seeing all sorted so well as they could wish, took and
led him toward the Church, making very pitious moan, and humbly desiring (for
Gods sake) of every one that they met, to grant them free passage, whereto they
charitably condiscended.

Thus leading him on, crying still; Beware there before, and give way for Gods
sake, they arrived at the body of Saint Arriguo, that (by his help) he might
be healed. And while all eyes were diligently observing, what miracle would be
wrought on Martellino, he having sitten a small space upon the Saints body,
and being sufficiently skillful in counterfeiting; began first to extend for
the one of his fingers, next his hand, then his arm, and so (by degrees) the
rest of his body. Which when the people saw, they made such a wonderful noise
in praise of Saint Arriguo, even as if it had thundered in the Church.

Now it chanced by ill fortune, that there stood a Florentine near to the
body, who knew Martellino very perfectly; but appearing so monstrously
misshapen, when he was brought into the Church, he could take no knowledge of
him. But when he saw him stand up and walk, he knew him then to be the man
indeed; whereupon he said: How comes it to pass, that this fellow should
be so miraculously cured, that never truly was any way impotent? Certain men
of the City hearing these words, entered into further questioning with him,
demanding, how he knew that the man had no such imperfection? Well enough
(answered the Florentine) I know him to be as direct in his limbs and body, as
you; I, or any of us all are: but indeed, he knows better how to dissemble
counterfeit tricks, then any man else that ever I saw.

When they heard this, they discoursed no further with the Florentine, but
pressed on mainely to the place where Martellino stood, crying out aloude. Lay
hold on this Traitor, a mocker of God, and his holy Saints, that had no
lamenesse in his limbs; but to make a mock of our Saint and us, came hither
in false and counterfeit manner. So laying hands upon him, they threw him
against the ground, haling him by the hair on his head, and tearing the
garments from his back, spurning him with their feet, and beating him with
their fists, that many were much ashamed to see it.

Poor Martellino was in a pitiful case, crying out for mercy, but no man
would hear him; for, the more he cried, the more still they did beat him, as
meaning to leave no life in him, which Stechio and Marquiso seeing, considered
with themselves, that they were likewise in a desperate case; and therefore,
fearing to be as much misvsed, they cried out among the rest; Kill the
counterfeit knave, lay on load, and spare him not; nevertheless, they took
care how to get him out of the peoples hands, as doubting, least they would
kill him indeed, by their extreme violence.

Suddenly, Marquiso bethought him how to do it, and proceeded thus. All the
Sergeants for Justice standing at the Church door, he ran with all possible
speed to the Potestates Lieutenant, and said unto him. Good my Lord Justice,
help me in an hard case; yonder is a villain that has cut my purse, I desire
he may be brought before you, that I may have my money again. He hearing
this, sent for a dozen of the Sergeants, who went to apprehend unhappy
Martellino, and recover him from the peoples fury, leading him on with them to
the Palace, no mean crowds thronging after him, when they heard that he was
accused to be a Cutpurse. Now durst they meddle no more with him, but assisted
the Officers; some of them charging him in like manner, that he had cut their
purses also.

Upon these clamours and complaints, the Potestates Lieutenant (being a man of
rude quality) took him suddenly aside, and examined him of the crimes
wherewith he was charged. But Martellino, as making no account of these
accusations, laughed, and returned scoffing answers. Whereat the Judge, waxing
much displeased, delivered him over to the Strappado, and stood by himself, to
have him confess the crimes imposed on him, and then to hang him afterward.
Being let down to the ground, the Judge still demanded of him, whether the
accusations against him were true, or no? Affirming, that it nothing auayled
him to deny it: whereupon he thus spoke to the Judge. My Lord, I am here
ready before you, to confess the truth; but I pray you, demand of all them
that accuse me, when and where I did cut their purses, and then I will tell you
that, which (as yet) I have not done, otherwise I purpose to make you no more
answers.

Well (quoth the Judge) thou requirest but reason; and calling diverse of the
accusers, one of them said, that he lost his purse eight days before; another
said six, another four, and some said the very same day. Which Martellino
hearing, replied. My Lord, they al lie in their throats, as I will plainly
prove before you. I would to God I had never set foot within this City, as it
is not many hours since my first entrance, and presently after mine arrival,
I went (in an evil hour I may say for me) to see the Saints body, where I was
thus beaten as you may behold. That all this is true which I say unto you, the
Seigneuries Officer that keeps your Book of presentations, will testify for
me, as also the Host where I am lodged. Wherefore good my Lord, if you find
all no otherwise, then as I have said, I humbly entreat you, that upon these
bad men's reports and false informations, I may not be thus tormented, and put
in peril of my life.

While matters proceeded in this manner, Marquiso and Stechio, understanding
how roughly the Potestates Lieutenant dealt with Martellino and that he had
already given him the Strappado; were in heavy perplexity, saying to
themselves; we have carried this business very badly, redeeming him out of the
Drying Pan, and flinging him into the Fire. Whereupon, trudging about from
place to place, and meeting at length with their Host, they told him truly how
all had happened, whereat he could not refrain from laughing. Afterward, he
went with them to one Master Alexander Agolante, who dwelt in Treuers, and was
in great credit with the Cities chief Magistrate, to whom he related the
whole Discourse; all three earnestly entreating him, to commisserate the case
of poor Martellino.

Master Alexander, after he had laughed heartily at this hot piece of
service, went with him to the Lord of Treuers; prevailing so well with him,
that he sent to have Martellino brought before him. The Messengers that went
for him, found him standing in his shirt before the Judge, very shrewdly shaken
with the Strappado, trembling and quaking pitifully. For the Judge would not
hear any thing in his excuse; but hating him (perhaps) because he was a
Florentine: flatly determined to have him hangde by the neck, and would not
deliver him to the Lord, until in mere despite he was compeld to do it.

The Lord of Treuers, when Martellino came before him, and had acquainted him
truly with every particular: Master Alexander requested, that he might be
dispatched thence for Florence, because he thought the halter to be about his
neck, and that there was no other help but hanging. The Lord, smiling (a long
while) at the accident, and causing Martellino to be handsomely apparrelled,
delivering them also his Pass, they escaped out of further danger, and tarried
no where, till they came unto Florence.

Rinaldo de Este, after he was robbed by Thieves, arrived at Chastea^
Guillaume, where he was friendly lodged by a fair widow, and recompensed
likewise for all his losses; returning afterward safe and well home unto his
own house.

The second Novel.
Whereby we may learn, that such things as sometime seem hurtful to us, may
turn to our benefit and commodity.

MVch merriment was among the Ladies, hearing this Tale of Martellinos
misfortunes, so familiarly reported by Madam Neiphila, and of the men, it was
best respected by Philostratus, who sitting nearest unto Neiphila, the Queen
commanded his Tale to be the next, when presently he began to speak thus.



Gracious Ladies, I am to speak of universal occasions, mingled with some
misfortunes in part, and partly with matters leaning to love: as many times may
happen to such people, that trace the dangerous paths of amorous desires, or
have not learned perfectly, to say S. Iulians pater noster, having good beds of
their own, yet (casually) meet with worser lodging.

In the time of Azzo, Marquess of Ferrara, there was a Merchant named Rinaldo
de Este, who being one day at Bologna, about some especial business of his
own; his occasions there ended, and riding from thence toward Verona, he fell
in company with other Horsemen, seeming to be Merchants like himself; but
indeed were Thieves, men of most badde life and conversation; yet he having no
such mistrust of them, rode on, conferring with them very familiarly. They
perceiving him to be a Merchant, and likely to have some store of money about
him, concluded between themselves to rob him, so soon as they found apt place
and opportunity. But because he should conceive no such suspicion, they rode on
like modest men, talking honestly and friendly with him, of good parts and
disposition appearing in him, offering him all humble and gracious service,
accounting themselves happy by his company, as he returned the same courtesy
to them, because he was alone, and but one servant with him.

Falling from one discourse to another, they began to talk of such prayers, as
men (in journey) use to salute God withal; and one of the Thieves (they being
three in number, spoke thus to Rinaldo. Sir, let it be no offense to you, that
I desire to know, what prayer you most use when thus you travel on the way?
Whereto Rinaldo replied in this manner. To tell you true Sir, I am a man gross
enough in such Divine matters, as meddling more with Merchandise, then I do with
Books. Nevertheless, at all times when I am thus in journey, in the morning
before I depart my Chamber, I say a Pater noster and an Aue Maria, for the
souls of the father and mother of Saint Julian, and after that, I pray God and
S. Julian to send me a good lodging at night. And let me tell you Sir, that
very oftentimes heretofore, I have met with many great dangers upon the way,
from all which I still escaped, and evermore (when night drew on) I came to an
exceeding good Lodging. Which makes me firmly believe, that Saint Julian (in
honor of whom I speak it) has begd of God such great grace for me; and me
thinks, that if any day I should fail of this prayer in the morning: I cannot
travail securely, nor come to a good lodging. No doubt then Sir (quoth the
other) but you have said that prayer this morning? I would be sorry else, said
Rinaldo, such an especial matter is not to be neglected.

He and the rest, who had already determined how to handle him before they
parted, said within themselves: Look thou have said thy prayer, for when we
have thy money, Saint Julian and thou shift for thy lodging. Afterward, the
same man thus again conferd with him. As you Sir, so I have ridden many
iournies, and yet I never used any such prayer, although I have heard it very
much commended, and my lodging has proved never the worser. Perhaps this
very night will therein resolve us both, whether of us two shall be the best
lodged; you that have said the prayer, or I that never used it at all. But I
must not deny, that in sted thereof, I have made use of some verses; as
Dirupisti, or the Iutemerata, or Deprofundis, which are (as my Grandmother has
often told me) of very great virtue and efficacy.

Continuing thus in talk of diverse things, winning way, and beguiling the
time, still waiting when their purpose should sort to effect: it fortuned, that
the Thieves seeing they were come near to a Town, called Casteau Guillaume,
by the foord of a River, the hour somewhat late, the place solitary, and
thickely shaded with trees, they made their assault; and having robbed him, left
him there on foot, stripped into his shirt, saying to him. Go now and see,
whether thy Saint Julian will allow thee this night a good lodging, or no, for
our own we are sufficiently provided; so passing the River, away they rode.
Rinaldoes servant, seeing his Master so sharply assailed, like a wicked
villain, would not assist him in any sort: but giving his horse the spurs,
never left gallowping, until he came to Chasteau Guillaume, where he entered
upon the point of night, providing himself of a lodging, but not caring what
became of his Master.

Rinaldo remaining there in his shirt, bare-foote and bare-legged, the weather
extremely cold, and snowing incessantly, not knowing what to do, dark night
drawing on, and looking round about him, for some place where to abide that
night, to the end he might not dye with cold: he found no help at all there
for him, in regard that (no long while before) the late war had burnt and
wasted all, and not so much as the least Cottage left. Compelled by the coldes
violence, his teeth quaking, and all his body trembling, he trotted on toward
Chasteau Guillaume, not knowing, whether his man was gone thither or no, or to
what place else: but persuaded himself, that if he could get entrance, there
was no fear of finding succor. But before he came within half a mile of the
Town, the night grew extremely dark, and arriving there so late, he found
the gates fast locked, and the Bridges drawn up, so that no entrance might be
admitted.

Grieuing greatly hereat, and being much discomforted, rufully he^ went spying
about the walls, for some place wherein to shroud himself, at least, to keep
the snow from falling upon him. By good hap, he espied an house upon the wall
of the Town, which had a terrace iutting out as a penthouse, under which he
purposed to stand all the night, and then to get him gone in the morning. At
length, he found a door in the wall, but very fast shut, and some small store
of straw lying by it, which he gathered together, and sitting down thereon
very pensiuely; made many sad complaints to Saint Julian, saying: This was not
according to the trust he reposed in her. But Saint Julian, taking compassion
upon him, without any ouer-long tarying; provided him of a good lodging, as you
shall hear how.

In this town of Chasteau Guillaume, lived a young Lady, who was a widow, so
beautiful and comely of her person, as sildome was seen a more lovely
creature. The Marquess Azzo most dearly affected her, and (as his choysest
Jewel of delight) gave her that house to live in, under the terrace whereof
poor Rinaldo made his shelter. It chanced the day before, that the Marquess
was come thither, according to his frequent custom, to wear away that night
in her company, she having secretly prepared a Bath for him, and a costly
supper beside. All things being ready, and nothing wanting but the Marquess
his presence: suddenly a Post brought him such Letters, which commanded him
instantly to horseback, and word he sent to the Lady, to spare him for that
night, because urgent occasions called him thence, and he rode away
immediately.

Much discontented was the Lady at this unexpected accident, and not knowing
now how to spend the time, resolved to use the Bath which he had made for the
Marquess, and (after supper) betake her self to rest, and so she entered into
the Bath. Close to the door where poor Rinaldo sat, stood the Bath, by
which means, she being therein, heard all his quiuering moanes, and
complaints, seeming to be such, as the Swanne singing before her death:
whereupon, she called her Chamber-maide, saying to her. Go up above, and
look over the terrace on the wall down to this door, and see who is there,
and what he does. The Chamber-maide went up aloft, and by a little glimmering
in the air, she saw a man sitting in his shirt, bare on feet and legs,
trembling in manner before rehearsed. She demanding, of whence, and what he
was; Rinaldoes teeth so trembled in his head, as very hardly could he form
any words, but (so well as he could) told her what he was, and how he came
thither: most pitifully entreating her, that if she could afford him any
help, not to suffer him starve there to death with cold.

The Chamber-maide, being much moved to compassion, returned to her Lady, and
told her all; she likewise pitying his distress, and remembering she had the
key of that door, whereby the Marquess both entered and returned, when he
intended not to be seen of any, said to her Maid. Go, and open the door
softly for him; we have a good supper, and none to help to eat it, and if he
be a man likely, we can allow him one nights lodging too. The Chamber-maide,
commending her Lady for this charitable kindness, opened the door, and seeing
he appeared as half frozen, she said unto him. Make have good man, get thee
into this Bath* which yet is good and warm, for my Lady her self came but
newly out of it. Whereto very gladly he condiscended, as not tarrying to be
bidden twice; finding himself so singularly comforted with the hear thereof,
even as if he had been restored from death to life. Then the Lady sent him
garments, which lately were her deceased husbands, and fitted him so aptly in
all respects, as if purposely they had been made for him.

Attending in further expectation, to know what else the Lady would command
him; he began to remember God and Saint Julian, heartily thanking her, for
delivering him from so bad a night as was threatened toward him, and bringing
him to so good entertainment. After all this, the Lady causing a fair fire to
be made in the nearest Chamber beneath, went and sat by it her self,
demanding how the honest man fared. Madame, answered the Chamber-maide, now
that he is in your deceased Lords garments, he appears to be a very goodly
Gentleman, and (questionless) is of respective birth and breeding, well
deserving this gracious favor which you have afforded him. Go then (quoth the
Lady) and conduct him hither, to sit by this fire, and sup here with me, for I
fear he has had but a sorry supper. When Rinaldo was entered into the
Chamber, and beheld her to be such a beautiful Lady, accounting his fortune to
exceed all comparison, he did her most humble reverence, expressing so much
thankfulness as possibly he could, for this her extraordinary grace and
favor.

The Lady fixing a steadfast eye upon him, well liking his gentle language and
behavior, perceiving also, how fitly her deceased husbands apparel was formed
to his person, and resembling him in all familiar respects, he appeared (in her
judgment) far beyond the Chambermaides commendations of him; so praying him
to sit down by her before the fire, she questioned with him, concerning this
unhappy nights accident befalne him, wherein he fully resolved her, and she
was the more persuaded, by reason of his servants coming into the Town before
night, assuring him, that he should be found for him early in the morning.

Supper being served in to the Table, and he seated according as the Lady
commanded, she began to observe him very considerately; for he was a goodly
man, complete in all perfections of person, a delicate pleasing countenance, a
quick alluring eye, fixed and constant, not wantonly gadding, in the iouiall
youthfulness of his time, and truest temper for amorous apprehension; all
these were as battering ensigns against a Bulwark of no strong resistance,
and wrought strangely upon her flexible affections. And though he fed
heartily, as occasion constrained, yet her thoughts had entertained a new kind
of diet, digested only by the eye; yet so cunningly concealed, that no motive
to immodesty could be discerned. Her mercy thus extended to him in misery, drew
on (by Table discourse) his birth, education, parents, friends, and alies; his
wealthy possessions by Merchandise, and a sound stability in his estate, but
above all (and best of all) the single and sole condition of a batch^ler; an
apt and easy steel to strike fire, especially upon such quick taking tinder,
and in a time favored by Fortune.

No imbarment remained, but remembrance of the Marquess, and that being
summond to her more advised consideration, her youth and beauty stood up as
conscious accusers, for blemishing her honor and fair repute, with lewd and
luxurious life; far unfit for a Lady of her degree, and well worthy of
general condemnation. What should I further say? upon a short conference with
her Chambermaide, repentance for sin past, and solemn promise of a constant
conversion, thus she delivered her mind to Rinaldo.

Sir, as you have related your fortunes to me, by this your casual happening
hither, if you can like the motion so well as she that makes it, my deceased
Lord and husband living so perfectly in your person; this house, and all mine,
is yours; and of a widow I will become your wife, except (unmanly) you deny
me. Rinaldo hearing these words, and proceeding from a Lady of such absolute
perfections, presuming upon so proud an offer, and condemning himself of folly
if he should refuse it, thus replied. Madam, considering that I stand bound for
ever hereafter, to confess that you are the gracious preserver of my life, and
I no way able to return requital; if you please so to shadow mine
insufficiency, and to accept me and my fairest fortunes to do you service: let
me die before a thought of denial, or any way to yield you the least
coffeehouse.

Here wanted but a Priest to join their hands, as mutual affection already
had done their hearts, which being sealed with infinite kisses; the
Chamber-maide called up Friar Roger her Confessor, and wedding and bedding were
both effected before the bright morning. In brief, the Marquess having heard
of the marriage, did not mislike it, but confirmed it by great and honorable
gifts; and having sent for his dishonest servant, he dispatched him (after
sound reprehension) to Ferrara, with Letters to Rinaldoes Father and friends,
of all the accidents that had befalne him. Moreover, the very same morning, the
three thieves, that had robbed, and so ill entreated Rinaldo, for another fact
by them the same night committed; were taken, and brought to the Town of
Chasteau Guillaume, where they were hanged for their offenses, and Rinaldo with
his wife rode to Ferrara.

Three young Gentlemen, being brethren, and having spent all their Lands and
possessions vainly, became poor. A Nephew of theirs (falling almost into as
desperate a condition) became acquainted with an Abbot, whom he afterward found
to be the King of Englands Daughter, and made him her Husband in marriage,
recompencing all his Uncles losses, and seating them again in good estate.

The third Novel.
Wherein is declared the dangers of Prodigality, and the manifold mutabilities
of Fortune.



THe fortunes of Rinaldo de Este, being heard by the Ladies and Gentlemen, they
admired his happiness, and commended his devotion to Saint I^lian, who (in
such extreme necessity) sent him so good succor. Nor was the Lady to be
blamed, for leaving base liberty, and converting to the chaste embraces of the
marriage bed, the dignity of women's honor, and eternal disgrace living
otherwise. While thus they descanted on the happy night between her and
Rinaldo, Madam Pampinea sitting next to Philostratus, considering, that her
discourse must follow in order, and thinking on what she was to say; the
Queen had no sooner sent out her command, but she being no less fair then
forward, began in this manner.

Ladies of great respect, the more we confer on the accidents of Fortune, so
much the more remains to consider on her mutabilities, wherein there is no
need of wonder, if discreetly we observe, that all such things as we fondly
term to be our own, are in her power, and so (consequently) change from one
to another, without any stay or arrest (according to her concealed judgment)
or settled order (at least) that can be known to us. Now, although these
things appear thus daily to us, even apparently in all occasions, and as has
been discerned by some of our precedent discourses; yet notwithstanding,
seeing it pleases the Queen, that our arguments should aim at these ends, I
will add to the former tales another of my own, perhaps not unprofitable for
the hearers, nor unpleasing in observation.

Sometime heretofore, there dwelt in our City, a Knight named Signior
Thebaldo, who (according as some report) issued from the Family of Lamberti,
but others derive him of the Agolanti; guiding (perhaps) their opinion herein,
more from the train of children, belonging to the said Thebaldo (evermore
equal to that of the Agolanti) then any other matter else. But setting aside,
from which of these two houses he came, I say, that in his time he was a very
welthy Knight, and had three Sons; the first being named Lamberto, the second
Thebaldo, and the third Agolanto, all goodly and graceful youths: howbeit, the
eldest had not completed eighteen years, when Signior Thebaldo the father
deceased, who left them all his goods and inheritances. And they, seeing them
selves rich in read^e moneys and reuennewes, without any other government then
their own voluntary disposition, kept no restraint upon their expenses, but
maintained many servants, and store of vnvalewable horses, beside Hawks and
Hounds, with open house for all comers; and not only all delights else fit
for Gentlemen, but what vanities beside best agreed with their wanton and
youthful appetites.

Not long had they run on this race, but the treasures left them by their
Father, began greatly to diminish; and their reuennewes suffised not, to
support such lavish expenses as they had begun: but they fell to engaging and
pawning their inheritances, selling one to day, and another to morrow, so that
they saw themselves quickly come to nothing, and then poverty opened their
eyes, which prodigality had before closed up. Hereupon, Lamberto (on a day)
calling his Brethren to him, showed them what the honors of their Father had
been, to what height his wealth amounted, and now to what an ebb of poverty
it was fallen, only through their inordinate expenses. Wherefore he counseled
them, (as best he could) before further misery insulted over them; to make sale
of the small remainder that was left, and then to betake themselves unto some
other abiding, where fairer Fortune might chance to shine upon them.

This advice prevailed with them; and so, without taking leave of any body, or
other solemnity then closest secrecy, they departed from Florence, not tarrying
in any place until they were arrived in England. Coming to the City of
London, and taking there a small house upon yearly rent, living on so little
charge as possible might be, they began to lend out money at use: wherein
Fortune was so favorable to them, that (in few years) they had gathered a
great sum of money: by means whereof it came to pass, that one while one of
them, and afterward another, returned back again to Florence: where, with
those sums, a great part of their inheritances were redeemed, and many other
bought beside. Linking themselves in marriage, and yet continuing their vsances
in England; they sent a Nephew of theirs thither, named Alessandro, a young man,
and of fair demeanor, to maintain their stock in employment: while they
three remained still at Florence, and growing forgetful of their former misery,
fell again into as unreasonable expenses as ever, never respecting their
household charges, because they had good credit among the Merchants, and the
moneys still sent from Alessandro, supported their expenses diverse years.

The dealings of Alessandro in England grew very great, for he lent out much
money to many Gentlemen, Lords, and Barons of the Land, upon engagement of
their Manours, Castles, and other reuennues: from whence he derived
immeasurable benefit. While the three Brethren held on in their lavish
expenses, borrowing moneys when they wanted until their supplies came from
England, whereon (indeed) was their only dependence: it fortuned, that
(contrary to the opinion of al men) war happened between the King of
England, and one of his sons, which occasioned much trouble in the whole
Country, by taking part on either side, some with the Son, and other with
the Father. In regard whereof, those Castles and places pawned to Alessandro,
were suddenly seized from him, nothing then remaining that returned him any
profit. But living in hope day by day, that peace would be concluded between
the Father and the Son, he never doubted, but all things then should be
restored to him, both the principal and interest, and therefore he would not
depart out of the Country.

The three Brethren at Florence, bounding within no limits their disordered
spending; borrowed daily more and more. And after some few years, the
Creditors seeing no effect of their hopes to com from them, all credit being
lost with them, and no repayment of promised dues; they were imprisoned, their
lands and all they had, not suffising to pay the moity of debts, but their
bodies remained in prison for the rest, their Wives and young children being
sent thence, some to one village, some to another, so that nothing now was to
be expected, but poverty and misery of life for ever.

As for honest Alessandro, who had awaited long time for peace in England,
perceiving there was no likelihood of it; and considering also, that (beside
his tarrying there in vain to recover his dues) he was in danger of his life;
without any further deferring, he set away for Italy. It came to pass, that
as he issued forth of Bruges, he saw a young Abbot also iourneying thence,
being clothed in white, accompanied with diverse Monks, and a great train
before, conducting the needful carriage. Two ancient Knights, Kinsmen to the
King, followed after, with whom Alessandro acquainted himself, as having
formerly known them, and was kindly accepted into their company. Alessandro
riding along with them, courteously requested to know, what those Monks were
that rode before, and such a train attending on them? Whereto one of the
Knights thus answered.

He that rides before, is a young Gentleman, and our Kinsman, who is newly
elected Abbot of one of the best Abbeyes in England; and because he is more
young in years, then the decrees for such a dignity do allow, we travail with
him to Rome, to entreat our Holy Father, that his youth may be dispensed
withal, and he confirmed in the said dignity; but he is not to speak a word
to any person. On rode this new Abbot, sometimes before his train, and other
whiles after, as we see great Lords use to do, when they ride upon the
Highways.

It chanced on a day, that Alessandro rode somewhat near to the Abbot, who
steadfastly beholding him, perceived that he was a very comely young man, so
affable, lovely, and gracious, that even in this first encounter, he had
never seen any man before, that better pleased him. Calling him a little
closer, he began to confer familiarly with him, demanding what he was, whence
he came, and whether he traveled. Alessandro imparted freely to him all his
affairs, in every thing satisfying his demands, and offering (although his
power was small) to do him all the service he could.

When the Abbot had heard his gentle answers, so wisely and discreetly
delivered, considering also (more particularly) his commendable carriage; he
took him to be (at the least) a well-borne Gentleman, and far differing from
his own logger-headed train. Wherefore, taking compassion on his great
misfortunes, he comforted him very kindly, wishing him to live always in good
hope. For, if he were virtuous and honest, he should surely attain to the
seat from whence Fortune had thrown him, or rather much higher. Entreating
him also, that seeing he iournied toward Tuscany, as he himself did the like;
to continue still (if he pleased) in his company. Alessandro most humbly thanked
him for such gracious comfort; protesting, that he would be always ready, to
do whatsoever he commanded.

The Abbot riding on, with newer crochets in his brain, then he had before
the sight of Alessandro; it fortuned, that after diverse days of travail, they
came to a small country Village, which affoorded little store of lodging, and
yet the Abbot would needs lie there. Alessandro, being well acquainted with the
Host of the house, willed him, to provide for the Abbot and his people, and
then to lodge him where he thought meetest. Now, before the Abbots coming
thither, the Harbinger that marshalled all such matters, had provided for his
train in the Village, some in one place, and others elsewhere, in the best
manner that the Town could yield. But when the Abbot had supt, a great part of
the night being spent, and every one else at his rest; Alessandro demanded of
the Host, what provision he had made for him; and how he should be lodged that
night?

In good sadness Sir (quoth the Host) you see that my house is full of Guests,
so that I and my people, must gladly sleep on the tables and benches:
Nevertheless, next adjoining to my Lord Abbots Chamber, there are certain
Corn-lofts, whether I can closely bring you, and making shift there with a
slender Pallet-bed, it may serve for one night, insted of a better. But mine
Host (quoth Alessandro) how can I pass through my Lords Chamber, which is so
little, as it would not allow Lodging for any of his Monks? If I had
remembered so much (said the Host) before the Curtains were drawn, I could
have lodgd his Monks in those Corn-lofts, and then both you and I might have
slept where now they do. But fear you not, my Lords Curtains are close
drawn, he sleeps (no doubt) soundly, and I can conueigh you thither quietly
enough, without the least disturbance to him, and a Pallet-bed shall be fitted
there for you. Alessandro perceiving, that all this might be easily done, and
no disease offered to the Abbot, accepted it willingly, and went thither
without any noise at all.

My Lord Abbot, whose thoughts were so busied about amorous desires, that no
sleep at all could enter his eyes; heard all this talk between the Host and
Alessandro, and also where he was appointed to lodge, wherefore he said to
himself. Seeing Fortune has fitted me with a propitious time, to compass the
happiness of my hearts desire; I know no reason why I should refuse it. Perhaps,
I shall never have the like offer again, or ever be enabled with such an
opportunity. So, being fully determined to prosecute his intention, and
persuading himself also, that the silence of night had bestowed sleep on all
the rest; with a low and trembling voice, he called Alessandro, aduising him
to come and lie down by him, which (after some few faint excuses) he did, and
putting off his clothes, lay down by the Abbot, being not a little proud of
so gracious a favor.

The Abbot, laying his arm over the others body, began to embrace and hug
him; even as amorous friends (provoked by earnest affection) use to do. Whereat
Alessandro very much maruayling, and being an Italian himself, fearing least
this folly in the Abbot, would convert to foul and dishonest action, shrunk
modestly from him. Which the Abbot perceiving, and doubting, least Alessandro
would depart and leave him, pleasantly smiling, and with bashful behavior,
baring his stomach, he took Alessandroes hand, and laying it thereon, said;
Alessandro, let all bad thoughts of bestiall abuse be far off from thee, and
feel here, to resolve thee from all such fear. Alessandro feeling the Abbots
breast, found there two pretty little mountainets, round, plumpe, and smooth,
appearing as if they had been of polished Iuory; whereby he perceived, that
the Abbot was a woman: which, setting an edge on his youthful desires, made
him fall to embracing, and immediately he offered to kiss her; but she
somewhat rudely repulsing him, as half offended, said.

Alessandro, forbear such boldness, upon thy lives peril, and before thou
further presume to touch me, understand what I shall tell thee. I am (as thou
perceiuest) no man, but a woman; and departing a Virgin from my Fathers House,
am traveling toward the Popes holiness, to the end that he should bestow me
in marriage. But the other day, when first I beheld thee, whether it proceeded
from thy happiness in fortune, or the fatal hour of my own infelicity for
ever, I know not; I conceived such an effectual kind of liking toward thee,
as never did woman love a man more truly, then I do thee, having sworn within
my soul to make thee my Husband before any other; and if thou will not accept
me as thy wife, set a lock upon thy lips concerning what thou have heard,
and depart hence to thine own bed again.

No doubt, but that these were strange news to Alessandro, and seemed merely
as a miracle to him. What she was, he knew not, but in regard of her train
and company, he reputed her to be both noble and rich, as also she was
wonderful fair and beautiful. His own fortunes stood out of future
expectation by his kinsmens overthrow, and his great losses in England;
wherefore, upon an opportunity so fairly offered, he held it no wisdom to
return refusal, but accepted her gracious motion, and referred all to her
disposing. She arising out of her bed, called him to a little Table standing
by, where hung a fair Crucifix upon the wall; before which, and calling him to
witness, that suffered such bitter and cruel torments on his Cross, putting
a Ring upon his finger, there she faithfully espoused him, refusing all the
World, to be only his: which being on either side confirmed solemnly, by an
holy vow, and chaste kisses; she commanded him back to his Chamber, and she
returned to her bed again, sufficiently satisfied with her Loves acceptance,
and so they iournied on till they came to Rome.

When they had rested themselves there for some few days, the supposed Abbot,
with the two Knights, and none else in company but Alessandro, went before the
Pope, and having done him such reverence as beseemed, the Abbot began to speak
in this manner.

Holy Father (as you know much better then any other) every one that desires
to live well and virtuously, ought to shun (so far as in them lies) all
occasions that may induce to the contrary. To the end therefore, that I (who
desire nothing more) then to live within the compass of a virtuous
conversation, may perfect my hopes in this behalf: I have fled from my Fathers
Court, and am come hither in this habit as you see, to crave therein your holy
and fatherly furtherance. I am daughter to the King of England, and have
sufficiently furnished my self with some of his treasures, that your holiness
may bestow me in marriage; because mine unkind Father, never regarding my youth
and beauty (inferior to few in my native Country) would marry me to the King of
Northwales, an aged, impotent, and sickly man. Yet let me tell your sanctity,
that his age and weakness has not so much occasioned my flight, as fear of
mine own youth and frailety; when being married to him, instead of loyal and
unstained life, lewd and dishonest desires might make me to wander, by breaking
the divine Laws of wedlock, and abusing the royal blood of my Father.

As I travailed hither with this virtuous intention, our Lord, who only
knows perfectly, what is best fitting for all his creatures; presented mine
eyes (no doubt in his mere mercy and goodness) with a man meet to be my
husband, which (pointing to Alessandro) is this young Gentleman standing by me,
whose honest, virtuous, and civil demeanor, deserves a Lady of far greater
worth, although (perhaps) nobility in blood be denied him, and may make him
seem not so excellent, as one derived from Royal descent. Holy and religious
vows have past between us both, and the Ring on his finger, is the firm
pledge of my faith and constancy; never to accept any other man in marriage,
but him only, although my Father, or any else do dislike it. Wherefore (holy
Father) the principal cause of my coming hither, being already effectually
concluded on, I desire to complete the rest of my pilgrimage, by visiting the
sanctified places in this City, whereof there are great plenty: And also, that
sacred marriage, being contracted in the presence of God only, between
Alessandro and my self, may by you be publicly confirmed, and in an open
congregation. For, seeing God has so appointed it, and our souls have so
solemnly vowed it, that no disaster whatsoever can alter it: you being Gods
vicar here on earth, I hope will not gainsay, but confirm it with your
fatherly benediction, that we may live in Gods fear, and dye in his favor.

Persuade your selves (fair Ladies) that Alessandro was in no mean
admiration, when he heard, that his wife was daughter to the King of England;
unspeakable joy (questionless) wholly overcame him: but the two Knights were
not a little troubled and offended, at such a strange and unexpected accident,
yea, so violent were their passions, that had they been any where else, then
in the Popes presence, Alessandro had felt their fury, and (perhaps) the
Princess her self too. On the other side, the Pope was much amazed, at the
habit she went disguised in, and likewise at the election of her husband; but,
perceiving there was no resistance to be made against it, he yielded the more
willingly to satisfy her desire. And therefore, having first comforted the two
Knights, and made peace between them, the Princess and Alessandro; he gave
order for the rest that was to be done.

When the appointed day for the solemnity was come, he caused the Princess
(clothed in most rich and royal garments) to appear before all the
Cardinals, and many other great persons then in presence, who were come to this
worthy Feast, which he had caused purposely to be prepared, where she seemed
so fair and goodly a Lady, that every eye was highly delighted to behold her,
commending her with no mean admiration. In like manner was Alessandro greatly
honored by the two Knights, being most sumptuous in appearance, and not like a
man that had lent money to usury, but rather of very royal quality; the Pope
himself celebrating the marriage between them, which being finished, with the
most magnificent pomp that could be devised, he gave them his benediction,
and licenced their departure thence.

Alessandro, his Princess and her train thus leaving Rome, they would needs
visit Florence, where the news of this accident was (long before) noysed, and
they received by the Citizens in royal manner. There did she deliver the
three brethren out of prison, having first paid all their debts, and reseated
them again (with their wives) in their former inheritances and possessions.
Afterward, departing from Florence, and Agolanto, one of the Uncles travailing
with them to Paris; they were there also most honorably entertained by the
King of France. From whence the two Knights went before for England, and
prevailed so succesfully with the King; that he received his daughter into
grace and favor, as also his Son in law her husband, to whom he gave the
order of Knighthoode, and (for his greater dignity) created him Earl of
Cornwall.

And such was the noble spirit of Alessandro, that he pacified the troubles
between the King and his son, whereon ensued great comfort to the Kingdom,
winning the love and favor of all the people; and Agolanto (by the means of
Alessandro) recovered all that was due to him and his brethren in England,
returning richly home to Florence, Count Alessandro (his kinsman) having first
dubd him Knight. Long time he lived in peace and tranquillity, with the fair
Princess his wife, proving to be so absolute in wisdom, and so famous a
Soldier; that (as some report) by assistance of his Father in law, he
conquered the Realm of Ireland, and was crowned King thereof.

Landolpho Ruffolo, falling into poverty, became a Pirate on the Seas, and
being taken by the Genewayes, hardly escaped drowning: Which yet
(nevertheless) he did, upon a little Chest or Coffer, full of very rich
Jewels, being carried thereon to Corfu, where he was well entertained by a good
woman; And afterward, returned richly home to his own house.

The fourth Novel.
Whereby may be discerned, into how many dangers a man may fall, through a
covetous desire to enrich himself.

MAdame Lauretta, sitting next to Madame Pampinea, and seeing how triumphantly
she had finished her discourse; without attending any thing else, spoke thus.
Gracious Ladies, we shall never behold (in mine opinion) a great act of
Fortune, then to see a man so suddenly exalted, even from the lowest death of
poverty, to a Royal estate of dignity; as the discourse of Madame Pampinea
has made good, by the happy advancement of Alessandro. And because it
appears necessary, that whosoever discourses on the subject proposed, should
no way vary from the very same terms; I shall not shame to tell a tale,
which, though it contain far greater mishaps then the former, may sort to as
happy an issue, albeit not so noble and magnificent. In which respect, it may
(perhaps) merit the less attention; but howsoever that fault shall be found in
you, I mean to discharge mine own duty.



Opinion has made it famous for long time, that the Seacoast of Rhegium to
Gaieta, is the only delectable part of all Italy, wherein, somewhat near to
Salerno, is a shore looking upon the Sea, which the inhabitants there dwelling,
do call the coast of Malfy, full of small Towns, Gardens, Springs and wealthy
men, trading in as many kinds of Merchandises, as any other people that I
know. Among which Towns, there is one, named Rauello, wherein (as yet to this
day there are rich people) there was (not long since) a very wealthy man, named
Landolpho Ruffolo, who being not contented with his riches, but coveting to
multiply them double and trebble, fell in danger, to loose both himself and
wealth together.

This man (as other Merchants are wont to do) after he had considered on his
affairs, bought him a very goodly Ship, ^ading it with diverse sorts of
Merchandises, all belonging to himself only, and making his voyage to the
Isle of Cyprus. Where he found, over and beside the Merchandises he had brought
thither, many Ships more there arrived, and all laden with the self same
commodities, in regard whereof, it was needful for him, not only to make a
good Mart of his goods; but also was further constrained (if he meant to vent
his commodities) to sell them away (almost) for nothing, endangering his utter
destruction and overthrow. Whereupon, grieuing exceedingly at so great a loss,
not knowing what to do, and seeing, that from very abundant wealth, he was
likely to fall into as low poverty: he resolved to dye, or to recompense his
losses upon others, because he would not return home poor, having departed
thence so rich.

Meeting with a Merchant, that bought his great Ship of him; with the money
made thereof, and also of his other Merchandises, he purchased another, being
a lighter vessel, apt and proper for the use of a Pirate, arming and
furnishing it in ample manner, for rouing and robbing upon the Seas. Thus he
began to make other men's goods his own, especially from the Turks he took
much wealth, Fortune being always therein so favorable to him, that he could
never compass the like by trading. So that, within the space of one year, he
had robbed and taken so many Galleys from the Turk; that he found himself well
recovered, not only of all his losses by Merchandise, but likewise his wealth
was wholly redoubled. Finding his losses to be very liberally required, and
having now sufficient, it were folly to hazard a second fall; wherefore,
conferring with his own thoughts, and finding that he had enough, and needed
not to cover after more: he fully concluded, now to return home to his own
house again, and live upon his goods thus gotten.

Continuing still in fear, of the losses he had sustained by traffic, and
minding, never more to employ his money that way, but to keep this light vessel,
which had helped him to all his wealth: he commanded his men to put forth their
Oars, and shape their course for his own dwelling. Being aloft in the higher
Seas, dark night ouer-taking them, and a mighty wind suddenly coming upon
them: it not only was contrary to their course, but held on with such
impetuous violence; that the small vessel, being unable to endure it, made to
land-ward speedily, and in expectation of a more friendly wind, entered a little
port of the Sea, directing up into a small Island, and there safely sheltred it
self. Into the same port which Landolpho had thus taken for his refuge, entered
(soon after) two great Carrackes of Genewayes, lately come from
Constantinople. When the men in them had espied the small Bark, and locked up
her passage from getting forth; understanding the Owners name, and that report
had famed him to be very rich, they determined (as men evermore addicted
naturally, to covet after money and spoil) to make it their own as a prize at
Sea.

Landing some store of their men, well armed with Crosse-bowes and other
weapons, they took possession of such a place, where none durst issue forth of
the small Bark, but endangered his life with their Darts and Arrows. Entering
aboard the Bark, and making it their own by full possession, all the men they
threw ouer-boord, without sparing any but Landolpho himself, whom they mounted
into one of the Carrackes, leaving him nothing but a poor shirt of Maile on
his back, and having rifled the Bark of all her riches, sunk it into the
bottom of the sea. The day following, the rough winds being calmed, the
Carrackes set sail agame, having a prosperous passage all the day long; but
upon the entrance of dark night, the winds blew more tempestuously then
before, and sweld the Sea in such rude storms, that the two Carracks were
sundered each from other, and by violence of the tempest it came to pass, that
the Carracke wherein lay poor miserable Landolpho (beneath the Isle of
Cephalonia) ran against a rock, and even as a glass against a wall, so split
the Carracke in pieces, the goods and merchandises floating on the Sea, Chests,
Coffers, Beds, and such like other things, as often happens in such lamentable
accidents.

Now, notwithstanding the nights obscurity, and impetuous violence of the
billows; such as could swim, made shift to save their lives by swimming.
Others caught hold on such things, as by Fortunes favor floated nearest to
them, among whom, distressed Landolpho, desirous to save his life, if possibly
it might be, espied a Chest or Coffer before him, ordained (no doubt) to be the
means of his safety from drowning. Now although the day before, he had wished
for death infinite times, rather then to return home in such wretched poverty;
yet, seeing how other men strove for safety of their lives by any help, were
it never so little, he took advantage of this favor offered him, and the rather
in a necessity so urgent. Keeping fast upon the Coffer so well as he could,
and being driven by the winds and waves, one while this way, and anon quite
contrary, he made shift for himself till day appeared; when looking every way
about him, seeing nothing but clouds, the seas and the Coffer, which one while
shrunk from under him, and another while supported him, according as the
winds and billows carried it: all that day and night thus he floated up and
down, drinking more then willingly he would, but almost hunger-starued through
want of food. The next morning, either by the appointment of heaven, or power
of the Winds, Landolpho who was (well-neere) become a Spundge, holding his
arms strongly about the Chest, as we have some do, who (dreading drowning)
take hold on any the very smallest help; drew near unto the shore of the
Island Corfu, where (by good fortune) a poor woman was scowring dishes with the
salt water and sand, to make them (house-wife like) neat and clean.

When she saw the Chest drawing near her, and not discerning the shape of any
man, she grew fearful, and retyring from it, cried out aloude. He had no
power of speaking to her, neither did his sight do him the smallest service;
but even as the waves and winds pleased, the Chest was driven still nearer to
the Land, and then the woman perceived that it had the form of a Cofer, and
looking more advisedly, beheld two arms extended over it, and afterward, she
espied the face of a man, not being able to judge, whether he were alive, or
no. Moved by charitable and womanly compassion, she stepped in among the
billows, and getting fast hold on the hair of his head, drew both the Chest
and him to the Land, and calling forth her Daughter to help her, with much
ado she unfolded his arms from the Chest, setting it up on her Daughters
head, and then between them, Landolpho was led into the Town, and there
conveyed into a warm Stoue, where quickly he recovered (by her pains) his
strength benumbed with extreme cold.

Good wines and comfortable broathes she cherished him withal, that his
senses being indifferently restored, he knew the place where he was; but not
in what manner he was brought thither, till the good woman showed him the Cofer
that had kept him floating upon the waves, and (next under God) had saved his
life. The Chest seemed of such slender weight, that nothing of any value could
be expected in it, either to recompense the woman's great pains and kindness
bestowne on him, or any matter of his own benefit. Nevertheless, the woman
being absent, he opened the Chest, and found innumerable precious stones
therein, some costly and curiously set in gold, and others not fixed in any
metal. Having knowledge of their great worth and value (being a Merchant, and
skild in such matters) he became much comforted, praising God for this good
success, and such an admirable means of deliverance from danger.

Then considering with himself, that (in a short time) he had been twice
well buffeted and beaten by Fortune, and fearing, least a third mishap might
follow in like manner; he consulted with his thoughts, how he might safest
order the business, and bring so rich a booty (without peril) to his own
home. Wherefore, wrapping up the Jewels in very unsightly cloutes, that no
suspicion at all should be conceived of them, he said to the good woman, that
the Chest would not do him any further service; but if she pleased to lend
him a small sack or bag, she might keep the Cofer, for in her house it
would diverse way stead her. The woman gladly did as he desired, and Landolpho
returning her infinite thanks, for the loving kindness she had affoorded
him, throwing the sack on his neck, passed by a Bark to Brundusiam, and from
thence to Tranium, where Merchants in the City bestowed good garments on him,
he acquainting them with his disasterous fortunes, but not a word concerning
his last good success.

Being come home in safety to Rauello, he fell on his knees, and thanked God
for all his mercies toward him. Then opening the sack, and viewing the Jewels
at more leisure then formerly he had done, he found them to be of so great
estimation, that selling them but at ordinary and reasonable rates, he was
three times richer, then when he departed first from his house. And having
vented them all, he sent a great sum of money to the good woman at Corfu, that
had rescued him out of the Sea, and saved his life in a danger so dreadful:
The like he did to Tranium, to the Merchants that had newly clothed him;
living richly upon the remainder, and never aduenturing more to the Sea, but
ended his days in wealth and honor.

Andrea de Piero, traveling from Perouse to Naples to buy Horses, was (in the
space of one night) surprised by three admirable accidents, out of all which
he fortunately escaped, and, with a rich Ring, returned home to his own
house.

The fifth Novel.
Comprehending, how needful a thing it is, for a man that trauelleth in
affairs of the World, to be provident and well advised, and carefully to keep
himself from the crafty and deceitful allurements of Strumpets.



THe precious Stones and Jewels found by Landolpho, makes me to remember
(said Madam Fiammetta, who was next to deliver her discourse) a Tale,
containing no less perils, then that reported by Madam Lauretta: but somewhat
different from it, because the one happened in sundry years, and this other
had no longer time, then the compass of one poor night, as instantly I will
relate unto you.

As I have heard reported by many, there sometime lived in Perouse or ^erugia,
a young man, named Andrea de Piero, whose profession was to trade about Horses,
in the nature of a Horse-courser, or Horse-master, who hearing of a good Fair
or Market (for his purpose) at Naples, did put five hundred Crowns of gold in
his purse, and iourneyed thither in the company of other Horse-coursers,
arriving there on a Sunday in the evening. According to instructions given him
by his Host, he went the next day into the Horse-ma^ket, where he saw very many
Horses that he liked, cheapening their prices as he went up and down, but
could fall to no agreement; yet to manifest that he came purposely to buy, and
not as a cheapener only, oftentimes (like a shalow brainde trader in the
world) he showed his purse of gold before all passengers, never respecting who,
or what they were that observed his folly.

It came to pass, that a young Sicillian wench (very beautiful, but at
command of whosoever would, and for small hire) passing then by, and (without
his perceiving) seeing such store of gold in his purse; presently she said to
her self: why should not all those crowns be mine, when the fool that owes
them, can keep them no closer? And so she went on. With this young wanton
there was (at the same time) an old woman (as commonly such stuff is always
so attended) seeming to be a Sicillian also, who so soon as she saw Andrea,
knew him, and, leaving her youthful commodity, ran to him, and embraced him
very kindly. Which when the younger Less perceived, without proceeding any
further, she stayed, to see what would ensue thereon. Andrea conferring with
the old Bawd, and knowing her (but not for any such creature) declared
himself very affable to her; she making him promise, that she would come and
drink with him at his lodging. So, breaking off further speeches for that
time, she returned to her young Cammerado; and Andrea went about buying his
horses, still cheapning good store, but did not buy any all that morning.

The Punke that had taken notice of Adreaes purse, upon the old woman's coming
back to her (having formerly studied, how she might get all the gold, or the
greater part thereof) cunningly questioned with her, what the man was, whence
he came, and the occasion of his business there? wherein she fully informed
her particularly, and in as ample manner as himself could have done: That she
had long time dwelt in Sicily with his Father, and afterward at Perouse;
recounting also, at what time she came thence, and the cause which now had
drawn him to Naples. The witty young housewife, being thoroughly instructed,
concerning the Parents and kindred of Andrea, their names, quality, and all
other circumstances thereto leading; began to frame the foundation of her
purpose thereupon, setting her resolution down constantly, that the purse and
gold was (already) more then half her own.

Being come home to her own house, away she sent the old Pandresse about
other business, which might hold her time long enough of employment, and
hinder her returning to Andrea according to promise, purposing, not to trust
her in this serious piece of service. Calling a young crafty Girl to her, whom
she had well tutoured in the like ambassages, when evening drew on, she sent
her to Andreas lodging, where (by good fortune) she found him sitting alone at
the door, and demanding of him, if he knew an honest Gentleman lodging there,
whose name was Signior Andrea de Piero; he made her answer, that himself was
the man. Then taking him aside, she said. Sir, there is a worthy Gentlewoman
of this City, that would gladly speak with you, if you pleased to vouchsafe
her so much favor.

Andrea, hearing such a kind of salutation, and from a Gentlewoman, named of
worth; began to grow proud in his own imaginations, and to make no mean
estimation of himself: As (undoubtedly) that he was an hansome proper man, and
of such carriage and perfections, as had attracted the amorous eye of this
Gentlewoman, and induced her to like and love him beyond all other, Naples not
containing a man of better merit. Whereupon he answered the Maid, that he was
ready to attend her Mistress, desiring to know, when it should be, and where
the Gentlewoman would speak with him? So soon as you please Sir, replied the
Damsel, for she tarieth your coming in her own house.

Instantly Andrea (without leaving any direction of his departure in his
lodging, or when he intended to return again) said to the Girl: Go before,
and I will follow. This little Chamber-commodity, conducted him to her
Mistresses dwelling, which was in a street named Naupertuis, a title
manifesting sufficiently the streets honesty: but he, having no such
knowledge thereof, neither suspecting any harm at all, but that he went to a
most honest house, and to a Gentlewoman of good respect; entered boldly, the
Maid going in before, and guiding him up a fair pair of stayres, which he
having more then half ascended, the cunning young Queen gave a call to her
Mistress, saying; Signtor Andrea is come already, whereupon, she appeared at
the stayres-head, as if she had stayed there purposely to entertain him. She
was young, very beautiful, comely of person, and rich in adornements, which
Andrea well observing, and seeing her descend two or three steps, with open
arms to embrace him, catching fast hold about his neck; he stood as a man
confounded with admiration, and she contained a cunning kind of silence, even
as if she were unable to utter one word, seeming hindered by extremity of joy
at his presence, and to make him effectually admire her extraordinary
kindness, having tears plenteously at command, intermixed with sighs and
broken speeches, at last, thus she spoke.

Signior Andrea, you are the most welcome friend to me in all the world; sealing
this salutation with infinite sweet kisses and embraces: whereat (in wonderful
amazement) he being strangely transported, replied; Madame, you honor me
beyond all compass of merit. Then, taking him by the hand, she guided him
through a goodly Hall, into her own Chamber, which was delicately embalmed with
Roses, Orenge-flowres, and all other pleasing smelles, and a costly bed in the
midst, curtained round about, very artificial Pictures beautifying the
walls, with many other embellishments, such as those Countries are liberally
stored withal. He being merely a nouice in these kinds of wanton carriages of
the World, and free from any base or degenerate conceit; firmly persuaded
himself, that (questionless) she was a Lady of no mean esteem, and he more
then happy, to be thus respected and honored by her. They both being seated on
a curious Chest at the Beds feet, tears cunningly trickling down her
cheeks, and sighs intermedled with inward sobbings, breathed forth in sad,
but very seemly manner; thus she began.

I am sure Andrea, that you greatly marvel at me, in gracing you with this
solemn and kind entertainment, and why I should so melt my self in sighs
and tears, at a man that has no knowledge of me, or (perhaps) sildome or
never heard any speeches of me: but you shall instantly receive from me matter
to augment your greater marvel, meeting here with your own sister, beyond
all hope or expectation in either of us both. But seeing that Heaven has been
so gracious to me, to let me see one of my brethren before I die (though
gladly I would have seen them all) which is some addition of comfort to me,
and that which (happily) thou have never heard before, in plain and truest
manner, I will reveal unto thee.

Piero, my Father and thine, dwelt long time (as thou can not choose but to
have understood) in Palermo, where, through the bounty, and other gracious good
parts remaining in him, he was much renowned; and (to this day) is no doubt
remembered, by many of his loving friends and well-willers. Among them that most
intimately affected Piero, my mother (who was a Gentlewoman, and at that time a
widow) did dearest of all other love him; so that forgetting the fear of her
Father, brethren, yea, and her own honor, they became so privately
acquainted, that I was begotten, and am here now such as thou see me.
Afterward, occasions so befalling our Father, to abandon Palermo, and return
to Perouse, he left my mother and me his little daughter, never after (for
ought that I could learn) once remembering either her or me: so that (if he had
not been my Father) I could have much condemned him, in regard of his
ingratitude to my Mother, and love which he ought to have shown me as his
child, being borne of no Chamber-maide, neither of a City sinner; albeit I
must needs say, that she was blameworthy, without any further knowledge of
him (moved only thereto by most loyal affection) to commit both her self, and
all the wealth she had, into his hands: but things ill done, and so long time
since, are more easily controled, then amended.

Being left so young at Palermo, and growing (well near) to the stature as now
you see me; my mother, being wealthy, gave me in marriage to one of the
Gergentes Family, a Gentleman, and of great revenues, who in his love to me
and my mother, went and dwelt at Palermo: where falling into the Guelphes
faction, and making one in the enterprise with Charles our King; it came to
pass, that they were discovered to Frederick King of Arragon, before their
intent could be put in execution, whereupon, we were enforced to fly from
Sicilie, even when my hope stood fairly to have been the greatest Lady in all
the Island. Packing up then such few things as we could take with us, few I may
well call them, in regard of our wealthy possessions, both in Palaces, Houses,
and Lands, all which we were constrained to forgo: we made our recourse to
this City, where we found King Charles so benign and gracious to us, that
recompencing the greater part of our losses, he bestowed Lands and Houses on us
here, beside a continual large pension to my husband your brother in Law, as
hereafter himself shall better acquaint you withal. Thus came I hither, and
thus remain here, where I am able to welcome my brother Andrea, thanks more
to Fortune, then any friendlinesse in him: with which words she embraced and
kissed him many times, sighing and weeping as she did before.

Andrea hearing this fable so artificially delivered, composed from point to
point, with such likely protestations, without faltring or failing in any one
words vtteranee; and remembering perfectly for truth, that his Father had
formerly dwelt at Palermo; knowing also (by some sensible feeling in himself)
the custom of young people, who are easily conquered by affection in their
youthful heat; seeing beside the tears, trembling speeches, and earnest
embracings of this cunning commodity: he took all to be faithfully true by her
thus spoken, and upon her silence, thus he replied. Lady, let it not seem
strange to you, that your words have raised marvel in me, because (indeed) I
had no knowledge of you, even no more then as if I had never seen you, never
also having heard my Father to speak either of you or your Mother (for some
considerations best known to himself) or if at any time he used such
language, either my youth then, or defective memory since, has utterly lost
it. But truly, it is no little joy and comfort to me, to find a sister here,
where I had no such hope or expectation, and where also my self am a mere
stranger. For to speak my mind freely of you, and the perfections gracefully
appearing in you, I know not any man, of how great repute or quality soever,
but you may well beseem his acceptance, much rather then mine, that am but a
mean Merchant. But fair sister, I desire to be resolved in one thing, to wit,
by what means you had understanding of my being in this City? whereto readily
she returned him this answer.

Brother, a poor woman of this City, whom I employ sometimes in household
occasions, came to me this morning, and (having seen you) told me, that she
dwelt a long while with our Father, both at Palermo, and Perouse. And because I
held it much better beseeming my condition, to have you visit me in mine own
dwelling, then I to come see you at a common Inn; I made the bolder to send
for you hither. After which words, in very orderly manner, she enquired of his
chiefest kindred and friends, calling them readily by their proper names,
according to her former instructions. Whereto Andrea still made her answer,
confirming thereby his belief of her the more strongly, and crediting
whatsoever she said, far better then before.

Their conference having long time continued, and the heat of the day being
somewhat extraordinary, she called for Greek wine, and banqueting stuff,
drinking to Andrea; and he pledging her very contentedly. After which, he would
have returned to his lodging, because it drew near supper time; which by no
means she would permit, but seeming more then half displeased, she said.
Now I plainly perceive brother, how little account you make of me,
considering, you are with your own Sister, who (you say) you never saw before,
and in her own House, whether you should always resort when you come to this
City; and would you now refuse her, to go and sup at a common Inn. Believe me
brother, you shall sup with me, for although my Husband is now from home, to my
no little coffeehouse: yet you shall find brother, that his wife can bid you
welcome, and make you good cheer beside.

Now was Andrea so confounded with this extremity of courtesy, that he knew
not what to say, but only thus replied. I love you as a Sister ought to be
loved, and accept of your exceeding kindness: but if I return not to my
lodging, I shall wrong mine Host and his guests too much, because they will not
sup until I come. For that (quoth she) we have a present remedy, one of my
servants shall go and give warning, whereby they shall not tarry your coming.
Albeit, you might do me a great kindness, to send for your friends to sup
with us here, where I assure ye they shall find that your Sister (for your
sake) will bid them welcome, and after supper, you may all walk together to
your Inn. Andrea answered, that he had no such friends there, as should be so
burthenous to her: but seeing she urged him so far, he would stay to sup
with her, and referred himself solely to her disposition.

Ceremonious show was made, of sending a servant to the Inn, for not expecting
Andreas presence at Supper, though no such matter was performed; but, after
diverse other discoursings, the table being covered, and variety of costly
viands placed thereon, down they sat to feeding, with plenty of curious Wines
liberally walking about, so that it was dark night before they arose from the
table. Andrea then offering to take his leave, she would (by no means) suffer
it, but told him that Naples was a City of such strict Laws and Ordinances,
as admitted no nightwalkers, although they were Natives, much less strangers,
but punished them with great severity. And therefore, as she had formerly sent
word to his Inn, that they should not expect his coming to supper, the like
had she done concerning his bed, intending to give her Brother Andrea one
nights lodging, which as easily she could afford him, as she had done a
Supper. All which this new-caught Woodcocke verily crediting, and that he was
in company of his own Sister Fiordeliza (for so did she cunningly style her
self, and in which belief he was merely deluded) he accepted the more
gladly her gentle offer, and concluded to stay there all that night.

After supper, their conference lasted very long, purposely dilated out in
length, that a great part of the night might therein be wasted: when, leaving
Andrea to his Chamber, and a Lad to attend, that he should lack nothing; she
with her women went to their lodgings, and thus our brother and supposed Sister
were parted. The season then being somewhat hot and soultry, Andrea put off his
hose and doublet, and being in his shirt alone, laid them underneath the beds
boulster, as seeming careful of his money. But finding a provocation to the
house of Office, he demanded of the Lad, where he might find it; who showed
him a little door in a corner of the Chamber, appointing him to enter there.
Safely enough he went in, but chanced to tread upon a board, which was fastened
at neither end to the joints whereon it lay, being a pit-fall made of purpose,
to entrap any such coxecombe, as would be trained to so base a place of
lodging, so that both he and the board fell down together into the draught;
yet such being his good fortune, to receive no harm in the fall (although it
was of extraordinary height) only the filth of the place, (it being over full)
had fowly myred him.

Now for your better understanding the quality of the place, and what ensued
thereupon, it is not unnecessary to describe it, according to a common use
observed in those parts. There was a narrow passage or entry, as often we see
reserved between two houses, for eithers benefit to such a needful place; and
boards loosely lay upon the joints, which such as were acquainted withal,
could easily avoid any peril, in passing to or from the stool. But our so
newly created brother, not dreaming to find a queen to his Sister, receiving
so foul a fall into the vaulte, and knowing not how to help himself, being
sorrowful beyond measure; cried out to the boy for light and aid, with
intended not to give him any. For the crafty wag, (a meet attendant for so
honest a Mistress) no sooner heard him to be fallen, but presently he ran to
inform her thereof, and she as speedily returned to the Chamber, where
finding his clothes under the beds head, she needed no instruction for search
in his pockets. But having found the gold, which Andrea indiscreetely carried
always about him, as thinking it could no where else be so safe: This was all
she aimed at, and for which she had ensnared him, faigning her self to be of
Palermo, and Daughter to Piero of Perouse, so that not regarding him any
longer, but making fast the house of Office door, there she left him in that
miserable taking.

Poor Andrea perceiving, that his calls could get no answer from the Lad;
cried out louder, but all to no purpose: when seeing into his own simplicity,
and understanding his error, though somewhat too late, he made such means
constrainedly, that he got over a wall, which severed that foul sink from the
Worlds eye; and being in the open street, went to the door of the House,
which then he knew too well to his cost, making loud exclaimes with rapping
and knocking, but all as fruitless as before. Sorrowing exceedingly, and
manifestly beholding his misfortune; Alas (quoth he) how soon have I lost a
Sister, and five hundred Crowns besides? with many other words, loud calls,
and beatings upon the door without intermission, the neighbors finding
themselves diseased, and unable to endure such ceaselesse vexation, rose from
their beds, and called to him, desiring him to be gone and let them rest. A
maid also of the same House, looking forth at the window, and seeming as newly
raised from sleep, called to him, saying; What noise is that beneath? Why
Virgin (answered Andrea) know you not me? I am Andrea de Piero, Brother to your
Mistress Fiordeliza. Thou art a drunken knave, replied the Maid, more full of
drink then wit, go sleep, go sleep, and come again to morrow: for I know
no Andrea de Piero, neither has my Mistress any such Brother, get thee gone
good man, and suffer us to sleep I pray thee. How now (quoth Andrea) do
thou not understand what I say? Thou know that I supt with thy Mistress
this night; but if our Sicilian kindred be so soon forgot, I pray thee give me
my clothes which I left in my Chamber, and then very gladly will I get me
gone. Hereat the Maid laughing out aloude, said; Surely the man is mad, or
walks the streets in a dream; and so clasping fast the window, away she
went and left him.

Now could Andrea assure himself, that his gold and clothes were past
recovery, which moving him to the more impatience, his former intercessions
became converted into fury, and what he could not compass by fair entreats,
he intended to win by outrage and violence, so that taking up a great stone
in his hand, he laid upon the door very powerful strokes. The neighbors
hearing this molestation still, admitting them not the least respite of rest,
reputing him for a troublesome fellow, and that he used those counterfeit words,
only to disturb the Mistress of the House, and all that dwelled near about
her; looking again out at their windows, they altogether began to rate and
reprove him, even like so many bawling Curres, barking at a strange dog passing
through the street. This is shameful villainy (quoth one) and not to be
suffered, that honest women should be thus molested in their houses, with
foolish idle words, and at such an unseasonable time of the night. For Gods
sake (good man) be gone, and let us sleep; if thou have any thing to say to
the Gentlewoman of the House, come to morrow in the day time, and no doubt but
she will make thee sufficient answer.

Andrea being somewhat pacified with these speeches, a shag-hairde
swash-buckler, a grim-visagde Ruffian (as sildome bawdy houses are without such
swaggering Champions) not seen or heard by Andrea, all the while of his being
in the house rapping out two or three terrible oaths, opened a casement, and
with a stearne dreadful voice, demanded who durst keep that noise beneath?
Andrea fearfully looking up, and (by a little glimmering of the Moon) seeing
such a rough fellow, with a black beard, strowting like the quilles of a
Porcupine, and patches on his face, for hurts received in no honest quarrels,
yawning also and stretching, as angry to have his sleep disturbed: trembling
and quaking, answered; I am the Gentlewomans brother of the house. The Ruffian
interrupting him, and speaking more fiercely then before; sealing his words
with horrible oaths, said. Sir, Rascal, I know not of whence or what thou
art, but if I come down to thee, I will so bombast thy prating coxcombe, as
thou was never better beaten in all thy life, like a drunken slave and beast as
thou art, that all this night wilt not let us sleep; and so he clapped to the
window again.

The neighbors, well acquainted with this Ruffians rude conditions, speaking
in gentle manner to Andrea, said. Shift for thy self (good man) in time, and
tarry not for his coming down to thee; except thou art weary of thy life,
be gone therefore, and say thou have a friendly warning. These words dismaying
Andrea, but much more the stearne oaths and ugly sight of the Ruffian, incited
also by the neighbors counsel, whom he imagined to advise him in charitable
manner: it caused him to depart thence, taking the way homeward to his Inn, in
no mean affliction and torment of mind, for the monstrous abuse offered him,
and loss of his money. Well he remembered the passages, whereby (the day
before) the young Girl had guided him, but the loathsome smell about him, was
so extremely offensive to himself: that, desiring to wash him at the Sea
side, he strayed too far wide on the contrary hand, wandering up the street
called Ruga Gatellana.

Proceeding on still, even to the highest part of the City, he espied a
Lantern and light, as also a man carrying it, and another man with him in
company, both of them coming toward him. Now, because he suspected them two
of the watch, or some persons that would apprehend him: he slept aside to
shun them, and entered into an old house hard by at hand. The other men's
intention was to the very same place, and going in, without any knowledge of
Andreaes being there, one of them laid down diverse instruments of iron, which
he had brought thither on his back, and had much talk with his fellow
concerning those engines. At last one of them said, I smell the most
abominable stink, that ever I felt in all my life. So, lifting up his
Lantern, he espied poor pitiful Andrea, closely couched behind the wall.
Which sight somewhat affrighting him, he yet boldly demanded, what and who he
was: whereto Andrea answered nothing, but lay still and held his peace. Nearer
they drew toward him with their light, demanding how he came thither, and in
that filthy manner.

Constraint having now no other evasion, but that (of necessity) all must out:
he related to them the whole adventure, in the same sort as it had befalne
him. They greatly pitying his misfortune, one of them said to the other.
Questionless, this villainy was done in the house of Scarabone Buttafuoco; And
then turning to Andrea, proceeded thus. In good faith poor man, albeit thou
have lost thy money, yet art thou highly beholding to Fortune, for falling
(though in a foul place) yet in succesfull manner, and entering no more back
into the house. For, believe me friend, if thou had not fallen, but quietly
gone to sleep in the house; that sleep had been thy last in this world, and
with thy money, thou had lost thy life likewise. But tears and lamentations
are now helpless, because, as easily may thou pluck the Stars from the
firmament, as get a gain the least doyt of thy loss. And for that shag-haird
Slave in the house, he will be thy deaths-man, if he but understand, that thou
make any enquiry after thy money. When he had thus admonished him, he began
also in this manner to comfort him. Honest fellow, we cannot but pity thy
present condition, wherefore, if thou will friendly associate us, in a business
which we are instantly going to effect: thy loss has not been so great, but
on our words we will warrant thee, that thine immediate gain shall far
exceed it. What will not a man (in desperate extremity) both well like and
allow of, especially, when it carries appearance of present comfort? So fared
it with Andrea, he persuaded himself, worse then had already happened, could
not befall him; and therefore he would gladly adventure with them.

The self same day preceding this disastrous night to Andrea, in the chief
Church of the City, had been buried the Archbishop of Naples, named Signior
Philippo Minutulo, in his richest pontifical roabes and ornaments, and a Ruby
on his finger, valued to be worth five hundred ducats of gold: this dead body
they purposed to rob and rifle, acquainting Andrea with their whole intent,
whose necessity (coupled with a covetous desire) made him more forward then
well advised, to join with them in this sacriligious enterprise. On they went
toward the great Church, Andreaes unsavory perfume much displeasing them,
whereupon the one said to his fellow. Can we devise no ease for this foul and
noisome inconvenience? the very smell of him will be a means to betray us.
There is a Well-pit hard by, answered the other, with a pulley and bucket
descending down into it, and there we may wash him from this filthiness. To
the Well-pit they came, where they found the rope and pulley hanging ready, but
the bucket (for safety) was taken away: whereon they concluded, to fasten the
rope about him, and so let him down into the Well-pit, and when he had washed
himself, he should wagge the rope, and then they would draw him up again,
which accordingly they forthwith performed.

Now it came to pass, that while he was thus washing himself in the
Well-pit, the watch of the City walking the round, and finding it to be a very
hot and sweltring night; they grew dry and thirsty, and therefore went to the
Well to drink. The other two men, perceiving the Watch so near upon them:
left Andrea in the Pit to shift for himself, running away to shelter
themselves. Their flight was not discovered by the Watch, but they coming to
the Well-pit, Andrea remained still in the bottom, and having cleansed
himself so well as he could, sat wagging the rope, expecting when he should
be haled up. This dumb sign the Watch discerned not, but sitting down by the
Wells side, they laid down their Bills and other weapons, tugging to draw up
the rope, thinking the Bucket was fastened thereto, and full of water. Andrea
being haled up to the Pits brim, left holding the rope any longer, catching
fast hold with his hands for his better safety: and the Watch at the sight
hereof being greatly affrighted, as thinking that they had dragd up a Spirit;
not daring to speak one word, ran away with all the have they could make.

Andrea hereat was not a little amazed, so that if he had not taken very good
hold on the brim: he might have fallen to the bottom, and doubtless there his
life had perished. Being come forth of the Well, and treading on Bills and
Halbards, which he well knew that his companions had not brought thither with
them; his marvel so much the more increased, ignorance and fear still
seizing on him, with silent bemoaning his many misfortunes, away thence he
wandered, but he wist not whither. As he went on, he met his two fellows, who
purposely returned to drag him out of the Well, and seeing their intent already
performed, desired to know who had done it: wherein Andrea could not resolve
them, rehearsing what he could, and what weapons he found lying about the
Well. Whereat they smiled, as knowing, that the Watch had haled him up, for
fear of whom they left him, and so declared to him the reason of their return.

Leaving off all further talk, because now it was about midnight, they went to
the great Church, where finding their entrance to be easy: they approached
near the Tomb, which was very great, being all of Marble, and the couer-stone
weighty, yet with crows of iron and other helps, they raised it so high, that
a man might without peril pass into it. Now began they to question one
another, which of the three should enter into the Tomb. Not I, said the first;
so said the second: No, nor I, answered Andrea. Which when the other two heard,
they caught fast hold of him, saying. Wilt not thou go into the Tomb? Be
advised what thou say, for, if thou will not go in: we will so beat thee
with one of these iron crows, that thou shall never go out of this Church
alive.

Thus poor Andrea is still made a property, and Fortune (this fatal night)
will have no other fool but he, as delighting in his hourly disasters. Fear
of their fury makes him obedient, into the grave he goes, and being within,
thus consults with himself. These cunning companions suppose me to be simple,
and make me enter the Tomb, having an absolute intention to deceive me. For,
when I have given them all the riches that I find here, and am ready to come
forth for mine equal portion: away will they run for their own safety, and
leaving me here, not only shall I loose my right among them, but must remain
to what danger may follow after. Having thus meditated, he resolved to make
sure of his own share first, and remembering the rich Ring, whereof they had
told him: forthwith he took it from the Archbishops finger, finding it
indifferently fit for his own. Afterward, he took the Cross, Miter, rich
garments, Gloves and all, leaving him nothing but his shirt, giving them all
these several parcels; protesting, that there was nothing else. Still they
pressed upon him, affirming that there was a Ring beside, urging him to search
diligently for it; yet still he answered, that he could not find it, and for
their longer tarying with him, seemed as if he serched very carefully, but all
appeared to no purpose.

The other two fellows, as cunning in craft as the third could be, still
willed him to search, and watching their aptest opportunity: took away the
props that supported the Tombe-stone, and running thence with their got booty,
left poor Andrea mewed up in the grave. Which when he perceived, and saw this
misery to exceed all the rest, it is far easier for you to guess at his
grief, then I am any way able to express it. His head, shoulders, yea all his
utmost strength he employeth, to remove that ouer-heauy hinderer of his
liberty: but all his labor being spent in vain, sorrow threw him in a swoond
upon the Bishops dead body, where if both of them might at that instant have
been observed, the Arch-byshops dead body, and Andrea in grief dying, very
hardly had been distinguished. But his senses regaining their former offices,
among his silent complaints, consideration presented him with choice of these
two unavoidable extremities. Dye staruing must he in the tomb, with
putrefaction of the dead body; or if any man came to open the Grave, then must
he be apprehended as a sacrilegious Thief, and so be hanged, according to the
laws in that case provided.

As he continued in these strange afflictions of mind, suddenly he heard a
noise in the Church of diverse men, who (as he imagined) came about the like
business, as he and his fellows had undertaken before; wherein he was not a
jot deceived, albeit his fear the more augmented. Having opened the Tomb, and
supported the stone, they varied also among themselves for entrance, and an
indiffrent while contended about it. At length, a Priest being one in the
company, boldly said. Why how now you white-liuer'd Rascals? What are you
afraid of? Do you think he will eat you? Dead men cannot bite, and therefore
I my self will go in. Having thus spoken, he prepared his entrance to the
Tomb in such order, that he thrust in his feet before, for his easier
descending down into it.

Andrea sitting upright in the Tomb, and desiring to make use of this happy
opportunity, caught the Priest fast by one of his legs, making show as if he
meant to dragge him down. Which when the Priest felt, he cried out aloud,
getting out with all the have he could make, and all his companions, being well
near frighted out of their wits, ran away amain, as if they had been
followed by a thousand diuels^. Andrea little dreaming on such fortunate
success, made means to get out of the grave, and afterward forth of the
Church, at the very same place where he entered.

Now began daylight to appear, when he, having the rich Ring on his finger,
wandered on he knew not whether: till coming to the Seaside, he found the way
directing to his Inn, where all his company were with his Host, who had been
very careful for him. Having related his manifold mischances, his Host
friendly advised him with speed to get him out of Naples. As instantly he did,
returning home to Perouse, having adventured his five hundred Crowns on a
Ring, wherewith he purposed to have bought Horses, according to the intent of
his journey thither.

Madame Beritola Caracalla, was found in an Island with two Goats, having lost
her two Sons, and thence travailed into Lunigiana: where one of her Sons
became servant to the Lord thereof, and was found somewhat ouerfamiliar with
his Masters daughter, who therefore caused him to be imprisoned. Afterward,
when the Country of Sicily rebelled against K. Charles, the aforesaid Son
chanced to be known by his Mother, and was married to his Masters daughter.
And his Brother being found likewise; they both returned to great estate and
credit.

The sixth Novel.
Herein all men are admonished, never to distrust the powerful hand of
Heaven, when Fortune seems to be most adverse against them.



THe Ladies and Gentlemen also, having smiled sufficiently at the several
accidents which did befall the poor Traveler Andrea, reported at large by
Madame Fiametta, the Lady Aemillia, seeing her tale to be fully concluded,
began (by commandment of the Queen) to speak in this manner.

The diversity of changes and alterations in Fortune as they are great, so
must they needs be grievous; and as often as we take occasion to talk of them,
as often do they awake and quicken our understandings, auouching, that it is no
easy matter to depend upon her flatteries. And I am of opinion, that to hear
them recounted, ought not any way to offend us, be it of men wretched or
fortunate; because, as they instrust the one with good advise, so they animate
the other with comfort. And therefore, although great occasions have been
already related, yet I purpose to tell a Tale, no less true then lamentable;
which albeit it sorted to a successful ending, yet notwithstanding, such and
so many were the bitter thwartings, as hardly can I believe, that ever any
sorrow was more joyfully sweetened.

You must understand then (most gracious Ladies) that after the death of
Frederick the second Emperor, one named Manfred, was crowned King of Sicilie,
about whom lived in great account and authority, a Neapolitane Gentleman,
called Henriet Capece, who had to Wife a beautiful Gentlewoman, and a
Neapolitane also, named Madam Beritola Caracalla. This Henriet held the
government of the Kingdom of Sicilie, and understanding, that King Charles the
first, had won the battle at Beneuentum, and slain King Maufred; the whole
Kingdom reuolting also to his devotion, and little trust to be reposed in the
Sicillians, or he willing to subject himself to his Lords enemy; provided for
his secret flight from thence. But this being discovered to the Sicillians, he
and many more, who had been loyal servants to King Manfred, were suddenly
taken and imprisoned by King Charles, and the sole possession of the Island
confirmed to him.

Madam Beritola not knowing (in so sudden and strange an alteration of State
affairs) what was become of her Husband, fearing also greatly before, those
inconveniences which afterward followed; being overcome with many passionate
considerations, having left and forsaken all her goods, going aboard a small
Bark with a Son of hers, aged about some eight years, named Geoffrey, and
grown great with child with another; she fled thence to Lipary, where she
was brought to bed of another Son, whom she named (answerable both to his
and her hard fortune) The poor expelled.

Having provided her self of a Nurse, they altogether went aboard again,
setting sail for Naples to visit her Parents; but it chanced quite contrary to
her expectation, because by stormy winds and weather, the vessel being bound
for Naples, was hurried to the I Will of Ponzo, where entering into a small Port of
the Sea, they concluded to make their aboade, till a time more furtherous
should favor their voyage.

As the rest, so did Madam Boritola go on shore in the Island, where having
found a separate and solitary place, fit for her silent and sad meditations,
secretly by her self, she sorrowed for the absence of her husband. Resorting
daily to this her sad exercise, and continuing there her complaints, unseen by
any of the Mariners, or whosoever else: there arrived suddenly a Galley of
Pirates, who seazing on the small Bark, carried it and all the rest in it away
with them. When Beritola had finished her woeful complaints, as daily she was
accustomed to do, she returned back to her children again; but finding no
person there remaining, whereat she wondered not a little: immediately
(suspecting what had happened indeed) she lent her looks on the Sea, and saw
the Galley, which as yet had not gone far, drawing the smaller vessel after
her. Hereby plainly she perceived, that now she had lost her children, as
formerly she had done her husband; being left there poor, forsaken, and
miserable, not knowing when, where, or how to find any of them again, and
calling for her husband and children, she fell down in a swound upon the
shore.

Now was not any body near, with cool water or any other remedy, to help the
recovery of her lost powers; wherefore her spirits might the more freely
wander at their own pleasure: but after they were returned back again, and
had won their wonted offices in her body, drowned in tears, and wringing her
hands, she did nothing but call for her children and husband, straying all
about, in hope to find them, seeking in Caves, Dens, and every where else,
that presented the very least glimpse of comfort. But when she saw all her
pains sort to no purpose, and dark night drawing swiftly on, hope and dismay
raising infinite perturbations, made her yet to be somewhat respective of her
self, and therefore departing from the seashore, he returned to the solitary
place, where she used to sigh and mourn alone by her self.

The night being ouer-past with infinite fears and affrights, and bright day
saluting the world again, with the expense of nine hours and more, she fell to
her former fruitless travails. Being somewhat sharply bitten with hunger,
because the former day and night she had not tasted any food: she made
therefore a benefit of necessity, and fed on the green hea^bes so well as she
could, notwithout many piercing afflictions, what should become of her in this
extraordinary misery. As she walked in these pensive meditations, she saw a
Goat enter into a Cave, and (within a while after) come forth again,
wandering along through the woods. Whereupon she stayed, and entered where she
saw the beast issue forth, where she found two young Kids, yeaned (as it seemed)
the selfsame day, which sight was very pleasing to her, and nothing (in that
distress) could more content her.

As yet she had milk freshly running in both her breasts, by reason of her so
late delivery in childbed; wherefore she lay down unto the two young Kids,
and taking them tenderly in her arms, suffered each of them to suck a teate,
whereof they made not any refusal, but took them as lovingly as their dammes,
and from that time forward, they made no distinguishing between their damme
and her. Thus this unfortunate Lady, having found some company in this solitary
desert, fed on herbs and roots* drinking fair running water, and weeping
silently to her self, so often as she remembered her husband, children, and
former days past in much better manner. Here she resolved now to live and dye,
being at last deprived both of the damme and younger Kids also, by their
wandering further into the near adjoining Woods, according to their Natural
inclinations; whereby the poor distressed Lady became more savage and wild in
her daily conditions, then otherwise she would have been.

After many months were ouer-passed, at the very same place where she took
landing; by chance, there arrived another small vessel of certain Pisans,
which remained there diverse days. In this Bark was a Gentleman, named Conrado
de Marchesi Malespini, with his holy and virtuous wife, who were returned back
from a Pilgrimage, having visited all the sanctified places, that then were in
the Kingdom of Apulia, and now were bound homeward to their own abiding. This
Gentleman, for the expelling of melancholy perturbations, one especial day
amongst other, with his wife, servants, and waiting hounds, wandered up into
the Island, not far from the place of Madam Beritolaes desert dwelling. The
hounds questing after game, at last happened on the two Kiddes where they were
feeding, and (by this time) had attained to indifferent growth: and finding
themselves thus pursued by the hounds, fled to no other part of the wood, then
to the Cave where Beritola remained, and seeming as if they sought to be
rescued only by her, she suddenly caught up a staff, and forced the hounds
thence to flight.

By this time, Conrado and his wife, who had followed closely after the hounds,
was come thither, and seeing what had happened, looking on the Lady, who was
become black, swarthy, meager, and hairy, they wondered not a little at her,
and she a great deal more at them. When (upon her req^est) Conrado had checked
back his hounds, they prevailed so much by earnest entreaties, to know what she
was, and the reason of her living there; that she entirely related her quality,
unfortunate accidents, and strange determination for living there. Which when
the Gentleman had heard, who very well knew her husband, compassion forced
tears from his eyes, and earnestly he labored by kind persuasions, to alter
so cruel a deliberation; making an honorable offer, for conducting her home to
his own dwelling, where she should remain with him in noble respect, as if
she were his own sister, without parting from him, till Fortune should smile
as fairly on her, as ever she had done before.

When these gentle offers could not prevail with her, the Gentleman left his
wife in her company, saying, that he would go fetch some food for her; and
because her garments were all rent and torn, he would bring her other of his
wives, not doubting but to win her thence with them. His wife abode there
with Beritola, very much bemoaning her great disasters, and when both viands
and garments were brought: by extremity of intercession, they caused her to put
them on, and also to feed with them, albeit she protested, that she would not
part thence into any place, where any knowledge should be taken of her. In the
end, they persuaded her, to go with them into Lunigiana, carrying also with her
the two young Goats and their damme, which were then in the Cave altogether,
prettily playing before Beritola, to the great admiration of Conrado and his
wife, as also the servants attending on them.

When the winds and weather grew favorable for them, Madam Beritola went
aboard with Conrado and his wife, being followed by the two young Goats and
his Damme; and because her name should be known to none but Conrado, and his
wife only, she would be styled no otherwise, but the Goatherdesse. Merrily,
yet gently blew the gale, which brought them to enter the River of Macra, where
going on shore, and into their own Castle, Beritola kept company with the
wife of Conrado, but in a mourning habit, and a waiting Gentlewoman of hers,
honest, humble, and very dutiful, the Goats always familiarly keeping them
company.

Return we now to the Pirates, which at Ponzo seized on the small Bark,
wherein Madam Beritola was brought thither, and carried thence away, without
any sight or knowledge of her. With such other spoils as they had taken, they
shaped their course for Geneway, and there (by consent of the Patrones of the
Galley) made a division of their booties. It came to pass, that (among other
things) the Nurse that attended on Beritola, and the two with her Children,
fell to the share of one Messer Gasparino d'Oria, who sent them together to his
own House, there to be employed in service as servants. The Nurse weeping
beyond measure for the loss of her Lady, and bemoaning her own miserable
fortune, whereinto she was now fallen with the two young Laddes; after long
lamenting, which she found utterly fruitless and to none effect, though she
was used as a servant with them, and being but a very poor woman, yet was she
wise and discreetly advised. Wherefore, comforting both her self, and them so
well as she could, and considering the depth of their disaster; she conceited
thus, that if the Children should be known, it might redounde to their greater
danger, and she be no way aduantaged thereby.

Hereupon, hoping that Fortune (early or late) would alter her stearne malice,
and that they might (if they lived) regaine once more their former condition:
she would not disclose them to any one whatsoever, till she should see the
time aptly disposed for it. Being thus determined, to all such as questioned
her concerning them, she answered that they were her own Children, Or
Grannotto da Prochyta.
naming the eldest not Geoffrey, but Iehannot de Procida. As for the youngest,
she cared not greatly for changing his name, and therefore wisely informed
Geoffrey, upon what reason she had altered his name, and what danger be might
fall into, if he should otherwise be discovered; being not satisfied with thus
telling him once, but remembering him thereof very often, which the gentle youth
(being so well instructed by the wise and careful Nurse) did very warily
observe.

The two young Laddes, very poorly garmented, but much worse hosed and shodde,
continued thus in the house of Gasparino, where both they and the Nurse were
long time employed, about very base and drudging Offices, which yet they
endured with admirable patience. But Iehannot, aged already about sixteen
years, having a loftier spirit, then belonged to a slavish servant, despising
the baseness of his servile condition; departed from the drudgery of Messer
Gasparino, and going aboard the Galleys, which were bound for Alexandria,
fortuned into many places, yet none of them affoording him any advancement. In
the end, about three or four hours after his departure from Gasparino, being
now a brave young man, and of very goodly form: he understood, that his Father
(whom he supposed to be dead) was as yet living; but in captivity, and prisoner
to King Charles. Wherefore, despairing of any successful fortune, he wandered
here and there, till he came to Lunigiana, and there (by strange accident) he
became servant to Messer Conrado Malespina, where the service proved well
liking to them both.

Very sildome times he had a sight of his Mother, because she always kept
company with Conradoes wife; and yet when they came within view of each other,
she knew not him, nor he her, so much years had altered them both, from what
they were wont to be, and when they saw each other last. Iehannot being thus in
the service of Messer Conrado, it fortuned that a daughter of his, named Spina,
being the Widow of one Messer Nicolas Grignan, returned home to her Fathers
House. Very beautiful and amiable she was, young likewise, aged but little
above sixteen; growing wonderously amorous of Iehannot, and he of her, in
extraordinary and most fervent manner; which love was not long without full
effect, continuing many mo^eths before any person could perceive it: which
making them to build on the more assurance, they began to carry their means
with less discretion, then is required in such nice cases, and which cannot be
too prouidently managed.

Upon a day, he and she walking to a goodly wood, plentifully furnished with
spreading Trees, having out-gone the rest of their company; they made choice of
a pleasant place, very daintily shaded, and beautified with all sorts of
flowers. There they spent sometime in amorous discourse, beside some other
sweet embraces, which though it seemed ouer-short to them, yet was it so
unadvisedly prolonged; that they were on a sudden surprised, first by the
Mother, and next by Messer Conrado himself: who greeuing beyond measure, to be
thus trecherously dealt withal, caused them to be apprehended by three of his
servants, and (without telling them any reason why) led bound to another
Castle of his, and fretting with extremity of rage, concluded in his mind,
that they should both shamefully be put to death.

The Mother to this regardlesse Daughter, having heard the angry words of her
Husband, and how he would be revenged on the faulty; could not endure that he
should be so severe: wherefore, although she was likewise much afflicted in
mind, and reputed her Daughter worthy (for so great an offense) of all cruel
punishment: ^yet she hasted to her displeased husband, who began to entreat,
that he would not run on in such a furious spleen, now in his aged years,
to be the murderer of his own child, and soil his hands in the blood of his
servant. Rather he might find out some mild course for the satisfaction of
his Anger, by committing them to close imprisonment, there to remain and
mourn for their folly committed. The virtuous and religious Lady alleged so
many commendable examples, and used such plenty of moving persuasions; that
she quite altered his mind, from putting them to death, and he commanded only,
that they should separately be imprisoned, with little store of food, and
lodging of the vneasiest, until he should otherwise determine of them, and so
it was done. What their life now was in captivity and continual tears, with
stricter abstinence then was needful for them; all this I must commit to your
consideration.

Iehannot and Spina remaining in this comfortless condition, and an whole
year being now out-worne, yet Conrado keeping them thus still imprisoned: it
came to pass, that Don Pedro King of Arragon, by the means of Messer John de
Procida, caused the Isle of Sicily to revolt, and took it away from King
Charles, whereat Conrado (he being of the Ghibbiline faction) not a little
rejoiced. Iehannot having intelligence thereof, by some of them that had him in
custody, breathing forth a vehement sigh, spoke in this manner. Alas poor
miserable wretch as I am! that have already gone begging through the world
above fourteen years, in expectation of nothing else but this opportunity;
and now it is come, must I be in prison, to the end, that I should never more
hope for any future happiness? And how can I get forth of this prison, except
it be by death only? How now, replied the Officer of the Guard? What does this
business of great Kings concern thee? What affairs have thou in Sicily?

Once more Iehannot sighed extremely, and returned him this answer. Me thinks
my heart (quoth he) does cleave in sunder, when I call to mind the charge
which my Father had there, for although I was but a little boy when I fled
thence: yet I can well remember, that I saw him Governor there, at such time
as King Manfred lived. The Guard, pursuing on still his purpose, demanded of
him, what, and who his Father was? My Father (replied Iehannot) I may now
securely speak of him, being out of the peril which nearly concerned me if I
had been discovered. He was the named (and so still if he be living) Henriet
Capece, and my name is Geoffrey, not Iehannot; and I make no doubt, but if I
were free from hence, and might be returned home to Sicily, I should (for his
sake) be placed in some authority.

The honest man of the Guard, without seeking after any further information; so
soon as he could compass the leisure, reported all to Messer Conrado, who
having heard these news (albeit he made no show thereof to the reuealer) went
to Madam Beritola, graciously demanding of her, if she had any son by her
husband, who was called Geoffrey. The Lady replied in tears, that if her
eldest son were as yet living, he was so named, and now aged about two and
twenty years. Conrado hearing this, imagined this same to be the man,
considering further withal, that if it fell out to prove so: he might have the
better means of mercy, and closely concealing his daughters shame, joyfully
join them in marriage together.

Hereupon he secretly caused Iehannot to be brought before him, examining him
particularly of all his passed life, and finding (by most manifest arguments)
that his name was truly Geoffrey, and he the eldest son of Henriet Capece, he
spoke to him alone in this manner. Iehannot, thou know how great the
injuries which thou have done me, and my dear daughter, gently entreating thee
(as became a good and honest servant) that thou should always have bin
respective of mine honor, and all that do appertain unto me. There are many
noble gentlewomen, who sustaining the wrog which thou have offered me, they
would have procured thy shameful death, which pity and compassion will not
suffer in me. Wherefore seeing (as thou informest me) that thou art honorably
derived both by father and mother; I will give end to all thine anguishes, even
when thy self art so pleased, releasing thee from the misery and captivity,
wherein I have so long time kept thee, and in one instant, reduce thine honor
and mine into complete perfection. As thou know, my Daughter Spina, whom
thou have embraced in kindness as a friend (although far unfitting for thee
or her) is a widow, and her marriage is both great and good; what her manners
and conditions are, thou indifferently know, and art not ignorant of her
Father and Mother: concerning thine own estate, as now I purpose not to speak
any thing. Therefore, when thou will, I am so determined, that whereas thou
have immodestly affected her, she shall become thy honest wife, and accepting
thee as my Son, to remain with me so long as you both please.

Imprisonment had somewhat misshapen Iehannot in his outward form, but not
impaired a jot of that noble spirit, really derived from his famous
progenitors, much less the true love he bare to his fair friend. And although
most earnestly he desired that, which Conrado now so franckly offered him, and
was in his power only to bestow on him; yet could he not cloud any part of
his greatness, but with a resolved judgment, thus replied. My Lord,
affectation of rule, desire of wealthy possessions, or any other matter
whatsoever, could never make me a traitor to you or yours; but that I have
loved, do love and for ever shall love your beauteous daughter; if that be
treason, I freely confess it, and will die a thousand deaths, before you or any
else shall enforce me to deny it; for I hold her highly worthy of my love. If I
have bin more vnma^nerly with her, then became me, according to the opinion of
vulgar judgment, I have committed but that error, which evermore is so
attendant upon youth; that to deny it, is to deny youth also. And if reverend
age would but remember, that once he was young, and measure others offenses by
his own; they would not be thought so great or grievous, as you (and many more)
account them to be, mine being committed as a friend, and not as an enemy: what
you make offer of so willingly to do, I have always desired, and if I had
thought it would have bin granted, long since I had most humbly requested it;
and so much the more acceptable would it have bin to me, by how much the
further off it stood from my hopes. But if you be so forward as your words do
witness, then feed me not with any further fruitless expectation: but
rather send me back to prison, and lay as many afflictions on me as you
please: for my endeared love to your Daughter Spina, makes me to love you the
more for her sake; how hardly soever you entreat me, and binds me in the
greater reverence to you, as being the father of my fairest friend.

Messer Conrado hearing these words, stood as one confounded with admiration,
reputing him to be a man of lofty spirit, and his affection most fervent to his
Daughter, which was as a little to his liking. Wherefore, embracing him, and
kissing his cheek, without any longer dallying, he sent in like manner for
his Daughter. Her restraint in prison had made her looks me ager, pale and
wanne, and very weak was she also of her person, far differing from the
woman she was wont to be, before her affection to Iehannot; there in presence
of her Father, and with free consent of either, they were contracted as man and
wife, and the espousals agreed on according to custom. Some few days after,
(without any ones knowledge of that which was done) having furnished them with
all things fit for the purpose, and time aptly serving, that the Mothers should
be partakers in this joy, he called his wife, and Madam Beritola, to whom first
he spoke in this manner.

What will you say Madam, if I cause you to see your eldest Son, not long since
married to one of my Daughters? whereunto Beritola thus replied. My Lord, I can
say nothing else unto you, but that I shall be much more obliged to you, then
already I am, and so much the rather, because you will let me see the thing
which is dearer to me then mine own life; and rendering it unto me in such
manner as you speak of, you will recall back some part of my former lost
hopes: and with these words the tears streamed abundantly from her eyes. Then
turning to his wife, he said; And you dear Love, if I show you such a Son
in Law, what will you think of it? Sir (quoth she) what pleases you, must
and shall satisfy me, be he Gentleman, or a beggar. Well said Madam, answered
Messer Conrado, I hope (within few days) to make you both joyful. So when the
amorous couple had recovered their former feature, and honorable garments were
prepared for them, privately thus he said to Geoffrey; Beyond the joy which
already thou art enriched withal, how would it please thee to meet with thine
own Mother here? I cannot believe Sir, replied Geoffrey, that her grievous
misfortunes have suffered her to live so long: yet notwithstanding, if Heaven
has been so merciful to her, my joys were incomparable, for by her gracious
counsel, I might well hope to recover no mean happiness in Sicilie. Within a
while after, both the Mothers were sent for, who were transported with
unspeakable joys, when they beheld the so lately married couple; being also
much amazed, when they could not guess what inspiration had guided Conrado to
this extraordinary benignity, joining Iehannot in marriage with Spina. Hereupon
Madam Beritola, remembering the speeches between her and Conrado, began to
observe him very advisedly, and by a hidden virtue, which long had silently
slept in her, and now with joy of spirit awaked, calling to mind the
lineatures of her Sons Infancy, without awaiting for any other
demonstrations, she folded him in her arms with earnest affection. Motherly
joy and pity now contended so violently together, that she was not able to
utter one word, the sensitive virtues being so closely combined, that (even as
dead) she fell down in the arms of her Son. And he wondering greatly
thereat, making a better recollection of his thoughts, did well remember, that
he had often before seen her in the Castle, without any other knowledge of
her. Nevertheless, by mere instinct of Nature, whose power (in such actions)
declares it self to be highly predominant; his very soul assured him, that
she was his Mother, and blaming his understanding, that he had not before
been better advised, he threw his arms about her, and wept exceedingly.

Afterward, by the loving pains of Conradoes wife, as also her daughter Spina,
Madam Beritola (being recovered from her passionate trance, and her vital
spirits executing their Offices again;) fell once more to the embracing of her
Son, kissing him infinite times, with tears and speeches of motherly
kindness, he likewise expressing the same dutiful humanity to her. Which
ceremonious courtesies being passed over and over, to no little joy in all the
beholders, beside repetition of their several misfortunes. Messer Conrado made
all known to his friends, who were very glad of this new alliance made by him,
which was honored with many solemn and magnificent feastings. Which being all
concluded, Geoffrey having found out fit place and opportunity, for conference
with his new created Father, without any sinister opposition; began as
follows.

Honorable Father, you have raised my contentment to the highest degree, and
have heaped also many gracious favors on my noble Mother; but now in the
final conclusion, that nothing may remain vneffected, which consists in
your power to perform: I would humbly entreat you, to honor my Mother with
your company, at a Feast of my making, where I would gladly also have my
Brother present. Messer Gasparino d' Oria (as I have once heretofore told you)
questing as a common Pyrate on the Seas, took us, and sent us home to his
house as slaves, where (as yet he detaineth him.) I would have you likewise
send one into Sicilie, who informing himself more amply in the state of the
Country; may understand what is become of Henriet my Father, and whether he be
living or no. If he remain alive, to know in what condition he is; and being
secretly instructed in all things, then to return back again to you.

This motion made by Geoffrey, was so pleasing to Conrado, that without any
reference to further leisure, he dispatched thence two discreet persons, the
one to Geneway, and the other to Sicilie: he which went for Geneway, having met
with Gasparino, earnestly entreated him, (on the behalf of Conrado) to send
him the Poor expelled; and his Nurse recounting every thing in order, which
Conrado had told him, concerning Geoffrey and his Mother: when Gasparino had
heard the whole discourse, he marvelled greatly thereat, and said; True it is,
that I will do any thing for Messer Conrado, which may be to his love and
liking, provided, that it lie in my power to perform; and (about some
fourteen years since) I brought such a Lad as you seek for, with his Mother
home to my house, whom I will gladly send unto him. But you may tell him from
me, that I advise him from ouer-rash crediting the fables of Iehannot, that now
terms himself by the name of Geoffrey, because he is a more wicked boy,
then he takes him to be, and so did I find him.

Having thus spoken, and giving kind welcome to the Messenger, secretly he
called the Nurse unto him, whom he heedfully examined concerning this case.
She having heard the rebellion in the Kingdom of Sicilie, and understanding
withal, that Henriet was yet living; joyfully threw off all her former fear,
relating every thing to him orderly, and the reasons moving her, to conceal
the whole business in such manner as she had done. Gasparino well perceiving,
that the report of the Nurse, and the message received from Conrado, varied not
in any one circumstance, began the better to credit her words. And being a
man most ingenious, making further inquisition into the business, by all the
possible means he could devise, and finding every thing to yield undoubted
assurance; ashamed of the vile and base usage, wherein he had so long time
kept the Ladde, and desiring (by his best means) to make him amends; he had a
fair Daughter, aged about thirteen years, and knowing what manner of man he
was, his father Henriet also yet living, he gave her to him in marriage, with a
very bountiful and honorable dowry.

The iouiall days of feasting being past, he went aboard a Galley, with the
Poor expelled; his Daughter, the Ambassador, and the Nurse, departing thence
to Lericy, where they were nobly welcomed by Messer Conrado, and his Castle
being not far from thence, with an honorable train they were conducted
thither, and entertained with all possible kindness. Now concerning the
comfort of the Mother, meeting so happily with both her Sons, the joy of the
Brethren and Mother together, having also found the faithful Nurse, Gasparino
and his Daughter, in company now with Conrado and his Wife, friends, familiars,
and all generally in a Iubilee of rejoicing: it exceeds capacity in me to
express it; and therefore I refer it to your more able imagination.

In the time of this mutual contentment, to the end that nothing might be
wanting, to complete and perfect this universal joy; our Lord, a most
abundant bestower where he begins, added long wished tidings, concerning
the life and good estate of Henriet Capece. For, even as they were feasting,
and the concourse great of worthy guests, both of Lords and Ladies: the first
service was scarcely set on the Tables, but the Ambassador which was sent to
Sicilie, arrived there before them. Among many other important matters, he
spoke of Henriet, who being so long a time detained in prison by King Charles,
when the commotion arose in the City against the King; the people (grudging at
Henriets long imprisonment) slew the Guards, and set him at liberty. Then as
capital enemy to King Charles, he was created Captain general, following the
chase, and killing the French.

By means whereof, he grew great in the grace of King Pedro, who replanted him
in all the goods and honors which he had before, with very high and eminent
authority. Hereunto the Ambassador added, that he was entertained with
extraordinary grace, and delivery of public joy and exaltation, when his Wife
and Son were known to be living, of whom no tidings had at any time been
heard, since the hour of his surprizall. Moreover, that a swift winged Bark
was now sent thither (upon the happy hearing of this news) well furnished with
noble Gentlemen, to attend till their returning back. We need to make no
doubt concerning the tidings brought by this Ambassador, nor of the Gentlemen's
welcome, thus sent to Madam Beritola and Geoffrey; who before they would sit
down at the Table, saluted Messer Conrado and his kind Lady (on the behalf
of Henriet) for all the great graces extended to her and her Son, with
promise of any thing, lying in the power of Henriet, to rest continually at
their command. The like they did to Signior Gasparino, (whose liberal favors
came unlooked for) with certain assurance, that when Henriet should understand
what he had done for his other Son, the Poor expelled; there would be no
defailance of riciprocall courtesies.

As the longest joys have no perpetuity of lasting, so all these graceful
ceremonies had their conclusion, with as many sighs and tears at parting, as
joys abounded at their first encountering. Imagine then, that you see such
aboard, as were to have here no longer abiding, Madam Beritola and Geoffrey,
with the rest, as the Poor expelled, the so late married Wives, and the
faithful Nurse bearing them company. With prosperous winds they arrived in
Sicilie, where the Wife, Sons, and Daughters, were joyfully met by Henriet at
Palermo, and with such honorable pomp, as a case so important equally
deserved. The Histories make further mention, that there they lived (a long
while after) in much felicity, with thankful hearts (no doubt) to Heaven, in
acknowledgement of so many great mercies received.

The Sultan of Babylon sent one of his Daughters, to be joined in marriage with
the King of Cholcos; who by diverse accidents (in the space of four years)
happened into the custody of nine men, and in sundry places. At length being
restored back to her Father, she went to the said King of Cholcos, as a
Maid, and as at first she was intended to be his wife.

The seventh Novel.
Aliuely demonstration, that the beauty of a Woman, (oftentimes) is very
hurtful to her self, and the occasion of many evils, yea, and of death, to
diverse men.

Peradventure the Novel related by Madam Aemilia, did not extend it self so
far in length, as it moved compassion in the Ladies minds, hearing the hard
fortunes of Beritola and her Children, which had incited them to weeping: but
that it pleased the Queen (upon the Tales conclusion) to command Pamphilus, to
follow (next in order) with his discourse, and he being thereto very obedient,
began in this manner.



It is a matter of no mean difficulty (virtuous Ladies) for us to take entire
knowledge of every thing we do, because (as oftentimes has been observed)
many men, imagining if they were rich, they should live securely, and without
any cares. And therefore, not only have their prayers and intercessions aimed
at that end, but also their studies and daily endeauours, without refusal of
any pains or perils have not meanly expressed their hourly solicitude. And
although it has happened accordingly to them, and their covetous desires fully
accomplished; yet at length they have met with such kind of people, who
likewise thirsting after their wealthy possessions, have bereft them of life,
being their kind and intimate friends, before they attained to such riches.
Some other, being of low and base condition, by aduenturing in many skirmishes
and foughten battles, trampling in the blood of their brethren and friends,
have been mounted to the sovereign dignity of Kingdoms, (believing that
therein consisted the truest happiness) but bought with the dearest price of
their lives. For, beside their infinite cares and fears, wherewith such
greatness is continually attended, at their royal Tables, they have drunk
poison in a golden pot. Many other in like manner (with most earnest appetite)
have coueted beauty and bodily strength, not foreseeing with any judgment,
that these wishes were not without peril; when being endued with them, they
either have been the occasion of their death, or such a lingering lamentable
estate of life, as death were a thousand times more welcome to them.

But because I would not speak particularly of all our frail and humane
affections, I dare assure ye, that there is not any one of these desires, to be
elected among us mortals, with entire foresight or providence, warrantable
against their ominous issue. Wherefore, if we would walk directly, we should
dispose our wills and affections, to be ordered and guided only by him, who
best knows what is needful for us, and will bestow them at his good
pleasure. Nor let me lay this blamefull imputation upon men only, for
offending in many things through over lavish desires: because you your selves
(gracious Ladies) sin highly in one, as namely, in coveting to be beautiful.
So that it is not sufficient for you, to enjoy those beauties bestowne on you
by Nature: but you practice to increase them, by the rarities of Art.
Wherefore, let it not offend you, that I tell you the hard fortune of a fair
Sarrazines, to whom it happened (by strange adventures) within the compass of
four years, nine several times to be married, and only for her beauty.

It is now a long time since, that there lived a Soldane in Babylon, named
Beminidab, to whom (while he lived) many things happened, answerable to his
own desires. Among diverse other children both male and female, he had a
daughter, called Alathiella, and she (according to the common voice of every
one that saw her) was the fairest Lady then living in all the world. And
because the King of Cholcos had wonderfully assisted him, in a valiant foughten
battle, against a mighty Army of Arabes, who on a sudden had assailed him:
he demanded his fair daughter in marriage, which likewise was badly granted
to him. A goodly and well armed Ship was prepared for her, with full
furnishment of all necessary provision, and accompanied with an honorable
train, both Lords and Ladies, as also most costly and sumptuous
accoustrements; commending her to the mercy of heaven, in this manner was she
sent away.

The time being propitious for their parting thence, the Mariners hoised their
sails, leaving the part of Alexandria, and sailing prosperously many days
together. When they had past the Country of Sardignia, and (as they imagined)
were well near to their iourneyes end: suddenly arose boisterous and contrary
winds, which were so impetuous beyond all measure, and so tormented the Ship
wherein the Lady was; that the Mariners, seeing no sign of comfort, gave over
all hope of escaping with life. Nevertheless, as men most expert in implacable
dangers, they labored to their uttermost power, and contended with infinite
blustering tempests, for the space of two days and nights together, hoping the
third day would prove more favorable. But therein they saw themselves
deceived, for the violence continued still, increasing in the night time more
and more, being no way able to comprehend, either where they were, or what
course they took, neither by mariuall judgment, or any apprehension else
whatsoever, the heavens were so clouded, and the nights darkness so ext^eame.

Being (unknown to them) near the Isle of Maiorica, they felt the Ship to
split in the bottom, by means whereof, perceiving now no hope of escaping
(every one caring for himself, and not any other) they threw forth a Squiffe
on the troubled waves, reposing more confidence of safety that way, then
abiding any longer in the broken Ship. Howbeit, such as were first descended
down, made stout resistance against all other followers, with their drawn
weapons: but safety of life so far prevailed, that what with the tempests
violence, and ouer-lading of the Squiffe, it sunk to the bottom, and all
perished that were therein. The The Ship being thus split, and more then half
full of water, tossed and tormented by the blustering winds, first one way, and
then another: was at last driven into a strand of the Isle Maiorica, no other
persons remaining therein, but only the Lady and her women, all of them
(through the rude tempest, and their own conceived fear) lying still, as if
they were more then half dead. And there, within a stones cast of the
neighboring shore, the Ship (by the rough surging billows) was fixed fast in
the sands, and so continued all the rest of the night, without any further
molestation of the winds.

When day appeared, and the violent storms were more mildly appeased, the
Lady, who seemed well near dead, lifted up her head, and began (weak as she
was) to call first one, and then another: but she called in vain, for such as
she named were far enough from her. Wherefore, hearing no answer, nor seeing
any one, she wondered greatly, her fears increasing then more and more.
Raising her self so well as she could, she beheld the Ladies that were of her
company, and some other of her women, lying still without any stirring:
whereupon, first iogging one, and then another, and calling them severally by
their names; she found them bereft of understanding, and even as if they were
dead, their hearts were so quailed, and their fear so ouer-ruling, which was
no mean dismay to the poor Lady her self. Nevertheless, necessity now being
her best counsailour, seeing her self thus all alone, and not knowing in what
place she was, she used such means to them that were living, that (at the
last) they came better to knowledge of themselves, And being unable to guess,
what was become of the men and Mariners, seeing the Ship also driven on the
sands, and filled with water: she began (with them) to lament most grievously,
and now it was about the hour of midday, before they could descry any person
on the shore, or any else to pity them in so urgent a necessity.

At length, noone being past, a Gentlewoman, named Baiazeth, attended by diverse
of his followers on horseback, and returning from a Country house belonging to
him, chanced to ride by on the sands. Upon sight of the Ship lying in that
case, he imagined truly what had happened, and commanded one of his men to
enter aboard it, which (with some difficulty) he did, to resolve his Lord what
remained therein. There he found the fair young Lady, with such small store
of company as was left her, fearfully hidden under the prow of the Ship. So
soon as they saw him, they held up their hands, woefully desiring mercy of him:
but he perceiving their lamentable condition, and that he understood not what
they said to them; their affliction grew the greater, laboring by signs and
gestures, to give them knowledge of their misfortune.

The servant, gathering what he could by their outward behavior, declared to
his Lord, what he had seen in the Ship: who caused the women to be brought on
shore, and all the precious things remaining with them, conducting them with
him to a place not far off, where, with food and warmth he gave them
comfort. By the rich garments which the Lady was clothed withal, he reputed
her to be a Gentlewomen well derived, as the great reverence done to her by the
rest, gave him good reason to conceive. And although her looks were pale and
wan, as also her person mightily altered, by the tempestuous violence of the
Sea: yet notwithstanding, she appeared fair and lovely in the eye of Baiazeth,
whereupon forthwith he determined, that if she were not married, he would enjoy
her as his own in marriage, or if he could not win her to be his wife, yet
(at the least) she should be his friend, because she remained now in his
power.

Baiazeth was a man of stern looks, rough and harsh both in speech and
behavior: yet causing the Lady to be honorably used diverse days together,
she became thereby well comforted and recovered. And seeing her beauty to
exceed all comparison, he was afflicted beyond measure, that he could not
understand her, nor she him, whereby he could not know, of whence or what she
was. His amorous flames increasing more and more; by kind, courteous, and
affable actions, he labored to compass what he aimed at. But all his
endeavor proved to no purpose, for she refused all familiar priuacie with
him, which so much the more kindled the fury of his fire. This being well
observed by the Lady, having now remained there a month and more, and
collecting by the customs of the Country, that she was among Turks, and in
such a place, where although she were known, yet it would little advantage
her, beside, that long protraction of time would provoke Baiazeth, by fair
means or force to obtain his will: she propounded to her self (with
magnanimity of spirit) to tread all misfortunes under her feet, commanding
her women (whereof she had but three now remaining alive) that they should
not disclose what she was; except it were in some such place, where manifest
signs might yield hope of regaining their liberty. Moreover, she admonished
them, stoutly to defend their honor and chastity, affirming, that she had
absolutely resolved with her self, that never any other should enjoy her, but
her intended husband; wherein her women did much commend her, promising to
preserve their reputation, according as she had commanded.

Day by day were the torments of Baiazeth, wonderfully augmented, yet still
his kind offers scornefully refused, and he as far off from compassing his
desires, as when he first began to move the matter: wherefore, perceiving
that all fair courses served to no effect, he resolved to compass his
purpose by craft and subtilty, reserving rigorous extremity for his final
conclusion. And having once observed, that wine was very pleasing to the Lady,
she being never used to drink any at all, because (by her Countries law) it
was forbidden her, and no mean store having been lately brought to Baiazeth
in a Bark of Geneway: he resolved to surprise her by means thereof, as a
chief Minister of Venus, to heat the coolest blood. And seeming now in his
outward behavior, as if he had given over his amorous pursuit, and which she
strove by all her best endeauours to withstand: one night, after a very
maiestick and solemn manner, he prepared a delicate and sumptuous supper,
whereto the Lady was invited: and he had given order, that he who attended on
her Cup, should serve her with many wines compounded and mingled together,
which he accordingly performed, as being cunning enough in such occasions.

Alothiella, instructing no such treachery intended against her, and liking the
wines pleasing taste extraordinarily; drank more then stood with with her
precedent modest resolution, and forgetting all her passed adversities, became
very frollick and merry: so that seeing some women dance after the manner
observed therein Maiorica, she also fell to dancing, according to the
Alexandrian custom. Which when Baiazeth beheld, he imagined the victory to be
more then half wone, and his hearts desire very near the obtaining: plying
her still with wine upon wine, and continuing this reuelling the most part of
the night. At the length, the invited guests being all gone, the Lady retired
then to her chamber, attended on by none but Baiazeth himself, and as
familiarly, as if he had been one of her women, she no way contradicting his
bold intrusion, so fair had wine ouer-gone her senses, and prevailed against
all modest bashfulnesse. These wanton embracings, strange to her that had never
tasted them before, yet pleasing beyond measure, by reason of his treacherous
advantage: afterward drew on many more of the like carowsing meetings, without
so much as a thought of her passed miseries, or those more honorable and
chaste respects, that ever ought to attend on Ladies.

Now, Fortune envying these their stolen pleasures, and that she, being the
purposed wife of a potent King, should thus become the wanton friend of a much
meaner man, whose only glory was her shame: altered the course of their too
common pastimes, by preparing a far greater infelicity for them. This
Baiazeth had a Brother, aged about five and twenty years, of most complete
person, in the very beauty of his time, and fresh as the sweetest smelling
Rose, he being named Amurath. After he had once seen this Lady (whose fair
feature pleased him beyond all women's else) she seemed in his sudden
apprehension, both by her outward behavior and civil apparancie, highly to
deserve his very best opinion, for she was not meanly entered into his favor.
Now he found nothing to his hinderance, in obtaining the height of his hearts
desire, but only the strict custody and guard, wherein his brother Baiazeth
kept her: which raised a cruel conceit in his mind, whereon followed (not
long after) as cruel an effect.

It came to pass, that at the same time, in the Port of the City, called
Caffa, there lay then a Ship laden with Merchandise, being bound thence for
Sm^r^^, of which Ship two Geneway Merchants (being brethren) were the Patrones
and owners, who had given direction for hoysing the sails, to depart thence
when the wind should serve. With these two Genewayes Amarath had couenanted,
for himself to go abord the Ship the night ensuing, and the Lady in his
company. When night was come, having resolved with himself what was to be
done: in a disguised habit he went to the house of Baiazeth, who stood not
any way doubtful of him, and with certain of his most faithful confederates
(whom he had sworn to the intended action) they hid themselves closely in the
house. After some part of the night was ouer-past, he knowing the several
lodgings both of Baiazeth and Alathiella: slew his brother soundly sleeping,
and seizing on the Lady, whom he found awake and weeping, threatened to kill
her also, if she made any noise. So, being well furnished, with the greater
part of costly Jewels belonging to Baiazeth, unheard or vndescried by any body,
they went presently to the Port, and there, without any further delay, Amurath
and the Lady were received into the Ship, but his companions returned back
again; when the Mariners, having their sails ready set, and the wind aptly
fitting for them, launched forth merrily into the maine.

You may well imagine, that the Lady was extraordinarily afflicted with grief
for her first misfortune, and now this second chancing so suddenly, must
needs offend her in greater manner: but Amurath did so kindly comfort her,
with mild, modest, and manly persuasions; that all remembrance of Baiazeth was
quickly forgotten, and she became converted to lovely demeanor, even when
Fortune prepared a fresh misery for her, as not satisfied with those whereof
she had tasted already. The Lady being enriched with vnequalled beauty (as we
have often related before) her behavior also in such exquisite and commendable
kind expressed: the two brethren, owners of the Ship, became so deeply
enamoured of her, that forgetting all their more serious affairs, they studied
by all possible means, to be pleasing and gracious in her eye, yet with such a
careful carriage, that Amurath should neither see or suspect it.

When the brethren had imparted their loves extremity each to the other, and
plainly perceived, that though they were equally in their fiery torments, yet
their desires were utterly contrary: they began severally to consider, that
gain gotten by Merchandise, admitted an equal and honest division, but this
purchase was of a different quality, pleading the title of a sole possession,
without any partner or intruder. Fearful and jealous were they both, least
either should aim at the others intention, yet willing enough to shake hands,
in ridding Amurath out of the way, who only was the hinderer of their hopes.
Whereupon they concluded together, that on a day, when the Ship sailed on very
swiftly, and Amurath was sitting upon the deck, studiously observing, how the
billows combatted each with other, and not suspecting any such treason in them
toward him: stealing softly behind him, suddenly they threw him into the
Sea, the Ship fleeting on above half a leagues distance, before any perceived
his fall into the Sea.

When the Lady heard thereof, and saw no likely means of recovering him
again, she fell to her wonted tears and lamentations: but the two Lovers came
quickly to comfort her, using kind words and pithie persuasions (albeit she
understood them not, or at the most very little) to appease the violence of her
passions; and, to speak uprightly, she did not so much bemoane the loss of
Amurath, as the multiplying of her own misfortunes, still one succeeding in
the neck of another. After diverse long and well delivered Orations, as also
very fair and courteous behavior, they had indifferently pacified her
complaynings: they began to discourse and commune with themselves, which of
them had most right and title to Alathiella, and (consequently) ought to enjoy
her. Now that Amurath was gone, each pleaded his privilege to be as good as
the others, both in the Ship, goods, and all advantages else whatsoever
happening: which the elder brother absolutely denied, alleging first his
propriety of birth, a reason sufficient, whereby his younger ought to give him
place; likewise his right and interest both in ship and goods, to be more then
the others, as being heir to his Father, and therefore in justice to be
highest preferred. Last of all, that his strength only threw Amurath into the
Sea, and therefore gave him the full possession of his prize, no right at all
remaining to his brother.

From temperate and calm speeches, they fell to frowns and ruder language,
which heated their blood in such violent manner, that forgetting brotherly
affection, and all respect of Parents or friends, they drew forth their
Poniards, stabbing each other so often and desperately, that before any in the
ship had the power or means to part them, both of them being very
dangerously wounded, the younger brother fell down dead* the elder being in
little better case, by receiving so many perilous hurts, remained
(nevertheless) living. This unhappy accident displeased the Lady very highly,
seeing her self thus left alone, without the help or counsel of any body, and
fearing greatly, least the anger of the two Brethrens Parents and Friends,
should now be laid to her charge, and thereon follow seueriry of punishment.
But the earnest entreaties of the wounded suruiuer, and their arrival at
Smirna soon after, delivered him from the danger of death, gave some ease to
her sorrow, and there with him she went on shore.

Remaining there with him in a common Inn, while he continued in the
Chirurgians cure, the fame of her singular and much admired beauty was soon
spread abroad throughout all the City; and amongst the rest, to the hearing of
the Prince of Ionia, who lately before (on very urgent occasions) was come to
Smirna. This rare rumor, made him desirous to see her, and after he had seen
her, she seemed far fairer in his eye, then common report had noysed her to
be, and suddenly grew so enamored of her, that she was the only Idea of his
best desires. Afterward, understanding in what manner she was brought thither,
he devised how to make her his own; practicing all possible means to
accomplish it: which when the wounded brothers Parents heard of, they not only
made tender of their willingness therein, but also immediately sent her to
him: a matter most highly pleasing to the Prince, and likewise to the Lady her
self; because she thought now to be freed from no mean peril, which
(otherwise) the wounded Merchants friends might have inflicted on her.

The Prince perceiving, that beside her matchless beauty, she had the true
character of royal behavior; grieved the more, that he could not be further
informed of what Country she was. His opinion being so steadfastly grounded,
that (less then Noble) she could not be, was a motive to set a keener edge on
his affection toward her, yet not to enjoy her as in honorable and loving
complement only, but as his espoused Lady and Wife. Which appearing to her by
apparent demonstrations, though intercourse of speech wanted to confirm it;
remembrance of her so many sad disasters, and being now in a most noble and
respected condition, her comfort enlarged it self with a settled hope, her
fears grew free from any more molestations, and her beauties became the only
theme and argument of private and public conference in all Natolia, that
(welneere) there was no other discourse, in any Assembly whatsoever.

Hereupon the Duke of Athens, being young, goodly, and valiant of person, as
also a near Kinsman to the Prince, had a desire to see her; and under color
of visiting his noble Kinsman, (as oftentimes before he had done) attended with
an honorable train, to Smirna he came, being there most royally welcomed,
and bounteously feasted. Within some few days of his there being, conference
passed between them, concerning the rare beauty of the Lady; the Duke
questioning the Prince, whether she was of such wonder, as fame had acquainted
the World withal? Whereto the Prince replied; Much more (noble Kinsman) then
can be spoken of, as your own eyes shall witness, without crediting any words
of mine. The Duke soliciting the Duke thereto very earnestly, they both went
together to see her; and she having before heard of their coming, adorned her
self the more maiestically, entertaining them with ceremonious demeanor (after
her Countries custom) which gave most gracious and unspeakable acceptance.

At the Princes affable motion, she sat down between them, their delight
being beyond expression, to behold her, but abridged of much more felicity,
because they understood not any part of her language: so that they could have
no other conference, but by looks and outward signs only; and the more they
beheld her, the more they marvelled at her rare perfections, especially the
Duke, who hardly credited that she was a mortal creature. Thus not
perceiving, what deep carowses of amorous poison, his eyes drank down by the
mere sight of her, yet thinking thereby only to be satisfied; he lost both
himself and his best senses, growing in love (beyond all measure) with her.
When the Prince and he were parted from her, and he was at his own private
amorous meditations in his Chamber; he reputed the Prince far happier then any
man else whatsoever, by the enjoying of such a peerless beauty.

After many intricate and distracted cogitations, which molested his brains
incessantly, regarding more his loves wanton heat, then reason, kindred, and
honorable hospitality; he resolutely determined (whatsoever ensued thereupon)
to bereave the Prince of his fair felicity, that none but himself might
possess such a treasure, which he esteemed to be the height of all happiness.
His courage being conformable to his bad intent, with all have it must be put
in execution; so that equity, justice, and honesty, being quite abandoned,
nothing but subtle stratagems were now his meditations. On a day, according to
a fore compacted treachery, which he had ordered with a Gentleman of the
Princes Chamber, who was named Churiacy; he prepared his horses to be in
readiness, and dispatched all his affairs else for a sudden departure. The
night following, he was secretly conveyed by the said Churiacy, and a friend of
his with him (being both armed) into the Princes Chamber, where he (while the
Lady was soundly sleeping) stood at a gazing window toward the Sea, naked in
his shirt, to take the cool air, because the season was exceeding hot. Having
formerly enstructed his friend what was to be done, very softly they stepped to
the Prince, and running their weapons quite through his body, immediately they
threw him forth of the window.

Here you are to observe, that the Palace was seated on the Sea shore, and
very high, and the window whereat the Prince then stood looking forth, was
directly over diverse houses, which the long continuance of time, and incessant
beating on by the surges of the Sea, had so defaced and ruined them, as sildome
they were visited by any person; whereof the Duke having knowledge before, was
the easier persuaded, that the falling of the Princes body in so vaste a place,
could neither be heard, or descried by any. The Duke and his companion having
thus executed what they came for, proceeded yet in their cunning a little
further; casting a strangling coard about the neck of Churiacy, seeming as if
they hugged and embraced him: but drew it with so maine strength, that he never
spoke one word after, and so threw him down after the Prince.

This done, and plainly perceiving that they were not heard or seen, either
by the Lady, or any other: the Duke took a light in his hand, going on to the
bed, where the Lady lay most sweetly sleeping; whom the more he beheld, the
more he admired and commended: but if in her garments she appeared so
pleasing, what did she now in a bed of such state and Majesty? Being no way
daunted by his so late committed sin, but swimming rather in surfeit of joy,
his hands all bloody, and his soul much more ugly; he laid him down on the
bed by her, bestowing infinite kisses and embraces on her, she supposing him to
be the Prince all this while, no^ opening her eyes to be otherwise resolved.
But this was not the delight he aimed at, neither did he think it safe for
him, to delay time with any longer tarying there: wherefore having his agents
at hand fit and convenient for the purpose, they surprised her in such sort,
that she could not make any noise or outcry, and carrying her thorough the same
false posterne, whereat themselves had entered, laying her in a Princely litter;
away they went with all possible speed, not tarrying in any place, until they
were arrived near Athens. But thither he would not bring her, because
himself was a married man, but rather to a goodly Castle of his own, not
distant far off from the City; where he caused her to be kept very secretly
(to her no little grief and sorrow) yet attended on and served in most
honorable manner.

The Gentlemen usually attending on the Prince, having waited all the next
morning till noone, in expectation of his rising, and hearing no stirring in
the Chamber: did thrust at the door, which was but only closed together, and
finding no body there, they presently imagined, that he was privately gone to
some other place, where (with the Lady, whom he so dearly affected) he might
remain some few days for his more contentment, and so they rested verily
persuaded. Within some few days following, while no other doubt came in
question, the Princes Fool, entering by chance among the ruined houses, where
lay the dead bodies of the Prince and Churicy: took hold of the cord about
Churiacyes neck, and so went along dragging it after him. The body being
known to many, with no mean marvel, how he should be murdered in so vile
manner: by gifts and fair persuasions they won him, to bring them to the
place where he found it. And there (to the no little grief of all the City)
they found the Princes body also, which they caused to be interred with all
the most maiesticke pomp that might be.

Upon further inquisition, who should commit so horrid a deed, perceiving
likewise, that the Duke of Athens was not to be found, but was closely gone:
they judged (according to the truth) that he had his hand in this bloody
business, and had carried away the Lady with him. Immediately, they elected
the Princes brother to be their Lord and Sovereign, inciting him to revenge
so horrid a wrong, and promising to assist him with their utmost power. The new
chosen Prince being assured afterward, by other more apparent and remarkable
proofs, that his people informed him with nothing but truth: suddenly, and
according as they had concluded, with the help of neighbors, kindred, and
friends, collected from diverse places; he mustred a goodly and powerful army,
marching on toward Athens, to make war against the Duke.

No sooner heard he of this warlike preparation made against him, but he
likewise levied forces for his own defense, and to his succor came many great
States: among whom, the Emperor of Constantinople sent his Son Constantine,
attended on by his Nephew Emanuell, with troops of fair and towardly horse,
who were most honorably welcomed and entertained by the Duke, but much more
by the Duchess, because she was their sister in law.

Military provision thus proceeding on daily more and more, the Duchess making
choice of a fit and convenient hour, took these two Princes with her to a
withdrawing Chamber; and there in floods of tears flowing from her eyes,
wringing her hands, and sighing incessantly, she recounted the whole History,
occasion of the war, and how dishonourably the Duke had dealt with her about
this strange woman, whom he purposed to keep in despite of her, as thinking
that she knew nothing thereof, and complaining very earnestly unto them,
entreated that for the Dukes honor, and her comfort, they would give their
best assistance in this case.

The two young Lords knew all this matter, before she thus reported it to
them; and therefore, without staying to listen her any longer, but comforting
her so well as they could, with promise of their best employed pains: being
informed by her, in what place the Lady was so closely kept, they took their
leave, and parted from her. Often they had heard the Lady much commended, and
her incomparable beauty highly extolled, yea, even by the Duke himself; which
made them the more desirous to see her: wherefore earnestly they solicited him,
to let them have a sight of her, and he (forgetting what happened to the
Prince, by showing her so unadvisedly to him) made them promise to grant their
request Causing a magnificent dinner to be prepared, and in a goodly garden, at
the Castle where the Lady was kept: on the morrow morning, attended on by a
small train, away they rode to dine with her.

Constantine being seated at the Table, he began (as one confounded with
admiration) to observe her iudiciously, affirming secretly to his soul that he
had never seen so complete a woman before; and allowing it for justice, that
the Duke, or any other whosoever, if (to enjoy so rare a beauty) they had
committed treason, or any mischief else beside, yet in reason they ought to be
held excused. Nor did he bestow so many looks upon her, but his praises
infinitely surpassed them, as thinking that he could not sufficiently commend
her, following the Duke step by step in affection: for being now grown amorous
of her, and remembrance of the intended war utterly abandoned; no other
thoughts could come nearer him, but how to bereave the Duke of her, yet
concealing his love, and not imparting it to any one.

While his fancies were thus amorously set on fire, the time came, that they
must make head against the Prince, who already was marching within the Dukes
Dominions: wherefore the Duke Constantine, and all the rest, according to a
counsel held among them, went to defend certain of the frontiers, to the end
that the Prince might pass no further. Remaining there diverse days together,
Constantine, who could think on nothing else, but the beautiful Lady,
considered with himself, that while the Duke was not so far off from her, it
was an easy matter to compass his intent: hereupon, the better to color his
present return to Athens, he seemed to be surprised with a sudden extreme
sickness, in regard whereof (by the Dukes free lisence, and leaving all his
power to his Cosen Emanuel) forthwith he iourneyed back to Athens. After some
conference bad with his sister, concerning her dishonorable wrongs endured at
his hands only by the Lady: he solemnly protested, that if she were so
pleased, he would aid her powerfully in the matter, by taking her from the
place where she was, and never more afterward, to be seen in that Country any
more.

The Duchess being faithfully persuaded, that he would do this only for her
sake, and not in any affection he bare to the Lady, made answer that it highly
pleased her; always provided, that it might be performed in such sort, as the
Duke her Husband should never understand, that ever she gave any consent
thereto, which Constantine swear unto her by many deep oaths, whereby she
referred all to his own disposition. Constanstine hereupon secretly prepared
in readiness a subtle Bark, sending it (in an evening) near to the garden
where the Lady resorted; having first informed the people which were in it,
fully in the business that was to be done. Afterward, accompanied with some
other of his attendants, he went to the Palace to the Lady, where he was
gladly entertained, not only by such as waited on her, but also by the Lady her
self.

Leading her along by the arm toward the Garden, attended on by two of her
servants, and two of his own, seeming as if he was sent from the Duke, to
confer with her: they walked alone to a Port opening on the Sea, which
standing ready open, upon a sign given by him to one of his accomplices, the
Bark was brought close to the shore, and the Lady being suddenly seized on,
was immediately conveyed into it; and he returning back to her people, with
his sword drawn in his hand, said: Let no man stir^e, or speak a word,
except he be willing to loose his life: for I intend not to rob the Duke of his
fair friend, but to expel the shame and dishonor which he has offered to my
Sister, no one being so hardy as to return him any answer. Aboard went
Constantine with his consorts, and sitting near to the Lady, who wrung her
hands, and wept bitterly; he commanded the Mariners to launch forth, flying
away on the wings of the wind, till about the break of day following, they
arrived at Melasso. There they took landing, and reposed on shore for some few
days, Constantine laboring to comfort the Lady, even as if she had been his
own Sister, she having good cause to curse her unfortunate beauty.

Going aboard the Bark again, within few days they came to Setalia, and
there fearing the reprehension of his Father, and least the Lady should be
taken from him; it pleased Constantine to make his stay, as in a place of no
mean security. And (as before) after much kind behavior used toward the
Lady, without any means in her self to redress the least of all these great
extremities: she became more mild and affable, for coffeehouse did not a
jot quail her.

While occurrences passed on in this manner, it fortuned, that Osbech the King
of Turkey (who was in continual war with the Emperor) came by accident to
Laiazzo: and hearing there how lasciuiously Constantine spent his time in
Setalia, with a Lady which he had stolen, being but weak and slenderly
guarded; in the night with certain well provided ships, his men and he entered
the Town, and surprised many people in their beds, before they knew of their
enemies coming, killing such as stood upon their defense against them, (among
whom was Constantine) and burning the whole Town, brought their booty and
prisoners aboard their ships, wherewith they returned back to Laiazzo. Being
thus come to Laiazzo, Osbech, who was a brave and gallant young man, upon a
reuiew of the pillage; found the fair Lady, whom he knew to be the beloved of
Constantine, because she was found lying on his bed. Without any further
delay, he made choice of her to be his Wife; causing his nuptials to be
honorably sollemnized, and many months he lived there in great joy with her.

But before occasions grew to this effect, the Emperor made a confederacy with
Bassano, King of Cappadocia, that he should descend with his forces, one way
upon Osbech, and he would assault him with his power on the other. But he
could not so conveniently bring this to pass, because the Emperor would not
yield to Bassano, in any unreasonable matter he demanded. Nevertheless, when
he understood what had happened to his Son (for whom his grief was beyond all
measure) he granted the King of Cappadociaes request, soliciting him withal
instancy, to be the more speedy in assailing Osbech. It was not long, before
he heard of this coniuration made against him; and therefore speedily mustered
up all his forces, ere he would be encompassed by two such potent Kings, and
marched on to meet the King of Cappadocia, leaving his Lady and Wife, (for her
safety) at Laiazzo, in the custody of a true and loyal servant of his.

Within a short while after, he drew near the Camp belonging to the King of
Cappadocia, where boldly he gave him battle; chancing therein to be slain,
his Army broken and discomfited, by means whereof the King of Cappadocia
remaining Conqueror, marched on toward Laiazzo, every one yielding him
obeisance all the way as he went. In the mean space, the servant to Osbech,
who was named Antiochus, and with whom the fair Lady was left in guard;
although he was aged, yet seeing she was so extraordinarily beautiful, he
fell in love with her, forgetting the sollemne vows he had made to his Master.
One happiness he had in this case to help him, namely, that he understood
and could speak her language, a matter of no mean comfort to her; who
constrainedly had lived diverse years together, in the state of a deaf or
dumb woman, because every where else they understood her not, nor she them,
but by shows and signs.

This benefit of familiar conference, began to embolden his hopes, eleuate
his courage, and make him seem more youthful in his own opinion, then any
ability of body could speak unto him, or promise him in the possession of her,
who was so far beyond him, and so unequal to be enjoyed by him; yet to
advance his hopes a great deal higher, news came, that Osbech was vanquished
and slain, and that Bassano made every where havoc of all: whereon they
concluded together, not to tarry there any longer, but storing themselves with
the goods of Osbech, secretly they departed thence to Rhodes. Being seated
there in some indifferent abiding, it came to pass, that Antiochus fell into a
deadly sickness, to whom came a Cyprian Merchant, one much esteemed by him, as
being an intimate friend and kind acquaintance, and in whom he reposed no
small confidence. Feeling his sickness to increase more and more upon him
daily, he determined, not only to leave such wealth as he had to this
Merchant, but the fair Lady likewise; and calling them both to his beds side,
he brake his mind unto them in this manner.

Dear Love, and my most worthily respected friend, I perceive plainly and
infallibly, that I am drawing near unto my end, which much discontenteth me;
because my hope was, to have lived longer in this world, for the enjoying of
your kind and most esteemed company. Yet one thing makes my death very
pleasing and welcome to me, namely, that lying thus in my bed of latest comfort
in this life: I shall expire and finish my course, in the arms of those two
persons, whom I most affected in all this world, as you my ever dearest friend,
and you fair Lady, whom (since the very first sight of you) I loved and
honored in my soul. Irksome and very grievous it is to me, that (if I dye) I
shall leave you here a stranger, without the counsel and help of any body:
and yet much more offensive would it become, if I had not such a friend as you
here present, who I am faithfully persuaded, will have the like care and
respect of her (even for my sake) as of my self, if time had allotted my
longer tarying here. And therefore (worthy friend) most earnestly I desire you,
that if I dye, all mine affairs and she may remain to your trusty care, as
being (by my self) absolutely commended to your providence, and so to dispose
both of the one and other, as may best agree with the comfort of my soul. As
for you (choice beauty) I humbly entreat, that after my death you would not
forget me, to the end, I may make my vaunt in another world, that I was
affected here, by the only fairest Lady that ever Nature framed. If of these
two things you will give me assurance; I shall depart from you with no mean
comfort.

The friendly Merchant, and likewise the Lady, hearing these words, wept both
bitterly, and after he had given over speaking: kindly they comforted him,
with promise and solemn vows, that if he dyed, all should be performed which
he had requested. Within a short while after, he departed out of this life, and
they gave him very honorable burial, according to that Country custom. Which
being done, the Merchant dispatching all his affairs at Rhodes, was desirous
to return home to Cyprus, in a Carrack of the Catelans then there being:
moving the Lady in the matter, to understand how she stood inclined, because
urgent occasions called him thence to Cyprus. The Lady made answer, that she
was willing to pass thither with him, hoping for the love he bare to deceased
Antiochus, that he would respect her as his Sister. The Merchant was willing to
give her any contentment, but yet resolved her, that under the title of being
his Sister, it would be no warrant of security to them both; wherefore he
rather advised her, to style him as her husband, and he would term her his
wife, and so he should be sure to defend her from all injuries whatsoever.

Being abord the Carrack, they had a Cabine and small bed conveniently allowed
them, where they slept together, that they might the better be reputed as man
and wife; for, to pass otherwise, would have been very dangerous to them
both. And questionless, their faithful promise made at Rhodes to Antiochus,
sickness on the Sea, and mutual respect they had of each others credit, was a
constant restraint to all wanton desires, and a motive rather to incite
chastity, then otherwise, and so (I hope) you are persuaded of them. But
howsoever, the winds blewe merrily, the Carrack sailed lustily, and (by this
time) they are arrived at Baffa, where the Cyprian Merchant dwelt, and where
she continued a long while with him, no one knowing otherwise, but that she
was his wife indeed.

Now it fortuned, that there arrived also at the same Baffa (about some
especial occasions of his) a Gentleman, whose name was Antigonus, well stepped
into years, and better stored with wisdom then wealth: because by meddling in
many matters, while he followed the service of the King of Cyprus, Fortune had
been very adverse to him. This ancient Gentleman, passing (on a day) by the
house where the Lady lay, and the Merchant being gone about his business into
Armenia: he chanced to see the Lady at a window of the house, and because she
was very beautiful, he observed her the more advisedly, recollecting his
senses together, that (doubtless he had seen her before, but in what place
he could not remember. The Lady her self likewise, who had so long time been
Fortunes tennis ball, and the term of her many miseries drawing now near
ending: began to conceive (upon the very first sight of Antigonus) that she had
formerly seen him in Alexandria, serving her Father in place of great degree.
Hereupon, a sudden hope persuaded her, that by the advice and furtherance of
this Gentleman, she should recover her wonted Royal condition: and opportunity
now aptly fitting her, by the absence of her pretended Merchant, husband, she
sent for him, requesting to have a few words with him.

When he was come into the house, she bashfully demanded of him, if he was not
named Antigonus of Famagosta, because she knew one (like him) so called? He
answered, that he was so named, saying moreover: Madame, me thinks that I
should know you, but I cannot remember where I have seen you, wherefore I
would entreat (if it might stand with your good liking) that my memory might
be quickened with better knowledge of you. The Lady perceiving him to be the man
indeed, weeping incessantly, she threw her arms about his neck, and soon
after asked Antigonus (who stood as one confounded with marvel) if he had
never seen her in Alexandria? Upon these words, Antigonus knew her immediately
to be Alathiella, daughter to the great Soldane, who was supposed (long since)
to be drowned in the Sea: and offering to do her such reverence as became him,
she would not permit him, but desired, that he would be assistant to her, and
willed him also to sit down a while by her.

A goodly Chair being brought him, in very humble manner he demanded of her,
what had become of her in so long a time: because it was verily believed
throughout all Egypt, that she was drowned in the Sea. I would it had bin so,
answered the Lady, rather then to lead such a life as I have done; and I
think my Father himself would wish it so, if ever he should come to the
knowledge thereof. With these words the tears rained down her fair cheeks:
wherefore Antigonus thus spoke unto her. Madame, discomfort not your self
before you have occasion, but (if you be so pleased) relate your passed
accidents to me, and what the course of your life has been: perhaps, I shall
give you such friendly advice as may stand you in sted, and no way be injurious
to you.

Fetching a sigh, even as if her heart would have split in sunder, thus she
replied. Ah Antigonus, me thinks when I look on thee, I seem to behold my
royal Father, and therefore moved with the like religious zeal and
charitable love, as (in duty) I owe unto him: I will make known to thee, what
I rather ought to conceal, and hide from any person living. I know thee to be
honorable, discreet, and truly wise, though I am a frail, simple, and weak
woman, therefore I dare discover to thee, rather then any other that I know, by
what strange and unexpected misfortunes, I have lived so long obscurely in the
world. And if in thy great and grave judgment (after the hearing of my many
miseries) thou can any way restore me to my former estate, I pray thee do it:
but if thou perceive it impossible to be done, as earnestly likewise I
entreat thee, never to reveal to any living person, that either thou have
seen me, or heard any speech of me. After these words, the tears still
streaming from her fair eyes, she recounted the whole passage of her rare
mishaps, even from her shipwreck in the Sea of Maiorica, until that very
instant hour; speaking them in such harsh manner as they happened, and not
sparing any jot of them.

Antigonus being moved to much compassion, declared how he pitied her by his
tears, and having been silent an indifferent while, as considering in this
case) what was best to be done, thus he began. Madam, seeing you have past
through such a multitude of misfortunes, yet undiscovered, what and who you
are: I will render you as blameless to your Father, and estate you as fairly
in his love, as at the hour when you parted from him, and afterward make you
wife to the King of Cholcos. She demanding of him, by what means possibly this
could be accomplished: breefely he made it known to her, how, and in what
manner he would perform it.

To cut off futther tedious circumstances, forthwith he returned to Famagosta,
and going before the King of the country, thus he spoke to him. Sir, you may
(if so you will be pleased) in an instant, do me an exceeding honor, who have
been impouerished by your service, and also a deed of great renown to your
self, without any much matter of expense and cost. The King demanding how?
Antigonus thus answered. The fair daughter of the Soldane, so generally
reported to be drowned, is arrived at Baffa, and to preserve her honor from
blemishing, has suffered many crosses and calamities: being at this instant in
very poor estate, yet desirous to re-visite her father. If you please to send
her home under my conduct, it will be great honor to you, and no mean
benefit to me; which kindness will for ever be thankfully remembered by the
Sultan.

The King in royal magnificence, replied suddenly, that he was highly pleased
with these good tidings; and having sent honorably for her from Baffa, with
great pomp she was conducted to Famagosta, and there most graciously welcomed
both by the King and Queen, with solemn triumphs, bankets, and reuelling,
performed in most Maiesticke manner. Being questioned by the King and Queen,
concerning so large a time of strange misfortunes: according as Antigonus had
formerly enstructed her, so did she shape the form of her answers, and
satisfied (with honor) all their demands. So, within few days after, upon her
earnest and instant request; with an honorable train of Lords and Ladies,
she was sent thence, and conducted all the way by Antigonus, until she came
unto the Soldans Court.

After some few days of her reposing there, the Sultan was desirous to
understand, how she could possibly live so long, in any Kingdom or Province
whatsoever, and yet no knowledge to be taken of her? The Lady, who perfectly
retained by heart, and had all her lessons at her fingers ends, by the wary
instructions which Antigonus had given her, answered her father in this manner.
Sir, about the twentieth day after my departure from you, a very terrible and
dreadful tempest ouer-tooke us, so that in dead time of the night, our ship
being split in sunder upon the sands, near to a place called Varna; what
became of all the men that were aboard, I neither know, or ever heard of. Only
I remember, then when death appeared, and I being recovered from death to life,
certain pezants of the country, coming to get what they could find in the
ship so wrackt, I was first (with two of my women) brought and set safely on
the shore.

No sooner were we there, but certain rude shagge-haird villains set upon us,
carrying away from me both my women, then haling me along by the hair of my
head, neither tears or intercessions could draw any pity from them. As thus
they dragd me into a spacious Woodd, four horsemen on a sudden came riding
by, who seeing how dishonourably the villains used me, rescued me from them,
and forced them to flight. But the four horsemen, seeming (in my judgment) to
be persons of power and authority, letting them go, came to me, urging sundry
questions to me, which neither I understood, or they mine answers. After many
deliberations held among themselves, setting me upon one of their horses, they
brought me to a Monastery of religious women, according to the custom of their
law: and there, whatsoever they did or said, I know not, but I was most
benignely welcomed thither, and honored of them extraordinarily, where (with
them in devotion) I dedicated my self to the Goddess of chastity, who is
highly reverenced and regarded among the women of that Country, and to her
religious service, they are wholly addicted.

After I had continued some time among them, and learned a little of their
language; they asked me, of whence, and what I was. Reason gave me so much
understanding, to be fearful of telling them the truth, for fear of
expulsion from among them, as an enemy to their Law and Religion: wherefore I
answered (according as necessity urged) that I was daughter to a Gentleman of
Cyprus, who sent me to be married in Candie; but our fortunes (meaning such as
had the charge of me) fell out quite contrary to our expectation, by losses,
Shipwreck, and other mischances; adding many matters more beside, only in
regard of fear, and yielding obediently to observe their customs.

At length, she that was in cheifest pre-eminence among these Women (whom they
termed by the name of their Lady Abbess) demanded of me, whither I was
willing to abide in that condition of life, or to return home again into
Cyprus. I answered, that I desired nothing more. But she, being very careful of
mine honor, would never repose confidence in any that came for Cyprus; till
two honest Gentlemen of France, who happened thither about two months since,
accompanied with their wives, one of them being a near kinswoman to the Lady
Abbess. And she well knowing, that they traveled in pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
to visit the holy Sepulcher, where (as they believe) that he whom they held for
their God was buried, after the Jews had put him to death: recommended me to
their loving trust, with especial charge, for delivering me to my Father in
Cyprus. What honorable love and respect I found in the company of those
Gentlemen and their wives, during our voyage back to Cyprus: the history would
be ouer-tedious in reporting, neither is it much material to our purpose,
because your demand is to another end.

Sailing on prosperously in our Ship, it was not long, before we arrived at
Baffa, where being landed, and not knowing any person, neither what I should
say to the Gentlemen, who only were careful for delivering me to my Father,
according as they were charged by the reverend Abbess: it was the will of
heaven doubtless (in pity and compassion of my passed disasters) that I was
no sooner come on shore at Baffa: but I should there happily meet with
Antigonus, whom I called unto in our country Language, because I would not be
understood by the Gentlemen nor their wives, requesting him to acknowledge me
as his Daughter. Quickly he apprehended mine intention, accomplishing what I
requested, and (according to his poor power) most bounteously feasted the
Gentlemen and their wives, conducting me to the K. of Cyprus, who received me
royally, and sent me home to you with so much honor, as I am no way able to
relate. What else remains to be said, Antigonus who has often heard the whole
story of my fortunes, at better leisure will report.

Antigonus then turning to the Sultan, said: My Lord, as she has often told
me, and by relation both of the Gentlemen and their wives, she has delivered
nothing but truth. Only she has forgotten somewhat worth the speaking, as
thinking it not fit for her to utter, because (indeed) it is not so convenient
for her. Namely, how much the Gentlemen and their wives (with whom she came)
commended the rare honesty and integrity of life, as also the unspotted virtue,
wherein she lived, among those chaste Religious women, as they constantly (both
with tears and solemn protestations) avouched to me, when kindly they
resigned their charge to me. Of all which matters, and many more beside, if I
should make discourse to your Excellency; this whole day, the night ensuing,
and the next days full extendure, are not sufficient to acquaint you withal.
Let it suffice then, that I have said so much, as (both by the reports, and
mine own understanding) may give you faithful assurance, to make your Royal
vaunt; of having the fairest, most virtuous, and honest Lady to your Daughter,
of any King or Prince whatsoever.

The Soldane was joyful beyond all measure, welcomming both him and the rest
in most stately manner, oftentimes entreating the Gods very heartily, that he
might live to requite them with equal recompense, who had so graciously
honored his daughter: but (above all the rest) the King of Cyprus, who sent
her home so maiestically. And having bestowne great gifts on Antigonus, within
a few days after, he gave him leave to return to Cyprus: with thankful
favors to the King as well by Letters, as also by Ambassadors expressly sent,
both from himself and his daughter.

When as this business was fully finished, the Soldane, desiring to accomplish
what formerly was intended and begun, namely, that she might be wife to the
King of Cholcos: he gave him intelligence of all that had happened, writing
moreover to him, that (if he were so pleased) he would yet send her in Royal
manner to him. The King of Cholcos was exceeding joyful of these glad tidings,
and dispatching a worthy train to fetch her, she was conuayed thither very
pompously, and she who had been embraced by so many, was received by him as an
honest virgin, living long time after with him in much joy and felicity. And
therefore, it has been said as a common Proverb: The mouth well kissed comes
not short of good fortune, but is still renewed like the Moon.

The Count D'Angiers being falsely accused, was banished out of France, and left
his two children in England in diverse places. Returning afterward (unknown)
through Scotland, he found them advanced unto great dignity. Then, repayring in
the habit of a Seruitour, into the King of France his Army, and his
innocence made publicly known; he was reseated in his former honorable
degree.

The eight Novel.
Whereby all men may plainly understand, that loyal^y faithfully kept to the
Prince (what perils so ever do ensue) does ye nevertheless renown a man, and
bring him to far greater honor.



THe Ladies sighed very often, hearing the variety of woeful miseries happening
to Alathiella: but who knows, what occasion moved them to those sighs?
Perhaps there were some among them, who rather sighed they could not be so
often married as she was, rather then for any other compassion they had of her
disasters. But leaving that to their own construction, they smiled merrily at
the last speeches of Pamphilus, and the Queen perceiving the Novel to be
ended: she fixed her eye upon Madame Eliza, as signifying thereby, that she
was next to succeed in order, which she joyfully embracing, spoke as
follows. The field is very large and spacious, wherein all this day we have
walked, and there is not any one here, so wearied with running the former
races, but nimbly would adventure on as many more, so copious are the
alterations of Fortune, in sad repetition of her wonderful changes: and among
the infinity of her various courses, I must make addition of another, which I
trust will no way discontent you.

When the Roman Empire was translated from the French to the Germains, mighty
dissentions grew between both the nations, insomuch that it drew a dismal and
a lingering war. In which respect, as well for the safety of his own
Kingdom, as to annoy and disturb his enemies; the King of France and one of
his sons, having congregated the forces of their own dominions, as also of
their friends and confederates, they resolved manfully to encounter their
enemies. But before they would adventure on any rash proceeding; they held it
as the chiefest part of policy and Royal providence, not to leave the State
without a chief or Governor. And having had good experience of Gualtier,
Count D'Angiers, to be a wise, worthy, and most trusty Lord, singularly expert
in military discipline, and faithful in all affairs of the Kingdom (yet
fitter for ease and pleasure, then laborious toil and travail:) he was
elected Lieutenant Governor in their sted, over the whole Kingdom of France,
and then they went on in their enterprise.

Now began the Count to execute the office committed to his trust, by orderly
proceeding, and with great discretion, yet not entering into any business,
without consent of the Queen and her fair daughter in law: who although they
were left under his care and custody, yet (notwithstanding) he honored them
as his superiors, and as the dignity of their quality required. Here you are
to observe, concerning Count Gualtier himself, that he was a most complete
person, aged little above forty years; as affable and singularly conditioned,
as any Noble man possibly could be, nor did those times afford a Gentleman,
that equalled him in all respects. It fortuned, that the King and his son
being busy in the aforementioned war, the wife and Lady of Count Gualtier died
in the mean while, leaving him only a son and a daughter, very young and of
tender years, which made his own home the less welcome to him, having lost
his dear Love and second self.

Hereupon, he resorted to the Court of the said Ladies the more frequently,
often conferring with them, about the weighty affairs of the Kingdom: in
which time of so serious interparlance, the Kings Sons wife, threw many
affectionate regards upon him, conuaying such conspiring passions to her heart
(in regard of his person and virtues) that her love exceeded all capacity of
government. Her desires out stepping all compass of modesty, or the dignity
of her Princely condition; throws off all regard of civil and sober thoughts,
and guides her into a Labyrinth of wanton imaginations. For, she regards not
now the eminency of his high authority, his gravity of years, and those parts
that are the true conducts to honor: but looks upon her own loose and
lascivious appetite, her young, gallant, and ouer-ready yielding nature,
comparing them with his want of a wife, and likely hope (thereby) of her sooner
prevailing; supposing, that nothing could be her hinderance, but only bashful
shame-facednesse, which she rather chose utterly to forsake and set aside, then
to fail of her hot enflamed affection, and therefore, she would needs be
the discouerer of her own disgrace.

Upon a day, being alone by her self, and the time seeming suitable to her
intention: she sent for the Count, under color of some other important
conference with him. The Count D'Angiers, whose thoughts were quite contrary
to hers: immediately went to her, where they both sitting down together on a
beds side in her Chamber, according as formerly she had plotted her purpose;
twice he demanded of her, upon what occasion she had thus sent for him. She
sitting a long while silent, as if she had no answer to make him: pressed by
the violence of her amorous passions, a vermillion tincture leaping up into her
face, yet shame enforcing tears from her eyes, with words broken and half
confused, at last she began to deliver her mind in this manner.

Honorable Lord, and my dearly respected friend, being so wise a man as you
are, it is no difficult matter for you to know, what a frail condition is
imposed both on men and women; yet (for diverse occasions) much more upon the
one, then the other. Wherefore desertfully, in the censure of a just and
upright Judge, a fault of diverse conditions (in respect of the person) ought
not to be censured with one and the same punishment. Beside, who will not say,
that a man or woman of poor and mean estate, having no other help for
maintenance, but laborious travail of their bodies should worthily receive
more sharp reprehension, in yielding to amorous desires, or such passions as
are incited by love; then a wealthy Lady whose living relieth not on her pains
or cares, neither wants any thing that she can wish to have: I dare presume,
that you your self will allow this to be equal and just. In which respect, I
am of the mind, that the forenamed allegations, ought to serve as a
sufficient excuse, yea, and to the advantage of her who is so possessed, if the
passions of love should ouer-reach her: always provided, that she can plead
(in her own defense) the choice of a wise and virtuous friend, answerable to
her own condition and quality, and no way to be taxed with a servile or vile
election.

These two especial observations, allowable in my judgment, and living now in
me, seazing on my youthful blood and years: have found no mean inducement to
love, in regard of my husbands far distance from me, meddling in the rude
uncivil actions of war, when he should rather be at home in more sweet
employment. You see Sir, that these Orators advance themselves here in your
presence, to acquaint you with the extremity of my ouer-commanding agony: and
if the same power has dominion in you, which your discretion (questionless)
cannot be void of; then let me entreat such advise from you, as may rather
help, then hinder my hopes. Believe it then for truth Sir, that the long
absence of my husband from me, the solitary condition wherein I am left, ill
agreeing with the hot blood running in my veins, and the temper of my earnest
desires: have so prevailed against my strongest resistances, that not only so
weak a woman as I am, but any man of much more potent might (living in ease
and idleness as I do) cannot withstand such continual assaults, having no
other help then flesh and blood.

Nor am I so ignorant, but public knowledge of such an error in me, would be
reputed a shrewd taxation of honesty: whereas (on the other side) secret
carriage, and heedfull managing such amorous affairs, may pass for current
without any reproach. And let me tell you Noble Count, that I repute Love
highly favorable to me, by guiding my judgment with such moderation, to make
election of a wise, worthy, and honorable friend, fit to enjoy the grace of a
far greater Lady then I am, and the first letter of his name, is the Count
D'Angiers. For if error have not misled mine eye, as in Love no Lady can be
easily deceived: for person, perfections, and all parts most to be commended in
a man, the whole Realm of France contains not your equal. Observe beside,
how forward Fortune shows her self to us both in this case, you to be
destitute of a wife, as I am of an husband; for I count him as dead to me, when
he denies me the duties belonging to a wife. Wherefore, in regard of the
unfeigned affection I bear you, and compassion, which you ought to have of
Royal Princess, even almost sick to death for your sake: I earnestly
entreat you, not to deny me your loving society, but pitying my youth and
fiery afflictions (never to be quenched but by your kindness) I may enjoy my
hearts desire.

As she uttered these words, the tears streamed abundantly down her fair
cheeks, preventing her of any further speech: so that deiecting her head into
her bosom, overcome with the predominance of her passions; she fell upon the
Countes knee, whereas else she had fallen upon the ground. When he, like a
loyal and most honorable man, sharply reprehended her fond and idle love,
and when she would have embraced him about the neck; he repulsed her roughly
from him, protesting upon his honorable reputation, that rather then he would
so wrong his Lord and Master, he would endure a thousand deaths.

The Lady seeing her desire disappointed, and her fond expectation utterly
frustrated: grew instantly forgetful of her intemperate love, and falling
into extremity of rage, converted her former gentle speeches, into this harsh
and ruder language. Villain (quoth she) shall the longing comforts of my
life, be abridged by thy base and scornful denial? Shall my destruction be
wrought by thy currish unkindness, and all my hoped joys be defeated in a
moment? Know slave, that I did not so earnestly desire thy sweet embracements
before, but now as deadly I hate and despise them, which either thy death or
banishment shall dearly pay for. No sooner had she thus spoken, but tearing
her hair, and renting her garments in pieces, she ran about like a
distracted woman, crying out aloude: Help, help, the Count D'Angiers will
forcibly dishonor me, the lustful Count will violence mine honor.

D'Angiers seeing this, and fearing more the malice of the ouer-credulous
Court, then either his own conscience, or any dishonorable act by him
committed, believing likewise, that her slanderous accusation would be
credited, above his true and spotless innocence: closely he conveyed himself
out of the Court, making what have he could, home to his own house, which
being too weak for warranting his safety upon such pursuit as would be used
against him, without any further advice or counsel, he seated his two children
on horseback, himself also being but meanly mounted, thus away thence he
went to Calice.

Upon the clamor and noise of the Lady, the Courtiers quickly flocked thither;
and, as lies soon win belief in hasty opinions, upon any silly or shallow
surmise: so did her accusation pass for current, and the Counts advancement
being envied by many, made his honest carriage (in this case) the more
suspected. In have and madding fury, they ran to the Counts houses, to arrest
his person, and carry him to prison: but when they could not find him, they
raced his goodly buildings down to the ground, and used all shameful violence
to them. Now, as il news sildome wants a speedy Messenger; so, in less space
then you will imagine, the King and Dolphin heard thereof in the Camp, and were
therewith so highly offended, that the Count had a sudden and severe
condemnation, all his progeny being sentenced with perpetual exile, and
promises of great and bountiful rewards, to such as could bring his body alive
or dead.

Thus the innocent Count, by his ouer-hasty and sudden flight, made himself
guilty of this foul imputation: and arriving at Callice with his children,
their poor and homely habites, hid them from being known, and thence they
crossed over into England, staying no where until he came to London. Before
he would enter into the City, he gave diverse good aduertisements to his
children, but especially two precepts above all the rest. First, with patient
souls to support the poor condition, whereto Fortune (without any offense in
him or them) had thus dejected them. Next, that they should have most heedfull
care, at no time to disclose from whence they came, or whose children they
were, because it extended to the peril of their lives. His Son, being named
Jews, and now about nine years old, his daughter called Violenta, and aged
seven years, did both observe their fathers direction, as afterward it did
sufficiently appear. And because they might live in the safer security, he
thought it for the best to change their names, calling his son Perotto, and
his daughter Gianetta, for thus they might best escape unknown.

Being entered into the City, and in the poor estate of beggars, they craved
every bodies mercy and alms. It came to pass, that standing one morning at
the Cathedral Church-doore, a great Lady of England, being then wife to the
Lord high Marshall, coming forth of the Church, espied the Count and his
children there begging. Of him she demanded what Countryman he was? and
whether those children were his own, or no? The Count replied, that he was
borne in Picardy, and for an unhappy fact committed by his eldest son (a
stripling of more hopeful expectation, then proved) he was enforced, with
those his two other children to forsake his country. The Lady being by nature
very pitiful, looking advisedly on the young Girl, began to grow in good
liking of her; because (indeed) she was amiable, gentle, and beautiful,
whereupon she said. Honest man, thy daughter has a pleasing countenance, and
(perhaps) her inward disposition may prove answerable to her outward goods
parts: if therefore thou can be content to leave her with me, I will give
her entertainment, and upon her dutiful carriage and behavior, if she live to
such years as may require it, I will have her honestly bestowne in marriage.
This motion was very pleasing to the Count, who readily declared his willing
consent thereto, and with the tears trickling down his cheeks, in thankful
manner he delivered his pretty daughter to the Lady.

She being thus happily bestowne, he minded to tarry no longer in London;
but, in his wonted begging manner, travailing thorough the Country with his
son Perotto, at length he came into Wales: but not without much weary pain
and travel, being never used before, to journey so far on foot. There dwelt
another Lord, in office of Marshalship to the King of England, whose power
extended over those parts; a man of very great authority, keeping a most noble
and bountiful house, which they termed the President of Wales his Court;
whereto the Count and his son oftentimes resorted, as finding there good
relief and comfort. On a day, one of the Presidents sons, accompanied with
diverse other Gentlemen's children, were performing certain youthful sports and
pastimes, as running, leaping, and such like, wherein Perotto presumed to make
one among them, excelling all the rest in such commendable manner, as none of
them ca^e any thing nere him. Diverse times the President had taken notice
thereof, and was so well pleased with the Lads behavior, that he enquired, of
whence he was? Answer was made, that he was a poor man's son, that every day
came for an alms to his gate.

The President being desirous to make the boy his, the Count (whose daily
prayers were to the same purpose) frankly gave his son to the Nobleman: albeit
natural and fatherly affection, urged some unwillingness to part so with him;
yet necessity and discretion, found it to be for the benefit of them both.
Being thus eased of care for his son and daughter, and they (though in
different places) yet under good and worthy government: the Count would
continue no longer in England: but, as best he could procure the means, passed
over into Ireland, and being arrived at a place called Stanford, became servant
to an Earl of that Country, a Gentleman professing Arms, on whom he attended
as a serving man, and lived a long while in that estate very painfully.

His daughter Violenta, clouded under the borrowed name of Gianetta, dwelling
with the Lady at London, grew so in years, beauty, comeliness of person, and
was so graceful in the favor of her Lord and Lady, yea, of every one in the
house beside, that it was wonderful to behold. Such as but observed her usual
carriage, and what modesty shined clearly in her eyes, reputed her well
worthy of honorable preferment; in which regard, the Lady that had received
her of her Father, not knowing of whence, or what she was; but as himself had
made report, intended to match her in honorable marriage, according as her
virtues worthily deserved. But God, the just rewarder of all good endeauours,
knowing her to be noble by birth, and (causeless) to suffer for the sins of
another; disposed otherwise of her, and that so worthy a Virgin might be no
mate for a man of ill conditions, no doubt ordained what was to be done,
according to his own good pleasure.

The noble Lady, with whom poor Gianetta dwelt, had but one only Son by her
Husband, and he most dearly affected of them both, as well in regard he was
to be their heir, as also for his virtues and commendable qualities, wherein
he excelled many young Gentlemen. Endued he was with heroycal valor, complete
in all perfections of person, and his mind every way answerable to his outward
behavior, exceeding Gianetta about six years in age. He perceiving her to
be a fair and comely Maiden, grew to affect her so entirely, that all things
else he held contemptible, and nothing pleasing in his eye but she. Now, in
regard her parentage was reputed poor, he kept his love conceal^d from his
Parents, not daring to desire her in marriage: for both he was to loose their
favor, by disclosing the vehemence of his afflictions, which proved a greater
torment to him, then if it had been openly known.

It came to pass, that love ouer-awed him in such sort, as he fell into a
violent sickness, and store of Physicions were sent for, to save him from
death, if possibly it might be. Their judgments observing the course of his
sickness, yet not reaching to the cause of the disease, made a doubtful
question of his recovery; which was so displeasing to his parents, that their
grief and sorrow grew beyond measure. Many earnest entreaties they moved to
him, to know the occasion of his sickness, whereto he returned no other
answer, but heartbreaking sighs, and incessant tears, which drew him more
and more into weakness of body.

It chanced on a day, a Physicion was brought unto him, being young in years,
but well experienced in his practice, and as he made trial of his pulse,
Gianetta (who by his Mothers command, attended on him very diligently) upon
some especial occasion entered into the Chamber, which when the young Gentleman
perceived, and that she neither spoke word, nor so much as looked toward him,
his heart grew great in amorous desire, and his pulse did beat beyond the
compass of ordinary custom; whereof the Physicion made good observation, to
note how long that fit would continue. No sooner was Gianetta gone forth of the
Chamber, but the pulse immediately gave over beating, which persuaded the
Physicion, that some part of the disease had now discovered it self apparently.

Within a while after, pretending to have some speech with Gianetta, and
holding the Gentleman still by the arm, the Physicion caused her to be sent
for, and immediately she came. Upon her very entrance into the Chamber, the
pulse began to beat again extremely, and when she departed, it presently
ceased. Now was he thoroughly persuaded, that he had found the true effect of
his sickness; when taking the Father and mother aside, thus he spoke to them.
If you be desirous of your Sons health, it consists not either in Physicion
or physic, but in the mercy of your fair Maid Gianetta; for manifest signs
have made it known to me, and he loves the Damsel very dearly: yet (for
ought I can perceive, the Maid does not know it) now if you have respect of
his life, you know (in this case) what is to be done. The Nobleman and his Wife
hearing this, became somewhat satisfied, because there remained a remedy to
preserve his life: but yet it was no mean grief to them, if it should so
succeed, as they feared, namely, the marriage between their Son and
Gianetta.

The Physicion being gone, and they repairing to their sick Son, the Mother
began with him in this manner. Son, I was always persuaded, that thou
would not conceal any secret from me, or the least part of thy desires;
especially, when without enjoying them, thou must remain in the danger of
death. Full well art thou assured, or in reason ought to be, that there is
not any thing for thy contentment, be it of what quality soever, but it should
have been provided for thee, and in as ample manner as for mine own self.
But though thou have wandered so far from duty, and hazarded both thy life and
ours, it comes so to pass, that Heaven has been more merciful to thee,
then thou would be to thy self or us. And to prevent thy dying of this
disease, a dream this night has acquainted me with the principal occasion of
thy sickness, to wit, extraordinary affection to a young Maiden, in some such
place as thou have seen her. I tell thee Son, it is a matter of no disgrace
to love, and why should thou shame to manifest as much, it being so apt and
convenient for thy youth? For if I were persuaded, that thou could not love,
I should make the less esteem of thee. Therefore dear Son, be not
dismayed, but freely discover thine affections. Expel those disastrous drouping
thoughts, that have endangered thy life by this long lingering sickness. And
let thy soul be faithfully assured, that thou can not require any thing to
be done, remaining within the compass of my power, but I will perform it; for
I love thee as dearly as mine own life. Set therefore aside this nice conceit
of shame and fear, revealing the truth boldly to me, if I may stead thee in
thy love; resolving thy self unfeignedly, that if my care stretch not to
compass thy content, account me for the most cruel Mother living, and utterly
unworthy of such a Son.

The young Gentleman having heard these protestations made by his Mother, was
not a little ashamed of his own folly; but recollecting his better thoughts
together, and knowing in his soul, that no one could better further his hopes,
then she; forgetting all his former fear, he returned her this answer;
Madam, and my dearly affected Mother, nothing has more occasioned my loves so
strict concealment, but an especial error, which I find by daily proof in
many, who being grown to years of grave discretion, do never remember, that
they themselves have bin young. But because herein I find you to be both
discreet and wise, I will not only affirm, what you have seen in me to be
true, but also will confess, to whom it is: upon condition, that the effect of
your promise may follow it, according to the power remaining in you, whereby
you only may secure my life.

His Mother, desirous to be resolved, whether his confession would agree with
the Physicians words, or no, and reserving another intention to her self: bad
him fear nothing, but freely discover his whole desire, and forthwith she
doubted not to effect it. Then Madame (quoth he) the matchless beauty, and
commendable qualities of your maid Gianetta, to whom (as yet) I have made no
motion, to commisserate this my languishing extremity, nor acquainted any
living creature with my love: the concealing of these afflictions to my self,
has brought me to this desperate condition: and if some mean be not
wrought, according to your constant promise, for the full enjoying of my
longing desires, assure your self (most noble Mother) that the date of my life
is very short.

The Lady well knowing, that the time now rather required kindest comfort, then
any severe or sharp reprehension; smiling on him, said. Alas dear son,
wast thou sick for this? Be of good cheer, and when thy strength is better
restored, then refer the matter to me. The young Gentleman, being put in good
hope by his mothers promise, began (in short time) to show apparent signs of
well-forwarded amendment: to the Mothers great joy and comfort, disposing her
self daily to prove, how in honor she might keep promise with her Son.

Within a short while after, calling Gianetta privately to her, in gentle
manner, and by the way of pleasant discourse, she demanded of her, whither she
was provided of a Lover, or no. Gianetta, being never acquainted with any such
questions, a scarlet Dye covering all her modest countenance, thus replied.
Madam, I have no need of any Lover, and very unseemly were it, for so poor a
Damsel as I am, to have so much as a thought of Lovers: being banished from
my friends and kinsfolk, and remaining in service as I do.

If you have none (answered the Lady) we will bestow one on you, which shall
content your mind, and bring you to a more pleasing kind of life; because it
is far unfit, that so fair a Maid as you are, should remain destitute of a
lover. Madam, said Gianetta, considering with my self, that since you
received me of my poor Father, you have used me rather like your daughter,
then a servant; it becomes me to do as pleases you. Notwithstanding, I
trust (in the regard of mine own good and honor) never to use any complaint in
such a case: but if you please to bestow a husband on me, I purpose to love and
honor him only, and not any other. For, of all the inheritance left me by my
progenitors, nothing remains to me but honorable honesty, and that shall be
my legacy so long as I live.

These words were of a quite contrary complexion, to those which the Lady
expected from her, and for effecting the promise made unto her Son: howbeit
(like a wise and noble Lady) much she inwardly commended the maids answers,
and said unto her. But tell me Gianetta, what if my Lord the King (who is a
gallant youthful Prince, and you so bright a beauty as you are) should take
pleasure in your love, would ye deny him? Suddenly the Maid returned this
answer: Madam, the King (perhaps) might enforce me; but with my free consent,
he shall never have any thing of me that is not honest. Nor did the Lady
mislike her Maids courage and resolution, but breaking off all her further
conference, intended shortly to put her project in proof, saying to her son,
that when he was fully recovered, he should have private access to Gianetta,
whom she doubted not but would be tractable enough to him; for she held it no
mean blemish to her honor, to move the Maid any more in the matter, but let
him compass it as he could.

Far from the young Gentleman's humor was this answer of his Mother, because
he aimed not at any dishonorable end: true, faithful, and honest love was the
sole scope of his intention, foul and loathsome lust he utterly defied;
whereupon, he fell into sickness again, rather more violently then before.
Which the Lady perceiving, revealed her whole intent to Gianetta, and finding
her constancy beyond common comparison, acquainted her Lord with all she had
done, and both consented (though much against their minds) to let him enjoy
her in honorable marriage: accounting it better, for preservation of their
only sons life, to match him far inferior to his degree, then (by denying
his desire) to let him pine away, and die for her love.

After great consultation with kindred and friends, the match was agreed upon,
to the no little joy of Gianetta, who devoutly returned infinite thanks to
heaven, for so mercifully respecting her dejected poor estate, after the
bitter passage of so many miseries, and never tearming her self any otherwise,
but the daughter of a poor Piccard. Soon was the young Gentleman recovered and
married, no man alive so well contented as he, and setting down an absolute
determination, to lead a loving life with his Gianetta.

Let us now convert our looks to Wales, to Perotto; being left there with the
other Lord Marshall, who was the President of that Country. On he grew in
years, choisely respected by his Lord, because he was most comely of person,
and addicted to all valiant attempts: so that in Tourneyes, Iustes, and other
actions of Arms, his like was not to be found in all the Island, being named
only Perotto the valiant Piccard, and so was he famed far and near. As God
had not forgotten his Sister, so in mercy he became as mindful of him; for, a
contagious mortality happening in the Country, the greater part of the people
perished thereby, the rest flying thence into other parts of the Land, whereby
the whole Province became dispeopled and desolate.

In the time of this plague and dreadful visitation, the Lord President, his
Lady, Sons, Daughters, Brothers, Nephews, and Kindred dyed, none remaining
alive, but one only Daughter marriageable a few of the household servants,
beside Perotto, whom (after the sickness was more mildly assuaged) with
counsel and consent of the Country people, the young Lady accepted to be her
husband, because he was a man so worthy and valiant, and of all the
inheritance left by her deceased Father, she made him Lord and sole commander.
Within no long while after, the King of England, understanding that his
President of Wales was dead, and fame liberally relating, the virtues, valor,
and good parts of Perotto the Piccard: he created him to be his President
there, and to supply the place of his deceased Lord. These fair fortunes,
within the compass of so short a time, fell to the two innocent children of
the Count D'Angiers, after they were left by him as lost and forlorn.

Eighteen years were now fully ouer-past, since the Count D'Angiers fled from
Paris, having suffered (in miserable so^t) many hard and lamentable
adversities, and seeing himself now to be grown aged he was desirous to
leave Ireland, and to know (if he might) what was become of both his children.
Hereupon, perceiving his wonted form to be so altered, that such as formerly
had conuersed most with him, could now not take any knowledge of him, and
feeling his body (through long labor and exercise endured in service) more
lusty, then in his idle youthful years, especially when he left the Court of
France, he purposed to proceed in his determination. Being very poor and
simple in apparel, he departed from the Irish Ear his Master, with whom he
had continued long in service, to no advantage or advancement, and crossing
over into England, travailed to the place in Wales, where he left Perotto: and
where he found him to be Lord Marshall and President of the Country, lusty and
in good health, a man of goodly feature, and most honorably respected and
reverenced of the people.

Well may you imagine, that this was no small comfort to the poor aged Countes
heart, yet would he not make himself known to him, or any other about him?
but referred his joy to a further enlarging or diminishing, by sight of the
other limme of his life, his dearly affected daughter Gianetta, denying rest
to his body in any place, until such time as he came to London. Making there
secret enquiry, concerning the Lady with whom he had left his daughter: he
understood, that a young Gentlewoman, named Gianetta, was married to that
Ladies only Son; which made a second addition of joy to his soul, accounting
all his passed adversities of no value, both his children being living, and in
so high honor.

Having found her dwelling, and (like a kind Father) being earnestly desirous
to see her; he daily resorted near to the house, where Sir Roger Mandauill
(for so was Gianettaes husband named) chauncing to see him, being moved to
compassion, because he was both poor and aged: commanded one of his men, to
take him into the house, and to give him some food for Gods sake, which
(accordingly) the servant performed. Gianetta had diverse children by her
husband, the eldest of them being but eight years old, yet all of them so
fair and comely as could be. As the old Count sat eating his meat in the
Hall, the children came all about him, embracing, hugging, and making much of
him, even as if Nature had truly instructed them, that this was their aged,
though poor Graundfather, and he as lovingly receiving these kind relations
from them, wisely and silently kept all to himself, with sighs, tears, and
joys entermixed together. So that the children would not part from him, though
their Tutour and Master called them often, which being told to their Mother,
she came forth of the near adjoining Parlour, and threatened to beat them,
if they would not do what their Master commanded them.

Then the children began to cry, saying, that they would tarry still by the
good old man, because he loved them better then their Master did; whereat
both the Lady and the Count began to smile. The Count, like a poor beggar, and
not as father to so great a Lady, arose, and did her humble reverence, because
she was now a Noble woman, conceiving wonderful joy in his soul, to see her
so fair and goodly a creature: yet could she take no knowledge of him, age,
want and misery had so mightily altered him, his head all white, his beard
without any comely form, his garments so poor, and his face so wrinkled,
lean and meager, that he seemed rather some Carter, then a Count. And
Gianetta perceiving, that when her children were fetched away, they returned
again to the old man, and would not leave him; desired their Master to let
them alone.

While thus the children continued making much of the good old man, Lord
Andrew Mandeuile, Father to Sir Roger, came into the Hall, as being so willed
to do by the Childrens Schoolemaister. He being a hasty minded man, and one
that ever despised Gianetta before, but much more since her marriage to his
son, angerly said. Let them alone with a mischief, and so befall them, their
best company ought to be with beggars, for so are they bred and borne by the
Mothers side: and therefore it is no marvel, if like will to like, a beggars
brats to keep company with beggars. The Count hearing these contemptible
words, was not a little grieved thereat, and although his courage was greater,
then his poor condition would permit him to express; yet, clouding all
injuries with noble patience, hanging down his head, and shedding many a salt
tear, endured this reproach, as he had done many, both before and after.

But honorable Sir Roger, perceiving what delight his children took in the
poor man's company; albeit he was offended at his Fathers harsh words, by
holding his wife in such base respect; yet favored the poor Count so much the
more, and seeing him weep, did greatly compassionate his case, saying to the
poor man, that if he would accept of his service, he willingly would
entertain him. Whereto the Count replied, that very gladly he would embrace
his kind offer: but he was capable of no other service, save only to be an
horse-keeper, wherein he had employed the most part of his time. Hereupon,
more for pleasure and pity, then any necessity of his service, he was
appointed to the keeping of one Horse, which was only for his Daughters
saddle, and daily after he had done his diligence about the Horse, he did
nothing else but play with the children. While Fortune pleased thus to dally
with the poor Count D'Angiers, and his children, it came to pass, that the
King of France (after diverse leagues of truces passed between him and the
Germans) died, and next after him, his Son the dolphin was crowned King, and
it was his wife that wrongfully caused the Counts banishment. After expiration
of the last league with the Germains, the wars began to grow much more fierce
and sharp, and the King of England, (upon request made to him by his new
brother of France) sent him very honorable supplies of his people, under the
conduct of Perotto, his lately elected President of Wales, and Sir Roger
Mandeuile, Son to his other Lord high Marshall; with whom also the poor Count
went, and continued a long while in the Camp as a common Soldier, where yet
like a valiant Gentleman (as indeed he was no less) both in advice and
actions; he accomplished many more notable matters, then was expected to come
from him.

It so fell out, that in the continuance of this war, the Queen of France
fell into a grievous sickness, and perceiving her self to be at the point of
death, she became very penitently sorrowful for all her sins, earnestly
desiring that she might be confessed by the Archbishop of Roane, who was
reputed to be an holy and virtuous man. In the repetition of her other
offenses, she revealed what great wrong she had done to the Count D'Angiers,
resting not so satisfied, with disclosing the whole matter to him alone; but
also confessed the same before many other worthy persons, and of great honor,
entreating them to work so with the King, that (if the Count were yet living,
or any of his Children) they might be restored to their former honor again.

It was not long after, but the Queen left this life, and was most royally
enterred, when her confession being disclosed to the King, after much sorrow
for so injuriously wronging a man of so great valor and honor: Proclamation
was made throughout the Camp, and in many other parts of France beside, that
whosoever could produce the Count D'Angiers, or any of his Children, should
richly be rewarded for each one of them; in regard he was innocent of the foul
imputation, by the Queens own confession, and for his wrongful exile so
long, he should be exalted to his former honor with far greater favors,
which the King franckely would bestow upon him. When the Count (who walked up
and down in the habit of a common seruitor) heard this Proclamation,
forthwith he went to his Master Sir Roger Mandeuile, requesting his speedy
repair to Lord Perotto, that being both assembled together, he would acquaint
them with a serious matter, concerning the late Proclamation published by the
King. Being by themselves alone in the Tent, the Count spoke in this manner to
Perotto. Sir, S. Roger Ma^deuile here, your equal competitor in this military
service, is the husband to your natural sister, hauings yet never received any
dowry with her, but her inherent vnblemishable virtue and honor. Now because
she may not still remain destitute of a competent Dowry: I desire that Sir
Roger, and none other, may enjoy the royal reward promised by the King. You
Lord Perotto, whose true name is Jews, manifest your self to be nobly borne,
and son to the wrongful banished Count D'Angiers: avouch moreover, that
Violenta, shadowed under the borrowed name of Gianetta, is your own Sister;
and deliver me up as your Father, the long exiled Count D'Angiers. Perotto
hearing this, beheld him more advisedly, and began to know him: then, the tears
flowing abundantly from his eyes, he fell at his feet, and often embracing
him, said: My dear and noble Father! a thousand times more dearly welcome to
your Son Jews.

Sir Roger Mandeuile, hearing first what the Count had said, and seeing what
Perotto afterward performed; became surprised with such extraordinary joy and
admiration, that he knew not how to carry himself in this case. Nevertheless,
giving credit to his words, and being somewhat ashamed, that he had not used
the Count in more respective manner, and remembering beside, the unkind
language of his furious Father to him: he kneeled down, humbly craving pardon,
both for his fathers rudenes and his own, which was courteously granted by the
Count, embracing him lovingly in his arms.

When they had a while discoursed their several fortunes, sometime in tears,
and then again in joy, Perotto and Sir Roger, would have the Count to be
garmented in better manner, but in no wise he would suffer it; for it was his
only desire, that Sir Roger should be assured of the promised reward, by
presenting him in the Kings presence, and in the homely habit which he did then
wear, to touch him with the more sensible shame, for his rash belief, and
injurious proceeding. Then Sir Roger Mandeuile, guiding the Count by the hand,
and Perotto following after, came before the King, offering to present the
Count and his children, if the reward promised in the Proclamation might be
performed. The king immediately commanded, that a reward of inestimable value
should be produced; desiring Sir Roger upon the sight thereof, to make good
his offer, for forthwith presenting the Count and his children. Which he made
no longer delay of, but turning himself about, delivered the aged Count, by
the title of his servant, and presenting Perotto next, said. Sir, here I
deliver you the Father and his Son, his daughter who is my wife, cannot so
conveniently be here now, but shortly, by the permission of heaven, your
Majesty shall have a sight of her.

When the King heard this, steadfastly he looked on the Count; and,
notwithstanding his wonderful alteration, both from his wonted feature and
form: yet, after he had very seriously viewed him, he knew him perfectly; and
the tears trickling down his cheeks, partly with remorsefull shame, and joy
also for his so happy recovery, he took up the Count from kneeling, kissing,
and embracing him very kindly, welcomming Perotto in the selfsame manner.
Immediately also he gave command, that the Count should be restored to his
honors, apparel, servants, horses, and furniture, answerable to his high
estate and calling, which was as speedily performed. Moreover, the King greatly
honored Sir Roger Mandeuile, desiring to be made acquainted with all their
passed fortunes.

When Sir Roger had received the royal reward, for thus surrendering the Count
and his Son, the Count calling him to him, said. Take that Princely
remuneration of my sovereign Lord the King, and commending me to your unkind
Father, tell him that your Children are no beggars brats, neither basely borne
by their Mothers side. Sir Roger returning home with his bountiful reward,
soon after brought his Wife and Mother to Paris, and so did Perotto his Wife,
where in great joy and triumph, they continued a long while with the noble
Count; who had all his goods and honors restored to him, in far^e greater
measure then ever they were before: his Sons in Law returning home with their
Wives into England, left the Count with the King at Paris, where he spent the
rest of his days in great honor and felicity.

Bernardo, a Merchant of Geneway, being deceived by another Merchant, named
Ambrosio, lost a great part of his goods. And commanding his innocent Wife to
be murdered, she escaped, and (in the habit of a man) became servant to the
Soldane. The deceiuer being found at last, she compassed such means, that her
Husband Bernardo came into Alexandria, and there, after due punishment
inflicted on the false deceiuer, she resumed the garments again of a woman,
and returned home with her Husband to Geneway.

The ninth Novel.
Wherein is declared, that by ouer-liberall commending the chastity of Women,
it falls out (oftentimes) to be very dangerous, especially by the means of
treacherers, who yet (in the end) are justly punished for their treachery.

MAdam Eliza having ended her compassionate discourse, which indeed had moved
all the rest to sighing; the Queen, who was fair, comely of stature, and
carrying a very maiesticall countenance, smiling more familiarly then the
other, spoke to them thus. It is very necessary, that the promise made to
Dioneus, should carefully be kept, and because now there remains none, to
report any more Nouels, but only he and my self: I must first deliver mine,
and he (who takes it for an honor) to be the last in relating his name, last
let him be for his own deliverance. Then pausing a little while, thus she
began again. Many times among vulgar people, it has passed as a common
Proverb: That the deceiuer is often trampled on, by such as he has deceived.
And this cannot show it self (by any reason) to be true, except such accidents
as awaite on treachery, do really make a just discovery thereof. And therefore
according to the course of this day observed, I am the woman, that must make
good what I have said for the approbation of that Proverb: no way (I hope)
distasteful to you in the hearing, but aduantageable to preserve you from any
such beguiling.

There was a fair and good Inn in Paris, much frequented by many



great Italian Merchants, according to such variety of occasions and business,
as urged their often resorting thither. One night among many other, having had
a merry Supper together, they began to discourse on diverse matters, and falling
from one relation to another; they communed in very friendly manner, concerning
their wives, left at home in their houses. Quoth the first, I cannot well
imagine what my wife is now doing, but I am able to say for my self, that if a
pretty female should fall into my company: I could easily forget my love to my
wife, and make use of such an advantage offered.

A second replied; And trust me, I should do no less, because I am persuaded,
that if my wife be willing to wander, the law is in her own hand, and I am
far enough from home: dumb walls blab no tales, and offenses unknown are
sildome or never called in question. A third man unapt in censure, with his
former fellows of the Jury; and it plainly appeared, that all the rest were of
the same opinion, condemning their wives ouer-rashly, and alleging, that when
husbands strayed so far from home, their wives had wit enough to make use of
their time.

Only one man among them all, named Bernardo Lomellino, and dwelling in
Geneway, maintained the contrary; boldly auouching, that by the especial
favor of Fortune, he had a wife so perfectly complete in all graces and
virtues, as any Lady in the world possibly could be, and that Italy scarsely
contained her equal. For, she was goodly of person, and yet very young,
quick, quaint, mild, and courteous, and not any thing appertaining to the
office of a wife, either for domesticke affairs, or any other employment
whatsoever, but in woman-hoode she went beyond all other. No Lord, Knight,
Esquire, or Gentleman, could be better served at his table, then himself
daily was, with more wisdom, modesty and discretion. After all this, he
praised her for riding, hawking, hunting, fishing, fowling, reading, writing,
enditing, and most absolute keeping his Books of accounts, that neither
himself, or any other Merchant could therein excel her. After infinite other
commendations, he came to the former point of their argument, concerning the
easy falling of women into wantonness, maintaining (with a solemn oath) that
no woman possibly could be more chaste and honest then she: in which respect,
he was verily persuaded, that if he stayed from her ten years space, yea (all
his life time) out of his house; yet never would she falsify her faith to
him, or be lewdly allured by any other man.

Among these Merchants thus communing together, there was a young proper man,
named Ambroginolo of Placentia, who began to laugh at the last praises, which
Bernardo had used of his wife, and seeming to make a mockery thereat,
demanded, if the Emperor had given him this privilege, above all other
married men? Bernardo being somewhat offended, answered: No Emperor bath done
it, but the especial blessing of heaven, exceeding all the Emperors on the
earth in grace, and thereby have received this favor; whereto Ambroginolo
presently thus replied. Bernardo, without all question to the contrary, I
believe that what thou have said, is true, but, for ought I can perceive, thou
have slender judgment in the nature of things: because, if thou did observe
them well, thou could not be of so gross understanding; for, by
comprehending matters in their true kind and nature, thou would speak of
them more correctly then thou do. And to the end, thou may not imagine,
that we who have spoken of our wives, do think any otherwise of them, then
as well and honestly as thou can of thine, nor that any thing else did urge
these speeches of them, or falling into this kind of discourse, but only by a
natural instinct and admonition; I will proceed familiarly a little further
with thee, upon the matter already propounded.

I have evermore understood, that man was the most noble creature, formed by
God to live in this world, and woman in the next degree to him: but man, as
generally is believed, and as is discerned by apparent effects, is the most
perfect of both. Having then the most perfection in him, without all doubt, he
must be so much the more firm and constant. So in like manner, it has been,
and is universally granted, that woman is more various and mutable, and the
reason thereof may be approved, by many natural circumstances, which were
needless now to make any mention of. If a man then be possessed of the greater
stability, and yet cannot contain himself from condiscending, I say not to
one that entreates him, but to desire any other that may please him, and
beside, to covet the enjoying of his own pleasing contentment (a thing not
chancing to him once in a month, but infinite times in a days space.) What
can you then conceive of a frail woman, subject (by nature) to entreaties,
flatteries, gifts, persuasions, and a thousand other enticing means, which a
man (that is affected to her) can use? Do thou think then that she has any
power to contain? Assuredly, though thou should rest so resolved, yet cannot
I be of the same opinion. For I am sure thou beleeuest, and must needs
confess it, that thy wife is a woman, made^ of flesh and blood, as other women
are: if it be so, she cannot be without the same desires, and the weakness
or strength as other women have, to resist such natural appetites as her own
are. In regard whereof, it is merely impossible (although she be most honest)
but she must needs do that which other women do; for there is nothing else
possible, either to be denied or affirmed to the contrary, as thou most
unadvisedly have done.

Bernardo answered in this manner. I am a Merchant* and no Philosopher, and
like a Merchant I mean to answer thee. I am not to learn, that these
accidents by thee related, may happen to fools, who are void of understanding
or shame: but such as are wise, and endued with virtue, have always such a
precious esteem of their honor, that they will contain those principles of
constancy, which men are merely careless of, and I justify my wife to be
one of them. Believe me Bernardo (replied Ambroginolo) if so often as thy wives
mind is addicted to wanton folly, a badge of scorn should arise on thy
forehead, to render testimony of her female frailty; I believe the number of
them would be more, then willingly you would wish them to be. And among all
married men, in every degree, the notes are so secret of their wives
imperfections, that the sharpest sight is not able to discern them; and the
wiser sort of men are willing not to know them; because shame and loss of
honor is never imposed, but in cases evident and apparent.

Persuade thy self then Bernardo, that, what women may accomplish in secret,
they will rarely fail to do: or if they abstain, it is through fear and
folly. Wherefore, hold it for a certain rule, that that woman is only chaste,
that never was solicited personally, or if she endured any such suit, either
she answered yea, or no. And albeit I know this to be true, by many infallible
and natural reasons, yet could I not speak so exactly as I do; if I had not
tried experimentally, the humors and affections of diverse women. Yea, and let
me tell thee more Bernardo, were I in private company with thy wife, howsoever
pure and precise thou presumest her to be: I should account it a matter of no
impossibility, to find in her the self same frailty.

Bernardoes blood began now to boil, and patience being a little put down by
choler, thus he replied. A combat of words requires ouerlong continuance, for
I maintain the matter, which thou deniest, and all this sorts to nothing in
the end. But seeing thou presumest, that all women are so apt and tractable,
and thy self so confident of thine own power: I willingly yield (for the
better assurance of my wifes constant loyalty) to have my head smitten off, if
thou can win her to any such dishonest act, by any means whatsoever thou
can use unto her; which if thou can not do, thou shall only loose a
thousand ducats of gold. Now began Ambroginolo to be heated with these words,
answering thus. Bernardo, if I had won the wager, I know not what I should do
with thy head; but if thou be willing to stand upon the proof, pawn down
five thousand Ducats of gold, (a matter of much less value then thy head)
against a thousand Ducats of mine, granting me a lawful limited time, which
I require to be no more then the space of three months, after the day of my
departiug hence. I will stand bound to go for Geneway, and there win such
kind consent of thy Wife, as shall be to mine own consent. In witness
whereof, I will bring back with me such private and especial tokens, as thou
thy self shall confess that I have not failed. Provided, that thou do first
promise upon thy faith, to absent thy self thence during my limited time, and
be no hinderance to me by thy Letters, concerning the attempt by me undertaken.

Bernardo said, be it a bargain, I am the man that will make good my five
thousand Ducats; and albeit the other Merchants then present, earnestly
labored to break the wager, knowing great harm must needs ensue thereon: yet
both the parties were so hot and fiery, as all the other men spoke to no
effect, but writings were made, sealed, and delivered under either of their
hands, Bernardo remaining at Paris, and Ambroginolo departing for Geneway.
There he remained some few days, to learn the streets name where Bernardo
dwelt, as also the conditions and qualities of his Wife, which scarcely pleased
him when he heard them; because they were far beyond her Husbands relation,
and she reputed to be the only wonder of women; whereby he plainly
perceived, that he had undertaken a very idle enterprise, yet would he not give
it over so, but proceeded therein a little further.

He wrought such means, that he came acquainted with a poor woman, who often
frequented Bernardoes house, and was greatly in favor with his wife; upon
whose poverty he so prevailed, by earnest persuasions, but much more by large
gifts of money, that he won her to further him in this manner following. A
fair and artificial Chest he caused to be purposely made, wherein himself
might be aptly contained, and so conveyed into the House of Bernardoes Wife,
under color of a formal excuse; that the poor woman should be absent from
the City two or three days, and she must keep it safe till he return. The
Gentlewoman suspecting no guile, but that the Chest was the receptacle of all
the woman's wealth; would trust it in no other room, then her own Bedchamber,
which was the place where Ambroginolo most desired to be.

Being thus conveyed into the Chamber, the night going on apace, and the
Gentlewoman fast asleep in her bed, a lighted Taper stood burning on the Table
by her, as in her Husbands absence she ever used to have: Ambroginolo softly
opened the Chest, according as cunningly he had contrived it; and stepping
forth in his sockes made of cloth, observed the situation of the Chamber, the
paintings, pictures, and beautiful hangings, with all things else that were
remarkable, which perfectly he committed to his memory. Going near to the bed,
he saw her lie there sweetly sleeping, and her young Daughter in like manner by
her, she seeming then as complete and pleasing a creature, as when she was
attired in her best bravery. No especial note or mark could he descrie,
whereof he might make credible report, but only a small wart upon her left
pappe, with some few hairs growing thereon, appearing to be as yellow as gold.

Sufficient had he seen, and durst presume no further; but taking one of her
Rings, which lay upon the Table, a purse of hers, hanging by on the wall, a
light wearing Robe of silk, and her girdle, all which he put into the Chest;
and being in himself, closed it fast as it was before, so continuing there in
the Chamber two several nights, the Gentlewoman neither mistrusting or missing
any thing. The third day being come, the poor woman, according as formerly was
concluded, came to have home her Chest again, and brought it safely into her
own house; where Ambroginolo coming forth of it, satisfied the poor woman to
her own liking, returning (with all the forenamed things) so fast as
conveniently he could to Paris.

Being arrived there long before his limited time, he called the Merchants
together, who were present at the passed words and wager; auouching before
Bernardo, that he had won his five thousand Ducats, and performed the task he
undertook. To make good his protestation, first he described the form of the
Chamber, the curious pictures hanging about it, in what manner the bed stood,
and every circumstance else beside. Next he showed the several things, which
he brought away thence with him, affirming that he had received them of her
self. Bernardo confessed, that his description of the Chamber was true, and
acknowledged moreover, that these other things did belong to his Wife: But
(quoth he) this may be gotten, by corrupting some servant of mine, both for
intelligence of the Chamber, as also of the Ring, Purse, and what else is
beside; all which suffice not to win the wager, without some other more
apparent and pregnant token. In troth, answered Ambroginolo, me thinks these
should serve for sufficient proofs; but seeing thou art so desirous to know
more: I plainly tell thee, that fair Geneura thy Wife, has a small round
wart upon her left pappe, and some few little golden hairs growing thereon.

When Bernardo heard these words, they were as so many stabs to his heart, yea,
beyond all compass of patient sufferance, and by the changing of his color,
it was noted manifestly, (being unable to utter one word) that Ambroginolo had
spoken nothing but the truth. Within a while after, he said; Gentlemen, that
which Ambroginolo has said, is very true, wherefore let him come when he
will, and he shall be paid; which accordingly he performed on the very next
day, even to the utmost penny, departing then from Paris toward Geneway, with
a most malicious intention to his Wife: Being come near to the City, he would
not enter it, but rode to a Country house of his, standing about ten miles
distant thence. Being there arrived, he called a servant, in whom he reposed
especial trust, sending him to Geneway with two Horses, writing to his Wife,
that he was returned, and she should come thither to see him. But secretly he
charged his servant, that so soon as he had brought her to a convenient place,
he should there kill her, without any pity or compassion, and then return to
him again.

When the servant was come to Geneway, and had delivered his Letter and
message, Geneura gave him most joyful welcome, and on the morrow morning
mounting on Horseback with the servant, rode merrily toward the Country
house; diverse things she discoursed on by the way, til they descended into a
deep solitary valey, very thickly beset with high and huge spreading Trees,
which the servant supposed to be a meet place, for the execution of his
Masters command. Suddenly drawing forth his Sword, and holding Geneura fast by
the arm, he said; Mistress, quickly commend your soul to God, for you must
die, before you pass any further. Geneura seeing the naked Sword, and hearing
the words so peremptorily delivered, fearfully answered; Alas dear friend,
mercy for Gods sake; and before thou kill me, tell me wherein I have offended
thee, and why thou must kill me? Alas good Mistress replied the servant, you
have not any way offended me, but in what occasion you have displeased your
Husband, it is utterly unknown to me: for he has strictly commanded me,
without respect of pity or compassion, to kill you by the way as I bring you,
and if I do it not, he has sworn to hang me by the neck. You know good
Mistress, how much I stand obliged to him, and how impossible it is for me, to
contradict any thing that he commands. God is my witness, that I am truly
compassionate of you, and yet (by no means) may I let you live.

Geneura kneeling before him weeping, wringing her hands, thus replied. Will thou turn Monster, and be a murderer of her that never wronged thee, to
please another man, and on a bare command? God, who truly knows all things,
is my faithful witness, that I never committed any offense, whereby to
deserve the dislike of my Husband, much less so harsh a recompense as this is.
But flying from mine own justification, and appealing to thy manly mercy, thou
may (were thou but so well pleased) in a moment satisfy both thy Master and
me, in such manner as I will make plain and apparent to thee. Take thou my
garments, spare me only thy doublet, and such a Bonnet as is fitting for a
man, so return with my habit to thy Master, assuring him, that the deed is
done. And here I swear to thee, by that life which I enjoy but by thy mercy, I
will so strangely disguise my self, and wander so far off from these
Countries, as neither he or thou, nor any person belonging to these parts,
shall ever hear any tidings of me.

The servant, who had no great good will to kill her, very easily grew
pitiful, took off her upper garments, and gave her a poor ragged doublet, a
silly Chapperone, and such small store of money as he had, desiring her to
forsake that Country, and so left her to walk on foot out of the valley. When
he came to his Master, and had delivered him her garments, he assured him,
that he had not only accomplished his command, but also was most secure from
any discovery: because he had no sooner done the deed, but four or five very
ravenous Wolfes, came presently running to the dead body, and gave it burial
in their bellies. Bernardo soon after returning to Geneway, was much blamed
for such unkind cruelty to his wife; but his constant auouching of her treason
to him (according then to the Countries custom) did clear him from all
pursuit of law.

Poor Geneura, was left thus alone and disconsolate, and night stealing fast
upon her, she went to a silly village near adjoining* where (by the means of
a good old woman) she got such provision as the place afforded, making the
doublet fit to her body, and converting her petticote to a pair of breeches,
according to the Mariners fashion: then cutting her hair, and queintly
disguised like to a Sayler, she went to the Sea coast. By good fortune, she
met there with a Gentleman of Cathalogna, whose name was Signior Enchararcho,
who came on land from his Ship, which lay hulling there about Albagia, to
refresh himself at a pleasant Spring. Enchararcho taking her to be a man, as
she appeared no otherwise by her habit; upon some conference passing between
them, she was entertained into his service, and being brought aboard the Ship,
she went under the name of Sicurano da Finale. There she had better apparel
bestowne on her by the Gentleman, and her service proved so pleasing and
acceptable to him, that he liked her care and diligence beyond all comparison.

It came to pass within a short while after, that this Gentleman of Cathalogna
sailed (with some charge of his) into Alexandria, carrying thither c^rtaine
peregrine Faulcons, which he presented to the Soldane: who oftentimes
welcomed this Gentleman to his table, where he observed the behavior of
Sicurano, attending on his Masters tre^cher, and therewith was so highly
pleased; that he requested to have him from the Gentleman, who (for his more
advancement) willingly parted with his so lately entertained servant* Sicurano
was so ready and discreet in his daily services; that he grew in as great
grace with the Soldane, as before he had done with Enchararcho.

At a certain season in the year, as customarie order (there observed) had
formerly been, in the City of Acres, which was under the Soldanes subjection:
there yearly met a great assembly of Merchants, as Christians, Moors, Jews,
Sarrazines, and many other Nations beside, as at a common Mart or Fair. And to
the end, that the Merchants (for the better sale of their goods) might be there
in the safer assurance; the Soldane used to send thither some of his ordinary
Officers, and a strong guard of Soldiers beside, to defend them from all
injuries and molestation, because he reaped thereby no mean benefit. And who
should be now sent about this business, but his new elected favorite
Sicurano; because she was skillful and perfect in the languages.

Sicurano being come to Acres, as Lord and Captain of the Guard for the
Merchants, and for the safety of their Merchandises* she discharged her office
most commendably, walking with her train through every part of the Fair,
where she observed a worthy company of Merchants, Sicilians, Pisanes,
Genewayes, Venetians, and other Italians, whom the more willingly she noted,
in remembrance of her native Country. At one especial time, among other,
chancing into a Shop or Boothe belonging to the Venetians; she espied (hanging
up with other costly wares) a Purse and a Girdle, which suddenly she
remembered to be sometime her own, whereat she was not a little abashed in her
mind. But, without making any such outward show, courteously she requested to
know, whose they were, and whether they should be sold, or no.

Ambroginolo of Placentia, was likewise come thither, and great store of
Merchandises he had brought with him, in a Carrack appertaining to the
Venetians, and he, hearing the Captain of the Guard demand, whose they were;
stepped forth before him, and smiling, answered: That they were his, but not
to be sold, yet if he liked them gladly, he would bestow them on him.
Sicurano seeing him smile, suspected, least himself had (by some unfitting
behavior) been the occasion thereof: and therefore, with a more settled
countenance, he said. Perhaps thou smilest, because I that am a man,
professing Arms, should question after such womanish toys. Ambroginolo
replied. My Lord, pardon me, Ismile not at you, or your demand; but at the
manner how I came by these things.

Sicurano, upon this answer, was ten times more desirous then before, and
said. If Fortune favored thee in friendly manner, by the obtaining of these
things: if it may be spoken, tell me how thou had them. My Lord (answered
Ambroginolo) these things (with many more beside) were given me by a
Gentlewoman of Geneway, named Madame Geneura, the wife to one Bernardo
Lomellino, in recompense of one nights lodging with her, and she desired me to
keep them for her sake. Now, the maine reason of my smiling, was the
remembrance of her husbands folly, in waging five thousand Ducats of gold,
against one thousand of mine, that I should not obtain my will of his wife,
which I did, and thereby wone the wager. But he, who better deserved to be
punished for his folly, then she, who was but sick of all women's disease:
returning from Paris to Geneway, caused her to be slain, as afterward it was
reported by himself.

When Sicurano heard this horrible lie, immediately she conceived, that this
was the occasion of her husbands hatred to her, and all the hard haps which she
had since suffered: whereupon, she reputed it for more then a mortal sin,
if such a villain should pass without due punishment. Sicurano seemed to like
well this report, and grew into such familiarity with Ambroginolo, that (by her
persuasions) when the Fair was ended, she took him higher with her into
Alexandria, and all his Wares along with him, furnishing him with a fit and
convenient Shop, where he made great benefit of his Merchandises, trusting all
his moneys in the Captains custody, because it was the safest course for him,
and so he continued there with no mean contentment.

Much did she pity her Husbands perplexity, devising by what good and
warrantable means, she might make known her innocence to him; wherein her
place and authority did greatly sted her, and she wrought with diverse gallant
Merchants of Geneway, that then remained in Alexandria, and by virtue of the
Soldans friendly Letters, beside to bring him thither upon an especial
occasion. Come he did, albeit in poor and mean order, which soon was better
altered by her appointment, and he very honorably (though in private)
entertained by diverse of her worthy friends, till time did favor what she
further intended.

In the expectation of Bernardoes arrival, she had so prevailed with
Ambroginolo, that the same tale which he formerly told to her, he delivered
again in presence of the Soldane, who seemed to be well pleased with it: But
after she had once seen her Husband, she thought upon her more serious
business; providing her self of an apt opportunity, when she entreated such
favor of the Soldane, that both the men might be brought before him, where if
Ambroginolo would not confess (without constraint) that which he had made his
vaunt of concerning Bernardoes Wife, he might be compelled thereto perforce.

Sicuranoes word was a Law with the Soldane, so that Ambroginolo and Bernardo
being brought face to face, the Soldane, with a stern and angry countenance,
in the presence of a most Princely Assembly; commanded Ambroginolo to declare
the truth, yea, upon peril of his life, by what means he won the wager, of the
five thousand golden Ducats he received of Bernardo. Ambroginolo seeing
Sicurano there present, upon whose favor he wholly relied, yet perceiving her
looks likewise to be as dreadful as the Soldanes, and hearing her threaten
him with most grievous torments, except he revealed the truth indeed: you may
easily guess (fair company) in what condition he stood at that instant.

Frowns and fury he beheld on either side, and Bernardo standing before him,
with a world of famous witnesses, to hear his lie confounded by his own
confession, and his tongue to deny what it had before so constantly avouched.
Yet dreaming on no other pain or penalty, but restoring back the five
thousand Ducats of gold, and the other things by him purloyned, truly he
revealed the whole form of his falsehood. Then Sicurano according as the
Soldane had formerly commanded him, turning to Bernardo, said. And thou, upon
the suggestion of this foul lie, what did thou to thy Wife? Being (quoth
Bernardo) overcome with rage, for the loss of my money, and the dishonor I
supposed to receive by my Wife; I caused a servant of mine to kill her, and as
he credibly avouched, her body was devoured by ravenous Wolves in a moment
after.

These things being thus spoken and heard, in the presence of the Soldane, and
no reason (as yet) made known, why the case was so seriously urged, and to
what end it would succeed: Sicurano spoke in this manner to the Soldane. My
gracious Lord, you may plainly perceive, in what degree that poor Gentlewoman
might make her vaunt, being so well provided, both of a loving friend, and a
husband. Such was the friends love, that in an instant, and by a wicked lie,
he robbed her both of her renown and honor, and bereft her also of her
husband. And her husband, rather crediting another falsehood, then the
invincible truth, whereof he had faithful knowledge, by long and very
honorable experience; caused her to be slain, and made food for devouring
Wolves. Beside all this, such was the good will and affection, borne to that
woman both by friend and husband, that the longest continuer of them in her
company, makes them alike in knowledge of her. But because your great wisdom
knows perfectly, what each of them have worthily deserved: if you please (in
your ever known gracious benignity) to permit the punishment of the deceiuer,
and pardon the party so deceived; I will procure such means, that she shall
appear here in your presence, and theirs.

The Soldane, being desirous to give Sicurano all manner of satisfaction,
having followed the course so industriously: bad him to produce the woman, and
he was well contented. Whereat Bernardo stood much amazed, because he verily
believed that she was dead. And Ambroginolo foreseeing already a preparation
for punishment, feared, that the repayment of the money would not now serve his
turn: not knowing also what he should further hope or suspect, if the woman
her self did personally appear, which he imagined would be a miracle.
Sicurano having thus obtained the Soldanes permission, in tears, humbling her
self at his feet, in a moment she lost her manly voice and demeanor, as
knowing, that she was now no longer to use them, but must truly witness what
she was indeed, and therefore thus spoke.

Great Soldane, I am the miserable and unfortunate Geneura, that, for the space
of six whole years, have wandered through the world, in the habit of a man,
falsely and most maliciously slaundered, by this villainous traitor
Ambroginolo, and by this unkind cruel husband, betrayed to his servant to be
slain, and left to be devoured by savage beasts. Afterward, desiring such
garments as better fitted for her, and showing her breasts; she made it
apparent, before the Soldane and his assistants, that she was the very same
woman indeed. Then turning her self to Ambroginolo, with more then manly
courage, she demanded of him, when, and where it was, that he lay with her, as
(villainously) he was not ashamed to make his vaunt. But he, having already
acknowledged the contrary, being stricken dumb with shameful disgrace, was
not able to utter one word.

The Soldane, who had always reputed Sicurano to be a man, having heard and
seen so admirable an accident: was so amazed in his mind, that many times he
was very doubtful, whether this was a dream, or an absolute relation of
truth. But, after he had more seriously considered thereon, and found it to
be real and infallible: with extraordinary gracious praises, he commended the
life, constancy, conditions and virtues of Geneura, whom (till that time) he
had always called Sicurano. So committing her to the company of honorable
Ladies, to be changed from her manly habit: he pardoned Bernardo her husband
(according to her request formerly made) although he had more justly deserved
death; which likewise himself confessed, and falling at the feet of Geneura,
desired her (in tears) to forgive his rash transgression, which most lovingly
she did, kissing and embracing him a thousand times.

Then the Soldane strictly commanded, that on some high and eminent place of
the City, Ambroginolo should be bound and impaled on a Stake, having his naked
body anointed all over with honey, and never to be taken off, until (of it
self) it fell in pieces, which, according to the sentence, was presently
performed. Next, he gave express charge, that all his money and goods should be
given to Geneura, which valued above ten thousand double Ducats. Forthwith
with a solemn feast was prepared, wherein, much honor was done to Bernardo,
being the husband of Geneura: and to her, as to a most worthy woman, and
matchless wife, he gave in costly Jewels, as also vessels of gold and silver
plate, so much as amounted to above ten thousand double Ducats more.

When the feasting was finished, he caused a Ship to be furnished for them,
granting them license to depart for Geneway when they pleased: whither they
returned most rich and joyfully, being welcomed home with great honor,
especially Madame Geneura, whom every one supposed to be dead, and always
after, so long as she lived, she was most famous for her manifold virtues.
But as for Ambroginolo, the very same day that he was impaled on the Stake,
anointed with honey, and fixed in the place appointed, to his no mean
torment: he not only died, but likewise was devoured to the bare bones, by
Flies, Waspes and Hornets, whereof the Country notoriously abounds. And his
bones, in full form and fashion, remained strangely black for a long while
after, knit together by the sinews; as a witness to many thousands of people,
which afterward beheld his carcass of his wickedness against so good and
virtuous a woman, that had not so much as a thought of any evil toward him.
And thus was the Proverb truly verified, that shame succeeds after ugly
sin, and the deceiuer is trampled and trod, by such as himself has deceived.

Pagammo da Monaco, a rouing Pirate on the Seas, carried away the fair Wife of
Signior Ricciardo di Chinzica, who understanding where she was* went thither;
and falling into friendship with Pagamino, demanded his Wife of him; whereto
he yielded, provided, that she would willingly go away with him. She denied
to part thence with her Husband, and Signior Ricciardo dying; she became the
Wife of Pagamino.

The tenth Novel.
Wherein old men are wittily reprehended, that will match themselves with
younger women, then is fit for their years and insufficiency; never
considering, what afterward may happen to them.



EVery one in this honest and gracious assembly, most highly commended the
Novel recounted by the Queen: but especially Dioneus, who remained, to finish
that days pleasure with his own discourse; and after many praises of the
former tale were past, thus he began. Fair Ladies, part of the Queens Novel,
has made an alteration of my mind, from that which I intended to proceed
next withal, and therefore I will report another. I cannot forget the unmanly
indiscretion of Bernardo, but much more the base arrogancy of Ambroginolo, how
justly deserved shame fell upon him; as well it may happen to all other, that
are so vile in their own opinions, as he apparently approved himself to be.
For, as men wander abroad in the world, according to their occasions in
diversity of Countries, and observation of the peoples behavior: so are their
humors as variously transported. And if they find women wantonly disposed
abroad, the like judgment they give of their wives at home; as if they had
never known their birth and breeding, or made proof of their loyal carriage
toward them. Wherefore, the Tale that I purpose to relate, will likewise
condemn all the like kind of men; but more especially such, as suppose
themselves to be endued with more strength, then Nature ever meant to bestow
upon them, foolishly believing, that they can cover and satisfy their own
defects, by fabulous demonstrations; and thinking to fashion other of their
own complexions, that are merely strangers to such gross follies.

Let me tell you then, that there lived in Pisa (about some hundred years
before Tuscanie and Liguria came to embrace the Christian Faith) a Judge better
stored with wisdom and ingenuity, then corporal abilities of the body, ^e
being named Signior Ricciardo di Cinzica. He being more then half persuaded,
that he could content a woman with such satisfaction as he daily bestowed on
his studies, being a widdower, and extraordinarily wealthy; labored (with no
mean pains and endeavor) to enjoy a fair and youthful wife in marriage:
both which qualities he should much rather have avoided, if he could have
ministered as good counsel to him, as he did to others, resorting to him for
advice.

Upon this his amorous and diligent inquisition, it came so to pass, that a
worthy Gentleman, called Bertolomea, one of the very fairest and choysest young
Maids in Pisa, whose youth did hardly agree with his age; but mucke was the
motive of this marriage, and no expectation of mutual contentment. The Judge
being married, and the Bride brought solemnly home to his house, we need make no
question of brave cheer and banqueting, well furnished by their friends on
either side: other matters were now hammering in the Judges head, for though he
could please all his Clyents with counsel; yet now such a suit was commenced
against himself, and in Beauties Court of continual requests, that the Judge
failing in plea for his own defense, was often nonsuited by lack of answer;
yet he wanted neither good wines, drugges, and all restauratiues, to comfort
the heart, and increase good blood; but all auayled not in this case.

But well fare a good courage, where performance fails, he could liberally
commend his passed iouiall days, and make a promise of as fair felicities yet
to come; because his youth would renew it self, like to the Eagle, and his
vigor in as full force as before. But beside all these idle allegations, he
would needs instruct his wife in an Almanac or Calender, which (long before)
he had bought at Rauenna, and wherein he plainly showed her, that there was
not any one day in the year, but it was dedicated to some Saint or other. In
reverence of whom, and for their sakes, he approved by diverse arguments and
reasons, that a man and his wife ought to abstain from bedding together.
Hereto he added, that those Saints days had their fasts and feasts, beside the
four seasons of the year, the vigils of the Apostles, and a thousand other
holy days, with Fridayes, Saturdayes, and Sundays, in honor of our Lords
rest, and all the sacred time of Lent; as also certain observations of the
Moon, and infinite other exceptions beside; thinking perhaps, that it was as
convenient for men to refrain from their wives conversation, as he did often
times from sitting in the Court. These were his daily documents to his young
wife, wherewith with (poor soul) she became so tired, as nothing could be
more irksome to her; and very careful she was, lest any other should teach her
what belo^ged to working days, because he would have herknow none but holidaies.

Afterwa^d it came to pass, that the season waxing extremely hot, Signior
Ricciardo would go recreate himself at his house in the Country, near unto
the black Mountain, where for his fair wives more contentment, he continued
diverse days together. And for her further recreation, he gave order, to have a
day of fishing, he going aboard a small Pinnace among the Fishers, and she was
in another, consorted with diverse other Gentlewomen, in whose company she
showed her self very well pleased. Delight made them launch further into the
Sea, then either the Judge was willing they should have done, or agreed with
respect of their own safety. For suddenly a Galliot came upon them, wherein
was one Pagamino, a Pyrate very famous in those days, who espying the two
Pinnaces, made out presently to them, and seized on that wherein the women
were. When he beheld there so fair a young woman, he coueted after no other
purchase; but mounting her into his Galliot, in the sight of Signior Ricciardo,
who (by this time) was fearfully landed, he carried her away with him. When
Signior Judge had seen this theft (he being so jealous of his wife, as
scarcely he would let the air breathe on her) it were a needless demand, to
know whether he was offended, or no. He made complaint at Pisa, and in many
other places beside, what injury he had sustained by those Pryrates, in carrying
his wife thus away from him: but all was in vain, he neither (as yet) knew the
man, nor whether he had conveyed her from him. Pagamino perceiving what a
beautiful woman she was, made the more precious esteem of his purchase, and
being himself a bachelar, intended to keep her as his own; comforting her
with kind and pleasing speeches, not using any harsh or uncivil demeanor to
her, because she wept and lamented grievously. But when night came, her
husbands Calendar falling from her girdle, and all the fasts and feasts quite
out of her remembrance; she received such courteous consolations from Pagamino,
that before they could arrive at Monaco, the Judge and his Law cases, were
almost out of her memory, such was his affable behavior to her, and she began
to converse with him in more friendly manner, and he entreating her as
honorably, as if she had been his espoused wife.

Within a short while after, report had acquainted Ricciardo the Judge, where,
and how his wife was kept from him; whereupon he determined, not to send any
one, but rather to go himself in person, and to redeem her from the Pyrate,
with what sums of money he should demand. By Sea he passed to Monaco, where he
saw his wife, and she him, as (soon after) she made known to Pagamino. On
the morrow following, Signior Ricciardo meeting with Pagamino, made means to be
acquainted with him, and within less the^ an hours space, they grew into
familiar and private conference: Pagamino yet pretending not to know him, but
expected what issue this talk would sort to. When time served, the Judge
discoursed the occasion of his coming thither, desiring him to demand what
ransom he pleased, and that he might have his wife home with him; whereto
Pagamino thus answered.

My Lord Judge, you are welcome hither, and to answer you breefely very true it
is, that I have a young Gentlewoman in my house, whom I neither know to be your
wife, or any other man's else whatsoever: for I am ignorant both of you and her,
albeit she has remained a while here with me. If you be her husband, as you
seem to avouch, I will bring her to you, for you appear to be a worthy
Gentleman, and (questionles) she cannot choose but know you perfectly. If she do
confirm that which you have said, and be willing to depart hence with you: I
shall rest well satisfied, and will have no other recompense for her ransom
(in regard of your grave and reverent years) but what your self shall please
to give me. But if it fall out otherwise, and prove not to be as you have
affirmed: you shall offer me great wrong, in seeking to get her from me;
because I am a young man, and can as well maintain so fair a wife, as you, or
any man else that I know. Believe it certainly, replied the Judge, that she is
my wife, and if you please to bring me where she is, you shall soon perceive
it: for, she will presently cast her arms about my neck, and I durst adventure
the utter loss of her, if she deny to do it in your presence. Come on then,
said Pagamino, and let us delay the time no longer.

When they were entered into Pagaminoes house, and sat down in the Hall, he
caused her to be called, and she, being readily prepared for the purpose, came
forth of her Chamber before them both, where friendly they sat conuersing
together; never uttering any one word to Signior Ricciardo, or knowing him from
any other stranger, that Pagamino might bring in to the house with him. Which
when my Lord the Judge beheld, (who expected to find a far more gracious
welcome) he stood as a man amazed, saying to himself. Perhaps the
extraordinary grief and mellancholly, suffered by me since the time of her
loss; has so altered my wonted complexion, that she is not able to take
knowledge of me. Wherefore, going nearer to her, he said. Fair Love, dearly
have I bought your going on fishing, because never man felt the like
afflictions, as I have done since the day when I lost you: but by this your
uncivil silence, you seem as if you did not know me. Why dearest Love, see
thou not that I am thy husband Ricciardo, who am come to pay what ransom this
Gentleman shall demand, even in the house where now we are: so to convey thee
home again, upon his kind promise of thy deliverance, after the payment of
thy ransom?

Bertolomea turning toward him, and seeming as if she smiled to her self,
thus answered. Sir, speak you to me? Advise your self well, least you mistake
me for some other, because, concerning my self, I do not remember, that ever
I did see you till now. How now quoth Ricciardo? consider better what you say,
look more circumspectly on me, and then you will remember, that I am your
loving husband, and my name is Ricciardo di Cinzica. You must pardon me Sir,
replied Bertolomea, I know it not so fitting for a modest woman (though you
(perhaps) are so persuaded) to stand gazing in the faces of men: and let me
look upon you never so often, certain I am, that (till this instant) I have
not seen you.

My Lord Judge conceived in his mind, that thus she denied all knowledge of him,
as standing in fear of Pagamino, and would not confess him in his presence.
Wherefore he entreated of Pagamino, to afford him so much favor, that he
might speak alone with her in her Chamber. Pagamino answered, that he was well
contented therewith, provided, that he should not kiss her against her will.
Then he requested Bartolomea, to go with him alone into her Chamber, there to
hear what he could say, and to answer him as she found occasion. When they
were come into the Chamber, and none there present but he and she, Signior
Ricciardo began in this manner. Heart of my heart, life of my life, the
sweetest hope that I have in this world; will thou not know thine own
Ricciardo, who loves thee more then he does himself? Why art thou so strange?
Am I so disfigured, that thou know me not? Behold me with a more pleasing
eye, I pray thee.

Bertolomea smiled to her self, and without suffering him to proceed any
further in speech, returned him this answer. I would have you to understand
Sir, that my memory is not so obliuious, but I know you to be Signior Ricciardo
di Cinzica, and my husband, by name or title; but during the time that I was
with you, it very ill appeared that you had any knowledge of me. For if you had
been so wise and considerate, as (in your own judgment) the world reputed you
to be, you could not be void of so much apprehension, but did apparently
perceive, that I was young, fresh, and cheerfully disposed; and so (by
consequent) meet to know matters requisite for such young women, beside
allowance of food and garments, though bashfulnesse and modesty forbid to utter
it. But if studying the Laws were more welcome to you then a wife, you ought
not to have married, and you loose the worthy reputation of a Judge, when you
fall from that venerable profession, and make your self a common proclaimer of
feasts and fasting days, lenten seasons, vigils, and solemnities due to
Saints, which prohibit the household conversation of husbands and wives.

Here am I now with a worthy Gentleman, that entertained me with very
honorable respect, and here I live in this chamber, not so much as hearing of
any feasts or fasting days; for, neither Fridaies, Saturdaies, vigils of
Saints, or any lingering Lents, enter at this door: but here is honest and
civil conversation, better agreeing with a youthful disposition, then those
harsh documents wherewith you tutord me. Wherefore my purpose is to continue
here with him, as being a place suitable to my mind and youth, referring feasts,
vigils, and fasting days, to a more mature and stayed time of age, when the
body is better able to endure them, and the mind may be prepared for such
ghostly meditations: depart therefore at your own pleasure, and make much of
your Calender, without enjoying any company of mine, for you hear my resolved
determination.

The Judge hearing these words, was overcome with exceeding grief, and when
she was silent, thus he began. Alas dear Love, what an answer is this? Have
thou no regard of thine own honor, thy Parents, and friends? Can thou rather
affect to abide here, for the pleasures of this man, and so sin capitally, then
to live at Pisa in the state of my wife? Consider dear heart, when this man
shall wax weary of thee, to thy shame and his own disgrace, he will reject
thee. I must and shall love thee for ever, and when I dye, I leave thee Lady
and commandresse of all that is mine. Can an inordinate appetite, cause thee to
be careless of thine honor, and of him that loves thee as his own life?
Alas, my fairest hope, say no more so, but return home with me, and now that I
am acquainted with thy inclination; I will endeavor hereafter to give thee
better contentment. Wherefore (dear heart) do not deny me, but change thy
mind, and go with me, for I never saw merry day since I lost thee.

Sir (quoth she) I desire no body to have care of mine honor, beside my self,
because it cannot be here abused. And as for my parents, what respect had they
of me, when they made me your wife: If then they could be so careless of me,
what reason have I to regard them now? And whereas you tax me, that I cannot
live here without capital sin; far is the thought thereof from me, for, here
I am regarded as the wife of Pagamino, but at Pisa, you reputed me not worthy
your society: because, by the point of the Moon, and the quadratures of
Geomatrie; the Planets held conjunction between you and me, whereas here I am
subject to no such constellations. You say beside, that hereafter you will
strive to give me better contentment then you have done; surely, in mine
opinion it is no way possible, because our complexions are so far different,
as Ice is from fire, or gold from dross. As for your allegation, of this
Gentleman's rejecting me, when his humor is satisfied; should if it prove to be
so (as it is the least part of my fear) what fortune soever shall betide me,
never will I make any means to you, what miseries or misaduentures may happen
to me; but the world will afford me one resting place or other, and more to my
contentment, then if I were with you. Therefore I tell you once again, to live
secured from all offense to holy Saints, and not to injury their feasts, fasts,
vigills, and other ceremonious seasons: here is my demourance, and from hence I
purpose not to part.

Our Judge was now in a woeful perplexity, and confessing his folly, in marying
a wife so young, and far unfit for his age and ability: being half desperate,
sad and displeased, he came forth of the Chamber, using diverse speeches to
Pagamino, whereof he made little or no account at all, and in the end, without
any other success, left his wife there, and returned home to Pisa. There,
further afflictions fell upon him, because the people began to scorn him,
demanding daily of him, what was become of his gallant young wife, making
homes, with ridiculous pointings at him: whereby his senses became distracted,
so that he ran rauing about the streets, and afterward died in very miserable
manner. Which news came no sooner to the ear of Pagamino, but, in the
honorable affection he bare to Bertolomea, he married her, with great
solemnity; banishing all Fasts, Vigils, and Lents from his house, and living
with her in much felicity. Wherefore (fair Ladies) I am of opinion, that
Bernardo of Geneway, in his disputation with Ambroginolo, might have shown
himself a great deal wiser, and spared his rash proceeding with his wife.

This tale was so merrily entertained among the whole company, that each one
smiling upon another, with one consent commended Dioneus, maintaining that he
spoke nothing but the truth, and condemning Bernardo for his cruelty. Upon a
general silence commanded, the Queen perceiving that the time was now very
far spent, and every one had delivered their several Nouels, which likewise
gave a period to her Royalty: she gave the Crown to Madam Neiphila,
pleasantly speaking to her in this order. Hereafter, the government of these
few people is committed to your trust and care, for with the day concludes my
dominion. Madam Neiphila, blushing at the honor done unto her, her cheeks
appeared of a vermillion tincture, her eyes glittering with graceful desires,
and sparkeling like the morning Star. And after the modest murmr of the
Assistants was ceased, and her courage in cheerful manner settled, seating her
self higher then she did before, thus she spoke.

Seeing it is so, that you have elected me your Queen, to vary somewhat from
the course observed by them that went before me, whose government you have all
so much commended: by approbation of your counsel, I am desirous to speak my
mind, concerning what I would have to be next followed. It is not unknown to you
all, that to morrow shall be Friday, and Saturday the next day following, which
are days somewhat molestuous to the most part of men, for preparation of their
weekly food and sustenance. Moreover, Friday ought to be reuerendly respected,
in remembrance of him, who died to give us life, and endured his bitter
passion, as on that day; which makes me to hold it fit and expedient, that we
should mind more weighty matters, and rather attend our prayers and devotions,
then the repetition of tales or Nouels. Now concerning Saturday, it has bin a
custom observed among women, to bath and wash themselves from such
immundicities as the former weeks to i will has imposed on the^. Beside, it is a
day of fasting, in honor of the ensuing Sabath, whereon no labor may be done,
but the observation of holy exercises.

By that which has bin said, you may easily conceive, that the course which
we have hitherto continued, cannot be prosecuted, in one and the same manner:
wherefore, I would advice and do hold it an action well performed by us, to cease
for these few days, from recounting any other Nouels. And because we have
remained here four days already, except we would allow the enlarging of our
company, with some other friends that may resort unto us: I think it necessary
to remove from hence, and take our pleasure in another place, which is already
by me determined. When we shall be there assembled, and have slept on the
discourses formerly delivered, let our next argument be still the mutabilities
of Fortune, but especially to concern such persons, as by their wit and
ingenuity, industriously have attained to some matter earnestly desired, or
else recovered again, after the loss. Heereon let us severally study and
premeditate, that the hearers may receive benefit thereby, with the comfortable
maintenance of our harmless recreations; the privilege of Dioneus always
reserved to himself.

Every one commended the Queens deliberation, concluding that it should be
accordingly prosecuted: and thereupon, the master of the household was called, to
give him order for that euenings Table service, and what else concerned the
time of the Queens Royalty, wherein he was sufficiently instructed: which
being done, the company arose, licensing every one to do what they listed. The
Ladies and Gentlemen walked to the Garden, and having sported themselves there
a while; when the hour of supper came, they sat down, and fared very
daintily. Being risen from the Table, according to the Queens command, Madam
Aemilia led the dance, and the ditty following, was sung by Madam Pampinea,
being answered by all the rest, as a Chorus.

The Song.
And if not I, what Lady else can sing,
Of those delights, which kind contentment bring?
Come, come, sweet Love, the cause of my chief good,
Of all my hopes, the firm and full effect;
Sing we together, but in no sad mood,
Of sighs or tears, which joy does counterchecke:
Stolen pleasures are delightful in the taste,
But yet Loves fire is often times too fierce;
Consuming comfort with ore-speedy haste,
Which into gentle hearts too far does pierce.
And if not I, etc.
The first day that I felt this fiery heat,
So sweet a passion did possess my soul,
That though I found the torment sharp, and great;
Yet still me thought to was but a sweet control.
Nor could I count it rude, or rigorous,
Taking my wound from such a piercing eye:
As made the pain most pleasing, gracious,
That I desire in such assaults to die.
And if not I, etc.
Grant then great God of Love, that I may still
Enjoy the benefit of my desire;
And honor her with all my deepest skill,
That first enflamde my heart with holy fire.
To her my bondage is free liberty,
My sickness health, my tortures sweet repose;
Say she the word, in full felicity,
All my extremes join in an happy close.
Then if not I, what Lover else can sing,
Of those delights which kind contentment bring.
After this Song was ended, they sung diverse other beside, and having great
variety of instruments, they parted to them as many pleasing dances. But the
Queen considering that the meet hour for rest was come, with their lighted
Torches before them they all repaired to their Chambers; sparing the other
days next succeeding, for those reasons by the Queen alleged, and spending
the Sunday in solemn devotion.

The end of the second Day.
The Third Day.
Upon which Day, all matters to be discoursed on, do pass under the regiment
of Madam Neiphila: concerning such persons as (by their wit and industry) have
attained to their long wished desires, or recovered something, supposed to be
lost.

The Induction to the ensuing Discourses.
THE morning put on a vermillion countenance, and made the Sun to rise
blushing red, when the Queen (and all the fair company) were come abroad
forth of their Chambers; the Seneshall or great Master of the Household, having
(long before) sent all things necessary to the place of their next intended
meeting. And the people which prepared there every needful matter, suddenly
when they saw the Queen was setting forward, charged all the rest of their
followers, as if it had been preparation for a Camp; to make have away with
the carriages, the rest of the Family remaining behind, to attend upon the
Ladies and Gentlemen.



With a mild, maiesticke, and gentle peace, the Queen rode on, being followed
by the other Ladies, and the three young Gentlemen, taking their way toward
the West; conducted by the musical notes of sweet singing Nightingales, and
infinite other pretty Birds beside, riding in a tract not much frequented, but
richly abounding with fair herbs and flowers, which by reason of the Suns
high mounting, began to open their bosom, and fill the fresh Air with their
odorifferous perfumes. Before they had traveled two small miles distance, all
of them pleasantly conuersing together; they arrived at another goodly Palace,
which being somewhat mounted above the plain, was seated on the side of a
little rising hill.

When they were entered there into, and had seen the great Hall, the Parlors,
and beautiful Chambers, every one stupendiously furnished, with all convenient
commodities to them belonging, and nothing wanting, that could be desired; they
highly commended it, reputing the Lord thereof for a most worthy man, that had
adorned it in such Princely manner. Afterward, being descended lower, and
noting the most spacious and pleasant Court, the Sellars stored with the
choysest Wines, and delicate Springs of water every where running, their
praises then exceeded more and more. And being weary with beholding such
variety of pleasures, they sat down in a fair Gallery, which took the view
of the whole Court, it being round engirt with trees and flowers, whereof the
season then yielded great plenty. And then came the discreet Master of the
Household, with diverse servants attending on him, presenting with Comfits, and
other Banqueting, as also very singular Wines, to serve in sted of a
breakefast.

Having thus reposed themselves a while, a Garden gate was set open to them,
coasting on one side of the Palace, and round enclosed with high mounted
walls. Whereinto when they were entered, they found it to be a most beautiful
Garden, stored with all varieties that possibly could be devised; and therefore
they observed it the more respectiuley. The walks and allies were long and
spacious, yet directly strait as an arrow, environed with spreading vines,
whereon the grapes hung in copious clusters; which being come to their full
ripeness, gave so rare a smell throughout the Garden, with other sweet savors
intermixed among, that they supposed to feel the fresh spiceries of the East.

It would require large length of time, to describe all the rarities of this
place, deserving much more to be commended, then my best faculties will afford
me. In the midst of the Garden, was a square plot, after the resemblance of a
Meadow, flourishing with high grass, herbs, and plants, beside a thousand
diversities of flowers, even as if by the art of painting they had been there
deputed. Round was it circkled with very verdant Orange and Cedar Trees, their
branches plentiously stored with fruit both old and new, as also the flowers
growing freshly among them, yielding not only a rare aspect to the eye, but
also a delicate savor to the smell.

In the midst of this Meadow, stood a Fountain of white Marble, whereon was
engraven most admirable workmanship, and within it (I know not whether it were
by a natural vein, or artificial) flowing from a figure, standing on a
Collomne in the midst of the Fountain, such abundance of water, and so
mounting up toward the Skies, that it was a wonder to behold. For after the
high ascent, it fell down again into the womb of the Fountain, with such a
noise and pleasing murmur, as the stream that glideth from a mill. When the
receptacle of the Fountain did ouerflow the bounds, it streamed along the
Meadow, by secret passages and channels, very fair and artificially made,
returning again into every part of the Meadow, by the like ways of cunning
conueighance, which allowed it full course into the Garden, running swiftly
thence down toward the plain; but before it came thither, the very swift
current of the stream, did drive two goodly Milles, which brought in great
benefit to the Lord of the soil.

The sight of this Garden, the goodly grafts, plants, trees, herbs, frutages,
and flowers, the Springs, Fountains, and pretty riuolets streaming from it, so
highly pleased the Ladies and Gentlemen* that among other infinite
commendations, they spared not to say: if any Paradise remained on the earth to
be seen, it could not possibly be in any other place, but only was contained
within the compass of this Garden. With no mean pleasure and delight they
vvalked round about it, making Chaplets of flowers, and other fair branches of
the trees, continually hearing the Birds in mellodious notes, ecchoing and
warbling one to another, even as if they envied each others felicities.

But yet another beauty (which before had not presented it self unto them) on
a sudden they perceived; namely diverse pretty creatures in many parts of the
Gardens. In one place Conies tripping about; in another place Hares; in a third
part Goats browsing on the herbs, and little young Hindes feeding every where:
yet without strife or warring together, but rather living in such a
Domesticke and pleasing kind of company, even as if they were appointed to
enstruct the most noble of all creatures, to imitate their sociable
conversation.

When their senses had sufficiently banquetted on these several beauties, the
tables were suddenly prepared about the Fountain, where first they sung six
Canzonets; and having paced two or three dances, they sat down to dinner,
according as the Queen ordained, being served in very sumptuous manner, with
all kind of costly and delicate viands, yet not any babbling noise among them.
The Tables being withdrawn, they played again upon their instruments, singing
and dancing gracefully together: till, in regard of the extreme heat, the
Queen commanded to give over, and permitted such as were so pleased, to take
their ease and rest. But some, as not satisfied with the places pleasures, gave
themselves to walking: others fell to reading the lives of the Romans; some to
the Chesse, and the rest to other recreations.

But, after the days warmth was more mildely qualified, and every one had
made benefit of their best content: they went (by order sent from the Queen)
into the Meadow where the Fountain stood, and being set about it, as they used
to do in telling their Tales (the argument appointed by the Queen being
propounded) the first that had the charge imposed, was Philostratus, who began
in this manner.

Massetto di Lamporechio, by counterfetting himself to be dumb, became a
Gardener in a Monastery of Nuns, where he had familiar conversation with them
all.

The first Novel.
Wherein is declared, that virginity is very hardly to be kept, in all places.



MOst worthy Ladies, there wantes no store of men and women, that are so
simple, as to credit for a certainty, that so soon as a young virgin has the
veil pnt on her head (after it is once shorn and filletted) and the black
Cowle given to cover her withal: she is no longer a woman, nor more sensible
of feminine affections, then as if in turning Nun, she became converted to a
stone. And if (perchance) they heard some matters, contrary to their former
settled persuasion; then they grow so furiously offended, as if one had
committed a most foul and enormous sin, directly against the course of
nature. And the torrent of this opinion hurries them on so violently, that they
will not admit the least leisure to consider, how (in such a full scope of
liberty, they have power to do what they list, yea beyond all means of
sufficient satisfying; never ramembring withal, how potent the privilege of
idleness is, especially when it is backed by solitude.

In like manner, there are other people now, who do verily believe, that the
Spade and Pickaxe, gross feeding and labor, do quench all sensual and
fleshly concupiscences, yea, in such as till and husband the grounds, by making
them dull, blockish, and (almost) mere senseless of understanding. But I will
approve (according as the Queen has commanded me, and within the compass of
her direction) and make it apparent to you al, by a short and pleasant Tale;
how greatly they are abused by error, that build upon so weak a foundation.

Not far from Alexandria, there was (and yet is) a great and goodly Monastery,
belonging to the Lord of those parts, who is termed the Admiral. And therein,
under the care and trust of one woman, diverse virgins were kept as recluses or
Nuns, vowed to chastity of life; out of whose number, the Sultan of Babylon
(under whom they lived in subjection) at every three years end, had usually
three of these virgins sent him. At the time whereof I am now to speak, there
remained in the Monastery, no more but eight religious Sisters only, beside the
Gouernesse or Lady Abbess, and an honest poor man, who was a Gardener, and
kept the garden in commendable order.

His wages being small, and he not well contented therewith, would serve there
no longer: but making his accounts even, with the Factotum or Bayliffe
belonging to the house, returned thence to the village of Lamporechio, being a
nature of the place. Among many other that gave him welcome home, was a young
Hebrew pezant of the country, sturdy, strong, and yet comely of person, being
named Masset. But because he was born not far off from Lamporechio, and had
there bin brought up all his younger days, his name of Masset (according to
their vulgar speech) was turned to Massetto, and therefore he was usually
called and known, by the name of Massetto of Lamporechio.

Massetto, falling in talk with the honest poor man, whose name was Lurco,
demanded of him what services he had done in the Monastery, having continued
there so long a time? Quoth Lurco I labored in the Garden, which is very fair
and great; then I went to the Forest to fetch home wood, and cleft it for their
Chamber fuel, drawing up all their water beside, with many other toilesom
services else: but the allowance of my wages was so little, as it would not pay
for the shoes I wore. And that which was worst of all, they being all young
women, I think the devil dwells among them, for a man cannot do any thing to
please them. When I have been busy at my work in the Garden, one would come
and say, Put this here, put that there; and others would take the dibble out
of my hand, telling me, that I did not perform any thing well, making me so
weary of their continual trifling, as I have left all business, gave over
the Garden, and what for one mollestation, as also many other; I intended to
tarry no longer there, but came away, as thou see. And yet the Factotum
desired me at my departing, that if I knew any one, who would undertake the
aforesaid labors, I should send him thither, as (indeed) I promised to do: but
let me fall sick and dye, before I help to send them any.

When Massetto had heard the words of Lurco, he was so desirous to dwell among
the Nuns, that nothing else now hammered in his head: for he meant more
subtly, then poor Lurco did, and made no doubt, to please them sufficiently.
Then considering with himself, how best he might bring his intent to effect;
which appeared not easily to be done, he could question no further therein with
Lurco, but only demanded other matters of him, and among them said. In Troth
thou did well Lurco, to come away from so tedious a dwelling; had he not need
to be more then a man that is to live with such women? It were better for him
to dwell among so many devils, because they understand not the tenth part that
women's wily wits can diue into.

After their conference was ended, Massetto began to beat his brains, how he
might compass to dwell among them, and knowing that he could well enough
perform all the labors, whereof Lurco had made mention: he cared not for any
loss he should sustain thereby: but only stood in doubt of his
entertainment, because he was too young and sprightly. Having pondered on many
imaginations, he said to himself. The place is far enough distant hence,
and none there can take knowledge of me; if I have wit sufficient, cleanely to
make them believe that I am dumb, then (questionless) I shall be received.
And resolving to prosecute this determination, he took a Spade on his
shoulder, and without revealing to any body, whether he went, in the disguise
of a poor laboring countryman, he traveled to the Monastery.

When he was there arrived, he found the great gate open, and entering in
boldly, it was his good hap to espy the Fac-totum in the court, according as
Lurco had given description of him. Making signs before him, as if he were
both dumb and deaf; he manifested, that he craved an Alms for Gods sake,
making shows beside, that if need required, he could cleave wood, or do any
reasonable kind of service. The Fac-totum gladly gave him food, and afterward
showed him diverse knotty logs of wood, which the weak strength of Lurco had
left vnclouen; but this fellow being more active and lusty, quickly rent them
all to pieces. Now it so fell out, that the Fac-totum must needs go to the
Forest, and took Massetto along with him thither: where causing him to fell
diverse Trees, by signs he bad him to lade the two Asses therewith, which
commonly carried home all the wood, and so drive them to the Monastery before
him, which Massetto knew well enough how to do, and performed it very
effectually.

Many other servile offices were there to be done, which caused the Fac-totum,
to make use of his pains diverse other days beside: in which time, the Lady
Abbess chancing to see him, demanded of the Fac-totum what he was? Madam
(quoth he) a poor laboring man, who is both deaf and dumb: hither he came
to crave an alms the other day, which in charity I could do no less but give
him; for which he has done many honest services about the house. It seems
beside, that he has some pretty skill in Gardening, so that if I can persuade
him to continue here, I make no question of his able services: for the old
silly man is gone, and we have need of such a stout fellow, to do the
business belonging unto the Monastery, and one fitter for the turn, comes
sildome hither. Moreover, in regard of his double imperfections, the Sisters
can sustain no impeachment by him. Whereto the Abbess answered, saying; By
the faith of my body, you speak but the truth: understand then, if he have
any knowledge in Gardening, and whether he will dwell here, or no: which
compass so kindly as you can. Let him have a new pair of shoes, fill his
belly daily full of meat, flatter, and make much of him, for we shall find
him work enough to do. All which, the Fac-totum promised to fulfill
sufficiently.

Massetto, who was not far off from them all this while, but seemed seriously
busied, about sweeping and making clean the Court, heard all these speeches;
and being not a little joyful of them, said to himself. If once I come to
work in your Garden, let the proof yield praise of my skill and knowledge.
When the Fac-totum perceived, that he knew perfectly how to undergo his
business, and had questioned him by signs, concerning his willingness to
serve there still, and received the like answer also, of his dutiful
readiness thereto; he gave him order, to work in the Garden, because the
season did now require it; and to leave all other affairs for the Monastery,
attending now only the Gardens preparation.

As Massetto was thus about his Garden emploiment, the Nuns began to resort
thither, and thinking the man to be dumb and deaf indeed, were the more
lavish of their language, mocking and flowting him very immodestly, as being
persuaded, that he heard them not. And the Lady Abbess, thinking he might as
well be an Eunuch, as deprived both of hearing and speaking, stood the less in
fear of the Sisters wal^s, but referred them to their own care and
providence. On a day, Massetto having labored somewhat extraordinarily, lay
down to rest himself awhile under the trees, and two delicate young Nuns,
walking there to take the air, drew near to the place where he dissembled
sleeping; and both of them observing his comeliness of person, began to pity
the poverty of his condition, but much more the misery of his great defectes.
Then one of them, who had a little liuelier spirit then the other, thinking
Massetto to be fast asleep, began in this manner.

Sister (quoth she) if I were faithfully assured of thy secrecy, Example, at
least excuses formed to that intent, prevails much with such kind of
religious women.
I would tell thee a thing which I have often thought on, and it may (perhaps)
redound to thy profit. Sister, replied the other Nun, speak your mind boldly,
and believe it (on my Maidenhead) that I will never reveal it to any creature
living. Encoraged by this solemn answer, the first Nun thus prosecuted her
former purpose, saying. I know not Sister, whether it has entered into thine
understanding or no, how strictly we are here kept and attended, never any man
daring to adventure among us, except our good and honest Fac-totum, who is very
aged; and this dumb fellow, maimed, and made imperfect by nature, and
therefore not worthy the title of a man. Ah Sister, it has of tentimes bin
told me, by Gentle-women coming hither to visit us, that all other sweetes in
the world, are mere mockeries, to the incomparable pleasures of man and woman,
of which we are barred by our unkind parents, binding us to perpetual
chastity, which they were never able to observe themselves.

A Sister of this house once told me, that before her turn came to be sent to
the Soldane, she fell in frailty, with a man that was both lame and blind, and
discovering the same to her Ghostly Father in confession; he absolved her of
that sin; affirming, that she had not transgressed with a man, because he
wanted his rational and understanding parts. Behold Sister, here lies a
creature, almost formed in the selfsame mold, dumb and deaf, which are two
the most rational and understanding parts that do belong to any man, and
therefore no Man, wanting them. If folly and frailty should be committed with
him (as many times since he came hither it has run in my mind) he is by
Nature, sworn to such secrecy, that he cannot (if he would) be a blabbe
thereof. Beside, the Laws and constitutions of our Religion does teach us,
that a sin so assuredly concealed, is more then half absolved.

Aue Maria Sister (said the other Nun) what kind of words are these you
utter? Do not you know, that we have promised our virginity to God? Oh Sister
(answered the other) how many things are promised to him every day, and not one
of a thousand kept or performed? If we have made him such a promise, and some
of our weaker witted Sisters do perform it for us, no doubt but he will accept
it in part of payment. Yea but Sister, replied the second Nun again, there
is another danger lying in our way: If we prove to be with child, how shall
we do then? Sister (quoth our courageous Wench) thou art afraid of a harm,
before it happen, if it come so to pass, let us consider on it then: thou art
but a Nouice in matters of such moment, and we are provided of a thousand
means, whereby to prevent conception. Or, if they should fail, we are so
surely fitted, that the world shall never know it: let it suffice, our lives
must not be (by any) so much as suspected, our Monastery questioned, or our
Religion rashly scandalized. Thus she schooled her younger Sister in wit,
albeit as forward as she in will, and longed as desirously, to know what kind
a creature a man was.

After some other questions, how this intention of theirs might be safely
brought to full effect: the sprightly Nun, that had wit at will, thus
answered. You see Sister (quoth she) it is now the hour of midday, when all
the rest of our Sisterhood are quiet in their Chambers, because we are then
allowed to sleep, for our earlier rising to morning Mattins. Here are none in
the Garden now but our selves, and, while I awake him, be you the watch, and
afterward follow me in my fortune, for I will valiantly lead you the way.
Massetto imitating a dogs sleep, hea^d all this conspiracy intended against
him, and longed as earnestly, till she came to awake him. Which being done, he
seeming very simply sottish, and she chearing him with flattering behavior:
into the close Arbor they went, which the Suns bright eye could not pierce
into, and there I leave it to the Nuns own approbation, whether Massetto was
a man rational, or no. Ill deeds require longer time to contriue, then act,
and both the Nuns, having been with Massetto at this new form of
confession, were enjoined (by him) an easy and silent penance, as brought them
the oftener to shrift, and made him to prove a perfect Confessor.

Desires obtained, but not fully satisfied, do commonly urge more frequent
access, then wisdom thinks expedient, or can continue without discovery.
Our two Iouiall Nuns, not a little proud of their private stolen pleasures,
so long resorted to the close Arbor; till an other Sister, who had often
observed their haunt thither, by means of a little hole in her window; that
she began to suspect them with Massetto, and imparted the same to two other
Sisters, all three concluding, to accuse them before the Lady Abbess. But upon
a further conference had with the offenders, they changed opinion, took the
same oath as the fore-woman had done, and because they would be free from any
taxation at all: they revealed their adventures to the other three ignorants,
and so fell all eight into one formal confederacy, but by good and wary
observation, least the Abbess her self should descry them; finding poor
Massetto such plenty of Garden-worke, as made him very doubtful in pleasing
them all.

It came to pass in the end, that the Lady Abbess, who all this while
imagined no such matter, walking all alone in the Garden on a day, found
Massetto sleeping under an Almond tree, having then very little business to
do, because he had wrought hard all the night before. She observed him to be
an hansome man, young, lusty, well limbde, and proportioned, having a merciful
commisseration of his dumbness and deafness, being persuaded also in like
manner, that if he were an Eunuch too, he deserved a thousand times the more to
be pitied. The season was exceeding hot, and he lay down so carelessly to
sleep, that something was noted, wherein she intended to be better resolved,
almost falling sick of the other Nuns disease. Having awaked him, she
commanded him (by signs) that he should follow her to her chamber, where he
was kep^ close so long, that the Nuns grew offended, because the Gardener
came not to his daily labor.

Well may you imagine that Massetto was no misse-proud man now, to be thus
advanced from the Garden to the Chamber, and by no worse woman, then the Lady
Abbess her self, what signs, shows, or what language he speaks there, I am
not able to express; only it appeard that his behavior pleased her so well,
as it procured his daily repairing thither; and acquainted her with such
familiar conversation, as she would have condemned in the Nuns her daughters,
but that they were wise enough to keep it from her. Now began Massetto to
consider with himself, that he had undertaken a task belonging to great
Hercules, in giving content meant to so many, and by continuing dumb in this
manner, it would redound to his no mean detriment. Whereupon, as he was one
night sitting by the Abbess, the string that restrained his tongue from
speech, brake on a sudden, and thus he spoke.

Madam, I have often heard it said, that one Cock may do service to ten
several Hens, but ten men can (very hardly) even with all their best
endeavor, give full satisfaction every way to one woman; and yet I am tied to
content mine, which is far beyond the compass of my power to do. Already
have I performed so much Garden and Chamber-worke, that I confess my self
stark tired, and can travail no further; and therefore let me entreat you to
lysence my departure hence, or find some means for my better ease. The
Abbess hearing him speak, who had so long served there dumb; being stricken
into admiration, and accounting it almost a miracle, said. How comes this to
pass? I verily believed thee to be dumb. Madam (quoth Massetto) so I was
indeed, but not by Nature; only I had a long lingering sickness, which bereft
me of speech, and which I have not only recovered again this night, but shall
ever remain thankful to you for it.

The Abbess verily credited his answer, demanding what he meant, in saying,
that he did service to nine? Madam, quoth he, this were a dangerous question,
and not easily answered before all the eight Sisters. Upon this reply, the
Abbess plainly perceived, that not only she had fallen into folly, but all
the Nuns likewise cried guilty too: wherefore being a woman of sound
discretion, she would not grant that Massetto should depart, but to keep him
still about the Nuns business, because the Monastery should not be
scandalized by him. And the Fac-totum being dead a little before, his strange
recovery of speech revealed, and some things else more nearly concerning them:
by general consent, and with the good liking of Massetto, he was created the
Fac-totum of the Monastery.

All the neighboring people dwelling thereabout, who knew Masetto to be dumb,
by fetching home wood daily from the Forest, and diverse employments in other
places; were made to believe that by the Nuns devout prayers and discipline,
as also the merits of the Saint, in whose honor the Monastery was built and
erected, Massetto had his long restrained speech restored, and was now become
their sole Fac-totum, having power now to employ others in drudgeries, and ease
himself of all such labors. And albeit he make the Nuns to be fruitful, by
increasing some store of younger Sisters; yet all matters were so close and
cleanly carried, as it was never talked of, till after the death of the Lady
Abbess, when Massetto began to grow in good years, and desired, to return
home to his Native abiding, which (within a while after) was granted him.

Thus Massetto, being rich and old, returned home like a wealthy Father, taking
no care for the nursing of his children, but bequeathed them to the place where
they were bred and born, having (by his wit and ingenious apprehension) made
such a benefit of his youthful years, that now he merrily took ease in his
age.

A Querry of the Stable, belonging to Agilulffo; King of the Lombards, found
the means of access to the Queens bed, without any knowledge or consent in
her. This being secretly discovered by the King, and the party known, he gau
him a mark, by shearing the hair of his head. Whereupon, he that was so
shorn, sheared likewise the heads of all his fellows in the lodging, and so
escaped the punishment intended toward him.

The second Novel.
Wherein is signified, the providence of a wise man, when he shall have reason
to use revenge. And the cunning means of another, when he compasses means
to defend himself from peril.

WHen the Novel of Philostratus was concluded, which made some of the Ladies
blush, and the rest to smile: it pleased the Queen, that Madam Pampinea should
follow next, to second the other gone before; when she, smiling on the whole
assembly, began thus. There are some men so shallow of capacity, that they will
(nevertheless) make show of knowing and understanding such things, as neither
they are able to do, nor appertain to them: whereby they will sometimes
reprehend other men's errors, and such faults as they have unwillingly
committed, thinking thereby to hide their own shame, when they make it much
more apparent and manifest. For proof whereof, fair company, in a contrary
kind I will show you the subtle cunning of one, who (perhaps) might be
reputed of less reckoning then Massetto; and yet he went beyond a King, that
thought himself to be a much wiser man.



Agilalffo, King of Lombardie, according as his Predecessors had done before
him, made the principal seat of his Kingdom, in the City of Pauia, having
embraced in marriage, Tendelinga, the late left widow of Vetario, who likewise
had been King of the Lombards; a most beautiful, wise and virtuous Lady, but
made unfortunate by a mischance. The occurrences and estate of the whole
Realm, being in an honorable, quiet and well settled condition, by the
discreet care and providence of the King; a Querrie appertaining to the
Queens Stable of Horse, being a man but of mean and low quality, though
comely of person, and of equal stature to the King; became immeasurably
amorous of the Queen. And because his base and servile condition, had endued
him with so much understanding, as to know infallibly, that his affection was
mounted, beyond the compass of conueniencie: wisely he concealed it to
himself, not acquainting any one therewith, or daring so much, as to discover
it either by looks, or any other affectionate behavior.

And although he lived utterly hopeless, of ever attaining to his hearts
desires; yet notwithstanding, he proudly gloried, that his love had soared so
high a pitch, as to be enamoured of a Queen. And daily, as the fury of his
flame increased; so his carriage was far above his fellows and companions, in
the performing of all such serviceable duties, as any way he imagined might
content the Queen. Whereon ensued, that whenever she road abroad to take
the air, she used oftener to mount on the Horse, which this Querrie brought
when she made her choice, then any of the other that were led by his fellows.
And this did he esteem as no mean happiness to him, to order the stirrope
for her mounting, and therefore gave daily his due attendance: so that, to
touch the Stirrup, but (much more) to put her foot into it, or touch any part
of her garments, he thought it the only heaven on earth.

But, as we see it oftentimes come to pass, that by how much the lower hope
declineth, so much the higher love ascends; even so fell it out with this
poor Querry; for, most irksome was it to him, to endure the heavy weight of
his continual oppressions, not having any hope at all of the very least
mitigation. And being utterly unable to relinquish his love diverse times he
resolved on some desperate conclusion, which might yet give the world an
evident testimony, that he dyed for the love he bare to the Queen. And upon
this determination, he grounded the success of his future fortune, to dye in
compassing some part of his desire, without either speaking to the Queen, or
sending any missiue of his love; for to speak or write, were merely in vain,
and drew on a worser consequence then death, which he could bestow on himself
more easily, and when he listed.

No other course now beleagers his brains, but only for secret access to the
Queens bed, and how he might get entrance into her Chamber, under color of
the King, who (as he knew very well) slept many nights together from the
Queen. Wherefore, to see in what manner, and what the usual habit was of the
King, when he came to keep company with his Queen: he hid himself diverse
nights in a Gallery, which was between both their lodging Chambers. At length,
he saw the King come forth of his Chamber, himself all alone, with a fair
night-mantle wrapped about him, carrying a lighted Taper in the one hand, and a
small white Wand in the other, so went he on to the Queens lodging; and
knocking at the door once or twice with the wand, and not using any word, the
door opened, the light was left without, and he entered the Chamber, where he
stayed not long, before his returning back again, which likewise very
diligently he observed.

So familiar was he in the Wardrobe, by often fetching and returning the King
and Queens furnitures; that the fellow to the same Mantle, which the King
wore when he went to the Queen, very secretly he conueighed away thence with
him, being provided of a Light, and the very like Wand. Now bestows he costly
bathings on his body, that the least sent of the Stable might not be felt about
him; and finding a time suitable to his desire, when he knew the King to be at
rest in his own Lodging, and all else sleeping in their beds; closely he
steals into the Gallery, where alighting his Taper, with Tinder purposely
brought thither, the Mantle folded about him, and the Wand in his hand,
valiantly he adventures upon his lives peril. Twice he knocked softly at the
door, which a waiting woman immediately opened, and receiving the Light, went
forth into the Gallery, while the supposed King, was conuersing with the
Queen.

Alas good Queen, here is sin committed, without any guilty thought in
thee, as (within a while after) it plainly appeared. For, the Querry having
compassed what he most covered, and fearing to forfeite his life by delay, when
his amorous desire was indifferently satisfied: returned back as he came, the
sleepy waiting woman not so much as looking on him, but rather glad, that she
might get her to rest again. Scarcely was the Querrie stepped into his bed,
unheard or discerned by any of his fellows, diverse of them lodging both in
that and the next Chamber: but it pleased the King to visit the Queen,
according to his wonted manner, to the no little marvel of the drowsy
waiting woman, who was never twice troubled in a night before. The King being
in bed, whereas always till then, his resort to the Queen, was altogether in
sadness and melancholy, both coming and departing without speaking one word:
now his Majesty was become more pleasantly disposed, whereat the Queen began
not a little to marvel. Now trust me Sir, quoth she, this has been a long
wished, and now most welcome alteration, vouch-safing twice in a night to
visit me, and both within the compass of one hour; for it cannot be much
more, since your being here, and now coming again.

The King hearing these words, suddenly presumed, that by some counterfeit
person or other, the Queen had been this night beguiled: wherefore (very
advisedly) he considered, that in regard the party was unknown to her, and
all the women about her; to make no outward appearance of knowing it, but
rather concealed it to himself. Far from the indiscretion of some
hare-braind men, who presently would have answered and sworn; I came not
hither this night, till now. Whereupon many dangers might ensue, to the
dishonor and prejudice of the Queen; beside, her error being discovered to
her, might afterward be an occasion, to urge a wandering in her appetite, and to
covet after change again. But by this silence, no shame redounded to him or
her, whereas prating, must needs be the publisher of open infamy: yet was he
much vexed in his mind, which neither by looks or words he would discover,
but pleasantly said to the Queen. Why Madame, although I was once here before
to night, I hope you mislike not my second seeing you, nor if I should please
to come again. No truly Sir, quoth she, I only desire you to have care of
your health. Well, said the King, I will follow your counsel, and now return
to mine own lodging again, committing my Queen to her good rest.

His blood boiling with rage and distemper, by such a monstrous injury offered
him; he wrapped his night-mantle about him, and leaving his Chamber, imagining,
that whatsoever he was, needs he must be one of his own house: he took a
light in his hand, and conuayed it into a little Lantern, purposing to be
resolved in his suspicion. No guests or strangers were now in his Court, but
only such as belonged to his household, who lodged altogether about the Escurie
and Stables, being there appointed to diverse beds. Now, this was his conceit,
that whosoever had been so lately familiar with the Queen, his heart and
pulse could (as yet) be hardly at rest, but rather would be troubled with
apparent agitation, as discovering the guilt of so great an offender. Many
Chambers had he passed through, where all were soundly sleeping, and yet he
felt both their breasts and pulses.

At last he came to the lodging of the man indeed, that had so impudently
usurped his place, who could not as yet sleep, for joy of his achieved
adventure. When he espied the King come in, knowing well the occasion of his
search, he began to wax very doubtful, so that his heart and pulse beating
extremely, he felt a further addition of fear, as being confidently persuaded,
that there was now no other way but death, especially if the King discovered
his agony. And although many considerations were in his brain, yet because he
saw that the King was unarmed, his best refuge was, to make show of sleep, in
expectation what the King intended to do. Among them all he had sought, yet
could not find any likelihood, whereby to gather a grounded probability; until
he came to this Querry, whose heart and pulses labored so sternely, that he
said to himself; yea mary, this is the man that did the deed.

Nevertheless, purposing to make no appearance of his further intention, he did
nothing else to him, but drawing forth a pair of sheares, which purposely he
brought thither with him, he clipped away a part of his locks, which (in those
times) they used to wear very long, to the end that he might the better know
him the next morning, and so returned back to his lodging again. The Querry,
who partly saw, but felt what was done to him; perceived plainly (being a
subtle ingenious fellow) for what intent he was thus marked. Wherefore,
without any longer dallying, up he rose, and taking a pair of sheares,
wherewith they used to trim their Horses; softly he went from bed to bed, where
they all lay yet soundly sleeping, and clipped away each man's lock from his
right ear, in the self same manner as the King had done his, and being not
perceived by any one of them, quietly he laid him down again.

In the morning, when the King was risen, he gave command that before the
Palace gates were opened, all his whole Family should come before him, as
instantly his will was fulfilled. Standing all uncovered in his presence, he
began to consider with himself, which of them was the man that he had marked.
And seeing the most part of them to have their locks cut, all after one and
the self same manner; maruailing greatly, he said to himself. The man whom I
seek for, though he be but of mean and base condition, yet it plainly
appears, that he is of no deiect or common understanding. And seeing, that
without further clamor and noise, he could not find out the party he looked
for; he concluded, not to win eternal shame, by compassing a poor revenge:
but rather (by way of admonition) to let the offender know in a word, that he
was both noted and observed. So turning to them all, he said; He that has
done it, let him be silent, and do so no more, and now depart about your
business.

Some other turbulent spirited man, no imprisonments, tortures, examinations,
and interrogatories, could have served his turn; by which course of
proceeding, he makes the shame to be publicly known, which reason requires
to keep concealed. But admit that condign vengeance were taken, it
diminishes not one title of the shame, neither qualifieth the peoples bad
affections, who will lash out as liberally in scandal, and upon the very least
babbling rumor. Such therefore as heard the Kings words, few though they were,
yet truly wise; marvelled much at them, and by long examinations among
themselves, questioned, but came far short of his meaning; the man only
excepted, whom indeed they concerned, and by whom they were never discovered,
so long as the King lived, neither did he dare at any time after, to hazard his
life in the like action, under the frowns or favor of Fortune.

Under color of Confession, and of a most pure conscience, a fair young
Gentlewoman, being amourously affected to an honest man; induced a devout and
solemn religious Friar, to advise her in the means (without his suspicion or
perceiving) how to enjoy the benefit of her friend, and bring her desires to
their full effect.

The third Novel.
Declaring, that the leude and naughty qualities of some persons, do
oftentimes misguide good people, into very great and grievous errors.

WHen Madam Pampinea sat silent, and the Querries boldness equalled with his
crafty cunning, and great wisdom in the King had passed among them with
general applause; the Queen, her self to Madam Philomena, appointed her to
follow next in order, and to hold rank with her discourse, as the rest had
done before her: whereupon Philomena graciously began in this manner.



It is my purpose, to acquaint you with a notable mockery, which was performed
(not in jest, but earnest) by a fair Gentlewoman, to a grave and devout
religious Friar, which will yield so much the more pleasure and recreation, to
every secular understander, if but diligently he or she do observe; how
commonly those religious persons (at least the most part of them) like
notorious fools, are the inuenters of new courses and customs, as thinking
themselves more wise and skilful in all things then any other; yet prove to be
of no worth or validity, addicting the very best of all their devises, to
express their own vileness of mind, and fatten themselves in their sties,
like to pampered Swine. And assure your selves worthy Ladies, that I do not
tell this Tale only to follow the order enjoined me; but also to inform you
that such Saint-like holy Sirs, of whom we are too opinatiue and credulous, may
be, yea, and are (diverse times) cunningly met withal, in their craftiness,
not only by men, but likewise some of our own sex, as I shall make it
apparent to you.

In our own City (more full of craft and deceit, then love or faithful
dealing) there lived not many years since a Gentlewoman, of good spirit,
highly minded, endued with beauty and all commendable qualities, as any other
woman (by nature) could be. Her name, or any others, concerned in this Novel,
I mean not to make manifest, albeit I know them, because some are yet living,
and thereby may be scandalized; and therefore it shall suffice to pass them
over with a smile. This Gentlewoman, seeing her self to be descended of very
great parentage, and (by chance) married to an Artezen, a Clothier or Drapier,
that lived by the making and selling of Cloth: she could not (because he was a
Tradesman) take down the height of her mind; conceiving, that no man of
mean condition (how rich soever) was worthy to enjoy a Gentlewoman in
marriage. Observing moreover, that with all his wealth and treasure, he
understood nothing better, then to open skeines of yarne, fill shuttles, lay
webbes in Loomes, or dispute with his Spinsters, about their business.

Being thus ouer-swayed with her proud opinion, she would no longer be
embraced, or regarded by him in any manner, and only because she could not
refuse him; but would find some other for her better satisfaction, who might
seem more worthy of her respect, then the Drapier her Husband did. Hereupon
she fell so deep in love, with a very honest man of our City also, and of
indifferent years; as what day she saw him not, she could take no rest the
night ensuing. The man himself knew nothing hereof, and therefore was the more
neglect and careless, and she being curious, nice, yet wisely considerate;
durst not let him understand it, neither by any woman's close conveyed message,
nor yet by Letters, as fearing the perils which happen in such cases. But her
eye observing his daily walks and resorts, gave her notice of his often
conuersing with a religious Friar, who albeit he was a fat and corpulent man,
yet notwithstanding, because he seemed to lead a sanctimonious life, and was
reported to be a most honest man; she persuaded her self, that he might be the
best means, between her and her friend.

Having considered with her self, what course was best to be observed in this
case; upon a day, apt and convenient, she went to the Convent, where he kept,
and having caused him to be called, she told him, that if his leisure so
served, very gladly she would be confessed, and only had made her choice of
him. The holy man seeing her, and reputing her to be a Gentlewoman, as indeed
she was no less; willingly heard her, and when she had confessed what she
could, she had yet another matter to acquaint him withal, and thereupon thus
she began.

Holy Father, it is no more then convenient, that I should have recourse to
you, to be assisted by your help and council, in a matter which I will impart
unto you. I know, that you are not ignorant of my parents and husband, of whom
I am affected as dearly as his life, for proof whereof, there is not any
thing that I can desire, but immediately I have it of him, he being a most rich
man, and may very sufficiently afford it. In regard whereof, I love him
equally as my self, and, setting aside my best endeauours for him; I must tell
you one thing, quite contrary to his liking and honor, wherein no woman can
more worthily deserve death, then my self. Understand then, good Father, that
there is a man, whose name I know not, but he seems to be honest, and of
good worth; moreover (if I am not deceived) he resorteth oftentimes to you,
being fair and comely of person, going always in black garments of good
price and value. This man, imagining (perhaps) no such mind in me, as truly
there is; has often attempted me, and never can I be at my door, or window,
but he is always present in my sight, which is not a little displeasing to
me; he watches my walks, and much I marvel, that he is not now here.

Let me tell you holy Sir, that such behauiours, do many times lay bad
imputations upon very honest women, yet without any offense in them. It has
often run in my mind, to let him have knowledge thereof by my brethren: but
afterward I considered, that men (many times) deliver messages in such sort, as
draw on very ungentle answers, whereon grow words, and words beget actions. In
which respect, because no harm or scandal should ensue, I thought it best to
be silent; determining, to acquaint you rather therewith, then any other, as
well because you seem to be his friend, as also in regard of your office,
which priuiledgeth you, to correct such abuses, not only in friends, but also
in strangers. Enowe other women there are, (more is the pity) who (perhaps)
are better disposed to such suites, then I am, and can both like and allow of
such courting, otherwise then I can do; as being willing to embrace such
offers, and (happily) loath to yield denial. Wherefore, most humbly I entreat
you, good Father (even for our blessed Ladies sake) that you would give him a
friendly reprehension, and advise him, to use such unmanly means no more
hereafter. With which words, she hung down her head in her bosom, cunningly
dissembling, as if she wept, wiping her eyes with her Handkerchife, when not a
tear fell from them, but indeed were dry enough.

The holy Religious man, so soon as he heard her description of the man,
presently knew whom she meant, and highly commending the Gentlewoman, for her
good and virtuous seeming disposition, believed faithfully all that she had
said: promising her, to order the matter so well and discreetly, as she should
not be any more offended. And knowing her to be a woman of great wealth (after
all their usual manner, when they cast forth their fishing nets for gain:)
liberally he commended Almes-deedes, and daily works of charity, recounting to
her (beside) his own particular necessities. Then, giving him two pieces of
gold, she said. I pray you (good Father) to be mindful of me, and if he chance
to make any denial: tell him boldly, that I spoke it my self to you, and by
the way of a sad complaint her confession being ended, and penance easy enough
enjoined her, she promised to make her parents bountiful benefactours to the
Convent, and put more money into his hand, desiring him in his Masses, to
remember the souls of her deceased friends, and so returned home to her house.

Within a short while after her departure, the Gentleman, of whom she had made
this counterfeit complaint, came thither, as was his usual manner, and having
done his duty to the holy Father; they sat down together privately, falling
out of one discourse into another. At the length, the Friar (in very loving and
friendly sort) mildly reproved him, for such amorous glaunces, and other
pursuites, which (as he thought) he daily used to the Gentlewoman, according
to her own speeches. The Gentleman meruailed greatly thereat, as one that had
never seen her, and very sildome passed by the way where she dwelt, which made
him the bolder in his answers; wherein the Confessor interrupting him, said.
Never make such admiration at the matter, neither waste more words in these
stout denials, because they cannot serve thy turn: I tell thee plainly, I
heard it not from any neighbors, but even of her own self, in a very
sorrowful and sad complaint. And though (perhaps) hereafter, thou can very
hardly refrain such follies; yet let me tell thee so much of her (and under
the seal of absolute assurance) that she is the only woman of the world, who
(in my true judgment) does hate and abhor all such base behavior.
Wherefore, in regard of thine own honor, as also not to vex and prejudice so
virtuous a Gentlewoman: I pray thee refrain such idleness henceforward, and
suffer her to live in peace.

The Gentleman, being a little wiser then his ghostly Father, perceived
immediately (without any further meditating on the matter) the notable polli^ie
of the woman: whereupon, making somewhat bashful appearance of any error
already committed; he said, he would afterward be better advised. So,
departing from the Friar, he went on directly, to pass by the house where the
Gentlewoman dwelt, and she stood always ready on her watch, at a little
window, to observe, when he should walk that way: And seeing him coming, she
showed her self so joyful, and gracious to him, as he easily understood,
whereto the substance of the holy Fathers chiding tended. And, from that time
forward, he used daily, though in covert manner (to the no little liking of
the Gentlewoman and himself) to make his passage through that street, under
color of some important occasions there, concerning him.

Soon after, it being plainly discerned on either side, that the one was as
well contented with these walks, as the other could be: she desired to
inflame him a little further, by a more liberal illustration of her affection
toward him, when time and place affoorded convenient opportunity. To the holy
Father again she went, (for she had been too long from shrift) and kneeling
down at his feet, intended to begin her confession in tears; which the Friar
perceiving, sorrowfully demanded of her, what new accident had happened? Holy
Father (quoth she) no novel accident, but only your wicked and ungracious
friend, by whom (since I was here with you, yea, no longer ago then yesterday)
I have been so wronged, as I verily believe that he was borne to be my
mortal enemy, and to make me do something to my utter disgrace for ever; and
whereby I shall not dare to be seen any more of you, my dear Father. How is
this? answered the Friar, has he not refrained from afflicting you so
abusiuely?

Pausing a while, and breathing forth many a dissembled sigh, thus she
replied. No truly, holy Father, there is no likelihood of his abstaining; for
since I made my complaint to you, he belike taking it in evil part, to be
contraried in his wanton humors, has (merely in despite) walked seven
times in a day by my door, whereas formerly, he never used it above once or
twice. And well were it (good Father) if he could be contented with those
walks, and gazing glaunces which he darts at me: but grown he is so bold
and shameless, that even yesterday, (as I told you) he sent a woman to me,
one of his Pandoraes) as it appeared, and as if I had wanted either Purses or
Girdles, he sent me (by her) a Purse and a Girdle. Whereat I grew so grievously
offended, as had it not been for my due respect and fear of God, and next the
sacred reverence I bear to you my ghostly Father; doubtless, I had done some
wicked deed. Nevertheless, happily I withstood it, and will neither say or
do any thing in this case, till first I have made it known to you.

Then I called to mind, that having redeliuered the Purse and Girdle to his
she messenger, (which brought them) with looks sufficient to declare my
coffeehouse: I called her back again, fearing least she would keep them
to her self, and make him believe, that I had received them (as I have heard
such kind of women use to do sometimes) and in anger I snatched them from her,
and have brought them hither to you, to the end that you may give him them
again; and tell him, I have no need of any such things, thanks be to Heaven
and my husband, as no woman can be better stored then I am. Wherefore good
Father, purposely am I now come to you, and I beseech you accept my just
excuse, that if he will not abstain from thus molesting me, I will disclose it
to my Husband, Father, and Brethren, whatsoever shall ensue thereon: for I had
rather he should receive the injury (if needs it must come) then I to be
causelessly blamed for him; wherein good Father tell me, if I do not well. With
many counterfeit sobbes, sighs, and tears, these words were delivered; and
drawing forth from under her gown, a very fair and rich purse, as also a
Girdle of great worth, she threw them into the Friars lap.

He verily believing all this false report, being troubled in his mind
thereat beyond measure, took the Gentlewoman by the hand, saying: Daughter, if
thou be offended at these impudent follies, assuredly I cannot blame thee, nor
will any wise man reprove thee for it; and I commend thee for following my
counsel. But let me alone for schooling of my Gentleman: ill has he kept his
promise made to me; wherefore, in regard of his former offense, as also this
other so lately committed, I hope to set him in such a heat, as shall make him
leave off from further iniurying thee. And in Gods name, suffer not thy self
to be conquered by choler, in disclosing this to thy kindred or husband,
because too much harm may ensue thereon. But fear not any wrong to thy self;
for, both before God and men, I am a true witness of thine honesty and virtue.

Now began she to appear somewhat better comforted; and forbearing to play on
this string any longer, as well knowing the covetousness of him and his equals
she said. Holy Father, some few nights past, me thought in my sleep, that
diverse spirits of my kindred appeared to me in a vision, who (me thought) were
in very great pains, and desired nothing else but Alms; especially my
God-mother, who seemed to be afflicted with such extreme poverty, that it was
most pitiful to behold. And I am half persuaded, that her torments are the
greater, seeing me troubled with such an enemy to goodness. Wherefore (good
Father) to deliver her soul and the others, out of those fearful flames;
among your infinite other devout prayers, I would have you to say the forty
Masses of S. Gregory, as a means for their happy deliverance, and so she put
ten ducates into his hand. Which the holy man accepted thankfully, and with
good words, as also many singular examples, confirmed her bountiful devotion:
and when he had given her his benediction, home she departed.

After that the Gentlewoman was gone, he sent for his friend, whom she so much
seemed to be troubled withal; and when he was come, he beholding his Holy
Father to look discontentedly: thought, that now he should hear some news
from his Mistress, and therefore expected what he would say. The Friar,
falling into the course of his former reprehensions, but yet in more rough and
impatient manner, sharply checked him for his immodest behavior toward the
Gentlewoman, in sending her the Purse and Girdle. The Gentleman, who as yet
could not guess whereto his speeches tended; somewhat coldly and temperately,
denied the sending of such tokens to her, to the end that he would not be
utterly discredited with the good man, if so be the Gentlewoman had shown him
any such things. But then the Friar, waxing much more angry, sternly said. Bad
man as thou art, how can thou deny a manifest truth? See sir, these are none
of your amorous tokens? No, I am sure you do not know them, nor ever saw them
till now.

The Gentleman, seeming as if he were much ashamed, said. Truly Father I do
know them, and confess that I have done ill, and very greatly offended: but
now I will swear unto you, seeing I understand how firmly she is affected,
that you shall never hear any more complaints of me. Such were his vows and
protestations, as in the end the ghostly Father gave him both the Purse and
Girdle: then after he had preached, and severely coniured him, never more to
vex her with any gifts at all, and he binding himself thereto by a solemn
promise, he gave him license to depart. Now grew the Gentleman very iocond,
being so surely certifyed of his Mistresses love, and by tokens of such worthy
esteem; wherefore no sooner was he gone from the Friar, but he went into
such a secret place, where he could let her behold at her Window, what precious
tokens he had received from her, whereof she was extraordinarily joyful,
because her devices grew still better and b^^ter; nothing now wanting, but her
husbands absence, upon some journey from the City, for the full effecting of
her desire.

Within a few days after, such an occasion happened, as her husband of necessity
must journey to Geneway; and no sooner was he mounted on horseback, taking
leave of her and all his friends: but she, being sure he was gone, went in all
have to her Ghostly Father; and, after a few feigned outward shows, thus she
spoke. I must now plainly tell you, holy father, that I can no longer endure
this wicked friend of yours; but because I promised you the other day, that I
would not do any thing, before I had your counsel therein, I am now come to
tell you, the just reason of my anger, and full purpose to avoid all further
mollestation.

Your friend I cannot term him, but (questionles) a very devil of hell. This
morning, before the break of day, having heard (but how, I know not) that my
husband was ridden to Geneway: got over the wall into my Garden, and climbing
up a tree which stands close before my chamber window, when I was fast
asleep, opened the Casement, and would have entered in at the window. But, by
great good fortune, I awaked and made show of an open outcry: but that he
entreated me, both for Gods sake and yours, to pardon him this error, and
never after he would presume any more to offend me. When he saw, that (for your
sake) I was silent, he closed fast the window again, departed as he came, and
since I never saw him, or heard any tidings of him. Now judge you, holy Father,
whether these be honest courses, or no, and to be endured by any civil
Gentlewoman; neither would I so patiently have suffered this, but only in my
dutiful reverence to you.

The Ghostly Father hearing this, became the sorrowfullest man in the world,
not knowing how to make her any answer, but only demanded of her diverse times,
whether she knew him so perfectly, that she did nor mistake him for some other?
Quoth she, I would I did not know him from any other. Alas dear daughter
(replied the Friar) what can more be said in this case, but that it was
overmuch boldness, and very il done; and thou shewedst thy self a worthy
wise woman, in sending him away so mercifully, as thou did. Once more I would
entreat thee (dear and virtuous daughter) seeing grace has hitherto kept thee
from dishonor, and twice already thou have credited my counsel, let me now
advise thee this last time. Spare speech, or complaining to any other of thy
friends, and leave it to me, to try if I can overcome this unchained devil,
whom I took to be a much more holy man. If I can recall him from this sensual
appetite, I shall account my labor well employed; but if I cannot do it,
henceforward (with my blessed benediction) I give thee leave to do, even what
thy heart will best tutor thee to. You see Sir (said she) what manner of man
he is, yet would I not have you troubled or disobeyed, only I desire to live
without disturbance, which work (I beseech you) as best you may: for I promise
you, good Father, never to solicit you more upon this occasion: And so, in a
pretended rage, she returned back from the ghostly Father.

Scarsely was she gone forth of the Church, but in comes the man that had
(supposedly) so much transgressed; and the Friar taking him aside, gave him the
most injurious words that could be used to a man, calling him disloyal,
perjured, and a traitor. He who had formerly twice perceived, how high the
holy man's anger mounted, did nothing but expect what he would say; and, like a
man extremely perplexed, strove how to get it from him, saying; Holy Father,
how come you to be so heinously offended? What have I done to incense you so
strangely? Hear me dishonest wretch answered the Friar, listen what I shall
say unto thee. Thou answerest me, as if it were a year or two past, since so
foul abuses were by thee committed, and they almost quite out of thy
remembrance. But tell me wicked man, where wast thou this morning, before
break of the day? Wheresoever I was, replied the Gentleman, me thinks the
tidings come very quickly to you. It is true, said the Friar, they are speedily
come to me indeed, and upon urgent necessity.

After a little curbing in of his wrath, somewhat in a milder strain, thus he
proceeded. Because the Gentlewomans husband is iourneyed to Geneway, proves
this a ladder to your hope, that to embrace her in your arms, you must climb
over the Garden wall, like a treacherous robber in the night season, mount up a
tree before her Chamber window, open the Casement, as hoping to compass that
by importunity, which her spotless chastity will never permit. There is
nothing in the world, that possibly she can hate more then you, and yet you
will love her whether she will or no. Many demonstrations her self has made
to you, how retrograde you are to any good conceit of her, and my loving
admonishments might have had better success in you, then as yet they show by
outward appearance. But one thing I must tell you, her silent sufferance of your
injuries all this while, has not bin in any respect of you, but at my earnest
entreaties, and for my sake. But now she will be patient no longer, and I have
given her free license, if ever hereafter you offer to attempt her any more,
to make her complaint before her Brethren, which will redound to your no mean
danger.

The Gentleman, having wisely collected his Loue-lesson out of the Holy Fathers
angry words, pacified the good old man so well as he could with very solemn
promises and protestations, that he should hear (no more) any misbehauiour of
his. And being gone from him, followed the instructions given in her complaint,
by climbing over the Garden Wall, ascending the Tree, and entering at the
Casement, standing ready open to welcome him. Thus the Friars simplicity,
wrought on by her most ingenuous subtlety, made way to obtain both their
longing desires.

A young Scholar, named Felice, enstructed Puccio di Rinieri, how to become
rich in a very short time. While Puccio made experience of the instructions
taught him; Felice obtained the favor of his Daughter.

The fourth Novel.
Wherein is declared, what craft and subtilty some wily wits can devise, to
deceive the simple, and compass their own desires.



AFter that Philomena had finished her Tale, she sat still; and Dioneus with
fair and pleasing Language) commended the Gentlewomans quaint cunning, but
smiled at the Confessors witless simplicity. Then the Queen, turning with
cheerful looks toward Pamphilus, commanded him to continue on their
delight; who gladly yielded, and thus began. Madame, many men there are, who
while they strive to climb from a good estate, to a seeming better; do become
in much worse condition then they were before. As happened to a neighbor of
ours, and no long time since, as the accident will better acquaint you withal.

According as I have heard it reported, near to Saint Brancazio, there dwelt
an honest man, and somewhat rich, who was called Puccio di Rinieri, and who
addicted all his pains and endeavors to Alchimy: wherefore, he kept no other
family, but only a widdowed daughter, and a servant; and because he had no
other Art or exercise, he used often to frequent the market place. And in
regard he was but a weak witted man, and a gourmand or gross feeder; his
language was the more harsh and rude, like to our common Porters or loutish
men, and his carriage also absurd, boore-like, and clownish. His daughter,
being named Monna Isabetta, aged not above eight and twenty, or thirty years;
was a fresh indifferent fair, plumpe, round woman, cherry cheekt, like a
Queene-Apple; and, to please her Father, fed not so sparingly, as otherwise she
would have done, but when she communed or iested with any body, she would talk
of nothing, but only concerning the great virtue in Alchimy, extolling it
above all other Arts.

Much about this season of the year, there returned a young Scholar from
Paris, named Felice, fair of complexion, comely of person, ingeniously witted,
and skilfully learned, who (soon after) grew into familiarity with Puccio: now
because he could resolve him in many doubts, depending on his profession of
Alchimy, (himself having only practice, but no great learning) he used many
questions to him, showed him very especial matters of secrecy, entertaining
him often to dinners and suppers, whenever he pleased to come and converse
with him; and his daughter likewise, perceiving with what favor her Father
respected him, became the more familiar with him, allowing him good regard and
reverence.

The young man continuing his resort to the House of Puccio, and observing the
widow to be fair, fresh, and prettily formal; he began to consider with
himself, what those things might be, wherein she was most wanting; and (if he
could) to save another labor, supply them by his best endeauours. Thus not
always carrying his eyes before him, but using many back and circumspect
regards, he proceeded so far in his wily apprehensions, that (by a few
sparks close kept together) he kindled part of the same fire in her, which
began to flame apparently in him. And he very wittily observing the same, as
occasion first smiled on him, and allowed him favorable opportunity, so did
he impart his intention to her.

Now albeit he found her plyant enough, to gain physic for her own grief,
as soon as his; yet the means and manner were (as yet) quite out of all
apprehension. For she in no other part of the World, would trust her self in
the young man's company, but only in her Fathers house; and that was a place
out of all possibility, because Puccio (by a long continued custom) used to
watch well near all the night, as commonly he did, each night after other,
never stirring forth of the rooms, which much abated the edge of the young
man's appetite. After infinite intricate reuoluings, wheeling about his busied
brain, he thought it not altogether an Herculian task, to enjoy his
happiness in the house, and without any suspicion, albeit Puccio kept still
within doors, and watched as he was wont to do.

Upon a day as he sat in familiar conference with Puccio, he began to speak
unto him in this manner; I have many times noted, kind friend Puccio, that all
thy desire and endeavor is, by what means thou may become very rich,
wherein (me thinks) thou take too wide a course, when there is a much near
and shorter way, which Mighell, Scotus, and other his associates, very
diligently observed and followed, yet were never willing to instruct other men
therein; whereby the mystery might be drowned in oblivion, and prosecuted by
none but only great Lords, that are able to undergo it. But because thou art
mine especial friend, and I have received from thee infinite kind favors;
whereas I never intended, that any man (by me) should be acquainted with so
rare a secret; if thou will imitate the course as I shall show thee, I purpose
to teach it thee in full perfection. Puccio being very earnestly desirous to
understand the speediest way to so singular a mystery, first began to entreat
him (with no mean instance) to acquaint him with the rules of so rich a
Science; and afterward swear unto him, never to disclose it to any person,
except he gave his consent thereto; affirming beside, that it was a rarity,
not easy to be comprehended by very apprehensiue judgments. Well (quoth
Felice) seeing thou have made me such a sound and solemn promise, I will make
it known unto thee.

Know then friend Puccio, the Philosophers do hold, that such as covet to
become rich indeed, must understand how to make the Stone: as I will tell thee
how, but mark the manner very heedfully. I do not say, that after the Stone is
obtained, thou shall be even as rich as now thou art; but thou shall plainly
perceive, that the very grosest substances, which hitherto thou have seen, all
of them shall be made pure gold, and such as afterward thou make, shall be
more certain, then to go or come with Aqua fortis, as now they do. Most
expedient is it therefore, that when a man will go diligently about this
business, and purposes to prosecute such a singular labor, which will and
must continue for the space of 40. nights, must give very careful attendance,
wholly abstaining from sleep, slumbering, or so much as nodding all that while.

Moreover, in some apt and convenient place of thy house, there must be a forge
or furnace erected, framed in decent and formal fashion, and near it a large
table placed, ordered in such sort, as standing upright on thy feet, and
leaning the reins of thy back against it; thou must stand steadfastly in that
manner every night, without the least motion or stirring, until the break of
day appears, and thine eyes still upon the Furnace fixed, to keep ever in
memory, the true order which I have prescribed. So soon as the morning is
seen, thou may (if thou will) walk, or rest a little upon thy bed, and
afterward go about thy business, if thou have any. Then go to dinner,
attending readily till the euenings approach, preparing such things as I will
readily set thee down in writing, without which there is not any thing to be
done; and then return to the same task again, not varying a jot from the
course directed. Before the time be fully expired, thou shall perceive many
apparent signs, that the stone is still in absolute forwardness, but it will
be utterly lost if thou fail in the least of all the obseruances. And when
the experience has crowned thy labor, thou art sure to have the Philosophers
stone, and thereby shall be able to enrich all, and work wonders beside.

Puccio instantly replied. Now trust me Sir, there is a great difficulty in
this labor, neither does it require any extraordinary length of time: but it
may very easily be followed and performed, and (by your friendly favor, in
helping to direct the Furnace and Table, according as you imagine most
convenient) on Sunday at night next, I will begin my task. The Scholar being
gone, he went to his daughter, and told her all the matter, and what he had
determined to do: which she immediately understood sufficiently, and what
would ensue on his nightly watching in that manner, returning him answer, that
whatsoever he liked and allowed of, it became not her any way to mislike. Thus
they continued in this kind concordance, till Sunday night came. When Puccio
was to begin his experience, and Felice to set forward upon his adventure.
Concluded it was, that every night the Scholar must come to Supper, partly to
be a witness of his constant performance, but more especially for his own
advantage.

The place which Puccio had chosen, for his hopeful attaining to the
Philosophers Stone, was close to the Chamber where his daughter lay, having no
other separation or division, but an old ruinous tottring wall. So that, when
the Scholar was playing his prize, Puccio heard an unwonted noise in the
house, which he had never observed before, neither knew the wall to have any
such motion: wherefore, not daring to stir from his standing, least all
should be marrd in the very beginning, he called to his daughter, demanding,
what busy labor she was about? The widow, being much addicted to frumping,
according as questions were demanded of her, and (perhaps) forgetting who spoke
to her, pleasantly replied: Whoop Sir, where are we now? Are the Spirits of
Alchimy walking in the house, that we cannot lie quietly in our beds?

Puccio meruailing at this answer, knowing she never gave him the like before;
demanded again, what she did? The subtle wench, remembering that she had not
answered as became her, said: Pardon me Father, my wits were not mine own,
when you demanded such a sudden question; and I have heard you say an hundred
times, that when folk go supperles to bed, either they walk in their sleep,
or being awake, talk very idely, as (no doubt) you have discernde by me. Nay
daughter (quoth he) it may be, that I was in a waking dream, and thought I
heard the old wall totter: but I see I was deceived, for now it is quiet and
still enough. Talk no more good Father, said she, least you stir from your
place, and hinder your labor: take no care for me, I am able enough to have
care of my self.

To prevent any more of these mighty disturbances, they went to lodge in
another part of the house, where they continued out the time of Puccioes
pains, with equal contentment to them both, which made her diverse times say
to Felice: You teach my father the chief grounds of Alchimy, while we help to
waste away his treasure. Thus the Scholar being but poor, yet well forwarded
in Learning, made use of Puccioes folly, and found benefit thereby, to keep
him out of wants, which is the bane and overthrow of numberless good wits. And
Puccio dying, before the date of his limited time, because he failed of the
Philosophers Stone, Isabetta joined in marriage with Felice, to make him amends
for enstructing her father, by which means he came to be her husband.

Ricciardo, surnamed the Magnifico, gave a Horse to Signior Francesco
Vergellisi, upon condition, that (by his leave and lisence) he might speak to
his Wife in his presence; which he did, and she not returning him any answer,
made answer to himself on her behalf, and according to his answer, so the
effect followed.

The fifth Novel.
Wherein is described the frailety of some Women, and folly of such Husbands,
as leave them alone to their own disposition.



PAmphilus having ended the Novel of Puccio the Alchimist, the Queen fixing
her eye on Madam Eliza, gave order, that she should succeed with hers next.
When she asking somewhat more austerely, then any of the rest, not in any
spleen, but as it was her usual manner, thus began. The World contains some
particular people* who do believe (because themselves know something) that
others are ignorant in all things; who for the most part, while they intend to
make a scorn of other men, upon the proof, do find^ themselves to carry away
the scorn. And therefore I account it no mean folly in them* who (upon no
occasion) will tempt the power of another man's wit or experience. But because
all men and women (perhaps) are not of mine opinion; I mean that you shall
perceive it more apparently, by an accident happening to a Knight of Pistoia,
as you shall hear by me related.

In the Town of Pistoia, bordering upon Florence, there lived not long since,
a Knight named Signior Francesco, descended of the lineage or family of the
Vergellisi, a man very rich, wise, and in many things provident, but gripple,
covetous, and too close handed, without respect to his vvorth and reputation.
He being called to the Office of Podesta in the City of Millaine, furnished
himself with all things (in honorable manner) beseeming such a charge; only,
a comely horse (for his own saddle) excepted, which he knew not by any means
how to compass, so loath he was to lay out money, albeit his credit much
depended thereon.

At the same time, there lived in Pistoya likewise, a young man, named
Ricciardo, derived of mean birth, but very wealthy, quick witted, and of
commendable person, always going so neat, fine, and formal in his apparel,
that he was generally termed the Magnifico, who had long time affected, yea,
and closely courted, (though without any advantage or success) the Lady and
Wife of Signior Francesco, who was very beautiful, virtuous, and chaste. It so
chanced, that this Magnifico had the very choysest and goodliest ambling
Gelding in all Tuscanie, which he loved dearly, for his fair form, and other
good parts. Upon a flying rumor throughout Pistoria, that he daily made love to
the foresaid Lady; some busy body, put it into the head of Signior Francesco,
that if he pleased to request the Gelding, the Magnifico would frankly give it
him, in regard of the love he bare to his Wife.

The base minded Knight, coveting to have the Horse, and yet not to part with
any money, sent for the Magnifico, desiring to buy his fair Gelding of him,
because he hoped to have him of free gift. The Magnifico hearing his request,
was not a little joyful hereof, and thus answered; Sir, if you would give me
all the wealth which you possess in this World, I will not sell you my Horse,
rather I will bestow him on you as a Gentlemanly gift; but yet upon this
condition, that before you have him delivered, I may with your lisence, and in
your presence speak a few words to your virtuous Lady, and so far off in
distance from you, as I may not be heard by any, but only her self. Signior
Francesco, wholly conducted by his base auaricious desire, and meaning to make
a scorn at the Magnifico, made answer; that he was well contented, to let him
speak with her when he would, and leaving him in the great Hall of the house,
he went to his Wives Chamber, and told her, how easily he might enjoy the
House; commanding her forthwith, to come and hear what he could say to her,
only she should abstain, and not return him any answer. The Lady with a
modest blush, much condemned this folly in him, that his covetousness should
serve as a cloak, to cover any unfitting speeches, which her chaste ears
could never endure to hear: nevertheless, being to obey her Husbands will,
she promised to do it, and followed him down into the House, to hear what
the Magnifico would say. Again, he there confirmed the bargain made with her
Husband, and sitting down by her in a corner of the Hall, far enough off
from any ones hearing, taking her courteously by the hand, thus he spoke.

Worthy Lady, it appears to me for a certainty, that you are so truly wise,
as you have (no doubt) a long while since perceived, what unfeigned affection
your beauty (far excelling all other women's that I know) has compelled me to
bear you. Setting aside those commendable qualities, and singular virtues,
gloriously shining in you, and powerful enough to make a conquest of the very
stoutest courage: I held it utterly needless, to let you understand by words,
how faithful the love is I bear you, were it not much more fervent and
constant, then ever any other man can express to a woman. In which condition
it shall still continue, without the least blemish or impair, so long as I
enjoy life or motion; yea, and I dare assure you, that if in the future World,
affection may contain the same powerful dominion, as it does in this; I am
the man, borne to love you perpetually. Whereby you may rest confidently
persuaded, that you enjoy not any thing, how poor or precious soever it be,
which you can so solemnly account to be your own, and in the truest title of
right, as you may my self, in all that I have, or for ever shall be mine.

To confirm your opinion in this case, by any argument of greater power, let
me tell you, that I should repute it as my fairest and most gracious fortune,
if you would command me some such service, as consists in mine ability to
perform, and in your courteous favor to accept, yea, if it were to travail
through the whole world, right willing am I, and obedient. In which regard,
fair Madame, if I be so much yours, as you hear I am, I may boldly adventure
(and not without good reason) to acquaint your chaste ears with my earnest
desires, for on you only depends my happiness, life and absolute comfort,
and as your most humble servant, I beseech you (my dearest good, and sole hope
of my soul) that rigor may dwell no longer in your gentle breast, but
Lady-like pity and compassion: whereby I shall say, that as your divine beauty
enflamed mine affections, even so it extended such a merciful qualification,
as exceeded all my hope, but not the half part of your pity.

Admit (miracle of Ladies) that I should die in this distress: Alas, my death
would be but your dishonor; I cannot be termed mine own murderer, when the
Dart came from your eye that did it, and must remain a witness of your
rigor. You cannot then choose but call to mind, and say within your own
soul: Alas! what a sin have I committed, in being so unmerciful to my
Magnifico. Repentance then serves to no purpose, but you must answer for such
unkind cruelty. Wherefore, to prevent so black a scandal to your bright
beauty, beside the ceaselesse acclamations, which will dog your walks in the
day time, and break your quiet sleeps in the night season, with fearful
sights and ghastly apparitions, houering and haunting about your bed; let all
these (...) you to mild mercy, and spill not life, when you may save it.

So the Magnifico ceasing, with tears streaming from his eyes, and si^hes
breaking from his heart, he sat still in exspectation of the Ladies answer,
who made neither long or short of the matter, neither Tilts nor Tourneying, nor
many lost mornings and euenings, nor infinite other such like offices, which
the Magnifico (for her sake) from time to time had spent in vain, without the
least show of acceptance, or any hope at all to win her love: Moved now in
this very hour, by these solemn protestations, or rather most prevailing
asseuerations; she began to find that in her, which (before) she never felt,
namely Love. And although (to keep her promise made to her husband) she spoke
not a word: yet her heart heauing, her soul throbbing, sighs intermixing, and
complexion altering, could not hide her intended answer to the Magnifico, if
promise had been no hinderance to her will. All this while the Magnifico sat
as mute as she, and seeing she would not give him any answer at all; he could
not choose but wonder thereat, yet at length perceived, that it was thus
cunningly contrived by her husband. Notwithstanding, observing well her
countenance, that it was in a quite contrary temper, another kind of fire
sparkling in her eye, other humors flowing, her pulses strongly beating, her
stomach rising, and sighs swelling; all these were arguments of a change, and
motives to advance his hope. Taking courage by this tickling persuasion, and
instructing his mind with a new kind of counsel: he would needs answer
himself on her behalf, and as if she had uttered the words, he spoke in this
manner.

Magnifico, and my friend, surely it is a long time since, when I first noted
thine affection toward me, to be very great and most perfect: but now I am
much more certain thereof, by thine own honest and gentle speeches, which
content me as they ought to do. Nevertheless, if heretofore I have seemed
cruel and unkind to thee, I would not have thee think, that my heart was any
way guilty of my outward severity; but did evermore love thee, and held thee
dearer then any man living. But yet it became me to do so, as well in fear of
others, as for the renown of mine own reputation. But now the time is at
hand, to let thee know more clearly, whether I do affect thee or no: as a
just guerdon of thy constant love, which long thou have, and still do bear
to me. Wherefore comfort thy self, and dwell upon this undoubted hope, because
Signior Francesco my husband, is to be absent hence for many days, being
chosen Podesta at Millaine, as thou can not choose but hear, for it is common
through the Country.

I know (for my sake) thou have given him thy goodly ambling Gelding, and so
soon as he is gone, I promise thee upon my word, and by the faithful love I
bear thee: that I will have further conference with thee, and let thee
understand somewhat more of my mind. And because this is neither fitting time
nor place, to discourse on matters of such serious moment; observe hereafter,
as a signal, when thou see my crimson skarfe hanging in the window of my
Chamber, which is upon the Garden side; that evening (so soon as it is night)
come to the Garden gate, with wary respect, that no eye do discover thee, and
there thou shall find me walking, and ready to acquaint thee with other
matters, according as I shall find occasion.

When the Magnifico, in the person of the Lady, had spoken thus, then he
returned her this answer. Most virtuous Lady, my spirits are so transported
with extraordinary joy, for this your gracious and welcome answer; that my
senses so fail me, and all my faculties quite forsake me, as I cannot give
you such thanks as I would. And if I could speak equally to my desire, yet
the season suits not therewith, neither were it convenient that I should be so
troublesome to you. Let me therefore humbly beseech you, that the desire I have
to accomplish your will (which words avail not to express) may remain in
your kind consideration. And, as you have commanded me, so will I not fail
to perform it accordingly, and in more thankful manner, then as yet I am able
to let you know. Now there rests nothing else to do, but, under the
protection of your gracious pardon, I to give over speech, and you to attend
your worthy husband.

Notwithstanding all that he had spoken, yet she replied not one word,
wherefore the Magnifico arose, and returned to the Knight, who went to meet
him, saying in a loud laughter. How now man? have I not kept my promise with
thee? No Sir, answered the Magnifico, for you promised I should speak with
your wife, and you have made me talk to a marble Statue. This answer was
greatly pleasing to the Knight, who, although he had an undoubted opinion of
his wife; yet this did much more strengthen his belief, and he said. Now thou
confessest thy Gelding to be mine? I do, replied the Magnifico, but if I had
thought, that no better success would have ensued on the bargain; without
your motion for the horse, I would have given him you: and I am sorry that I
did not, because now you have bought my horse, and yet I have not sold him. The
Knight laughed heartily at this answer, and being thus provided of so fair a
beast, he rode on his journey to Millaine, and there entered into his authory of
Podesta.

The Lady remained now in liberty at home, considering on the Magnificoes
words, and likewise the Gelding, which (for her sake) was given to her husband.
Oftentimes she saw him pass to and fro before her window, still looking when
the Flagge of defiance should be hanged forth, that he might fight valiantly
under her Colors. The Story says, that among many of her much better
meditations, she was heard to talk thus idely to her self. What do I mean?
Wherefore is my youth? The old miserable man is gone to Millaine, and God
knows when he comes back again, ever, or never. Is dignity preferred
before wedlockes holy duty, and pleasures abroad, more then comforts at home?
Ill can age pay youths arrerages, when time is spent, and no hope sparde.
Actions omitted, are often times repented, but done in due season, they are
sildome sorrowed for. Upon these vn-Lady-like private consultations, whether
the window showed the signal or no; it is no matter belonging to my charge: I
say, husbands are unwise, to grant such ill advantages, and wives much worse,
if they take hold of them, only judge you the best, and so the Tale is ended.

Ricciardo Minutolo fell in love with the Wife of Philippello Fighinolfi, and
knowing her to be very jealous of her Husband, gave her to understand, that he
was greatly enamoured of his Wife, and had appointed to meet her privately in
a Bathing house, on the next day following: Where she hoping to take him tardie
with his close compacted Mistress, found her self to be deceived by the said
Ricciardo.

The sixth Novel.
Declaring, how much perseverance, and a courageous spirit is available in
love.

NO more remained to be spoken by Madame Eliza, but the cunning of the
Magnifico, being much commended by all the company: the Queen commanded Madame
Fiammetta, to succeed next in order with one of her Nouels, who (smilingly)
made answer that she would, and began thus. Gracious Ladies, me thinks we
have spoken enough already, concerning our own City, which as it abounds
copiously in all commodities, so is it an example also to every convenient
purpose. And as Madam Eliza has done, by recounting occasions happening in
another World, so must we now leap a little further off, even so far as
Naples, to see how one of those Saint-like Dames, that nicely seems to shun
Loves allurings, was guided by the good spirit to a friend of hers, and tasted
of the fruit, before she knew the flowers. A sufficient warning for you, to
apprehend before hand, what may follow after; and to let you see beside, that
when an error is committed, how to be discreet in keeping it from public
knowledge.



In the City of Naples, it being of great antiquity, and (perhaps) as
pleasantly situated, as any other City in all Italy, there dwelt sometime a
young Gentleman, of noble parentage, and well known to be wealthy, named
Ricciardo Minutolo, who, although he had a Gentlewoman (of excellent beauty,
and worthy the very kindest affecting) to his wife; yet his gadding eye gazed
elsewhere, and he became enamoured of another, which (in general opinion)
surpassed all the Neapolitane women else, in feature, favor, and the choysest
perfections, she being named Madam Catulla, wife to as gallant a young
Gentleman, called Philippello Fighinolfi, who most dearly he loved beyond all
other, for her virtue and admired chastity.

Ricciardo loving this Madam Catulla, and using all such means, whereby the
grace and liking of a Lady might be obtained; found it yet a matter beyond
possibility, to compass the height of his desire: so that many desperate and
dangerous resolutions beleagred his brain, seeming so intricate, and unlikely
to afford any hopeful issue, as he wished for nothing more then death. And
death (as yet) being deaf to all his earnest imprecations, delayed him on in
lingering afflictions, and continuing still in such an extreme condition, he
was advised by some of his best friends, utterly to abstain from this fond
pursuit, because his hopes were merely in vain, and Madam Catulla prized
nothing more precious to her in the World, then unstained loyalty to her
Husband; and yet she lived in such extreme jealousy of him, as fearing least
some bird flying in the Air, should snatch him from her.

Ricciardo not unacquainted with this her jealous humor, as well by credible
hearing thereof, as also by daily observation; began to consider with himself,
that it were best for him, to dissemble amorous affection in some other place,
and (hence-forward) to set aside all hope, of ever enjoying the love of Madam
Catulla, because he was now become the servant to another Gentlewoman,
pretending (in her honor) to perform many worthy actions of Arms, Iousts,
Tournaments, and all such like noble exercises, as he was wont to do for Madam
Catulla. So that almost all the people of Naples, but especially Madam Catulla,
became verily persuaded, that his former fruitless love to her was quite
changed, and the new elected Lady had all the glory of his best endeauours,
perseuering so long in this opinion, as now it passed absolutely for current.
Thus seemed he now as a mere stranger to her, whose house before he familiarly
frequented; yet (as a neighbor) gave her the days salutations, according as
he chanced to see her, or meet her.

It came to pass, that it being now the delightful Summer season, when all
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen used to meet together (according to a custom long
observed in that Country) sporting along on the Sea Coast, dining and supping
there very often. Ricciardo Minutolo happened to hear, that Madam Catulla
(with a company of her friends) intended also to be present there among them,
at which time, consorted with a seemly train of his confederates, he resorted
thither, and was graciously welcomed by Madam Catulla, where he pretended no
willing long time of tarrying; but that Catulla and the other Ladies were feign
to entreat him, discoursing of his love to his new elected Mistress: which
Minutolo graced with so solemn a countenance, as it ministered much more matter
of conference, all coveting to know what she was.

So far they walked, and held on this kind of discoursing, as every Lady and
Gentlewoman, waxing weary of too long a continued argument, began to separate
her self with such an associate as she best liked, and as in such walking
women are wont to do; so that Madam Catulla having few females left with her,
stayed behind with Minutolo, who suddenly shot forth a word, concerning her
husband Philippello, and of his loving another woman beside her self. She that
was overmuch jealous before, became so suddenly set on fire, to know what she
was of whom Minutolo spoke; as she sat silent a long while, till being able
to contain no longer, she entreated Ricciardo, even for the Ladies sake,
whose love he had so devoutly embraced, to resolve her certainly, in this
strange alteration of her Husband; whereunto thus he answered.

Madam, you have so straightly coniured me, by urging the remembrance of her; for
whose sake I am not able to deny any thing you can demand, as I am ready
therein to pleasure you. But first you must promise me, that neither you, or
any other person for you, shall at any time disclose it to your Husband, until
you have seen by effect, that which I have told you proves to be true: and
when you please, I will instruct you how your self shall see it. The Lady was
not a little joyful, to be thus satisfied in her Husbands folly, and
constantly crediting his words to be true, she swear a solemn oath, that no
one alive should ever know it. So stepping a little further aside, because no
listening ear should hear him, thus he began.

Lady, if I did love you now so effectually, as heretofore I have done, I
should be very circumspect, in uttering any thing which I imagined might
distaste you. I know not whether your Husband Philippello, were at any time
offended; because I affected you, or believed, that I received any kindness
from you: but whether it were so or no, I could never discern it by any
outward appearance. But now awaiting for the opportunity of time, which he
conceived should afford me the least suspicion; he seeks to compass that,
which (I doubt) he fears I would have done to him, in plain terms Madam, to
have his pleasure of my wife. And as by some carriages I have observed, within
few days past, he has solicited and pursued his purpose very secretly, by
many Ambassages, and other means, as (indeed) I have learned from her self,
and always she has returned in such answers, as she received by my
direction.

And no longer ago Madam, then this very morning, before my coming hither, I
found a woman messenger in my House, in very close conference with my Wife,
when growing doubtful of that which was true indeed, I called my Wife,
enquiring, what the woman would have with her, and she told me it was another
pursuit of Philippello Fighinolfi, who (quoth she) upon such answers as you
have caused me to send him from time to time, perhaps does gather some hope of
prevailing in the end, which makes him still to importune me as he does. And
now he aduentureth so far, as to understand my final intention, having thus
ordered his complot, that when I please, I must meet him secretly in an house
of this City, where he has prepared a Bath ready for me, and hops to enjoy
the end of his desire, as very earnestly he has solicited me thereto. But if
you had not commanded me, to hold him in suspense with so many frivolous
answers; I would (long ere this) have sent him such a message, as should have
been little to his liking.

With patience (Madam) I endured all before, but now (me thinks) he proceeds
too far, which is not any way to be suffered; and therefore I intended to let
you know it, whereby you may perceive, how well you are rewarded, for the
faithful and loyal love you bear him, and for which I was even at the door
of death. Now, because you may be the surer of my speeches, not to be any lies
or fables, and that you may (if you be so pleased) approve the truth by your
own experience: I caused my Wife to send him word, that she would meet him
to morrow, at the Bathing-house appointed, about the hour of noonday, when
people repose themselves, in regard of the heates violence; with which answer
the woman returned very iocondly. Let me now tell you Lady, I hope you have
better opinion of my wit, then any meaning in me, to send my wife thither; I
rather did it to this end, that having acquainted you with his treacherous
intent, you should supply my wives place, by saving both his reputation and
your own, and frustrating his unkind purpose to me. Moreover, upon the view of
his own delusion, wrought by my wife in mere love to you, he shall see his
foul shame, and your most noble care, to keep the rites of marriage between
you still unstained.

Madame Catulla, having heard this long and unpleasing report; without any
consideration, either what he was that told the tale, or what a treason he
intended against her: immediately (as jealous persons use to do) she gave
faith to his forgerie, and began to discourse many things to him, which
imagination had often misguided her in, against her honest minded husband, and
enflamed with rage, suddenly replied; that she would do according as he had
advised her, as being a matter of no difficulty. But if he came, she would so
shame and dishonor him, as no woman whatsoever should better school him.
Ricciardo highly pleased herewith, and being persuaded, that his purpose would
take the full effect: confirmed the Lady in her determination with many words
more; yet putting her in memory, to keep her faithful promise made, without
revealing the matter to any living person, as she had sworn upon her faith.

On the morrow morning, Ricciardo went to an ancient woman of his
acquaintance, who was the Mistress of a Bathing-house, and there where he had
appointed Madame Catulla, that the Bath should be prepared for her, giving her
to understand the whole business, and desiring her to be favorable therein to
him. The woman, who had been much beholding to him in other matters, promised
very willingly to fulfill his request, concluding with him, both what should be
done and said. She had in her house a very dark Chamber, without any window to
afford it the least light, which Chamber she had made ready, according to
Ricciardoes direction, with a rich Bed therein, so soft and delicate as
possible could be, wherein he entered so soon as he had dined, to attend the
arrival of Madame Catulla. On the same day, as she had heard the speeches of
Ricciardo, and gave more credit to them then became her; she returned home to
her house in wonderful impatience. And Philippello her husband came home
discontentedly too, whose head being busied about some worldly affairs,
perhaps he looked not so pleasantly, neither used her so kindly, as he was wont
to do. Which Catulla perceiving, she was ten times more suspicious then
before, saying to her self. Now apparent truth does disclose it self, my
husbands head is troubled now with nothing else, but Ricciardoes wife, with
whom (to morrow) he purposes his meeting; wherein he shall be disappointed, if
I live; taking no rest at all the whole night, for thinking how to handle her
husband.

What shall I say more? On the morrow, at the hour of midday, accompanied
only with her Chamber-mayde, and without any other alteration in opinion; she
went to the house where the Bath was promised, and meeting there with the old
woman, demanded of her, if Philippello were come thither as yet or no? The
woman, being well instructed by Ricciardo, answered: Are you she that should
meet him here. Yes, replied Catulla. Go in then to him (quoth the woman) for
he is not far off before you.

Madame Catulla, who went to seek that which she would not find, being
brought veiled into the dark Chamber where Ricciardo was, entered into the
Bath, hoping to find none other there but her husband, and the custom of the
Country, never disallowed such meetings of men with their wives, but held them
to be good and commendable. In a counterfeit voice he bad her welcome, and she,
not seeming to be any other then she was indeed, entertained his embracings in
as loving manner; yet not daring to speak, least he should know her, but
suffered him to proceed in his own error.

Let pass the wanton follies passing between them, and come to Madame
Catulla, who finding it a fit and convenient time, to vent forth the tempest of
her spleen, began in this manner. Alas! how mighty are the misfortunes of
women, and how ill requited is the loyal love, of many wives to their
husbands? I, a poor miserable Lady, who, for the space of eight years now
fully completed, have loved thee more dearly then mine own life, find now
(to my hearts endless grief) how thou wastest and consumest thy desires, to
delight them with a strange woman, like a most vile and wicked man as thou art.
With whom do thou now imagine thy self to be? Thou art with her, whom thou
have long time deluded by false blandishments, feigning to affect her, when
thou doatest in thy desires elsewhere. I am thine own Catulla, and not the
wife of Ricciardo, traiterous and unfaithful man, as thou art. I am sure thou
know my voice, and I think it a thousand years, until we may see each
other in the light, to do thee such dishonor as thou justly deseruest,
dogged, disdainefull, and villainous wretch. By conceiving to have another
woman in the wanton embraces, thou have declared more iouiall disposition, and
demonstrations of far greater kindness, then domesticke familiarity. At home
thou look sower, sullen or surly, often froward, and sildome well pleased.
But the best is, whereas thou intendest this husbandry for another man's
ground, thou have (against thy will) bestowed it on thine own, and the water
has run a contrary course, quite from the current where thou meantst it.

What answer can thou make, devil, and no man? What, have my words smitten
thee dumb? Thou may (with shame enough) hold thy peace, for with the face
of a man, and love of an husband to his wife, thou art not able to make any
answer.

Ricciardo durst not speak one word, but still expressed his affable behavior
toward her, bestowing infinite embraces and kisses on her: which so much the
more augmented her rage and anger, continuing on her chiding thus. If by these
flatteries and idle follies, thou hopest to comfort or pacify me, thou runnest
quite by as from thy reckoning: for I shall never imagine my self half
satisfied, until in the presence of my parents, friends, and neighbors, I
have revealed thy base behavior. Tell me, treacherous man, am not I as fair,
as the wife of Ricciardo? Am I not as good a Gentlewoman borne, as she is?
What can thou more respect in her, then is in me? Villain, monster, why
do thou not answer me? I will send to Ricciardo, who loves me beyond all
other women in Naples, and yet could never vaunt, that I gave him so much as a
friendly look: he shall know, what a dishonor thou had intended toward
him; which both he and his friends will revenge soundly upon thee.

The exclamations of the Lady were so tedious and irksome, that Ricciardo
perceiving, if she continued longer in these complaints, worse would ensue
thereon, then could be easily remedied: resolved to make himself known to
her, to reclaim her out of this violent ecstasy, and holding her somewhat
strictly, to prevent her escaping from him, he said. Madam, afflict your self
no further, for, what I could not obtain by simply loving you, subtilty has
better taught me, and I am your Ricciardo, which she hearing, and perfectly
knowing him by his voice; she would have leapt out of the Bath, but she could
not, and to avoid her crying out, he laid his hand on her mouth, saying.
Lady, what is done, cannot now be undone, albeit you cried out all your life
time. If you exclaim, or make this known openly by any means; two
unavoidable dangers must needs ensue thereon. The one (which you ought more
carefully to respect) is the wounding of your good renown and honor, because,
when you shall say, that by treachery I drew you hither: I will boldly
maintain the contrary, auouching, that having corrupted you with gold, and not
giving you so much as couetously you desired; you grew offended, and thereon
made the outcry, and you are not to learn, that the world is more easily
induced to believe the worst, then any goodness, be it never so manifest. Next
unto this, mortal hatred must arise between your husband and me, and
(perhaps) I shall as soon kill him, as he me; whereby you can hardly live in
any true contentment after. Wherefore, joy of my life, do not in one moment,
both shame your self, and cause such peril between your husband and me: for
you are not the first, neither can be the last, that shall be deceived. I have
not beguiled you, to take any honor from you, but only declared, the
faithful affection I bear you, and so shall do for ever, as being your
bounden and most obedient servant; and as it is a long time ago, since I
dedicated my self and all mine to your service, so henceforth must I remain
for ever. You are wise enough (I know) in all other things; then show your
self not to be silly or simple in this.

Ricciardo uttered these words, tears streaming abundantly down his cheeks,
and Madame Catulla (all the while) likewise showred forth her sorrows equally
to his, now, although she was exceedingly troubled in mind, and saw what her
own jealous folly had now brought her to, a shame beyond all other whatsoever:
in the midst of her tormenting passions, she considered on the words of
Ricciardo, found good reason in them, in regard of the unavoidable evils,
whereupon she thus spoke. Ricciardo, I know not how to bear the horrible
injury, and notorious treason used by thee against me, grace and goodness
having so forsaken me, to let me fall in so foul a manner. Nor becomes it
me, to make any noise or outcry here, whereto simplicity, or rather deuillish
jealousy, did conduct me. But certain I am of one thing, that I shall never
see any one joyful day, till (by one means or other I be revenged on thee.
Thou have glutted thy desire with my disgrace, let me therefore go from thee,
never more to look upon my wronged husband, or let any honest woman ever see
my face.

Ricciardo perceiving the extremity of her perplexed mind, used all manly and
mild persuasions, which possibly he could devise to do, to turn the torrent
of this high tide, to a calmer course; as by outward show she made appearance
of, until (in frightfull fears shunning every one she met withal, as
arguments of her guiltiness) she recovered her own house, where remorse so
tortured her distressed soul, that she fell into so fierce a melancholy, as
never left her till she died. Upon the report whereof, Ricciardo becoming
likewise a widdower, and grieuing extraordinarily for his heinous
transgression, penitently betook himself to live in a wilderness, where (not
long after) he ended his days.

Thebaldo Elisei, having received an unkind repulse by his beloved, departed
from Florence, and returning thither again (a long while after) in the habit
of a Pilgrim; he spoke with her, and made his wrongs known unto her. He
delivered her Husband from the danger of death, because it was proved, that he
had slain Thebaldo: he made peace with his brethren, and in the end, wisely
enjoyed his hearts desire.

The seventh Novel.
Wherein is signified the power of Love, and the diversity of dangers,
whereinto men may daily fall.



SO ceased Fiametta her discourse, being generally commended, when the Queen,
to prevent the loss of time, commanded Aemillia to follow next, who thus
began. It likes me best (gracious Ladies) to return home again to our own
City, which it pleased the former two discoursers to part from: And there I
will show you, how a Citizen of ours, recovered the kindness of his Love,
after he had lost it.

Sometime there dwelt in Florence a young gentleman, named Thebaldo Elisci,
descended of a noble House, who became earnestly enamored of a Widow, called
Hermelina, the daughter to Aldobrandino Palermini: well deserving, for his
virtues and commendable qualities, to enjoy of her whatsoever he could desire.
Secretly they were espoused together, but Fortune, the enemy to Lovers
felicities, opposed her malice against them, in depriving Thebaldo of those
dear delights, which sometime he held in free possession, and making him as a
stranger to her gracious favors. Now grew she contemptibly to despise him,
not only denying to hear any message sent from him, but scorning also to
vouchsafe so much as a sight of him, causing in him extreme grief and
melancholy, yet concealing all her unkindness so wisely to himself, as no one
could understand the reason of his sadness.

After he had labored by all hopeful courses, to obtain that favor of her,
which he had formerly lost, without any offense in him, as his innocent soul
truly witnessed with him, and saw that all his further endeauours were
fruitless and in vain; he concluded to retreat himself from the World, and
not to be any longer irksome in her eye, that was the only occasion of his
unhappiness. Hereupon, storing himself with such sums of money, as suddenly
he could collect together, secretly he departed from Florence, without speaking
any word to his friends or kindred; except one kind companion of his, whom he
acquainted with most of his secrets, and so traveled to Ancona, where he
termed himself by the name of Sandolescio. Repairing to a wealthy Merchant
there, he placed himself as his servant, and went in a Ship of his with him to
Cyprus; his actions and behavior proved so pleasing to the Merchant, as not
only he allowed him very sufficient wages, but also grew into such association
with him; as he gave the most of his affairs into his hands, which he guided
with such honest and discreet care, that he himself (in few years compass)
proved to be a rich Merchant, and of famous report.

While matters went on in this successful manner, although he could not
choose, but still he remembered his cruel Mistress, and was very desperately
transported for her love, as coveting (above all things e^se) to see her once
more; yet was he of such powerful constancy, as 7. whole years together, he
vanquished all those fierce conflicts. But on a day it chanced he heard a song
sung in Cyprus, which he himself had formerly made, in honor of the love he
bare to his Mistress, and what delight he conceived, by being daily in her
presence; whereby he gathered, that it was impossible for him to forget her,
and proceeded on so desirously, as he could not live, except he had a sight of
her once more, and therefore determined on his return to Florence. Having set
all his affairs in due order, accompanied with a servant of his only, he
passed to Ancona, where when he was arrived, he sent his Merchandises to
Florence, in name of the Merchant of Ancona, who was his especial friend and
partner; trauayling himself alone with his servant, in the habit of a
Pilgrim, as if he had been newly returned from Jerusalem.

Being come to Florence, he went to an Inn kept by two brethren, near
neighbors to the dwelling of his Mistress, and the first thing he did, was
passing by her door, to get a sight of her if he were so happy. But he found
the windows, doors, and all parts of the house fast shut up, whereby he
suspected her to be dead, or else to be changed from her dwelling: wherefore
(much perplexed in mind) he went on to the two brothers Inn, finding four
persons standing at the gate, attired in mourning, whereat he marvelled not a
little; knowing himself to be so transfigured, both in body and habit, far
from the manner of common use at his parting thence, as it was a difficult
matter to know him: he stepped boldly to a Shooe-makers shop near adjoining, and
demanded the reason of their wearning mourning. The Shoo-maker made answer
thus; Sir, those men are clad in mourning, because a brothers of theirs, being
named Thebaldo (who has been absent hence a long while) about some fifteen
days since was slain. And they having heard, by proof made in the Court of
Instice, that one Aldobrandino Palermini (who is kept close prisoner) was the
murderer of him, as he came in a disguised habit to his daughter, of whom he
was most affectionately enamoured; cannot choose, but let the World know by
their outward habites, the inward affliction of their hearts, for a deed so
dishonourably committed.

Thebaldo wondered greatly hereat, imagining, that some man belike resembling
him in shape, might be slain in this manner, and by Aldobr andino, for whose
misfortune he grieved maruellously. As concerning his Mistress, he understood
that she was living, and in good health; and night drawing on apace, he went
to his lodging, with infinite molestations in his mind, where after supper, he
was lodged in a Corne-loft with his man. Now by reason of many disturbing
imaginations, which incessantly wheeled about his brain, his bed also being
none of the best, and his supper (perhaps) somewhat of the coursest; a great
part of the night was spent, yet could he not close his eyes together. But
lying still broad awake, about the dead time of night, he heard the treading
of diverse persons over his head, who descended down a pair of stayres by his
Chamber, into the lower parts of the house, carrying a light with them, which
he discerned by the chinkes and crannies in the wall. Stepping softly out of
his bed, to see what the meaning hereof might be, he espied a fair young
woman, who carried the light in her hand, and three men in her company,
descending down the stayres together, one of them speaking thus to the young
woman. Now we may boldly warrant our safety, because we have heard it
assuredly, that the death of Thebaldo Elisei, has been sufficiently approved
by the Brethren, against Aldobrandino Palermini, and he has confessed the
fact; whereupon the sentence is already set down in writing. But yet it
behooves us notwithstanding, to conceal it very secretly, because if ever
hereafter it should be known, that we are they who murdered him, we shall be
in the same danger, as now Aldobrandino is.

When Thebaldo had heard these words, he began to consider with himself, how
many and great the dangers are, wherewith men's minds may daily be molested.
First, he thought on his own brethren in their sorrow, and buried a stranger
in steed of him, accusing afterward (by false opinion, and upon the testimony
of as false witnesses) a man most innocent, making him ready for the stroke of
death. Next, he made a strict observation in his soul, concerning the blinded
severity of Law, and the Ministers thereto belonging, who pretending a diligent
and careful inquisition for truth, do oftentimes (by their tortures and
torments) hear lies avouched (only for ^ase of pain) in the place of a true
confession, yet thinking themselves (by doing so) to be the Ministers of God
and Justice, whereas indeed they are the Devils executioners of his
wickedness. Lastly, converting his thoughts to Aldobrandino, the imagined
murderer of a man yet living, infinite cares beleagured his soul, in devising
what might best be done for his deliverance.

So soon as he was risen in the morning, leaving his servant behind him in
his lodging, he went (when he thought it fit time) all alone toward the house
of his Mistress, where finding by good fortune the gate open, he entered into a
small Parlour beneath, and where he saw his Mistress sitting on the ground,
wringing her hands, and woefully weeping, which (in mere compassion) moved him
to weep likewise; and going somewhat near her, he said. Madam, torment your
self no more, for your peace is not far off from you. The Gentlewoman
hearing him say so, lifted up her head, and in tears spoke thus. Good man,
thou seem to me to be a Pilgrim stranger; what do thou know, either
concerning my peace, or mine affliction? Madam (replied the Pilgrim) I am of
Constantinople, and (doubtless) am conducted hither by the hand of Heaven, to
convert your tears into rejoicing, and to deliver your Father from death. How
is this? answered she: If thou be of Constantinople, and art but now arrived
here; do thou know who we are, either I, or my Father?

The Pilgrim discoursed to her, even from one end to the other, the history of
her Husbands sad disasters, telling her, how many years since she was
espoused to him, and many other important matters, which well she knew, and was
greatly amazed thereat, thinking him verily to be a Prophet, and kneeling at
his feet, entreated him very earnestly, that if he were come to deliver her
Father Aldobrandino from death, to do it speedily, because the time was very
short. The Pilgrim appearing to be a man of great holiness, said. Rise up
Madam, refrain from weeping, and observe attentively what I shall say; yet
with this caution, that you never reveal it to any person whatsoever. This
tribulation whereinto you are fallen, (as by revelation I am faithfully
informed) is for a grievous sin by you heretofore committed, whereof divine
mercy is willing to purge you, and to make a perfect amends by a sensible
feeling of this affliction; as seeking your sound and absolute recovery, least
you fall into far greater danger then before. Good man (quoth she) I am
burdened with many sins, and do not know for which any amends should be
made by me, any one sooner then another: wherefore if you have intelligence
thereof, for charities sake tell it me, and I will do so much as lies in me,
to make a full satisfaction for it. Madam, answered the Pilgrim; I know well
enough what it is, and will demand it no more of you, to win any further
knowledge thereof, then I have already: but because in revealing it your self,
it may touch you with the more true compunction of soul; let us go to the
point indeed, and tell me, do you remember, that at any time you were married
to an Husband, or no?

At the hearing of these words, she breathed forth a very vehement sigh, and
was stricken with admiration at this question, believing that not any one had
knowledge thereof. Howbeit, since the day of the supposed Thebaldoes burial,
such a rumor ran abroad, by means of some speeches, rashly dispersed by a
friend of Thebaldoes, who (indeed) knew it; whereupon she returned him this
answer. It appears to me (good man) that divine ordinatiuation has revealed
unto you all the secrets of men; and therefore I am determined, not to conceal
any of mine from you. True it is, that in my younger years, being left a
widow, I entirely affected an unfortunate young Gentleman, who (in secret) was
my Husband, and whose death is imposed on my Father. The death of him I have
the more bemoaned, because (in reason) it did nearly concern me, by showing
my self so savage and rigorous to him before his departure: nevertheless, let
me assure you Sir, that neither his parting, long absence from me, or his
untimely death, never had the power to bereave my heart of his remembrance.

Madame, said the Pilgrim, the unfortunate young Gentleman that is slain,
did never love you; but sure I am, that Thebaldo Elisei loved you dearly. But
tell me, what was the occasion whereby you conceived such hatred against him?
Did he at any time offend you? No truly Sir, quoth she; but the reason of my
anger toward him, was by the words and threatenings of a religious Father, to
whom once I revealed (under confession) how faithfully I affected him, and what
private familiarity had passed between us. When instantly he used such
dreadful threatenings to me, and which (even yet) do afflict my soul, that if
I did not abstain, and utterly refuse him, the Devil would fetch me quick to
Hell, and cast me into the bottom of his quenchlesse and everlasting fire.

These menaces were so prevailing with me, as I refused all further
conversation with Thebaldo, in which regard, I would receive neither letters or
messages from him. Howbeit, I am persuaded, that if he had continued here
still, and not departed hence in such desperate manner as he did, seeing him
melt and consume daily away, even as Snow by power of the Sunne-beames: my
austere deliberation had been long ago quite altered, because not at any time
(since then) life has not allowed me one merry day, neither did I, or ever can
love any man like unto him.

At these words the Pilgrim sighed, and then proceeded on again thus. Surely
Madam, this one only sin, may justly torment you, because I know for a
certainty, that Thebaldo never offered you any injury, since the day he first
became enamoured of you; and what grace or favor you affoorded him, was your
own voluntary gift, and (as he took it) no more then in modesty might well
become you; for he loving you first, you had been most cruel and unkind, if
you should not have requited him with the like affection. If then he continued
so just and loyal to you, as (of mine own knowledge) I am able to say he did;
what should move you to repulse him so rudely? Such matters ought well to be
considered on before hand; for if you did imagine, that you should repeat it
as an action ill done, yet you could not do it, because as he became yours, so
were you likewise only his; and he being yours, you might dispose of him at
your pleasure, as being truly obliged to none but you. How could you then
withdraw your self from him, being only his, and not commit most manifest
theft, a far unfitting thing for you to do, except you had gone with his
consent?

Now Madam, let me further give you to understand, that I am a religious
person, and a pilgrim, and therefore am well acquainted with all the courses
of their dealing; if therefore I speak somewhat more amply of them, and for
your good, it cannot be so unseeming for me to do it, as it would appear ugly
in another. In which respect, I will speak the more freely to you, to the
end, that you may take better knowledge of them, then (as it seems) hitherto
you have done. In former passed times such as professed Religion, were learned
and most holy persons; but our religious professors now adays, and such as
coue^ to be so esteemed; have no matter at all of Religion in them, but only
the outward show and habit. Which yet is no true badge of Religion neither,
because it was ordained by religious institutions, that their garments should
be made of narrow, plain, and coursest spun cloth, to make a public
manifestation to the world, that (in mere devotion, and religious disposition)
by wrapping their bodies in such base clothing, they condemned and despised all
temporal occasions. But now adays they make them large, deep, glistering,
and of the finest cloth or stuffes to be gotten, reducing those habites to so
proud and pontifical a form, that they walk Peacock-like rustling, and
strouting with them in the Churches; yea, and in open public places, as if
they were ordinary secular persons, to have their pride more notoriously
observed. And as the Angler bestows his best cunning, with one line and bait
to catch many fishes at one strike; even so do these counterfeted
habite-mongers, by their dissembling and crafty dealing, beguile many credulous
widows, simple women, yea, and men of weak capacity, to credit whatsoever
they do or say, and herein they do most of all exercise themselves.

And to the end, that my speeches may not savor of any untruth against them;
these men which I speak of, have not any habit at all of religious men, but
only the color of their garments, and whereas they in times past, desired
nothing more then the salvation of men's souls; these fresher witted fellows,
covet after women and wealth, and employ all their pains by their whispering
confessions, and figures of painted fearful examples, to affright and terrify
unsettled and weak consciences, by horrible and blasphemous speeches; yet
adding a persuasion withal, that their sins may be purged by Almes-deedes
and Masses. To the end, that such as credit them in these their daily courses,
being guided more by appearance of devotion, then any true compunction of heart,
to escape severe penances by them enjoined: may some of them bring bread,
others wine, others coin, all of them matter of commodity and benefit, and
simply say, these gifts are for the souls of their good friends deceased.

I make not any doubt, but Almes-deedes and prayers, are very mighty, and
prevailing means, to appease heavens anger for some sins committed; but if
such as bestow them, did either see or know, to whom they give them: they would
more warily keep them, or else cast them before Swine, in regard they are
altogether so unworthy of them. But come we now to the case of your ghostly
father, crying out in your ear, that secret marriage was a most grievous sin:
Is not the breach thereof far greater. Familiar conversation between man and
woman, is a concession merely natural: but to rob, kill, or banish any one,
proceeds from the minds malignity. That you did rob Thebaldo, your self
has already sufficiently witnessed, by taking that from him, which with free
consent in marriage you gave him. Next I must say, that by all the power
remaining in you, you killed him, because you would not permit him to remain
with you, declaring your self in the very height of cruelty, that he might
destroy his life by his own hands. In which case the Law requires, that
whosoever is the occasion of an ill act committed, he or she is as deep in
the fault, as the party that did it. Now concerning his banishment, and
wandering seven years in exile through the world; you cannot deny, but that
you were the only occasion thereof. In all which three several actions, far
more capitally have you offended; then by contracting of marriage in such
clandestine manner.

But let us see, whether Thebaldo deserved all these several castigations, or
not. In truth he did not, your self have confessed (beside that which I know)
that he loved you more dearly then himself, and nothing could be more
honored, magnified and exalted, then daily you were by him, above all other
women whatsoever. When he came in any place, where honestly, and without
suspicion he might speak to you: all his honor, and all his liberty, lay
wholly committed into your power. Was he not a noble young Gentleman? Was he
(among all those parts that most adorn a man, and appertain to the very
choycest respect) inferior to any one of best merit in your City? I know that
you cannot make denial to any of these demands. How could you then by the
persuasion of a beast, a fool, a villain, yea, a vagabond, envying both his
happiness and yours, enter into so cruel a mind against him? I know not what
error misguideth women, in scorning and despising their husbands: but if they
entered into a better consideration, understanding truly what they are, and what
nobility of nature God has endued man withal, far above all other
creatures; it would be their highest title of glory, when they are are so
preciously esteemed of them, so dearly affected by them, and so gladly
embraced in all their best abilities.

This is so great a sin, as the divine Justice (which in an equal balance
brings all operations to their full effect) did purpose not to leave
unpunished; but, as you enforced against all reason, to take away Thebaldo from
your self: even so your Father Aldobrandino, without any occasion given by
Thebaldo, is in peril of his life, and you a partaker of his tribulation. Out
of which if you desire to be delivered, it is very convenient that you promise
one thing which I shall tell you, and may much better be by you performed.
Namely, that if Thebaldo do at any time return from his long banishment, you
shall restore him to your love, grace, and good acceptance; accounting him in
the self same degree of favor and private entertainment, as he was at the
first, before you wicked ghostly father so hellishly incensed you against him.

When the Pilgrim had finished his speeches, the Gentlewoman, who had listened
to them very attentively (because all the all caged reasons appeared to be
plainly true) became verily persuaded, that all these afflictions had fallen on
her and her Father, for the ungrateful offense by her committed, and therefore
thus replied. Worthy man, and the friend to goodness, I know undoubtedly, that
the words which you have spoken are true, and also I understand by your
demonstration, what manner of people some of those religious persons are, whom
heretofore I have reputed to be Saints, but find them now to be far otherwise.
And to speak truly, I perceive the fault to be great and grievous, wherein I
have offended against Thebaldo, and would (if I could) willingly make amends,
even in such manner as you have advised. But how is it possible to be done?
Thebaldo being dead, can be no more recalled to this life; and therefore, I
know not what promise I should make, in a matter which is not to be performed.
Whereto, the Pilgrim without any longer pausing, thus answered.

Madam, by such revelations as have been shown to me, I know for a
certainety, that Thebaldo is not dead, but living, in health, and in good
estate; if he had the fruition of your grace and favor. Take heed what you
say Sir (quoth the Gentlewoman) for I saw him lie slain before my door, his
body having received many wounds, which I folded in mine arms, and washed his
face with my brinish tears; whereby (perhaps) the scandal arose, that flew
abroad to my disgrace. Believe me Madam, (replied the Pilgrim) say what you
will, I dare assure you that Thebaldo is living, and if you dare make promise,
concerning what has been formerly requested, and keep it inuiolably; I make
no doubt, but you your self shall shortly see him. I promise it (quoth she)
and bind my self thereto by a sacred oath, to keep it faithfully: for never
could any thing happen, to yield me the like contentment, as to see my Father
free from danger, and Thebaldo living.

At this instant Thebaldo thought it to be a very apt and convenient time to
disclose himself, and to comfort the Lady, with an assured signal of hope,
for the deliverance of her Father, wherefore he said. Lady, to the end that I
may comfort you infallibly, in this dangerous peril of your Fathers life; I am
to make known an especial secret to you, which you are to keep carefully (as
you tender your own life) from ever being revealed to the world. They were
then in a place of sufficient priuacy, and alone by themselves, because she
reposed great confidence in the Pilgrims sanctity of life, as thinking him
none other, then as he seemed to be. Thebaldo took out of his Purse a Ring,
which she gave him, the last night of their conuersing together, and he had
kept with no mean care, and showing it to her, he said. Do you know this
Ring Madam? So soon as she saw it, immediately she knew it, and answered.
Yes Sir, I know the Ring, and confess that heretofore I gave it unto Thebaldo.

Hereupon the Pilgrim stood up, and suddenly putting off his poor linen
Frocke, as also the Hood from his head; using then his Florentine tongue, he
said. Then tell me Madam, do you not know me? When she had advisedly beheld
him, and knew him indeed to the Thebaldo; she was stricken into a wonderful
astonishment, being as fearful of him, as she was of the dead body, which
she saw lying in the street. And I dare assure you, that she durst not go
near him, to respect him, as Thebaldo so lately come from Cyprus: but (in
terror) fled away from him; as if Thebaldo had been newly risen out of his
grave, and came thither purposely to affright her; wherefore he said. Be not
afraid Madam, I am your Thebaldo, in health, alive, and never as yet died,
neither have I received any wounds to kill me, as you and my brethren have
formerly imagined.

Some better assurance getting possession of her soul, as knowing him
perfectly by his voice, and looking more steadfastly on his face, which
constantly avouched him to be Thebaldo; the tears trickling amain down her
fair cheeks, she ran to embrace him, casting her arms about his neck, and
kissing him a thousand times, saying; Theboldo, my true and faithful! Husband,
nothing in the World can be so welcome to me. Thebaldo having most kindly
kissed and embraced her, said; Sweet wife, time will not now allow us those
ceremonious courtesies, which (indeed) so long a separation do justly
challenge; but I must about a more weighty business, to have your Father safe
and soundly delivered, which I hope to do before to morrow at night, when you
shall hear tidings to your better contentment. And questionless, if I speed
no worse then my good hope persuades me, I will see you again to night, and
acquaint you at better leisure, in such things as I cannot do now at this
present.

So putting on his Pilgrims habit again, kissing her once more, and
comforting her with future good success, he departed from her, going to the
prison where Aldobrandino lay, whom he found more pensive, as being in hourly
expectation of death, then any hope he had to be freed from it. Being brought
nearer to him by the prisoners favor, as seeming to be a man, come only to
comfort him; sitting down by him, thus he began. Aldobrandino, I am a friend
of thine, whom Heaven has sent to do thee good, in mere pity and compassion
of thine innocence. And therefore, if thou will grant me one small request,
which I am earnestly to crave at thy hands; thou shall hear (without any
failing) before to morrow at night, the sentence of thy free absolution,
whereas now thou expectest nothing but death; whereunto Aldobrandino thus
answered. Friendly man, seeing thou art so careful of my safety (although I
know thee not, neither do remember that ever I saw thee till now) thou must
needs (as it appears no less) be some especial kind friend of mine. And to
tell thee the truth, I never committed the sinful deed, for which I am
condemned to death. Most true it is, I have other heinous and grievous sins,
which (undoubtedly) have thrown this heavy judgment upon me, and therefore I
am the more willing to undergo. Nevertheless, let me thus far assure thee,
that I would gladly, not only promise something, which might to the glory of
God, if he were pleased in this case to take mercy on me; but also would as
willingly perform and accomplish it. Wherefore, demand whatsoever thou
please of me, for unfeignedly (if I escape with life) I will truly keep
promise with thee.

Sir, replied the Pilgrim, I desire nor demand any thing of you, but that you
would pardon the four brethren of Thebaldo, who have brought you to this hard
extremity, as thinking you to be guilty of their brothers death, and that you
would also accept them as your brethren and friends, upon their craving pardon
for what they have done. Sir, answered Aldobrandino, no man knows how sweet
revenge is, nor with what heat it is to be desired, but only the man who has
been wronged. Notwithstanding, not to hinder my hope, which only aymeth at
Heaven; I freely forgive them, and henceforth pardon them for ever; intending
moreover, that if mercy give me life, and clear me from this bloody
imputation, to love and respect them so long as I shall live. This answer was
most pleasing to the Pilgrim, and without any further multiplication of
speeches, he entreated him to be of good comfort, for he feared not but before
the time prefixed, he should hear certain tidings of his deliverance.

At his departing from him, he went directly to the Signoria, and prevailed so
far, that he spoke privately with a Knight, who was then one of the States
chiefest Lords, to whom he said. Sir, a man ought to bestow his best pains
and diligence, that the truth of things should be apparently known;
especially, such men as hold the place and office as you do: to the end, that
those persons which have committed no foul offense, should not be punished,
but only the guilty and heinous transgressors. And because it will be no mean
honor to you, to lay the blame where it worthily deserves; I am come hither
purposely, to inform you in a case of most weighty importance. It is not
unknown to you, with what rigor the State has proceeded against Aldobrandino
Palermini, and you think verily he is the man that has slain Thebaldo
Elisei, whereupon your law has condemned him to dye. I dare assure you Sir,
that a very unjust course has been taken in this case, because Aldobrandino
is falsely accused, as you your self will confess before midnight, when they
are delivered into your power, that were the murderers of the man.

The honest Knight, who was very sorrowful for Aldobrandino, gladly gave
attention to the Pilgrim, and having conferred on many matters, appertaining
to the fact committed: the two brethren, who were Thebaldoes Hostess, and
their Chamber-mayd, upon good advise given, were apprehended in their first
sleep, without any resistance made in their defense. But when the tortures
were sent for, to understand truly how the case went; they would not endure
any pain at all, but each aside by himself, and then altogether, confessed
openly, that they did the deed, yet not knowing him to be Thebaldo Elisei.
And when it was demanded of them, upon what occasion they did so foul an act.
They answered, that they were so hateful against the man's life, because he
would luxuriously have abused one of their wives, when they both were absent
from their own home.

When the Pilgrim had heard this their voluntary confession, he took his
leave of the Knight, returning secretly to the house of Madame Hermelina, and
there, because all her people were in their beds, she careful awaited his
return, to hear some glad tidings of her father, and to make a further
reconciliation between her and Thebaldo, when, sitting down by her, he said.
Dear Love, be of good cheer, for (upon my word) to morrow you shall have your
father home safe, well, and delivered from all further danger: and to confirm
her the more confidently in his words, he declared at large the whole carriage
of the business. Hermelina being wondrously joyful, for two such sudden and
succesfull accidents to enjoy her husband alive and in health, and also to have
her father freed from so great a danger; kissed and embraced him most
affectionately, welcomming him lovingly into her bed, whereto so long time he
had been a stranger.

No sooner did bright day appear, but Thebaldo arose, having acquainted her
with such matters as were to be done, and once more earnestly desiring her, to
conceal (as yet) these occurrences to her self. So, in his Pilgrims habit,
he departed from her house, to awaite convenient opportunity, for attending on
the business belonging to Aldobrandino. At the usual hour appointed, the
Lords were all set in the Signioria, and had received full information,
concerning the offense imputed to Aldobrandino: setting him at liberty by
public consent, and sentencing the other malefactors with death, who (within
a few days after) were beheaded in the place where the murder was committed.
Thus Aldobrandino being released, to his exceeding comfort, and no small joy of
his daughters, kindred and friends, all knowing perfectly, that this had
happened by the Pilgrims means: they conducted him home to Aldobrandinoes
house, where they desired him to continue so long as himself pleased, using
him with most honorable and gracious respect; but especially Hermelina, who
knew (better then the rest) on whom she bestowed her liberal favors, yet
concealing all closely to her self.

After two or three days were ouer-past, in these complementall entercoursings
of kindness, Thebaldo began to consider, that it was high time for
reconciliation, to be solemnly past between his brethren and Aldobrandino.
For, they were not a little amazed at his strange deliverance, and went
likewise continually armed, as standing in fear of Aldobrandino and his
friends; which made him the more earnest, for accomplishment of the promise
formerly made unto him. Aldobrandino lovingly replied, that he was ready to
make good his word. Whereupon, the Pilgrim provided a goodly Banquet, whereat
he purposed to have present, Aldobrandino, his daughter, kindred, and their
wives. But first, himself would go in person, to inuit them in peace to his
Banquet, to perform this desired pacification, and conferred with his
brethren, using many pregnant and forcible arguments to them, such as are
requisite in the like discordant cases. In the end, his reasons were so wise,
and prevailing with them, that they willingly condiscended, and thought it no
disparagement to them, for the recovery of Aldobrandinoes kindness again, to
crave pardon for their great error committed.

On the morrow following, about the hour of dinner time, the four brethren of
Thebaldo, attired in their mourning garments, with their wives and friends,
came first to the house of Aldobrandino, who purposely attended for them, and
having laid down their weapons on the ground: in the presence of all such, as
Aldobrandino had invited as his witnesses, they offered themselves to his
mercy, and humbly required pardon of him, for the matter wherein they had
offended him. Aldobrandino, shedding tears, most lovingly embraced them, and
(to be brief) pardon whatsoever injuries he had received. After this, the
sisters and wives, all clad in mourning, courteously submitted themselves, and
were graciously welcomed by Madame Hermelina, as also diverse other Gentlewomen
there present with her. Being all seated at the Tables, which were furnished
with such rarities as could be wished for; all things else deserved their due
commendation, but only sad silence, occasioned by the fresh remembrance of
sorrow, appearing in the habites of Thebaldoes friends and kindred, which the
Pilgrim himself plainly perceived, to be the only disgrace to him and his
feast. Wherefore, as before he had resolved, when time served to purge away
this melancholy; he arose from the Table, when some (as yet) had scarce begun
to eat, and thus spoke.

Gracious company, there is no defect in this Banquet, and more debarres it of
the honor it might else have, but only the presence of Thebaldo, who having
been continually in your company, it seems you are not willing to take
knowledge of him, and therefore I mean my self to show him. So, uncasing
himself out of his Pilgrims clothes, and standing in his Hose and Doublet: to
their no little admiration, they all knew him, yet doubted (a good while)
whether it were he or no. Which he perceiving, he repeated his bretherens and
absent kindreds names, and what occurrences had happened between them from
time to time, beside the relation of his own passed fortunes, inciting tears
in the eyes of his brethren, and all else there present, every one hugging and
embracing him, yea, many beside, who were no kin at all to him, Hemelina only
excepted, which when Aldobrandino saw, he said unto her. How now Hermelina? Why
do thou not welcome home Thebaldo, so kindly as all here else have done?

She making a modest courtesy to her Father, and answering so loud as every
one might hear her, said. There is not any in this assembly, that more
willingly would give him all expression of a joyful welcome home, and thankful
gratitude for such especial favors received, then in my heart I could afford
to do: but only in regard of those infamous speeches, noysed out against me, on
the day when we wept for him, who was supposed to be Thebaldo, which slander
was to my great discredit. Go on boldly, replied Aldobrandino, do thou
think that I regard any such praters? In the procuring of my deliverance, he
has approved them to be manifest liers, albeit I my self did never credit
them. Go then I command thee, and let me see thee both kiss and embrace him.
She who dedesired nothing more, showed her self not slothful in obeying her
Father, to do but her duty to her husband. Wherefore, being risen; as all the
rest had done, but yet in far more effectual manner, she declared her
unfeigned love to Thebaldo. These bountiful favors of Aldobrandino, were
joyfully accepted by Thebaldoes brethren, as also every one else there present
in company; so that all former rancour and hatred, which had caused heavy
variances between them, was now converted to mutual kindness, and solemn
friendship on every side.

When the feasting days were finished, the garments of sad mourning were quite
laid aside, and those, becoming so general a joy, put on, to make their
hearts and habites suitable. Now, concerning the man slain, and supposed to be
Thebaldo, he was one, that in all parts of body, and trueness of complexion
so nearly resembled him, as Thebaldoes own brethren could not distinguish the
one from the other: but he was of Lunigiana, named Fatinolo, and not Thebaldo,
whom the two brethren Inne-keepers maliced, about some idle suspicion
conceived, and having slain him, lay de his body at the door of Aldobrandino,
where, by the reason of Thebaldoes absence, it was generally reputed to be he,
and Aldobrandino charged to do the deed, by vehement persuasion of the
brethren, knowing what love had passed between him and his daughter Hermelina.
But happy was the Pilgrims return, first to hear those words in the Inn,
the means to bring the murder to light; and then the discreet carriage of the
Pilgrim, until he plainly approved himself, to be truly Thebaldo.

Ferando, by drinking a certain kind of Powder, was buried for dead. And by
the Abbot, who was enamoured of his Wife, was taken out of his Grave, and put
into a dark prison, where they made him believe, that he was in Purgatory.
Afterward, when time came that he should be raised to life again; he was
made to keep a child, which the Abbot had got by his Wife.

The eight Novel.
Wherein is displayed, the apparent folly of Jealousy: And the subtilty of
some religious carnal minded men, to beguile silly and simple married men.



WHen the long discourse of Madame Aemilia was ended, not displeasing to any,
in regard of the length, but rather held too short, because no exceptions could
be taken against it, comparing the raritie of the accidents, and changes
together: the Queen turned to Madame Lauretto, giving her such a manifest
sign, as she knew, that it was her turn to follow next, and therefore she
took occasion to begin thus. Fair Ladies, I intend to tell you a Tale of
truth, which (perhaps) in your opinions, will seem to sound like a lie: and
yet I heard by the very last relation, that a dead man was wept and mournd for,
in sted of another being then alive. In which respect. I am now to let you
know, how a living man was buried for dead, and being raised again, yet not as
living, himself, and diverse more beside, did believe that he came forth of his
grave, and adored him as a Saint, who was the occasion thereof, and who (as a
bad man) deserved justly to be condemned.

In Tuscanie there was sometime an Abbey, seated, as now we see commonly they
are, in a place not much frequented with people, and thereof a Monk was Abbot,
very holy and curious in all things else, save only a wanton appetite to
women: which yet he kept so cleanly to himself, that though some did suspect
it, yet it was known to very few. It came to pass, that a rich Country
Franklin, named Ferando, dwelt as a near neighbor to the said Abbey, he being
a man material, of simple and gross understanding, yet he fell into great
familiarity with the Abbot; who made use of this friendly conversation to no
other end, but for diverse times of recreation, when he delighted to smile at
his silly and sottish behavior.

Upon this his private frequentation with the Abbot, at last he observed, that
Ferando had a very beautiful woman to his wife, with whom he grew so deeply
in love, as he had no other meditations either by day or night, but how to
become acceptable in her favor. Nevertheless, he concealed his amorous
passions privately to himself, and could plainly perceive, that although
Ferando (in all things else) was merely a simple fellow, and more like an
Idiot, then of any sensible apprehension: yet was he wise enough in loving his
wife, keeping her carefully out of all company, as one (indeed) very jealous,
least any should kiss her, but only himself, which drove the Abbot into
despair, for ever attaining the issue of his desire. Yet being subtle,
crafty, and cautelous, he wrought so on the flexible nature of Ferando, that
he brought his wife with him diverse days to the Monastery; where they walked
in the goodly Garden, discoursing on the beatitudes of eternal life, as also
the most holy deeds of men and women, long since departed out of this life, in
marvelous civil and modest manner. Yet all these were but trains to a
further intention, for the Abbot must needs be her ghostly Father, and she
come to be confessed by him; which the fool Ferando took as an especial
favor, and therefore he gave his consent the sooner.

At the appointed time, when the woman came to confession to the Abbot, and was
on her knees before him, to his no small contentment, before she would say any
thing else, thus she began: Sacred Father, if God had not given me such an
husband as I have, or else had bestowed on me none at all; I might have been
so happy, by the means of your holy doctrine, very easily to have entered into
the way, whereof you spoke the other day, which leads to eternal life. But
when I consider with my self, what manner of man Ferando is, and think upon
his folly withal; I may well term my self to be a widow, although I am a
married wife, because while he lives, I cannot have any other husband. And yet
(as sottish as you see him) he is (without any occasion given him) so
extremely jealous of me; as I am not able to live with him, but only in
continual tribulation and hearts grief. In which respect, before I enter into
confession, I most humbly beseech you, that you would vouchsafe (in this
distress) to assist me with your fatherly advise and counsel, because, if
thereby I cannot attain to a more pleasing kind of happiness; neither
confession, or any thing else, is able to do me any good at all.

These words were not a little welcome to my Lord Abbot, because (thereby) he
half assured himself, that Fortune had laid open the path to his hoped
pleasures, whereupon he said. Dear daughter, I make no question to the
contrary, but it must needs be an exceeding infelicity, to so fair and goodly
a young woman as you are, to be plagued with so sottish an husband, brainsick,
and without the use of common understanding; but yet subject to a more bellish
affliction then all these, namely jealousy, and therefore you being in this
woeful manner tormented, your tribulations are not only so much the more
credited, but also as amply grieved for, and pitied. In which heavy and irksom
perturbations, I see not any means of remedy, but only one, being a kind of
physic (beyond all other) to cure him of his foolish jealousy; which
medicine is very familiar to me, because I know best how to compound it,
always provided, that you can be of so strong a capacity, as to be secret in
what I shall say unto you.

Good Father (answered the Woman) never make you any doubt thereof, for I would
rather endure death it self, then disclose any thing which you enjoin me to
keep secret: wherefore, I beseech you Sir to tell me, how, and by what means
it may be done. If (quoth the Abbot) you desire to have him perfectly cured, of
a disease so dangerous and offensive, of necessity he must be sent into
Purgatory. How may that be done, said the woman, he being alive? He must needs
die, answered the Abbot, for his more speedy passage thither; and when he has
endured so much punishment, as may expiate the quality of his jealousy, we
have certain devout and zealous prayers, whereby to bring him back again to
life, in as able manner as ever he was. Why then, replied the woman, I must
remain in the state of a Widow? Very true, said the Abbot, for a certain
time, in all which space, you may not (by any means) marry again, because
the heavens will therewith be highly offended: but Ferando being returned to
life again, you must repossesse him as your Husband, but never to be jealous
any more. Alas Sir (quoth the woman) so that he may be cured of his wicked
jealousy, and I no longer live in such an hellish imprisonment, do as you
please.

Now was the Abbot (well near) on the highest step of his hope, making her
constant promise, to accomplish it: But (quoth he) what shall be my recompense
when I have done it? Father, said she, whatsoever you please to ask, if it
remain within the compass of my power: but you being such a virtuous and
sanctified man, and I a woman of so mean worth or merit; what sufficient
recompense can I be able to make you? Whereunto the Abbot thus replied. Fair
woman, you are able to do as much for me, as I am for you, because as I do
dispose my self, to perform a matter for your comfort and consolation, even
so ought you to be as mindful of me, in any action concerning my life and
welfare. In any such matter Sir (quoth she) depending on your benefit so
strictly, you may safely presume to command me. You must then (said the Abbot)
grant me your love, and the kind embracing of your person; because so violent
are mine affections, as I pine and consume away daily, till I enjoy the
fruition of my desires, and none can help me therein but you.

When the woman heard these words, as one confounded with much amazement, this
she replied. Alas, holy Father! what a strange motion have you made to me? I
believed very faithfully, that you were no less then a Saint, and is it
convenient, that when silly women come to ask counsel of such sanctified men,
they should return them such unfitting answers? Be not amazed good woman,
said the Abbot, at the motion which I have made unto you, because holiness is
not thereby impaired a jot in me; for it is the inhabitant of the soul, the
other is an imperfection attending on the body: but be it whatsoever, your
beauty has so powerfully prevailed on me, that entire love has compelled me
to let you know it. And more may you boast of your beauty, then any that ever I
beheld before, considering, it is so pleasing to a sanctified man, that it can
draw him from divine contemplations, to regard a matter of so humble an
equality.

Let me tell you moreover, worthy Woman, that you see me reverenced here as
Lord Abbot, yet am I but as other men are, and in regard I am neither aged, nor
misshapen, me thinks the motion I have made, should be the less offensive to
you, and therefore the sooner granted. For, all the while as Ferando remains
in Purgatory, do you but imagine him to be present with you, and your
persuasion will the more absolutely be confirmed. No man can, or shall be privy
to our close meetings, for I carry the same holy opinion among all men, as you
your self conceived of me, and none dare be so saucie, as to call in question
whatsoever I do or say, because my words are Oracles, and mine actions more
then half miracles; do you not then refuse so gracious an offer. Enough there
are, who would gladly enjoy that, which is francke and freely presented to you,
and which (if you be a wise Woman) is merely impossible for you to refuse.
Richly am I possessed of Gold and Jewels, which shall be all yours, if you
please in favor to be mine; wherein I will not be gaine-saide, except your
self do deny me.

The Woman having her eyes fixed on the ground, knew not well how she should
deny him; and yet in plain words, to say she consented, she held it to be
ouer-base and immodest, and ill agreeing with her former reputation: when the
Abbot had well noted this attention in her, and how silent she stood without
returning any answer; he accounted the conquest to be more then half his own:
so that continuing on his formal persuasions, he never ceased, but allured
her still to believe whatsoever he said. And she much ashamed of his
importunity, but more of her own flexible yielding weakness, made answer,
that she would willingly accomplish his request; which yet she did not
absolutely grant, until Ferando were first sent into Purgatory. And till then
(quoth the Abbot) I will not urge any more, because I purpose his speedy
sending thither: but yet, so far lend me your assistance, that either to
morrow, or else the next day, he may hither once more to converse with me. So
putting a fair gold Ring on her finger, they parted till their next meeting.

Not a little joyful was the Woman of so rich a gift, hoping to enjoy a great
many more of them, and returning home to her neighbors, acquainted them with
wonderful matters, all concerning the sanctimonious life of the Abbot, a mere
miracle of men, and worthy to be truly termed a Saint. Within two days after,
Ferando went to the Abbye again, and so soon as the Abbot espied him, he
presently prepared for his sending of him into Purgatory. He never was without
a certain kind of drugge, which being beaten into powder, would work so
powerfully upon the brain, and all the other vital senses, as to entrance
them with a deadly sleep, and deprive them of all motion, either in the
pulses, or any other part else, even as if the body were dead indeed; in which
operation it would so hold and continue, according to the quantity given and
drunk, as it pleased the Abbot to order the matter. This powder or drugge, was
sent him by a great Prince of the East, and therewith he wrought wonders upon
his Nouices, sending them into Purgatory when he pleased, and by such
punishments as he inflicted on them there, made them (like credulous asses)
believe whatsoever himself listed.

So much of this powder had the Abbot provided, as should suffice for three
days entrauncing, and having compounded it with a very pleasant Wine, calling
Ferando into his Chamber, there gave it him to drink, and afterward walked
with him about the Cloister, in very friendly conference together, the silly
sot never dreaming on the treachery intended against him. Many Monks beside
were recreating themselves in the Cloister, most of them delighting to behold
the follies of Ferando, on whom the potion began so to work, that he slept
in walking, nodding and reeling as he went, till at the last he fell down,
as if he had been dead.

The Abbot pretending great admiration at this accident, called his Monks
about him, all laboring by rubbing his temples, throwing cold water and
vinegar in his face, to revive him again; alleging that some fume or vapor
in the stomach, had thus ouer-awed his understanding faculties, and quite
deprived him of life indeed. At length, when by tasting the pulse, and all
their best employed pains, they saw that their labor was spent in vain; the
Abbot used such persuasions to the Monks, that they all believed him to be
dead: whereupon they sent for his Wife and friends, who crediting as much as
the rest did, were very sad and sorrowful for him.

The Abbot (clothed as he was) laid him in a hollow vault under a Tomb, such
as there are used in stead of Graves; his Wife returning home again to her
House, with a young Son which she had by her Husband, protesting to keep
still within her House, and never more to be seen in any company, but only to
attend her young Son, and be very careful of such wealth as her Husband had
left unto her.

From the City of Bologna, that very instant day, a well staide and governed
Monk there arrived, who was a near kinsman to the Abbot, and one whom he
might securely trust. In the dead time of the night, the Abbot and this Monk
arose, and taking Ferando out of the vault, carried him into a darge dungeon or
prison, which he termed by the name of Purgatory, and where he used to
discipline his Monks, when they had committed any notorious offense, deserving
to be punished in Purgatory. There they took off his usual wearing garments,
and clothed him in the habit of a Monk, even as if he had been one of the
house; and laying him on a bundle of straw, so left him until his senses
should be restored again. On the day following, late in the evening, the
Abbot, accompanied with his trusty Monk, (by way of visitation) went to see
and comfort the supposed widow; finding her attired in black, very sad and
pensive, which by his wonted persuasions, indifferently he appeased;
challenging the benefit of her promise. She being thus alone, not hindered by
her Husbands jealousy, and espying another goodly gold Ring on his finger, how
frailety and folly ouer-ruled her, I know not, she was a weak woman, he a
devilish deluding man; and the strongest holds by ouer-long battery and
besieging, must needs yield at the last, as I fear she did: for very often
afterward, the Abbot used in this manner to visit her, and the simple ignorant
Country people, carrying no such ill opinion of the holy Abbot, and having
seen Ferando lying for dead in the vault, and also in the habit of a Monk;
were verily persuaded, that when they saw the Abbot pass by to and fro, but
most commonly in the night season, it was the ghost of Ferando, who walked in
this manner after his death, as a just penance for his jealousy.

When Ferandoes senses were recovered again, and he found himself to be in
such a darkesome place; not knowing where he was, he began to cry and make a
noise. When presently the Monk of Bologna (according as the Abbot had tutured
him) stepped into the dungeon, carrying a little wax candle in the one hand, and
a smarting whip in the other, going to Ferando, he stripped off his clothes, and
began to lash him very soundly. Ferando roaring and crying, could say nothing
else, but, where am I? The Monk (with a dreadful voice) replied: Thou art in
Purgatory. How? said Ferando; what? Am I dead? Thou art dead (quoth the Monk)
and began to lash him lustily again. Poor Ferando, crying out for his Wife
and little Son, demanded a number of idle questions, whereto the Monk still
fitted him with as fantastic answers. Within a while after, he set both food
and wine before him, which when Ferando saw, he said; How is this? Do dead
men eat and drink? Yes, replied the Monk, and this food which here thou
see, thy Wife brought hither to their Church this morning, to have Masses
devoutly sung for thy soul; and as to other, so must it be set before thee,
for such is the command of the Patron of this place.

Ferando having lain entranced three days and three nights, felt his stomach
well prepared to eat, and feeding very heartily, still said; O my good Wife,
O my loving Wife, long may thou live for this extraordinary kindness. I
promise thee (sweet heart) while I was alive, I cannot remember, that ever any
food and wine was half so pleasing to me. O my dear Wife; O my honey Wife.
Can thou (quoth the Monk) praise and commend her now, using her so
villainously in thy life time? Then did he whip him more fiercely then before,
when Ferando holding up his hands, as craving for mercy, demanded wherefore he
was so severely punished? I am so commanded (quoth the Monk) by supreme power,
and twice every day must thou be thus disciplinde. Upon what occasion? replied
Ferando. Because (quoth the Monk) thou wast most notoriously jealous of thy
Wife, she being the very kindest woman to thee, as all the Country contains
not her equal. It is too true, answered Ferando, I was overmuch jealous of
her indeed: but had I known, that jealousy was such a hateful sin against
Heaven, I never would have offended therein.

Now (quoth the Monk) thou can confess thine own wilful folly, but this
should have been thought on before, and whilst thou wast living in the World.
But if the Fates vouchsafe to favor thee so much, as hereafter to send thee to
the World once more; remember thy punishment here in Purgatory, and sin no
more in that foul sin of jealousy. I pray you Sir tell me, replied Ferando,
after men are dead, and put into Purgatory, is there any hope of their ever
visiting the World any more? Yes, said the Monk, if the fury of the Fates be
once appeased. O that I knew (quoth Ferando) by what means they would be
appeased, and let me visit the World once again: I would be the best Husband
that ever lived, and never more be jealous, never wrong so good a Wife, nor
ever use one unkind word against her. In the mean while, and till their anger
may be qualified; when next my Wife does send me ^oode, I pray you work so
much, that some Candles may be sent me also, because I live here in
uncomfortable darkness; and what should I do with food, if I have no light.
She sends Lights enough, answered the Monk, but they are burnt out on the Altar
in Masse-time, and thou can have none other here, but such as I must bring my
self; neither are they allowed, but only for the time of thy feeding and
correcting.

Ferando breathing forth a vehement sigh, desired to know what he was, being
thus appointed to punish him in Purgatory? I am (quoth the Monk) a dead man,
as thou art, borne in Sardignia, where I served a very jealous Master; and
because I soothed him in his jealousy, I had this penance imposed on me, to
serve thee here in Purgatory with meat and drink, and (twice every day) to
discipline thy body, until the Fates have otherwise determined both for thee
and me. Why? said Ferando, are any other persons here, beside you and I? Many
thousands, replied the Monk, whom thou can neither hear nor see, no more
then they are able to do the like by us. But how far, said Ferando, is
Purgatory distant from our native Countries? About some fifty thousand leagues,
answered the Monk; but yet passable in a moment, whenever the offended Fates
are pleased: and many Masses are daily said for thy soul, at the earnest
entreaty of thy Wife, in hope of thy conversion; and becoming a new man,
hating to be jealous any more hereafter.

In these and such like speeches, as thus they beguiled the time, so did they
observe it for a daily course, sometime discipling, other whiles eating and
drinking, for the space of ten whole months together: in the which time, the
Abbot sildome failed to visit Ferandoes wife, without the least suspicion in
any of the neighbors, by reason of their settled opinion, concerning the
nightly walking of Ferandoes ghost. But, as all pleasures cannot be exempted
from some following pain or other, so it came to pass, that Ferandoes wife
proved to be conceived with child, and the time was drawing on for her
deliverance. Now began the Abbot to consider, that Ferandoes folly was
sufficiently chastised, and he had been long enough in Purgatory: wherefore,
the better to countenance all passed inconveniences, it was now thought high
time, that Ferando should be sent to the world again, and set free from the
pains of Purgatory, as having paid for his jealousy dearly, to teach him
better wisdom hereafter.

Late in the dead time of the night, the Abbot himself entered into the dark
dungeon, and in an hollow counterfeited voice, called to Ferando, saying.
Comfort thy self Ferando, for the Fates are now pleased, that thou shall be
released out of Purgatory, and sent to live in the world again. Thou did
leave thy wife newly conceived with child, and this very morning she is
delivered of a goodly Son, whom thou shall cause to be named Bennet: because,
by the incessant prayers of the holy Abbot, thine own loving wife, and for
sweet Saint Bennets sake, this grace and favor is afforded thee. Ferando
hearing this, was exceeding joyful, and returned this answer: For ever
honored be the Fates, the holy Lord Abbot, blessed Saint Bennet, and my most
dearly beloved wife, whom I will faithfully love for ever, and never more
offend her by any jealousy in me.

When the next food was sent to Ferando, so much of the powder was mingled
with the wine, as would serve only for four hours entrauncing, in which
time, they clothed him in his own wearing apparel again, the Abbot himself
in person, and his honest trusty Monk of Bologna, conueying and laying him in
the same vault under the Tomb, where at the first they gave him burial. The
next morning following, about the break of day, Ferando recovered his senses,
and through diverse chinkes and crannies of the Tomb, descried daylight, which
he had not seen in ten months space before. Perceiving then plainly, that
he was alive, he cried out aloude, saying: Open, open, and let me forth of
Purgatory, for I have been here long enough in conscience. Thrusting up his
head against the cover of the Tomb, which was not of any great strength,
neither well closed together; he put it quite off the Tomb, and so got forth
upon his feet: at which instant time, the Monks having ended their morning
Mattins, and hearing the noise, ran in have thither, and knowing the voice of
Ferando, saw that he was come forth of the Monument,

Some of them were ancient Signiors of the house, and yet but mere Nouices (as
all the rest were) in these cunning and politic stratagems of the Lord Abbot,
when he intended to punish any one in Purgatory, and therefore, being
affrighted, and amazed at this rare accident; they fled away from him running
to the Abbot, who making a show to them, as if he were but new come forth of
his Oratory, in a kind of pacifying speeches, said; Peace my dear Sons,
be not affraide, but fetch the Cross and Holy Water hither; then follow me,
and I will show you, what miracle the Fates have pleased to show in our
Convent, therefore be silent, and make no more noise; all which was performed
according to his command.

Ferando looking lean and pale (as one, that in so long time had not seen
the light of heaven, and endured such strict discipline twice every day: stood
in a ghastly amazement by the Tombs side, as not daring to adventure any
further, or knowing perfectly, whether he was (as yet) truly alive, or no. But
when he saw the Monks and Abbot coming, with their lighted Torches, and
singing in a solemn manner of Procession, he humbled himself at the Abbots
feere, saying. Holy Father, by your zealous prayers (as has bin miraculously
revealed to me) and the prayers of blessed S. Bennet; as also of my honest,
dear, and loving Wife, I have bin delivered from the pains of Purgatory, and
brought again to live in this world; for which unspeakable grace and favor,
most humbly I thank the well-pleased Fates, S. Bennet, your Father-hood, and my
kind Wife, and will remember all your loves to me for ever. Blessed be the
Fates, answered the Abbot, for working so great a wonder here in our
Monastery. Go then my good Son, seeing the Fates have bin so gracious to thee;
Go (I say) home to thine own house, and comfort thy kind wife, who ever since
thy departure out of this life, has lived in continual mourning, love,
cherish, and make much of her, never afflicting her henceforth with causlesse
jealousy. No I warrant you good Father, replied Ferando; I have bin well whipped
in Purgatory for such folly, and therefore I might be called a stark fool, if
I should that way offend any more, either my loving wife, or any other.

The Abbot causing Miserere to be devoutly sung, sprinkling Ferando well with
Holy Water, and placing a lighted Taper in his hand, sent him home so to his
own dwelling Village: where when the Neighbors beheld him, as people half
frighted out of their wits, they fled away from him, so scared and terrified,
as if they had seen some dreadful sight, or ghastly apparition; his wife being
as fearful of him, as any of the rest. He called to them kindly by their
several names, telling them, that he was newly risen out of his grave, and
was a man as he had bin before. Then they began to touch and feel him, growing
into more certain assurance of him, perceiving him to be a living man indeed:
whereupon, they demanded many questions of him; and he, as if he were become
far wiser then before, told them tidings, from their long deceased Kindred
and Friends, as if he had met with them all in Purgatory, reporting a thousand
lies and fables to them, which (nevertheless) they believed.

Then he told them what the miraculous voice had said unto him, concerning the
birth of another young Son, whom (according as he was commanded) he caused to
be named Bennet Ferando. Thus his return to life again, and the daily wonders
reported by him, caused no mean admiration in the people, with much
commendation of the Abbots Holiness, and Ferandoes happy curing of his
jealousy.

Juliet of Narbona, cured the King of France of a dangerous Fistula, in
recompense whereof, she requested to enjoy as her husband in marriage, Bertrand
the Count of Roussilion. He having married her against his will, as utterly
despising her, went to Florence, where he made love to a young Gentle woman.
Juliet, by a queint and cunning policy, compassed the means (insted of his
chosen new friend) to lie with her own husband, by whom she conceived, and
had two Sons; which being afterward made known unto Count Bertrand, he
accepted her into his favor again, and loved her as his loyal and honorable
wife.

The Ninth Novel.
Commending the good judgment and understanding in Ladies or Gentlewomen, that
are of a quick and apprehensiue spirit.



NOw there remained no more (to preserve the privilege granted to Dioneus
vninfringed) but the Queen only, to declare her Novel. Wherefore, when the
discourse of Madam Lauretta was ended, without attending any motion to be made
for her next succeeding, with a gracious and pleasing disposition, thus she
began to speak. Who shall tell any Tale hereafter, to carry any hope or
expectation of a King, having heard the rare and witty discourse of Madame
Lauretta? Believe me, it was very aduantageable to us all, that she was not
this days first beginner, because few or none would have had any courage to
follow after her; and therefore the rest yet remaining, are the more to be
feared and suspected. Nevertheless, to avoid the breach of order, and to
claim no privilege by my place, of not performing what I ought to do: prove
as it may, a Tale you must have, and thus I proceed.

There lived sometime in the kingdom of France, a Gentleman named Isnarde,
being the Count of Roussillion, who because he was continually weak, crazie
and sickly, kept a Physician daily in his house, who was called Master Gerard
of Narbona. Count Isnarde had one only Son, very young in years, yet of
towardly hope, fair, comely, and of pleasing person, named Bertrand; with
whom, many other children of his age, had their education: and among them, a
daughter of the forenamed Physician, called Juliet; who, even in these tender
years, fixed her affection upon young Bertrand, with such an earnest and
intimate resolution, as was most admirable in so young a maiden, and more then
many times is noted in years of greater discretion. Old Count Isnard dying,
young Bertrand fell as a Ward to the King, and being sent to Paris, remained
there under his royal custody and protection, to the no little discomfort of
young Juliet, who became grievously afflicted in mind, because she had lost
the company of Bertrand.

Within some few years after, the Physician her Father also dyed, and then her
desires grew wholly addicted, to visit Paris her self in person, only
because she would see the young Count, awaiting but time and opportunity, to
fit her stolen journey thither. But her kindred and friends, to whose care and
trust she was committed, in regard of her rich dowry, and being left as a
fatherless Orphane: were so circumspect of her walks and daily behavior, as
she could not compass any means of ^scaping. Her years made her now almost
fit for marriage, which so much more increased her love to the Count, making
refusal of many worthy husbands, and labored by the motions of her friends
and kindred, yet all denied, they not knowing any reason for her refusalles. By
this time the Count was become a gallant goodly Gentleman, and able to make
election of a wife, whereby her affections were the more violently enfl^med, as
fearing least some other should be preferred before her, and so her hopes be
utterly disappointed.

It was noysed abroad by common report, that the King of France was in a very
dangerous condition, by reason of a strange swelling on his stomach, which
failing of apt and convenient curing, became a Fistula, afflicting him daily
with extraordinary pain and anguish, no Surgeon or Physician being found,
that could minister any hope of healing, but rather increased the grief, and
drove it to more vehement extreamitie, compelling the King, as dispairing
utterly of all help, to give over any further counsel or advice. Hereof
fair Juliet was wondrously joyful, as hoping that this accident would prove
the means, not only of her journey to Paris, but if the disease were no more
then she imagined; she could easily cure it, and thereby compass Count
Bertrand to be her husband. Hereupon, quickening up her wits, with remembrance
of those rules of Art, which (by long practice and experience) she had learned
of her skillful Father, she compounded certain herbs together, such as she
knew fitting for that kind of infirmity, and having reduced hit compound into
a powder, away she rode forthwith to Paris.

Being there arrived, all other serious matters set aside, first she must
needs have a sight of Count Bertrand, as being the only Saint that caused her
pilgrimage. Next she made means for her access to the King, humbly entreating
his Majesty, to vouchsafe her the sight of his Fistula. When the King saw her,
her modest looks did plainly deliver, that she was a fair, comely, and
discreet young Gentlewoman; wherefore, he would no longer hide it, but laid
it open to her view. When she had seen and felt it, presently she put the
King in comfort; affirming, that she knew her self able to cure his Fistula,
saying: Sir, if your Highness will refer the matter to me, without any
peril of life, or any the least pain to your person, I hope (by the help of
heaven) to make you whole and sound within eight days space. The King hearing
her words, began merrily to smile at her, saying: How is it possible for
thee, being a young Maiden, to do that which the best Physicians in Europe, are
not able to perform? I commend thy kindness, and will not remain
unthankful for thy forward willingness: but I am fully determined, to use no
more counsel, or to make any further trial of Physic or Surgery. Whereto
fair Juliet thus replied: Great King, let not my skill and experience be
despised, because I am young, and a Maiden; for my profession is not Physic,
neither do I undertake the ministering thereof, as depending on mine own
knowledge; but by the gracious assistance of heaven, and some rules of skillful
observation, which I learned of reverend Gerard of Narbona, who was my worthy
Father, and a Physician of no mean fame, all the while he lived.

At the hearing of these words, the King began somewhat to admire at her
gracious carriage, and said within himself. What know I, whether this virgin
is sent to me by the direction of heaven, or no? Why should I disdain to make
proof of her skill? Her promise is, to cure me in a small times compass, and
without any pain or affliction to me: she shall not come so far, to return
again with the loss of her labor, I am resolved to try her cunning, and
thereon said. Fair Virgin, if you cause me to break my settled determination,
and fail of curing me, what can you expect to follow thereon? Whatsoever
great King (quoth she) shall please you. Let me be strongly guarded, yet not
hindered, when I am to prosecute the business: and then if I do not perfectly
heal you within eight days, let a good fire be made, and therein consume my
body unto ashes. But if I accomplish the cure, and set your Highness free
from all further greeuance, what recompense then shall remain to me?

Much did the King commend the confident persuasion which she had of her own
power, and presently replied. Fair beauty (quoth he) in regard that thou art a
Maid and unmarried, if thou keep promise, and I find my self to be fully
cured: I will match thee with some such Gentleman in marriage, as shall be of
honorable and worthy reputation, with a sufficient dowry beside. My gracious
Sovereign said she, willing am I, and most heartily thankful withal, that
your Highness shall bestow me in marriage: but I desire then, to have such a
husband, as I shall desire or demand by your gracious favor, without presuming
to crave any of your Sons, Kindred, or Alliance, or appertaining unto your
Royal blood. Whereto the King gladly granted. Young Juliet began to minister
her Physic, and within fewer days then her limited time, the King was sound
and perfectly cured; which when he perceived, he said unto her. Trust me
virtuous Maid, most woorthily have thou won a Husband, name him, and thou
shall have him. Royal King (quoth she) then have I won the Count Bertrand of
Roussillion, whom I have most entirely loved from mine Infancy, and cannot (in
my soul) affect any other. Very loath was the King to grant her the young
Count, but in regard of his solemn passed promise, and his royal word engaged,
which he would not by any means break; he commanded, that the Count should be
sent for, and spoke thus to him.

Noble Count, it is not unknown to us, that you are a Gentleman of great
honor, and it is our royal pleasure, to discharge your wardship, that you may
repair home to your own House, there to settle your affairs in such order,
as you may be the readier to enjoy a Wife, which we intend to bestow upon you.
The Count returned his Highness most humble thanks, desiring to know of
whence, and what she was? It is this Gentlewoman, answered the King, who (by
the help of Heaven) has been the means to save my life. Well did the Count
know her, as having very often before seen her; and although she was very
fair and amiable, yet in regard of her mean birth, which he held as a
disparagement to his Nobility in blood; he made a scorn of her, and spoke thus
to the King. Would your Highness give me a Quacksaluer to my Wife, one that
deals in drugges and Physicarie? I hope I am able to bestow my self much
better then so. Why? quoth the King, would thou have us break our faith;
which for the recovery of our health, we have given to this virtuous virgin,
and she will have no other reward, but only Count Bertrand to be her husband?
Sir, replied the Count, you may dispossess me of all that is mine, because I
am your Ward and Subject, and any where else you may bestow me: but pardon me
to tell you, that this marriage cannot be made with any liking or allowance of
mine, neither will I ever give consent thereto.

Sir, said the King, it is our will that it shall be so, virtuous she is,
fair and wise; she loves thee most affectionately, and with her may thou
lead a more Noble life, then with the greatest Lady in our Kingdom. Silent,
and discontented stood the Count, but the King commanded preparation for the
marriage; and when the appointed time was come, the Count (albeit against his
will) received his wife at the Kings hand; she loving him dearly as her own
life. When all was done, the Count requested of the King, that what else
remained for further solemnization of the marriage, it might be performed in
his own Country, reserving to himself what else he intended. Being mounted
on horseback, and humbly taking their leave of the King, the Count would not
ride home to his own dwelling, but into Tuscany, where he heard of a war
between the Florentines and the Senesi, purposing to take part with the
Florentines, to whom he was willingly and honorably welcomed, being created
Captain of a worthy Company, and continuing there a long while in service.

The poor forsaken new married Countess, could scarsely be pleased with such
dishonorable unkindness, yet governing her impatience with no mean discretion,
and hoping by her virtuous carriage, to compass the means of his recall: home
she rode to Roussillion, where all the people received her very lovingly. Now,
by reason of the Counts so long absence, all things were there far out of
order; mutinies, quarrels, and civil dissentions, having procured many
dissolute irruptions, to the expense of much blood in many places. But she,
like a jolly stirring Lady, very wise and provident in such disturbances,
reduced all occasions to such ciuility again, that the people admired her rare
behavior, and condemned the Count for his unkindness toward her.

After that the whole country of Roussillion (by the policy and wisdom of
this worthy Lady was fully re-established) in their ancient liberties; she made
choice of two discreet knights, whom she sent to the Count her husband, to let
him understand, that if in displeasure to her, he was thus become a stranger
to his own country: upon the return of his answer, to give him contentment,
she would depart thence, and by no means disturb him. Roughly and churlishly
he replied; Let her do as she list, for I have no determination to dwell with
her, or near where she is. Tell her from me, when she shall have this Ring,
which you behold here on my finger, and a son in her arms begotten by me;
then will I come live with her, and be her love. The Ring he made most precious
and dear account of, and never took it off from his finger, in regard of an
especial virtue and property, which he well knew to be remaining in it. And
these two Knights, hearing the impossibility of these two strict conditions,
with no other favor else to be derived from him; sorrowfully returned back to
their Lady, and acquainted her with this unkind answer, as also his
unalterable determination, which well you may conceive, must needs be very
unwelcome to her.

After she had an indifferent while considered with her self, her resolution
became so vndauntable; that she would adventure to practice such means,
whereby to compass those two apparent impossibilities, and so to enjoy the
love of her husband. Having absolutely concluded what was to be done, she
assembled all the cheifest men of the country, revealing unto them (in
mournful manner) what an attempt she had made already, in hope of recovering
her husbands favor, and what a rude answer was thereon returned. In the end,
she told them, that it did not suit with her unworthiness, to make the Count
live as an exile from his own inheritance, upon no other inducement, but only
in regard of her: wherefore, she had determined between heaven and her soul,
to spend the remainder of her days in Pilgrimages and prayers, for
preservation of the Counts soul and her own; earnestly desiring them, to
undertake the charge and government of the Country, and signifying unto the
Count, how she had forsaken his house, and purposed to wander so far thence,
that never would she visit Roussillion any more. In the delivery of these
words, the Lords and gentlemen wept and sighed extraordinarily, using many
earnest imprecations to alter this resolve in her, but all was in vain.

Having taken her sad and sorrowful farewell of them all, accompanied only
with her Maid, and one of her Kinsmen, away she went, attired in a Pilgrims
habit, yet well furnished with money and precious Jewels, to avoid all wants
which might befall her in travail; not acquainting any one whether she went.
In no place stayed she, until she was arrived at Florence, where happening
into a poor Widows house, like a poor Pilgrim, she seemed well contented
therewith. And desiring to hear some tidings of the Count, the next day she
saw him pass by the house on horseback, with his company. Now, albeit she
knew him well enough, yet she demanded of the good old Widow, what Gentleman
he was? She made answer, that be was a stranger there, yet a Nobleman, called
Count Bertrand of Roussillion, a very courteous Knight, beloved and much
respected in the City. Moreover, that he was far in love with a neighbor of
hers, a young Gentlewoman, but very poor and mean in substance, yet of honest
life, virtuous, and never taxed with any evil report: only her poverty was
the maine imbarment of her marriage, dwelling in house with her mother, who was
a wise, honest, and worthy Lady.

The Countess having well observed her words, and considered thereon from point
to point; debated soberly with her own thoughts, in such a doubtful case what
was best to be done. When she had understood which was the house, the ancient
Ladies name, and likewise her daughters, to whom her husband was now so
affectionately devoted; she made choice of a fit and convenient time, when (in
her Pilgrims habit) secretly she went to the house. There she found the mother
and daughter in poor condition, and with as poor a family: whom after she had
ceremoniously saluted, she told the old Lady, that she requested but a little
conference with her. The Lady arose, and giving her courteous entertainment,
they went together into a withdrawing chamber, where being both set down, the
Countess began in this manner.

Madame, in my poor opinion, you are not free from the frowns of Fortune, no
more then I my self am: but if you were so well pleased, there is no one that
can comfort both our calamities in such manner, as you are able to do. And
believe me answered the Lady, there is nothing in the world that can be so
welcome to me, as honest comfort. The Countess proceeding on in her former
speeches said: I have now need (good Madame) both of your trust and fidelity,
whereon if I should rely, and you fail me, it will be your own undoing as
well as mine. Speak then boldly, replied the old Lady, and remain
constantly assured, that you shall no way be deceived by me. Hereupon, the
Countess declared the whole course of her love, from the very original to
the instant, revealing also what she was, and the occasion of her coming
thither, relating every thing so perfectly, that the Lady verily believed her,
by some reports which she had formerly heard, and which moved her the more to
compassion. Now, when all circumstances were at full discovered, thus spoke the
Countess.

Among my other miseries and misfortunes, which has half broken my heart in
the mere repetition, beside the sad and afflicting sufferance; two things
there are, which if I cannot compass to have, all hope is quite frustrate for
ever, of gaining the grace of my Lord and Husband. Yet those two things may I
obtain by your help, if all be true which I have heard, and you can therein
best resolve me. Since my coming to this City, it has credibly been told me,
that the Count my husband, is deeply in love with your daughter. If the Count
(quoth the Lady) love my daughter, and have a wife of his own, he must
think, and so shall surely find it, that his greatness is no privilege for
him, whereby to work dishonor upon her poverty. But indeed, some apparances
there are, and such a matter as you speak of, may be so presumed; yet so far
from a very thought of entertaining in her or me; as whatsoever I am able to
do, to yield you any comfort and content, you shall find me therein both
willing and ready: for I prize my daughters spotles poverty as at high a rate,
as he can do the pride of his honor.

Madam, quoth the Countess, most heartily I thank you. But before I presume
any further on your kindness, let me first tell you, what faithfully I intend
to do for you, if I can bring my purpose to effect I see that your daughter is
beautiful, and of sufficient years for marriage; and is debarred thereof (as I
have heard) only by lack of a competent dowry. Wherefore Madame, in recompense
of the favor I expect from you, I will enrich her with so much ready money as
you shall think sufficient to match her in the degree of honor. Poverty made
the poor Lady, very well to like of such a bountiful offer, and having a
noble heart she said: Great Countess say, wherein am I able to do you any
service, as can deserve such a gracious offer? If the action be honest,
without blame or scandal to my poor, yet vndetected reputation, gladly I will
do it; and it being accomplished, let the requital rest in your own noble
nature.

Observe me then Madam, replied the Countess. It is most convenient for my
purpose, that by some trusty and faithful messenger, you should advertise the
Count my husband, that your daughter is, and shall be at his command: but
because she may remain absolutely assured, that his love is constant to her,
and above all other: she must entreat him, to send her (as a testimony
thereof) the Ring which he wears upon his little finger, albeit she has
heard, that he loves it dearly. If he send the Ring, you shall give it me, and
afterward send him word, that your daughter is ready to accomplish his
pleasure; but, for the more safety and secrecy, he must repair hither to your
house, where I being in bed insted of your daughter, fair Fortune may so
favor me, that (unknown to him) I may conceive with child. Upon which good
success, when time shall serve, having the Ring on my finger, and a child in
my arms begotten by him, his love and liking may be recovered, and (by your
means) I continue with my Husband, as every virtuous Wife ought to do.

The good old Lady imagined, that this was a matter somewhat difficult, and
might lay a blamefull imputation on her daughter: Nevertheless, considering,
what an honest office it was in her, to be the means, whereby so worthy a
Countess should recover an unkind husband, led altogether by lust, and not a
jot of cordial love; she knew the intent to be honest, the Countess virtuous,
and her promise religious, and therefore undertook to effect it. Within few
days after, very ingeniously, and according to the instructed order, the Ring
was obtained, albeit much against the Counts will; and the Countess, in sted
of the Ladies virtuous daughter, was embraced by him in bed: the hour proving
so auspicious, and Juno being Lady of the ascendent, conjoined with the witty
Mercury, she conceived of two goodly Sons, and her deliverance agreed
correspondently with the just time.

Thus the old Lady, not at this time only, but at many other meetings beside;
gave the Countess free possession of her husbands pleasures, yet always in
such dark and concealed secrecy, as it was never suspected, nor known by any
but themselves, the Count lying with his own wife, and disappointed of her
whom he more dearly loved. Always at his vprising in the mornings (which
usually was before the break of day, for for preventing the least scruple of
suspicion) many familiar conferences passed between them, with the gifts of
diverse fair and costly Jewels; all which the Countess carefully kept, and
perceiving assuredly, that she was conceived with child, she would no longer
be troublesome to the good old Lady; but calling her aside, spoke thus to her.
Madam, I must needs give thanks to heaven and you, because my desires are
amply accomplished, and both time and your deserts do justly challenge, that I
should accordingly quite you before my departure. It remains now in your
own power, to make what demand you please of me, which yet I will not give you
by way of reward, because that would seem to be base and mercenary: but only
whatsoever you shall receive of me, is in honorable recompense of fair and
virtuous deseruings, such as any honest and well-minded Lady in the like
distress, may with good credit allow, and yet no prejudice to her reputation.

Although poverty might well have tutored the Ladies tongue, to demand a
liberal recompense for her pains; yet she requested but an 100 pounds, as a
friendly help toward her daughters marriage, and that with a bashful
blushing was uttered too; yet the Countess gave her five hundred pounds,
beside so many rich and costly Jewels, as amounted to a far greater sum. So
she returned to her wonted lodging, at the aged widows house, where first she
was entertained at her coming to Florence; and the good old Lady, to avoid
the Counts repairing to her house any more, departed thence suddenly with her
daughter, to diverse friends of hers that dwelt in the Country, whereat the
Count was much discontented; albeit afterward, he did never hear any more
tidings of her or her daughter, who was worthily married, to her Mothers great
comfort.

Not long after, Count Bertrand was re-called home by his people: and he having
heard of his wives absence, went to Roussillion so much the more willingly. And
the Countess knowing her husbands departure from Florence, as also his safe
arrival at his own dwelling, remained still in Florence, until the time of
her deliverance, which was of two goodly Sons, lively resembling the looks
of their Father, and all the perfect lineaments of his body. Persuade your
selves, she was not a little careful of their nursing; and when she saw the
time answerable to her determination, she took her journey (unknown to any)
and arrived with them at Montpellier, where she rested her self for diverse
days, after so long and wearisome a journey.

Upon the day of all Saints, the Count kept a solemn Festival, for the
assembly of his Lords, Knights, Ladies, and Gentlewomen: upon which Iouiall
day of general rejoicing, the Countess attired in her wonted Pilgrims weed,
repaired thither, entering into the great Hall, where the Tables were readily
covered for dinner. Preassing thorough the throng of people, with her two
children in her arms, she presumed unto the place where the Count sat, and
falling on her knees before him, the tears trickling abundantly down her
checkes, thus she spoke. Worthy Lord, I am thy poor, despised, and unfortunate
wife; who, that thou might return home, and not be an exile from thine own
abiding, have thus long gone begging through the world. Yet now at length, I
hope thou will be so honourably-minded, as to perform thine own too strict
imposed conditions, made to the two Knights which I sent unto thee, and which
(by thy command) I was enjoined to do. Behold here in mine arms, not only one
Son by thee begotten, but two Twins, and thy Ring beside. High time is it
now, if men of honor respect their promises, that after so long and redious
travel, I should at last be welcomed as thy true wife.

The Count hearing this, stood as confounded with admiration; for full well
he knew the Ring: and both the children were so perfectly like him, as he was
confirmed to be their Father by* general judgment. Upon his urging by what
possible means this could be brought to pass: the Countess in presence of the
whole assembly, and unto her eternal commendation, related the whole history,
even in such manner as you have formerly heard it. Moreover, she reported the
private speeches in bed, uttered between himself and her, being witnessed
more apparently, by the costly Jewels there openly shown. All which infallible
proofs, proclaiming his shame, and her most noble carriage to her husband; he
confessed, that she had told nothing but the truth in every point which she had
reported.

Commending her admirable constancy, excellency of wit, and sprightly courage,
in making such a bold adventure; he kissed the two sweet boys, and to keep
his promise, whereto he was earnestly importuned, by all his best esteemed
friends there present, especially the honorable Ladies, who would have no
denial, but by forgetting his former harsh and uncivil carriage toward her,
to accept her for ever as his lawful wife: folding her in his arms, and
sweetly kissing her diverse times together, he bad her welcome to him, as his
virtuous, loyal, and most loving wife, and so (for ever after) he would
acknowledge her. Well knew he that she had store of better beseeming garments
in the house, and therefore requested the Ladies to walk with her to her
Chamber, to uncase her of those pilgrims weeds, and cloth her in her own
more sumptuous garments, even those which she wore on her wedding day, because
that was not the day of his contentment, but only this: for now he confessed
her to be his wife indeed, and now he would give the King thanks for her, and
now was Count Bertrand truly married to the fair Juliet of Narbona.

The wonderful and chaste resolved continency of fair Serictha, daughter to
Siwalde King of Denmark, who being sought and sued unto by many worthy persons,
that did affect her dearly, would not look any man in the face, until such
time as she was married.

The tenth Novel.
A very singular and worthy president, for all young Ladies and Gentlewomen: not
rashly to bestow themselves in marriage, without the knowledge and consent of
their Parents and Friends:



DIoneus having diligently listened to the Queens singular discourse, so soon
as she had concluded, and none now remaining but himself, to give a full
period unto that days pleasure: without longer trifling the time, or expecting
any command from the Queen, thus he began. Gracious Ladies, I know that you do
^ow expect from me, some such queint Tale, as shall be suitable to my merry
disposition, rather sauouring of wantonness, then any discreet and sober
wisdom, and such a purpose indeed, I once had entertained. But having well
observed all your several relations, grounded on grave and worthy examples,
especially the last, so notably delivered by the Queen: I cannot but commend
fair Juliet of Narbona, in perfourming two such strange impossibilities, and
conquering the unkindness of so cruel a husband. If my Tale come short of the
precedent excellency, or give not such content, as you (perhaps) expect; accept
my good will, and let me stand engaged for a better hereafter.

The Annals of Denmark do make mention, that the King of the said country,
who was first set down as Prince, contrary to the ancient custom and laws
observed among the Danes, namely Hunguinus; had a son called Siwalde, who
succeeded him in the estates and kingdom, belonging to his famous
predecessors. That age, and the Court of that Royal Prince, was very highly
renowned, by the honor of fair Serictha, Daughter to the said Siwalde; who
beside her general repute, of being a miracle of Nature, in perfection of
beauty, and most complete in all that the heart of man could desire to note,
in a body full of grace, gentleness, and whatsoever else, to attract the eyes
of every one to behold her: was also so chaste, modest, and bashful, as it
was merely impossible, to prevail so far with her, that any man should come
to speak with her. For, in those days, marriages were pursued and sought by
valor, and by the only opinion, which stout Warriors conceived, of the
virtuous qualities of a Lady. Notwithstanding, never could any man make his
vaunt, that she had given him so much as a look, or ever any one attained to
the favor, to whisper a word in her ear. Because both the custom and will of
Parents then (very respectively kept in those Northern parts of the world) of
hearing such speak, as desired their daughters in marriage; grew from offering
them some worthy services; and thereby compassed means, to yield their
contentation, by some gracious and kind answers.

But she, who was far off from the desire of any such follies, referring her
self wholly to the will and disposition of the King her Lord and Father; was so
contrary, to give any living man an answer, that her eye never looked on any
one speaking to her, appearing as sparing in vouchsafing a glance, as her heart
was free from a thought of affection. For, she had no other imagination, but
that Maids, both in their choice and will, ought to have any other
disposition, but such as should be pleasing to their parents, either to
grant, or deny, according as they were guided by their grave judgment. In
like manner, so well had she brideled her sensual appetites, with the curb
of Reason, Wisdom, and Providence, setting such a severe and constant
restraint, on the twinkling or motions of her eyes, in absolute obedience to
her Father; as never was she seen to turn her head aside, to lend one look
on any man of her age.

A worthy sight it was, to behold Knights errant, passing, repassing to
Denmark, and back again, laboring to conquer those settled eyes, to win the
least sign of grace and favor, from her whom they so dutiously pursued, to
steal but a silly glimpse or glance, and would have thought it a kind of
honorable theft. But this immouable rock of beauty, although she knew the
disseignes of them which thus frequented the Court of the King her Father, and
could not pretend ignorance of their endeavor, aiming only at obtaining her in
marriage: yet did she not lend a^y look of her eye, yielding the least signal
of the hearts motion, in affecting any thing whatsoever, but what it pleased
her Father she should do.

Serictha living in this strange and unusual manner, it moved many Princes
and great Lords, to come and court her, contending both by signs and words, to
change her from this severe constancy, and make known (if possible it might
be) whether a woman would or could be so resolute, as to use no respect at all
toward them, coming from so many strange countries, to honor her in the
Courts of the King her father. But in these days of ours, if such a number of
gallant spirits should come, to ask but one look of some of our beauties; I
am half affraide, that they should find the eyes of many of our dainty
darlings, not so sparing of their glances, as those of Serictha were.
Considering, that our Courtiers of these times, are this way emulous one of
another, and women are so forward in offering themselves, that they perform
the office of suitors, as fearing lest they should not be solicited, yea, though
it be in honest manner.

The King, who knew well enough, that a daughter was a treasure of some danger
to keep, and growing doubtful withal least (in the end) this so obstinate
severity would be shaken, if once it came to pass, that his daughter should
feel the piercing apprehensions of love, and whereof (as yet) she never had
any experience; he determined to use some remedy for this great concourse of
lovers, and strange kind of carriage in the Princess his daughter. For, he
apparently perceived, that such excelling beauty as was in Serictha, with those
good and commendable customs, and other ornaments of his daughters mind, could
never attain to such an height of perfection; but yet there would be found
some men, so wittily accute and ingenious, as to convert and humor a maid,
according to their will, and make a mockery of them, who were (before) of most
high esteem, Beside, among so great a troop of Lords, as daily made tender of
their amorous service, some one or other would prove so happy, as (at the last)
she should be his Mistress. And therefore forbearing what otherwhise he had
intended, as a final conclusion of all such follies: calling his daughter
alone to himsel^e in his Chamber, and standing clear from all other attention,
he used to her this, or the like Language.

I know not fair daughter, what reason may move you to show your self so
disdainful toward so many Noble and worthy men, as come to visit you, and
honor my Court with their presence, offering me their love and loyal service,
under this only pretense (as I perceive) of obtaining you, and compassing the
happiness (as it appears in plain strife among them) one day to win the
prize, you being the maine issue of all their hope. If it be bashful modesty,
which (indeed) ought to attend on all virgins of your years, and so veyles
your eyes, as (with honor) you cannot look on any thing, but what is your
own, or may not justly vouchsafe to see: I comme^d your maidenly continency,
which yet nevertheless, I would not have to be so severe, as (at length) your
youth falling into mislike thereof, it may be the occasion of some great
misfortune, either to you, or me, or else to us both together: considering what
rapes are ordinarily committed in these quarters, and of Ladies equal every
way to your self; which happening, would presently be the cause of my death.

If it be in regard of some vow which you have consecrated to virginity, and to
some one of our Gods: I seek not therein to hinder your disseignes, neither
will bereave the celestial powers, of whatsoever appertains to them. Albeit
I could wish, that it should be kept in a place more straited, and separate
from the resort of men; to the end, that so bright a beauty as yours is, should
cause no discords among amorous suitors, neither my Court prove a Camp
destinied unto the conclusion of such quarrels, or you be the occasion of
ruining so many, whose service would beseem a much more needful place, then
to dye here by fond and foolish opinion of enjoying a vain pleasure, yet
remaining in the power of another body to grant. If therefore I shall
perceive, that these behauiours in you do proceed from pride, or contempt of
them, who endeavor to do you both honor and service, and in sted of granting
them a gracious look, in arrogancy you keep from them, making them enemies
to your folly and my sufferance: I swear to you by our greatest God, that I
will take such due order, as shall make you feel the hand of an offended
Father, and teach you (henceforth) to be much more affable.

Wherefore dear daughter, you shall do me a singular pleasure, freely to
acquaint me with your mind, and the reasons of your so stricte severity:
promising you, upon the word and faith of a King, nay more, of a loving and
kind Father, that if I find the cause to be just and reasonable, I will
desist so far from hindering your intent, as you shall rather perceive my
fatherly furtherance, and rest truly resolved of my help and favor. Wherefore
fair daughter, neither blush or dismay, or fear to let me understand your
will; for evidently I see, that mere virgin shame has made a rapture of your
soul, being nothing else but those true splendors of virtue derived from your
Ancestors, and shining in you most gloriously, gracing you with a much richer
embellishing, the^ those beauties bestowed on you by Nature. Speak therefore
boldly to your Father, because there is no law to prohibit your speech to him:
for when he commands, he ought to be obeyed: promising upon mine oath once
again, that if your reasons are such as they ought to be, I will not fail to
accommodate your fancy.

The wise and virtuous Princess, hearing the King to allege such gracious
reasons, and to lay so kind a command on her; making him most low and humble
reverence, in sign of dutiful accepting such favor, thus she answered.
Royal Lord and Father, seeing that in your Princely Court, I have gathered
whatsoever may be termed virtuous in me, and you being the principal
instructor of my life, from whom I have learned those lessons, how maids (of
my age) ought to govern and maintain themselves: you shall apparently
perceive, that neither gazing looks, which I ought not to yield without your
consent, nor pride or arrogancy, never taughr me by you, or the Queen my most
honorable Lady and Mother, are any occasion of my carriage toward them, which
come to make ostentation of their folly in your Court, as if a mere look of
Serictha, were sufficient to yield assurance effectually of their desires
victory.

Nothing (my most Royal Lord and Father) induces me to this kind of
behavior, but only due respect of your honor and mine own: and to the end
it may not be thought, that I belie my self, in not eying the affectionate
offers of amorous pursuers, or have any other private reserved meaning, then
what may best please King Siwalde my Father: let it suffice Sir, that it
remains in your power only, to make an apt election and choice for me; for I
neither ought, nor will allow the acceptance of any suitors kindness, so much
as by a look (much less then by words) until your Highness shall nominate
the man, to be a meet husband for Serictha. It is only you then (my Lord)
that bears the true lifeblood of our Ancestors. It is the untainted life of
the Queen my Mother, that sets a chaste and strict restraint on mine eyes,
from estranging my heart, to the idle amorous enticements of young giddy-headed
Gentlemen, and have sealed up my soul with an absolute determination, rather
to make choice of death, then any way to alter this my warrantable severity.

You being a wise King, and the worthy Father of Serictha, it is in you to
mediate, counsel, and effect, what best shall beseem the desseignes of your
daughter: because it is the virtue of children, yea, and their eternal glory
and renown, to illustrate the lives and memories of their parents. It
consists in you, either to grant honest license to such Lords as desire me,
or to oppose them with such discreet conditions, as both your self may sit
free from any further afflicting, and they rest defeated of dangerous
dissentions, according as you foresee what may ensue. Which yet (nevertheless)
I hold as a matter impossible, if their discord should be grounded on the sole
apprehension of their souls: and the only prevention thereof, is, not to yield
any sign, glance of the eye, or so much as a word more to one man then
another: for, such is the settled disposition of your daughters soul, and which
she humbly entreats, may so be still suffered.

Many means there are, whereby to win the grace of the greatest King, by
employing their pains in worthy occasions, answerable unto their years and
virtue, if any such sparks of honor do shine in their souls; rather then by
gaining here any matter of so mean moment, by endeavoring to shake the
simplicity of a bashful maid: Let them clear the Kings highways of
Thieves, who make the passages difficult: or let them expel Pirates from off
the Seas, which make our Danish coasts every way inaccessible. These are such
Noble means to merit, as may throw deserved recompense upon them, and much
more worthily, then making Idols of Ladies looks, or gazing for babies in
their wanton eyes. So may you bestow on them what is your own, granting
Serictha to behold none, but him who you shall please to give her: for
otherwise, you know her absolute resolve, never to look any living man in the
face, but only you my gracious Lord and Father.

The King hearing this wise and modest answer of his daughter, could not choose
but commend her in his heart; and smiling at the counsel which she gave him,
returned her this answer. Understand me well, fair daughter; neither am I
minded to break your determination wholly, nor yet to govern my self
according to your fancy. I stand indifferently contented, that until I have
otherwise purposed, you shall continue the nature of your ancient custom: yet
conditionally, that when I command an alteration of your carriage, you fail
not therein to declare your obedience. What else remains beside, for so silly
a thing as a Woman is, and for the private pleasing of so many great Princes
and Lords, I will not endanger any of their lives; because their parents and
friends (being sensible of such losses) may seek revenge, perhaps to their
own ruin, and some following scourge to my indiscretion. For I consider
(daughter) that I have neighbors who scarsely love me, and of whom (in time) I
may right my self, having received (by their means) great wrongs and
injuries. Also I make no doubt, but to manage your loue-sute with discretion,
and set such a pleasing proceednig between them, as neither shall beget any
hatred in them toward me, nor yet offend them in their affections pursuit,
till fortune may smile so favorably upon some one man, to reach the height of
both your wished desires.

Siwalde was thus determinately resolved, to let his daughter live at her own
discretion, without any alteration of her continued severity, perceiving day
by day, that many came still to request her in marriage; and he could not give
her to them all, nor make his choice of any one, least all the rest should
become his enemies, and fall in quarrel one with another. Only this therefore
was his ordination, that among such a number of amorous suitors, he only should
wear the Laurel wreath of victory, who could obtain such favor of Serictha,
as but to look him in the face. This condition seemed to be of no mean
difficulty, yea, and so impossible, that many gave over their amorous
enterprise: whereof Serictha was wondrouslie joyful, seeing her self eased of
such tedious importunity, dulling her ears with their proffered services, and
foppish allegations of fantastic servitude: such as ydle-headed Lovers do use
to protest before their Mistresses, wherein they may believe them, if they list.

Among all them that were thus forward in their heat of affection, there was a
young Danish Lord, named Ocharus, the son of a Pirate, called Hebonius, the
same man, who having stolen the Sister unto King Hunguinus, and Sister to
Siwalde, and affiancing himself to her, was slain by King Haldune, and by
thus killing him, enjoyed both the Lady, and the kingdom of the Goths also,
as her inheritance. This Ocharus, relying much on his comeliness of person,
wealth, power, and valor, but (above all the rest) on his excellent and
eloquent speaking; bestowed his best endeavor to obtain Serictha,
notwithstanding the contemptible carriage of the rest toward him; whereupon
prevailing for his access to the Princess, and admitted to speak, as all the
other did, he reasoned with her in this manner.

Whence may it proceed, Madam, that you being the fairest and wisest Princess
living at this day in all the Northern parts, should make so small account of
your self, as to deny that, which with honor you may yield to them, as seek
to do you most humble service; and forgetting the rank you hold, do refuse to
deigne them recompense in any manner whatsoever, seeking only to enjoy you in
honorable marriage? Perhaps you are of opinion, that the gods should become
slaves to you^ beauty, in which respect, men are utterly unworthy to crave any
such acquaintance of you. If it be so, I confess my self conquered: But if
the gods seek no such association with women, and since they forsook the
World, they left this legacy to us men; I think you covet after none, but such
as are extracted of their blood, or may make vaunt of their near kindred and
alliance to them. I know that many have wished, and do desire you: I know
also, that as many have requested you of the King your Father, but the choice
remains in your power, and you being ordained the Judge, to distinguish the
merit of all your Suitors; me thinks you do wrong to the office of a Judge; in
not regarding the parties which are in suite, to sentence the dese^t of the
best and brauest, and so to delay them with no more lingering.

I cannot think Madam, that you are so far out of your self, and so chill
cold in your affection, but desire of occasions, equal to your virtue and
singular beauty, do sometime touch you feelingly, and make you to wish for
such a man, answerable to the greatness of your excellency. And if it should
be otherwise (as I imagine it to be impossible) yet you ought to break such an
obstinate design, only to satisfy the King your Father, who can desire
nothing more, then to have a Son in Law, to revenge him on the Tyrant of
Swetia; who, as you well know, was sometime the murderer of your Grandfather
Hunguinus, and also of his Father. If you please to vouchsafe me so much grace
and favor, as to make me the man, whom your heart has chosen to be your
Husband; I swear unto you by the honor of a Soldier, that I will undergo
such service, as the King shall be revenged, you royally satisfied, and my
self advanced to no mean happiness, by being the only fortunate man of the
World. Gentle Princess, the most beautiful daughter to a King, open that
indurate heart, and so soften it, that the sweet impressions of love may be
engraven therein; see there the loyal pursuit of your Ocharus, who, to save
his life, cannot so much as win one look from his divine Mistress.

This niceness is almost merely barbarous, that I, wishing to adventure my
life prodigally in your service, you are so cruel, as not to deigne recompense
to this duty of mine, with the least sign of kindness that can be imagined.
Fair Serictha, if you desire the death of your friendly servant Ocharus, there
are many other means whereby to perform it, without consuming him in so small
a fire, and suffering him there to languish without any answer. If you will
not look upon me; if my face be so unworthy, that one beam of your bright
Suns may not shine upon it: If a word of your mouth be too precious for me;
make a sign with your hand, either of my happiness or disaster. If your hand
be envious of mine ease, let one of your women be she, to pronounce the
sentence of life o^ death; because, if my life be hateful to you, this hand of
mine may satisfy your will, and sacrifice it to the rigor of your disdain.
But if (as I am rather persuaded) the ruin of your servants, be against your
more merciful wishes; deal so that I may perceive it, and express what
compassion you have of your Ocharus, who coueteth nothing more, then your daily
hearts ease and contentment, with a privilege of honor above other Ladies.
All this discourse was heard by Serictha, but so little was she moved
therewith, as she was far enough off from returning him any answer, neither
did any of the Gentlewomen attending on her, ever hear her use the very least
word to any of her amorous sollicitors, nor did she know any one of them, but
by speech only, which drove them all into an utter despair, perceiving no
possible means whereby to conquer her.

The Histories of the Northe^ne (...) de^^are, that in those times, the rapes
of women were not much (...), and such as pursued any Lady or Gentlewoman with
love (...) persuaded, that they never made sufficient proof of the^ (...)
passions, if they undertook not all cunning stratagems, with adventure of
their lives to all perils whatsoever, for the rape or stealth of them, whom
they purposed to enjoy in marriage. As we read in the Goths History of Gramo,
Son to the King of Denmark, who being impa^^ently amourous of the daughter
to the King of the Goths, and winning the love of the Lady, stole her away,
before her Parents or friends had any notice thereof; by means of which rape,
there followed a most bloody war between the Goths and the Danes. In
recompense of which injury, Sibdagerus, King of Norway, being chosen chief
Commander of the Swetians and Goths, entered powerfully into Denmark, where
first he violated the Sister to King Gramo, and led away her Daughter, whom in
the like manner he made his Spouse, as the Dane had done the Daughter of
Sigtruge, Prince of the Goths.

I induce these brief narrations, only to show, that while Ocharus made
honest and affable means, to win respect from Serictha, and used all
honorable services to her, as the Daughter of so great a Prince worthily
deserved: some there were, not half so conscientious as he, especially one of
the amourous suitors, who being weary of the strange carriages of Serictha,
dissembling to prosecute his purpose no further; prevailed so far, that he
corrupted one of her Governesses, for secretly training her to such a place,
where the rauisher should lie in ambush to carry her away, so to enjoy her by
policy, seeing all other means failed for to compass his desire.

Behold to what a kind of foolish rage, which giddy headed dullards do term a
natural passion, they are led, who, being guided more by sensuality, then
reason or discretion, follow the braine-sicke motions of their rash
apprehensions. He which pursues, and protests to love a Lady for her
gentillity and virtue; knows not how to measure what love is, neither sees
or conceiueth, how far the permission of his own endeavor extends.
Moreover, you may observe, that never any age was so gross, or men so simple,
but even almost from the beginning, avarice did hood-winke the hearts of men,
and that (with gold) the very strongest Fortification in the World has been
broken, yea, and the best bard gates laid wide open. Serictha, who shunned the
sight of all men, and never distrusted them which kept about her; she who
never knew (except some natural spark gave light to her understanding) what
belonged to the embracements of men, must now (without dreaming thereon) fall
as food to the insatiable appetite of a wretch, who compassed this surprisall
of her, to glory in his own lewdness, and make a mock of the Princesses
settled constancy.

She, good Lady, following the council of her traiterous guide, went abroad
on walking, but weakly accompanied, as one that admitted no men to attend her,
which she might have repented very dearly, if Heaven had not succored her
innocence, by the help of him, who wished her as well as the rauisher, though
their desires were quite contrary; the one to enjoy her by violence, but the
other affecting rather to die, then do the least act which might displease
her. No sooner was Serictha ar^iued at the destined place, where her false
Gouernesse was to deliver her; but behold a second Paris came, and seized on
her, hurrying her in haste away, before any help could possibly rescue her;
the place being far off from any dwelling.

Now the rauisher durst not convey her to his own abiding, to enjoy the
benefit of his purchase; but haled her into a small thicket of trees, where,
although she knew the evident peril, whereinto her severe continency had now
thrown her: yet notwithstanding, she would not lift up her eyes, to see what
he was that had thus stolen her, so firmly she dwelt upon grounded
deliberation, and such was the vigor of her chaste resolve. And albeit she
knew a wickedness (worse then death) preparing for her, who had no other glory
then in her virtue, and desire to live contentedly; yet was she no more
astouned thereat, then if he had led her to the Palace of the King her Father:
persuading herself, that violence done to the body, is no prejudice to honor,
when the mind is free and clear from consent.

As thus this robber of beauty was preparing to massacre the modesty of the
fair Princess, she resisted him with all her power, yea, and defended her
self so worthily, that he could not get one look of her eye, one kiss of her
cheek, nor any advantage whatsoever, crying out shrilly, and struggling against
him strongly: her outcryes were heard by one, who little imagined that she was
so near, whom he loved more dearly then his own life, namely, Ocharus; who
was walking accidentally alone in this wood, devising by what means he might
win grace from his stern Mistress. No sooner took he knowledge of her, and
saw her (in the arms of another) to be ravished; but he cried out to the
thief, saying, Hand off villain, let not such a slave as thou, profane with
an irreverent touch the sacred honor of so chaste a Princess, who deserves
to be more royally respected, then thus rudely hurried: Hand off I say, or else
I swear by her divine perfections, whom I esteem above all creatures in this
World, to make thee die more miserably, then ever any man as yet did.

Whosoever had seen a Lion or an Ounce rouse himself, chafing when any one
aduentureth to rob him of his prey; and these with fierce eyes, mounted
creasts, writhed tails, and sharpened paws, make against him that durst so
mollest him. In the like manner did the rauisher show himself, and one while
snarling, another while bristling the darted disdainefull looks at Ocharus,
and spoke to him in this manner. Vile and base Sea-thiefe, as thou art, welcome
to thy deserved wages, and just repayment for thy proud presuming. It glads my
heart not a little, to meet thee here, where thou shall soon perceive what
good will I bear thee, and whether thou be worthy or no to enjoy the honor of
this Lady, now in mine own absolute possession. It will also increase her more
ample persuasion of my worth, and plead my merit more effectually in her
favor; when she shall see what a powerful arm I have, to punish this proud
insolence of a Pirate.

This harsh language was so distasteful to Ocharus, that like a Bull, made
angry by the teeth of some Mastiue Dog, or pricked by the point of a weapon,
he ran upon his enemy, and was so roughly welcomed by him, as it could not
easily be judged which of them had the better advantage. But in the end Fortune
favored most the honest man, and Ocharus having overthrown the robber, he
smote the head of him quite from his shoulders, which he presented to her, whom
he had delivered out of so great a peril, and thus he spoke. You may now
behold Madam, whether Ocharus be a true lover of Sericthaes virtues, or no, and
your knowledge fully resolved, at what end his affection aims; as also, how
far his honest desert extends, for you both to love him, and to recompense
the loyal respect he has used toward you. Never look on the villains face,
who strove to shame the King your Fathers Court, by violation of theeuery, the
chasest Princess on the Earth; but regard Ocharus, who is ready to sacrifice
himself, if you take as much pleasure in his ruin, as (he thinks) he has
given you contentment, by delivering you from this Traitor.

Does it not appear unto you Madam, that I have as yet done enough, whereby to
be thought a worthy Husband, for the royal Daughter of Denmark? Have I not
satisfied the Kings own Ordinance, by delivering his Daughter, as already I
have done? Will Serictha be so constant in her cruelty, as not to turn her eye
toward him, who exposed his life, to no mean peril and danger, only in the
defense of her Chastity? Then I plainly perceive, that the wages of my
deuoire, is ranked amongst those precedent services, which I have performed
for so hurtful a beauty. Yet gentle Princess, let me tell you, my carriage
has bin of more importance, then all the others can be, and my merit no way to
be compared with theirs; at least, if you pleased to make account of him, who
is an unfeigned lover of your modesty, and devoutly honors your virtuous
behavior. And yet Madame, shall I have none other answer from you, but your
perpetual silence? Can you continue so obstinate in your opinion, in making
your self still as strange to your Ocharus, as to the rest, who have no other
affection, but only to the bare outside of beauty? Why then, Royal Lady,
seeing (at this instant time) all my labor is but lost, and your heart seems
much more hardened, in acknowledging any of my honest services: at least yet let
me be so happy, as to conduct you back to the Palace, and restore you to that
sacred safety, which will be my souls best comfort to behold.

No outward sign of kind acceptance, did any way express it self in her,
but rather as fearing, lest the commodiousnesse of the place should incite this
young Lord, to forget all honest respect, and imitate the other in like
baseness. But he, who rather wished a thousand deaths, then any way to
displease his Mistress, as if he were half doubtful of her suspicion, made
offer of guiding her back to the place, from whence she had before been
stolen, where she found her company still staying, as not daring to stir
thence, to let the King know his daughters ill fortune; but when they saw her
return, and in the company of so worthy a Knight, they grew resolved, that no
violence had been done unto her.

The Princess, sharply rebuking her women, for leaving her so basely as they
had done, gave charge to one of them (because she would not seem altogether
negligent and discourteous) that she being gone thence, she should not fail to
thank Ocharus, for the honest and faithful service he had done unto her,
which she would continually remember, and recompense as it lay in her power.
Nevertheless, she advised him withal, not to hope of any more advantage
thereby, then reason should require. For, if it were the will of the Gods, that
she should be his wife, neither she or any other could let or hinder it: but if
her destiny reserved her for another, all his services would avail to no
purpose, but rather to make her the more rigorous toward him.

This gracious answer, thus given him by her Gentlewoman, although it gave some
small contentment to the poor languishing lover: yet he saw no assured sign
whereon to settle his resolve, but his hopes vanished away in smoke, as fast
as opinion bred them in his brain. And gladly he would have given over all
further amorous solicitings, but by some private persuasions of her message
sent him, which in time might so advance his services done for her sake, as
would derive far greater favors from her. Whereupon, he omitted no time or
place, but as occasion gave him any gracious permission, still plied her
memory, with his manly rescuing her from the rauisher, sufficient to plead
his merit to her Father, and that (in equity) she ought to be his wife, by
right both of Honor and Arms; no man being able to deserve her, as he had
done.

So long he pursued her in this manner, that his speeches seemed hateful to
her, and devising how to be free from his daily importunities, at length, in
the habit of a poor Chamber-maide, she secretly departed out of the Court,
wandering into the solitary parts of the country; where she entered into
service, and had the charge of keeping Sheep. It may seem strange, that a
Kings only daughter should stray in such sort, and despising Courtly life,
betake her self to pains and seruility: but such was her resolution, and
women delighting altogether in extremes, spare no attempts to compass their
own wills. All the Court was in an uproar for the Ladies loss, the Father in
no mean affliction, the Lovers well-nere beside their wits, and every one else
most grievously tormented, that a Lady of such worth should so suddenly be
gone, and all pursuit made after her, gain no knowledge of her.

In this high tide of sorrow and disaster, what shall we say of the gentle Lord
Ocharus? What judgment can sound the depth of his woeful extremity? Fearing
least some other thief had now made a second stealth of his divine Goddess;
he must needs follow her again, seeking quite throughout the world, never more
rerurning back to the Court, nor to the place of his own abiding, until he
heard tidings of his Mistress, or ended his days in the search of her. No
Village, Town, Cottage, Cast, or any place else of note or name, did he leave
unsought, but diligently he searched for Serictha; striving to get knowledge,
under what habit she lived thus concealed, but all his labor was to no effect:
which made him leave the places so much frequented, and visit the solitary
desert shades, entering into all Caves and rusticke habitations, whereon he
could fasten his eye, to seek for the lost Treasure of his soul.

On a day, as he wandered along in a spacious valley, seated between two
pleasant hills, taking delight to hear the gentle murmr of the rivers,
running by the sides of two neighboring rocks, planted with all kind of
trees, and very thickely spread with moss: he espied a flock of Sheep
feeding on the grass, and not far off from them sat a Maid spinning on her
Distaffe; who having got a sight of him, presently covered her face with a
veil. Love, who sat as Sentinel both in the heart and eye of the gentle
Norwegian Lord, as quickly discovered the subtilty of the fair Shephearddesse,
enstructing the soul of Ocharus, that thus she hid her face, as coveting not
to be known: whereupon he gathered, that doubtless this was she, for whom he
had sought with such tedious travail, and therefore going directly unto her,
thus he spoke.

Gentle Princess; wherefore do you thus hide your self from me? Why do you
haunt these retreats and desolate abodes, having power to command over
infinite men, that cannot live but by your presence? What has moved you
Madame, to fly from company, to dwell among desert Rocks, and serve as a
slave, to such as are no way worthy of your service? Why do you forsake a
potent King, whose only daughter and hope you are; leaving your country and
royal train of Ladies, and so far abasing your self, to live in the
dejected state of a servant, and to some rusticke clown or peazant? What
reason have you, to despise so many worthy Lords, that dearly love and honor
you, but (above them all) your poor slave Ocharus, who has no spare of his
own life, for the safety of yours, and also for the defense of your honor?
Royal maid, I am the same man that delivered you from the villain, who would
have violated your fair chastity; and since then, have not spared any pain or
travel in your search: for whose loss, King Siwalde is in extreme anguish,
the Danes in mourning habites, and Ocharus even at the door of death, being no
way able to endure your absence.

Are you of the mind, worthy Madame, that I have not hitherto deserved so much
as one good look or glance of your eye, in recompense of so many good and
loyal services? If Alas! I am neither rauisher, nor demander of any unjust
requests, or else inciuill in my motions: I may merit one regard of my
Mistress. I require only so silly a favor, that her eyes may pay me the
wages for all which I have hitherto done in her service. What would you do
Madam, if I were an importunate solicitor, and requested far greater matters
of you, in just recompense of my labors? I do not desire, that you should
embrace me. I am not so bold, as to request a kiss of Sericthaes, more then
immortal lips. Nor do I covet, that she should any otherwise entreat me,
then with such severity as beseems so great a Princess. I ask no more, but
only to eleuate your chaste eyes, and grace me with one little look, as being
the man, who for his virtue and loyal affection, has deserved more then that
favor, yea, a much greater and excellent recompense. Can you then be so
cruel, as to deny me so small a thing, without regard of the maine debt,
wherein you stand engaged to your Ocharus?

The Princess perceiving that it auailed nothing to conceal her self, being
by him so apparently discovered; began now to speak (which she had never done
before, either to him, or any other of her amorous suitors) answering him in
this manner. Lord Orharus, it might suffice you, that your importunity made me
forsake my Fathers Court, and causes me to live in this abased condition,
which I purpose to prosecute all my life time; or so long (at the least) as
you, and such as you are, pursue me so fondly as you have presumed to do. For I
am resolved, never to favor you any otherwise, then hitherto I have done;
desiring you therefore, that Serictha wanting an Interpreter to tell you her
will, you would now receive it from her own mouth, determining sooner to dye,
then alter a jot of her intended purpose.

Ocharus hearing this unwelcome answer, was even upon the point to have slain
himself: but yet, not to lose the name of a valiant man, or to be thought of
an effeminate or cowardly spirit, that a Woman should force him to an act, so
far unfitting for a man of his rank; he took his leave of her, solemnly
promising, not to forget her further pursuit, but at all times to obey her so
long as he lived, although her command was very hard for him to endure. So he
departed thence, not unto the Court, she being not there, that had the power to
enjoin his presence: but home to his own house, where he was no sooner
arrived, but he began to wax weary of his former folly; accusing himself of
great indiscretion, for spending so much time in vain, and in her service, who
utterly despised him, and all his endeavors which he undertook. He began to
accuse her of great ingratitude, laying overmuch respect upon her virtue, to
have no feeling at all of his loyal sufferings; but merely made a mockery of
his martyrdom. Hereupon, he concluded to give over all further affection, to
languish no longer for her sake, that hated him and all his actions.

While he continued in these melancholy passions, the Princess, who all this
while had persisted in such strict severity, as astonished the courages of her
stoutest servants; considering (more deliberately) on the sincere affection of
Ocharus, and that virtue only made him the friend to her modesty, and not
wanton or lascivious appetite; she felt a willing readiness in her soul, to
gratify him in some worthy manner, and to recompense some part of his
travails. Which to effect, she resolved to follow him (in some counterfeite
habit) even to the place of his own abiding, to try, if easily he could take
knowledge of her, whom so lately he saw in the garments of a Shephearddesse.
Being thus minded, she went to her Mistress whom she served, and who had
likewise seen Lord Ocharus (of whom she had perfect knowledge) when he
conferred with the Shephearddesse, and enquiring the cause, why he resorted in
that manner to her; Serictha returned her this answer.

Mistress, I make no doubt, but you will be somewhat amazed, and (perhaps) can
hardly credit when you hear, that she who now serves you in the poor degree
of Shephearddesse, is the only daughter to Siwalde King of the Danes: for
whose love, so many great Lords have continually labored; and that I only
attracted hither Ocharus, the Noble Son of valiant Hebonius, to wander in
these solitary deserts, to find out her that fled from him, and held him in
as high disdain, as I did all the rest of his fellow riuals. But if my words
may not herein sufficiently assure you, I would advise you, to send where
Ocharus dwells, and there make further enquiry of him, to the end that you
may not imagine me a liar. If my speeches do otherwise prevail with you, and
you remain assured, that I am she, whom your Noble neighbor so dearly
affects, albeit I never made any account at all of him: then I do earnestly
entreat you, so much to stand my friend, as to provide some convenient means
for me, whereby I may pass unknown to the Castle of Ocharus, to revenge my
self on his civil honesty, and smile at him hereafter, if he prove not so
clearly sighted, as to know her being near him, whom he vaunteth to love
above all women else.

The good Countrey-woman hearing these words, and perceiving that she had the
Princess in her house, of whose speeches she made not any doubt, in regard of
her stout countenance, gravity, and fair demeanor, began to relish something
in her mind, far differing from matter of common understanding, and therefore
roundly replied in this kind of language.

Madam (for servant I may no longer call you) I make no question to the
contrary, but that you are derived of high birth; having observed your
behavior, and womanly carriage. And so much the more I remain assured
thereof, having seen such great honor done unto you, by the Noble Lord, and
worthy Warrior Ocharus: wherefore, it lies not in my power, to impeach your
desseignes, much less to talk of your longer service, because you are the
Princess Serictha, whom I am to perform all humble duty unto, as being one
of your meanest subjects. And although you were not she, yet would I not
presume any way to offend you, in regard of the true and virtuous love, which
that good Knight Ocharus seems to bear you. If my company be needful for
you, I beseech you to accept it: if not, take whatsoever is mine, which may any
way sted you; for, to make you pass unknown, I can and will provide
sufficiently, even to your own contentment, and in such strange manner, as
Ocharus (were he never so clearly sighted) shall be deceived, you being attired
in those fashion garments, which here in these parts are usually worn.

Serictha being wonderously joyful at her answer, suffered her to paint, or
rather soil her fair face, with the juice of diverse herbs and roots, and
clothed her in such an habit as those women use to wear that live in the
mountains of Norway, upon the seacoast fronting Great Britain. Being thus
disguised, confidently she went, tobeguile the eye of her dearest friend, and
so to return back again from him, having affoorded him such a secret favor,
in requital of his honorable services; delivering her out of so great a
danger, and coming to visit her in so solitary a life. Nor would she have
the woman's company any further, then till she came within the sight of Ocharus
his Castle; where when she was arrived (he being then absent) the mother unto
the Noble Gentleman, gave her courteous welcome; and, notwithstanding her gross
and homely outward appearance, yet she collected by her countenance, that there
was a matter of much more worth in her, then to be a woman of base breeding.

When Ocharus was returned home, he received advertisement by his mother,
concerning the arrival of this stranger, when as suddenly his soul half
persuaded him, of some kind courtesy to proceed from his sweet rebel,
pretending now some feigned excuse, in recompense of all his travails, and
passed honest offices. Observing all her actions and gestures, her wonted
rigor never bending one jot, or gave way to her eye to look upon any man; he
grew the better assured, that she was the daughter to King Siwalde. Yet
feigning to take no knowledge thereof, he bethought himself of a queint
policy, whereby to make trial, whether secret kindness had conducted this
Lady thither, or no, to conclude his torments, and give a final end to his
grievous afflictions.

Upon a watchword given to his Mother, he pretended, and so caused it to be
noised through the house, that he was to marry a very honorable Lady; which the
constant and chaste maid verily believed; and therefore gave the more diligent
attendance (as a new-come servant) to see all things in due decency, as no one
could express her self more ready, because she esteemed him above all other
men. Yet such was the obstinate opinion she conceived of her own preciseness,
as she would rather suffer all the flames of love, then express the least show
of desire to any man living. Nevertheless, she was inwardly offended, that any
other should have the honor, to make her vaunt of enjoying Ocharus; whom
(indeed) she coueted, and thought him only worthy in her heart, to be Son in
law to the King of Denmark.

Now, as the Mother was very seriously busied in preparing the Castle, for
receiving the pretended Bride; she employed her new Maid ( Serictha I mean)
as busily as any of the rest. In the meanewhile, Ocharus was laid upon a bed,
well noting all her carriage and behavior, she having a lighted Candle in her
hand, without any Candlestick to hold it in. As all the servants (both men and
maids) were running hastily from place to place, to carry such occasions as they
were commanded, the candle was consumed so near to Sericthaes fingers, that it
burned her hand. She, not to fail a jot in her height of mind, and to declare
that her courage was invincible; was so far off from casting away the small
snuff which offended her, that she rather graspt it the more strongly, even to
the enflaming of her own flesh, which gave light to the rest about their
business. A matter (almost) as marvelous, as the act of the noble Roman,
who gave his hand to be burned, in presence of the Tuscane King, that had
besiedged Rome. Thus this Lady would needs make it apparently known, by this
generous act of hers, that her heart could not be enflamed or conquered, by
all the fires of concupiscence, in suffering so stoutly and courageously, the
burning of this material fire.

Ocharus, who (as we have already said) observed every thing that Serictha
did; perceiving that she spoke not one word, albeit her hand burned in such
fierce manner, was much astonished at her sprightly mind. And as he was about to
advise her, to hurl away the fire so much offending her; Cu^iositie (merely
natural unto Women) made the Lady lift up her eyes, to see (by stealth)
whether her friend had noted her invincible constancy, or no. Hereby Ocharus
won the honor of his long expected victory; and leaping from off the bed, he
ran to embrace her, not with any such fear as he had formerly used, in not
daring so much as to touch her: but boldly now clasping his arms about her, he
said. At this instant Madam, the King your Fathers decree is fully
accomplished, for I am the first man that ever you looked in the face, and you
are only mine, without making any longer resistance. You are the Princely Lady
and wife, by me so constantly loved and desired, whom I have followed with such
painful travels, exposing my life to infinite perils in your service: you
have seen and looked on him, who never craved any thing of you, but only this
favor, whereof you cannot bereave me again, because the Gods themselves, at
such time as I least expected it, have bestowne it on me, as my deserved
recompense, and worthy reward.

In the delivery of these words, he kissed and embraced her a thousand times,
she not using any great resistance against him, but only as somewhat offended
with her self, either for being so rash in looking on him, or else for
delaying his due merit so long; or rather, because with her good will she had
fallen into the transgression. She declared no violent or contending motion, as
loath to continue so long in his a^mes; but rather, evident signs of hearty
contentment, yet in very bashful and modest manner, willing enough to accept
his loving kindness, yet not wandering from her wonted chaste carriage. He
being favorably excused, for the outward expression of his amourous behavior
to her, and certified withal, that since the time of freeing her from the
wretch, who sought the violating of her chastity, she had entirely respected
him, (albeit, to shun suspicion of lightness, and to win more assurance, of
what she credited sufficiently already, she continued her stiff opinion
against him) yet always this resolution was set down in her soul, never
(with her will) to have any other Husband but Ocharus, who (above all other)
had best deserved her, by his generosity, virtue, manly courage, and valiancy;
whereof he might the better assure himself, because (of her own vo^untary
disposition) she followed to find him out, not for any other occasion, but to
revenge her self (by this honest Office) for all that he had done or
undertaken, to win the grace and love of the King of Denmarkes Daughter, to
whom he presented such dutiful service.

Ocharus, who would not loose this happiness, to be made King of all the
Northern Islands, with more then a thankful heart, accepted all her gracious
excuses. And being desirous to waste no longer time in vain, lest Fortune
should raise some new stragatem against him, to dispossess him of so fair a
felicity; left off his counterfeit intended marriage, and effected this in good
earnest, and was wedded to his most esteemed Serictha. Not long had these
lovers lived in the lawful and sacred rites of marriage, but King Siwalde was
advertised, that his Daughter had given her consent to Ocharus, and received
him as her noble Husband. The party was not a jot displeasing to him, he
thought him to be a worthy Son in Law, and the condition did sufficiently
excuse the match; only herein lay the error and offense, that the marriage
was sollemnized without his knowledge and consent, he being not called thereto,
or so much as acquainting him therewith, which made him condemn Ocharus of
ouerbold arrogance, he being such a great and powerful King, to be so lightly
respected by his Subject, and especially in the marriage of his Daughter.

But Serictha, who was now metamorphosed from a maid to a wife, and had lain a
few nights by the side of a Soldiour, was become much more valiant and
aduenturous then she was before. She took the matter in hand, went to her
Father, who welcomed her most lovingly, and so pleasing were her speeches,
carried with such wit and womanly discretion, that nothing wanted to approve
what she had done. Matters which he had never known, or so much as heard of,
were now openly revealed, how Ocharus had delivered her from the rauisher, what
worthy respect he then used toward her, and what honor he extended to her in
the deserts, where she tended her flock as a Shephearddesse, with many other
honorable actions beside: that the Kings anger became mildely qualified, and
so far he entered into affection, that he would not do any thing
thence-forward, without the counsel and advise of his Son in Law, whom so
highly he esteemed, and liked so respectively of him, and his race; that his
Queen dying, he married with the Sister to Ocharus, going hand in hand with
the gentle and modest Princess Serictha.

This Novel of Dioneus, was commended by all the company, and so much the
rather, because it was free from all folly and obscoennesse. And the Queen
perceiving, that as the Tale was ended, so her dignity must now be expired:
she took the Crown of Laurel from off her head, and graciously placed it on
the head of Philostratus, saying; The worthy Discourse of Dioncus, being out of
his wonted wanton element, causes me (at the resignation of mine Authority)
to make choice of him as our next Commander, who is best able to order and
enstruct us all; and so I yield both my place and honor to Philostratus, I
hope with the good liking of all our assistants: as plainly appears by their
instant carriage toward him, with all their heartiest love and sufferages.

Whereupon Philostratus, beginning to consider on the charge committed to his
care, called the Master of the household, to know in what estate all matters
were, because where any defect appeared, every thing might be the sooner
remedied, for the better satisfaction of the company, during the time of his
authority. Then returning back to the assembly, thus he began. Lovely Ladies,
I would have you to know, that since the time of ability in me, to distinguish
between good and evil, I have always been subject (perhaps by the means of
some beauty here among us) to the proud and imperious dominion of love, with
expression of all duty, humility, and most intimate desire to please: yet all
has proved to no purpose, but still I have bin rejected for some other,
whereby my condition has fallen from ill to worse, and so still it is likely,
even to the hour of my death. In which respect, it best pleases me, that our
conferences to morrow, shall extend to no other argument, but only such casesas
are most conformable to my calamity, namely of such, whose love has had
unhappy ending, because I await no other issue of mine; nor willingly would I
be called by any other name, but only, the miserable and unfortunate Lover.

Having thus spoken, he arose again; granting leave to the rest, to recreate
themselves till supper time. The Garden was very fair and spacious, affoording
large limits for their several walks; the Sun being already so low descended,
that it could not be offensive to any one, the Connies, Kids, and young Hindes
skipping every where about them, to their no mean pleasure and contentment.
Dioneus and Fiammetta, sat singi^g together, of Messire Guiglielmo and the
Lady of Virtue. Philomena and Pamphilus playing at the Chesse, all sporting
themselves as best they pleased. But the hour of Supper being come, and the
Tables covered about the fair fountain, they sat down and supt in most
loving manner. Then Philostratus, not to swerue from the course which had been
observed by the Queens before him, so soon as the Tables were taken away,
gave command, that Madam Lauretta should begin the dance, and likewise to
sing a Song. My gracious Lord (quoth she) I can skill of no other Songs, but
only a piece of mine own, which I have already learned by heart, and may well
beseem this fair assembly: if you please to allow of that, I am ready to
perform it with all obedience. Lady, replied the King, you your self being so
fair and lovely, so needs must be whatsoever comes from you, therefore let
us hear such as you have. Madam Lauretta, giving enstruction to the Chorus,
prepared, and began in this manner.

The Song.
NO soul so comfortless,
Has more cause to express,
Like woe and heaviness,
As I poor amorous Maid.
He that did form the Heavens and every Star,
Made me as best him pleased,
Lovely and gracious, no Element at jar,
Or else in gentle breasts to move stern War,
But to have strifes appeased
Where Beauties eye should make the deepest scarre.
And yet when all things are confessed,
Never was any soul distressed,
Like mine poor amorous Maid.
No soul so comfortless, etc.
There was a time, when once I was held dear,
Blessed were those happy days:
Numberless Loue-suites whispred in mine ear,
All of fair hope, but none of desperate fear;
And all sung Beauties praise.
Why should black clouds obscure so bright a clear?
And why should others swim in joy,
And no heart drowned in annoy,
Like mine poor amorous Maid?
No soul so comfortless, etc.
Well may I curse that sad and dismal day,
When in unkind exchange;
Another Beauty did my hopes betray,
And stole my dearest Love from me away:
Which I thought very strange,
Considering vows were past, and what else may
Assure a loyal Maidens trust,
Never was Lover so unjust,
Like mine poor amorous Maid.
No soul so comfortless, etc.
Come then kind Death, and finish all my woes,
Thy help is now the best.
Come lovely Nymphs, lend hands mine eyes to close,
And let him wander wheresoere he goes,
Vaunting of mine unrest;
Beguiling others by his treacherous shows.
Grave on my Monument,
No true love was worse spent,
Then mine poor amorous Maid.
No soul so comfortless, etc.
So did Madam Lauretta finish her Song, which being well observed of them all,
was understood by some in diverse kinds: some alluding it one way, and others
according to their own apprehensions, but all consenting, that both it was an
excellent Ditty, well devised, and most sweetly sung. Afterward, lighted
Torches being brought, because the Stars had already richly spangled all the
heavens, and the fit hour of rest approaching: the King commanded them all to
their Chambers, where we mean to leave them until the next morning.

The End of the Third Day.
The Fourth Day.
Wherein all the several Discourses, are under the Government of Honorable
Philostratus: And concerning such persons, whose Loves have had successelesse
ending.

The Induction unto the ensuing Nouelles.
MOst worthy Ladies, I have always heard, as well by the sayings of the
judicious, as also by mine own observation and reading, that the impetuous and
violent winds of envy, do sildome blow turbulently; but on the highest Towers
and tops of the trees most eminently advanced. Yet (in mine opinion) I have
found my self much deceived; because, by striving with my very uttermost
endeavor, to shun the outrage of those implacable winds; I have labored to
go, not only by plain and even paths, but likewise through the deepest
valleys. As very easily may be seen and observed in the reading of these few
small Nouels, which I have written not only in our vulgar Florentine prose,
without any ambitious title: but also in a most humble style, so low and gentle
as possibly I could. And although I have been rudely shaken, yea, almost half
vnrooted, by the extreme agitation of those blustering winds, and torn in
pieces by that base back-biter, envy: yet have I not (for all that)
discontinued, or broken any part of mine intended enterprise. Wherefore, I can
sufficiently witness (by mine own comprehension) the saying so much observed
by the wise, to be most true; That nothing is without envy in this world, but
misery only.

Among variety of opinions, fair Ladies; some, seeing these Novelties, spared
not to say; That I have been ouer-pleasing to you, and wandered too far from
mine respect, imbasing my credit and repute, by delighting my self too
curiously, for the fitting of your honors, and have extolled your worth too
much, with addition of worse speeches then I mean to utter. Others, seeming to
express more maturity of judgment, have likewise said, That it was very
vnsuteable for my years, to meddle with women's wanton pleasures, or contend to
delight you by the very least of my labors. Many more, making show of
affecting my good fame and esteem, say; I had done much more wisely, to have
kept me with the Muses at Parnassus, then to confound my studies with such
effeminate follies. Some other beside, speaking more despightfully then
discreetly, said; I had declared more humanity, in seeking means for mine own
maintenance, and wherewith to support my continual necessities, then to glut
the world with gulleries, and feed my hopes with nothing but wind. And
others, to calumniate my travails, would make you believe, that such matters
as I have spoken of, are merely disguised by me, and figured in a quite
contrary nature, quite from the course as they are related. Whereby you may
perceive (virtuous Ladies) how while I labor in your service, I am agitated
and mollested with these blusterings, and bitten even to the bare bones, by the
sharp and venomous teeth of envy; all which (as heaven best knows) I gladly
endure, and with good courage.

Now, albeit it belongs only to you, to defend me in this desperate
extremity; yet, notwithstanding all their utmost malice, I will make no spare
of my best abilities, and, without answering them any otherwise then is
fitting, will quickly keep their slanders from mine ears, with some slight
reply, yet not deserving to be dreamt on. For I apparently perceive, that
(having not already attained to the third part of my pains) they are grown to
so great a number, and presume very far upon my patience: they may increase,
except they be repul^ed in the beginning, to such an infinity before I can
reach to the end, as with their very least pains taking, they will sink me
to the bottomless depth, if your sacred forces (which are great indeed) may
not serve for me in their resistance. But before I come to answer any one of
them, I will relate a Tale in mine own favor; yet not a whole Tale, because
it shall not appear, that I purpose to mingle mine, among those which are to
proceed from a company so commendable. Only I will report a parcel thereof,
to the end, that what remains untold, may sufficiently express, it is not to
be numbered among the rest to come.

By way then of familiar discourse, and speaking to my malicious detractors, I
say, that a long while since, there lived in our City, a Citizen who was named
Philippo Balduccio, a man but of mean condition, yet very wealthy, well
qualified, and expert in many things appertaining unto his calling. He had a
wife whom he loved most entirely, as she did him, leading together a sweet and
peaceable life, studying on nothing more, then how to please each other
mutually. It came to pass, that as all flesh must, the good woman left this
wretched life for a better, leaving one only son to her husband, about the
age of two years. The husband remained so disconsolate for the loss of his
kind Wife, as no man possibly could be more sorrowful, because he had lost
the only jewel of his joy. And being thus divided from the company which he
most esteemed: he determined also to separate himself from the world,
addicting al his endeavors to the service of God; and applying his young son
likewise, to the same holy exercises. Having given away all his goods for Gods
sake, he departed to the Mountain Asinaio, where he made him a small Cell, and
lived there with his little son, only upon charitable alms, in abstinence
and prayer, forbearing to speak of any worldly occasions, or letting the Lad
see any vain sight: but conferred with him continually, on the glories of
eternal life, of God and his Saints, and teaching him nothing else but devout
prayers, leading this kind of life for many years together, not permitting
him ever to go forth of the Cell, or showing him any other but himself.

The good old man used diverse times to go to Florence, where having received
(according to his opportunities) the alms of diverse well disposed people, he
returned back again to his hermitage. It fortuned, that the boy being now
about eighteen years old, and his Father grown very aged; he demanded of
him one day, whether he went? Wherein the old man truly resolved him:
whereupon, the youth thus spoke unto him. Father, you are now grown very
aged, and hardly can endure such painful travel: why do you not let me go to
Florence, that by making me known to your well disposed friends, such as are
devoutly addicted both to God, and you; I, who am young, and better able to
endure travail then you are, may go thither to supply our necessities, and you
take your ease in the mean while? The aged man, perceiving the great growth of
his Son, and thinking him to be so well instructed in Gods service, as no
wordly vanities could easily allure him from it; did not dislike the Lads
honest motion, but when he went next to Florence, took him thither along with
him.

When he was there, and had seen the goodly Palaces, Houses, and Churches,
with all other sights to be seen in so populous a City: he began greatly to
wonder at them, as one that had never seen them before, at least within the
compass of his remembrance; demanding many things of his Father, both what
they were, and how they were named: wherein the old man still resolved him. The
answers seemed to content him highly, and caused him to proceed on in further
questionings, according still as they found fresh occasions: till at the last,
they met with a troop of very beautiful women, going on in seemly manner
together, as returning back from a Wedding. No sooner did the youth behold
them, but he demanded of his Father, what things they were; whereto the old man
replied thus. Son, cast down thy looks unto the ground, and do not seem to
see them at all, because they are bad things to behold. Bad things Father?
answered the Lad: How do you call them? The good old man, not to quicken any
concupiscible appetite in the young boy, or any inclinable desire to ought but
goodness; would not term them by their proper name of Women, but told him
that they were called young Gozlings.

Here grew a matter of no mean marvel, that he who had never seen any
women before now; appeared not to respect the fair Churches, Palaces, goodly
horses, Gold, Silver, or any thing else which he had seen; but, as fixing his
affection only upon this sight, suddenly said to the old man. Good Father, do
so much for me, as to let me have one of these Gozlings. Alas Son (replied
the Father) hold thy peace I pray thee, and do not desire any such naughty
thing. Then by way of demand, he thus proceeded, saying. Father, are these
naughty things made of themselves? Yes Son, answered the old man. I know not
Father (quoth the Lad) what you mean by naughtiness, nor why these goodly
things should be so badly termed; but in my judgment, I have not seen any
thing so fair and pleasing in mine eye, as these are, who excel those painted
Angels, which here in the Churches you have shown me. And therefore Father, if
either you love me, or have any care of me, let me have one of thse Gozlings
home to our Cell, where we can make means sufficient for her feeding. I will
not (said the Father) be so much thine enemy, because neither thou, or I, can
rightly skill of their feeding. Perceiving presently, that Nature had far
greater power then his Sons capacity and understanding; which made him
repent, for fondly bringing his son to Florence.

Having gone so far in this fragment of a Tale, I am content to pause here,
and will return again to them of whom I spoke before; I mean my envious
deprauers: such as have said (fair Ladies) that I am double blameworthy, in
seeking to please you, and that you are also ouerpleasing to me; which freely I
confess before all the world, that you are singularly pleasing to me, and I
have strouen how to please you effectually. I would demand of them (if they
seem so much amazed heereat,) considering, I never knew what belonged to
true-loue kisses, amorous embraces, and their delectable fruition, so often
received from your graces; but only that I have seen, and do yet daily
behold, your commendable conditions, admired beauties, noble adornments by
nature, and (above all the rest) your womenly and honest conversation. If he
that was nourished, bred, and educated, on a savage solitary Mountain, within
the confines of a poor small Cell, having no other company then his Father: If
such a one, I say, upon the very first sight of your sex, could so constantly
confess, that women were only worthy of affection, and the object which
(above all things else) he most desired; why should these contumelious spirits
so murmr against me, tear my credit with their teeth, and wound my
reputation to the death, because your virtues are pleasing to me, and I
endeavor likewise to please you with my utmost pains? Never had the
auspitious heavens allowed me life, but only to love you; and from my very
infancy, mine intentions have always been that way bent: feeling what virtue
flowed from your fair eyes, understanding the mellifluous accents of your
speech, whereto the enkindled flames of your sighs gave no mean grace. But
remembering especially, that nothing could so please an Hermit, as your divine
perfections, an unnurtured Lad, without understanding, and little differing
from a mere brutish beast: undoubtedly, whosoever loves not women, and
desires to be affected of them again; may well be ranked among these
women-haters, speaking out of cankred spleen, and utterly ignorant of the
sacred power (as also the virtue) of natural affection, whereof they seeming
so careless, the like am I of their deprauing.

Concerning them that touch me with mine age; Do not they know, that although
Leeks have white heads, yet the blades of them are always green? But
referring them to their flouts and taunts, I answer, that I shall never hold it
any disparagement to me, so long as my life endures, to delight my self with
those exercises, which Guido Caualconti, and Dante Alighieri, already aged, as
also Messer Cino de Pistoia, older then either of them both, held to be their
chiefest honor. And were it not a wandering too far from our present
argument, I would allege Histories to approve my words, full of very ancient
and famous men, who in the ripest maturity of all their time, were carefully
studious for the contenting of women, albeit these cock-braines neither know
the way how to do it, nor are so wise as to learn it.

Now, for my dwelling at Parnassus with the Muses, I confess their counsel to
be very good: but we cannot always continue with them, nor they with us. And
yet nevertheless, when any man departs from them, they delighting
themselves, to see such things as may be thought like them, do not therein
deserve to be blamed. We find it recorded, that the Muses were women, and
albeit women cannot equal the performance of the Muses; yet in their very
prime aspect, they have a lively resemblance with the Muses: so that, if women
were pleasing for nothing else, yet they ought to be generally pleasing in that
respect. Beside all this, women have bin the occasion of my composing a
thousand Verses, whereas the Muses never caused me to make so much as one.
Very true it is, that they gave me good assistance, and taught me how I should
compose them, yea, and directed me in writing of these Nouels. And how basely
soever they judge of my studies, yet have the Muses never scorned to dwell with
me, perhaps for the respective service, and honorable resemblance of those
Ladies with themselves, whose virtues I have not spared to commend by them.
Wherefore, in the composition of these varieties, I have not strayed so far
from Parnassus, nor the Muses; as in their silly conjectures they imagine.

But what shall I say to them, who take so great compassion on my poverty, as
they advise me to get something, whereon to make my living? Assuredly, I know
not what to say in this case, except by due consideration made with my self,
how they would answer me, if necessity should drive me to crave kindness of
them; questionles, they would then say: Go, seek comfort among thy fables and
follies. Yet I would have them know, that poor Poets have always found more
among their fables and fictions; then many rich men ever could do, by
ransacking all their bags of treasure. Beside, many other might be spoken of,
who made their age and times to flourish, merely by their inventions and
fables: whereas on the contrary, a great number of other busier brains,
seeking to gain more then would serve them to live on; have utterly run
upon their own ruin, and overthrown themselves for ever. What should I say
more? To such men, as are either so suspicious of their own charity, or of my
necessity, whenever it shall happen: I can answer (I thank my God for it)
with the Apostle; I know how to abou^d, and how to abate, yea, how to endure
both prosperity and want; and therefore, let no man be more careful of me,
then I am of my self.

For them that are so inquisitiue into my discourses, to have a further
construction of them, then agrees with my meaning, or their own good manners,
taxing me with writing one thing, but intending another; I could wish, that
their wisdom would extend so far, as but to compare them with their
originals, to find them a jot discordant from my writing; and then I would
freely confess, that they had some reason to reprehend me, and I should
endeavor to make them amends. But until they can touch me with any thing else,
but words only; I must let them wander in their own giddy opinions, and
follow the course proiected to my self, saying of them, as they do of me.

Thus holding them all sufficiently answered for this time, I say (most worthy
Ladies) that by heavens assistance and yours, whereto I only lean: I will
proceed on, armed with patience; and turning my back against these impetuous
winds, let them breath till they burst, because I see nothing can happen to
harm me, but only the venting of their malice. For the roughest blastes, do
but raise the smallest dust from off the ground, driving it from one place to
another; or, carrying it up to the air, many times it falls down again on
men's heads, yea, upon the Crowns of Emperors and Kings, and sometimes on the
highest Palaces and tops of Towers; from whence, if it chance to descend again
by contrary blasts, it can light no lower, then whence it came at the first.
And therefore, if ever I strove to please you with my uttermost abilities in
any thing, surely I must now contend to express it more then ever. For, I know
right well, that no man can say with reason, except some such as my self, who
love and honor you, that we do any otherwise then as nature has commanded us;
and to resist her laws, requires a greater and more powerful strength then
ours: and the contenders against her supreme privileges, have either labored
merely in vain, or else incurred their own bane. Which strength, I freely
confess my self not to have, neither covet to be possessed of it in this
case: but if I had it, I would rather lend it to some other, then any way to use
it on mine own behalf. Wherefore, I would advise them that thus check and
control me, to give over, and be silent; and if their cold humors cannot
learn to love, let them live still in their frostie complexion, delighting
themselves in their corrupted appetites: suffering me to enjoy mine own, for
the little while I have to live; and this is all the kindness I require of them.

But now it is time (bright beauties) to return whence we parted, and to
follow our former order begun, because it may seem we have wandered too far.
By this time the Sun had chased the Starre-light from the heavens, and the
shadie moisture from the ground, when Philostratus the King being risen, all
the company arose likewise. When being come into the goodly Garden, they spent
the time in variety of sports, dining where they had supt the night before.
And after that the Sun was at his highest, and they had refreshed their spirits
with a little slumbering, they sat down (according to custom) about the
fair Fountain. And then the King commanded Madam Fiammeta, that she should
give beginning to the days Nouels: when she, without any longer delaying, began in this gracious manner.

Tancrede, Prince of Salerne, caused the amorous friend of his daughter to be
slain, and sent her his heart in a cup of Gold: which afterward she steeped in
an impoysoned water, and then drinking it, so dyed.

The first Novel.
Wherein is declared the power of Love, and their cruelty justly reprehended,
who imagine to make the vigor thereof cease, by abusing or killing one of the
Lovers.



OUR King (most Noble and virtuous Ladies) has this day given us a subject,
very rough and stearne to discourse on, and so much the rather, if we consider,
that we are come hither to be merry and pleasant, where sad Tragical reports
are no way suitable, especially, by reviving the tears of others, to bedew our
own checkes withal. Nor can any such argument be spoken of, without moving
compassion both in the reporters, and hearers. But (perhaps) it was his
highness pleasure, to moderate the delights which we have already had. Or
whatsoever else has provoked him thereto, seeing it is not lawful for me, to
alter or contradict his appointment; I will recount an accident very pitiful,
or rather most unfortunate, and well worthy to be graced with our tears.

Tancrede, Prince of Salerne (which City, before the Consulles of Rome held
dominion in that part of Italy, stood free, and thence (perchance) took the
modern title of a Principality) was a very humane Lord, and of ingenious
nature; if, in his elder years, he had not soiled his hands in the blood of
Lovers, especially one of them, being both near and dear unto him. So it
fortuned, that during the whole life time of this Prince, he had but one only
daughter (albeit it had been much better, if he had had none at all) whom he so
choisely loved and esteemed, as never was any child more dearly affected of a
Father: and so far extended his ouer-curious respect of her, as he would
sildome admit her to be forth of his sight; neither would he suffer her to
marry, although she had outstept (by diverse years) the age meet for marriage.
Nevertheless, at length, he matched her with the Son to the Duke of Capua,
who lived no long while with her; but left her in a widdowed estate, and then
she returned home to her father again.

This Lady, had all the most absolute perfections, both of favor and feature,
as could be wished in any woman, young, queintly disposed, and of admirable
understanding, more (perhaps) then was requisite in so weak a body.
Continuing thus in Court with the King her Father, who loved her beyond all his
future hopes; like a Lady of great and glorious magnificence, she lived in all
delights and pleasure. She well perceiving, that her Father thus exceeding in
his affection to her, had no mind at all of re-marrying her, and holding it
most immodest in her, to solicit him with any such suite: concluded in her
minds private consultations, to make choice of some one especial friend or
favorite (if Fortune would prove so furtherous to her) whom she might acquaint
secretly, with her sober, honest, and familiar purposes. Her Fathers Court
being much frequented, with plentiful access of brave Gentlemen, and others
of inferior quality, as commonly the Courts of Kings and Princes are, whose
carriage and demeanor she very heedfully observed. There was a young Gentleman
among all the rest, a servant to her Father, and named Guiscardo, a man not
derived from any great descent by blood, yet much more Noble by virtue and
commendable behavior, then appeared in any of the other, none pleased her
opinion, like as he did; so that by often noting his parts and perfections, her
affection being but a glowing spark at the first, grew like a Bauin to take
flame, yet kept so closely as possibly she could; as Ladies are wary enough in
their love.

The young Gentleman, though poor, being neither block nor dullard, perceived
what he made no outward show of, and understood himself so sufficiently, that
holding it no mean happiness to be affected by her, he thought it very base
and cowardly in him, if he should not express the like to her again. So
loving mutually (yet secretly) in this manner, and she coveting nothing more,
then to have private conference with him, yet not daring to trust any one with
so important a matter; at length she devised a new cunning stratageme, to
compass her longing desire, and acquaint him with her private purpose, which
proved to be in this manner. She wrote a Letter, concerning what was the next
day to be done, for their secret meeting together; and conueying it within the
joint of an hollow Cane, in jesting manner threw it to Guiscardo, saying; Let
your man make use of this, insted of a pair of bellows, when he means to
make fire in your chamber. Guiscardo taking up the Cane, and considering with
himself, that neither was it given, or the words thus spoken, but doubtless
on some important occasion: went unto his lodging with the Cane, where viewing
it respectively, he found it to be cleft, and opening it with his knife, found
there the written Letter enclosed.

After he had read it, and well considered on the service therein concerned;
he was the most joyful man of the world, and began to contriue his aptest
means, for meeting with his gracious Mistress, and according as she had given
him direction. In a corner of the Kings Palace, it being seated on a rising
hill, a cave had long been made in the body of the same hill, which received
no light into it, but by a small spiracle or vent-loope, made our ingeniously
on the hills side. And because it had not in long time been frequented, by the
access of any body, that ventlight was ouer-growne with briars and bushes,
which almost engirt it round about. No one could descend into this cave or
vault, but only by a secret pair of stairs, answering to a lower Chamber of
the Palace, and very near to the Princesses lodging, as being altogether at
her command, by means of a strong barred and defensible door, whereby to
mount or descend at her pleasure. And both the cave it self, as also the
degrees conducting down into it, were now so quite worn out of memory (in
regard it had not been visited by any one in long time before) as no man
remembered that there was any such thing.

But Love, from whose bright discerning eyes, nothing can be so closely
concealed, but at the length it comes to light: had made this amorous Lady
mindful thereof, and because she would not be discovered in her intention,
many days together, her soul became perplexed; by what means that strong
door might best be opened, before she could compass to perform it. But
after that she had found out the way, and gone down her self alone into the
cave; observing the loope-light, and had made it commodious for her purpose,
she gave knowledge thereof to Guiscardo, to have him devise an apt course for
his descent, acquainting him truly with the height, and how far it was
distant from the ground within. After he had found the souspirall in the hills
side, and given it a larger entrance for his safer passage; he provided a
Ladder of cords, with steps sufficient for his descending and ascending, as
also a wearing suit made of leather, to keep his skin vnscratched of the
thorns, and to avoid all suspicion of his resorting thither. In this manner
went he to the said loope-hole the night following, and having fastened the
one end of his corded ladder, to the strong stumpe of a tree being closely by
it; by means of the said ladder, he descended down into the cave, and there
attended the coming of his Lady.

She, on the morrow morning, pretending to her waiting woman, that she was
scarsly well, and therefore would not be diseased the most part of that day;
commanded them to leave her alone in her Chamber, and not to return until she
called for them, locking the door her self for better security. Then opened
she the door of the cave, and going down the stairs, found there her amorous
friend Guiscardo, whom she saluting with a chaste and modest kiss; caused him
to ascend up the stayres with her into her chamber. This long desired, and now
obtained meeting, caused the two dearly affecting Lovers, in kind discourse
of amorous argument (without inciuill or rude demeanor) to spend there the most
part of that day, to their hearts joy and mutual contentment. And having
concluded on their often meeting there, in this cunning and concealed sort;
Guiscardo went down into the cave again, the Princess making the door fast
after him, and then went forth among her Women. So in the night season,
Guiscardo ascended up again by his Ladder of cords, and covering the
loope-hole with brambles and bushes, returned (unseen of any) to his own
lodging: the cave being afterward guilty of their often meeting there in this
manner.

But Fortune, who has always bin a fatal enemy to lovers stolen felicities,
became envious of their thus secret meeting, and overthrew (in an instant) all
their poor happiness, by an accident most spightfull and malicious. The King
had used diverse days before, after dinner time, to resort all alone to his
daughters Chamber, there conuersing with her in most loving manner. One unhappy
day amongst the rest, when the Princess, being named Ghismonda, was sporting
in her private Garden among her Ladies, the King (at his wonted time) went to
his daughters Chamber, being neither heard or seen by any. Nor would he have
his daughter called from her pleasure, but finding the windows fast shut, and
the Curtains close drawn about the bed; he sat down in a chair behind it,
and leaning his head upon the bed, his body being covered with the curtain, as
if he hid himself purposely; he mused on so many matters, until at last he
sell fast asleep.

It has bin observed as an ancient Adage, that when disasters are ordained to
any one, commonly they prove to be inevitable, as poor Ghismonda could
witness too well. For, while the King thus slept, she having (unluckily)
appointed another meeting with Guiscardo, left her Gentlewomen in the Garden,
and stealing softly into her Chamber, having made all fast and sure, for being
descried by any person: opened the door to Guiscardo, who stood there ready on
the staire-head, awaiting his entrance; and they sitting down on the bed side
(according as they were wont to do) began their usual kind conference again,
with sighs and loving kisses mingled among them. It chanced that the King
awaked, and both hearing and seeing this familiarity of Guiscardo with his
Daughter, he became extremely confounded with grief thereat. Once he intended,
to cry out for help, to have them both there apprehended; but he held it a
part of greater wisdom, to sit silent still, and (if he could) to keep
himself so closely concealed: to the end, that he might the more secretly, and
with far less disgrace to himself, perform what he had rashly intended to
do.

The poor discovered Lovers, having ended their amorous interparlance, without
suspicion of the Kings being so near in person, or any else, to betray their
ouer-confident trust; Guiscardo descended again into the Cave, and she leaving
the Chamber, returned to her women in the Garden; all which Tancrede too well
observed, and in a rapture of fury, departed (unseen) into his own lodging.
The same night, about the hour of men's first sleep, and according as he had
given order; Guiscardo was apprehended, even as he was coming forth of the
loope-hole, and in his homely leather habit. Very closely was he brought
before the King, whose heart was swollen so great with grief, as hardly was he
able to speak* notwithstanding, at the last he began thus. Guiscardo, the love
and respect I have used toward thee, has not deserved the shameful wrong
which thou have requited me withal, and as I have seen with mine own eyes
this day. Whereto Guiscardo could answer nothing else, but only this: Alas my
Lord! Love is able to do much more, then either you, or I. Whereupon, Tancrede
commanded, that he should be secretly well guarded, in a near adjoining
Chamber, and on the next day, Ghismonda having (as yet) heard nothing hereof,
the Kings brain being infinitely busied and troubled, after dinner, and as he
often had used to do: he went to his daughters chamber, where calling for her,
and shutting the doors closely to them, the tears trickling down his aged
white beard, thus he spoke to her.

Ghismonda, I was once grounded in a settled persuasion, that I truly knew thy
virtue, and honest integrity of life; and this belief could never have been
altered in me, by any sinister reports whatsoever, had not mine eyes seen, and
mine ears heard the contrary. Nor did I so much as conceive a thought either
of thine affection, or private conuersing with any man, but only he that was
to be thy husband. But now, I my self being able to avouch thy folly, imagine
what an heart-breake this will be to me, so long as life remains in this
poor, weak, and aged body. Yet, if needs thou must have yielded to this wanton
weakness, I would thou had made choice of a man, answerable to thy birth
and Nobility: whereas on the contrary, among so many worthy spirits as resort
to my Court, thou likest best to converse with that silly young man Guiscardo,
one of very mean and base descent, and by me (even for Gods sake) from his
very youngest years, brought up to this instant in my Court; wherein thou
have given me much affliction of mind, and so overthrown my senses, as I
cannot well imagine how I should deal with thee. For him, whom I have this
night caused to be surprised, even as he came forth of your close contrived
conueyance, and detain as my prisoner, I have resolved how to proceed with
him: but concerning thy self* mine oppressions are so many and violent, as I
know not what to say of thee. One way, thou have merely murdered the unfeigned
affection I bare thee, as never any father could express more to his child:
and then again, thou have kindled a most just indignation in me, by thine
immodest and wilful folly, and whereas Nature pleads pardon for the one, yet
justice stands up against the other, and urges cruel severity against thee:
nevertheless, before I will determine upon any resolution, I come purposely
first to hear thee speak, and what thou can say for thy self, in a bad
case, so desperate and dangerous.

Having thus spoken, he hung down the head in his bosom, weeping as
abundantly, as if it had been a child severely disciplinde. On the other
side, Ghismonda hearing the speeches of her Father, and perceiving withal,
that not only her secret love was discovered, but also Guiscardo was in close
prison, the matter which most of all did torment her; she fell into a very
strange kind of ecstasy, scorning tears, and entreating terms, such as
feminine frailety are always aptest unto: but rather, with height of courage,
controling fear or servile baseness, and declaring invincible fortitude in
her very looks, she concluded with her self, rather then to urge any humble
persuasions, she would lay her life down at the stake. For plainly she
perceived, that Guiscardo already was a dead man in Law, and death was likewise
as welcome to her, rather then the deprivation of her Love; and therefore, not
like a weeping woman, or as checked by the offense committed, but careless of
any harm happening to her: stoutly and courageously, not a tear appearing in
her eye, or her soul any way to be perturbed, thus she spoke to her Father.

Tancrede, to deny what I have done, or to entreat any favor from you, is
now no part of my disposition: for as the one can little avail me, so shall
not the other any way advantage me. Moreover, I covet not, that you should
extend any clemency or kindness to me, but by my voluntary confession of the
truth; do intend (first of all) to defend mine honor, with reasons sound,
good, and substantial, and then virtuously pursue to full effect, the
greatness of my mind and constant resolution. True it is, that I have loved,
and still do, honorable Guiscardo, purposing the like so long as I shall
live, which will be but a small while: but if it be possible to continue the
same affection after death, it is for ever vowed to him only. Nor did mine
own womanish weakness so much thereto induce me, as the matchless virtues
shining clearly in Guiscardo, and the little respect you had of marrying me
again. Why royal Father, you cannot be ignorant, that you being composed of
flesh and blood, have begotten a Daughter of the self same composition, and
not made of stone or iron. Moreover, you ought to remember (although now you
are far stepped in years) what the Laws of youth are, and with what
difficulty they are to be contradicted. Considering withal, that albeit
(during the vigor of your best time) you evermore were exercised in Arms; yet
you should likewise understand, that negligence and idle delights, have mighty
power, not only in young people, but also in them of greatest years.

I being then made of flesh and blood, and so derived from your self; having
had also so little benefit of life, that I am yet in the spring, and blooming
time of my blood: by either of these reasons, I must needs be subject to
natural desires, wherein such knowledge as I have once already had, in the
estate of my marriage, perhaps might move a further intelligence of the like
delights, according to the better ability of strength, which exceeding all
capacity of resistance, induced a second motive to affection, answerable to my
time and youthful desires, and so (like a young woman) I became amorous again;
yet did I strive, even with all my utmost might, and best virtuous faculties
abiding in me, no way to disgrace either you or my self, as (in equal
censure) yet I have not done. But Nature is above all humane power, and Love,
commanded by Nature, has prevailed for Love, joining with Fortune: in mere
pity and commiseration of my extreme wrong. I found them both most benign and
gracious, teaching me a way secret enough, whereby I might reach the height of
my desires, howsoever you became instructed, or (perhaps) found it out by
accident; so it was, and I deny it not.

Nor did I make election of Guiscardo by chance, or rashly, as many women do,
but by deliberate counsel in my soul, and most mature advise; I chose him
above all other, and having his honest harmless conversation, mutually we
enjoyed our hearts contentment. Now it appears, that I having not offended
but by love; in imitation of vulgar opinion, rather then truth: you seek to
reprove me bitterly, alleging no other maine argument for your anger, but
only my not choosing a gentleman, or one more worthy. Wherein it is most
evident, that you do not so much check my fault, as the ordination of
Fortune; who many times aduanceth men of meanest esteem, and abaseth them of
greater merit. But leaving this discourse, let us look into the orignall of
things, wherein we are first to observe, that from one mass or lump of
flesh, both we, and all other received our flesh, and one Creator has created
all things; yea, all creatures, equally in their forces and faculties, and
equal likewise in their virtue: which virtue was the first that made
distinction of our birth and equality, in regard, that such as had the most
liberal portion thereof, and performed actions thereto answerable, were
thereby termed noble; all the rest remaining unnoble: now although contrary use
did afterward hide and conceal this Law, yet was it not therefore banished
from Nature or good manners. In which respect, whosoever did execute all his
actions by virtue, declared himself openly to be noble; and he that termed
him otherwise, it was an error in the miscaller, and not in the person so
wrongfully called; as the very same privilege is yet in full force among us at
this day.

Cast an heedfull eye then (good Father) upon all your Gentlemen, and advisedly
examine their virtues, conditions and manner of behavior. On the other side,
observe those parts remaining in Guiscardo: and then, if you will judge truly,
and without affection, you will confess him to be most noble, and that all
your Gentlemen (in respect of him) are but base Grooms and villains. His
virtues and excelling perfections, I never credited from the report or
judgment of any person; but only by your speeches, and mine own eyes as true
wirnesses. Who did ever more commend Guiscardo, extolling all those
singularities in him, most requisite to be in an honest virtuous man; then you
your self have done? Nor need you to be sorry, or ashamed of your good
opinion concerning him; for, if mine eyes have not deceived my judgment, you
never gave him the least part of praise, but I have known much more in him,
then ever your words were able to express: wherefore, if I have been any way
deceived, truly the deceit proceeded only from you. How will you then
maintain, that I have thrown my liking on a man of base condition? In troth
(Sir) you cannot. Perhaps you will allege, that he is mean and poor; I
confess it, and surely it is to your shame, that you have not bestowne place
of more preferment, on a man so honest and well deserving, and having been so
long a time your servant. Nevertheless, poverty impaireth not any part of
noble Nature, but wealth hurries it into horrible confusions. Many Kings and
great Princes have heretofore been poor, when diverse of them that have delued
into the Earth, and kept Flocks in the Feld, have been advanced to riches,
and exceeded the other in wealth.

Now, as concerning your last doubt, which most of all afflicts you, namely,
how you shall deal with me; boldly rid your brain of any such disturbance,
for if you have resolved now in your extremity of years, to do that which
your younger days evermore despised, I mean, to become cruel; use your
utmost cruelty against me, for I will never entreat you to the contrary,
because I am the sole occasion of this offense, if it do deserve the name of
an offense. And this I dare assure you, that if you deal not with me, as you
have done already, or intend to Guiscardo, mine own hands shall act as much:
and therefore give over your tears to women, and if you purpose to be cruel,
let him and me in death drink both of one cup, at least, if you imagine that
we have deserved it.

The King knew well enough the high spirit of his Daughter, but yet
(nevertheless) he did not believe, that her words would prove actions, or she
do as she said. And therefore parting from her, and without intent of using
any cruelty to her; concluded, by quenching the heat of another, to cool the
fiery rage of her distemper, commanding two of his followers (who had the
custody of Guiscardo) that without any rumor or noise at all, they should
strangle him the night ensuing, and taking the heart forth of his body, to
bring it to him, which they performed according to their charge. On the next
day, the King called for a goodly standing Cup of Gold, wherein he put the
heart of Guiscardo, sending it by one of his most familiar servants to his
Daughter, with command also to use these words to her. Thy Father has sent
thee this present, to comfort thee with that thing which most of all thou
affectest, even as thou have comforted him with that which he most hated.

Ghismonda, nothing altered from her cruel deliberation, after her Father was
departed from her, caused certain poisonous roots and herbs to be brought
her, which she (by distillation) made a water of, to drink suddenly,
whenever any cross accident should come from her Father; whereupon, when the
messenger from her Father had delivered her the present, and uttered the words
as he was commanded: she took the Cup, and looking into it with a settled
countenance, by sight of the heart, and effect of the message, she knew
certainly, that it was the heart of Guiscardo; then looking stearnely on the
servant, thus she spoke unto him. My honest friend, it is no more then right
and justice, that so worthy a heart as this is, should have any worser grave
then gold, wherein my Father has dealt most wisely. So, lifting the heart up
to her mouth, and sweetly kissing it, she proceeded thus. In all things, even
till this instant, (being the utmost period of my life) I have evermore found
my Fathers love most effectual to me; but now it appears far greater, then
at any time heretofore: and therefore from my mouth, thou must deliver him the
latest thanks that ever I shall give him, for sending me such an honorable
present.

These words being ended, holding the Cup fast in her hand, and looking
seriously upon the heart, she began again in this manner. Thou sweet
entertainer of all my dearest delights, accursed be his cruelty, that causes
me thus to see thee with my corporal eyes, it being sufficient enough for me,
always to behold thee with the sight of my soul. Thou have run thy race,
and as Fortune ordained, so are thy days finished: for as all flesh has an
ending; so have thou concluded, albeit too soon, and before thy due time. The
travails and miseries of this World, have now no more to meddle with thee, and
thy very heauiest enemy, has bestowed such a grave on thee, as thy greatness
in virtue worthily deserves; now nothing else is wanting, wherewith to
beautify thy Funeral, but only her sighs and tears, that was so dear unto
thee in thy life time. And because thou might the more freely enjoy them,
see how my merciless Father (on his own mere motion) has sent thee to me;
and truly I will bestow them frankly on thee, though once I had resolved, to
die with dry eyes, and not shedding one tear, dreadlesse of their utmost
malice toward me.

And when I have given thee the due oblation of my tears, my soul, which
sometime thou have kept most carefully, shall come to make a sweet conjunction
with thine: for in what company else can I travail more contentedly, and to
those unfrequented silent shades, but only in thine? As yet I am sure it is
present here, in this Cup sent me by my Father, as having a provident respect
to the place, for possession of our equal and mutual pleasures; because thy
soul affecting mine so truly, cannot walk alone, without his dear companion.

Having thus finished her complaint, even as if her head had been converted
into a wellspring of water, so did tears abundantly flow from her fair eyes,
kissing the heart of Guiscardo infinite times. All which while, her women
standing by her, neither knew what heart it was, nor to what effect her
speeches tended: but being moved to compassionate tears, they often demanded
(albeit in vain) the occasion of her sad complaining, comforting her to their
utmost power. When she was not able to weep any longer, wiping her eyes, and
lifting up her head, without any sign of the least dismay, thus she spoke to
the heart. Dear heart, all my duty is performed to thee, and nothing now
remains vneffected; but only breathing my last, to let my ghost accompany
thine.

Then calling for the glass of water, which she had readily prepared the day
before, and pouring it upon the heart lying in the Cup, courageously advancing
it to her mouth, she drank it up every drop; which being done, she lay down
upon her bed, holding her Lovers heart fast in her hand, and laying it so near
to her own as she could. Now although her women knew not what water it was,
yet when they had seen her to quaffe it off in that manner, they sent word to
the King, who much suspecting what had happened, went in all haste to his
Daughters chamber, entering at the very instant, when she was laid upon her
bed; beholding her in such passionate pangs, with tears streaming down his
reverend beard, he used many kind words to comfort her, when boldly thus she
spoke unto him. Father (quoth she) well may you spare these tears, because
they are unfitting for you, and not any way desired by me; who but your self,
has seen any man to mourn for his own wilful offense. Nevertheless, if
but the least jot of that love do yet abide in you, whereof you have made such
liberal profession to me; let me obtain this my very last request, to wit,
that seeing I might not privately enjoy the benefit of Guiscardoes love, and
while he lived; let yet (in death) one public grave contain both our bodies,
that death may afford us, what you so cruelly in life denied us.

Extremity of grief and sorrow, withheld his tongue from returning any
answer, and she perceiving her end approaching, held the heart still closed to
her own bare breast, saying; Here Fortune, receive two true hearts latest
oblation, for, in this manner are we coming to thee. So closing her eyes, all
sense forsook her, life leaving her body breathless. Thus ended the hapless
love of Guiscardo, and Ghismonda, for whose sad disaster, when the King had
mourned sufficiently, and repented fruitlesly; he caused both their bodies to
be honorably embalmed, and buried in a most royal Monument; not without
general sorrow of the subjects of Salerne.

Friar Albert made a young Venetian Gentlewoman believe, that God Cupid was
fallen in love with her, and he resorted oftentimes unto her, in the disguise of
the same God. Afterward, being frighted by the Gentlewomans kindred and
friends, he cast himself out of her Chamber window, and was hidden in a poor
man's House; on the day following, in the shape of a wild or savage man, he was
brought upon the Rialto of Saint Mark, and being there publicly known by the
Brethren of his Order; he was committed to Prison.

The second Novel.
Reprehending the lewd lives of dissembling hypocrites; and checking the
arrogant pride of vaine-headed women.

THE Novel recounted by Madam Fiammetta, caused tears many times in the eyes
of all the company; but it being finished, the King showing a stearne
countenance, said; I should much have commended the kindness of fortune, if
in the whole course of my life, I had tasted the least moity of that delight,
which Guiscardo received by conuersing with fair Ghismonda. Nor need any of
you to wonder thereat, or how it can be otherwise, because hourly I feel a
thousand dying torments, without enjoying any hope of ease or pleasure: but
referring my fortunes to their own poor condition, it is my will, that Madam
Pampinea proceed next in the argument of successelesse love, according as Madam
Fiammetta has already begun, to let fall more dew-drops on the fire of mine
afflictions. Madam Pampinea perceiving what a task was imposed on her, knew
well (by her own disposition) the inclination of the company, whereof she was
more respective, then of the Kings command: wherefore, choosing rather to
recreate their spirits, then to satisfy the Kings melancholy humor; she
determined to relate a Tale of mirthfull matter, and yet to keep within
compass of the purposed Argument.



It has been continually used as a common Proverb; that a bad man, taken and
reputed to be honest and good, may commit many evils, yet neither credited, or
suspected: which proverb gives me very ample matter to speak of, and yet
not varying from our intention, concerning the hypocrisy of some religious
persons, who having their garments long and large, their faces made
artificially pale, their language meek and humble, to get men's goods from
them; yet four, harsh, and stearne enough, in checking and controuling other
men's errors, as also in urging others to give, and themselves to take, without
any other hope or means of salvation. Nor do they endeavor like other men,
to work out their souls health with fear and trembling; but, even as if they
were sole owners, Lords, and possessors of Paradise, will appoint to every
dying person, places (there) of greater or lesser excellency, according as they
think good, or as the legacies left by them are in quantity, whereby they not
only deceive themselves, but all such as give credit to their subtle
persuasions. And were it lawful for me, to make known no more then is merely
necessary; I could quickly disclose to simple credulous people, what craft
lies concealed under their holy habites: and I would wish, that their lies and
deluding should speed with them, as they did with a Franciscane Friar, none of
the younger Nouices, but one of them of greatest reputation, and belonging to
one of the best Monasteries in Venice. Which I am the rather desirous to
report, to recreate your spirits, after your tears for the death of fair
Ghismonda.

Sometime (Honorable Ladies) there lived in the City of Imola, a man of most
lewd and wicked life; named, Bertho de la massa, whose shameless deeds were
so well known to all the Citizens, and won such respect among them; as all his
lies could not compass any belief, no, not when he delivered a matter of
sound truth. Wherefore, perceiving that his lewdness allowed him no longer
dwelling there; like a desperate aduenturer* he transported himself thence to
Venice, the receptacle of all foul sin and abomination, intending there to
exercise his wonted bad behavior, and live as wickedly as ever he had done
before. It came to pass, that some remorse of conscience took hold of him,
for the former passages of his dissolute life, and he pretended to be surprised
with very great devotion, becoming much more Catholic then any other man,
taking on him the profession of a Franciscane Cordelier, and calling himself
Friar Albert of Imola.

In this habit and outward appearance, he seemed to lead an austere and
sanctimonious life, highly commending penance and abstinence, never eating
flesh, or drinking wine, but when he was provided of both in a close corner.
And before any person could take notice thereof, he became (of a thief)
Ruffian, forswearer and murderer, as formerly he had been a great Preacher;
yet not abandoning the forenamed vices, when secretly he could put any of them
in execution. Moreover, being made Priest, when he was celebrating Mass at the
Altar, if he saw himself to be observed by any; he would most mournefully
read the passion of our Savior, as one whose tears cost him little,
whenever he pleased to use them: so that, in a short while, by his preaching
and tears, he fed the humors of the Venetians so pleasingly; that they made
him executour (well near) of all their Testaments, yea, many chose him as
depositary or Guardion of their moneys; because he was both Confessor and
Councellor, almost to all the men and women.

By this well seeming outside of sanctity, the Wolf became a Shepherd, and
his renown for holiness was so famous in those parts, as Saint Frances
himself had hardly any more. It fortuned, that a young Gentlewoman, being
somewhat foolish, wanton and proud minded, named Madam Lisetta de Caquirino,
wife to a wealthy Merchant, who went with certain Galleys into Flanders, and
there lay as Lieger long time, in company of other Gentlewomen, went to be
confessed by this ghostly Father; kneeling at his feet, although her heart was
high enough, like a proud minded woman, (for Venetians are presumptuous,
vainglorious, and witted much like to their skittish Gondoloes) she made a
very short rehearsal of her sins. At length Friar Albert demanded of her,
whether she had any amorous friend or lover? Her patience being exceedingly
provoked, stearne anger appeared in her looks, which caused her to return him
this answer. How now Sir Domine? what? have you no eyes in your head? Can you
not distinguish between mine, and these other common beauties? I could have
Lovers enough, if I were so pleased; but those perfections remaining in me, are
not to be affected by this man, or that. How many beauties have you beheld, any
way answerable to mine, and are more fit for Gods, then mortals.

Many other idle speeches she uttered, in proud opinion of her beauty, whereby
Friar Albert presently perceived, that this Gentlewoman had but a hollow
brain, and was fit game for folly to fly at; which made him instantly
enamoured of her, and that beyond all capacity of resisting, which yet he
referred to a further, and more commodious time. Nevertheless, to show
himself an holy and religious man now, he began to reprehend her, and told her
plainly, that she was vainglorious, and overcome with infinite follies.
Hereupon, she called him a logger headed beast, and he knew not the difference
between an ordinary complexion, and beauty of the highest merit. In which
respect, Friar Albert, being loath to offend her any further; after confession
was fully ended, let her pass away among the other Gentlewomen, she giving him
diverse disdainful looks.

Within some few days after, taking one of his trusty brethren in his company,
he went to the House of Madam Lisetta, where requiring to have some conference
alone with her self; she took him into a private Parlor, and being there,
not to be seen by any body, he fell on his knees before her, speaking in this
manner. Madam, for charities sake, and in regard of your own most gracious
nature, I beseech you to pardon those harsh speeches, which I used to you the
other day, when you were with me at confession: because, the very night ensuing
thereon, I was chastised in such such cruel manner, as I was never able to
stir forth of my bed, until this very instant morning; whereto the weak
witted Gentlewoman thus replied. And who I pray you (quoth she) did chastise
you so severely? I will tell you Madam, said Friar Albert, but it is a matter
of admirable secrecy.

Being alone by my self the same night in my Dorter, and in very serious
devotion, according to my usual manner: suddenly I saw a bright splendor
about me, and I could no sooner arise to discern what it might be, and whence
it came, but I espied a very goodly young Lad standing by me, holding a golden
Bow in his hand, and a rich Quiver of Arrows hanging at his back. Catching
fast hold on my Hood, against the ground he threw me rudely, trampling on me
with his feet, and beating me with so many cruel blows, that I thought my
body to be broken in pieces. Then I desired to know, why he was so rigorous to
me in his correction? Because (quoth he) thou did so saucily presume this
day, to reprove the celestial beauty of Madam Lisetta, who (next to my Mother
Venus) I love most dearly. Whereupon I perceived, he was the great commanding
God Cupid, and therefore I craved most humbly pardon of him. I will pardon thee
(quoth he) but upon this condition, that thou go to her so soon as
conveniently thou can, and (by lowly humility) prevail to obtain her free
pardon: which if she will not vouchsafe to grant thee, then shall I in stearne
anger return again, and lay so many torturing afflictions on thee, that all
thy whole life time shall be most hateful to thee. And what the displeased God
said else beside, I dare not disclose, except you please first to pardon me.

Mistress shallow brain, being swollen big with this wind, like an empty
bladder; conceived no small pride in hearing these words, constantly crediting
them to be true, and therefore thus answered. Did I not tell you Father Albert,
that my beauty was celestial? But I swear by my beauty, notwithstanding your
idle passed arrogance, I am heartily sorry for your so severe correction; which
that it may no more be inflicted on you, I do freely pardon you; yet with this
prouiso, that you tell me, what the God else said unto you; whereto Friar
Albert thus replied. Madam, seeing you have so graciously vouchsafed to pardon
me, I will thankfully tell you all: but you must be very careful and
respective, that whatsoever I shall reveal unto you, must so closely be
concealed, as no living creature in the World may know it; for you are the
only happy Lady now living, and that happiness relieth on your silence and
secrecy: with solemn vows and protestations she sealed up her many
promises, and then the Friar thus proceeded.

Madam, the further charge imposed on me by God Cupid, was to tell you, that
himself is so extremely enamoured of your beauty, and you are become so
gracious in his affection; as, many nights he has come to see you in your
Chamber, sitting on your pillow, while you slept sweetly, and desiring very
often to awake you, but only fearing to affright you. Wherefore, now he sends
you word by me, that one night he intends to come visit you, and to spend
some time in conuersing with you. But in regard he is a God, and merely a
spirit in form, whereby neither you or any else have capacity of beholding
him, much less to touch or feel him: he says, that (for your sake) he will
come in the shape of a man, giving me charge also to know of you, when you
shall please to have him come, and in whose similitude you would have him to
come, whereof he will not fail; in which respect, you may justly think your
self to be the only happy woman living, and far beyond all other in your
good fortune.

Mistress want-wit presently answered, she was well contented, that God Cupid
should love her, and she would return the like love again to him; protesting
withal, that wheresoever she should see his maiesticall picture, she would
set a hallowed burning Taper before it. Moreover, at all times he should be
most welcome to her, whenever he would vouchsafe to visit her; for, he
should always find her alone in her private Chamber: on this condition, that
his old Love Psyches, and all other beauties else whatsoever, must be set
aside, and none but her self only to be his best Mistress, referring his
personal form of appearance, to what shape himself best pleased to assume,
so that it might not be frightfull, or offensive to her.

Madam (quoth Friar Albert) most wisely have you answered, and leave the matter
to me; for I will take order sufficiently, and to your contentment. But you may
do me a great grace, and without any prejudice to your self, in granting me
one poor request; namely, to vouchsafe the Gods appearance to you, in my
bodily shape and person, and in the perfect form of a man as now you behold
me, so may you safely give him entertainment, without any taxation of the
world, or ill apprehension of the most curious inquisition. Beside, a greater
happiness can never befall me: for, while he assumeth the soul out of my
body, and walks on the earth in my humane figure: I shall be wandering in the
joys of Lovers Paradise, feeling the fruition of their felicities; which are
such, as no mortality can be capeable of, no, not so much as in imagination.

The wise Gentlewoman replied, that she was well contented, in regard of the
severe punishment inflicted on him by God Cupid, for the reproachful speeches
he had given her; to allow him so poor a kind of consolation, as he had
requested her to grant him. Whereupon Friar Albert said: Be ready then Madam
to give him welcome to morrow in the evening, at the entering into your house,
for coming in an humane body, he cannot but enter at your door, whereas, if
(in powerful manner) he made use of his wings, he then would fly in at your
window, and then you could not be able to see him.

Upon this conclusion, Albert departed, leaving Lisetta in no mean pride of
imagination, that God Cupid should be enamored of her beauty; and therefore
she thought each hour a year, till she might see him in the mortal shape of
Friar Albert. And now was his brain wonderfully busied, to visit her in more
then common or humane manner; and therefore he made him a suit (close to his
body) of white Taffata, all poudred over with Stars, and spangles of Gold, a
Bow and Quiver of Arrows, with wings also fastened to his back behind him,
and all cunningly covered with his Friars habit, which must be the sole means
for his safe passage.

Having obtained license of his Superior, and being accompanied with an holy
Brother of the Convent, yet ignorant of the business by him intended; he went
to the house of a friend of his, which was his usual receptacle, whenever he
went about such deeds of darkness. There did he put on his dissembled habit of
God Cupid, with his wings, Bow, and Quiver, in formal fashion; and then
(clouded over with his Monks Cowle) leaves his companion to awaite his
returning back, while he visited foolish Lisetta, according to her
expectation, readily attending for the Gods arrival.

Albert being come to the house, knocked at the door, and the Maid admitting
him entrance, according as her Mistress had appointed, she conducted him to
her Mistresses Chamber, where laying aside his Friars habit, and she seeing
him shine with such glorious splendor, adding action also to his assumed
dissimulation, with maiesticke motion of his body, wings, and bow, as if he had
been God Cupid, indeed converted into a body much bigger of stature, then
Painters commonly do describe him, her wisdom was so overcome with fear and
admiration, that she fell on her knees before him, expressing all humble
reverence unto him. And he spreading his wings over her, as with wiers and
strings he had made them pliant; showed how graciously he accepted her
humiliation; folding her in his arms, and sweetly kissing her many times
together, with repetition of his entire love and affection toward her. So
delicately was he perfumed with odorifferous savors, and so complete of
person in his spangled garments, that she could do nothing else, but wonder at
his rare behavior, reputing her felicity beyond all Women's in the world, and
utterly impossible to be equalled, such was the pride of her presuming. For he
told her diverse tales and fables, of his awefull power among the other Gods,
and stolen pleasures of his upon the earth; yet gracing her praises above all
his other Loves, and vows made now, to affect none but her only, as his often
visitations should more constantly assure her, that she verily credited all
his protestations, and thought his kisses and embraces, ^arre to exceed any
mortal comparison.

After they had spent so much time in amorous discoursing, as might best fit
with this their first meeting, and stand clear from suspicion on either side:
our Albert-Cupid, or Cupid-Albert, which of the^ you best please to term him,
closing his spangled wings together again behind his back, fastening also
on his Bow and Quiver of Arrows, ouer-clouds all with his religious Monks
Cowle, and then with a parting kiss or two, returned to the place where he had
left his fellow and companion, perhaps employed in as devout an exercise, as he
had bin in his absence from him; whence both repayring home to the Monastery,
all this nights wandering was allowed as tolerable, by them who made no spare
of doing the like.

On the morrow following, Madam Lisetta immediately after dinner, being
attended by her Chambermaid, went to see Friar Albert, finding him in his
wonted form and fashion, and telling him what had happened between her and God
Cupid, with all the other lies and tales which he had told her. Truly Madam
(answered Albert) what your success with him has been, I am no way able to
comprehend; but this I can assure you, that so soon as I had acquainted him
with your answer, I felt a sudden rapture made of my soul, and visibly (to my
apprehension) saw it carried by Elues and Fairies, into the floury fields about
Elisium, where Lovers departed out of this life, walk among the beds of
Lillies and Roses, such as are not in this world to be seen, neither to be
imagined by any humane capacity. So super-abounding was the pleasure of this
joy and solace, that, how long I continued there, or by what means I was
transported hither again this morning, it is beyond all ability in me to
express, or how I assumed my body again after that great God had made use
thereof to your service. Well Friar Albert (quoth she) you may see what an
happiness has befalne you, by so gross an opinion of my perfections, and
what a felicity you enjoy, and still are like to do, by my pardoning your
error, and granting the Gods access to me in your shape: which as I envy not,
so I wish you hereafter to be wiser, in taking upon you to judge of beauty.
Much other idle folly proceeded from her, which still he soothed to her
contentment, and (as occasion served) many meetings they had in the former
manner.

It fortuned within a few days after, that Madam Lisetta being in company with
one of her Gossips, and their conference (as commonly it falls out to be)
concerning other women of the City; their beauty, behavior, amorous suitors
and servants, and general opinion conceived of their worth and merit; wherein
Lisetta was overmuch conceyted of her self, not admitting any other to be her
equal. Among other speeches, sauouring of an unseasoned brain: Gossip (quoth
she) if you knew what account is made of my beauty, and who holds it in no
mean estimation, you would then freely confess, that I deserve to be
preferred before any other. As women are ambitious in their own opinions, so
commonly are they covetous of one another secrets, especially in matter of
emulation, whereupon the Gossip thus replied. Believe me Madam, I make no doubt
but your speeches may be true, in regard of your admired beauty, and many
other perfections beside: yet let me tell you, privileges, how great and
singular soever they be, without they are known to others, beside such as do
particularly enjoy them; they carry no more account, then things of ordinary
estimation. Whereas on the contrary, when any Lady or Gentlewoman has some
eminent and peculiar favor, which few or none other can reach unto, and it is
made famous by general notion: then do all women else admire and honor her, as
the glory of their kind, and a miracle of Nature.

I perceive Gossip said Lisetta whereat you aim, and such is my love to you, as
you should not lose your longing in this case, were I but constantly secured of
your secrecy, which as hitherto I have been no way able to tax, so would I be
loath now to be more suspicious of then needs. But yet this matter is of such
maine moment, that if you will protest as you are truly virtuous, never to
reveal it to any living body, I will disclose to you almost a miracle. The
virtuous oath being past, with many other solemn protestations beside, Lisetta
then proceeded in this manner.

I know Gossip, that it is a matter of common and ordinary custom, for Ladies
and Gentlewomen to be graced with favorites, men of frail and mortal
conditions, whose natures are as subject to inconstancy, as their very best
endeavors dedicated to folly, as I could name no mean number of our Ladies
here in Venice. But when Sovereign deities shall feel the impression of our
humane desires, and behold subjects of such prevailing efficacy, as to subdue
their greatest power, yea, and make them enamored of mortal creatures: you may
well imagine Gossip, such a beauty is superior to any other. And such is the
happy fortune of your friend Lisetta, of whose perfections, great Cupid the
awefull commanding God of Love himself, conceived such an extraordinary
liking: as he has abandoned his seat of supreme Majesty, and appeared to me
in the shape of a mortal man, with lively expression of his amorous passions,
and what extremities of anguish he has endured, only for my love. May this be
possible? replied the Gossip. Can the Gods be touched with the apprehension of
our frail passions? True it is Gossip, answered Lisetta, and so certainly
true, that his sacred kisses, sweet embraces, and most pleasing speeches, with
proffer of his continual devotion toward me, has given me good cause to
confirm what I say, and to think my felicity far beyond all other women's,
being honored with his often nightly visitations.

The Gossip inwardly smiling at her idle speeches, which (nevertheless) she
avouched with very vehement asseuerations: fell instantly sick of women's
natural disease, thinking every minute a tedious month, till she were in
company with some other Gossips, to break the obligation of her virtuous
promise, and that others (as well as her self) might laugh at the folly of
this shallow-witted woman. The next day following, it was her hap to be at a
wedding, among a great number of other women, who^ quickly she acquainted with
this so strange a wonder; as they did the like to their husbands: and passing
so from hand to hand, in less space then two days, all Venice was fully
possessed with it.

Among the rest, the brethren to this foolish woman, heard this admirable news
concerning their Sister; and they discreetly concealing it to themselves,
closely concluded, to watch the walks of this pretended god: and if he soared
not too lofty a flight, they would clip his wings, to come the better
acquainted with him. It fortuned, that the Friar hearing his Cupidicall
visitations ouer-publikely discovered, purposed to check and reprove Lisetta
for her indiscretion. And being habited according to his former manner, his
Friarly Cowle covering al his former bravery, he left his companion where he
used to stay, and closely walked along unto the house. No sooner was he entered,
but the Brethren being ambushed near to the door, went in after him, and
ascending the stairs, by such time as he had uncased himself, and appeared
like God Cupid, with his spangled wings displayed: they rushed into the
Chamber, and he having no other refuge, opened a large Casement, standing
directly over the great gulf or River, and presently leapt into the water;
which being deep, and he skillful in swimming, he had no other harm by his
fall, albeit the sudden affright did much perplex him.

Recovering the further side of the River, he espied a light, and the door of
an house open, wherein dwelt a poor man, whom he earnestly entreated, to save
both his life and reputation, telling him many lies and tales by what means he
was thus disguised, and thrown by night-walking Villains into the water. The
poor man, being moved to compassionate his distressed estate, laid him in his
own bed, ministering such other comforts to him, as the time and his poverty
did permit; and day drawing on, he went about his business, aduising him to
take his rest, and it should not be long till he returned. So, locking the
door, and leaving the counterfe^ God in bed, away goes the poor man to his
daily labor. The Brethren to Lisetta, perceiving God Cupid to be fled and
gone, and she in melancholy sadness sitting by them: they took up the
Relics he had left behind him, I mean the Friars hood and Cowle, which
showing to their sister, and sharply reproving her unwomanly behavior: they
left her in no mean discomfort, returning home to their own houses, with
their conquered spoils of the forlorn Friar.

During the time of these occurrences, broad day speeding on, and the poor man
returning homeward by the Rialto, to visit his guest so left in bed: he beheld
diverse crowds of people, and a general rumor noysed among them, that God Cupid
had been that night with Madame Lisetta, where being ouer-closely pursued by
her Brethren, for fear of being surprised, he leapt out of her window into the
gulf, and no one could tell what was become of him. Hereupon, the poor man
began to imagine that the guest entertained by him in the night time, must
needs be the same supposed God Cupid, as by his wings and other embellishments
appeared: wherefore being come home, and sitting down on the beds side by him,
after some few speeches passing between them, he knew him to be Friar Albert,
who promised to give him fifty ducates, if he would not betray him to
Lisettaes brethren.

Upon the acceptance of this offer, the money being sent for, and paid down;
there wanted nothing now, but some apt and convenient means, whereby Albert
might safely be conveyed into the Monastery, which being wholly referred to
the poor man's care and trust, thus he spoke. Sir, I see no likely-hoode of
your clear escaping home, except in this manner as I advise you. We observe
this day as a merry Festival, and it is lawful for any one, to disguise a man
in the skin of a Bear, or in the shape of a savage man, or any other form of
better device. Which being so done, he is brought upon S. Marks market place,
where being hunted a while with dogs, upon the huntings conclusion, the Feast
is ended; and then each man leads his monster whether him pleases. If you can
accept any of these shapes, before you be seen here in my poor abiding,
then can I safely (afterward) bring you where you would be. Otherwise, I see
no possible means, how you may escape hence unknown; for it is without all
question to the contrary, that the Gentlewomans brethren, knowing your
concealment in some one place or other, will set such spies and watches for you
throughout the City, as you must needs be taken by them.

Now, although it seemed a most severe imposition, for Albert to pass in any
of these disguises: yet his exceeding fear of Lisettaes brethren and friends,
made him gladly yield, and to undergo what shape the poor man pleased, which
thus he ordered. Anointing his naked body with Honey, he then covered it over
with downy small Feathers, and fastening a chain about his neck, and a strange
ugly vizard on his face; he gave him a great staff in the one hand, and two
huge Mastiue dogs chained together in the other, which he had borrowed in the
Butchery. Afterward, he sent a man to the Rialto, who there proclaimed by the
sound of Trumpet: That all such as desired to see God Cupid, which the last
night had descended down from the skies, and fell (by ill hap) into the
Venetian gulf, let them repair to the public Market place of S. Mark, and
there he would appear in his own likeness.

This being done, soon after he left his house, and leading him thus disguised
along by his chain, he was followed by great crowds of people, every one
questioning of whence, and what he was. In which manner, he brought him to the
Market place, where an infinite number of people were gathered together, as
well of the followers, as of them that before heard the proclamation. There he
made choice of a pillar, which stood in a place somewhat highly exalted, whereto
he chained his savage man, making show, as if he meant to awaite there, till
the hunting should begin: in which time, the Flies, Waspes, and Hornets, did so
terribly sting his naked body, being anointed with Honey, that he endured
thereby unspeakable anguish. When the poor man saw, that there needed no more
concourse of people; pretending, as if he purposed to let loose his Saluage
man; he took the mask or vizard from Alberts face, and then he spoke aloud in
this manner.

Gentlemen and others, seeing the wild Boar comes not to our hunting,
because I imagine that he cannot easily be found: I mean (to the end you may
not lose your labor in coming hither) to show you the great God of Love
called Cupid, whom Poets feigned long since to be a little boy, but now grown
to manly stature. You see in what manner he has left his high dwelling, only
for the comfort of our Venetian beauties: but belike, the night-fogs
ouer-flagging his wings, he fell into our gulf, and comes ow to present his
service to you. No sooner had he taken off his vizard, but every one knew him
to be Friar Albert; and suddenly arose such shoutes and outcries, with most
bitter words breathed forth against him, hurling also stones, dirt and filth in
his face, that his best acquaintance then could take no knowledge of him, and
not any one pitying his abusing.

So long continued the offended people in their fury, that news thereof was
carried to the Convent, and six of his Religious brethren came, who casting an
habit about him, and releasing him from his chain, they led him to the
Monastery, not without much mollestation and trouble of the people; where
imprisoning him in their house, severity of some inflicted punishment, or
rather conceit for his open shame, shortened his days, and so he dyed. Thus
you see fair Ladies, when licentious life must be clouded with a cloak of
sanctity, and evil actions daily committed, yet escaping vncredited: there
will come a time at length, for just discovering of all, that the good may
shine in their true luster of glory, and the bad sink in their own deserved
shame.

Three young Gentlemen affecting three Sisters, fled with them into Candie.
The eldest of them (through jealousy) becomes the death of her Lover: The
second, by consenting to the Duke of Candies request, is the means of saving
her life. Afterward, her own Friend kills her, and thence flies away with
the elder Sister. The third couple, both man and woman, are charged with her
death, and being committed prisoners, they confess the fact: And fearing
death, by corruption of money they prevail with their keepers, escaping from
thence to Rhodes, where they died in great poverty.

The third Novel.
Herein is declared, how dangerous the occasion is, ensuing by anger and
despite, in such as entirely love, especially, being iniuried and offended by
them that they love.



WHen the King perceived, that Madame Pampinea had ended her discourse; he sat
sadly a pretty while, without uttering one word, but afterward spoke thus.
Little goodness appeared in the beginning of this Novel, because it ministered
occasion of mirth; yet the ending proved better, and I could wish, that worse
inflictions had fallen on the venerious Friar. Then turning toward Madam
Lauretta, he said; Lady, do you tell us a better tale, if possible it may be.
She smiling, thus answered the King: Sir, you are ouer-cruelly bent against
poor Lovers, in desisiring, that their amourous processions should have harsh
and sinister concludings. Nevertheless, in obedience to your severe command,
among three persons amourously perplexed, I will relate an unhappy ending;
whereas all may be said to speed as unfortunately, being equally alike, in
enjoying the issue of their desires, and thus I purpose for to proceed.

Every vice (choice Ladies) as very well you know, redoundeth to the great
disgrace and prejudice, of him or her by whom it is practiced, and oftentimes
to others. Now, among those common hurtful enemies, the sin or vice which
most carries us with full carrere, and draws us into unavoidable perils and
dangers; in mine opinion, seems to be that of choler or anger, which is
nothing else, but a sudden and inconsiderate moving, provoked by some received
injury, which having excluded all respect of reason, and dimde (with dark
vapors) the bright discerning sight of the understanding, enflameth the mind
with most violent fury. And albeit this inconvenience happens most to men,
and more to some few, then others; yet notwithstanding, it has been noted,
that women have felt the self same infirmity, and in more extreme manner,
because it much sooner is kindled in them, and burns with the brighter flame,
in regard they have the lesser consideration, and therefore not to be wondered
at. For if we will advisedly observe, we shall plainly perceive, that fire
(even of his own nature) takes hold on such things as are light and tender,
much sooner then it can on hard and weighty substances; and some of us women
(let men take no offense at my words) are far more soft and delicate then
they be, and therefore more frail. In which regard, seeing we are naturally
inclined hereto, and considering also, how much our affability and gentleness,
do show themselves pleasing and full of content, to those men with whom we are
to live; and likewise, how anger and fury are compacted of extraordinary
perils: I purpose (because we may be the more valiant in our courage, to
outstand the fierce assaults of wrath and rage) to show you by mine ensuing
Nouel, how the loves of three young Gentlemen, and of as many Gentlewomen, came
to fatal and unfortunate success, by the tempestuous anger of one among them,
according as I have formerly related unto you.

Marseilles (as you are not now to learn) is in Prouence, seated on the Sea,
and is also a very ancient and most noble City, which has been (heretofore)
inhabited with far richer and more wealthy Merchants, then at this instant
time it is. Among whom there was one, named Narnaldo Ciuada, a man but of mean
condition, yet clear in faith and reputation, and in lands, goods, and ready
moneys, immeasurably rich. Many children he had by his Wife, among whom were
three Daughters, which exceeded his Sons in years. Two of them being
twins, and borne of one body, were counted to be fifteen years old; the
third was fourteen, and nothing hindered marriage in their Parents own
expectation, but the return home of Narnaldo, who was then abroad in Spain
with his Merchandises. The eldest of these Sisters was named Ninetta, the
second Magdalena, and the third Bertella. A Gentleman (albeit but poor in
fortunes) and called Restagnone, was so extraordinarily enamoured of Ninetta,
as no man possibly could be more, and she likewise as earnest in affection
toward him; yet both carrying their loves proceeding with such secrecy, as
long time they enjoyed their hearts sweet contentment, yet undiscovered by any
eye.

It came to pass, that two other young Gallants, the one named Folco, and the
other Hugnetto, (who had attained to incredible wealth, by the decease of their
Father) were also as far in love, the one with Magdalena, and the other with
Bertella. When Restagnone had intelligence thereof, by the means of his fair
friend Ninetta; he purposed to relieve his poverty, by friendly furthering both
their love, and his own: and growing into familiarity with them, one while he
would walk abroad with Folco, and then again with Hugnetto, but oftener with
them both together, to visit their Mistresses, and continue worthy friendship.
On a day, when he saw the time suitable to his intent, and that he had invited
the two Gentlemen home to his House, he fell into this like conference with
them.

Kind friends (quoth he) the honest familiarity which has past between us,
may render you some certain assurance, of the constant love I bear to you
both, being as willing to work any means that may tend to your good, as I
desire to compass mine own. And because the truth of mine affection cannot
conceal it self to you, I mean to acquaint you with an intention, wherewith
my brain has a long while traveled, and now may soon be delivered of, if it
may pass with your liking and approbation. Let me then tell you, that except
your speeches savor of untruth, and your actions carry a double understanding,
in common behavior both by night and day, you appear to pine and consume
away, in the cordial love you bear to two of the Sisters, as I suffer the
same afflictions for the third, with reciprocal requital of their dearest
affection to us. Now, to qualify the heat of our tormenting flames, if you
will condescend to such a course as I shall advise you, the remedy will yield
them equal ease to ours, and we may safely enjoy the benefit of contentment.
As wealth abounds with you both, so does want most extremely tyrannize over
me: but if one bank might be made of both your rich substances, I embraced
therein as a third partaker, and some quarter of the World dissigned out by us,
where to live at hearts ease upon your possessions; I durst engage my credit,
that all the Sisters, (not meanly stored with their Fathers treasure) shall
bear us company to what place soever we please. There each man freely enjoying
his own dearest love, we may live like three brerhren, without any hinderance
to our mutual contentment; it remains now in you Gentlemen, to accept this
comfortable offer, or to refuse it.

The two Brothers, whose passions exceeded their best means for support,
perceiving some hope how to enjoy their loves; desired no long time of
deliberation, or greatly disputed with their thoughts what was best to be done:
but readily replied, that let happen any danger whatsoever, they would join
with him in this determination, and he should partake with them in their
wealthiest fortunes. After Restagnone had heard their answer, within some few
days following, he went to confer with Ninetta, which was no easy matter
for him to compass. Nevertheless, opportunity proved so favorable to him,
that meeting with her at a private place appointed, he discoursed at large,
what had passed between him and the other two young Gentlemen, maintaining the
same with many good reasons, to have her like and allow of the enterprise.
Which although (for a while) he could very hardly do; yet, in regard she had
more desire then power, without suspicion to be daily in his company, she
franckly thus answered. My hearts chosen friend, I cannot any way mislike your
advise, and will take such order with my Sisters, that they shall agree to our
resolution: let it therefore be your charge, that you and the rest make every
thing ready, to depart from hence so soon, as with best convenient means we
may be enabled.

Restagnone being returned to Folco and Hugnetto, who thought every hour a
year, to hear what would succeed upon the promise past between them; he told
them in plain terms, that their Ladies were as free in consent as they, and
nothing wanted now, but furnishment for their sudden departing Having
concluded, that Candye should be their harbor for entertainment, they made
sale of some few inheritances, which lay the readiest for their purpose, as
also the goods in their Houses, and then, under color of venting Merchandises
abroad; they bought a nimble Pinnace, fortified with good strength and
preparation, and waited but for a convenient wind. On the other side, Ninetta,
who was sufficiently acquainted with the forwardness of her Sisters desires
and her own; had so substantially prevailed with them, that a good voyage now
was the sole expectation. Whereupon, the same night when they should set away,
they opened a strong barred Chest of their Fathers, whence they took great
store of gold and costly Jewels, wherewith escaping secretly out of the House;
they came to the place where their Lovers attended for them, and going all
aboard the Pinnace, the winds were so furtherous to them; that without
touching any where, the night following they arrived at Geneway.

There being out of peril or pursuit, they all knit the knot of holy wedlock,
and then freely enjoyed their long wished desires, from whence setting sail
again, and being well furnished with all things wanting; passing on from Port
to Port, at the end of eight days they landed in Candie, not meeting with any
impeachment by the way. Determining there to spend their days, first they
provided themselves of fair and goodly Lands in the Country, and then of
beautiful dwelling Houses in the City, with all due furnishments belonging to
them, and Families well beseeming such worthy Gentlemen, and all delights else
for their daily recreations, inuiting their Neighbors, and they them again in
loving manner; so that no Lovers could wish to live in more ample contentment.

Passing on their time in this height of felicity, and not crossed by any
sinister accidents, it came to pass (as often we may observe in the like
occasions, that although delights do most especially please us, yet they breed
surfeit, when they swell too ouer-great in abundance) that Restagnone, who most
dearly affected his fair Ninetta, and had her now in his free possession,
without any peril of loosing her: grew now also to be weary of her, and
consequently, to fail in those familiar performances, which formerly had
passed between them. For, being one day invited to a Banquet, he saw there a
beautiful Gentlewoman of that Country, whose perfections pleasing him beyond
all comparison: he labored (by painful pursuit) to win his purpose; and
meeting with her in diverse private places, grew prodigal in his expenses upon
her. This could not be so closely carried, but being seen and observed by
Ninetta, she became possessed with such extreme jealousy, that he could not
do any thing whatsoever, but immediately he had knowledge of it: which fire,
growing to a flame in her, her patience became extremely provoked, urging
rough and rude speeches from her to him, and daily tormenting him beyond power
of sufferance.

As the enjoying of any thing in too much plenty, makes it appear irksome and
loathing to us, and the denial of our desires, do more and more whet on the
appetite: even so did the angry spleen of Ninetta proceed on in violence,
against this new commenced love of Restagnone. For in succession of time,
whether he enjoyed the embracements of his new Mistress, or no: yet Ninetta
(by sinister reports, but much more through her own jealous imaginations) held
it for infallible, and to be most certain. Hereupon, she fell into an
extreme melancholy, which melancholy begat implacable fu^y, and
(consequently) such contemptible disdain: as converted her former kindly love
to Restagnone, into most cruel and bloody hatred; yea, and so strangely was
reason or respect confounded in her, as no revenge else but speedy death, might
satisfy the wrongs she imagined to receive by Restagnone and his Minion.

Upon enquiry, by what means she might best compass her bloody intention,
she grew acquainted with a Grecian woman, and wonderfully expert in the
compounding of poisons, whom she so persuaded, by gifts and bounteous
promises, that at the length she prevailed with her. A deadly water was
distilled by her, which (without any other counsel to the contrary) on a day
when Restagnone had his blood somewhat ouer-heated, and little dreamed on any
such Treason conspired against him by his Wife, she caused him to drink a
great draught thereof, under pretense, that it was a most sovereign and
cordial water: but such was the powerful operation thereof, that the very
next morning, Restagnone was found to be dead in his bed. When his death was
understood by Folco, Hugnetto and their Wives, and not knowing how he came to
be thus empoysoned (because their sister seemed to bemoane his sudden death,
with as apparent shows of mourning as they could possibly express) they
buried him very honorably, and so all suspicion ceased.

But as Fortune is infinite in her fagaries, never acting disaster so closely,
but as cunningly discovers it again: so it came to pass, that within a few
days following, the Grecian woman, that had delivered the poison to Ninetta,
for such another deed of damnation, was apprehended even in the action. And
being put upon the tortures, among many other horrid villainies by her
committed, she confessed the empoysoning of Restagnone, and every particle
thereto appertaining. Whereupon, the Duke of Candie, without any noise or
publication, setting a strong guard (in the night time) about the house of
Folco, where Ninetta then was lodged; there suddenly they seized on her, and
upon examination, in maintenance of her desperate revenge; voluntarily
confessed the fact, and what else concerned the occasion of his death, by the
wrongs which he had offered her.

Folco and Hugnetto understanding secretly, both from the Duke, and other
intimate friends, what was the reason of Ninettaes apprehension, which was not
a little displeasing to them, labored by all their best pains and endeavor,
to work such means with the Duke, that her life might not perish by fire,
although she had most justly deserved it; but all their attempts proved to no
effect, because the Duke had concluded to execute justice.

Here you are to observe, that Magdalena (being a very beautiful Woman,
young, and in the choicest flower of her time:) had often before bin solicited
by the Duke, to entertain his love and kindness, whereto by no means she
would listen or give consent. And being now most earnestly importuned by her,
for the safety of her Sisters life, she took hold on this her daily suite to
him, and in private told her, that if she was so desirous of Ninettaes life: it
lay in her power to obtain it, by granting him the fruition of her love. She
apparently perceiving, that Ninetta was not likely to live, but by the
prostitution of her chaste honor, which she preferred before the loss of her
own life, or her Sisters; concluded, to let her dye, rather then run into any
such disgrace. But having an excellent ingenious wit, quick, and apprehensiue
in perilous occasions, she intended now to make a trial of ouer-reaching the
lascivious Duke in his wanton purpose, and yet to be assured of her Sisters
life, without any blemish to her reputation.

Soliciting him still as she was wont to do, this promise passed from her to
him, that when Ninetta was delivered out of prison, and in safety at home in
her house: he should resort thither in some queint disguise, and enjoy his
long expected desire; but until then she would not yield. So violent was the
Duke in the prosecution of his purpose, that under color of altering the
manner of Ninettaes death, not suffering her to be consumed by fire, but to be
drowned, according to a custom observed there long time, and at the
importunity of her Sister Magdalena, in the still silence of the night, Ninetta
was conveyed into a sack, and sent in that manner to the House of Folco, the
Duke following soon after, to challenge her promise.

Magdalena, having acquainted her Husband with her virtuous intention, for
preserving her Sisters life, and disappointing the Duke in his wicked desire;
was as contrary to her true meaning in this case, as Ninetta had formerly been
adverse to Restagnone, only being ouer-ruled likewise by jealousy, and
persuaded in his rash opinion, that the Duke had already dishonored Magdalena,
otherwise, he would not have delivered Ninetta out of prison. Mad fury gave
further fire to this unmanly persuasion, and nothing will now quench this
violent shame, but the life of poor Magdalena, suddenly sacrificed in the
rescue of her Sisters, such a devil is anger, when the understandings bright
eye is thereby abused. No credit might be given to her womanly protestations,
nor any thing seem to alter his bloody purpose; but, having slain Magdalena
with his Poniard, (notwithstanding her tears and humble entreaties) he ran in
haste to Ninettaes Chamber, she not dreaming on any such desperate accident,
and to her he used these dissembling speeches.

Sister (quoth he) my wife has advised, that I should speedily convey you
hence, as fearing the renewing of the Dukes fury, and your falling again into
the hands of Justice: I have a Bark readily prepared for you, and your life
being secured, it is all that she and I do most desire. Ninetta being
fearful, and no way distrusting what he had said; in thankful allowance of
her Sisters care, and courteous tender of his so ready service; departed thence
presently with him, not taking any farewell of her other Sister and her
Husband. To the Seashore they came, very weakly provided of moneys to defray
their charges, and getting aboard the Bark, directed their course themselves
knew not whether.

The amourous Duke in his disguise, having long daunced attendance at Folcoes
door, and no admittance of his entrance; angerly returned back to his Court,
protesting severe revenge on Magdalena, if she gave him not the better
satisfaction, to clear her from thus basely abusing him. On the morrow
morning, when Magdalena was found murdered in her Chamber, and tidings thereof
carried to the Duke; present search was made for the bloody offender, but Folco
being fled and gone with Ninetta; some there were, who bearing deadly hatred to
Hugnetto, incensed the Duke against him and his wife, as supposing them to be
guilty of Magdalenaes death. He being thereto very easily persuaded, in regard
of his immoderate love to the slain Gentlewoman; went himself in person
(attended on by his Guard) to Hugnettoes House, where both he and his wife were
seized as prisoners.

These news were very strange to them, and their imprisonment as unwelcome;
and although they were truly innocent, either in knowledge of the horrid fact,
or the departure of Folco with Ninetta: yet being unable to endure the tortures
extremity, they made themselves culpable by confession, and that they had hand
with Folco in the murder of Magdalena. Upon this their forced confession, and
sentence of death pronounced on them by the Duke himself; before the day
appointed for their public execution, by great sums of money, which they had
closely hid in their House, to serve when any urgent extremity should happen
to them; they corrupted their keepers, and before any intelligence could be had
of their flight, they escaped by Sea to Rhodes, where they lived afterward in
great distress and misery. The just vengeance of Heaven followed after Folco
and Ninetta, he for murdering his honest wife, and she for poisoning her
offending Husband: for being beaten a long while on the Seas, by tempestuous
storms and weather, and not admitted landing in any Port or creek; they were
driven back on the Coast of Candie again, where being apprehended, and
brought to the City before the Duke, they confessed their several notorious
offenses, and ended their loathed lives in one fire together.

Thus the idle and loose love of Restagnone, with the frantic rage and
jealousy of Ninetta and Folco, ouerturned all their long continued happiness,
and threw a disastrous ending on them all.

Gerbino, contrary to the former plighted faith of his Grandfather, King
Gulielmo, fought with a Ship at Sea, belonging to the King of Thunis, to take
away his Daughter, who was then in the same Ship. She being slain by them
that had the possession of her, he likewise slew them; and afterward had his
own head smitten off.

The fourth Novel.
In commendation of Justice between Princes; and declaring withal, that
neither fear, dangers, nor death it self, can any way daunt a true and loyal
Lover.



MAdam Lauretta having concluded her Nouel, and the company complaining on
Lovers misfortunes, some blaming the angry and jealous fury of Ninetta, and
every one delivering their several opinions; the King, as awaking out of a
passionate perplexity, exalted his looks, giving a sign to Madam Elisa, that
she should follow next in order, whereto she obeying, began in this manner. I
have heard (Gracious Ladies, quoth she) of many people, who are verily
persuaded, that Loves arrows, never wound any body, but only by the eyes
looks and gazes, mocking and scorning such as maintain that men may fall in
love by hearing only. Wherein (believe me) they are greatly deceived, as will
appear by a Novel which I must now relate unto you, and wherein you shall
plainly perceive, that not only fame or report is as prevailing as sight; but
also has conducted diverse, to a wretched and miserable ending of their lives.

Gulielmo the second, King of Sicilie, according as the Sicilian Chronicles
record, had two children, the one a son, named Don Rogero, and the other a
daughter, called Madam Constance. The said Rogero died before his Father,
leaving a son behind him, named Gerbino, who, with much care and cost, was
brought up by his Grandfather, proving to be a very goodly Prince, and
wondrously esteemed for his great valor and humanity. His fame could not
contain it self, within the bounds or limits of Sicilie only, but being
published very prodigally, in many parts of the world beside, flourished with
no mean commendations throughout all Barbary, which in those days was
tributary to the King of Sicilie. Among other persons, deserving most to be
respected, the renowned virtues, and affability of this gallant Prince Gerbino,
was understood by the beauteous Daughter to the King of Thunis, who by such as
had seen her, was reputed to be one of the rarest creatures, the best
conditioned, and of the truest noble spirit, that ever Nature framed in her
very choycest pride of art.

Of famous, virtuous, and worthy men, it was continually her cheifest delight
to hear, and the admired actions of valiant Gerbino, reported to her by many
singular discoursers, such as could best describe him, with language answerable
to his due deseruings, won such honorable entertainment in her understanding
soul, that they were most affectionately pleasing to her, and in capitulating
(over and over again) his manifold and heroycall perfections; mere speech
made her extremely amorous of him, nor willingly would she lend an ear to any
other discourse, but that which tended to his honor and advancement.

On the other side, the fame of her incomparable beauty, with addition of her
other infinite singularities beside; as the World had given ^are to in
numberless places, so Sicilie came at length acquainted therewith, in such
flowing manner, as was truly answerable to her merit. Nor seemed this as a bare
babbling rumor, in the Princely hearing of royal Gerbino; but was embraced
with such a real apprehension, and the entire probation of a true
understanding: that he was no less enflamed with noble affection toward her,
then she expressed the like in virtuous opinion of him. Wherefore, awaiting
such convenient opportunity, when he might entreat license of his Grandfather,
for his own going to Thunis, under color of some honorable occasion, for the
earnest desire he had to see her: he gave charge to some to his especial
friends (whose affairs required their presence in those parts) to let the
Princess understand, in such secret manner as best they could devise, what
noble affection he bare unto her, deuoting himself only to her service.

One of his chosen friends thus put in trust, being a Ieweller, a man of
singular discretion, and often resorting to Ladies for sight of his Iewelles,
winning like admittance to the Princess: related at large unto her, the
honorable affection of Gerbino, with full tender of his person to her service,
and that she only was to dispose of him. Both the message and the messenger,
were most graciously welcome to her, and flaming in the self-same affection
toward him; as a testimony thereof, one of the very choicest Jewels which she
bought of him, she sent by him to the Prince Gerbino, it being received by him
with such joy and contentment, as nothing in the world could be more pleasing
to him. So that afterward, by the trusty carriage of this Ieweller, many
Letters and Loue-tokens passed between them, each being as highly pleased with
this poor, yet happy kind of intercourse, as if they had seen and conuersed
with one another.

Matters proceeding on in this manner, and continuing longer then their
loue-sicke passions easily could permit, yet neither being able to find out any
other means of help; it fortuned, that the King of Thunis promised his
daughter in marriage to the King of Granada, whereat she grew exceeding
sorrowful, perceiving, that not only she should be sent further off, by a
large distance of way from her friend, but also be deprived utterly, of all
hope ever to enjoy him. And if she could have devised any means, either by
secret flight from her Father, or any way else to further her intention, she
would have adventured it for the Princes sake. Gerbino in like manner hearing of
this purposed marriage, lived in a hell of torments, consulting oftentimes with
his soul, how he might be possessed of her by power, when she should be sent
by Sea to her husband, or private stealing her away from her Fathers Court
before: with these and infinite other thoughts, was he incessantly afflicted,
both day and night.

By some unhappy accident or other, the King of Thunis heard of this their
secret love, as also of Gerbinoes purposed policy to surprise her, and how
likely he was to effect it, in regard of his manly valor, and store of stout
friends to assist him. Hereupon, when the time was come, that he would convey
his daughter thence to her marriage, and fearing to be prevented by Gerbino: he
sent to the King of Sicily, to let him understand his determination, craving
safe conduct from him, without impeachment of Gerbino, or any one else, until
such time as his intent was accomplished. King Gulielmo being aged, and never
acquainted with the affectionat proceedings of Gerbino, nor any doubtful
reason to urge this security from him, in a case convenient to be granted:
yielded the sooner thereto right willingly, and as a signale of his honorable
meaning, he sent him his royal Glove, with a full confirmation for his safe
conduct.

No sooner were these Princely assurances received, but a goodly ship was
prepared in the Port of Carthagena, well furnished with all things thereto
belonging, for the sending his daughter to the King of Granada, writing for
nothing else but best favoring winds. The young Princess, who understood and
saw all this great preparation; secretly sent a servant of hers to Palermo,
giving him especial charge, on her behalf, to salute the Prince Gerbino, and
to tell him withal, that (within few days) she must be transported to
Granada. And now opportunity gave fair and free mean, to let the world know,
whether he were a man of that magnanimous spirit, or no, as general opinion
had formerly conceived of him, and whether he affected her so firmly, as by
many close messages he had assured her. He who had the charge of this embassy,
effectually performed it, and then returned back to Thunis.

The Prince Gerbino, having heard this message from his divine Mistress, and
knowing also, that the King his Grandfather, had past his safe conduct to the
King of Thunis, for peaceable passage thorough his Seas: was at his wits end,
in this urgent necessity, what might best be done. Notwithstanding, moved by
the settled constancy of his plighted Love, and the speeches delivered to him
by the messenger from the Princess: to show himself a man endued with
courage, he departed thence unto Messina, where he made ready two speedy
galleys, and fitting them with men of valiant disposition, set away to
Sardignia, as making full account, that the Ship which carried the Princess,
must come along that Coast. Nor was his expectation therein deceived: for,
within few days after, the Ship (not ouer-swiftly winded) came sailing near
to the place where they attended for her arrival; whereof Gerbino had no
sooner gotten a sight, but to animate the resolutes which were in his company,
thus he spoke.

Gentlemen, if you be those men of valor, as heretofore you have been
reputed, I am persuaded, that there are some among you, who either formerly
have, or now instantly do feel, the all-commanding power of Love, without
which (as I think) there is not any mortal man, that can have any goodness
or virtue dwelling in him. Wherefore, if ever you have been amorously affected,
or presently have any apprehension thereof, you shall the more easily judge of
what I now aim at. True it is, that I do love, and love has guided me to be
comforted, and manfully assisted by you, because in yonder Ship, which you see
comes on so gently under sail (even as if she offered her self to be our
prize) not only is the Jewel which I most esteem, but also mighty and
vnvalewable treasure, to be won without any difficult labor, or hazard of a
dangerous fight, you being men of such vndauntable courage. In the honor of
which victory, I covet not any part or parcel, but only a Lady, for whose
sake I have undertaken these Arms, and freely give you all the rest contained
in the ship. Let us set on them, Gentlemen, and my dearest friends;
courageously let us assail the ship, you see how the wind favors us, and
(questionless) in so good an action, Fortune will not fail us.

Gerbino needed not to have spoken so much, in persuading them to seize so rich
a booty; because the men of Messina were naturally addicted to spoil and
rapine: and before the Prince began his Oration, they had concluded to make the
ship their purchase. Wherefore, giving a loud shout, according to their
Country manner, and commanding their Trumpets to sound chearefully, they
rowed on amain with their Oars, and (in mere despite) set upon the ship. But
before the Galleys could come near her, they that had the charge and managing
of her, perceiving with what speed they made toward them, and no likely
means of escaping from them, resoluedly they stood upon their best defense,
for now it was no time to be slothful.

The Prince being come near to the Ship, commanded that the Patrones should
come to him, except they would adventure the fight. When the Sarazines were
thereof advertised, and understood also what he demanded, they returned answer:
That their motion and proceeding in this manner, was both against Law and
plighted faith, which was promised by the King of Sicily, for their safe
passage through his Sea, by no means to be mollested or assailed. In testimony
whereof, they showed his Glove, auouching moreover, that neither by force (or
otherwise) they would yield, or deliver him any thing which they had aboorde
their Ship.

Gerbino espying his gracious Mistress on the Ships deck, and she appearing
to be far more beautiful, then Fame had made relation of her: being much
more enflamed now, then formerly he had bin, replied thus when they showed the
Glove. We have (quoth he) no Faulcon here now, to be humbled at the sight of
your Glove: and therefore, if you will not deliver the Lady, prepare your selves
for fight, for we must have her whether you will or no. Hereupon, they began to
let fly (on both sides) their Darts and arrows, with stones sent in violent
sort from their slings, thus continuing the fight a long while, to very great
harm on either side. At the length, Gerbino perceiving, that small benefit
would redound to him, if he did not undertake some other kind of course: he
took a small Pinnace, which purposely he brought with him from Sardignia, and
setting it on a flaming fire, conveyed it (by the Galleys help) close to the
ship. The Sarazines much amazed thereat, and evidently perceiving, that either
they must yield or die; brought their Kings daughter upon the prow of the ship,
most grievously weeping and wringing her hands. Then calling Gerbino, to let
him behold their resolution, there they slew her before his face; and
afterward, throwing her body into the Sea, said: Take her, there we give her to
thee, according to our bounden duty, and as thy perjury has justly deserved.

This sight was not a little grievous to the Prince Gerbino, who madded now
with this their monstrous cruelty, and not caring what became of his own life,
having lost her for whom he only desired to live: not dreading their Darts,
Arrows, slinged stones, or what violence else they could use against him; he
leapt aboard their ship, in despite of all that durst resist him, behauing
himself there like a hunger-starued Lion, when he enters among a heard of
beasts, tearing their carcasses in pieces both with his teeth and paws. Such
was the extreme fury of the poor Prince, not sparing the like of any one, that
durst appear in his presence; so that what with the bloody slaughter, and
violence of the fires increasing in the Ship; the Mariners got such wealth as
possibly they could save, and suffering the Sea to swallow the rest, Gerbino
returned unto his Galleys again, nothing proud of this so ill-gotten victory.

Afterward, having recovered the Princesses dead body out of the Sea, and
enbalmed it with sighs and tears: he returned back into Sicilie, where he
caused it to be most honorably buried, in a little Island, named Vstica, face
to face confronting Trapanum. The King of Thunis hearing these disastrous
News, sent his Ambassadors (habited in sad mourning) to the aged King of
Sicily, complaining of his faith broken with him, and how the accident had
fallen out. Age being suddenly incited to anger, and the King extremely offended
at this injury, seeing no way whereby to deny him justice, it being urged so
instantly by the Ambassadors: caused Gerbino to be apprehended, and he
himself (in regard that none of his Lords and Barons would therein assist him,
but labored to divert them by their earnest importunity) pronounced the
sentence of death on the Prince, and commanded to have him beheaded in his
presence; affecting rather, to dye without an heir, then to be thought a King
void of justice. So these two unfortunate Lovers, never enjoying the very least
benefit of their long wished desires: ended both their lives in violent manner.

The three Brethren to Isabella, slew a Gentleman that secretly loved her. His
ghost appeared to her in her sleep, and showed her in what place they had
buried his body. She (in silent manner) brought away his head, and putting it
into a pot of earth, such as Flowers, Basile, or other sweet herbs are
usually set in; she watered it (a long while) with her tears. Whereof her
Brethren having intelligence; soon after she dyed, with mere conceit of
sorrow.

The fifth Novel.
Wherein is plainly proved, that Love cannot be rooted up, by any humane
power or providence; especially in such a soul, where it has been really
apprehended.

THE Novel of Madame Eliza being finished, and somewhat commended by the
King, in regard of the Tragical conclusion; Philomena was enjoined to proceed
next with her discourse. She being overcome with much compassion, for the hard
Fortunes of Noble Gerbino, and his beautiful Princess, after an extreme and
vehement sighe, thus she spoke. My tale (worthy Ladies) extends not to
persons of so high birth or quality, as they were of whom Madame Eliza gave you
relation: yet (peradventure) it may prove to be no less pitiful. And now I
remember my self, Messina so lately spoken of, is the place where this
accident also happened.



In Messina there dwelt three young men, Brethren, and Merchants by their common
profession, who becoming very rich by the death of their Father, lived in very
good fame and repute. Their Father was of San Gemignano, and they had a Sister
named Isabella, young, beautiful, and well conditioued; who, upon some
occasion, as yet remained unmarried. A proper youth, being a Gentleman borne in
Pisa, and named Lorenzo, as a trusty factor or servant, had the managing of the
Brethrens business and affairs. This Lorenzo being of comely personage,
affable, and excellent in his behavior, grew so gracious in the eyes of
Isabella, that she affoorded him many very respective looks, yea, kindnesses
of no common quality. Which Lorenzo taking notice of, and observing by degrees
from time to time, gave over all other beauties in the City, which might
allure any affection from him, and only fixed his heart on her, so that their
love grew to a mutual embracing, both equally respecting one another, and
entertaining kindnesses, as occasion gave leave.

Long time continued this amorous league of love, yet not so cunningly
concealed, but at the length, the secret meeting of Lorenzo and Isabella, to
ease their poor souls of Loves oppressions, was discovered by the eldest of
the Brethren, unknown to them who were thus betrayed. He being a man of great
discretion, although this sight was highly displeasing to him: yet
notwithstanding, he kept it to himself till the next morning, laboring his
brain what might best be done in so urgent a case. When day was come, he
resorted to his other brethren, and told them what he had seen in the time
past, between their sister and Lorenzo.

Many deliberations passed on in this case; but after all, thus they concluded
together, to let it proceed on with patient supportance, that no scandal
might ensue to them, or their Sister, no evil act being (as yet) committed.
And seeming, as if they knew not of their love, had a wary eye still upon her
secret walks, awaiting for some convenient time, when without their own
prejudice, or Isabellaes knowledge, they might safely break off this their
stolen love, which was altogether against their liking. So, showing no worse
countenance to Lorenzo, then formerly they had done, but employing and
conuersing with him in kind manner; it fortuned, that riding (all three) to
recreate themselves out of the City, they took Lorenzo in their company, and
when they were come to a solitary place, such as best suited with their vile
purpose: they ran suddenly upon Lorenzo, slew him, and afterward enterred hid
body, where hardly it could be discovered by any one. Then they returned back
to Messina, and gave it forth (as a credible report) that they had sent him
abroad about their affairs, as formerly they were wont to do: which every one
verily believed, because they knew no reason why they should conceit any
otherwise.

Isabella, living in expectation of his return, and perceiving his stay to her
was so offensiuely long: made many demands to her Brethren, into what parts
they had sent him, that his tarrying was so quite from all wonted course. Such
was her importunate speeches to them, that they taking it very discontentedly,
one of them returned her this frowning answer. What is your meaning Sister, by
so many questionings after Lorenzo? What urgent affairs have you with him,
that makes you so impatient upon his absence? If hereafter you make any more
demands for him, we shall shape you such a reply, as will be but little to
your liking. At these harsh words, Isabella fell into abundance of tears,
where-among she mingled many sighs and groans, such as were able to overthrow
a far stronger constitution: so that, being full of fear and dismay, yet no
way distrusting her brethrens cruel deed; she durst not question any more
after him.

In the silence of dark night, as she lay afflicted in her bed, oftentimes
would she call for Lorenzo, entreating his speedy returning to her: And then
again, as if he had been present with her, she checked and reproved him for his
so long absence. One night amongst the rest, she being grown almost hopeless,
of ever seeing him again, having a long while wept and grievously lamented;
her senses and faculties utterly spent and tired, that she could not utter any
more complaints, she fell into a trance or sleep; and dreamed, that the ghost
of Lorenzo appeared unto her, in torn and unbefitting garments, his looks
pale, meager, and staring: and (as she thought) thus spoke to her. My dear
love Isabella, thou do nothing but torment thy self, with calling on me,
accusing me for ouerlong tarrying from thee: I am come therefore to let thee
know, that thou can not enjoy my company any more, because the very same day
when last thou saw me, thy brethren most bloodily murdered me. And
acquainting her with the place where they had buried his mangled body: he
strictly charged her, not to call him at any time afterward, and so vanished
away.

The young Damsel awaking, and giving some credit to her Vision, sighed and
wept exceedingly; and after she was risen in the morning, not daring to say any
thing to her brethren, she resolutely determined, to go see the place formerly
appointed her, only to make trial, if that which she seemed to see in her
sleep, should carry any likelihood of truth. Having obtained favor of her
brethren, to ride a days journey from the City, in company of her trusty
Nurse, who long time had attended on her in the house, and knew the secret
passages of her love: they rode directly to the designed place, which being
covered with some store of dried leaves, and more deeply sunk then any other
part of the ground therabout, they dug not far, but they found the body of
murdered Lorenzo, as yet very little corrupted or impaired, and then perceived
the truth of her vision.

Wisdom and government so much prevailed with her, as to instruct her soul,
that her tears spent there, were merely fruitless and in vain, neither did
the time require any long tarrying there. Gladly would she have carried the
whole body with her, secretly to bestow honorable enterment on it, but it
exceeded the compass of her ability. Wherefore, in regard she could not have
all, yet she would be possessed of a part, and having brought a keen razor
with her, by help of the Nurse, she divided the head from the body, and
wrapped it up in a Napkin, which the nurse conveyed into her lap, and then
laid the body in the ground again. Thus being undiscovered by any, they
departed thence, and arrived at home in convenient time, where being alone by
themselves in the Chamber: she washed the head over and over with her tears,
and bestowed infinite kisses thereon.

Not long after, the Nurse having brought her a large earthen pot, such as
we use to set Basile, Marierom, Flowers, or other sweet herbs in, and
shrouding the head in a silken Scarf, put it into the pot, covering it with
earth, and planting diverse roots of excellent Basile therein, which she never
watered, but either with her tears, Rose water, or water distilled from the
Flowers of Oranges. This pot she used continually to sit by, either in her
chamber, or any where else: for she carried it always with her, sighing and
breathing forth sad complaints thereto, even as if they had been uttered to
her Lorenzo, and day by day this was her continual exercise, to the no mean
admiration of her brethren, and many other friends that beheld her.

So long she held on in this mourning manner, that, what by the continual
watering of the Basile, and putrefaction of the head, so buried in the pot of
earth; it grew very flourishing, and most odorifferous to such as scented it,
so that as no other Basile could possibly yield so sweet a savor. The
neighbors noting this behavior in her, observing the long continuance
thereof, how much her bright beauty was defaced, and the eyes sunk into her
head by incessant weeping, made many kind and friendly motions, to understand
the reason of her so violent oppressions; but could not by any means prevail
with her, or win any discovery by her Nurse, so faithful was she in secrecy
to her. Her brethren also waxed weary of this carriage in her; and having very
often reproved her for it, without any other alteration in her: at length, they
closely stole away the pot of Basile from her, for which she made infinite
woeful lamentations, earnestly entreating to have it restored again, auouching
that she could not live without it.

Perceiving that she could not have the pot again, she fell into an extreme
sickness, occasioned only by her ceaselesse weeping: and never urged she to
have any thing, but the restoring of her Basile pot. Her brethren grew greatly
amazed thereat, because she never called for ought else beside; and thereupon
were very desirous to ransacke the pot to the very bottom. Having emptied out
all the earth, they found the Scarf of silk, wherein the head of Lorenzo was
wrapped; which was (as yet) not so much consumed, but by the locks of hair,
they knew it to be Lorenzoes head, whereat they became confounded with
amazement.

Fearing least their offense might come to open publication, they buried it
very secretly; and, before any could take notice thereof, they departed from
Messina, and went to dwell in Naples. Isabella crying and calling still for her
pot of Basile, being unable to give over mourning, dyed within a few days
after. Thus have you heard the hard fare of poor Lorenzo and his Isabella.
Within no long while after, when this accident came to be publicly known, an
excellent ditty was composed thereof, beginning thus: Cruel and unkind was
the Christian,
That robbed me of my Basiles bliss, etc.


A beautiful young Virgin, named Andreana, became enamored of a young Gentleman,
called Gabriello. In conference together, she declared a dream of hers to him,
and he another of his to her; whereupon Gabriello fell down suddenly dead in
her arms. She, and her Chamber-maide were apprehended, by the Officers
belonging to the Seigneury, as they were carrying Gabriello, to lay him before
his own door. The Potestate offering violence to the Virgin, and she
reststing him virtuously: it came to the understanding of her Father, who
approved the innocence of his daughter, and compassed her deliverance. But she
afterward, being weary of all worldly felicities, entered into Religion, and
became a Nun.

The sixth Novel.
Describing the admirable accidents of Fortune; and the mighty prevailing power
of Love.

THE Novel which Madam Philomena had so graciously related, was highly
pleasing unto the other Ladies; because they had oftentimes heard the Song,
without knowing who made it, or upon what occasion it was composed. But when
the King saw that the Tale was ended: he commanded Pamphilus, that he should
follow in his due course: whereupon he spoke thus.



The dream already recounted in the last Novel, does minister matter to me,
to make report of another Tale, wherein mention is made of two several
dreams; which diuined as well what was to ensue, as the other did what had
happened before. And no sooner were they finished in the relation, by both the
parties which had formerly dreampt them, but the effects of both as suddenly
followed.

Worthy Ladies, I am sure it is not unknown to you, that it is, and has been
a general passion, to all men and women living, to see diverse and sundry
things while they are sleeping. And although (to the sleeper) they seem most
certain, so that when he awaketh, he judges the truth of some, the
likelihood of others, and some beyond all possibility of truth: yet
notwithstanding, many dreams have been observed to happen, and very strangely
have come to pass. And this has been a grounded reason for some men, to give
as great credit to such things as they see sleeping, as they do to others
usually waking. So that, according unto their dreams, and as they make
construction of them, that are sadly distasted, or merrily pleased, even as (by
them) they either fear or hope. On the contrary, there are some, who will not
credit any dream whatsoever, until they be fallen into the very same danger
which formerly they saw, and most evidently in their sleep.

I mean not to commend either the one or other, because they do not always
fall out to be true; neither are they at all times liars. Now, that they prove
not all to be true, we can best testify to our selves. And that they are not
always liars, has already sufficiently been manifested, by the discourse of
Madame Philomena, and as you shall perceive by mine own, which next comes in
order to salute you. Wherefore, I am of this opinion, that in matters of good
life, and performing honest actions; no dream is to be feared presaging the
contrary, neither are good works any way to be hindered by them. Likewise, in
matters of bad and wicked quality, although our dreams may appear favorable
to us, and our visions flatter us with prosperous success: yet let us give no
credence unto the best, nor addict our minds to them of contrary Nature. And
now we will proceed to our Novel.

In the City of Brescia, there lived sometime a Gentleman, named Messer Negro
da Ponte Cararo, who (among many other children) had a daughter called
Andreana, young and beautiful, but as yet unmarried. It fortuned, that she
fell in love with a neighbor, named Gabriello, a comely young Gentleman, of
affable complexion, and graciously conditioned. Which love was (with like
kindness) welcomed and entertained by him, and by the furtherance of her
Chamber-maide, it was so cunningly carried, that in the Garden belonging to
Andreanaes Father, she had many meetings with her Gabriello. And solemn vows
being mutually passed between them, that nothing but death could alter their
affection: by such ceremonious words as are used in marriage, they married
themselves secretly together, and continued their stolen chaste pleasures, with
equal contentment to them both.

It came to pass, that Andreana sleeping in her bed, dreamed, that she met
with Gabriello in the Garden, where they both embracing lovingly together, she
seemed to see a thing black and terrible, which suddenly issued forth of his
body, but the shape thereof she could not comprehend. It rudely seized upon
Gabriello, and in despite of her utmost strength (with incredible force)
snatched him out of her arms, and sinking with him into the earth, they never
after did see one another; whereupon, overcome with extremity of grief and
sorrow, presently she awaked, being then not a little joyful, that she found
no such matter as she feared, yet continued very doubtful of her dream. In
regard whereof, Gabriello being desirous to visit her the night following: she
labored very diligently to hinder his coming to her; yet knowing his loyal
affection toward her, and fearing least he should grow suspicious of some other
matter: she welcomed him into the Garden, where gathering both white and
Damask Roses (according to the nature of the season) at length, they sat
down by a goodly Fountain, which stood in the midst of the Garden

After some small familiar discourse passing between them, Gabriello demanded
of her upon what occasion she denied his coming thither the night before, and
by such a sudden unexpected admonition? Andreana told him, that it was in
regard of a troublesome dream, wherewith her soul was perplexed the precedent
night, and doubt what might ensue thereon. Gabriello hearing this, began to
smile, affirming to her, that it was an especial note of folly, to give any
credit to idle dreams: because (oftentimes) they are caused by excess of
feeding, and continually are observed to be mere lies. For (quoth he) if I
had any superstitious belief of dreams, I should not then have come hither
now: yet not so much as being dismayed by your dream, but for another of mine
own, which I am the more willing to acquaint you withal.

Me thought, I was in a goodly delightful Forest, in the Noble exercise of
sportfull hunting, and became there possessed of a young Hind, the very
loueliest and most pleasing beast that was ever seen. It seemed to be as white
as snow, and grew (in a short while) so familiar with me, that by no means it
would forsake me. I could not but accept this rare kindness in the beast, and
fearing least (by some ill hap) I might loose it, I put a collar of Gold about
the neck thereof, and fastened it into a chain of Gold also, which then I held
strictly in my hand. The Hind afterward couched down by me, laying his head
mildely in my lap; and on a sudden, a black Greyhound bitch came rushing on
us (but whence, or how I could not imagine) seeming half hunger-starued, and
very ugly to look upon. At me she made her full carriere, without any power in
me of resistance: and putting her mouth into the left side of my bosom,
griped it so mainly with her teeth, that (me thought) I felt my heart quite
bitten through, and she tugged on still, to take it wholly away from me; by
which imagined pain and anguish I felt, instantly I awaked: Laying then my
hand upon my side, to know whether any such harm had befaln me, or no, and
finding none at all, I smiled at mine own folly, in making such a frivolous
and idle search. What can be said then in these or the like cases? Diverse times
I have had as ill seeming dreams, yea, and much more to be feared: yet never
any thing hurtful to me) followed thereon; and therefore I have always made
the less account of them.

The young Maiden, who was still dismayed by her own dream, became much more
afflicted in her mind, when she had heard this other reported by Gabriello:
but yet to give him no occasion of distaste, she bare it out in the best manner
she could devise to do. And albeit they spent the time in much pleasing
discourse, maintained with infinite sweet kisses on either side: yet was she
still suspicious, but knew not whereof; fixing her eyes oftentimes upon his
face, and throwing strange looks to all parts of the Garden, to catch hold on
any such black ugly sight, whereof he had formerly made description to her. As
thus she continued in these afflicting fears, it fortuned, that Gabriello
suddenly breathing forth a very vehement sighe, and throwing his arms fast
about her, said: O help me dear Love, or else I dye; and, in speaking the
words, fell down upon the ground. Which the young Damsel perceiving, and
drawing him into her lap, weeping said: Alas sweet Friend, What pain do
thou feel?

Gabriello answered not one word, but being in an exceeding sweat, without any
ability of drawing breath, very soon after gave up the ghost. How grievous
this strange accident was to poor Andreana, who loved him as dearly as her
own life: you that have felt loves tormenting afflictions, can more easily
conceive, then I relate. Wringing her hands, and weeping incessantly, calling
him, rubbing his temples, and using all likely means to reduce life: she found
all her labor to be spent in vain, because he was stark dead indeed, and
every part of his body as cold as ice: whereupon, she was in such woeful
extremity, that she knew not what to do or say. All about the Garden she went
weeping, in infinite fears and distraction of soul, calling for her
Chambermaid, the only secret friend to their stolen meetings, and told her the
occasion of this sudden sorrow. After they had sighed and mourned awhile, over
the dead body of Gabriello, Andreana in this manner spoke to her maid.

Seeing Fortune has thus bereft me of my Love, mine own life must needs be
hateful to me: but before I offer any violence to my self, let us devise some
convenient means, as may both preserve mine honor from any touch or scandal,
and conceal the secret love passing between us: but yet in such honest sort,
that this body (whose blessed soul has too soon forsaken it) may be
honorably enterred. Whereto her Maid thus answered: Mistress, never talk of
doing any violence to your self, because by such a black and dismal deed, as
you have lost his kind company here in this life, so shall you never more see
him in the other world: for immediately you sink down to hell, which foul
place cannot be a receptacle for his fair soul, that was endued with so many
singular virtues. Wherefore, I hold it far better for you, to comfort your
self by all good means, and with the power of fervent prayer, to fight
against all desperate intruding passions, as a truly virtuous mind ought to
do. Now, as concerning his enterrement, the means is readily prepared for you
here in this Garden, where never he has been seen by any, or his resorting
hither known, but only to our selves. If you will not consent to have it so,
let you and I convey his body hence, and leave it in such apt place, where it
may be found to morrow morning: and being then carried to his own house, his
friends and kindred will give it honest burial.

Andreana, although her soul was extraordinarily sorrowful, and tears flowed
abundantly from her eyes; yet she listened attentively to her maids counsel;
allowing her first advice against desperation, to be truly good; but to the
rest thus she replied. God forbid (quoth she) that I should suffer so dear a
loving friend, as he has always showed himself to me; nay, which is much
more, my husband; by sacred and solemn vows passed between us, to be put into
the ground basely, and like a dog, or else to be left in the open street. He
has had the sacrifice of my virgin tears, and if I can prevail, he shall
have some of his kindred, as I have instantly devised, what (in this hard case)
is best to be done. Forthwith she sent the maid to her Chamber, for diverse
else of white Damask lying in her Chest, which when she had brought, they
spread it abroad on the grass, even in the manner of a winding sheet, and
therein wrapped the body of Gabriello, with a fair wrought pillow lying under
his head, having first (with their tears) closed his mouth and eyes, and
placed a Chaplet of Flowers on his head, covering the whole shroud over in the
same manner; which being done, thus she spoke to her maid.

The door of his own house is not far hence, and thither (between us two)
he may be easily carried, even in this manner as we have adorned him; where
leaving him in his own Porch, we may return back before it be day; and
although it will be a sad sight to his friends; yet, because he dyed in mine
arms, and we being so well discharged of the body, it will be a little
comfort to me. When she had ended these words, which were not uttered without
infinite tears, the Maid entreated her to make have, because the night passed
swiftly on. At last, she remembered the Ring on her finger, wherewith Gabriello
had solemnly espoused her, and opening the shroud again, she put it on his
finger, saying, My dear and loving husband, if thy soul can see my tears, or
any understanding to remain in thy body, being thus untimely taken from me:
receive the latest guifte thou gave me, as a pledge of our solemn and
spotless marriage. So, making up the shroud again as it should be, and
conueighing it closely out of the Garden, they went on along with it, toward
his dwelling house.

As thus they passed along, it fortuned, that they were met and taken by the
Guard or Watch belonging to the Potestate, who had bin so late abroad, about
very earnest and important business. Andreana, desiring more the dead man's
company, then theirs whom she had thus met withal, boldly spoke thus to them.
I know who and what you are, and can tell my self, that to offer flight will
nothing avail me: wherefore, I am ready to go along with you before the
Seigneurie, and there will tell the truth concerning this accident. But let not
any man among you, be so bold as to lay hand on me, or to touch me, because I
yield so obediently to you: neither to take any thing from this body, except he
intend that I shall accuse him. In which respect, not any one daring to
displease her, she went with the dead body to the Seigneurie, there to
answer all Objections.

When notice hereof was given to the Potestate, he arose; and she being
brought forth into the Hall before him, he questioned with her, how and by
what means this accident happened. Beside, he sent for diverse Physicians, to
be informed by them, whether the Gentleman were poisoned, or otherwise
murdered: but al of them affirmed the contrary, auouching rather, that some
impostumation had engendered near his heart, which suddenly breaking,
occasioned his as sudden death. The Potestate hearing this, and perceiving
that Andreana was little or nothing at all faulty in the matter: her beauty and
good carriage, kindled a villainous and lustful desire in him toward her,
provoking him to the immodest motion, that upon granting his request, he would
release her. But when he saw, that all his persuasions were to no purpose, he
sought to compass his will by violence; which, like a virtuous and valiant
Virago, she worthily withstood, defending her honor Nobly, and reproouing him
with many injurious speeches, such as a lustful Letcher justly deserved.

On the morrow morning, these news being brought to her Father, Messer Negro
da Ponte Cararo; greeuing thereat exceedingly, and accompanied with many of his
friends, he went to the Palace. Being there arrived, and informed of the matter
by the Potestate: he demanded (in tears) of his daughter, how, and by what
means she was brought thither? The Potestate would needs accuse her first, of
outrage and wrong offered to him by her, rather then to tarry her accusing of
him: yet, commending the young Maiden, and her constancy, proceeded to say,
that only to prove her, he had made such a motion to her, but finding her so
firmly virtuous, his love and liking was now so addicted to her, that if her
Father were so pleased, to forget the remembrance of her former secret husband,
he willingly would accept her in marriage.

While thus they continued talking, Andreana coming before her Father, the
tears trickling mainly down her cheeks, and falling at his feet, she began
in this manner. Dear Father, I shall not need to make an historical
relation, either of my youthful boldness or misfortunes, because you have
both seen and known them: rather most humbly, I crave your pardon, for
another error by me committed, in that, both without your leave and liking, I
accepted the man as my troth-plighted husband, whom (above all other in the
world) I most entirely affected. If my offense herein do challenge the
forfeite of my life, then (good Father) I free you from any such pardon:
because my only desire is to die your daughter, and in your gracious favor;
with which words, in sign of her humility, she kissed his feet. Messer Negro
da Ponte, being a man well stepped into years, and of a mild and gentle nature,
observing what his daughter had said: could not refrain from tears, and in
his weeping, lovingly took her from the ground, speaking thus to her.

Daughter, I could have wished, that thou had taken such an husband, as (in
my judgment) had been best fitting for thee, and yet if thou did make
election of one, answerable to thine own good opinion and liking: I have no
just reason to be therewith offended. My greatest cause of complaint, is, thy
too severe concealing it from me, and the slender trust thou did repose in
me, because thou have lost him, before I knew him. Nevertheless, seeing these
occasions are thus come to pass, and accidents already ended, cannot by any
means be re-called: it is my will, that as I would gladly have contented thee,
by making him my Son in Law, if he had lived; so I will express the like
love to him now he is dead. And so turning himself to his kindred and friends,
lovingly requested of them, that they would grace Gabriello with most honorable
obsequies.

By this time, the kindred and friends to the dead man (upon noise of his
death bruited abroad) were likewise come to the Palace, yea, most of the men
and women dwelling in the City, the body of Gabriello being laid in the
midst of the Court, upon the white Damask shrowde given by Andreana, with
infinite Roses and other sweet Flowers lying thereon: and such was the peoples
love to him, that never was any man's death, more to be bemoaned and lamented.
Being delivered out of the Court, it was carried to burial, not like a
Burgess or ordinary Citizen, but with such pomp as beseemed a Lord Baron, and
on the shoulders of very noble Gentlemen, with very especial honor and
reverence.

Within some few days after, the Potestate pursuing his former motion of
marriage, and the Father moving it to his daughter; she would not by any means
listen thereto. And he being desirous to give her contentment, delivered her
and her Chambermaid into a Religious Abbey, very famous for devotion and
sanctity, where afterward they ended their lives.

Fair Simonida affecting Pasquino, and walking with him in a pleasant garden,
it fortuned, that Pasquino rubbed his teeth with a leaf of Sage, and
immediately fell down dead. Simonida being brought before the bench of
Justice, and charged with the death of Pasquino: she rubbed her teeth likewise
with one of the leaves of the same Sage, as declaring what she saw him do; and
thereon she dyed also in the same manner.

The seventh Novel.
Whereby is given to understand, that Love and Death do use their power equally
alike, as well upon poor and mean persons, as on them that are rich and Noble.



PAmphilus having ended his Tale, the King declaring an outward show of
compassion, in regard of Andreanaes disastrous Fortune: fixed his eye on Madam
Emillia, and gave her such an apparent sign, as expressed his pleasure, for
her next succeeding in discourse; which being sufficient for her understanding,
thus she began. Fair assembly, the Nouel so lately delivered by Pamphilus,
makes me willing to report another to you, varying from it, in any kind of
resemblance; only this excepted: that as Andreana lost her lover in a Garden,
even so did she of whom I am now to speak. And being brought before the
seat of Justice, according as Andreana was, freed her self from the power of
the Law; yet neither by force, or her own virtue, but by her sudden and
inopinate death. And although the nature of Love is such (according as we have
oftentimes heretofore maintained) to make his abiding in the houses of the
Noblest persons; yet men and women of poor and far inferior quality, do not
always sit out of his reach, though enclosed in their meanest Cottages;
declaring himself sometimes as powerful a commander in those humble places,
as he does in the richest and most imperious Palaces. As will plainly appear
unto you, either in all, or a great part of my Novel, whereto our City
pleads some title; though, by the diversity of our discourses, talking of so
many several accidents; we have wandered into many other parts of the world, to
make all answerable to our own liking.

It is not any long time since, when there lived in our City of Florence, a
young and beautiful Damsel, yet according to the nature of her condition;
because she was the Daughter of a poor Father, and called by the name of
Simonida. Now, albeit she was not supplied by any better means, then to
maintain her self by her own painful travel, and earne her bread before
she could eat it, by carding and spinning to such as employed her; yet was
she not of so base or dejected a spirit, but had both courage and sufficient
virtue, to understand the secret solicitings of love, and to distinguish the
parts of well deserving both by private behavior and outward ceremony. As
natural instinct was her first tutor thereto, so wanted she not a second maine
and urging motion, a chip hewed out of the like Timber, one no better in birth
then her self, a proper young springall, named Pasquino, whose generous
behavior, and graceful actions (in bringing her daily wool to spin, by
reason his master was a Clothier) prevailed upon her liking and affection.

Nor was he negligent in the observation of her amorous regards, but the Tinder
took, and his soul flamed with the selfsame fire; making him as desirous of
her loving acceptance, as possibly she could be of his: so that the commanding
power of love, could not easily be distinguished in which of them it had the
greater predominance. For, every day as he brought her fresh supply of
woolles, and found her seriously busied at her wheel: her soul would vent
forth many deep sighs, and those sighs fetch floods of tears from her eyes,
thorough the singular good opinion she had conceived of him, and earnest desire
to enjoy him. Pasquino on the other side, as leisure gave him leave for the
least conuersing with her: his disease was every way answerable to her, for
tears stood in his eyes, sighs flew abroad, to ease the poor hearts
afflicting oppressions, which though he was unable to conceal; yet would he
seem to clowd them cleanly, by entreating her that his masters work might be
nearly performed, and with such speed as time would permit her, intermixing
infinite praises of her artificial spinning; and affirming withal, that the
Quilles of Yearne received from her, were the choicest beauty of the whole
piece; so that when other worke-women played, Simonida was sure to want no
employment.

Hereupon, the one soliciting, and the other taking delight in being
solicited; it came to pass, that often access bred the bolder courage, and
overmuch bashfulnesse became abandoned, yet no immodestie passing between
them: but affection grew the better settled in them both* by interchangeable
vows of constant perseverance, so that death only, but no disaster else had
power to divide them. Their mutual delight continuing on in this manner, with
more forcible increasing of their Loves equal flame it fortuned, that Pasquino
sitting by Simonida, told her of a goodly Garden, whereto he was desirous to
bring her, to the end, that they might the more safely converse together,
without the suspicion of envious eyes. Simonida gave answer of her well-liking
the motion, and acquainting her Father therewith, he gave her leave, on the
Sunday following after dinner, to go ferch the pardon of S. Gallo, and
afterward to visit the Garden.

A modest young maiden named Lagina, following the same profession, and being an
intimate familiar friend, Simonida took along in her company, and came to the
Garden appointed by Pasquino; where she found him readily expecting her
coming, and another friend also with him, called Puccino (albeit more usually
termed Strambo) a secret well-willer to Lagina, whose love became the more
furthered by this friendly meeting. Each Lover delighting in his hearts chosen
Mistress, caused them to walk alone by themselves, as the spaciousness of
the Garden gave them ample liberty: Puccino with his Lagina in one part, and
Pasquino with his Simonida in another. The walk which they had made choice of,
was by a long and goodly bed of Sage, turning and returning by the same bed as
their conference ministered occasion, and as they pleased to recreate
themselves, affecting rather to continue still there, then in any part of the
Garden.

One while they would sit down by the Sage bed, and afterward rise to walk
again, as ease or weariness seemed to inuit them. At length, Pasquino
chanced to crop a leaf of the Sage, wherewith he both rubbed his teeth and
gummes, and champing it between them also, saying; that there was no better
thing in the world to cleanse the teeth withal, after feeding. Not long had he
thus champed the Sage in his teeth, returning to his former kind of
discoursing, but his countenance began to change very pale, his sight failed,
and speech forsook him; so that (in brief) he fell down dead. Which when
Simonida beheld, wringing her hands, she cried out for help to Strambo and
Lagina, who immediately came running to her. They finding Pasquino not only to
be dead, but his body swollen, and strangely ouer-spred with foul black spots,
both on his face, hands, and all parts else beside: Strambo cried out, saying;
Ah wicked maid, what have thou poisoned him?

These words and their shrill outcries also, were heard by Neighbors dwelling
near to the Garden, who coming in suddenly upon them, and seeing Pasquino
lying dead, and hugely swollen, Strambo likewise complaining, and accusing
Simonida to have poisoned him; she making no answer, but standing in a ghastly
amazement, all her senses merely confounded, at such a strange and uncouth
accident, in loosing him whom she so dearly loved: knew not how to excuse her
self, and therefore every one verily believed, that Strambo had not unjustly
accused her. Poor woeful maid, thus was she instantly apprehended, and
drowned in her tears, they led her along to the Potestates Palace, where her
accusation was justified by Strambo, Lagina, and two men more; the one named
Atticciato, and the other Malageuole, fellows and companions with Pasquino,
who came into the Garden also upon the outcry.

The Judge, without any delay at all, gave ear to the business, and examined
the case very strictly: but could by no means comprehend, that any malice
should appear in her toward him, nor that she was guilty of the man's death.
Wherefore, in the pre^ence of Simonida, he desired to see the dead body, and
the place where he fell down dead, because there he intended to have her
relate, how she saw the accident to happen, that her own speeches might the
sooner condemn her, whereas the case yet remained doubtful, and far beyond
his comprehension. So, without any further publication, and to avoid the
following of the turbulent multitude: they departed from the bench of Justice,
and came to the place, where Pasquinoes body lay swollen like a Tun. Demanding
there questions, concerning his behavior, when they walked there in conference
together, and, not a little admiring the manner of his death, while he stood
advisedly considering thereon.

She going to the bed of Sage, reporting the whole precedent history, even from
the original to the ending: the better to make the case understood, without the
least color of ill carriage toward Pasquino; according as she had seen him
do, even so did she pluck another leaf of the Sage, rubbing her teeth
therewith, and champing it as he formerly did. Strambo, and the other intimate
friends of Pasquino, having noted in what manner she used the Sage, and this
appearing as her utmost refuge, either to acquit or condemn her: in presence
of the Judge they smiled thereat, mocking and deriding whatsoever she said,
or did, and desiring (the more earnestly) the sentence of death against her,
that her body might be consumed with fire, as a just punishment for her
abominable transgression.

Poor Simonida, sighing and sorrowing for her dear loves loss, and
(perhaps) not meanly terrified, with the strict infliction of torment so
severely urged and followed by Strambo and the rest: standing dumb still,
without answering so much as one word; by tasting of the same Sage, fell down
dead by the bed, even by the like accident as Pasquino formerly did, to the
admirable astonishment of all there present.

Oh poor unfortunate Lovers, whose Stars were so inauspicious to you, as to
finish both your mortal lives, and fervent love, in less limitation then a
days space. How to censure of your deaths, and happiness to ensue thereon, by
an accident so strange and inevitable: it is not within the compass of my
power, but to hope the best, and so I leave you. But yet concerning Simonida
her self, in the common opinion of us that remain living: her true virtue and
innocence (though Fortune was other wise most cruel to her) would not suffer
her to sink under the testimony of Strambo, Lagina, Atticciato and Malageuole,
being but carders of wool, or perhaps of meaner condition; a happier course was
ordained for her, to pass clearly from their infamous imputation, and follow
her Pasquino, in the very same manner of death, and with such a speedy
expedition.

The Judge standing amazed, and all there present in his company, were silent
for a long while together: but, upon better re-collection of his spirits, thus
he spoke. This inconvenience which thus has happened, and confounded our senses
with no common admiration; in mine opinion concerns the bed of Sage,
auouching it either to be venomous, or dangerously infected, which
(nevertheless) is seldom found in Sage. But to the end, that it may not be
offensive to any more hereafter, I will have it wholly digd up by the roots,
and then to be burnt in the open Market place.

Hereupon, the Gardener was presently sent for, and before the Judge would
depart thence, he saw the bed of Sage dug up by the roots, and found the
true occasion, whereby these two poor Lovers lost their lives, For, just in
the midst of the bed, and at the maine root, which directed all the Sage in
growth; lay an huge mighty Toad, even weltring (as it were) in a hole full of
poison; by means whereof, in conjecture of the Judge, and all the rest, the
whole bed of Sage became envenomed, occasioning every leaf thereof to be
deadly in taste. None being so hardy, as to approach near the Toade, they
made a pile of wood directly over it, and setting it on a flaming fire, threw
all the Sage therinto, and so they were consumed together. So ended all further
suite in Law, concerning the deaths of Pasquino and Simonida: whose bodies
being carried to the Church of Saint Paul, by their sad and sorrowful
accusers, Strambo, Lagina, Atticciato and Malageuole, were buried together in
one goodly Monument, for a future memory of their hard Fortune.

Ieronimo affecting a young Maiden, named Siluestra: was constrained (by the
earnest importunity of his Mother) to take a journey to Paris. At his return
home from thence again, he found his love Siluestra married. By secret
means, he got entrance into her house, and dyed upon the bed lying by her.
Afterward, his body being carried to Church, to receive burial, she likewise
died there instantly upon his coarse.

The eight Novel.
Wherein is again declared, the great indiscretion and folly of them, that
think to constrain love, according to their will, after it is constantly
settled before: With other instructions, concerning the unspeakable power of
Love.



MAdam Emillia had no sooner concluded her Novel, but Madame Neiphila (by the
Kings command) began to speak in this manner. It seems to me (Gracious
Ladies) that there are some such people to be found, who imagine themselves to
know more, then all other else in the world beside, and yet indeed do know
nothing at all: presuming (thorough this arrogant opinion of theirs) to employ
and oppose their senseless understanding, against infallible grounded reason,
yea, and to attempt courses, not only contrary to the counsel and judgment of
men, but also to cross the nature of divine ordination. Out of which saucy and
ambitious presumption, many mighty harms have already had beginning, and more
are like to ensue upon such boldness, because it is the ground of all evils.

Now, in regard that among all other natural things, no one is less subject
to take counsel, or can be wrought to contrariety, then Love, whose nature is
such, as rather to run upon his own rash consumption, then to be ruled by
admonitions of the very wisest: my memory has inspired it self, with matter
incident to this purpose, effectually to approve, what I have already said. For
I am now to speak of a woman, who would appear to have more wit, then either
she had indeed, or appertained to her by any title* The matter also, wherein
she would needs show her studious judgment and capacity, was of much more
consequence then she could deserve to meddle withal. Yet such was the issue of
her fond presuming; that (in one instant) she expelled both love, and the soul
of her own son out of his body, where (doubtless) it was planted by divine
favor and appointment.

In our own City (according to true and ancient testimony) there dwelt
sometime a very worthy and wealthy Merchant, named Leonardo Sighiero, who by
his wife had one only Son, called Ieronimo and within a short while after
his birth, Leonardo being very sick, and having settled al his affairs in good
order; departed out of this wretched life to a better. The Tutors and
Governors of the Child, thought it fittest to let him live with his Mother,
where he had his whole education, though schooled among many other worthy
neighbors children, according as in most Cities they use to do. Young Ieronimo
growing on in years, and frequenting daily the company of his Schoole-fellowes
and others: he would often sport (as the rest did) with the neighbors, and
much pretty pastime they found together.

In the harmless recreations of youth, grauer judgments have often observed,
that some especial matter received then such original, as greater effect has
followed thereon. And many times, parents and kindred have been the occasion
(although perhaps beyond their expectation) of very strange and extraordinary
accidents, by names of familiarity passing between Boys and Girls, as King
and Queen, sweet heart and sweet heart, friend and friend, husband and wife,
and diverse other such like kind terms, proouing afterward to be true
indeed. It fell out so with our young Ieronimo; for, among a number of pretty
Damsels, daughters to men of especial respect, and others of far inferior
quality: a Tailors daughter, excelling the rest in favor and feature (albeit
her Father was but poor) Ieronimo most delighted to sport withal; and no
other titles passed between them, even in the hearing of their parents and
friends, but wife and husband: such was the beginning of their young
affection, presaging (no doubt) effectually to follow.

Nor grew this familiarity (as yet) any way distasted, till by their daily
conuersing together, and enterchange of infinite pretty speeches: Ieronimo felt
a strange alteration in his soul, with such enforcing and powerful
afflictions; as he was never well but in her company, nor she enjoyed any rest
if Ieronimo were absent. At the length, this being noted by his Mother, she
began to rebuke him, yea, many times gave him both threatenings and blows,
which proving to no purpose, nor hindering his access to her; she complained
to his Tutors, and like one that in regard of her riches, thought to plant an
Orange upon a black thorn, spoke as follows.

This Son of mine Ieronimo, being as yet but fourteen years of age, is so
deeply enamored of a young Girl, named Siluestra, daughter unto a poor Tailor,
our near dwelling neighbor: that if we do not send him out of her company,
one day (perhaps) he may make her his wife, and yet without any knowledge of
ours, which questionless would be my death. Otherwise, he may pine and consume
himself away, if he see us procure her marriage to some other. Wherefore, I
hold it good, that to avoid so great an inconvenience, we should send Ieronimo
some far distance hence, to remain where some of our Factors are employed:
because, when he shall be out of her sight, and their often meetings utterly
disappointed; his affection to her will the sooner cease, by frustrating his
hope for ever enjoying her, and so we shall have the better means, to match
him with one of greater quality. The Tutors did like well of her advice, not
doubting but it would take answerable effect: and therefore, calling Ieronimo
into a private Parlor, one of them began in this manner.

Ieronimo, you are now grown to an indifferent stature, and (almost) able to
take government of your self. It cannot then seem any way inconvenient, to
acquaint you with your deceased Fathers affairs, and by what good courses he
came to such wealth. You are his only son and heir, to whom he has
bequeathed his rich possessions (your Mothers moity evermore remembered) and
travail would now seem fitting for you, as well to experience in Traffic and
Merchandise, as also to let you see the worlds occurrences. Your Mother
therefore (and we) have thought it expedient, that you should journey from hence
to Paris, there to continue for some such fitting time, as may grant you full
and free opportunity, to survey what stock of wealth is there employed for
you, and to make you understand, how your Factors are furtherous to your
affairs. Beside, this is the way to make you a man of more solid apprehension,
and perfect instruction in civil courses of life; rather then by continuing
here to see none but Lords, Barons, and Gentlemen, whereof we have too great a
number. When you are sufficiently qualified there, and have learned what
belongs to a worthy Merchant, such as was Leonardo Sighiero your famous
Father; you may return home again at your own pleasure.

The youth gave them attentive hearing, and (in few words) returned them
answer: That he would not give way to any such travail, because he knew how
to dispose of himself in Florence, as well as in any other place he should be
sent too. Which when his Tutors heard, they reproved him with many severe
speeches: and seeing they could win no other answer from him, they made return
thereof to his Mother. She storming extremely thereat, yet not so much for
denying the journey to Paris, as in regard of his violent affection to the
Maid; gave him very bitter and harsh language. All which auailing nothing, she
began to speak in a more mild and gentle strain, entreating him with
flattering and affable words, to be governed in this case by his Tutors good
advise. And so far (in the end) she prevailed with him, that he yielded to
live at Paris for the space of a year; but further time he would not grant,
and so all was ended.

Ieronimo being gone to remain at Paris, his love daily increasing more and
more, by reason of his absence from Siluestra, under fair and friendly
promises, of this month and the next month sending for him home; there they
detained him two whole years together. Whereupon, his love was grown to such
an extremity, that he neither would, or could abide any longer there, but home
he returned, before he was expected. His love Siluestra, by the cunning
compacting of his Mother and Tutors, he found married to a Tent-makers Son;
whereat he vexed and grieved beyond all measure. Nevertheless, seeing the
case was now no way to be helped; he strove to bear it with so much
patience, as so great a wrong, and his hearts tormenting grief, would give him
leave to do.

Having found out the place where she dwelt, he began (as it is the custom of
young Lovers) to use diverse daily walks by her door: as thinking in his mind,
that her remembrance of him was constantly continued, as his was most entirely
fixed on her. But the case was very strangely altered, because she was now
grown no more mindful of him, then if she had never seen him before. Or if
she did any way remember him, it appeared to be so little, that manifest signs
declared the contrary. Which Ieronimo very quickly perceived, albeit not
without many melancholy perturbations. Notwithstanding, he labored by all
possible means, to recover her former kindness again: but finding all his
pains friuouslie employed; he resolved to dye, and yet to compass some speech
with her before.

By means of a near dwelling neighbor (that was his very dear and intimate
friend) he came acquainted with every part of the house, and prevailed so far,
that one evening; when she and her husband supt at a neighbors house; he
compassed access into the same bed chamber, where Siluestra used most to
lodge. Finding the Curtains ready drawn, he hid himself behind them on the
further side of the bed, and so tarried there vntlll Siluestra and her husband
were returned home, and laid down in bed to take their rest. The husbands
senses were soon overcome with sleep, by reason of his painful toyling all
the day, and bodies that are exercised with much labor, are the more desirous
to have ease. She staying up last, to put out the light, and hearing her
husband sleep so soundly, that his snoring gave good evidence thereof: laid
her self down the more respectively, as being very loath any way to disease
him, but sweetly to let him enjoy his rest.

Siluestra lay on the same side of the bed, where Ieronimo had hid himself
behind the Curtains; who stepping softly to her in the dark, and laying his
hand gently on her breast, said: Dear Love, forbear a little while to sleep,
for here is thy loyal friend Ieronimo. The young woman starting with
amazement, would have cried out, but that he entreated her to the contrary;
protesting, that he came for no ill intent to her, but only to take his latest
leave of her. Alas Ieronimo (quoth she) those idle days are past and gone,
when it was no way unseemly for our youth, to entertain equality of those
desires, which then well agreed with our young blood. Since when, you have
lived in foreign Countries, which appeared to me to alter your former
disposition: for, in the space of two whole years, either you grew forgetful
of me (as change of air, may change affection) or (at the best) made such
account of me, as I never heard the least salutation from you. Now you know me
to be a married wife, in regard whereof, my thoughts have embraced that chaste
and honorable resolution, not to mind any man but my husband; and therefore,
as you are come hither without my love or license, so in like manner I do
desire you to be gone. Let this privilege of my Husbands sound sleeping, be
no color to your longer continuing here, or encourage you to find any
further favor at mine hand: for if mine husband should awake, beside the danger
that thereon may follow to you, I cannot but loose the sweet happiness of
peaceful life, which hitherto we have both mutually embraced.

The young man, hearing these words, and remembering what loving kindness he
had formerly found, what secret love Letters he had sent from Paris, with
other private intelligences and tokens, which never came to her receite and
knowledge, so cunningly his Mother and Tutors had carried the matter:
immediately he felt his heart strings to break; and lying down upon the beds
side by her, uttered these his very last words. Siluestra farewell, thou have
kilde the kindest heart that ever loved a woman: and speaking no more, gave up
the ghost. She hearing these words delivered with an entire sighe, and
deepe-fetcht groan: did not imagine the strange consequence following thereon;
yet was moved to much compassion, in regard of her former affection to him.
Silent she lay an indifferent while, as being unable to return him any
answer; and looking when he would be gone, according as before she had
earnestly entreated him. But when she perceived him to lie so still, as neither
word or motion came from him, she said: Kind Ieronimo, why do thou not
depart and get thee gone? So putting forth her hand, it happened to light upon
his face, which she felt to be as cold as ice: whereat maruelling not a little,
as also at his continued silence: she iogged him, and felt his hands in like
manner, which were stiffely extended forth, and all his body cold, as not
having any life remaining in him, which greatly amazing her, and confounding
her with sorrow beyond all measure, she was in such perplexity, that she could
not devise what to do or say.

In the end, she resolved to try how her husband would take it, that so strange
an accident should thus happen in his house, and putting the case as if it did
not concern them, but any other of the neighbors; awaking him first,
demanded of him what was best to be done, if a man should steal into a
neighbors house, unknown to him, or any of his family; and in his bed chamber
to be found dead. He presently replied (as not thinking the case concerned
himself) that, the only help in such an unexpected extremity, was, to take
the dead body, and convey it to his own house, if he had any; whereby no
scandal or reproach would follow to them, in whose house he had so
unfortunately dyed. Hereupon, she immediately arose, and lighting a candle,
showed him the dead body of Ieronimo, with protestation of every particular,
both of her innocence, either of knowledge of his coming thither, or any
other blame that could concern her. Which he both instantly knowing and
believing, made no more ceremony, but putting on his Garments, took the dead
body upon his shoulders, and carried it to the Mothers door, where he left
it, and afterward returned to his own house again.

When day light was come, and the dead body found lying in the Porch, it moved
very much grief and amazement, considering, he had bin seen the day before,
in perfect health to outward appearance. Nor need we to urge any question of
his Mothers sorrow upon this strange accident, who, causing his body to be
carefully searched, without any blow, bruise, wound, or hurt upon it, the
Physicians could not give any other opinion, but that some inward conceyte of
grief had caused his death, as it did indeed, and no way otherwise. To the
chief Church was the dead body carried, to be generally seen of all the
people, his mother and friends weeping heavily by it, as many more did the like
beside, because he was beloved of every one. In which time of universal
mourning, the honest man (in whose house he dyed) spoke thus to his wife:
disguise thy self in some decent manner, and go to the Church, where (as I
hear) they have laid the body of Ieronimo. Crowde in amongst the Women, as I
will do the like amongst the men, to hear what opinion passes of his death,
and whether we shall be scandalized thereby, or no.

Siluestra, who was now become full of pity too late, quickly condiscended,
as desiring to see him dead, whom sometime she dearly affected in life. And
being come to the Church, it is a matter to be admired, if advisedly we
consider on the powerful working of love; for the heart of this woman, which
the prosperous fortune of Ieronimo could not pierce, now in his woeful death
did split in sunder; and the ancient sparks of love so long concealed in the
embers, brake forth into a furious flame; and being violently surprised with
extraordinary compassion, no sooner did she come near to the dead body, where
many stood weeping round about it; but strangely shrieking out aloud, she fell
down upon it: and even as extremity of grief finished his life, so did it
hers in the same manner. For she moved neither hand nor foot, because her
vital powers had quite forsaken her. The women laboring to comfort her by all
the best means they could devise; did not take any knowledge of her, by reason
of her disguised garments: but finding her dead indeed, and knowing her also
to be Siluestra, being overcome with unspeakable compassion, and danted with no
mean admiration, they stood strangely gazing each upon other.

Wonderful crowds of people were then in the Church; and this accident being
now noysed among the men, at length it came to her Husbands understanding,
whose grief was so great, as it exceeded all capacity of expression.
Afterward, he declared what had happened in his house the precedent night,
according as his wife had truly related to him, with all the speeches, which
past between Siluestra and Ieronimo; by which discourse, they generally
conceived, the certain occasion of both their sudden deaths, which moved them
to great compassion. Then taking the young woman's body, and ordering it as a
coarse ought to be: they laid it on the same Biere by the young man, and when
they had sufficiently sorrowed for their disastrous fortune, they gave them
honorable burial both in one grave. So, this poor couple, whom love (in
life) could not join together, death did unite in an inseparable conjunction.

Messer Guiglielmo of Rossiglione having slain Messer Guiglielmo Guardastagno,
whom he imagined to love his wife, gave her his heart to eat. Which she
knowing afterward, threw her self out of an high window to the ground; and
being dead, was then buried with her friend.

The ninth Novel.
Whereby appears, what ill success attends on them, that love contrary to
reason: in offering injury both to friendship and marriage together.



WHen the Novel of Madam Neiphila was ended, which occasioned much compassion
in the whole assembly; the King who would not infringe the privilege granted
to Dioneus, no more remaining to speak but they two, began thus. I call to
mind (gentle Ladies) a Novel, which (seeing we are so far entered into the
lamentable accidents of successelesse love, will urge you unto as much
commisseration, as that so lately reported to you. And so much the rather,
because the persons of whom we are to speak, were of respective quality; which
approves the accident to be more cruel, then those whereof we have formerly
discoursed.

According as the people of Prouence do report, there dwelt sometime in that
jurisdiction, two noble Knights, each well possessed of Castles and followers;
the one being named Messer Guiglielmo de Rossiglione, and the other Messer
Guiglielmo Guardastagno. Now, in regard that they were both valiant Gentlemen,
and singularly expert in actions of Arms; they loved together the more
mutually, and held it as a kind of custom, to be seen in all Tiltes and
Tournaments, or any other exercises of Arms, going commonly alike in their
wearing garments. And although their Castles stood about five miles distant
each from other, yet were they daily conversant together, as very loving and
intimate friends. The one of them, I mean Messer Guiglielmo de Rossiglione,
had to wife a very gallant beautiful Lady, of whom Messer Guardastagno
(forgetting the laws of respect and loyal friendship) became ouer-fondly
enamoured, expressing the same by such outward means, that the Lady her self
took knowledge thereof, and not with any dislike, as it seemed, but rather
lovingly entertained; yet she grew not so forgetful of her honor and
estimation, as the other did of faith to his friend.

With such indiscretion was this idle love carried, that whether it sorted to
effect, or no, I know not: but the husband received some such manner of
behavior, as he could not easily digest, nor thought it fitting to endure.
Whereupon, the league of friendly amity so long continued, began to fail in
very strange fashion, and became converted into deadly hatred: which yet he
very cunningly concealed, bearing an outward show of constant friendship
still, but (in his heart) he had vowed the death of Guardastagno. Nothing
wanted, but by what means it might best be effected, which fell out to be in
this manner. A public lust or Tourney, was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet
throughout all France, wherewith immediately, Messer Guiglielmo Rossiglione
acquainted Messer Guardastagno, entreating him that they might further confer
thereon together, and for that purpose to come and visit him, if he intended to
have any hand in the business. Guardastagno being exceeding glad of this
accident, which gave him liberty to see his Mistress; sent answer back by the
messenger, that on the morrow at night, he would come and sup with Rossiglione;
who upon this reply, proiected to himself in what manner to kill him.

On the morrow, after dinner, arming himself, and two more of his servants
with him, such as he had solemnly sworn to secrecy, he mounted on horseback,
and rode on about a mile from his own Castle, where he lay closely ambushed in
a Wood, through which Guardastagno must needs pass. After he had stayed there
some two hours space and more, he espied him come riding with two of his
attendants, all of them being unarmed, as no way distrusting any such intended
treason. So soon as he was come to the place, where he had resolved to do the
deed; he rushed forth of the ambush, and having a sharp Lance readily charged
in his rest, ran mainly at him, saying: False villain, thou art dead.
Guardastagno, having nothing wherewith to defend himself, nor his servants
able to give him any succor; being pierced quite through the body with the
Lance, down he fell dead to the ground, and his men (fearing the like
misfortune to befall them) gallopped mainely back again to their Lords
Castle, not knowing them who had thus murdered their Master, by reason of
their armed disguises, which in those martial times were usually worn.

Messer Guiglielmo Rossiglione, alighting from his horse, and having a keen
knife ready drawn in his hand; opened therewith the breast of dead
Guardastagno, and taking forth his heart with his own hands, wrapped it in
the Banderole belonging to his Lance, commanding one of his men to the charge
thereof, and never to disclose the deed. So, mounting on horseback again,
and dark night drawing on apace, he returned home to his Castle. The Lady, who
had heard before of Guardastagnoes intent, to suppe there that night, and
(perhaps) being earnestly desirous to see him; meruailing at his so long
tarrying, said to her husband. Believe me Sir (quoth she) me thinks it is
somewhat strange, that Messer Guiglielmo Guardastagno delays his coming so
long, he never used to do so til now. I received tidings from him wife (said
he) that he cannot be here till to morrow. Whereat the Lady appearing to be
displeased, concealed it to her self, and used no more words.

Rossiglione leaving his Lady, went into the Kitchen, where calling for the
Cook, he delivered him the heart, saying: Take this heart of a wild Boar,
which it was my good hap to kill this day, and dress it in the daintiest
manner thou can devise to do; which being so done, when I am set at the
Table, send it to me in a silver dish, with sauce beseeming so dainty a
morsel. The Cook took the heart, believing it to be no otherwise, then as
his Lord had said: and using his utmost skill in dressing it, did divide it
into artificial small slices, and made it most pleasing to be tasted. When
supper time was come, Rossiglione sat down at the table with his Lady: but
he had little or no appetite at all to eat, the wicked deed which he had done
so perplexed his soul, and made him to sit very strangely musing. At length,
the Cook brought in the dainty dish, which he himself setting before his wife,
began to find fault with his own lack of stomach, yet provoked her with many
fair speeches, to taste the Cooks cunning in so rare a dish.

The Lady having a good appetite indeed, when she had first tasted it, fed
afterward so heartily thereon, that she left very little, or none at all
remaining. When he perceived that all was eaten, he said unto her: Tell me
Madam, how you do like this delicate kind of meat? In good faith Sir (quoth
she) in all my life I was never better pleased. Now trust me Madam, answered
the Knight, I do verily believe you, nor do I greatly wonder thereat, if you
like that dead, which you loved so dearly being alive. When she heard these
words, a long while she sat silent, but afterward said. I pray you tell me
Sir, what meat was this which you have made me to eat? Muse no longer (said
he) for therein I will quickly resolve thee. Thou have eaten the heart of
Messer Guiglielmo Guardastagno, whose love was so dear and precious to thee,
thou false, perfidious, and disloyal Lady: I plucked it out of his vile body
with mine own hands, and made my Cook to dress it for thy diet.

Poor Lady, how strangely was her soul afflicted, hearing these harsh and
unpleasing speeches? Tears flowed abundantly from her fair eyes, and like
tempestuous winds embowelled in the earth, so did vehement sighs break
mainly from her heart, and after a tedious time of silence, she spoke in this
manner. My Lord and husband, you have done a most disloyal and damnable deed,
misguided by your own wicked jealous opinion, and not by any just cause given
you, to murder so worthy and Noble a Gentleman. I protest unto you upon my
soul, which I wish to be confounded in eternal perdition, if ever I were
unchaste to your bed, or allowed him any other favor, but what might well
become so honorable a friend. And seeing my body has been made the
receptacle for so precious a kind of food, as the heart of so valiant and
courteous a Knight, such as was the Noble Guardastagno; never shall any other
food hereafter, have entertainment there, or my self live the Wife to so
bloody a husband.

So starting up from the Table, and stepping unto a great gazing Window, the
Casement whereof standing wide open behind her: violently she leaped out
thereat, which being an huge height in distance from the ground, the fall did
not only kill her, but also shiuered her body into many pieces. Which
Rossiglione perceiving, he stood like a body without a soul, confounded
with the killing of so dear a friend, loss of a chaste and honorable wife,
and all through his own ounr-credulous conceit.

Upon further conference with his private thoughts, and remorsefull
acknowledgement of his heinous offense, which repentance (too late) gave him
eyes now to see, though rashness before would not permit him to consider;
these two extreamities enlarged his dulled understanding. First, he grew
fearful of the friends and followers to murdered Guardastagno, as also the
whole Country of Prouence, in regard of the peoples general love unto him;
which being two maine and important motives, both to the detestation of so
horrid an act, and immediate severe revenge to succeed thereon: he made such
provision as best he could, and as so sudden a warning would give leave, he
fled away secretly in the night season.

These unpleasing news were soon spread abroad the next morning, not only of
the unfortunate accidents, but also of Rossiglions flight; in regard whereof,
the dead bodies being found, and brought together, as well by the people
belonging to Guardastagno, as them that attended on the Lady: they were laid
in the Chapel of Rossigliones Castle; where, after so much lamentation for
so great a misfortune to befall them, they were honorably enterred in one fair
Tomb, with excellent Verses engraven thereon, expressing both their noble
degree, and by what unhappy means, they chanced to have burial there.

A Physicians wife laid a Lover of her Maids (supposing him to be dead) in a
Chest, by reason that he had drunk Water, which usually was given to procure a
sleepy entrancing. Two Lombard Usurers, stealing the Chest, in hope of a rich
booty, carried it into their own house, where afterward the man awaking, was
apprehended for a Thief. The Chamber-maide to the Physicians wife, going
before the bench of Justice, accuses her self for putting the imagined dead
body into the Chest, by which means he escapes hanging: And the thieves which
stole away the Chest, were condemned to pay a great sum of money.

The tenth Novel.
Wherein is declared, that sometime by aduenturous accident, rather then any
reasonable comprehension, a man may escape out of manifold perilles, but
especially in occurrences of Love.



AFTER that the King had concluded his Novel, there remained none now but
Dioneus to tell the last: which himself confessing, and the King commanding
him to proceed, he began in this manner. So many miseries of unfortunate
Love, as all of you have already related, has not only swollen your eyes with
weeping, but also made sick our hearts with sighing: yea (Gracious Ladies) I
my self find my spirits not meanly afflicted thereby. Wherefore the whole day
has been very irksome to me, and I am not a little glad, that it is so near
ending. Now, for the better shutting it up altogether, I would be very loath to
make an addition, of any more such sad and mournful matter, good for nothing
but only to feed melancholy humor, and from which (I hope) my fair Stars
will defend me. Tragical discourse, thou art no fit companion for me, I will
therefore report a Novel which may minister a more iouiall kind of argument,
unto those tales that must be told to morrow, and with the expiration of our
present Kings reign, to rid us of all heart-greeuing hereafter.

Know then (most gracious assembly) that it is not many years since, when
there lived in Salerne, a very famous Physician, named Signieur Mazzeo della
Montagna, who being already well entered into years, would (nevertheless)
marry with a beautiful young Maiden of the City, bestowing rich garments,
gaudie attyres, Ringes, and Iewelles on her, such as few Women else could any
way equal, because he loved her most dearly. Yet being an aged man, and
never remembering, how vain and idle a thing it is, for age to make such an
unfitting Election, injurious to both; and therefore endangering that
domesticke agreement, which ought to be the sole and maine comfort of
Marriage: it makes me therefore to misdoubt, that as in our former Tale of
Signiour Ricciardo de Cinzica, some days of the Calender did here seem as
distastefull, as those that occasioned the other Woman's coffeehouse. In such
unequal choyses, Parents commonly are more blamewoorthie, then any imputation,
to be laid on the young Women, who gladdely would enjoy such as in heart they
have elected: but that their Parents, looking thorough the glasses of greedy
lucre, do overthrow both their own hopes, and the fair fortunes of their
children together.

Yet to speak uprightly of this young married Wife, she declared her self to
be of a wise and cheerful spirit, not discoraged with her inequality of
marriage: but bearing all with a contented browe, for fear of urging the very
least mislike in her Husband. And he, on the other side, when occasions did
not call him to visit his pacients, or to be present at the College among his
fellow-Doctours, would always be chearing and comforting his Wife, as one
that could hardly afford to be out of her company. There is one especial
fatal misfortune, which commonly awaiteth on old men's marriages; when
freezing December will match with flouring May, and green desires appear in
age, beyond all possibility of performance. Nor are there wanting good store of
wanton Gallants, who hating to see Beauty in this manner betrayed, and to the
embraces of a loathed bed, will make their folly seen in public appearance,
and by their daily proffers of amorous services (seeming compassionate of the
woman's disaster) are usually the cause of jealous suspicions, and very heinous
household discontentments.

Among diverse other, that feign would be nibling at this bayte of beauty,
there was one, named Ruggiero de Ieroly, of honorable parentage, but yet of
such a deboshed and disordered life, as neither Kindred or Friends, were
willing to take any knowledge of him, but utterly gave him over to his
dissolute courses: so that, thoroughout all Salerne, his conditions caused his
general contempt, and he accounted no better, but even as a theeuing and
lewd companion. The Doctors Wife, had a Chamber-maide attending on her; who,
notwithstanding all the ugly deformities in Ruggiero, regarding more his person
then his imperfections (because he was a complete and well-featured youth)
bestowed her affection most entirely on him, and oftentimes did supply his
wants, with her own best means.

Ruggiero having this benefit of the Maids kind love to him, made it an
hopeful mounting Ladder, whereby to derive some good liking from the
Mistress, presuming rather on his outward comely parts, then any other honest
quality that might commend him. The Mistress knowing what choice her Maid had
made, and unable by any persuasions to remove her, took knowledge of
Ruggieroes private resorting to her house, and in mere love to her Maid (who
had very many especial deseruings in her) oftentimes she would (in kind
manner) rebuke him, and advise him to a more settled course of life; which
counsel, that it might take the better effect; she graced with liberal gifts:
one while with Gold, others with Silver, and often with garments, for his
comelier access thither: which bounty, he (like a lewd mistaker) interpreted
as assurances of her affection to him, and that he was more graceful in her
eye, then any man else could be.

In the continuance of these proceedings, it came to pass, that master Doctor
Mazzeo (being not only a most expert Physician, but likewise as skillful in
Chirurgerie beside) had a Pacient in cure, who by great misfortune, had one
of his legs broken all in pieces; which some weaker judgment having formerly
dealt withal, the bones and sinews were become so fowly putrified, as he
told the parties friends, that the leg must be quite cut off, or else the
Pacient must needs dye: yet he intended so to order the matter, that the
perrill should proceed no further, to prejudice any other part of the body.
The case being thus resolved on with the Pacient and his Friends, the day and
time was appointed when the deed should be done: and the Doctor conceyuing,
that except the Patient were sleepily entranced, he could not by any means
endure the pain, but must needs hinder what he meant to do: by distillation
he made such an artificial Water, as (after the Pacient has received it) it
will procure a kind of dead sleep, and endure so long a space, as necessity
requires the use thereof, in full performance of the work.

After he had made this sleepy water, he put it into a glass, wherewith it was
filled (almost) up to the brimme; and till the time came when he should use
it, he set it in his own Chamber-Windowe, never acquainting any one, to what
purpose he had provided the water, nor what was his reason of setting it there;
when it drew toward the evening, and he was returned home from his pacients, a
Messenger brought him Letters from Malfy, concerning a great conflict happening
there between two Noble Families, wherein diverse were very dangerously wounded
on either side, and without his speedy repairing thither, it would prove to the
loss of many lives. Hereupon, the cure of the man's leg must needs be
prolonged, until he was returned back again, in regard that many of the
wounded persons were his worthy friends, and liberal bounty was there to be
expected, which made him presently go aboard a small Bark, and forthwith set
away toward Malfy.

This absence of Master Doctor Mazzeo, gave opportunity to aduenturous
Ruggiero, to visit his house (he being gone) in hope to get more Crowns, and
courtesy from the Mistress, under formal color of courting the Maid. And
being closely admitted into the house, when diverse Neighbors were in
conference with her Mistress, and held her with such pleasing Discourse, as
required longer time then was expected: the Maid, had no other room to
conceal Ruggiero in, but only the bed chamber of her Master, where she locked
him in; because none of the household people should descry him, and stayed
attending on her Mistress, till all the Guests took their leave, and were gone.
Ruggiero thus remaining alone in the Chamber, for the space of three long
hours and more, was visited neither by Maid nor Mistress, but awaited when he
should be set at liberty.

Now, whether feeding on salt meats before his coming thither, or customary use
of drinking, which makes men unable any long while to abstain, as being never
satisfied with excess; which of these two extremes they were, I know not: but
drink needs he must. And, having no other means for quenching his thirst,
espied the glass of water standing in the Window, and thinking it to be some
sovereign kind of water, reserved by the Doctor for his own drinking, to
make him lusty in his old years, he took the glass; and finding the Water
pleasing to his palate, drank it off every drop; then sitting down on a
Coffer by the beds side, soon after he fell into a sound sleep, according to
the powerful working of the water.

No sooner were all the Neighbors gone, and the Maid at liberty from her
Mistress, but vnlocking the door, into the chamber she went; and finding
Ruggiero sitting fast asleep, she began to hunch and punche him, entreating
him (softly) to awake: but all was to no purpose, for he neither moved, or
answered one word, whereat her patience being some what provoked, she punched
him more rudely, and angerly said: Awake for shame thou drowsy dullard, and if
thou be so desirous of sleeping, get thee home to thine own lodging, because
thou art not allowed to sleep here. Ruggiero being thus rudely punched, fell
from off the Coffer flat on the ground, appearing no other in all respects,
then as if he were a dead body. Whereat the Maid being fearfully amazed,
plucking him by the nose and young beard, and what else she could devise to do,
yet all her labor proving still in vain: she was almost beside her wits,
stamping and rauing all about the room, as if sense and reason had forsaken
her; so violent was her extreme distraction.

Upon the hearing of this noise, her Mistress came suddenly into the Chamber,
where being affrighted at so strange an accident, and suspecting that Ruggiero
was dead indeed: she pinched him strongly, and burnt his fingers with a candle,
yet all was as fruitless as before. Then sitting down, she began to consider
advisedly with her self, how much her honor and reputation would be
endangered hereby, both with her Husband, and in vulgar opinion when this
should come to public notice. For (quoth she to her Maid) it is not thy fond
love to this unruly fellow that can sway the censure of the monster multitude,
in believing his access hither only to thee: but my good name, and honest
repute, as yet untouched with the very least taxation, will be rackt on the
tenter of infamous judgment, and (though never so clear) branded with
general condemnation. It is wisdom therefore, that we should make no noise
but (in silence) consider with our selves, how to clear the house of this dead
body, by some such helpful and witty device, as when it shall be found in the
morning, his being here may pass without suspicion, and the worlds rash
opinion no way touch us.

Weeping and lamenting is now laid aside, and all hope in them of his lives
restoring: only to rid his body out of the house, that now requires their care
and cunning, whereupon the Maid thus began. Mistress (quoth she) this
evening, although it was very late, at our next Neighbors door (who you know
is a Ioyner by his trade) I saw a great Chest stand; and, as it seems, for a
public sale, because two or three nights together, it has not been thence
removed: and if the owner have not locked it, all invention else cannot furnish
us with the like help. For therein will we lay his body, whereon I will bestow
two or three wounds with my Knife, and leaving him so, our house can be no more
suspected concerning his being here, then any other in the street beside; nay
rather far less, in regard of your husbands credit and authority. Moreover,
hereof I am certain, that he being of such bad and disordered qualities: it
will the more likely be imagined, that he was slain by some of his own loose
companions, being with them about some pilfering business, and afterward hid his
body in the chest, it standing so fitly for the purpose, and dark night also
favoring the deed.

The Maids counsel past under the seal of allowance, only her Mistress thought
it not convenient, that (having affected him so dearly) she should mangle his
body with any wounds; but rather to let it be gathered by more likelihood,
that villains had strangled him, and then conveyed his body into the Chest.
Away she sends the Maid, to see whether the Chest stood there still, or no; as
indeed it did, and unlocked, whereof they were not a little joyful. By the
help of her Mistress, the Maid took Ruggiero upon her shoulders, and
bringing him to the door, with dillidilegent respect that no one could
discover them; in the Chest they laid him, and so there left him, closing
down the lidde according as they found it.

In the same street, and not far from the Ioyner, dwelt two young men who were
Lombards, living upon the interest of their moneys, coveting to get much, and
spend little. They having observed where the chest stood, and wanting a
necessary mooueable to household, yet loath to lay out money for buying it:
complotted together this very night, to steal it thence, and carry it home to
their house, as accordingly they did; finding it somewhat heavy, and therefore
imagining, that matter of worth was contained therein. In the chamber where
their wives lay, they left it; and so without any further search till the next
morning, they laid them down to rest likewise.

Ruggiero, who had now slept a long while, the drink being digested, and the
virtue thereof fully consummated; began to awake before day. And although his
natural sleep was broken, and his senses had recouerd their former power, yet
notwithstanding, there remained such an astonishment in his brain, as not
only did afflict him all the day following, but also diverse days and nights
afterward. Having his eyes wide open, and yet not discerning any thing, he
stretched forth his arms every where about him, and finding himself to be
enclosed in the chest, he grew more broad awake, and said to himself. What is
this? Where am I? Do I wake or sleep? Full well I remember, that not long
since I was in my sweet-hearts Chamber, and now (me thinks) I am mewed up in a
chest. What should I think hereof? Is master Doctor returned home, or hathsome
other inconvenience happened, whereby finding me asleep, she was enforced to
hide me thus? Surely it is so, and otherwise it cannot be: wherefore, it is
best for me to lie still, and listen when I can hear any talking in the
Chamber.

Continuing thus a longer while then otherwise he would have done, because his
lying in the bare Chest was somewhat uneasy and painful to him; turning diverse
times on the one side, and then as often again on the other, coveting still for
ease, yet could not find any: at length, he thrust his back so strongly
against the Chests side, that (it standing on an uneven ground) it began to
totter, and after fell down. In which fall, it made so loud a noise, as the
women (lying in the beds standing by) awaked, and were so overcome with fear,
that they had not the power to speak one word. Ruggiero also being affrighted
with the Chests fall, and perceiving how by that means it was become open: he
thought it better, least some other sinister fortune should befall him, to be
at open liberty, then enclosed up so strictly. And because he knew not where he
was, as also hoping to meet with his Mistress; he went all about groping in
the dark, to find either some stairs or door, whereby to get forth.

When the Women (being then awake) heard his trampling, as also his iustling
against the doors and Windows; they demanded, Who was there? Ruggiero, not
knowing their voices, made them no answer, wherefore they called to their
husbands, who lay very soundly sleeping by them, by reason of their so late
walking abroad, and therefore heard not this noise in the house. This made the
Women much more timorous, and therefore rising out of their beds, they opened
the Casements toward the street, crying out aloude, Thieves, Thieves. The
neighbors arose upon this outcry, running up and down from place to place,
from engirting the house, and others entering into it: by means of which
troublesome noise, the two Lombards awaked, and seizing there upon poor
Ruggiero, (who was well-neere affrighted out of his wits, at so strange an
accident, and his own ignorance, how he happened thither, and how to escape
from them) he stood gazing on them without any answer.

By this time, the Sergeants and other Officers of the City, ordinarily
attending on the Magistrate, being raised by the tumult of this vproare, were
come into the house, and had poor Ruggiero committed unto their charge: who
bringing him before the Governor, was forthwith called in question, and known
to be of a most wicked life, a shame to al his friends and kindred. He could
say little for himself, never denying his taking in the house, and therefore
desiring to finish all his fortunes together, desperately confessed, that he
came with a fellonious intent to rob them, and the Governor gave him sentence
to be hanged.

Soon were the news spread throughout Salerne; that Ruggiero was apprehended,
about robbing the house of the two usuring Lombardes: which when Mistress
Doctor and her Chamber-maide heard, they were confounded with most strange
admiration, and scarsely credited what they themselves had done the night
before, but rather imagined all matters past, to be no more then merely a
dream, concerning Ruggieroes dying in the house, and their putting him into
the Chest, so that by no likely or possible means, he could be the man in
this perilous extreamitie.

In a short while after, Master Doctor Mazzco was returned from Malfy, to
proceed in his cure of the poor man's leg; and calling for his glass of
Water, which he left standing in his own Chamber window, it was found quite
empty, and not a drop in it: whereat he raged so extremely, as never had the
like impatience been noted in him. His wife, and her Maid, who had another
kind of business in their brain, about a dead man so strangely come to life
again, knew not well what to say; but at the last, his Wife thus replied
somewhat angerly. Sir (quoth she) what a coil is here about a paltry glass
of Water, which perhaps has been spilt, yet neither of us faulty therein? Is
there no more such water to be had in the world? Alas dear Wife (said he)
you might repute it to be a common kind of Water, but indeed it was not so;
for I did purposely compound it, only to procure a dead-seeming sleep: And so
related the whole matter at large, of the Pacients leg, and his Waters loss.

When she had heard these words of her husband, presently she conceived, that
the water was drunk off by Ruggiero, which had so sleepily entranced his
senses, as they verily thought him to be dead, wherefore she said. Believe me
Sir, you never acquainted us with any such matter, which would have procured
more careful respect of it: but seeing it is gone, your skill extends to make
more, for now there is no other remedy. While thus Master Doctor and his Wife
were conferring together, the Maid went speedily into the City, to understand
truly, whither the condemned man was Ruggiero, and what would now become of
him. Being returned home again, and alone with her Mistress in the Chamber,
thus she spoke. Now trust me Mistress, not one in the City speaks well of
Ruggiero, who is the man condemned to dye; and, for ought I can perceive, he
has neither Kinsman nor Friend that will do any thing for him; but he is left
with the Provost, and must be executed to morrow morning. Moreover Mistress,
by such instructions as I have received, I can well-neere inform you, by what
means he came to the two Lombards house, if all be true that I have heard.

You know the loyner before whose door the Chest stood, wherein we did put
Ruggiero; there is now a contention between him and another man, to whom (it
seems) the Chest does belong; in regard whereof, they are ready to quarrel
extremly each with other. For the one owing the Chest, and trusting the Ioyner
to sell it for him, would have him to pay him for the Chest. The Ioyner denies
any sale thereof, auouching, that the last night it was stolen from his door.
Which the other man contrarying, maintains that he sold the Chest to the two
Lombard usurers, as himself is able to affirm, because he found it in the
house, when he (being present at the apprehension of Ruggiero) saw it there in
the same house. Hereupon, the Ioyner gave him the lie, because he never sold
it to any man; but if it were there, they had robbed him of it, as he would make
it manifest to their faces. Then falling into calmer speeches they went
together to the Lombardes house, even as I returned home. Wherefore Mistress,
as you may easily perceive, Ruggiero was (questionless) carried thither in the
chest, and so there found; but how he revived again, I cannot comprehend.

The Mistress understanding now apparently, the full effect of the whole
business, and in what manner it had been carried, revealed to the maid her
husbands speeches, concerning the glass of sleepie Water, which was the only
engine of all this trouble, clearly acquitting Ruggiero of the robbery,
howsoever (in desperate fury, and to make an end of a life so contemptible) he
had wrongfully accused himself. And notwithstanding this his hard fortune,
which has made him much more infamous then before, in all the dissolute
behavior of his life: yet it could not quail her affection toward him; but
being loath he should dye for some other man's offense, and hoping his future
reformation; she fell on her knees before her mistress, and (drowned in her
tears) most earnestly entreated her, to advise her with some such happy
course, as might be the safety of poor Ruggieroes life. Mistress Doctor,
affecting her maid dearly, and plainly perceiving, that no disastrous fortune
whatsoever, could alter her love to condemned Ruggiero; hoping the best
hereafter, as the Maid her self did, and willing to save life rather then
suffer it to be lost without just cause, she directed her in such discreet
manner, as you will better conceive by the success.

According as she was instructed by her Mistress, she fell at the feet of
Master Doctor, desiring him to pardon a great error, whereby she had overmuch
offended him. As how? said Master Doctor. In this manner (quoth the Maid) and
thus proceeded. You are not ignorant Sir, what a le^d liver Ruggiero de Ieroly
is, and notwithstanding all his imperfections, how dearly I love him, as he
protests the like to me, and thus has our love continued a year, and more.
You being gone to Malfy, and your abse^^ granting me apt opportunity, for
conference with so kind a friend; I made the bolder, and gave him entrance
into your house, yea even into mine own Chamber, yet free from any abuse,
neither did he (bad though he be) offer any. Thirsty he was before his coming
thither, either by salt meats, or distempered diet, and I being unable to fetch
him wine or water, by reason my Mistress sat in the Hall, seriously talking
with her Sisters; remembered, that I saw a vial of Water standing in your
Chamber Window, which he drinking quite off, I set it empty in the place
again. I have heard your coffeehouse for the said Water, and confess my
fault to you therein: but who lives so justly, without offending at one time
or other? And I am heartily sorry for my transgression; yet not so much for the
water, as the hard fortune that has followd thereon; because thereby Ruggiero
is in danger to lose his life, and all my hopes are utterly lost. Let me
entreat you therefore (gentle Master) first to pardon me, and then to grant me
permission, to succor my poor condemned friend, by all the best means I can
devise.

When the Doctor had heard all her discourse, angry though he were, yet thus he
answered with a smile. Much better had it bin, if thy follies punishment had
fallen on thy self, that it might have paid thee with deserved repentance,
upon thy Mistresses finding thee sleeping. But go and get his deliverance if
thou can, with this caution, that if ever hereafter he be seen in my house,
the peril thereof shall light on thy self. Receiving this answer, for her
first entrance into the attempt, and as her Mistress had advised her, in all
have she went to the prison, where she prevailed so well with the Iaylor,
that he granted her private conference with Ruggiero. She having instructed
him what he should say to the Provost, if he had any purpose to escape with
life; went thither before him to the Provost, who admitting her into his
presence, and knowing that she was Master Doctors maid, a man especially
respected of all the City, he was the more willing to hear her message, he
imagining that she was sent by her Master.

Sir (quoth she) you have apprehended Ruggiero de Ieroly, as a thief, and
judgment of death is (as I hear) pronounced against him: but he is
wrongfully accused, and is clearly innocent of such a heinous detection. So
entering into the History, she declared every circumstance, from the original
to the end: relating truly, that being her Lover, she brought him into her
Masters house, where he drank the compounded sleepy water, and reputed for
dead, she laid him in the Chest. Afterward, she rehearsed the speeches
between the Ioyner, and him that laid claim to the Chest, giving him to
understand thereby, how Ruggiero was taken in the Lombards house.

The Provost presently gathering, that the truth in this case was easy to be
known; sent first for Master Doctor Mazzeo, to know, whether he compounded
any such water, or no: which he affirmed to be true, and upon what occasion he
prepared it. Then the Ioyner, the owner of the Chest, and the two Lombards,
being severally questioned withal: it appeared evidently, that the Lombards
did steal the chest in (...) night season, and carried it home to their own
house. In the end, Ruggiero being brought from the prison, and demanded, where
he was lodged the night before, made answer, that he knew not where. Only he
well remembered, that bearing affection to the Chamber-maide of Master Doctor
Mazzea della Montagna, she brought him into a Chamber, where a violl of water
stood in the Window, and he being extremely thirsty, drank it off all. But
what became of him afterward (till being awake, he found himself enclosed in
a Chest, and in the house of the two Lombards) he could not say any thing.

When the Provost had heard all their answers, which he caused them to repeat
over diverse times, in regard they were very pleasing to him: he cleared
Ruggiero from the crime imposed on him, and condemned the Lombards in three
hundred Ducates, to be given to Ruggiero in way of an amends, and to enable
his marriage with the Doctors Maid, whose constancy was much commended, and
wrought such a miracle on penitent Ruggiero; that, after his marriage, which
was graced with great and honorable pomp, he regained the intimate love of
all his kindred, and lived in most Noble condition, even as if he had never
been the disordered man.

If the former Nouels had made all the Ladies sad and sighe, this last of
Dioneus as much delighted them, as restoring them to their former iocond humor,
and banishing Tragical discourse for ever. The King perceiving that the Sun
was near setting, and his government as near ending, with many kind and
courteous speeches, excused himself to the Ladies, for being the motive of
such an argument, as expressed the infelicity of poor Lovers. And having
finished his excuse, up he arose, taking the Crown of Laurel from off his
own head, the Ladies awaiting on whose head he pleased next to set it, which
proved to be the gracious Lady Fiammetta, and thus he spoke. Here I place
this Crown on her head, that knows better then any other, how to comfort
this fair assembly to morrow, for the sorrow which they have this day endured.

Madame Fiammetta, whose locks of hair were curled, long, and like golden
wiers, hanging somewhat down over her white and delicate shoulders her visage
round, wherein the Damask Rose and Lilly contende^ for priority, the eyes in
her head, resembling those of the Faulcon me, senger, and a dainty mouth; her
lips looking like two little Rubyes with a commendable smile thus she replied.

Philostratus, gladly I do accept your gift; and to the end that ye may the
better remember your self, concerning what you have done hitherto: I will and
command, that general preparation be made against to morrow, for fair and
happy fortunes happening to Lovers, after former cruel and unkind accidents.
Which proposition was very pleasing to them all.

Then calling for the Master of the Household, and taking order with him, what
was most needful to be done; she gave leave unto the whole company (who were
all risen) to go recreate themselves until supper time. Some of them walked
about the Garden, the beauty whereof banished the least thought of weariness.
Others walked by the River to the Mill, which was not far off, and the rest
fell to exercises, fitting their own fancies, until they heard the summons for
Supper. Hard by the goodly Fountain (according to their wonted manner) they
supped altogether, and were served to their no mean contentment: but being
risen from the Table, they fell to their delight of singing and dancing. While
Philomena led the dance, the Queen spoke in this manner.

Philostratus, I intend not to vary from those courses heretofore observed by
my predecessors, but even as they have already done, so it is my authority, to
command a Song. And because I am well assured, that you are not unfurnished of
Songs answerable to the quality of the passed Nouels: my desire is, in regard
we would not be troubled hereafter, with any more discourses of unfortunate
Love, that you shall sing a Song agreeing with your own disposition.
Philostratus made answer, that he was ready to accomplish her command, and
without all further ceremony, thus he began.

The Song.
Chorus. My tears do plainly prove,
How justly that poor heart has cause to grieve,
Which (under trust) finds Treason in his Love.
WHen first I saw her, that now makes me sigh,
Distrust did never enter in my thoughts.
So many virtues clearly shined in her,
That I esteemed all martyrdom was light
Which Love could lay on me. Nor did I grieve,
Although I found my liberty was lost.
But now mine error I do plainly see:
Not without sorrow, thus betrayed to be.
My tears do, etc.
For, being left by basest treachery
Of her in whom I most reposed trust:
I then could see apparent flattery
In all the fairest shows that she did make.
But when I strove to get forth of the snare,
I found my self the further plunged in.
For I beheld another in my place,
And I cast off, with manifest disgrace.
My tears do, etc.
Then felt my heart such hels of heavy woes,
Not vtterable. I cursed the day and hour
When first I saw her lovely countenance,
Enricht with beauty, far beyond all other,
Which set my soul on fire, enflamde each part,
Making a martyrdom of my poor heart.
My faith and hope being basely thus betrayde;
I durst not move, to speak I was affrayde.
My tears do, etc.
Thou can (thou powerful God of Love) perceive,
My ceasselesse sorrow, void of any comfort,
I make my moan to thee, and do not fable,
Desiring, that to end my misery,
Death may come speedily, and with his Dart
With one fierce stroke, quite passing through my heart:
To cut off future fell contending strife,
An happy end be made of Love and Life.
My tears do, etc.
No other means of comfort does remain,
To ease me of such sharp afflictions,
But only death. Grant then that I may die,
To finish grief and life in one blessed hour.
For, being bereft of any future joys,
Come, take me quickly from so false a friend.
Yet in my death, let thy great power approve,
That I died true, and constant in my Love.
My tears, etc.
Happy shall I account this sighing Song,
If some (beside my self) do learn to sing it,
And so consider of my miseries,
As may incite them to lament my wrongs.
And to be warned by my wretched fate;
Least (like my self) themselves do sigh too late.
Learn Lovers learn, what it is to be unjust.
And be betrayed where you repose best trust.
The words contained in this Song, did manifestly declare, what torturing
afflictions poor Philostratus felt, and more (perhaps) had been perceived by
the looks of the Lady whom he spoke of, being then present in the dance; if
the sudden ensuing darkness had not hid the crimson blush, which mounted up
into her face. But the Song being ended, and diverse other beside, lasting till
the hour of rest drew on; by command of the Queen, they all repaired to their
Chambers.

The End of the Fourth Day.
THE FIFTH DAY.
Whereon, all the Discourses do pass under the Government of the most Noble
Lady Fiammetta: Concerning such persons, as have been successful in their
Love, after many hard and perilous misfortunes.

The Induction.
NOW began the Sun to dart forth his golden beams, when Madam Fiammetta
(incited by the sweet singing Birds, which since the break of day, sat
merrily chanting on the trees) arose from her bed: as all the other Ladies
likewise did, and the three young Gentlemen descending down into the fields,
where they walked in a gentle pace on the green grass, until the Sun were
risen a little higher. On many pleasant matters they conferred together, as
they walked in several companies, til at the length the Queen, finding the
heat to enlarge it self strongly, returned back to the Castle; where when
they were all arrived, she commanded, that after this mornings walking, their
stomachs should be refreshed with wholesome Wines, as also diverse sorts of
banqueting stuff. Afterward, they all repaired into the Garden, not departing
thence, until the hour of dinner was come: at which time, the Master of the
household, having prepared every thing in decent readiness, after a solemn song
was sung, by order from the Queen, they were seated at the Table.

When they had dined, to their own liking and contentment, they began (in
continuation of their former order) to exercise diverse dances, and afterward
voices to their instruments, with many pretty Madrigals and Roundelayes. Upon
the finishing of these delights, the Queen gave them leave to take their rest,
when such as were so minded, went to sleep, others solaced themselves in the
Garden. But after midday was ouerpast, they met (according to their wonted
manner) and as the Queen had commanded, at the fair Fountain; where she
being placed in her seat royal, and casting her eye upon Pamphilus, she bad
him begin the days discourses, of happy success in love, after disastrous and
troublesome accidents; who yielding thereto with humble reverence, thus began.

Many Nouels (gracious Ladies) do offer themselves to my memory, wherewith to
begin so pleasant a day, as it is her Highness desire that this should be,
among which plenty, I esteem one above all the rest: because you may
comprehend thereby, not only the fortunate conclusion, wherewith we intend to
begin our day; but also, how mighty the forces of Love are, deserving to be
both admired and reverenced. Albeit there are many, who scarsely knowing what
they say, do condemn them with infinite gross imputations: which I purpose to
disprove, and (I hope) to your no little pleasing.

Chynon, by falling in love, became wise, and by force of Arms, winning his
fair Lady Iphigenia on the Seas, was afterward imprisoned at Rhodes. Being
delivered by one named Lysimachus, with him he recovered his Iphigenia again,
and fair Cassandra, even in the midst of their marriage. They fled with them
into Candye, where after they had married them, they were called home to their
own dwelling.

The first Novel.
Wherein is approved, that Love (oftentimes) makes a man both wise and valiant.



ACcording to the ancient Annals of the Cypriots, there sometime lived in
Cyprus, a Noble Gentleman, who was commonly called Aristippus, and exceeded all
other of the Country in the goods of Fortune. Diverse children he had, but
(amongst the rest) a Son, in whose birth he was more unfortunate then any of
the rest; and continually grieved, in regard, that having all the complete
perfections of beauty, good form, and manly parts, surpassing all other youths
of his age or stature, yet he wanted the real ornament of the soul, reason
and judgment; being (indeed a mere Idiot or Fool, and no better hope to be
expected of him. His true name, according as he received it by Baptism, was
Galesus, but because neither by the laborious pains of his Tutors, indulgence,
and fair endeavor of his parents, or ingenuity of any other, he could be
brought to ciuility of life, understanding of Letters, or common carriage of a
reasonable creature: by his gross and deformed kind of speech, his qualities
also sauouring rather of brutish breeding, then any way derived from manly
education; as an epithet of scorn and derision, generally, they gave him the
name of Chynon, which in their native Country language, and diverse other
beside, signifies a very Sot or Fool, and so was he termed by every one.

This lost kind of life in him, was no mean burden of grief unto his Noble
Father, and all hope being already spent, of any future happy recovery, he gave
command (because he would not always have such a sorrow in his sight) that he
should live at a Farm of his own in a Country Village, among his Peazants and
Plough-Swaines. Which was not any way distastefull to Chynon, but well agreed
with his own natural disposition; for their rural qualities, and gross
behavior pleased him beyond the Cities ciuility. Chynon living thus at his
Fathers Country Village, exercising nothing else but rural demeanor, such as
then delighted him above all other: it chanced upon a day about the hour of
noone, as he was walking over the fields, with a long Staff on his neck,
which commonly he used to carry; he entered into a small thicket, reputed the
goodliest in all those quarters, and by reason it was then the month of May,
the Trees had their leaves fairly shot forth.

When he had walked through the thicket, it came to pass, that (even as if good
Fortune guided him) he came into a fair Meadow, on every side engirt with
Trees, and in one corner thereof stood a goodly Fountain, whose current was
both cool and clear. Hard by it, upon the green grass, he espied a very
beautiful young Damsel, seeming to be fast asleep, attired in such fine
loose garments, as hid very little of her white body: only from the girdle
downward, she ware a kirtle made close unto her, of interwouen delicate silk,
and at her feet lay two other Damsels sleeping, and a servant in the same
manner. No sooner had Chynon fixed his eye upon her, but he stood leaning
upon his staff, and viewed her very advisedly, without speaking a word, and
in no mean admiration, as if he had never seen the form of a woman before. He
began then to feel in his harsh rural understanding (whereinto never till
now, either by painful instruction, or all other good means used to him, any
honest ciuility had power of impression) a strange kind of humor to awake,
which informed his gross and dull spirit, that this Damsel was the very
fairest, which ever any living man beheld.

Then he began to distinguish her parts, commending the tresses of her hair,
which he imagined to be of gold; her forehead, nose, mouth, neck, arms, but
(above all) her breasts, appearing (as yet) but only to show themselves, like
two little mountainets. So that, of a fielden clownish lout, he would needs now
become a judge of beauty, coveting earnestly in his soul, to see her eyes,
which were veiled over with sound sleep, that kept them fast enclosed
together, and only to look on them, he wished a thousand times, that she
would awake. For, in his judgment, she excelled all the women that ever he had
seen, and doubted, whether she were some Goddess or no; so strangely was he
metamorphosed from folly, to a sensible apprehension, more then common. And so
far did this sudden knowledge in him extend; that he could conceive of divine
and celestial things, and that they were more to be admired and reverenced,
then those of humane or terrene consideration; wherefore the more gladly he
contented himself, to tarry til she awaked of her own accord. And although the
time of stay seemed tedious to him, yet notwithstanding, he was overcome with
such extraordinary contentment, as he had no power to depart thence, but stood
as if he had bin glued fast to the ground.

After some indifferent respite of time, it chanced that the young Damosel (who
was named Iphigenia) awaked before any of the other with her, and lifting up
her head, with her eyes wide open, she saw Chynon standing before her, leaning
still on his staff; whereat meruailing not a little, she said unto him:
Chynon, whither wanderest thou, or what do thou seek for in this wood?
Chynon, who not only by his countenance, but likewise his folly, Nobility of
birth, and wealthy possessions of his father, was generally known throughout
the Country, made no answer at all to the demand of Iphigenia: but so soon
as he beheld her eyes open, he began to observe them with a constant regard, as
being persuaded in his soul, that from them flowed such an unutterable
singularity, as he had never felt til then. Which the young Gentlewoman well
noting, she began to wax fearful, least these steadfast looks of his, should
incite his rusticity to some attempt, which might redound to her dishonor:
wherefore awaking her women and servant, and they all being risen, she said.
Farewell Chynon, I leave thee to thine own good Fortune; whereto he presently
replied, saying: I will go with you. Now, although the Gentlewoman refused his
company, as dreading some act of inciuility from him: yet could she not devise
any way to be rid of him, til he had brought her to her own dwelling, where
taking leave mannerly of her, he went directly home to his Fathers house,
saying; Nothing should compel him to live any longer in the muddy Country. And
albeit his Father was much offended heereat, and all the rest of his kindred
and friends: (yet not knowing how to help it) they suffered him to continue
there still, expecting the cause of this his so sudden alteration, from the
course of life, which contented him so highly before.

Chynon being now wounded to the heart (where never any civil instruction could
before get entrance) with loves piercing dart, by the bright beauty of
Iphigenia, moved much admiration (falling from one change to another) in his
Father, Kindred, and all else that knew him. For first, he requested of his
Father, that he might be habited and respected like to his other Brethren,
whereto right gladly he condiscended. And frequenting the company of civil
youths, observing also the carriage of Gentlemen, especially such as were
amorously inclined: he grew to a beginning in short time (to the wonder of
every one) not only to understand the first instruction of letters, but also
became most skillful, even amongst them that were best exercised in
Philosophy. And afterward, love to Iphigenia being the sole occasion of this
happy alteration, not only did his harsh and clownish voice convert it self
more mildely, but also he became a singular Musician, and could perfectly play
on any Instrument. Beside, he took delight in the riding and managing of great
horses, and finding himself of a strong and able body, he exercised all kinds
of Military Disciplines, as well by sea, as on the land. And, to be brief,
because I would not seem tedious in the repetition of al his virtues, scarsly
had he attained to the fourth year, after he was thus fallen in love, but he
became generally known, to be the most civil, wise, and worthy Gentleman,
as well for all virtues enriching the mind, as any whatsoever to beautify the
body, that very hardly he could be equalled throughout the whole kingdom of
Cyprus.

What shall we say then (virtuous Ladies) concerning this Chynon? Surely
nothing else, but that those high and divine virtues, infused into his gentle
soul, were by envious Fortune bound and shut up in some small angle of his
intellect, which being shaken and set at liberty by love, (as having a far
more potent power then Fortune, in quickening and reviving the dull drowsy
spirits; declared his mighty and sovereign Authority, in setting free so many
fair and precious virtues unjustly detayned, to let the worlds eye behold them
truly, by manifest testimony, from whence he can deliver those spirits
subjected to his power, and guide them (afterward) to the highest degrees of
honor. And although Chynon by affecting Iphigenia, failed in some particular
things; yet notwithstanding, his Father Aristippus duly considering, that love
had made him a man, whereas (before) he was no better then a beast: not only
endured all patiently, but also advised him therein, to take such courses as
best liked himself. Nevertheless, Chynon (who refused to be called Galesus,
which was his natural name indeed) remembering that Iphigenia termed him
Chynon, and coveting (under that title) to accomplish the issue of his honest
amorous desire: made many motions to Ciphaeus the Father of Iphigenia, that he
would be pleased to let him enjoy her in marriage. But Ciphaeus told him, that
he had already passed his promise for her, to a Gentleman of Rhodes, named
Pasimondo, which promise he religiously intended to perform.

The time being come, which was concluded on for Iphigeniaes marriage, in
regard that the affianced husband had sent for her: Chynon thus communed with
his own thoughts. Now is the time (quoth he) to let my divine Mistress see,
how truly and honorably I do affect her, because (by her) I am become a man.
But if I could be possessed of her, I should grow more glorious, then the
common condition of a mortal man, and have her I will, or loose my life in the
adventure. Being thus resolved, he prevailed with diverse young Gentlemen his
friends, making them of his faction, and secretly prepared a Ship, furnished
with all things for a Nauall fight, setting suddenly forth to sea, and hulling
abroad in those parts by which the vessel should pass, that must convey
Iphigenia to Rhodes to her husband. After many honors done to them, who were to
transport her thence unto Rhodes, being embarked, they set sail upon their
Bon viaggio.

Chynon, who slept not in a business so earnestly importing him, set on them
(the day following) with his Ship, and standing aloft on the deck, cried out
to them that had the charge of Iphigenia, saying. Strike your sails, or else
determine to be sunk in the Sea. The enemies to Chynon, being nothing danted
with his words, prepared to stand upon their own defense; which made Chynon,
after the former speeches delivered, and no answer returned, to command the
grapling Irons to be cast forth, which took such fast hold on the Rhodians
ship, that (whether they would or no) both the vessels joined close together.
And he showing himself fierce like a Lion, not tarrying to be seconded by
any, stepped aboard the Rhodians ship, as if he made no respect at all of them,
and having his sword ready drawn in his hand (incited by the virtue of
unfeigned love) said about him on all sides very manfully. Which when the men
of Rhodes perceived, casting down their weapons, and all of them (as it were)
with one voice, yielded themselves his prisoners: whereupon he said.

Honest Friends, neither desire of booty, or hatred to you, did occasion my
departure from Cyprus, thus to assail you with drawn weapons: but that which
heereto has most moved me, is a matter highly importing to me, and very easy
for you to grant, and so enjoy your present peace. I desire to have fair
Iphigenia from you, whom I love above all other Ladies living, because I could
not obtain hereof her Father, to make her my lawful wife in marriage. Love is
the ground of my instant Conquest, and I must use you as my mortal enemies, if
you stand upon any further terms with me, and do not deliver her as mine
own: for your Pasimondo, must not enjoy what is my right, first by virtue of
my love, and now by conquest: Deliver her therefore, and depart hence at your
pleasure.

The men of Rhodes, being rather constrained thereto, then of any free
disposition in themselves; with tears in their eyes, delivered Iphigenia to
Chynon; woe beholding her in like manner to weep, thus spoke unto her. Noble
Lady, do not any way discomfort your self, for I am your Chynon, who have more
right and true title to you, and much better do deserve to enjoy you, by my
long continued affection to you, then Pasimondo can any way plead; because you
belong to him but only by promise. So, bringing her aboard his own ship, where
the Gentlemen his companions gave her kind welcome, without touching any thing
else belonging to the Rhodians, he gave them free liberty to depart.

Chynon being more joyful, by the obtaining of his hearts desire, then any
other conquest else in the world could make him, after he had spent some time
in comforting Iphigenia, who as yet sat sadly sighing; he consulted with his
companions, who joined with him in opinion, that their safest course was, by no
means to return to Cyprus; and therefore all (with one consent) resolved to
set sail for Candye, where every one made account, but especially Chynon, in
regard of ancient and new combined Kindred, as also very intimate friends, to
find very worthy entertainment, and so to continue there safely with
Iphigenia. But Fortune, who was so favorable to Chynon, in granting him so
pleasing a Conquest, to show her inconstancy, as suddenly changed the
inestimable joy of our iocond Lover, into as heavy sorrow and disaster. For,
four hours were not fully completed, since his departure from the Rhodians,
but dark night came upon them, and he sitting conuersing with his fair
Mistress, in the sweetest solace of his soul; the winds began to blow roughly,
the Seas swelled angerly, and a tempest arose impetuously, that no man could
see what his duty was to do, in such a great unexpected distress, nor how to
warrant themselves from perishing.

If this accident were displeasing to poor Chynon, I think the question were
in vain demanded: for now it seemed to him, that the Godds had granted his
chief desire, to the end he should dye with the greater anguish, in losing
both his love and life together. His friends likewise, felt the self same
affliction, but especially Iphigenia, who wept and grieved beyond all measure,
to see the ship beaten with such stormy billows, as threatened her sinking
every minute. Impatiently she cursed the love of Chynon, greatly blaming his
desperate boldness, and maintaining, that so violent a tempest could never
happen, but only by the Gods displeasure, who would not permit him to have a
wife against their will; and therefore thus punished his proud presumption, not
only in his unavoidable death, but also that her life must perish for company.

She continuing in these woeful lamentations, and the Mariners laboring all in
vain, because the violence of the tempest increased more and more, so that
every moment they expected wracking: they were carried (contrary to their own
knowledge) very near unto the Isle of Rhodes, which they being no way able to
avoid, and utterly ignorant of the coast; for safety of their lives, they
labored to land there if possibly they might. Wherein Fortune was somewhat
furtherous to them, driving them into a small gulf of the Sea, whereinto (but
a little while before) the Rhodians, from whom Chynon had taken Iphigenia, were
newly entered with their ship. Nor had they any knowledge each of other, till
the break of day (which made the heavens to look more clearly) gave them
discovery, of being within a flight shoot together. Chynon looking forth, and
espying the same ship which he had left the day before, he grew exceeding
sorrowful, as fearing that which after followed, and therefore he willed the
Mariners, to get away from her by all their best endeavor, and let fortune
afterward dispose of them as she pleased; for into a worse place they could not
come, no^ fall into the like danger.

The Mariners employed their very utmost pains, and all proved but loss of
time: for the wind was so stern, and the waves so turbulent, that still they
drove them the contrary way: so that striving to get forth of the gulf,
whether they would or no, they were driven on land, and instantly known to the
Rhodians, whereof they were not a little joyful. The men of Rhodes being
landed, ran presently to a near neighboring Village, where dwelt diverse
worthy Gentlemen, to whom they reported the arrival of Chynon, what fortune
befell them at Sea, and that Iphigenia might now be recovered again, with
chastisement to Chynon for his bold insolence. They being very joyful of these
good news, took so many men as they could of the same Village, and ran
immediately to the Sea side, where Chynon being newly Landed and his people,
intending flight into a near adjoining Forest, for defense of himself and
Iphigenia, they were all taken, led thence to the Village, and afterward to
the chief City of Rhodes.

No sooner were they arrived, but Pasimondo, the intended Husband for Iphigenia
(who had already heard the tidings) went and complained to the Senate, who
appointed a Gentleman of Rhodes, named Lysimachus, and being that year
sovereign Magistrate over the Rhodians, to go well provided for the
apprehension of Chynon and all his company, committing them to prison, which
accordingly was done. In this manner, the poor unfortunate lover Chynon, lost
his fair Iphigenia, having won her in so short a while before, and scarsely
requited with so much as a kiss. But as for Iphigenia, she was royally
welcomed by many Lords and Ladies of Rhodes, who so kindly comforted her,
that she soon forgotte all her grief and trouble on the Sea, remaining in
company of those Ladies and Gentlewomen, until the day determined for her
marriage.

At the earnest entreary of diverse Rhodian Gentlemen, who were in the Ship with
Iphigenia, and had their lives courteously saved by Chynon: both he and his
friends had their lives likewise spared, although Pasimondo labored
importunately, to have them all put to death; only they were condemned to
perpetual imprisonment, which (you must think) was most grievous to them, as
being now hopeless of any deliverance. But in the mean time, while Pasimondo
was ordering his nuptial preparation, Fortune seeming to repent the wrongs
she had done to Chynon, prepared a new accident, whereby to comfort him in
this deep distress, and in such manner as I will relate unto you.

Pasimondo had a Brother, younger then he in years, but not a jot inferior to
him in virtue, whose name was Hormisda, and long time the case had been in
question, for his taking to wife a fair young Gentlewoman of Rhodes, called
Cassandra; whom Lysimachus the Governor loved very dearly, and hindered her
marriage with Hormisda, by diverse strange accidents. Now Pasimondo perceiving,
that his own Nuptials required much cost and solemnity, he thought it very
convenient, that one day might serve for both the Weddinges, which else would
lanch into more lavish expenses, and therefore concluded, that his brother
Hormisda should marry Cassandra, at the same time as he wedded Iphigenia.
Heereuppon, he consulted with the Gentlewomans parents, who liking the motion
as well as he, the determination was set down, and one day to effect the
duties of both.

When this came to the hearing of Lysimachus, it was very greatly displeasing
to him, because now he saw himself utterly deprived of al hope to attain the
issue of his desire, if Hormisda received Cassandra in marriage. Yet being a
very wise and worthy man, he dissembled his distaste, and began to consider on
some apt means, whereby to disappoint the marriage once more, which he found
impossible to be done, except it were by way of rape or stealth. And that did
not appear to him any difficult matter, in regard of his Office and Authority:
only it would seem dishonest in him, by giving such an unfitting example.
Nevertheless, after long deliberation, honor gave way to love, and resolutely
he concluded to steal her away, whatsoever became of it.

Nothing wanted now, but a convenient company to assist him, and the order how
to have it done. Then he remembered Chynon and his friends, whom he detained as
his prisoners, and persuaded himself, that he could not have a more faithful
friend in such a business, then Chynon was. Hereupon, the night following, he
sent for him into his Chamber, and being alone by themselves, thus he began.
Chynon (quoth he) as the Gods are very bountiful, in bestowing their
blessings on men, so do they therein most wisely make proof of their virtues,
and such as they find firm and constant, in all occurrences which may happen,
them they make worthy (as valiant spirits) of the very best and highest
merits. Now, they being willing to have more certain experience of thy
virtues, then those which heretofore thou have shown, within the bounds and
limits of thy fathers possessions, which I know to be superabounding: perhaps
do intend to present thee other occasions, of more important weight and
consequence.

For first of all (as I have heard) by the piercing solicitudes of love, of a
senseless creature, they made thee to become a man endued with reason.
Afterward, by adverse fortune, and now again by wearisome imprisonment, it
seems that they are desirous to make trial, whether thy manly courage be
changed, or no, from that which heretofore it was, when thou enioyedst a
matchless beauty, and lost her again in so short a while. Wherefore, if thy
virtue be such as it has bin, the Gods can never give thee any blessing more
worthy of acceptance, then she who^ they are now minded to bestow on thee: in
which respect, to the end that thou may reassume thy wonted heroicke spirit,
and become more courageous then ever heretofore, I will acquaint thee withal
more at large.

Understand then Noble Chynon, that Pasimondo, the only glad man of thy
misfortune, and diligent suitor after thy death, makes all have he can
possibly deu^se to do, to celebrate his marriage with thy fair mistress:
because he would plead possession of the prey, which Fortune (when she smiled)
did first bestow, and (afterward frowning) took from thee again. Now, that it
must needs be very irksome to thee (at least if thy love be such, as I am
persuaded it is) I partly can collect from my self, being intended to be
wronged by his brother Hormisda, even in the selfsame manner, and on his
marriage day, by taking fair Cassandra from me, the only Jewel of my love
and life. For the prevention of two such notorious injuries, I see that Fortune
has left us no other means, but only the virtue of our courages, and the
help of our right hands, by preparing our selves to Arms, opening a way to
thee, by a second rape or stealth; and to me the first, for absolute possession
of our divine Mistresses. Wherefore, if thou art desirous to recover thy loss,
I will not only pronounce liberty to thee (which I think thou do little care
for without her) but dare also assure thee to enjoy Iphigenia, so thou will
assist me in mine enterprise, and follow me in my fortune, if the Gods do let
them fall into our power.

You may well imagine, that Chynons dismayed soul was not a little cheared at
these speeches; and therefore, without craving any long respit of time for
answer, thus he replied. Lord Lysimachus, in such a business as this is, you
cannot have a faster friend then my self at least, if such good hap may betide
me, as you have more then half promised: and therefore do no more but command
what you would have to be effected by me, and make no doubt of my courage in
the execution: whereon Lysimachus made this answer. Know then Chynon (quoth
he) that three days hence; these marriages are to be celebrated in the
houses of Pasimondo and Hormisda, upon which day, thou, thy friends, and my
self (with some others, in whom I repose especial trust) by the friendly
favor of night, will enter into their houses, while they are in the midst of
their Iouiall feasting; and (seizing on the two Brides) bear them thence to a
Ship, which I will have lie in secret, waiting for our coming, and kill all
such as shall presume to impeach us. This direction gave great contentment to
Chynon, who remained still in prison, without revealing a word to his own
friends, until the limited time was come.

Upon the Wedding day, performed with great and magnificent Triumph, there was
not a corner in the Brethrens houses, but it sung joy in the highest key.
Lysimachus, after he had ordered all things as they ought to be, and the hour
for dispatch approached near; he made a division in three parts, of Chynon,
his followers, and his own friends, being all well armed under their outward
habites. Having first used some encouraging speeches, for more resolute
prosecution of the enterprise, he sent one troop secretly to the Port, that
they might not be hindered of going aboard the ship, when the urgent necessity
should require it. Passing with the other two trains of Pasimondo, he left the
one at the door, that such as were in the house might not shut them up fast,
and so impeach their passage forth. Then with Chynon, and the third band of
Confederates, he ascended the stairs up into the Hall, where he found the
Brides with store of Ladies and Gentlewomen, all sitting in comely order at
Supper. Rushing in roughly among the attendants, down they threw the Tables,
and each of them laying hold of his Mistress, delivered them into the hands of
their followers, commanding that they should be carried aboard the ship, for
avoiding of further inconveniences.

This hurrie and amazement being in the house, the Brides weeping, the Ladies
lamenting, and all the servants confusedly wondering; Chynon and Lysimachus
(with their Friends) having their weapons drawn in their hands, made all
opposers to give them way, and so gained the stair head for their own
descending. There stood Pasimondo, with an huge long Staff in his hand, to
hinder their passage down the stayres; but Chynon saluted him so soundly on
the head, that it being cleft in twain, he fell dead before his feet. His
Brother Hormisda came to his rescue, and sped in the selfsame manner as he
had done; so did diverse other beside, whom the companions to Lysimachus and
Chynon, either slew outright, or wounded.

So they left the house, filled with blood, tears, and outcries, going on
together, without any hinderance, and so brought both the Brides aboard the
ship, which they rowed away instantly with their Oars. For, now the shore
was full of armed people, who came in rescue of the stolen Ladies: but all in
vain, because they were lanched into the main, and sailed on merrily toward
Candye. Where being arrived, they were worthily entertained by honorable
Friends and Kinsmen, who pacified all unkindness between them and their
Mistresses: And, having accepted them in lawful marriage, there they lived in
no mean joy and contentment: albeit there was a long and troublesome difference
(about these rapes) between Rhodes and Cyprus.

But yet in the end, by the means of Noble Friends and Kindred on either side,
laboring to have such coffeehouse appeased, endangering war between the
Kingdoms: after a limited time of banishment, Chynon returned joyfully with
his Iphigenia home to Cyprus, and Lysimachus with his beloved Cassandra unto
Rhodes, each living in their several Countries, with much felicity.

Fair Constance of Liparis, fell in love with Martuccio Gomito: and hearing
that he was dead, desperately she entered into a Bark, which being transported
by the winds to Susa in Barbary, from thence she went to Thunis, where she
found him to be living. There she made her self known to him, and he being in
great authority, as a privy Counselor to the King: he married the said
Constance, and returned richly home with her, to the Island of Liparis.

The second Novel.
Wherein is declared the firm loyalty of a true Lover: And how Fortune does
sometime humble men, to raise them afterward to a far higher degree.



WHen the Queen perceived, that the Novel recited by Pamphilus was concluded,
which she graced with especial commendations: she commanded Madame Aemillia,
to take her turn as next in order; whereupon, thus she began. Me thinks it is
a matter of equity, that every one should take delight in those things, whereby
the recompense may be noted, answerable to their own affection. And because I
rather desire to walk along by the paths of pleasure, then dwell on any
ceremonious or scrupulons affectation, I shall the more gladly obey our Queen
to day, then yesterday I did our melancholy King.

Understand then (Noble Ladies) that near to Sicily, there is a small Island,
commonly called Liparis, wherein (not long since) lived a young Damsel, named
Constance, born of very sufficient parentage in the same Island. There dwelt
also a young man, called Martuccio Gomito, of comely feature, well conditioned,
and not inexpert in many virtuous qualities; affecting Constance in hearty
manner: and she so answerable to him in the same kind, that to be in his
company, was her only felicity. Martuccio coveting to enjoy her in marriage,
made his intent known to her Father: who vpbraiding him with poverty, told
him plainly that he should not have her. Martuccio greeuing to see himself
thus despised, because he was poor: made such good means, that he was
provided of a small Bark; and calling such friends (as he thought fit) to his
association, made a solemn vow, that he would never return back to Liparis,
until he was rich, and in better condition.

In the nature and course of a Rouer or Pirate, so put he thence to sea,
coasting all about Barbary, robbing and spoiling such as he met with; who
were of no greater strength then himself: wherein Fortune was so favorable to
him, that he became wealthy in a very short while. But as felicities are not
always permanent, so he and his followers, not contenting themselves with
sufficient riches: by greedy seeking to get more, happened to be taken by
certain ships of the Sarazins, and so were robbed themselves of all that they
had gotten, yet they resisted them stoutly a long while together, though it
proved to the loss of many lives among them. When the Sarazens had sunk his
ship in the Sea, they took him with them to Thunis, where he was imprisoned,
and lived in extremest misery.

News came to Liparis, not only by one, but many more beside, that all those
which departed thence in the small Bark with Martuccio, were drowned in the
Sea, and not a man escaped. When Constance heard these unwelcome tidings (who
was exceeding full of grief, for his so desperate departure) she wept and
lamented extraordinarily, desiring now rather to dye, then live any longer. Yet
she had not the heart, to lay any violent hand on her self, but rather to end
her days by some new kind of necessity. And departing privately from her
Fathers house, she went to the port or haven, where (by chance) she found a
small Fisher-boate, lying distant from the other vessels, the owners whereof
being all gone on shore, and it well furnished with Masts, Sails, and Oars,
she entered into it; and putting forth the Oars, being somewhat skillful in
sailing, (as generally all the Women of that Island are) she so well guyded
the Sails, Rudder, and Oars, that she was quickly far off from the Land,
and soly remained at the mercy of the winds. For thus she had resolved with
her self, that the Boat being vncharged, and without a guide) would either be
ouer-whelmed by the winds, or split in pieces against some Rock; by which
means she could not escape although she would, but (as it was her desire)
must needs be drowned.

In this determination, wrapping a mantle about her head, and lying down
weeping in the boats bottom, she hourly expected her final expiration: but
it fell out otherwise, and contrary to her desperate intention, because the
wind turning to the North, and blowing very gently, without disturbing the
Seas a jot, they conducted the small Boat in such sort, that after the night of
her entering into it, and the morowes sailing until the evening, it came
within an hundred leagues of Thunis, and to a strond near a Town called Susa.
The young Damsel knew not whether she were on the sea or land; as one, who
not by any accident happening, lifted up her head to look about her, neither
intended ever to do. Now it came to pass, that as the boat was driven to the
shore, a poor woman stood at the Sea side, washing certain Fishermens Nets;
and seeing the boat coming toward her under sail, without any person
appearing in it, she wondered thereat not a little. It being close at the shore,
and she thinking the Fishermen to be asleep therein: stepped boldly, and looked
into the boat, where she saw not any body, but only the poor distressed
Damsel, whose sorrows having brought her now into a sound sleep, the woman
gave many calls before she could awake her, which at the length she did, and
looked very strangely about her.

The poor woman perceiving by her habit that she was a Christian, demanded of
her (in speaking Latin) how it was possible for her, being all alone in the
boat, to arrive there in this manner? When Constance heard her speak the
Latin tongue, she began to doubt, least some contrary wi^de had turned her
back to Liparis again, and starting up suddenly, to look with better advice
about her, she saw her self at Land: and not knowing the Country, demanded
of the poor woman where she was? Daughter (quoth she) you are here hard by
Susa in Barbary. Which Constance hearing, and plainly perceiving, that death
had denied to end her miseries, fearing least she should receive some
dishonor, in such a barbarous unkind Country, and not knowing what should now
become of her, she sat down by the boats side, wringing her hands, and
weeping bitterly.

The good Woman did greatly compassionate her case, and prevailed so well by
gentle speeches, that she conducted her into her own poor habitation; where
at length she understood, by what means she happened thither so strangely. And
perceiving her to be fasting, she set such homely bread as she had before her,
a few small Fishes, and a Crewse of Water, praying her for to accept of that
poor entertainment, which mere necessity compelled her to do, and showed her
self very thankful for it.

Constance hearing that she spoke the Latin language so well; desired to know
what she was. Whereto the old woman thus answered: Gentlewoman (quoth she) I
am of Trapanum, named Carapresa, and am a servant in this Country to certain
Christian Fishermen. The young Maiden (albeit she was very full of sorrow)
hearing her name to be Carapresa, conceived it as a good augury to her self,
and that she had heard the name before, although she knew not what occasion
should move her thus to do. Now began her hopes to quicken again, and yet she
could not tell upon what ground; nor was she so desirous of death as before,
but made more precious estimation of her life, and without any further
declaration of her self or country, she entreated the good woman (even for
charities sake) to take pity on her youth, and help her with such good advice,
to prevent all injuries which might happen to her, in such a solitary woeful
condition.

Carapresa having heard her request, like a good woman as she was, left
Constance in her poor Cottage, and went hastily to leave her nets in safety:
which being done, she returned back again, and covering Constance with her
Mantle, led her on to Susa with her, where being arrived, the good woman began
in this manner. Constance, I will bring thee to the house of a very worthy
Sarazin Lady, to whom I have done many honest services, according as she
pleased to command me. She is an ancient woman, full of charity, and to her I
will commend thee as best I may, for I am well assured, that she will gladly
entertain thee, and use thee as if thou were her own daughter. Now, let it be
thy part, during thy time of remaining with her, to employ thy utmost diligence
in pleasing her, by deserving and gaining her grace, till heaven shall bless
thee with better fortune: And as she promised, so she performed.

The Sarazine Lady, being well stepped into years, upon the commendable speeches
delivered by Carapresa, did the more seriously fasten her eye on Constance, and
compassion provoking her to tears, she took her by the hand, and (in loving
manner) kissed her forehead. So she led her further into her house, where
dwelt diverse other women (but not one man) all exercising themselves in
several labors, as working in all sorts of silk, with Imbroideries of Gold
and Silver, and sundry other excellent Arts beside, which in short time were
very familiar to Constance, and so pleasing grew her behavior to the old
Lady, and all the rest beside; that they loved and delighted in her
wonderfully, and (by little and little) she attained to the speaking of their
language, although it were very harsh and difficult.

Constance continuing thus in the old Ladies service at Susa, and thought to be
dead or lost in her own Fathers house; it fortuned, that one reigning then as
King of Thunis, who named himself Mariabdela: there was a young Lord of great
birth, and very powerful, who lived as then in Granada, and pleaded that the
Kingdom of Thunis belonged to him. In which respect, he mustred together a
mighty Army, and came to assault the King, as hoping to expel him. These news
coming to the ear of Martuccio Gomito, who spoke the Barbarian Language
perfectly; and hearing it reported, that the King of Thunis made no mean
preparation for his own defense: he conferred with one of his keepers, who had
the custody of him, and the rest taken with him, saying: If (quoth he) I could
have means to speak with the King, and he were pleased to allow of my
counsel, I can enstruct him in such a course, as shall assure him to win the
honor of the field. The Guard reported these speeches to his master, who
presently acquainted the King therewith, and Martuccio being sent for; he was
commanded to speak his mind: Whereupon he began in this manner.

My gracious Lord, during the time that I have frequented your country, I have
heedfully observed, that the Military Discipline used in your fights and
battles, depends more upon your Archers, then any other men employed in
your war. And therefore, if it could be so ordered, that this kind of
Artillery might fail in your enemies Camp, and yours be sufficiently
furnished therewith, you need make no doubt of winning the battle: whereto
the King thus replied. Doubtless, if such an act were possible to be done, it
would give great hope of successful prevailing. Sir, said Martuccio, if you
please it may be done, and I can quickly resolve you how. Let the strings of
your Archers Bows be made more soft and gentle, then those which heretofore
they have formerly used; and next, let the nockes of the Arrows be so
provided, as not to receive any other, then those pliant gentle strings. But
this must be done so secretly, that your enemies may have no knowledge thereof,
least they should provide themselves in the ^ame manner. Now the reason
(Gracious Lord) why thus I counsel you, is to this end. When the Archers on
the Enemies side have shot their Arrows at your men, and yours in the like
manner at them: it follows, that (upon mere constraint) they must gather up
your Arrows, to shoot them back again at you, for so long while as the
battle endures, as no doubt but your men will do the like to them. But your
enemies will find themselves much deceived, because they can make no use of
your peoples Arrows, in regard that the nockes are too narrow to receive their
boisterous strings. Which will fall out contrary with your followers, for the
pliant strings belonging to your Bows, are as apt for their enemies great
nockt Arrows, as their own, and so they shall have free use of both,
reserving them in plentiful store, when your adversaries must stand
unfurnished of any, but them that they cannot any way use.

This counsel pleased the King very highly, and he being a Prince of great
understanding, gave order to have it accordingly followed, and thereby
valiantly vanquished his enemies. Hereupon, Martuccio came to be great in his
grace, as also consequently rich, and seated in no mean place of authority.
Now, as worthy and commendable actions are soon spread abroad, in honor of the
man by whom they happened: even so the fame of this rare got victory, was
quickly noysed throughout the Country, and came to the hearing of poor
Constance, that Martuccio Gomito (whom she supposed so long since to be dead)
was living, and in honorable condition. The love which formerly he bare unto
him, being not altogether extinct in her heart; of a small spark, brake forth
into a sudden flame, and so increased day by day, that her hope (being before
almost quite dead) revived again in cheerful manner.

Having imparted all her fortunes to the good old Lady with whom she dwelt;
she told her beside, that she had an earnest desire to see Thunis, to satisfy
her eyes as well as her ears, concerning the rumor blazed abroad. The good
old Lady commended her desire, and (even as if she had been her mother) took
her with her aboard a Bark, and so sailed thence to Thunis, where both she and
Constance found honorable welcome, in the house of a kinsman to the Sarazin
Lady. Carapresa also went along with them thither, and her they sent abroad
into the City, to understand the news of Martuccio Gomito. After they knew
for a certainty that he was living) and in great authority about the King,
according as the former report went of him. Then the good old Lady, being
desirous to let Martuccio know, that his fair friend Constance was come
thither to see him; went her self to the place of his abiding, and spoke unto
him in this manner. Noble Martuccio, there is a servant of thine in my house,
which came from Liparis, and requires to have a little private conference with
thee: but because I durst not trust any other with the message, my self (at
her entreaty) am come to acquaint thee therewith. Martuccio gave her kind and
hearty thanks, and then went along with her to the house.

No sooner did Constance behold him, but she was ready to dye with conceit of
joy, and being unable to contain her passion: suddenly she threw her arms
about his neck, and in mere compassion of her many misfortunes, as also the
instant solace of her soul (not being able to utter one word) the tears
trickled abundantly down her cheeks. Martuccio also seeing his fair friend,
was overcome with exceeding admiration, and stood awhile, as not knowing what
to say; till venting forth a vehement sighe, thus he spoke. My dearest love
Constance! art thou yet living? It is a tedious long while since I heard thou
wast lost, and never any tydinges known of thee in thine own Fathers house.
With which words, the tears standing in his eyes, most lovingly he embraced
her. Constance recoun^ed to him all her fortunes, and what kindness she had
received from the Sarazine Lady, since her first hour of coming to her. And
after much other discourse passing between them, Martuccio departed from her,
and returning to the King his master, told him all the history of his
fortunes, and those beside of his Love Constance, being purposely minded (with
his gracious liking) to marry her according to the Christian Law.

The King was much amazed at so many strange accidents, and sending for
Constance to come before him; from her own mouth he heard the whole relation of
her continued affection to Martuccio, whereupon he said. Now trust me fair
Damsel, thou have dearly deserved him to be thy husband. Then sending for
very costly Jewels, and rich presents, the one half of them he gave to her,
and the other to Martuccio, granting them license withal, to marry according
to their own minds.

Martuccio did many honors, and gave great gifts to the aged Sarazine Lady,
with whom Constance had lived so kindly respected: which although she had no
need of, neither ever expected any such rewarding; yet (conquered by their
urgent importunity, especially Constance, who could not be thankful enough to
her) she was enforced to receive them, and taking her leave of them weeping,
sailed back again to Susa.

Within a short while after, the King licensing their departure thence, they
entered into a small Bark, and Carapresa with them, sailing on with prosperous
gales of wind, until they arrived at Liparis, where they were entertained
with general rejoicing. And because their marriage was not sufficiently
performed at Thunis, in regard of diverse Christian ceremonies there wanting,
their Nuptials were again most honorably solemnized, and they lived (many
years after) in health and much happiness.

Pedro Bocamazzo, escaping away with a young Damsel which he loved, named
Angelina, met with Thieves in his journey. The Damsel flying fearfully into a
Forest, by chance arriueth at a Castle. Pedro being taken by the Thieves, and
happening afterward to escape from them; comes (accidentally to the same
Castle where Angelina was. And marrying her, they then returned home to Rome.

The third Novel.
Wherein, the several powers both of Love and Fortune, is more at large
approved.



THere was not any one in the whole company, but much commended the Novel
reported by Madam Emillia, and when the Queen perceived it was ended, she
turned toward Madam Eliza, commanding her to continue on their delightful
exercise: whereto she declaring her willing obedience, began to speak thus.
Courteous Ladies, I remember one unfortunate night, which happened to two
Lovers, that were not endued with the greatest discretion. But because they had
very many fair and happy days afterward, I am the more willing for to let
you hear it.

In the City of Rome, which (in times past) was called the Lady and Mistress
of the world, though now scarsely so good as the waiting maid: there dwelt
sometime a young Gentleman, named Pedro Boccamazzo, descended from one of the
most honorable families in Rome, who was much enamoured of a beautiful
Gentlewoman, called Angelina, daughter to one named Gigliuozzo Saullo, whose
fortunes were none of the fairest, yet he greatly esteemed among the Romans.
The intercourse of love between these twain, had so equally enstructed their
hearts and souls, that it could hardly be judged which of them was the more
fervent in affection. But he, not being imputed to such oppressing passions,
and therefore the less able to support them, except he were sure to compass
his desire plainly made the motion, that he might enjoy her in honorable
marriage. Which his parents and friends hearing, they went to confer with him,
blaming him with overmuch baseness, so far to disgrace himself and his
stock. Beside, they advised the Father to the Maid, neither to credit what
Pedro said in this case, or to live in hope of any such match, because they
all did wholly despise it.

Pedro perceiving, that the way was shut up, whereby (and none other) he was to
mount the Ladder of his hopes; began to wax weary of longer living: and if he
could have won her fathers consent, he would have married her in the despite of
all his friends. Nevertheless, he had a conceit hammering in his head, which
if the maid would be as forward as himself, should bring the matter to full
effect. Letters and secret intelligences passing still between, at length he
understood her ready resolution, to adventure with him thorough all fortunes
whatsoever, concluding on their sudden and secret flight from Rome. For which
Pedro did so well provide, that very early in a morning, and well mounted on
horseback, they took the way leading unto Alagna, where Pedro had some honest
friends, in whom he reposed especial trust. Riding on thus through the
country, having no leisure to accomplish their marriage, because they stood
in fear of pursuit: they were ridden above four leagues from Rome, still
shortning the way with their amorous discoursing.

It fortuned, that Pedro having no certain knowledge of the way, but following
a trackt guiding too far on the left hand; rode quite out of course, and came
at last within sight of a small Castle, out of which (before they were aware)
issued twelve Villains, whom Angelina sooner espied, then Pedro could do,
which made her cry (...) to him, saying: Help dear Love to save us, or else we
shall be assailed. Pedro then turning his horse so expeditiously as he could,
and giving him the spurs as need required; mainly be gallopped into a near
adjoining Forest, more minding the following of Angelina, then any direction
of his way, or the^ that endeavored to be his hinderance. So that by often
winding and turning about, as the passage appeared troublesome to him, when he
thought him self free and furthest from them, he was round engirt, and seized
on by them. When they had made him to dismount from his horse, questioning him
of whence and what he was, and he resolving them therein, they fell into a
secret consultation, saying thus among themselves. This man is a friend to our
deadly enemies, how can we then otherwise dispose of him, but bereave him of
all he has, and in despite of the Orsini (men in nature hateful to us) hang
him up here on one of these Trees?

All of them agreeing in this dismal resolution, they commanded Pedro to put
off his garments, which he yielding to do (albeit unwillingly) it so fell out,
that five and twenty other thieves, came suddenly rushing in upon them, crying,
Kill, kill, and spare not a man.

They which before had surprised Pedro, desiring now to shifte for their own
safety; left him standing quaking in his shirt, and so ran away mainely to
defend themselves. Which the new crewe perceiving, and that their number far
exceeded the other: they followed to rob them of what they had gotten,
accounting it as a present purchase for them. Which when Pedro perceived, and
saw none tarrying to prey upon him; he put on his clothes again, and
mounting on his own Horse, gallopped that way, which Angelina before had
taken: yet could he not descry any tracke or path, or so much as the footing
of a horse; but thought himself in sufficient security, being rid of them
that first seized on him, and also of the rest, which followed in the pursuit
of them.

For the loss of his beloved Angelina, he was the most woeful man in the
world, wandering one while this way, and then again another, calling for her
all about the Forest, without any answer returning to him. And not daring to
ride back again, on he travailed still, not knowing where to make his
arrival. And having formerly heard of savage ravenous beasts, which commonly
live in such unfrequented Forests: he not only was in fear of loosing his
own life, but also despayred much for his Angelina, least some Lion or Woolfe,
had torn her body in pieces.

Thus rode on poor unfortunate Pedro, until the break of day appeared, not
finding any means to get forth of the Forest, still crying and calling for
his fair friend, riding many times backward, when as he thought he rode
forward, until he became so weak and faint, what with extreme fear, loud
calling, and continuing so long a while without any sustenance, that the whole
day being thus spent in vain, and dark night suddenly come upon him, he
was not able to hold out any longer.

Now was he in far worse case then before, not knowing where, or how to
dispose of himself, or what might best be done in so great a necessity. From
his Horse he alighted, and tying him by the bridle unto a great tree, up he
climbed into the same Tree, fearing to be devoured (in the night time) by some
wild beast, choosing rather to let his Horse perish, then himself. Within a
while after, the Moon began to rise, and the skies appeared bright and
clcare: yet durst he not nod, or take a nap, lest he should fall out of the
tree; but sat still greeuing, sighing, and mourning, despairing of ever seeing
his Angelina any more, for he could not be comforted by the smallest hopeful
persuasion, that any good fortune might befall her in such a desolate Forest,
where nothing but dismal fears was to be expected, and no likelihood that she
should escape with life.

Now, concerning poor affrighted Angelina, who (as you heard before) knew not
any place of refuge to fly unto: but even as it pleased her horse to carry
her: she entered so far into the Forest, that she could not devise where to
seek her own safety. And therefore, even as it fared with her friend Pedro,
in the same manner did it fall out with her, wandering the whole night, and all
the day following, one while taking one hopeful tracke, and then another,
calling, weeping, wringing her hands, and grievously complaining of her hard
fortune. At the length, perceiving that Pedro came not to her at all, she found
a little path (which she lighted on by great good fortune) even when dark
night was apace drawing, and followed it so long, til it brought her within the
sight of a small poor Cottage, whereto she rode on so fast as she could; and
found therein a very old man, having a wife rather more aged then he, who seeing
her to be without company, the old man spoke thus unto her.

Fair daughter (quoth he) whether wander you at such an unseasonable hour,
and all alone in a place so desolate? The Damsel weeping, replied; that she
had lost her company in the forest, and enquired how near she was to Alagna.
Daughter (answered the old man) this is not the way to Alagna, for it is a boue
six leagues hence. Then she desired to know, how far off she was from
such houses, where she might have any reasonable lodging? There are none so
near, said the old man, that day light will give you leave to reach. May it
please you then good Father (replied Angelina) seeing I cannot travail any
whether else; For Gods sake, to let me remain here with you this night.
Daughter answered the good old man, we can gladly give you entertainment
here, for this night, in such poor manner as you see: but let me tell you
withal, that up and down these wooddes (as well by night as day) walk
companies of all conditions, and rather enemies then friends, who do us many
greeuious displeasures and harms. Now if by msifortune, you being here, any
such people should come, and seeing you so loouely fair, as indeed you are,
offer you any shame or injury: Alas you see it lies not in our power to lend
you any help or succor. I thought it good (therefore) to acquaint you
heerewith; because if any such mischance do happen, you should not afterward
complain of us.

The young Maiden, seeing the time to be so far spent, albeit the old man's
words did much dismay her, yet she thus replied. If it be the will of heaven,
both you and I shall be defended from any misfortune: but if any such mischance
do happen, I account the matter less deserving grief, if I fall into the mercy
of men, then to be devoured by wild beasts in this Forest. So, being
dismounted from her horse, and entered into the homely house; she supt poorly
with the old man and his wife, with such mean cates as their provision
affoorded: and after supper, lay down in her garments on the same poor
pallet, where the aged couple took their rest, and was very well contented
therewith, albeit she could not refrain from sighing and weeping, to be thus
divided from her dear Pedro, of whose life and welfare she greatly despaired.

When it was almost day, she heard a great noise of people travailing by,
whereupon suddenly she arose, and ran into a Garden plot, which was on the
backside of the poor Cottage, espying in one of the corners a great stacke of
Hay, wherein she hid her self, to the end, that traveling strangers might not
readily find her there in the house. Scarsely was she fully hidden, but a
great company of Thieves and Villains, finding the door open, rushed into the
Cottage, where looking round about them for some booty, they saw the Damsels
horse stand ready sadled, which made them demand to whom it belonged. The good
old man, not seeing the Maiden present there, but immagining that she had
made some shift for her self, answered thus. Gentlemen, there is no body here
but my wife and my self: as for this Horse, which seems to be escaped from
the Owner; he came hither yesternight, and we gave him houseroome here,
rather then to be devoured by Wolves abroad. Then said the principal of the
Theeuish crew: This horse shall be ours, in regard he has no other master, and
let the owner come claim him of us.

When they had searched every corner of the poor Cottage, and found no such
prey as they looked for, some of them went into the back side, where they had
left their Iauelins and Targets, wherewith they used commonly to travail. It
fortuned, that one of them, being more subtily suspicious then the rest, thrust
his Iaueline into the stacke of Hay, in the very same place where the Damsel
lay hidden, missing very little of killing her; for it entered so far, that
the iron head pierced quite thorough her Garments, and touched her left bare
breast: whereupon, she was ready to cry out, as fearing that she was wounded:
but considering the place where she was, she lay still, and spoke not a word.
This disordred company, after they had fed on some young Kids, and other flesh
which they brought with them thither, they went thence about their theeuing
exercise, taking the Damsels horse along with them.

After they were gone a good distance off, the good old man began thus to
question his Wife. What is become (quoth he) of our young Gentlewoman, which
came so late to us yesternight? I have not seen her to day since our arising.
The old woman made answer, that she knew not where she was, and sought all
about to find her. Angelinaes fears being well ouer-blowne, and hearing none
of the former noise, which made her the better hope of their departure, came
forth of the Hay-stack; whereof the good old man was not a little joyful, and
because she had so well escaped from them: so seeing it was now broad
daylight, he said unto her. Now that the morning is so fairly begun, if you
can be so well contented, we will bring you to a Castle, which stands about two
miles and an half hence, where you will be sure to remain in safety. But you
must needs travail thither on foot, because the night-walkers that happened
hither, have taken away your horse with them.

Angelina making little or no account of such a loss, entreated them for
charities sake, to conduct her to that Castle, which accordingly they did, and
arrived there between seven and eight of the clock. The Castle belonged to
one of the Orsini, being called, Liello di Campo di Fiore, and by great good
fortune, his wife was then there, she being a very virtuous and religious Lady.
No sooner did she look upon Angelina, but she knew her immediately, and
entertaining her very willingly, requested, to know the reason of her thus
arriving there: which she at large related, and moved the Lady (who likewise
knew Pedro perfectly well) to much compassion, because he was a kinsman and
dear friend to her Husband; and understanding how the Thieves had surprised
him, she feared, that he was slain among them, whereupon she spoke thus to
Angelina. Seeing you know not what is become of my kinsman Pedro, you shall
remain here with me, until such time, as (if we hear no other tidings of
him) you may with safety be sent back to Rome.

Pedro all this while sitting in the Tree, so full of grief, as no man could be
more; about the hour of midnight (by the bright splendor of the Moon) espied
about some twenty Wolves, who, so soon as they got a sight of the Horse, ran
and engirt him round about. The Horse when he perceived them so near him, drew
his head so strongly back-ward, that breaking the reins of his bridle, he
labored to escape away from them. But being beset on every side, and utterly
unable to help himself, he contended with his teeth and feet in his own
defense, till they haled him violently to the ground, and tearing his body in
pieces, left not a ^ot of him but the bare bones, and afterward ran ranging
through the Forest. At this sight poor Pedro was mightily dismayed, fearing to
speed no better then his Horse had done, and therefore could not devise what
was best to be done; for he saw no likelihood now, of getting out of the
Forest with life. But daylight drawing on apace, and he almost dead with
cold, having stood quaking so long in the Tree; at length by continual looking
every where about him, to discern the least glimpse of any comfort; he espied
a great fire, which seemed to be about half a mile off from him.

By this time it was broad day, when he descended down out of the Tree, (yet
not without much fear) and took his way toward the fire, where being
arrived, he found a company of Shepherds banqueting about it, whom he
courteously saluting, they took pity on his distress, and welcomed him
kindly. After he had tasted of such cheer as they had, and was indifferently
refreshed by the good fire; he discoursed his hard disasters to them, as also
how he happened thither, desiring to know, if any Village or Castle were near
thereabout, where he might in better manner relieve himself. The Shepherds
told him, that about a mile and an half from thence, was the Castle of Signior
Liello di Campo di Fiore, and that his Lady was now residing there; which was
no mean comfort to poor Pedro, requesting that one of them would accompany
him thither, as two of them did in loving manner, to rid him of all further
fears.

When he was arrived at the Castle, and found there diverse of his familiar
acquaintance; he labored to procure some means, that the Damsel might be
sought for in the Forest. Then the Lady calling for her, and bringing her to
him; he ran and caught her in his arms, being ready to swoune with conceit of
joy, for never could any man be more comforted, then he was at the sight of his
Angelina, and questionless, her joy was not a jot inferior to his, such a
simpathy of firm love was sealed between them. The Lady of the Castle, after
she had given them very gracious entertainment, and understood the scope of
their bold adventure; she reproved them both somewhat sharply, for presuming
so far without the consent of their Parents. But perceiving (notwithstanding
all her remonstrances) that they continued still constant in their resolution,
without any inequality on either side; she said to her self. Why should this
matter be any way offensive to me? They love each other loyally; they are not
inferior to one another in birth, but in fortune; they are equally loved and
allied to my Husband, and their desire is both honest and honorable. Moreover,
what know I, if it be the will of Heaven to have it so? Thieves intended to
hang him, in malice to his name and kindred, from which hard fate he has
happily escaped. Her life was endangered by a sharp pointed Iaueline, and yet
her fairer stars would not suffer her so to perish: beside, they both have
escaped the fury of ravenous wild beasts, and all these are apparent signs,
that future comforts should recompense former passed misfortunes; far be it
therefore from me, to hinder the appointment of the Heavens.

Then turning her self to them, thus she proceeded. If your desire be to
join in honorable marriage, I am well contented therewith, and your nuptials
shall here be sollemnized at my Husbands charges. Afterward both he and I will
endeavor, to make peace between you and your discontented Parents. Pedro was
not a little joyful at her kind offer, and Angelina much m^re then he; so they
were married together in the Castle, and worthily feasted by the Lady, as
Forest entertainment could permit, and there they enjoyed the first fruits of
their love. Within a short while after, the Lady and they (well mounted on
Horseback* and attended with an honorable train) returned to Rome; where
her Lord Liello and she prevailed so well with Pedroes angry Parents: that all
variance ended in love and peace, and afterward they lived lovingly together,
till old age made them as honorable, as their true and mutual affection
formerly had done.

Ricciardo Manardy, was found by Messer Lizio da Valbonna, as he sat fast
asleep at his Daughters Chamber window, having his hand fast in hers, and she
sleeping in the same manner. Whereupon, they were joined together in marriage,
and their long loyal love mutually recompensed.

The fourth Novel.
Declaring the discreet providence of Parents, in care of their Childrens love
and their own credit, to cut off inconveniences, before they do proceed too
far.

MAdam Eliza having ended her Tale, and heard what commendations the whole
company gave thereof; the Queen commanded Philostratus, to tell a Novel
agreeing with his own mind, who smiling thereat, thus replied. Fair Ladies,
I have been so often checked and snapt, for my yester days matter and argument
of discoursing, which was both tedious and offensive to you; that if I intended
to make you any amends, I should now undertake to tell such a Tale, as might
put you into a mirthfull humor. Which I am determined to do, in relating a
brief and pleasant Novel, not any way offensive (as I trust) but exemplary
for some good notes of observation.



Not long since, there lived in Romania, a Knight, a very honest Gentleman, and
well qualified, whose name was Messer Lizio da Valbonna, to whom it fortuned,
that (at his entrance into age) by his Lady and wife, called Iaquemina, he had
a Daughter, the very choycest and goodliest gentlewoman in all those places.
Now because such a happy blessing (in their old years) was not a little
comfortable to them; they thought themselves the more bound in duty, to be
circumspect of her education, by keeping her out of ouer-frequent companies,
but only such as agreed best with their gravity, and might give the least ill
example to their Daughter, who was named Catharina; as making no doubt, but by
this their provident and wary respect, to match her in marriage answerable to
their liking. There was also a young Gentleman, in the very flourishing estate
of his youthful time, descended from the Family of the Manardy da Brettinoro,
named Messer Ricciardo, who oftentimes frequented the House of Messer Lizio,
and was a continual welcome guest to his Table, Messer Lizio and his wife
making the like account of him, even as if he had been their own Son.

This young Gallant, perceiving the Maiden to be very beautiful, of singular
behavior, and of such years as was fit for marriage, became exceedingly
enamoured of her, yet concealed his affection so closely as he could; which was
not so covertly carried, but that she perceived it, and grew in as good liking
of him. Many times he had an earnest desire to have conference with her, which
yet still he deferred, as fearing to displease her; till at the length he
lighted on an apt opportunity, and boldly spoke to her in this manner. Fair
Catharina, I hope thou will not let me die for thy love? Signior Ricciardo
(replied she suddenly again) I hope you will extend the like mercy to me, as
you desire that I should show to you. This answer was so pleasing to Messer
Ricciardo, that presently he said. Alas dear Love, I have dedicated all my
fairest fortunes only to thy service, so that it remains soly in thy power,
to dispose of me as best shall please thee, and to appoint such times of
private conversation, as may yield more comfort to my poor afflicted soul.

Catharina standing musing a while, at last returned him this answer. Signior
Ricciardo, quoth she, you see what a restraint is set on my liberty, how short
I am kept from co^uersing with any one, that I hold this our enterparlance now
almost miraculous. But if you could devise any convenient means, to admit us
more familiar freedom, without any prejudice to mine honor, or the least
distaste of my Parents; do but enstruct it, and I will adventure it. Ricciardo
having considered on many ways and means, thought one to be the fittest of
all; and therefore thus replied. Catharina (quoth he) the only place for our
more private talking together, I conceive to be the Gallery over your Fathers
Garden. If you can win your Mother to let you lodge there, I will make means
to climb over the wall, and at the goodly gazing window, we may discourse so
long as we please. Now trust me dear Love (answered Catharina) no place can be
more convenient for our purpose, there shall we hear the sweet Birds sing,
especially the Nightingale, which I have heard singing there all the night
long; I will break the matter to my Mother, and how I speed, you shall hear
further from me. So, with diverse parting kisses, they brake off conference,
till their next meeting.

On the day following, which was toward the ending of the month of May,
Catharina began to complain to her Mother, that the season was ouer-hot and
tedious, to be still lodged in her Mothers Chamber, because it was an
hinderance to her sleeping; and wanting rest, it would be an empairing of her
health. Why Daughter (quoth the Mother) the weather (as yet) is not so hot, but
(in my mind) you may very well endure it. Alas Mother, said she, aged people,
as you and my Father are, do not feel the heates of youthful blood, by
reason of your far colder complexion, which is not to be measured by younger
years. I know that well Daughter, replied the Mother; but is it in my power,
to make the weather warm or cool, as thou perhaps would have it? Seasons
are to be suffered, according to their several qualities; and though the last
night might seem hot, this next ensuing may be cooler, and then thy rest will
be the better. No Mother, quoth Catharina, that cannot be; for as Summer
proceeds on, so the heat increases, and no expectation can be of temperate
weather, until it grows to Winter again. Why Daughter, said the Mother,
what would thou have me to do? Mother (quoth she) if it might stand with
my Fathers good liking and yours, I would be spared from in the Garden Gallery,
which is a great deal more cool, and temperate. There shall I hear the
sweet Nightingale sing, as every night she uses to do, and many other
pretty Birds beside, which I cannot do, lodging in your Chamber.

The Mother loving her Daughter dearly, as being somewhat ouerfond of her,
and very willing to give her contentment; promised to impart her mind to her
Father, not doubting but to compass what she requested. When she had moved
the matter to Messer Lizio, whose age made him somewhat froward and teasty;
angerly he said to his wife. Why how now woman? Cannot our Daughter sleep,
except she hear the Nightingale sing? Let there be a bed made for her in the
Oven, and there let the Crickets make her melody. When Catharina heard this
answer from her Father, and saw her desire to be disappointed; not only could
she take any rest the night following, but also complained more of the heat
then before, not suffering her Mother to take any rest, which made her go
angerly to her Husband in the morning, saying. Why Husband, have we but one
only Daughter, whom you pretend to love right dearly, and yet can you be so
careless of her, as to deny her a request, which is no more then reason? What
matter is it to you or me, to let her lodge in the Garden Gallery? Is her young
blood to be compared with ours? Can our weak and crazie bodies, feel the
frolic temper of hers? Alas, she is hardy (as yet) out of her childish
years, and Children have many desires far differing from ours: the singing
of Birds is rare music to them, and chiefly the Nightingale; whose sweet
notes will provoke them to rest, when neither art or physic can do it.

Is it even so Wife? answered Messer Lizio. Must your will and mine be governed
by our Daughter? Well be it so then, let her bed be made in the Garden
Gallerie, but I will have the keeping of the key, both to lock her in at
night, and set her at liberty every morning. Woman, woman, young wenches are
wily, many wanton crochets are busy in their brains, and to us that are aged,
they sing like Lapwings, telling us one thing, and intending another; talking
of Nightingales, when their minds run on Cocke-Sparrowes. Seeing Wife, she
must needs have her mind, let yet your care and mine extend so far, to
keep her chastity uncorrupted, and our credulity from being abused. Catharina
having thus prevailed with her Mother, her bed made in the Garden Gallery, and
sectet intelligence given to Ricciardo, for preparing his means of access to
her window; old provident Lizio locks the door to bed-ward, and gives her
liberty to come forth in the morning, for his own lodging was near to the
same Gallery.

In the dead and silent time of night, when all (but Lovers) take their rest;
Ricciardo having provided a Ladder of Ropes, with grapling hooks to take hold
above and below, according as he had occasion to use it. By help thereof,
first he mounted over the Garden wall, and then climbde up to the Gallery
window, before which (as is every where in Italy) was a little round eng^^ting
Tarras, only for a man to stand upon, for making clean the window, or
otherwise repairing it. Many nights (in this manner) enjoyed they their
meetings, entermixing their amorous conference with infinite kisses and kind
embraces, as the window gave leave, he sitting in the Tarras, and departing
always before break of day, for fear of being discovered by any.

But, as excess of delight is the Nurse to negligence, and begets such an
ouer-presuming boldness, as afterward proves to be sauced with repentance: so
came it to pass with our ouer-fond Lovers, in being taken ^ardy through their
own folly. After they had many times met in this manner, the nights (according
to the season) growing shorter and shorter, which their stolen delight made
them less respective of, then was requisite in an adventure so dangerous: it
fortuned, that their amorous pleasure had so far transported them, and dulled
their senses in such sort, by these then continued nightly watchings; that they
both fell fast asleep, he having his hand closed in hers, and she one arm
folded about his body, and thus they slept till broad day light. Old Messer
Lizio, who continually was the morning Cock to the whole House, going forth
into his Garden, saw how his Daughter and Ricciardo were seated at the window.
In he went again, and going to his wives Chamber, said to her. Rise quickly
wise, and you shall see, what made our Daughter so desirous to lodge in the
Garden Gallery. I perceive that she loved to hear the Nightingale, for she
has caught one, and holds him fast in her hand. Is it possible, said the
Mother, that our Daughter should catch a live Nightingale in the dark? You
shall see that your self, answered Messer Lizio, if you will make haste, and
go with me.

She, putting on her garments in great haste, followed her Husband, and being
come to the Gallery door, he opened it very softly, and going to the window,
showed her how they both sat fast asleep, and in such manner as has been
before declared: whereupon, she perceiving how Ricciardo and Catharina had
both deceived her, would have made an outcry, but that Messer Lizio spoke thus
to her. Wife, as you love me, speak not a word, neither make any noise: for,
seeing she has loved Ricciardo without our knowledge, and they have had their
private meetings in this manner, yet free from any blamefull imputation; he
shall enjoy her, and she him. Ricciardo is a Gentleman, well derived, and of
rich possessions, it can be no disparagement to us, that Catharina match with
him in marriage, which he neither shall, or dare deny to do, in regard of our
Laws severity; for climbing up to my window with his Ladder of Ropes, whereby
his life is forfeited to the Law, except our Daughter please to spare it, as it
remains in her power to do, by accepting him as her husband, or yielding his
life up to the Law, which surely she will not suffer, their love agreeing
together in such mutual manner, and he aduenturing so dangerously for her.

Madam Iaquemina, perceiving that her husband spoke very reasonably, and was no
more offended at the matter; stepped aside with him behind the drawn Curtains,
until they should awake of themselves. At the last, Ricciardo awaked, and
seeing it was so far in the day, thought himself half dead, and calling to
Catharina, said. Alas dear Love! what shall we do? we have slept too long,
and shall be taken here. At which words, Messer Lizio stepped forth from behind
the Curtains, saying-Nay, Signior Ricciardo, seeing you have found such an
unbefitting way hither, we will provide you a better for your back returning.
When Ricciardo saw the Father and Mother both there present, he could not
devise what to do or say, his senses became so strangely confounded; yet
knowing how hainously he had offended, if the strictness of Law should be
challenged against him, falling on his knees, he said. Alas Messer Lizio, I
humbly crave your mercy, confessing my self well worthy of death, that knowing
the sharp rigor of the Law, I would presume so audaciously to break it. But
pardon me worthy Sir, my loyal and unfeigned love to your Daughter Catharina,
has been the only cause of my transgressing.

Ricciardo (replied Messer Lizio) the love I bear thee, and the honest
confidence I do repose in thee, step up (in some measure) to plead thine
excuse, especially in the regard of my Daughter, whom I blame thee not for
loving, but for this unlawful way of presuming to her. Nevertheless,
perceiving how the case now stands, and considering withal, that youth and
affection were the ground of thine offense: to free thee from death, and my
self from dishonor, before thou departest hence, thou shall espouse my
Daughter Catharina, to make her thy lawful wife in marriage, and wipe off all
scandal to my House and me. All this while was poor Catharina on her knees
likewise to her Mother, who (notwithstanding this her bold adventure) made
earnest suite to her Husband to remit all, because Ricciardo right gladly
condiscended, as it being the maine issue of his hope and desire; to accept his
Catharina in marriage, whereto she was as willing as he. Messer Lizio presently
called for the Confessor of his House, and borrowing one of his Wives Rings,
before they went out of the Gallery; Ricciardo and Catharina were espoused
together, to their no little joy and contentment.

Now had they more leisure for further conference, with the Parents and kindred
to Ricciardo, who being no way discontented with this sudden match, but
applauding it in the highest degree; they were publicly married again in the
Cathedral Church, and very honorable triumphs performed at the nuptials,
living long after in happy prosperity.

Guidotto of Cremona, departing out of this mortal life, left a Daughter of
his, with Iacomino of Pauia. Giouanni di Seuerino, and Menghino da Minghole,
fell both in love with the young Maiden, and fought for h^^; who being
afterward known, to be the Sister to Giouanni, she was given in marriage to
Menghino.

The fifth Novel.
Wherein may be observed, what quarrels and contentions are occasioned by Love;
with some particular description, concerning the sincerity of a loyal friend.



ALl the Ladies laughing heartily, at the Novel of the Nightingale, so
pleasingly delivered by Philostratus, when they saw the same to be fully ended,
the Queen thus spoke. Now trust me Philostratus, though yester-day you did
much oppress me with melancholy, yet you have made me such an amends to day,
as we have little reason to complain any more of you. So converting her
speech to Madam Neiphila, she commanded her to succeed with her discourse,
which willingly she yielded to, beginning in this manner. Seeing it pleased
Philostratus, to produce his Novel out of Romania: I mean to walk with him
in the same jurisdiction, concerning what I am to say.

There dwelt sometime in the City of Fano, two Lombards, the one being named
Guidotto of Cremona, and the other Iacomino of Pauia, men of sufficient
entrance into years, having followed the wars (as Soldiers) all their
youthful time. Guidotto feeling sickness to ouer-master him, and having no
son, kinsman, or friend, in whom he might repose more trust, then he did in
Iacomino: having long conference with him about his worldly affairs, and
settled his whole estate in good order; he left a Daughter to his charge, about
ten years of age, with all such goods as he enjoyed, and then departed out of
this life. It came to pass, that the City of Forenza, long time being molested
with tedious wars, and subjected to very servile condition; began now to
recover her former strength, with free permission (for all such as pleased) to
return and possess their former dwellings. Whereupon, Iacomino (having
sometime been an inhabitant there) was desirous to live in Faenza again,
conuaying thither all his goods, and taking with him also the young girl,
which Guidotto had left him, whom he loved, and respected as his own child.

As she grew in stature, so she did in beauty and virtuous qualities, as none
was more commended throughout the whole City, for fair, civil, and honest
demeanor, which incited many amorously to affect her. But (above all the rest)
two very honest young men, of good fame and repute, who were so equally in love
addicted to her, that being jealous of each others fortune, in preventing of
their several hopeful expectation; a deadly hatred grew suddenly between
them, the one being named, Giouanni de Seuerino, and the other Menghino da
Minghole. Either of these two young men, before the Maid was fifteen years
old, labored to be possessed of her in marriage, but her Guardian would give
no consent thereto: wherefore, perceiving their honest intended meaning to be
frustrated, they now began to busy their brains, how to forestall one another
by craft and circumuention.

Iacomino had a Maide-seruant belonging to his House, somewhat aged, and a
Man-seruant beside, named Griuello, of mirthfull disposition, and very
friendly, with whom Giouanni grew in great familiarity; and when he found time
fit for the purpose, he discovered his love to him, requesting his furtherance
and assistance, in compassing the height of his desire, with bountiful
promises of rich rewarding; whereto Griuello returned this answer. I know not
how to sted you in this case, but when my Master shall sup forth at some
Neighbors House, to admit your entrance where she is: because, if I offer to
speak to her, she never will stay to hear me. Wherefore, if my service this
way may do you any good, I promise to perform it; do you beside, as you
shall find it most convenient for you. So the bargain was agreed on between
them, and nothing else now remained, but to what issue it should sort in the
end.

Menghino, on the other side, having entered into the Chamber-maides
acquaintance, sped so well with her, that she delivered so many messages from
him, as had (already) half won the liking of the Virgin; passing further
promises to him beside, of bringing him to have conference with her, whenever
her Master should be absent from home. Thus Menghino being favored (on the one
side) by the old Chamber-maide, and Giouanni (on the other) by trusty
Griuello; their amorous war was now on foot, and diligently followed by both
their sollicitors. Within a short while after, by the procurement of Griuello,
Iacomino was invited by a neighbor to supper, in company of diverse his very
familiar friends, whereof intelligence being given to Giouanni; a conclusion
passed between them, that (upon a certain signale given) he should come, and
find the door standing ready open, to give him all access unto the affected
Maiden.

The appointed night being come, and neither of these hot Lovers knowing the
others intent, but their suspicion being alike, and increasing still more and
more; they made choice of certain friends and associates, well armed and
provided, for eithers safer entrance when need should require. Menghino stayed
with his troop, in a near neighboring house to the Maiden, attending when
the signal would be given: but Giouanni and his con^orts, were ambushed
somewhat further off from the House, and both saw when Iacomino went forth to
supper. Now Grinello and the Chamber-maide began to vary, which should send the
other out of the way, till they had effected their several intention;
whereupon Grinello said to her. What makes thee to walk thus about the House,
and why do thou not get thee to bed? And thou (quoth the Maid) why do
thou not go to attend on our Master, and tarry for his returning home? I am
sure thou have supt long ago, and I know no business here in the House for
thee to do. Thus (by no means) the one could send away the other, but either
remained as the others hinderance.

But Grinello remembering himself, that the hour of his appointment with
Giouanni was come, he said to himself. What care I whether our old Maid be
present, or no? If she disclose any thing that I do, I can be revenged on her
when I list. So, having made the signal, he went to open the door, even when
Giouanni (and two of his confederates) rushed into the House, and finding the
fair young Maiden sitting in the Hall, laid hands on her, to bear her away.
The Damsel began to resist them, crying out for help so loud as she could,
as the old Chamber-maide did the like: which Menghino hearing, he ran
thither presently with his friends, and seeing the young Damsel brought
well-neere out of the House; they drew their Swords, crying out: Traitors, you
are but dead men, here is no violence to be offered, neither is this a booty
for such base grooms. So they laid about them lustily, and would not permit
them to pass any further. On the other side, upon this mutinous noise and
outcry, the Neighbors came forth of their Houses, with lights, staves, and
clubbes, greatly reproving them for this outrage, yet assisting Menghino: by
means whereof, after a long time of contention, Menghino recovered the Maiden
from Giouanni, and placed her peaceably in Iacominoes House.

No sooner was this hurly-burly somewhat calmed, but the Serieants to the
Captain of the City, came thither, and apprehended diverse of the mutiners:
among whom were Menghino, Giouanni, and Grinello, committing them immediately
to prison. But after every thing was pacified, and Iacomino returned home to
his House from supper; he was not a little offended at so gross an injury.
When he was fully informed, how the matter happened, and apparently perceived,
that no blame at all could be imposed on the Maiden: he grew the better
contented, resolving with himself (because no more such inconveniences should
happen) to have her married so soon as possibly he could.

When morning was come, the kindred and friends on either side, understanding
the truth of the error committed, and knowing beside, what punishment would be
inflicted on the prisoners, if Iacomino pressed the matter no further, then as
with reason and equity well he might; they repaired to him, and (in gentle
speeches) entreated him, not to regard a wrong offered by unruly and youthful
people, merely drawn into the action by persuasion of friends; submitting
both themselves, and the offenders, to such satisfaction as he pleased to
appoint them. Iacomino, who had seen and observed many things in his time, and
was a man of sound understanding, returned them this answer.

Gentlemen, if I were in mine own Country, as now I am in yours; I would as
forwardly confess my self your friend, as here I must needs fall short of
any such service, but even as you shall please to command me. But plainly, and
without all further ceremonious complement, I must agree to whatsoever you can
request; as thinking you to be more injured by me, then any great wrong that I
have sustained. Concerning the young Damsel remaining in my House, she is
not (as many have imagined) either of Cremona, or Pauia, but borne a Faentine,
here in this Cirie: albeit neither my self, she, or he of whom I had her, did
ever know it, or yet could learn whose Daughter she was. Wherefore, the suite
you make to me, should rather (in duty) be mine to you: for she is a native of
your own, do right to her, and then you can do no wrong unto me.

When the Gentlemen understood, that the Maiden was borne in Faenza, they
marvelled thereat, and after they had thanked Iacomino for his courteous answer;
they desired him to let them know, by what means the Damsel came into his
custody, and how he knew her to be borne in Faenza: when he, perceiving them
attentive to hear him, began in this manner.

Understand worthy Gentlemen, that Guidotto of Cremona, was my companion and
dear friend, who growing near to his death, told me, that when this City was
surprised by the Emperor Frederigo, and all things committed to sack and
spoil; he and certain of his confederates entered into a House, which they
found to be well furnished with goods, but utterly forsaken of the dwellers,
only this poor Maiden excepted, being then aged but two years, or
thereabout. As he mounted up the steps, with intent to depart from the House;
she called him Father, which word moved him so compassionately: that he went
back again, brought her away with him, and all things of worth which were in
the House, going thence afterward to Fano, and there deceasing, he left her and
all his goods to my charge; conditionally, that I should see her married when
due time required, and bestow on her the wealth which he had left her. Now,
very true it is, although her years are convenient for marriage, yet I could
never find any one to bestow her on, at least that I thought fitting for her:
howbeit, I will listen thereto much more respectively, before any other such
accident shall happen.

It came to pass, that in the reporting of this discourse, there was then a
Gentleman in the company, named Guillemino da Medicina, who at the surprizal of
the City, was present with Guidotto of Cremona, and knew well the House which
he had ransacked, the owner whereof was also present with him, wherefore taking
him aside, he said to him. Bernardino, hear thou what Iacomino has
related? yes very well, replied Bernardino, and remember withal, that in that
dismal bloody combustion, I lost a little Daughter, about the age as Iacomino
spoke he. Questionless then, replied Guillemino, she must needs be the same
young Maiden, for I was there at the same time, and in the House, whence
Guidotto did bring both the girl and goods, and I do perfectly remember, that
it was thy House. I pray thee call to mind, if ever thou saw any scarre or
mark about her, which may revive thy former knowledge of her, for my mind
persuades me, that the Maid is thy Daughter.

Bernardino musing a while with himself, remembered, that under her left care,
she had a scarre, in the form of a little cross, which happened by the
biting of a Wolf, and but a small while before the spoil was made. Wherefore,
without deferring it to any further time, he stepped to Iacomino (who as yet
stayed there) and entreated him to fetch the Maiden from his house, because
she might be known to some in the company: whereto right willingly he
condiscended, and there presented the Maid before them. So soon as Bernardino
beheld her, he began to be much inwardly moved, for the perfect character of
her Mothers countenance, was really figured in her sweet face; only that her
beauty was somewhat more excelling. Yet not herewith satisfied, he desired
Iacomino to be so pleased, as to lift up a little the locks of hair,
depending over her left ear* Iacomino did it presently, albeit with a modest
blushing in the maid, and Bernardino looking advisedly on it, knew it to be
the self same cross; which confirmed her constantly to be his Daughter.

Overcome with excess of joy, which made the tears to trickle down his
cheeks, he proffered to embrace and kiss the Maid: but she refusing his
kindness, because (as yet) she knew no reason for it, he turned himself to
Iacomino, saying. My dear brother and friend, this Maid is my Daughter, and
my House was the same which Guidotto spoiled, in the general havoc of our
City, and thence he carried this child of mine, forgotten (in the fury) by my
Wife her Mother. But happy was the hour of his becoming her Father, and
carrying her away with him; for else she had perished in the fire, because the
House was instantly burnt down to the ground. The Maiden hearing his words,
observing him also to be a man of years and gravity: she believed what he
said, and humbly submitted her self to his kisses and embraces, even as
instructed thereto by instinct of nature. Bernardino instantly sent for his
wife, her own mother, his daughters, sons, and kindred, who being acquainted
with this admirable accident, gave her most gracious and kind welcome, he
receiving her from Iacomino as his child, and the legacies which Guidotto had
left her.

When the Captain of the City (being a very wise and worthy Gentleman) heard
these tidings, and knowing that Giouanni, then his prisoner, was the Son to
Bernardino, and natural Brother to the newly recovered Maid: he bethought
himself, how best he might qualify the fault committed by him. And entering
into the Hall among them, handled the matter so discreetly, that a loving
league of peace was confirmed between Giouanni and Menghino, to whom (with
free and full consent on all sides) the fair Maid, named Agatha, was given in
marriage, with a more honorable enlargement of her dowry, and Grinello, with
the rest, delivered out of prison, which for their tumultuous riot they had
justly deserved. Menghino and Agatha had their wedding worthily sollemnized,
with all due honors belonging thereto; and long time after they lived in
Faenza, highly beloved, and graciously esteemed.

Guion di Procida, being found familiarly conuersing with a young Damsel,
which he loved; and had been given (formerly) to Frederigo, King of Sicilie:
was bound to a stake, to be consumed with fire. From which danger
(nevertheless) he escaped, being known by Don Rogiero de Oria, Lord Admiral
of Sicilie, and afterward married the Damsel.

The sixth Novel.
Wherein is manifested, that love can lead a man into numberless perils: out
of which he escapes with no mean difficulty.



THe Novel of Madam Neiphila being ended, which proved very pleasing to the
Ladies: the Queen commanded Madam Pampinea, that she should prepare to take
her turn next, whereto willingly obeying, thus she began. Many and mighty
(Gracious Ladies) are the prevailing powers of love, conducting amorous souls
into infinite travels, with inconveniences no way auoidable, and not easily to
be foreseen, or prevented. As partly already has been observed, by diverse of
our former Nouels related, and some (no doubt) to ensue hereafter; for one of
them (coming now to my memory) I shall acquaint you withal, in so good
terms as I can.

Ischia is an Island very near to Naples, wherein (not long since) lived a
fair and lovely Gentlewoman, named Restituta, Daughter to a Gentleman of the
same Isle, whose name was Marino Bolgaro. A proper youth called Guion, dwelling
also in a near neighboring Isle, called Procida, did love her as dearly as
his own life, and she was as intimately affected toward him. Now because the
sight of her was his only comfort, as occasion gave him leave; he resorted to
Ischia very often in the day time, and as often also in the night season, when
any Barque passed from Procida to Ischia; if to see nothing else, yet to behold
the walls that enclosed his Mistress thus.

While this love continued in equal feruency, it chanced upon a fair Summers
day, that Restituta walked alone upon the Sea-shoare, going from Rock to
Rock, having a naked knife in her hand, wherewith she opened such Oysters as
she found among the stones, seeking for small pearls enclosed in their
shelles. Her walk was very solitary and shady, with a fair Spring or well
adjoining to it, and thither (at that very instant time) certain Sicilian
young Gentlemen, which came from Naples, had made their retreat. They
perceiving the Gentlewoman to be very beautiful (she as yet not having any
sight of them) and in such a silent place alone by her self: concluded
together, to make a purchase of her, and carry her thence away with them; as
indeed they did, notwithstanding all her outcries and exclaimes, bearing her
perforce aboard their Barque.

Setting sail thence, they arrived in Calabria, and then there grew a great
contention between them, to which of them this booty of beauty should belong;
because each of them pleaded a title to her. But when they could not grow to
any agreement, but doubted greater disaster would ensue thereon, by breaking
their former league of friendship: by an equal conformity in consent, they
resolved, to bestow her as a rich present, on Frederigo King of Sicilie, who
was then young and iouiall, and could not be pleased with a better gift;
wherefore, they were no sooner landed at Palermo, but they did according as
they had determined. The King did commend her beauty extraordinarily, and liked
her far beyond all his other Loves: but, being at that time empaired in his
health, and his body much distempered by ill diet; he gave command, that until
he should be in more able disposition, she must be kept in a goodly house of
his own, erected in a beautiful Garden, called the Cube, where she was
attended in most pompeous manner.

Now grew the noise and rumor great in Ischia, about this rape or stealing away
of Restituta; but the chiefest greeuance of all, was, that it could not be
known how, by whom, or by what means. But Guion di Procida, whom this injury
concerned much more then any other; stood not in expectation of better tidings
from Ischia, but hearing what course the Bark had taken, made ready another,
to follow after with all possible speed. Flying thus on the winged minds
through the Seas, even from Minerua, unto the Scalea in Calabria, searching for
his lost Love in every angle: at length it was told him at the Scale^ that
she was carried away by certain Sicillian Mariners, to Palermo, whither
Guion set sail immediately.

After some diligent search made there, he understood, that she was delivered
to the King, and he had given strict command, for keeping her in his place of
pleasure; called the Cube: which news were not a little grievous to him, for
now he was almost quite out of hope, not only of ever enjoying her, but also
of seeing her. Nevertheless, Love would not let him utterly despair,
whereupon he sent away his Barque, and perceiving himself to be vnk own of
any; he continued for some time in Palermo, walking many times by that goodly
place of pleasure. It chanced on a day, that keeping his walk as he used to
do, Fortune was so favorable to him, as to let him have a sight of her at her
window; from whence also she had a full view of him, to their exceeding comfort
and contentment. And Guion observing, that the Cube was seated in a place of
small resort; approached so near as possibly he durst, to have some conference
with Restituta.

As Love sets a keen edge on the dullest spirit, and (by a small advantage)
makes a man the more aduenturous: so this little time of unseen talk,
inspired him with courage, and her with witty advice, by what means his
access might be much nearer to her, and their communication concealed from any
discovery, the situation of the place, and benefit of time duly considered.
Night must be the cloud to their amorous conclusion, and therefore, so much
thereof being spent, as was thought convenient, he returned thither again,
provided of such grappling-yrons, as is required when men will clamber, made
fast unto his hands and knees; by their help he attained to the top of the
wall, whence discending down into the Garden, there he found the maine yard of
a ship, whereof before she had given him instruction, and rearing it up
against her chamber window, made that his means for ascending thereto, she
having left it open for his easier entrance.

You cannot deny (fair Ladies) but here was a very hopeful beginning, and
likely to have as happy an ending, were it not true Loves fatal misery, even
in the very height of promised assurance, to be thwarted by unkind prevention,
and in such manner as I will tell you. This night, intended for our Lovers
meeting, proved disastrous and dreadful to them both: for the King, who at the
first sight of Restituta, was highly pleased with her excelling beauty; gave
order to his Eunuchs and other women, that a costly bathe should be prepared
for her, and therein to let her wear away that night, because the next day he
intended to visit her. Restituta being royally conducted from her Chamber to
the Bathe, attended on with Torch-light, as if she had been a Queen: none
remained there behind, but such women as waited on her, and the Guards without,
which watched the Chamber.

No sooner was poor Guian aloft at the window, calling softly to his
Mistress, as if she had been there; but he was ouer-heard by the women in the
dark, and immediately apprehended by the Guard, who forthwith brought him
before the Lord Marshall, where being examined, and he auouching, that
Restituta was his elected wife, and for her he had presumed in that manner;
closely was he kept in prison till the next morning. When he came into the
Kings presence, and there boldly justified the goodness of his cause:
Restituta likewise was sent for, who no sooner saw her dear Love Guian, but
she ran and caught him fast about the neck, kissing him in tears, and
greeuing not a little at his hard fortune. Hereat the King grew exceedingly
enraged, loathing and hating her now, much more then formerly he did affect
her, and having himself seen, by what strange means he did climb over the
wall, and then mounted to her Chamber window; he was extremely impatient, and
could not otherwise be persuaded, but that their meetings thus had been very
many.

Forthwith he sentenced them both with death, commanding, that they should be
conveyed thence to Palermo, and there (being stripped stark naked) be bound to a
stake back to back, and so to stand the full space of nine hours, to see if
any could take knowledge, of whence, or what they were; then afterward, to be
consumed with fire. The sentence of death, did not so much daunt or dismay the
poor Lovers, as the uncivil and unsightly manner, which (in fear of the
Kings wrathful displeasure) no man durst presume to contradict. Wherefore, as
he had commanded, so were they carried thence to Palermo, and bound naked to a
stake in the open Market place, and (before their eyes) the fire and wood
brought, which was to consume them, according to the hour as the King had
appointed. You need not make any question, what an huge concourse of people
were soon assembled together, to behold such a sad and woeful spectacle, even
the whole City of Palermo, both men and women. The men were stricken with
admiration, beholding the vnequalled beauty of fair Restituta, and the self
same passion possessed the women, seeing Guian to be such a goodly and complete
young man: but the poor unfortunate Lovers themselves, they stood with their
looks dejected to the ground, being much pitied of all, but no way to be
helped or rescued by any, awaiting when the happy hour would come, to finish
both their shame and lives together.

During the time of this tragical expectation, the fame of this public
execution being noysed abroad, calling all people far and near to behold
it; it came to the ear of Don Rogiero de Oria, a man of much admired valor,
and then the Lord high Admiral of Sicily, who came himself in person, to the
place appointed for their death. First he observed the Maiden, confessing her
(in his soul) to be a beauty beyond all compare. Then looking on the young
man, thus he said within himself: If the inward endowments of the mind, do
parallel the outward perfections of body; the World cannot yield a more
complete man. Now, as good natures are quickly incited to compassion
(especially in cases almost commanding it) and compassion knocking at the door
of the soul, does quicken the memory with many passed recordations: so this
noble Admiral, advisedly beholding poor condemned Guion, conceived, that he
had somewhat seen him before this instant, and upon this persuasion (even as
if divine virtue had tutured his tongue) he said: Is not thy name Guion di
Procida?

Mark now, how quickly misery can receive comfort, upon so poor and silly a
question; for Guion began to eleuate his dejected countenance, and looking on
the Admiral, returned him this answer. Sir, heretofore I have been the man
which you spoke of; but now, both that name and man must die with me. What
misfortune (quoth the Admiral) has thus unkindly crossed thee? Love (answered
Guion) and the Kings displeasure. Then the Admiral would needs know the whole
history at large, which briefly was related to him, and having heard how all
had happened; as he was turning his Horse to ride away thence, Guion called to
him, saying. Good my Lord, entreat one favor for me, if possible it may be.
What is that? replied the Admiral. You see Sir (quoth Guion) that I am very
shortly to breathe my last; all the grace which I do most humbly entreat, is,
that as I am here with this chaste Virgin, (whom I honor and love beyond my
life) and miserably bound back to back: our faces may be turned each to
other, to the end, that when the fire shall finish my life, by looking on her,
my soul may take her flight in full felicity. The Admiral smyling, said; I
will do for thee what I can, and (perhaps) thou may so long look on her,
as thou will be weary, and desire to look off her.

At his departure, he commanded them that had the charge of this execution, to
proceed no further, until they heard more from the King, to whom he
gallopped immediately, and although he beheld him to be very angerly moved;
yet he spared not to speak in this manner. Sir, wherein have those poor young
couple offended you, that are so shamefully to be burnt at Palermo? The King
told him: whereto the Admiral (pursuing still his purpose) thus replied.
Believe me Sir, if true love be an offense, then theirs may be termed to be
one; and albeit it did deserve death, yet far be it from thee to inflict it
on them: for as faults do justly require punishment, so do good turns as
equally merit grace and requital. Know thou what and who they are, whom
thou have so dishonourably condemned to the fire? Not I, quoth the King. Why
then I will tell thee, answered the Admiral, that thou may take the better
knowledge of them, and forbear hereafter, to be so ouer-violently transported
with anger.

The young Gentleman, is the Son to Landolfo di Procida, the only Brother to
Lord John di Procida, by whose means thou becamest Lord and King of this
Country. The fair young Damsel, is the Daughter to Marino Bolgaro, whose
power extends so far, as to preserve thy prerogative in Ischia, which (but
for him) had long since been out-rooted there. Beside, these two maine
motives, to challenge justly grace and favor from thee; they are in the flower
and pride of their youth, having long continued in loyal love together, and
compelled by feruency of endeared affection, not any will to displease thy
Majesty: they have offended (if it may be termed an offense to love, and in
such lovely young people as they are.) Can thou then find in thine heart to
let them die, whom thou rather ought to honor, and recompense with no mean
rewards?

When the King had heard this, and believed for a certainty, that the Admiral
told him nothing but truth: he appointed not only, that they should proceed
no further, but also was exceeding sorrowful for what he had done, sending
presently to have them released from the Stake, and honorably to be brought
before him. Being thus enstructed in their several qualities, and standing in
duty obliged, to recompense the wrong which he had done, with respective
honors: he caused them to be clothed in royal garments, and knowing them to
be knit in unity of soul; the like he did by marrying them sollemnly together,
and bestowing many rich gifts and presents on them, sent them honorably
attented home to Ischia; where they were with much joy and comfort received,
and lived long after in great felicity.

Theodoro falling in love with Violenta, the Daughter to his Master, named
Amarigo, and she conceiving with child by him; was condemned to be hanged. As
they were leading him to the Gallows, beating and misusing him all the way: he
happened to be known by his own Father, whereupon he was released, and
afterward enjoyed Violenta in marriage.

The seventh Novel.
Wherein is declared, the sundry travels and perilous accidents, occasioned by
those two powerful Commanders, Love and Fortune, the insulting Tyrants over
human life.

GReatly were the Ladies minds perplexed, when they heard, that the two poor
Lovers were in danger to be burned: but hearing afterward of their happy
deliverance, for which they were as joyful again; upon the concluding of the
Novel, the Queen looked on Madam Lauretta, enioyning her to tell the next
Tale, which willingly she undertook to do, and thus began.

Fair Ladies, at such time as the good King William reigned in Sicily, there
lived within the same Dominions a young Gentleman, named Signior Amarigo, Abbot
of Trapani, who (among his other worldly blessings, commonly termed the goods
of Fortune) was not unfurnished of children; and therefore having need of
servants, he made his provision of them as best he might. At that time,
certain Galleys of Geneway Pirates coming from the Eastern parts, which
coasting along Armenia, had taken diverse children; he bought some of them,
thinking that they were Turks. They all resembling clownish Peazants, yet
there was one among them, who seemed to be of more tractable and gentle nature,
yea, and of a more affable countenance then any of the rest, being named,
Theodoro: who growing on in years, (albeit he lived in the condition of a
servant) was educated among Amarigoes Children, and as enstructed rather by
nature, then accident, his conditions were very much commended, as also the
feature of his body, which proved so highly pleasing to his Master Amarigo,
that he made him a free man, and imagining him to be a Turk, caused him to be
baptized, and named Pedro, creating him superintendent of all his affairs, and
reposing his chiefest trust in him.



As the other Children of Signior Amarigo grew in years and stature, so did a
Daughter of his, named Violenta, a very goodly and beautiful Damsel,
somewhat ouer-long kept from marriage by her Fathers covetousness, and casting
an eye of good liking on poor Pedro. Now, albeit she loved him very dearly,
and all his behavior was most pleasing to her, yet maiden modesty forbad her
to reveal it, till Love (too long concealed) must needs disclose it self.
Which Pedro at the length took notice of, and grew so forward toward her in
equality of affection, as the very sight of her was his only happiness. Yet
very fearful he was, least it should be noted, either by any of the House, or
the Maiden her self: who yet well observed it, and to her no mean
contentment, as it appeared no less (on the other side) to honest Pedro.

While thus they loved together merely in dumb shows, not daring to speak
to each other, (though nothing more desired) to find some ease in this their
oppressing passions: Fortune, even as if she pitied their so long
languishing, enstructed them how to find out a way, whereby they might both
better relieve themselves. Signior Amarigo, about some two or three miles
distance from Trapani, had a Countrey-House or Farm, whereto his Wife, with
her Daughter and some other women, used oftentimes to make their resort, as it
were in sportfull recreation; Pedro always being diligent to man them thither.
One time among the rest, it came to pass, as often it falls out in the
Summer season, that the fair Sky became suddenly ouer-clouded, even as they
were returning home toward Trapani, threatening a storm of rain to overtake
them, except they made the speedier haste.

Pedro, who was young, and likewise Violenta, went far more lightly then her
Mother and her company, as much perhaps provoked by love, as fear of the
sudden rain falling, and paced on so fast before them, that they were wholly
out of sight. After many flashes of lightning, and a few dreadful clappes of
thunder, there fell such a tempestuous shower of hayle, as compelled the Mother
and her train to shelter themselves in a poor Countrey-mans Cottage. Pedro
and Violenta having no other refuge, ran likewise into a poor Sheepe-coate,
so over ruined, as it was in danger to fall on their heads; for no body dwelt
in it, neither stood any other house near it, and it was scarcely any shelter
for them, howbeit, necessity enforces to make shift with the meanest. The
storm increasing more and more, and they coveting to avoid it so well as they
could, sighs and dry hemmes were often inter-uented, as dumbly (before) they
were wont to do, when willingly they could afford another kind of speaking.

At last Pedro took heart, and said: I would this shower would never cease,
that I might be always where I am. The like could I wish, answered Violenta,
so we were in a better place of safety. These wishes drew on other gentle
language, with modest kisses and embraces, the only ease to poor Lovers
souls; so that the rain ceased not, till they had taken order for their
oftener conuersing, and absolute plighting of their faithes together. By this
time the storm was fairly over blown, and they attending on the way, till
the Mother and the rest were come, with whom they returned to Trapani, where by
wise and provident means, they often conferred in private together, and
enjoyed the benefit of their amorous desires, yet free from any ill surmise or
suspicion.

But, as Lovers felicities are sildome permanent, without one encountering
cross or other: so these stolen pleasures of Pedro and Violenta, met with as
sour a sauce in the farewell. For, she proved to be conceived with child,
then which could befall them no heavier affliction, and Pedro fearing to loose
his life therefore, determined immediate flight, and revealed his purpose to
Violenta. Which when she heard, she told him plainly, that if he fled,
forthwith she would kill her self. Alas dear Love (quoth Pedro) with what
reason can you wish my tarrying here? This conception of yours, does discover
our offense, which a Fathers pity may easily pardon in you: but I being his
servant and vassal, shall be punished both for your sin and mine, because he
will have no mercy on me. Content thy self Pedro, replied Violenta, I will
take such order for mine own offense, by the discreet counsel of my loving
Mother, that no blame shall any way be laid on thee, or so much as a surmise,
except thou will fondly betray thy self. If you can do so, answered Pedro,
and constantly maintain your promise; I will not depart, but see that you
prove to be so good as your word.

Violenta, who had concealed her amiss so long as she could, and saw no other
remedy, but now at last it must needs be discovered; went privately to her
Mother, and (in tears) revealed her infirmity, humbly craving her pardon, and
furtherance in hiding it from her Father. The Mother being extraordinarily
displeased, chiding her with many sharp and angry speeches, would needs know
with whom she had thus offended. The Daughter (to keep Pedro from any
detection) forged a Tale of her own brain, far from any truth indeed,
which her Mother verily believing, and willing to preserve her Daughter from
shame, as also the fierce anger of her Husband, he being a man of very
implacable nature: conveyed her to the Countrey-Farme, whither Signior Amarigo
sildome or never resorted, intending (under the shadow of sickness) to let her
lie in there, without the least suspicion of any in Trapani.

Sin and shame can never be so closely carried, or clouded with the greatest
cunning; but truth has a loop-light whereby to discover it, even when it
supposes it self in the surest safety. For, on the very day of her
deliverance, at such time as the Mother, and some few friends (sworn to
secrecy) were about the business: Signior Amarigo, having been in company of
other Gentlemen, to fly his Hawke at the River, upon a sudden, (but very
unfortunately, albeit he was alone by himself) stepped into his Farm house,
even to the next room where the women were, and heard the newborn Babe to
cry, whereat maruelling not a little, he called for his Wife, to know what
young child cried in his House. The Mother, amazed at his so strange coming
thither, which never before he had used to do, and pitying the woeful
distress of her Daughter, which now could be no longer covered, revealed what
happened to Violenta. But he, being nothing so rash in belief, as his Wife
was, made answer, that it was impossible for his Daughter to be conceived with
child, because he never observed the least sign of love in her to any man
whatsoever, and therefore he would be satisfied in the truth, as she expected
any favor from him, for else there was no other way but death.

The Mother labored by all means she could devise, to pacify her Husbands
fury, which proved all in vain; for being thus impatiently incensed, he drew
forth his Sword, and stepping with it drawn into the Chamber (where she had
been delivered of a goodly Son) he said unto her. Either tell me who is the
Father of this Bastard, or thou and it shall perish both together. Poor
Violenta, less respecting her own life, then she did the childs; forgot her
sollemne promise made to Pedro, and discovered all. Which when Amarigo had
heard, he grew so desperately enraged, that hardly he could forbear from
killing her. But after he had spoken what his fury enstructed him, he mounted
on Horseback again, ryding back to Trapani, where he disclosed the injury
which Pedro had done him, to a noble Gentleman, named Signior Conrado, who was
Captain for the King over the City.

Before poor Pedro could have any intelligence, or so much as suspected any
treachery against him; he was suddenly apprehended, and being called in
question, stood not on any denial, but confessed truly what he had done:
whereupon, within some few days after, he was condemned by the Captain, to be
whipped to the place of execution, and afterward to be hanged by the neck.
Signior Amarigo, because he would cut off (at one and the same time) not only
the lives of the two poor Lovers, but their childs also; as a frantic man,
violently carried from all sense of compassion, even when Pedro was led and
whipped to his death: he mingled strong poison in a Cup of wine, delivering it to
a trusty servant of his own, and a naked Rapier withal, speaking to him in
this manner. Go carry these two presents to my late Daughter Violenta, and
tell her from me, that in this instant hour, two several kinds of death are
offered unto her, and one of them she must make choice of, either to drink the
poison, and so die, or to run her body on this Rapiers point, which if she
deny to do, she shall be haled to the public market place, and presently be
burned in the sight of her lewd companion, according as she has worthily
deserved. When thou have delivered her this message, take her bastard brat, so
lately since borne, and dash his brains out against the walls, and afterward
throw him to my Dogs to feed on.

When the Father had given this cruel sentence, both against his own Daughter,
and her young Son, the servant, readier to do evil, then any good, went to
the place where his Daughter was kept. Poor condemned Pedro, (as you have
heard) was led whipped to the lybbet, and passing (as it pleased the Captains
Officers to guide him) by a fair Inn: at the same time were lodged there
three chief persons of Armenia, whom the King of the Country had sent to
Rome, as Ambassadors to the Popes Holiness, to negociate about an important
business nearly concerning the King and State. Reposing there for some few
days, as being much wearied with their journey, and highly honored by the
Gentlemen of Trapani, especially Signior Amarigo; these Ambassadors standing
in their Chamber window, heard the woeful lamentations of Pedro in his passage
by.

Pedro was naked from the middle upward, and his hands bound fast behind him,
but being well observed by one of the Ambassadors, a man aged, and of great
authority, named Phineo: he espied a great red spot upon his breast, not
painted, or procured by his punishment, but naturally imprinted in the flesh,
which women (in these parts) term the Rose. Upon the sight hereof, he
suddenly remembered a Son of his own, which was stolen from him about
fifteen years before, by Pirates on the Seacoast of Laiazzo, never hearing
any tidings of him afterward. Upon further consideration, and compairing his
Sons age with the likelihood of this poor wretched man's; thus he conferred
with his own thoughts. If my Son (quoth he) be living, his age is equal to
this man's time, and by the red blemish on his breast, it plainly speaks him
for to be my Son.

Moreover, thus he conceived, that if it were he, he could not but remember his
own name, his Fathers, and the Armenian Language; wherefore, when he was just
opposite before the window, he called aloud to him, saying: Theodoro. Pedro
hearing the voice, presently lifted up his head, and Phineo speaking Armenian,
said: Of whence art thou, and what is thy Fathers name? The Sergeants (in
reverence to the Lord Ambassador) stayed a while, till Pedro had returned his
answer, who said. I am an Armenian borne, Son to one Phineo, and was brought
hither I cannot tell by whom. Phineo hearing this, knew then assuredly, that
this was the same Son which he had lost; wherefore, the tears standing in
his eyes with conceit of joy: down he descended from the window, and the
other Ambassadors with him, running in among the Sergeants to embrace his
Son, and casting his own rich Cloak about his whipped body, entreating them
to forbear and proceed no further, till they heard what command he should
return withal unto them; which very willingly they promised to do.

Already, by the general rumor dispersed abroad, Phineo had understood the
occasion, why Pedro was thus punished, and sentenced to be hanged; wherefore,
accompanied with his fellow Ambassadors, and all their attending train, he
went to Signior Conrado, and spoke thus to him. My Lord, he whom you have sent
to death as a slave, is a free Gentleman borne, and my Son, able to make her
amends whom he has dishonored, by taking her in marriage as his lawful Wife.
Let me therefore entreat you, to make stay of the execution, until it may be
known, whether she will accept him as her Husband, or no; least (if she be so
pleased) you offend directly against your own Law. When Signior Conrado heard,
that Pedro was Son to the Lord Ambassador, he wondered thereat not a little,
and being somewhat ashamed of his fortunes error, confessed, that the claim
of Phineo was conformable to Law, and ought not to be denied him; going
presently to the Council Chamber, sending for Signior Amarigo immediately
thither, and acquainting him fully with the case.

Amarigo, who believed that his Daughter and her Child were already dead, was
the wofullest man in the World, for his so rash proceeding, knowing very well,
that if she were not dead, the scandal would easily be wipt away with credit.
Wherefore he sent in all poast haste, to the place where his Daughter lay, that
if his command were not already executed, by no means to have it done at all.
He who went on this speedy errand, found there Signior Amarigoes servant
standing before Violenta, with the Cup of poison in his one hand, and the
drawn Rapier in the other, reproaching herewith very foul and injurious
speeches, because she had delayed the time so long, and would not accept the
one or other, striving (by violence) to make her take the one. But hearing his
Masters command to the contrary, he left her, and returned back to him,
certifying him how the case stood.

Most highly pleased was Amarigo with these glad news, and going to the
Ambassador Phineo, in tears excused himself (so well as he could) for his
severity, and craving pardon; assured him, that if Theodoro would accept his
Daughter in marriage, willingly he would bestow her on him. Phineo allowed his
excuses to be tolerable, and said beside; If my Son will not mary your
Daughter, then let the sentence of death be executed on him. Amarigo and Phineo
being thus accorded, they went to poor Theodoro, fearfully looking every
minute when he should die, yet joyful that he had found his Father, who
presently moved the question to him. Theodoro hearing that Violenta should be
his Wife, if he would so accept her: was overcome with such exceeding joy, as
if he had leapt out of hell into Paradise; confessing, that no greater felicity
could befall him, if Violenta her self were so well pleased as he.

The like motion was made to her, to understand her disposition in this case,
who hearing what good hap had befalne Theodoro, and now in like manner must
happen to her: whereas not long before, when two such violent deaths were
prepared for her, and one of them she must needs embrace, she accounted her
misery beyond all other women's, but she now thought her self above all in
happiness, if she might be wife to her beloved Theodoro, submitting her self
wholly to her Fathers disposing. The marriage being agreed on between them, it
was celebrated with great pomp and sollemnity, a general Feast being made for
all the Citizens, and the young married couple nourished up their sweet Son,
which grew to be a very comely child.

After that the Embassy was dispatched at Rome, and Phineo (with the rest) was
returned thither again; Violenta did reverence him as her own natural
Father, and he was not a little proud of so lovely a Daughter, beginning a
fresh feasting again, and continuing the same a whole month together. Within
some short while after, a Galley being fairly furnished for the purpose,
Phineo, his Son, Daughter, and their young Son went aboard, sailing away
thence to Laiazzo, where afterward they lived long in much tranquillity.

Anastasio, a Gentleman of the Family of the Honesti, by loving the Daughter to
Signior Paulo Trauersario, lauishly wasted a great part of his substance,
without receiving any love from her again. By persuasion of some of his
kindred and friends, he went to a Country dwelling of his, called Chiasso,
where he saw a Knight desperately pursue a young Damsel, whom he slew, and
afterward gave her to be devoured by his Hounds. Anastasio invited his friends,
and hers also whom he so dearly loved, to take part of a dinner with him, who
likewise saw the same Damsel so torn in pieces: which his unkind Love
perceiving, and fearing least the like ill fortune should happen to her; she
accepted Anastasio to be her Husband.

The eighth Novel.
Declaring, that Love not only makes a man prodigal, but also an enemy to
himself. Moreover, adventure oftentimes brings such matters to pass, as wit
and cunning in man can never comprehend.

SO soon as Madam Lauretta held her peace, Madam Philomena (by the Queens
command) began, and said. Lovely Ladies, as pity is most highly commended in
our Sex, even so is cruelty in us as severely revenged (oftentimes) by divine
ordination. Which that you may the better know, and learn likewise to shun, as
a deadly evil; I purpose to make apparent by a Novel, no less full of
compassion, then delectable.



Rauenna being a very ancient City in Romania, there dwelt sometime a great
number of worthy Gentlemen, among whom I am to speak of one more especially,
named Anastasio, descended from the Family of the Honesti, who by the death of
his Father, and an Uncle of his, was left extraordinarily abounding in riches;
and growing to years fitting for marriage, (as young Gallants are easily apt
enough to do) he became enamoured of a very beautiful Gentlewoman, who was
Daughter to Signior Paulo Trauersario, one of the most ancient and noble
Families in all the Country. Nor made he any doubt, but by his means and
industrious endeavor, to derive affection from her again; for he carried
himself like a brave minded Gentleman, liberal in his expenses, honest and
affable in all his actions, which commonly are the true notes of a good nature,
and highly to be commended in any man. But, howsoever Fortune became his enemy,
these laudable parts of manhood did not any way friend him, but rather appeared
hurtful to him: so cruel, unkind, and almost merely savage did she show her
self to him; perhaps in pride of her singular beauty, or presuming on her
nobility by birth, both which are on her blemishes, then ornaments in a woman,
especially when they be abused.

The harsh and uncivil usage in her, grew very distastefull to Anastasio, and
so insufferable, that after a long time of fruitless service, requited still
with nothing but coy disdain; desperate resolutions entered into his brain, and
often he was minded to kill himself. But better thoughts supplanting those
furious passions, he abstained from any such violent act; and governed by more
manly consideration, determined, that as she hated him, he would require her
with the like, if he could: wherein he became altogether deceived, because as
his hopes grew to a daily decaying, yet his love enlarged it self more and
more.

Thus Anastasio perseuering still in his bootelesse affection, and his expenses
not limited within any compass; it appeared in the judgment of his Kindred
and Friends, that he was fallen into a mighty consumption, both of his body and
means. In which respect, many times they advised him to leave the City of
Rauenna, and live in some other place for such a while; as might set a more
moderate stint upon his spendings, and bridle the indiscreete course of his
love, the only fuel which fed this furious fire.

Anastasio held out thus a long time, without lending an ear to such friendly
counsel: but in the end, he was so nearly followed by them, as being no
longer able to deny them, he promised to accomplish their request. Whereupon,
making such extraordinary preparation, as if he were to set thence for France or
Spain, or else into some further distant country: he mounted on horseback,
and accompanied with some few of his familiar friends, departed from Rauenna,
and rode to a country dwelling house of his own, about three or four miles
distant from the City, which was called Chiasso, and there (upon a very
goodly green) erecting diverse Tents and Pauillions, such as great persons make
use of in the time of a Progress: he said to his friends, which came with him
thither, that there he determined to make his abiding, they all returning
back unto Rauenna, and might come to visit him again so often as they
pleased.

Now, it came to pass, that about the beginning of May, it being then a very
mild and serrene season, and he leading there a much more magnificent life,
then ever he had done before, inuiting diverse to dine with him this day, and as
many to morrow, and not to leave him till after supper: upon the sudden,
falling into remembrance of his cruel Mistress, he commanded all his servants
to forbear his company, and suffer him to walk alone by himself awhile,
because he had occasion of private meditations, wherein he would not (by any
means) be troubled. It was then about the ninth hour of the day, and he
walking on solitary all alone, having gone some half miles distance from his
Tents, entered into a Grove of Pine-trees, never minding dinner time, or any
thing else, but only the unkind requital of his love.

Suddenly he heard the voice of a woman, seeming to make most mournful
complaints, which breaking of his silent considerations, made him to lift up
his head, to know the reason of this noise. When he saw himself so far
entered into the Grove, before he could imagine where he was; he looked
amazedly round about him, and out of a little thicket of bushes and briars,
round engirt with spreading trees, he espied a young Damsel come running
toward him, naked from the middle upward, her hair disheuelled on her
shoulders, and her fair skin rent and torn with the briars and brambles, so
that the blood ran trickling down mainly; she weeping, wringing her hands,
and crying out for mercy so loud as she could. Two fierce Bloodhounds also
followed swiftly after, and where their teeth took hold, did most cruelly bite
her. Last of all (mounted on a lusty black Courser) came gallopping a Knight,
with a very stern and angry countenance, holding a drawn short Sword in his
hand, giving her very vile and dreadful speeches, and threatening every minute
to kill her.

This strange and uncouth sight, bred in him no mean admiration, as also kind
compassion to the unfortunate woman; out of which compassion, sprung an earnest
desire, to deliver her (if he could) from a death so full of anguish and
horror: but seeing himself to be without Arms, he ran and plucked up the
plant of a Tree, which handling as if it had been a staff, he opposed
himself against the Dogs and the Knight, who seeing him coming, cried out
in this manner to him. Anastasio, put not thy self in any opposition, but
refer to my Hounds and me, to punish this wicked woman as she has justly
deserved. And in speaking these words, the Hounds took fast hold on her body,
so staying her, until the Knight was come nearer to her, and alighted from his
horse: when Anastasio (after some other angry speeches) spoke thus unto him. I
cannot tell what or who thou art, albeit thou take such knowledge of me: yet
I must say, that it is mere cowardice in a Knight, being armed as thou art, to
offer to kill a naked woman, and make thy dogs thus to seize on her, as if
she were a savage beast; therefore believe me, I will defend her so far as I
am able.

Anastasio, answered the Knight, I am of the same City as thou art, and do well
remember, that thou wast a little Ladde, when I (who was then named Guido
Anastasio, and thine Uncle) became as entirely in love with this woman, as now
thou art of Paulo Trauersarioes daughter. But through her coy disdain and
cruelty, such was my heavy fate, that desperately I slew my self with this
short sword which thou beholdest in mine hand: for which rash sinful deed, I
was and am condemned to eternal punishment. This wicked woman, rejoicing
immeasurably in mine unhappy death, remained no long time alive after me, and
for her merciless sin of cruelty, and taking pleasure in my oppressing
torments; dying unrepentant, and in pride of her scorn, she had the like
sentence of condemnation pronounced on her, and sent to the same place where I
was tormented.

There the three impartial Judges, imposed this further infliction on us both;
namely, that she should fly in this manner before me, and I (who loved her
so dearly while I lived) must pursue her as my deadly enemy, not like a woman
that had any taste of love in her. And so often as I can overtake her, I am to
kill her with this sword, the same Weapon wherewith I slew my self. Then am I
enjoined, therewith to open her accursed body, and tear out her hard and
frozen heart, with her other inwards, as now thou see me do, which I give
unto my hounds to feed on. Afterward, such is the appointment of the supreme
powers, that she re-assumeth life again, even as if she had not been dead at
all, and falling to the same kind of flight, I with my hounds am still to
follow her, without any respite or intermission. Every Friday, and just at this
hour, our course is this way, where she suffers the just punishment
inflicted on her. Nor do we rest any of the other days, but are appointed unto
other places, where she cruelly executed her malice against me, being now (of
her dear affectionate friend) ordained to be her endless enemy, and to pursue
her in this manner) for so many years, as she exercised months of cruelty
toward me. Hinder me not then, in being the executioner of divine justice; for
all thy interposition is but in vain, in seeking to cross the appointment of
supreme powers.

Anastasio having attentively heard all this discourse, his hair stood
upright like Porcupines quils, and his soul was so shaken with the terror,
that he stepped back to suffer the Knight to do what he was enjoined, looking
yet with mild commisseration on the poor woman. Who kneeling most humbly
before the Knight, and sternly seized on by the two blood hounds, he opened her
breast with his weapon, drawing forth her heart and bowels, which instantly he
threw to the dogs, and they devoured them very greedily. Soon after, the
Damsel (as if none of this punishment had been inflicted on her) started up
suddenly, running amain toward the Sea shore, and the Hounds swiftly
following her, as the Knight did the like, after he had taken his sword, and
was mounted on horseback; so that Anastasio had soon lost all sight of them,
and could not guess what was become of them.

After he had heard and observed all these things, he stood awhile as
confounded with fear and pity, like a simple silly man, hoodwinkt with his
own passions, not knowing the subtle enemies cunning illusions, in offering
false suggestions to the sight, to work his own ends thereby, and increase
the number of his deceived servants. Forthwith he persuaded himself, that he
might make good use of this woman's tormenting, so justly imposed on the Knight
to prosecute, if thus it should continue still every Friday. Wherefore, setting
a good note or mark upon the place, he returned back to his own people, and
at such time as he thought convenient, sent for diverse of his kindred and
friends from Rauenna, who being present with him, thus he spoke to them.

Dear Kinsmen and Friends, ye have a long while importuned me, to discontinue
my ouer-doating love to her, whom you all think, and I find to be my mortal
enemy: as also, to give over my lavish expenses, wherein I confess my self
too prodigal; both which requests of yours, I will condescend to, provided,
that you will perform one gracious favor for me; Namely, that on Friday next,
Signior Paulo Trauersario, his wife, daughter, with all other women linked in
lineage to them, and such beside only as you shall please to appoint, will
vouchsafe to accept a dinner here with me; as for the reason thereto moving
me, you shall then more at large be acquainted withal. This appeared no
difficult matter for them to accomplish: wherefore, being returned to Rauenna,
and as they found the time answerable to their purpose, they invited such as
Anastasio had appointed the^. And although they found it somewhat ^n hard
matter, to gain her company whom he so dearly affected; yet notwithstanding,
the other women won her along with them.

A most magnificent dinner had Anastasio provided, and the tables were covered
under the Pine-trees, where he saw the cruel Lady so pursued and slain:
directing the guests so in their seating, that the young Gentlewoman his unkind
Mistress, sat with her face opposite unto the place, where the dismal
spectacle was to be seen. About the closing up of dinner, they began to
hear the noise of the poor prosecuted Woman, which drove them all to much
admiration; desiring to know what it was, and no one resolving them, they arose
from the tables, and looking directly as the noise came to them, they espied
the woeful Woman, the Dogs eagerly pursuing her; and the armed Knight on
horse back ^^^lopping fiercely after them with his drawn weapon, and came very
nere unto the company, who cried out with loud exclaimes against the dogs and
the Knight, stepping forth in assistance of the iniuried woman.

The Knight spoke unto them, as formerly he had done to Anastasio, (which made
them draw back, possessed with fear and admiration) acting the same cruelty
as he did the Friday before, not differing in the least degree. Most of the
Gentlewomen there present, being near allied to the unfortunate Woman, and
likewise to the Knight, remembering well both his love and death, did shed
tears as plentifully, as if it had b^n to the very persons themselves, in
visiall performance of the action indeed. Which tragical Scene being passed
over, and the Woman and Knight gone out of their sight: all that had seen this
strange accident, fell into diversity of confused opinions, yet not daring to
disclose them, as doubting some further danger to ensue thereon.

But beyond all the rest, none could compare in fear and astonishment with the
cruel young Maid affected by Anastasio, who both saw and observed all with a
more inward apprehension, knowing very well, that the moral of this dismal
spectacle, carried a much nearer application to her then any other in all the
company. For now she could call to mind, how unkind and cruel she had shown
her self to Anastasio, even as the other Gentlewoman formerly did to her
Lover, still flying from him in great contempt and scorn: for which, she
thought the Bloodhounds also pursued her at the heels already, and a sword of
due vengeance to mangle her body. This fear grew so powerful in her, that, to
prevent the like heavy doom from falling on her; she studied (by all her best
and commendable means, and therein bestowed all the night season) how to
change her hatred into kind love, which at the length she fully obtained, and
then purposed to prosecute in this manner.

Secretly she sent a faithful Chamber-maide of her own, to greet Anastasio
on her behalf; humbly entreating him to come see her: because now she was
absolutely determined, to give him satisfaction in all which (with honor) he
could request of her. Whereto Anastasio answered, that he accepted her message
thankfully, and desired no other favor at her hand, but that which stood with
her own offer, namely, to be his Wife in honorable marriage. The Maid
knowing sufficiently, that he could not be more desirous of the match, then
her Mistress showed her self to be, made answer in her name, that this
motion would be most welcome to her.

Hereupon, the Gentlewoman her self, became the solicitour to her Father and
Mother, telling them plainly, that she was willing to be the Wife of
Anastasio: which news did so highly content them, that upon the Sunday next
following, the marriage was very worthily sollemnized, and they lived and loved
together very kindly. Thus the divine bounty, out of the malignant enemies
secret machinations, can cause good effects to arise and succeed. For, from
this conceit of fearful imagination in her, not only happened this long
desired conversion, of a Maid so obstinately scornful and proud: but likewise
all the women of Rauenna (being admonished by her example) grew afterward more
kind and tractable to men's honest motions, then ever they showed themselves
before. And let me make some use hereof (fair Ladies) to you, not to stand
ouer-nicely conceited of your beauty and good parts, when men (growing enamored
of you by them) solicit you with their best and humblest services. Remember
then this disdainful Gentlewoman, but more especially her, who being the death
of so kind a Lover, was therefore condemned to perpetual punishment, and he
made the minister thereof, whom she had cast off with coy disdain, from which
I wish your minds to be as free, as mine is ready to do you any acceptable
service.

Frederigo, of the Alberighi Family, loved a Gentlewoman, and was not requited
with like love again. By bountiful expenses, and over liberal inuitations,
he wasted and consumed all his lands and goods, having nothing left him, but a
Hawke or Faulcon. His unkind Mistress happens to come visit him, and he
not having any other food for her dinner; made a dainty dish of his Faulcone
for her to feed on. Being conquered by this his exceeding kind courtesy; she
changed her former hatred toward him, accepting him as her Husband in
marriage, and made him a man of wealthy possessions.

The ninth Novel.
Wherein is figured to the life, the notable kindness and courtesy, of a true
and constant Lover: As also the magnanimous mind of a famous Lady.

MAdame Philomena having finished her discourse, the Queen perceiving, that
her turn was the next, in regard of the privilege granted to Dioneus; with a
smiling countenance thus she spoke. Now or never am I to maintain the order
which was instituted when we begann^ this commendable exercise, whereto I yield
with all humble obedience. And (worthy Ladies) I am to acquaint you with a
Novel, in some sort answerable to the precedent, not only to let you know,
how powerfully your kindnesses do prevail, in such as have a free and gentle
soul: but also to advise you, in being bountiful, where virtue does ^^stly
chal^nge it. And evermore, let your favors shine on worthy deseruers, without
the direction of chance or Fortune, who never bestows any gift by
discretion; but rashly without consideration, even to the first she blindly
meets withal.



You are to understand then, that Coppo di Borghese Domenichi, who was of our
own City, and perhaps (as yet) his name remains in great and reverend
authority, now in these days of ours, as well deserving eternal memory; yet
more for his virtues and commendable qualities, then any boast of Nobility from
his predecessors. This man, being well entered into years, and drawing toward
the finishing of his days; it was his only delight and felicity, in
conversation among his neighbors, to talk of matters concerning antiquity,
and some other things within compass of his own knowledge: which he would
deliver in such singular order, (having an absolute memory) and with the best
Language, as very few or none could do the like. Among the multiplicity of his
queint discourses, I remember he told us, that sometime there lived in Florence
a young Gentleman, named Frederigo, Son to Signior Philippo Alberigho, who was
held and reputed, both for Arms, and all other actions beseeming a Gentleman,
hardly to have his equal through all Tuscany.

This Frederigo (as it is no rare matter in young Gentlemen) became enamored of
a Gentlewoman, named Madam Giana, who was esteemed (in her time) to be the
fairest and most gracious Lady in all Florence. In which respect, and to reach
the height of his desire, he made many sumptuous Feasts and Banquets, Ioustes,
Tiltes, Tournaments, and all other noble actions of Arms, beside, sending her
infinite rich and costly presents, making spare of nothing, but las^ing all out
in lavish expense. Notwithstanding, she being no less honest then fair, made
no reckoning of whatsoever he did for her sake, or the least respect of his
own person. So that Frederigo, spending thus daily more, then his means and
ability could maintain, and no supplies any way redounding to him, or his
faculties (as very easily they might) diminished in such sort, that he became
so poor; as he had nothing left him, but a small poor Farm to live upon, the
silly revenues whereof were so mean, as scarcely allowed him meat and drink;
yet had he a Fair Hawke or Faulcon, hardly any where to be fellowed, so
expeditious and sure she was of flight. His low ebb and poverty, no way
quailing his love to the Lady, but rather setting a keener edge thereon; he saw
the City life could no longer contain him, where most he coueted to abide: and
therefore, betook himself to his poor Country Farm, to let his Faulcon get
him his dinner and supper, patiently supporting his penurious estate, without
suite or means making to one, for help or relief in any such necessity.

While thus he continued in this extremity, it came to pass, that the Husband
to Madam Giana fell sick, and his debility of body being such, as little, or
no hope of life remained: he made his last will and testament, ordaining
thereby, that his Son (already grown to indifferent stature) should be heir
to all his Lands and riches, wherein he abounded very greatly. Next unto him,
if he chanced to die without a lawful heir, he subsistuted his Wife, whom
most dearly he affected, and so departed out of this life. Madam Giana being
thus left a widow; as commonly it is the custom of our City Dames, during the
Summer season, she went to a House of her own in the Country, which was
somewhat near to poor Frederigoes Farm, and where he lived in such an honest
kind of contented poverty.

Hereupon, the young Gentleman her Son, taking great delight in Hounds and
Hawks; grew into familiarity with poor Frederigo, and having seen many fair
flights of his Faulcon, they pleased him so extraordinarily, that he earnestly
desired to enjoy her as his own; yet durst not move the motion for her,
because he saw how choycely Frederigo esteemed her. Within a short while after,
the young Gentleman, became very sick, whereat his Mother grieved exceedingly,
(as having no more but he, and therefore loved him the more entirely) never
parting from him either night or day, comforting him so kindly as she could,
and demanding, if he had a desire to any thing, willing him to reveal it, and
assuring him withal, that (if it were within the compass of possibility) he
should have it. The youth hearing how many times she had made him these
offers, and with such vehement protestations of performance, at last thus spoke.

Mother (quoth he) if you can do so much for me, as that I may have
Frederigoes Faulcon, I am persuaded, that my sickness soon will cease. The
Lady hearing this, sat some short while musing to her self, and began to
consider, what she might best do to compass her Sons desire: for well she
knew, how long a time Frederigo had most lovingly kept it, not suffering it
ever to be out of his sight. Moreover, she remembered, how earnest in affection
he had been to her, never thinking himself happy, but only when he was in
her company; wherefore, she entered into this private consultation with her
own thoughts. Shall I send, or go my self in person, to request the Faulcon
of him, it being the best that ever flew? It is his only Jewel of delight,
and that taken from him, no longer can he wish to live in this World. How far
then void of understanding shall I show my self, to rob a Gentleman of his
sole felicity, having no other joy or comfort left him? These and the like
considerations, wheeled about her troubled brain, only in tender care and
love to her Son, persuading her self assuredly, that the Faulcon were her
own, if she would but request it: yet not knowing whereon it were best to
resolve, she returned no answer to her Son, but sat still in her silent
meditations. At the length, love to the youth, so prevailed with her, that she
concluded on his contentation, and (come of it what could) she would not send
for it; but go her self in person to request it, and then return home again
with it, whereupon thus she spoke. Son, comfort thy self, and let
languishing thoughts no longer offend thee: for here I promise thee, that the
first thing I do to morrow morning, shall be my journey for the Faulcon, and
assure thy self, that I will bring it with me. Whereat the youth was so ioyed,
that he imagined, his sickness began instantly a little to leave him, and
promised him a speedy recovery.

Somewhat early the next morning, the Lady, in care of her sick Sons health,
was up and ready betimes, and taking another Gentlewoman with her; only as a
mornings recreation, she walked to Frederigoes poor Country Farm, knowing
that it would not a little glad him to see her. At the time of her arrival
there, he was (by chance) in a silly Garden, on the backe-side of his House,
because (as yet) it was no convenient time for flight: but when he heard, that
Madam Giana was come thither, and desired to have some conference with him; as
one almost confounded with admiration, in all haste he ran to her, and saluted
her with most humble reverence. She in all modest and gracious manner,
requited him with the like salutations, thus speaking to him. Signior
Frederigo, your own best wishes befriend you, I am now come hither, to
recompense some part of your passed travails, which heretofore you pretended
to suffer for my sake, when your love was more to me, then did well become you
to offer, or my self to accept. And such is the nature of my recompense, that
I make my self your guest, and mean this day to dine with you, as also this
Gentlewoman, making no doubt of our welcome: whereto, with lowly reverence,
thus he replied.

Madam, I do not remember, that ever I sustained any loss or hinderance by
you, but rather so much good, as if I was worth any thing, it proceeded from
your great deseruings, and by the service in which I did stand engaged to you.
But my present happiness can no way be equalled, derived from your
super-abounding gracious favor, and more then common course of kindness,
vouchsafing (of your own liberal nature) to come and visit so poor a servant.
Oh that I had as much to spend again, as heretofore riotously I have run
through: what a welcome would your poor Host bestow upon you, for gracing this
homely house with your divine presence? With these words, he conducted her
into his house, and then into his simple Garden, where having no convenient
company for her, he said. Madam, the poverty of this place is such, that it
affoordeth none fit for your conversation: this poor woman, wife to an honest
Husbandman will attend on you, while I (with some speed) shall make ready
dinner.

Poor Frederigo, although his necessity was extreme, and his grief great,
remembering his former inordinate expenses, a moity whereof would now have stood
him in some sted; yet he had a heart as free and forward as ever, not a iotte
dejected in his mind, though utterly overthrown by Fortune. Alas! how was his
good soul afflicted, that he had nothing wherewith to honor his Lady? Up and
down he runs, one while this way, then again another, exclaiming on his
disastrous Fate, like a man enraged, or bereft of senses: for he had not one
penny of money neither pawn or pledge, wherewith to procure any. The time hasted
on, and he would gladly (though in mean measure) express his honorable
respect of the Lady. To beg of any, his nature denied it, and to borrow he
could not, because his neighbors were all as needy as himself.

At last, looking round about, and seeing his Faulcon standing on her perch,
which he felt to be very plumpe and fat, being void of all other helps in his
need, and thinking her to be a Foul meet for so Noble a Lady to feed on:
without any further demurring or delay, he plucked off her neck, and caused the
poor woman presently to pull her Feathers: which being done, he put her on the
spit, and in short time she was daintily roasted. Himself covered the table,
set bread and salt on, and laid the Napkins, whereof he had but a few left him.
Going then with cheerful looks into the Garden, telling the Lady that dinner
was ready, and nothing now wanted, but her presence. She, and the Gentlewoman
went in, and being seated at the table, not knowing what they fed on, the
Falcon was all their food; and Frederigo not a little joyful, that his
credit was so well saved. When they were risen from the table, and had spent
some small time in familiar conference: the Lady thought it fit, to acquaint
him with the reason of her coming thither, and therefore (in very kind
manner) thus began.

Frederigo, if you do yet remember your former carriage toward me, as also my
many modest and chaste denials, which (perhaps) you thought to savor of a
harsh, cruel, and vn-womanly nature: I make no doubt, but you will wonder at
my present presumption, when you understand the occasion, which expressly
moved me to come hither. But if you were possessed of children, or ever had
any, whereby you might comprehend what love (in nature) is due unto them: then I
durst assure my self, that you would partly hold me excused.

Now, in regard that you never had any, and I myself (for my patt) have bnt
only one, I stand not exempted from those Laws, which are in common to other
mothers. And being compelled to obey the power of those Laws; contrary to mine
own will, and those duties which reason ought to maintain: I am to request
such a gift of you, which I am certain, that you do make most precious account
of, as in manly equity you can do no less. For, Fortune has bin so extremely
adverse to you, that she has robbed you of all other pleasures, allowing you
no comfort or delight, but only that poor one, which is your fair Faulcone.
Of which Bird, my Son is become so straungeiy desirous, as, if I do not
bring it to him at my coming home; I fear so much the extremity of his
sickness, as nothing can ensue thereon, but his loss of life. Wherefore I
beseech you, not in regard of the love you have born me, for thereby you stand
no way obliged: but in your own true gentle nature (the which has always
declared it self ready in you, to do more kind offices generally, then any
other Gentleman that I know) you will be pleased to give her me, or at the
least, let me buy her of you. Which if you do, I shall freely then confess,
that only by your means, my Sons life is saved, and we both shall for ever
remain engaged to you.

When Frederigo had heard the Ladies request, which was now quite out of his
power to grant, because it had been her service at dinner: he stoodlike a man
merely dulled in his senses, the tears trickling amain down his checkes:
and he not able to utter one word. Which she perceiving, began to conjecture
immediately, that these tears and passions proceeded rather from grief of
mind, as being loather to part with his Faulcon, then any other kind of
matter: which made her ready to say, that she would not have it. Nevertheless
she did not speak, but rather tarried to attend his answer. Which, after some
small respite and pawse, he returned in this manner.

Madame, since the hour, when first mine affection became soly devoted to your
service; Fortune has been cross and contrary to me, in many occasions, as
justly, and in good reason I may complain of her. Yet all seemed light and
easy to be endured, in comparison of her present malicious contradiction, to
my utter overthrow, and perpetual mollestation. Considering, that you are come
hither to my poor house, which (while I was rich and able) you would not so
much as vouchsafe to look on. And now you have requested a small matter of me,
wherein she has also most crookedly thwarted me, because she has disabled
me, in bestowing so mean a gift, as your self will confess, when it shall
be related to you in very few words.

So soon as I heard, that it was your gracious pleasure to dine with me,
having regard to your excellency, and what (by merit) is justly due unto you: I
thought it a part of my bounden duty, to entertain you with such exquisite
viands, as my poor power could any way compass, and far beyond respect or
welcome, to other common and ordinary persons. Whereupon, remembering my
Faulcon, which now you ask for; and her goodness, excelling all other of her
kind; I supposed, that she would make a dainty dish for your diet, and having
dressed her, so well as I could devise to do: you have fed heartily on her, and I
am proud that I have so well bestowne her. But perceiving now, that you would
have her for your sick Son; it is no mean affliction to me, that I am
disabled of yielding you contentment, which all my life time I have desired to
do.

To approve his words, the feathers, feet, and beak were brought in, which
when she saw, she greatly blamed him for killing so rare a Falcon, to content
the appetite of any woman whatsoever. Yet she commended his height of spirit,
which poverty had no power to abase. Lastly, her hopes being fr^strate for
enjoying the Faulcon, and fearing besides the health of her Son: shethanked
Frederigo for his honorable kindness, returning home again sad and
melancholy. Shortly after, her son either greeuing that he could not have
the Faulcone, or by extremity of his disease, chanced to dye, leaving his
mother a most woeful Lady.

After so much time was expired, as conveniently might agree with sorrow and
mourning; her Brethren made many motions to her, to join her self in marriage
again, because she was extraordinarily rich, and as yet but young in years.
Now, although she was well contented never to be married any more; yet being
continually importuned by them, and remembering the honorable honesty of
Frederigo, his last poor, yet magnificent dinner, in killing his Faulcone for
her sake, she said to her Brethren. This kind of widdowed estate does like
me so well, as willingly I would never leave it: but seeing you are so earnest
for my second marriage, let me plainly tell you, that I will never accept of
any other husband, but only Frederigo di Alberino.

Her brethren in scornful manner reproved her, telling her, that he was a
beggar, and had nothing left to keep him in the world. I know it well (quoth
she) and am heartily sorry for it. But give me a man that has need of wealth,
rather then wealth that has need of a man. The Brethren hearing how she
stood addicted, and knowing Frederigo to be a worthy Gentleman, though
poverty had disgraced him in the World: consented thereto, so she bestowed her
self and her riches on him. He on the other side, having so noble a Lady to
his Wife, and the same whom he had so long and dearly loved: submitted all
his fairest Fortunes unto her, became a better husband (for the world) then
before, and they lived and loved together in equal joy and happiness.

Pedro di Vinciolo went to sup at a friends House in the City. His Wife (in the
mean while) had a young man (whom she loved) at supper with her. Pedro
returning whom upon a sudden, the young man was hidden under a Coope for
Hens. Pedro, in excuse of his so soon coming home, declares, how in the
House of Herculano (with whom he should have supt) a friend of his Wives was
found, which was the reason of the Suppers breaking off. Pedroes Wife reproving
the error of Hetculanoes Wife; an Ass (by chance) treads on the young man's
fingers, that lay hidden under the Hen Coope. Upon his crying out, Pedro
steppeth thither, sees him, knows him, and finds the fallacy of his Wife:
with whom (nevertheless) he grows to agreement, in regard of some
imperfections in himself.

The tenth Novel.
Reprehending the cunning shifts, of light headed and immodest Women, who, by
abusing themselves, do throw evil aspersions on all the Sex.



THe Queens Novel being ended, and all the company applauding the happy
fortune of Frederigo, as also the noble nature of Madam Giana: Dioneus, who
never expected any command, prepairing to deliver his discourse, began in this
manner. I know not, whether I should term it a vice accidental, and ensuing
through the badnesse of complexions upon us mortals; or else an error in
Nature, to joy and smile rather at lewd accidents, then at deeds that justly
deserve commendation, especially, when they do not any way concern our
selves. Now, in regard that all the pains I have hitherto taken, and am also
to undergo at this present, aymeth at no other end, but only to purge your
minds of melancholy, and entertain the time with mirthful matter: pardon me
I pray you (fair Ladies) if my Tale trip in some part, and savor a little of
immodesty; yet in hearing it, you may observe the same course, as you do in
pleasing and delightful Gardens, pluck a sweet Rose, and yet preserve your
fingers from pricking. Which very easily you may do, wincking at the
imperfections of a foolish man, and smiling at the amorous subtilties of his
Wife, compassionating the misfortune of others, where urgent necessity does
require it.

There dwelt (not long since) in Perugia, a wealthy man, named Pedro di
Vinciolo, who perhaps) more to deceive some other, and restrain an evil
opinion, which the Perugians had conceived of him, in matter no way beseeming a
man, then any beauty or good feature remaining in the woman entered into the
estate of marriage. And Fortune was so conform to him in his election, that
the woman whom he had made his wife, had a young, lusty, and well enabled body,
a red hairde wench, hot and fiery spirited, standing more in need of three
Husbands, then he, who could not any way well content one Wife, because his
mind ran more on his money, then those offices and duties belonging to
wed-lock, which time acquainting his Wife withal, contrary to her own
expectation, and those delights which the estate of marriage afforded, knowing
her self also to be of a sprightly disposition, and not to be easily tamed by
household cares and attendances: she waxed weary of her Husbands unkind
courses, vpbraided him daily with harsh speeches, making his own home merely
as a hell to him.

When she saw that this domesticke disquietnesse returned her no benefit, but
rather tended to her own consumption, then any amendment in her miserable
Husband; she began thus to confer with her private thoughts. This Husband of
mine lives with me, as if he were no Husband, or This Wife; the marriage bed,
which should be a comfort to us both, seems hateful to him, and as little
pleasing to me, because his mind is on his money, his head busied with worldly
cogitations, and early and late in his counting house, admitting no familiar
conversation with me. Why should not I be as respectlesse of him, as he
declares himself to be of me? I took him for an Husband, brought him a good
and sufficient dowry, thinking him to be a man, and affected a woman as a man
ought to do, else he had never been any Husband of mine. If he be a Woman
hater, why did he make choice of me to be his Wife? If I had not intended to be
of the World, I could have coopt my self up in a Cloister, and shorn my self
a Nun, but that I was not borne to such severity of life. My youth shall be
blasted with age, before I can truly understand what youth is, and I shall be
branded with the disgraceful word barrenness, knowing my self meet and able
to be a Mother, were my Husband but worthy the name of a Father, or expected
issue and posterity, to leave our memorial to after times in our race, as all
our predecessors formerly have done, and for which marriage was chiefly
instituted. Castles long besieged, do yield at the last, and women wronged by
their own Husbands, can hardly warrant their own frailty, especially living
among so many temptations, which flesh and blood are not always able to
resist. Well, I mean to be advised in this case, before I will hazard my
honest reputation, either to suspicion or scandal, then which, no woman can
have two heavier enemies, and very few there are that can escape them.

Having thus a long while consulted with her self, and (perhaps) oftener then
twice or thrice; she became secretly acquainted with an aged woman, generally
reputed to be more then half a Saint, walking always very demurely in the
streets, counting (over and over) her Pater nosters, and all the Cities holy
pardons hanging at her girdle, never talking of any thing, but the lives of the
holy Fathers, or the wounds of Saint Frances, all the World admiring her
sanctity of life, even as if she were divinely inspired: this she Saint must
be our distressed woman's Counselor, and having found out a convenient season,
at large she imparted all her mind to her, in some such manner as formerly you
have heard, whereto she returned this answer.

Now trust me Daughter, thy case is to be pitied, and so much the rather,
because thou art in the flower and spring time of thy youth, when not a minute
of time is to be left: for there is no greater an error in this life, then the
loss of time, because it cannot be recovered again; and when the fiends
themselves affright us, yet if we keep our embers still covered with warm
ashes on the hearth, they have not any power to hurt us. If any one can truly
speak thereof, then I am able to deliver true ^estimony; for I know, but not
without much perturbation of mind, and piercing afflictions in the spirit; how
much time I lost without any profit. And yet I lost not all, for I would not
have thee think me to be so foolish, that I did altogether neglect such an
especial benefit; which when I call to mind, and consider now in what
condition I am, thou must imagine, it is no small hearts grief to me, that age
should make me utterly despised, and no fire afforded to light my tinder.

With men it is not so, they are borne apt for a thousand occasions, as well
for the present purpose we talk of, as infinite other beside; yea, and many of
them are more esteemed being aged, then when they were young. But women serve
only for men's contentation, and to bring children, and therefore are they
generally beloved, which if they fail of, either it is by unfortunate
marriage, or some imperfection depending on nature, not through want of good
will in themselves. We have nothing in this world but what is given us, in
which regard, we are to make use of our time, and employ it the better while we
have it. For, when we grow to be old, our Husbands, yea, our very dearest and
nearest friends, will scarcely look on us. We are then fit for nothing, but to
sit by the fire in the Kitchen, telling tales to the Cat, or counting the pots
and pannes on the shelues. Nay, which is worse, rimes and songs is made of us,
even in mere contempt of our age, and commendation of such as are young, the
daintiest morsels are fittest for them, and we referred to feed on the scrappes
from their trenchers, or such reuersion as they can spare us. I tell thee
Daughter, thou could not make choice of a meerer woman in all the City, to
whom thou might safely open thy mind, and knows better to advise thee then
I do. But remember withal, that I am poor, and it is your part not to suffer
poverty to be vnsupplyed. I will make thee partaker of all these blessed
pardons, at every Altar I will say a Pater noster, and an Aue Maria, that thou
may prosper in thy hearts desires, and be defended from foul sin and
shame, and so she ended her Motherly counsel.

Within a while after, it came to pass, that her Husband was iniuited forth
to Supper, with one named Herculano, a kind friend of his, but his Wife refused
to go, because she had appointed a friend to supper with her, to whom the old
woman was employed as her messenger, and was well recompensed for her labor.
This friend was a gallant proper youth, as any all Perugia yielded, and
scarcely was he seated at the Table, but her Husband was returned back, and
called to be let in at the door. Which when she perceived, she was almost
half dead with fear, and coveting to hide the young man, that her Husband
should not have any sight of him, she had no other means, but in an enrry,
hard by the Parlour where they purposed to have supt, stood a Coope or Hen pen,
wherein she used to keep her Pullen, under which he crept, and then she
covered it with an old empty sack, and after ran to let her Husband come in.
When he was entered into the House; as half offended at his so sudden return,
angerly he said: It seems Sir you are a shauer at your meat, that you have
made so short a supper. In troth Wife (quoth he) I have not supt at all, no,
not so much as eaten one bit. How happened that? said the woman. Mary wife (quoth
he) I will tell you, and then thus he began.

As Herculano, his wife, and I were sitting down at the Table, very near unto
us we heard one sneeze, whereof at the first we made no reckoning, until we
heard it again the second time, yea, a third, fourth, and fifth, and many more
after, whereat we were not a little amazed. Now Wife I must tell you, before we
entered the room where we were to sup, Herculanoes wife kept the door fast
shut against us, and would not let us enter in an indifferent while; which made
him then somewhat offended, but now much more, when he had heard one to sneeze
so often. Demanding of her a reason for it, and who it was that thus sneezed in
his House: he started from the Table, and stepping to a little door near the
stairs head, necessarily there made, to set such things in, as otherwise would
be troublesome to the room, (as in all Houses we commonly see the like) he
perceived, that the party was hidden there, which we had heard so often to
sneeze before.

No sooner had he opened the door, but such a smell of brimston came forth
(whereof we felt not the least savor before) as made us likewise to cough and
sneeze, being no way able to refrain it. She seeing her Husband to be much
moved, excused the matter thus, that (but a little while before) she had
whited certain linen with the smoke of brimstone, as it is an usual thing
to do, and then set the pan into that spare place, because it should not be
offensive to us. By this time, Herculano had espied him that sneezed, who being
almost stifled with the smell, and closeness of the small room wherein he
lay, had not any power to help himself, but still continued coughing and
sneezing, even as if his heart would have split in twain. Forth he plucked him
by the heels, and perceiving how matters had past, he said to her. I thank
you Wife, now I see the reason, why you kept us so long from coming into this
room, let me die, if I bear this wrong at your hands. When his Wife heard
these words, and saw the discovery of her shame; without returning either
excuse or answer, forth of doors she ran, but whither, we know not.
Herculano drew his Dagger, and would have slain him that still lay sneezing:
but I dissuaded him from it, as well in respect of his, as also mine own
danger, when the Law should censure on the deed. And after the young man was
indifferently recovered; by the persuasion of some Neighbors coming in: he
was closely conveyed out of the house, and all the noise quietly pacified.
Only (by this means, and the flight of Herculanoes wife) we were disappointed
of our Supper; and now you know the reason of my so soon returning.

When she had heard this whole discourse, then she perceived, that other Women
were subject to the like infirmity, and as wise for themselves, as she could
be, though these and the like sinister accidents might sometimes cross them,
and gladly she wished, that Herculanoes Wifes excuse, might now serve to
acquit her: but because in blaming others errors, our own may sometime chance
to escape discovery, and clear us, albeit we are as guilty; in a sharp
reprehending manner, thus she began. See Husband, here is hansome behavior, of
an holy fair seeming, and Saint like woman, to whom I durst have confessed my
sins, I conceived such a religious persuasion of her lives integrity, free
from the least scruple of taxation. A woman, so far stepped into years, as
she is, to give such an evil example to other younger women, is it not a
sin beyond all sufferance? Accursed be the hour, when she was borne into
this World, and her self likewise, to be so lewdly and incontinently given; an
universal shame and slander, to all the good women of our City.

Shall I term her a woman, or rather some savage monster in a woman's shape?
Has she not made an open prostitution of her honesty broken her plighted
faith to her Husband, and all the womanly reputation she had in this World?
Her Husband, being an honorable Citizen, entreating her always, as few men
else in the City do their wives; what an heart-breake must this needs be to
him, good man? Neither I, nor any honest man else, ought to have any pity on
her; but (with our own hands) tear her in pieces, or dragge her along to a
good fire in the market place, wherein she and her minion should be consumed
together, and their base ashes dispersed abroad in the wind, least the pure
Air should be infected with them.

Then, remembering her own case, and her poor affrighted friend, who lay in
such distress under the Hen-coope; she began to advise her Husband, that he
would be pleased to go to bed, because the night passed on apace. But Pedro,
having a better will to eat, then to sleep, desired her to let him have some
meat, else he must go to bed with an empty belly; whereto she answered.
Why Husband (quoth she) do I make any large provision, when I am debard of
your company? I would I were the wife of Herculano, seeing you cannot content
your self from one nights feeding, considering, it is now ouer-late to make
any thing ready.

It fortuned, that certain Husbandmen, which had the charge of Pedroes Farm
house in the Country, and there followed his affairs of Husbandry, were
returned home this instant night, having their Asses laden with such provision,
as was to be used in his City-house. When the Asses were unladen, and set up in
a small Stable, without watering; one of them being (belike) more thirsty then
the rest, brake loose, and wandering all about smelling to seek water,
happened into the entry, where the young man lay hidden under the Hen-pen. Now,
he being constrained (like a Carpe) to lie flat on his belly, because the Coope
was ouerweighty for him to carry, and one of his hands more extended forth,
then was requisite for him in so urgent a shift: it was his hap (or ill fortune
rather) that the Ass set his foot on the young man's fingers, treading so
hard, and the pain being very irksome to him, as he was enforced to cry out
aloude, which Pedro hearing, he wondered thereat not a little.

Knowing that this cry was in his house, he took the candle in his hand, and
going forth of the Parlour, heard the cry to be louder and louder; because the
Ass removed not his foot, but rather trod the more firmly on his hand.
Coming to the Coope, driving thence the Ass, and taking off the old sack, he
e^pyed the young man, who, beside the painful anguish he felt of his fingers,
arose up trembling, as fearing some outrage beside to be offered him by Pedro,
who knew the youth perfectly, and demanded of him, how he came thither. No
answer did he make to that question, but humbly entreated (for charities sake)
that he would not do^ him any harm. Fear not (quoth Pedro) I will not offer
thee any violence: only tell me how thou came hither, and for what occasion;
wherein the youth fully resolved him.

Pedro being no less joyful for thus finding him, then his wife was
sorrowful, took him by the hand, and brought him into the Parlour, where she
sat trembling and quaking, as not knowing what to say in this distress.
Seating himself directly before her, and holding the youth still fast by the
hand, thus he began. Oh Wife! what bitter speeches did you use (even now)
against the wife of Herculano, maintaining that she had shamed all other
women, and justly deserved to be burned? Why did you not say as much of your
self? Or, if you had not the heart to speak it, how could you be so cruel
against her, knowing your offense as great as hers? Questionless, nothing else
urged you thereto, but that all women are of one and the same condition,
covering their own gross faults by far inferior infirmities in others. You
are a perverse generation, merely false in your fairest shows.

When she saw that he offered her no other violence, but gave her such vaunting
and reproachful speeches, holding still the young man before her face, merely
to vex and despite her: she began to take heart, and thus replied. Do
thou compare me with the wife of Herculano, who is an old, discembling
hypocrite? yet she can have of him whatsoever she desires, and he uses her as
a woman ought to be, which favor I could never yet find at thy hands. Put the
case, that thou keep me in good garments, allowing me to go neatly hosed
and shod; yet well thou know, there are other meet matters belonging to a
woman, and every way as necessarily required, both for the preservation of
Household quietness, and those other rites between a Husband and Wife. Let me
be worser garmented, courser dieted, yea, debarred of all pleasure and
delights; so I might once be worthy the name of a Mother, and leave some
remembrance of woman-hood behind me. I tell thee plainly Pedro, I am a woman as
others are, and subject to the same desires, as (by nature) attends on flesh
and blood: look how thou failest in kindness toward me, think it not amiss,
if I do the like to thee, and endeavor thou to win the worthy tile of a
Father, because I was made to be a Mother.

When Pedro perceived, that his Wife had spoken nothing but reason, in regard
of his overmuch neglect toward her, and not using such household kindness, as
ought to be between Man and Wife, he returned her this answer. Well Wife (quoth
he) I confess my fault, and hereafter will labor to amend it; conditionally,
that this youth, nor any other, may no more visit my House in mine absence.
Get me therefore something to eat, for doubtless, this young man and thy
self fell short of your supper, by reason of my so soon returning home. In
troth Husband, said she, we did not eat one bit of any thing, and I will be
a true and loyal Wife to thee, so thou will be the like to me. No more words
then wife, replied Pedro, all is forgotten and forgiven, let us to supper, and
we are all friends. She seeing his anger was so well appeased, lovingly kissed
him, and laying the cloth, set on the supper, which she had provided for her
self and the youth, and so they supt together merrily, not one unkind word
passing between them. After supper, the youth was sent away in friendly
manner, and Pedro was always afterward more loving to his Wife, then formerly
he had been, and no complaint passed on either side, but mutual joy and
household contentment, such as ought to be between man and wife.

Dioneus having ended his Tale, for which the Ladies returned him no thanks,
but rather angerly frowned on him: the Queen, knowing that her government was
now concluded, arose, and taking off her Crown of Laurel, placed it
graciously on the head of Madam Eliza, saying. Now Madam, it is your turn to
command. Eliza having received the honor, did (in all respects) as others
formerly had done, and after she had enstructed the Master of the Household,
concerning his charge during the time of her regiment, for contentation of all
the company; thus she spoke.

We have long since heard, that with witty words, ready answers, and sudden
jests or taunts, many have checked and reproved great folly in others, and to
their own no mean commendation. Now, because it is a pleasing kind of
argument, ministering occasion of mirth and wit: my desire is, that all our
discourse to morrow shall tend thereto. I mean of such persons, either Men or
Women, who with some sudden witty answer, have encountered a scorner in his own
intention, and laid the blame where it justly belonged. Every one commended
the Queens appointment, because it sauoured of good wit and judgment; and the
Queen being risen, they were all discharged till supper time, falling to such
several exercises as themselves best fancyed.

When supper was ended, and the instruments laid before them; by the Queens
consent, Madam Aemillia undertook the dance, and the Song was appointed to
Dioneus, who began many, but none that proved to any liking, they were so
palpably obscene and idle, sauouring altogether of his own wanton disposition.
At the length, the Queen looking stearnely on him, and commanding him to sing
a good one, or none at all; thus he began.

The Song.
EYes, can ye not refrain your hourly weeping?
Ears, how are you depriude of sweet attention?
Thoughts, have you lost your quiet silent sleeping?
Wit, who has robde thee of thy rare invention?
The lack of these, being life and motion giving:
Are senseless shapes, and no true signs of living.
Eyes, when you gazde upon her Angel beauty;
Ears, while you heard her sweet delicious strains,
Thoughts (sleeping then) did yet perform their duty,
Wit, then took springtly pleasure in his pains.
While she did live, then none of these were scanting,
But now (being dead) they all are gone and wanting.
After that Dioneus (by proceeding no further) declared the finishing of his
Song; many more were sung beside, and that of Dioneus highly commended. Some
part of the night being spent in other delightful exercises, and a fitting
hour for rest drawing on: they betook themselves to their Chambers, where we
will leave them till to morrow morning.

The end of the Fifth Day.
FINIS.
The Errata of such faults as have unwillingly escaped in the Printing.
Folio a. b. the several sides: Line correction:

FOl. 4. a. Line 32, for been reputed, read have reputed: 5 b. 8: for
twaining, r. wauing: 7 b. 6. for fearfully, r. fairly: Eod. b. 18, for
flames, r. flowers; 12 b. 24, for Nigilles, r. Vigilles: 14 a. 39, for within
himself, r. said within himself: Eod. b. 14, for shift, r. shrift: Eod. b.
22, for Daughters door, r. Dorter door: Eod. b. 35, for venial, r.
veneriall: 21. a. 12, for paired, r. paid: 28 b. 20: for commanding, r.
commanded; 29 b. 29, for for the, r. forth: 33 a. 19, for ensigns r. engines:
37 b. 12, for great, r. greater: Eod. b. 13, for death, r. depth; 39 a. 2, for
some do, r. seen some do: 40 b. 26, for Naupertuis, r. Malpertuis: 46 a. 3,
for instrust, r. enstruct: Eod. b. 20, for he, r. she; 47 b. 3, for his, r.
their: Eod. b. 17, for the two with her children, r. and the two children with
her: 48 a. 4, for hours, r. years: Eod. a. 42, for who, r. and: 4^ a. 5, for
injuries which, r. injuries are which: Eod. a. 8, for Gentlewoman, r.
Gentlemen: Eod. b. 5, for was as a little, r. was not a little: 52, a. 21, for
badly, r. kindly: Eod: b. 35, for Gentlewoman, r. Gentleman; Eod* b. vlt. for
them r. him: 53 b. 11, for instructing, r. mistructing: 55 a. 31, for Duke, r.
Prince: 56 a. 42, for horse, r. force: Eod. b. 41, for not so far, r. now so
far: 64 a. 19, for both, r. loath: 68 a. 22, for ear, r. Earl; Eod. a. 26, for
Ambrosio, r. Ambroginolo: Eod. b. 32, for name, r. own: 70 a. 14, for unapt,
r. iumpt; 74 b. 30, for he, r. her Eod. b. 16; for him, r. himself: Eod. b.
19, for Gentleman, r. Gentlewoman: 75 a. 2, for she was, r. he was; 77 b. vlt.
for parted, r. played: 78 b, 16, for with, r. them with: 81 b. 34, for an
easy, r. such an easy; 82 a. 39, for mine, r. nine: Eod. b. 40, for means,
r. craft: 90. a. 18, for must, r. he must: Eod* a: ^9, for is a great, r. is no
great; Eod: b. 31, for mighty, r. nightly: 85 a: 20, for her self, r. turning
her self: Eob: b, 24, for and only, r: saving only: 86 a. 8, 9, read thus.
If I should do any thing contrary to his liking and honor, no woman could more
worthily, etc. 91 a. 14, for asking, r. looking: Eod. b. 22, for house, r.
horse: 96 b. 19, for husband, r. father; 98 b. 40, for has not, r. has; 99 a.
7, for repeat, r. repent: 101 a. 14, for undergo, r. undergo it; Eod. b. 8,
for Hostess, r. Hosts: 102 a. 41, for and, r. or; 104 b. 40, for hither, r.
come hither: 105 a. 42, for darge, r. dark: 107 b. 27, for a King, r. liking:
114, b. 23, for your, r. our: 116, b. 12, for these, r. then: 118, a. 8, for no
spare, r. made no spare: 122, a. 27, for mine respect, r. mine own respect:
Eod. a. 29* for honor, r humors: Eod. b. 13, for quickly, r. quietly: 155, a.
34, for and and, r. one: Eod. b. 27, for she, r. he: 156, a. 10, for shame, r.
flame; 158, a. 4, for writing, r. waiting: 159, a. 4, for like, r. life: Eod.
a. 19, for divert them, r. divert him: 167, b. 22; for neighbors, r. neighbors
children: 168, a. 24, for to experience, r. to gain experience: 169 b. 9, for
instantly r. constantly: 170, b. 24, for received, r. perceived: 187, a. 6; for
imputed, r. inured: 190, a. 13, for places, r. parts: 191, a 5; for spared
from, r. lodged: Eod: a. 26, for hardy, r. hardly: 192, b: 22, for Forenza, r.
Faenza: 194, b: 7: for spoke he, r. speaks:

THE Decameron CONTAINING An hundred pleasant Nouels.

Wittily discoursed, between seven Honorable Ladies, and three Noble
Gentlemen.

The last Five Days.

London, Printed by Isaac Iaggard, 1620.



TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight, Lord Baron of Sh^rland,
Earl of Montgomery, and Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter.
Having (by your Honorable command) translated this Decameron, or Cento
Nouelle, surnamed Il Principe Galeotto, of ten days several discourses,
grounded on variable and singular Arguments, happening between seven Noble
Ladies, and three ver-Honourable Gentlemen: Although not attyred in such
elegant cy of phrase, or nice curiosity of style, as a quicker and more
sprightly wit could have performed, but in such home-borne language, as my
ability could stretch unto; yet it comes (in all duty) to kiss your Noble
hand, and to shelter it self under your Gracious protection, though not from
the leering eye, and ouer-lauish tongue of snarling Envy; yet from the power of
his blasting poison, and malice of his machinations.

To the Reader.
Books (Courteous Reader) may rightly be compared to Gardens; wherein, let the
painful Gardener express never so much care and diligent endeavor; yet among
the very fairest, sweetest, and freshest Flowers, as also Plants of most
precious Virtue; ill sauouring and stinking Weeds, fit for no use but the fire
or mucke-hill, will spring and sprout up. So fares it with Books of the very
best quality, let the Author be never so indulgent, and the Printer vigilant:
yet both may miss their aim, by the escape of Errors and Mistakes, either in
sense or matter, the one fault ensuing by a ragged Written Copy; and the other
thorough want of wary Correction. If then the best Books cannot be free from
this common infirmity; blame not this then, of far lighter argument, wherein
thy courtesy may help us both: His blame, in acknowledging his more
sufficiency, then to write so gross and absurdly: And mine, in pardoning
unwilling Errors committed, which thy judgment finding, thy pen can as easily
correct.

Farewell.
THE SIXTH DAY.
Governed under the Authority of Madam Eliza, and the Argument of the
Discourses or Nouels there to be recounted, do concern such persons; who by
some witty words (when any have checked or taunted them) have revenged
themselves, in a sudden, unexpected and discreet answer, thereby preventing
loss, danger, scorn and disgrace, retorting them on the busi-headed
Questioners.

The Induction.
THe Moon haning past the heaven, lost her bright splendour, by the arising of
a more powerful light, and every part of our world began to look clear: when
the Queen (being risen) caused all the Company to be called, walking forth
afterward upon the pearled dew (so far as was supposed convenient) in fair
and familiar conference together, according as severally they were disposed,
and repetition of diverse the passed Nouels, especially those which were most
pleasing, and seemed so by their present commendations. But the Sun being
somewhat higher mounted, gave such a sensible warmth to the air, as caused
their return back to the Palace, where the Tables were readily covered
against their coming, strewed with sweet herbs and odoriferous flowers,
seating themselves at the Tables (before the heat grew more violent) according
as the Queen commanded.

After dinner, they sung diverse excellent Canzonnets, and then some went to
sleep, others played at the Chesse, and some at the Tables: But Dioneus and
Madam Lauretta, they sung the loue-conflict between Troylus and Cressida. Now
was the hour come, of repairing to their former Consistory or meeting place,
the Queen having thereto generally summoned them, and seating themselves (as
they were wont to do) about the fair fountain. As the Queen was commanding
to begin the first Novel, an accident suddenly happened, which never had
befalne before: to wit, they heard a great noise and tumult, among the household
servants in the Kitchen. Whereupon, the Queen caused the Master of the
Household to be called, demanding of him, what noise it was, and what might be
the occasion thereof? He made answer, that Lacisca and Tindar^ were at some
words of coffeehouse, but what was the occasion thereof, he knew not.
Whereupon, the Queen commanded that they should be sent for, (their anger and
violent speeches still continuing) and being come into her presence, she
demanded the reason of their discord; and Tindaro offering to make answer,
Lacisca (being somewhat more ancient then he, and of a fiercer fiery spirit,
even as if her heart would have leapt out of her mouth) turned her self to
him, and with a scornful frowning countenance, said. See how this bold,
unmannerly and beastly fellow, dare presume to speak in this place before me:
Stand by (saucy impudence) and give your better leave to answer; then turning
to the Queen, thus she proceeded.

Madam, this idle fellow would maintain to me, that Signior Sicophanto
marrying with Madama dell^^ Grazza, had the victory of her virginity the very
first night; and I avouched the contrary, because she had been a mother twice
before, in very fair aduenturing of her fortune. And he dared to affirm
beside, that young Maids are so simple, as to loose the flourishing April of
their time, in mere fear of their parents, and great prejudice of their
amourous friends. Only being abused by infinite promises, that this year and
that year they shall have husbands, when, both by the laws of nature and
reason, they are not tied to tarry so long, but rather ought to lay hold upon
opportunity, when it is fairly and friendly offered, so that seldom they come
maids to marriage. Beside, I have heard, and know some married wives, that
have played diverse wanton prancks with their husbands, yet carried all so
demurely and smoothly; that they have gone free from public detection. All
which this woodcocke will not credit, thinking me to be so young a Nouice, as if
I had been borne but yesterday.

While Larisca was delivering these speeches, the Ladies smiled on one another,
not knowing what to say in this case: And although the Queen (five or six
several times) commanded her to silence; yet such was the earnestnes of her
spleen, that she gave no attention, but held on still* even until she had
uttered all that she pleased. But after she had concluded her complaint, the
Queen (with a smiling countenance) turned toward Dioneus, saying. This matter
seems most properly to belong to you; and therefore I dare repose such trust
in you, that when our Nouels (for this day) shall be ended, you will conclude
the case with a definitive sentence. Whereto Dioneus presently thus replied.
Madam the verdict is already given, without any further expectation: and I
affirm, that Lacisca has spoken very sensibly, because she is a woman of
good apprehension, and Tindaro is but a puny, in practice and experience, to
her.

When Licisca heard this, she fell into a loud Laughter, and turning her self
to Tindaro, said: The honor of the day is mine, and thine own quarrel has
overthrown thee in the field. Thou that (as yet) has scarsely learned to
suck, would thou presume to know so much as I do? Could thou imagine
me, to be such a trewant in loss of my time, that I came hither as an
ignorant creature? And had not the Queen (looking very frowningly on her)
strictly enjoined her to silence; she would have continued still in this
triumphing humor. But fearing further chastisement for disobedience, both she
and Tindaro were commanded thence, where was no other allowance all this day,
but only silence and attention, to such as should be enjoined speakers.

And then the Queen, somewhat offended at the folly of the former
controversy, commanded Madame Philomena, that she should give beginning to the
days Nouels: which (in dutiful manner) she undertook to do, and seating
her self in formal fashion, with modest and very gracious gesture, thus she
began.

A Knight requested Madam Oretta, to ride behind him on horseback, and
promised, to tell her an excellent Tale by the way. But the Lady perceiving,
that his discourse was idle, and much worse delivered: entreated him to let her
walk on foot again.

The First Novel.
Reprehending the folly of such men, as undertake to report discourses, which
are beyond their wit and capacity, and gain nothing but blame for their labor.



GRacious Ladies, like as in our fair, clear, and serene seasons, the Statres
are bright ornaments to the heavens, and the flowery fields (so long as the
spring time lasts) wear their goodliest Liueries, the Trees likewise
bragging in their best adornings: Even so at friendly meetings, short, sweet,
and sententious words, are the beauty and ornament of any discourse, sauouring
of wit and sound judgment, worthily deserving to be commended. And so much the
rather, because in few and witty words, aptly suting with the time and
occasion, more is delivered then was expected, or sooner answered, then rashly
apprehended: which, as they become men very highly, yet do they show more
singular in women.

True it is, what the occasion may be, I know not, either by the badnesse of
our wits, or the especial enmity between our complexions and the
celestial bodies: there are scarsely any, or very few Women to be found among
us, that well knows how to deliver a word, when it should and ought to be
spoken; or, if a question be moved, understands to suite it with an apt
answer, such as conveniently is required, which is no mean disgrace to us
women. But in regard, that Madame Pampinea has already spoken sufficiently of
this matter, I mean not to press it any further: but at this time it shall
satisfy me, to let you know, how wittily a Lady made due observation of
opportunity, in answering of a Knight, whose talk seemed tedious and
offensive to her.

No doubt there are some among you, who either do know, or (at the least) have
heard, that it is no long time since, when there dwelt a Gentlewoman in our
City, of excellent grace and good discourse, with all other rich endowments of
Nature remaining in her, as pity it were to conceal her name: and therefore
let me tell ye, that she was called Madame Oretta, the Wife to Signior Geri
Spina. She being upon some occasion (as now we are) in the Country, and
passing from place to place (by way of neighbourly inuitations) to visit her
loving Friends and Acquaintance, accompanied with diverse Knights and
Gentlewomen, who on the day before had diued and supt at her house, as now
(belike) the selfsame courtesy was intended to her: walking along with her
company upon the way; and the place for her welcome being further off then she
expected* a Knight chanced to overtake this fair troop, who well knowing Madam
Oretta, using a kind and courteous salutation, spoke thus unto her.

Madam, this foot travel may be offensive to you, and were you so well
pleased as my self, I would ease your journey behind me on my Gelding, even
so far as you shall command me: and beside, will shorten your weariness with
a Tale worth the hearing. Courteous Sir (replied the Lady) I embrace your kind
offer with such acceptance, that I pray you to perform it; for therein you
shall do me an especial favor. The Knight, whose Sword (perhaps) was as
vnsuteable to his side, as his wit out of fashion for any ready discourse,
having the Lady mounted behind him: rode on with a gentle pace, and (according
to his promise) began to tell a Tale, which indeed (of it self) deserved
attention, because it was a known and commendable History, but yet delivered
so abruptly, with idle repetitions of some particulars three or four several
times, mistaking one thing for another, and wandering erroneously from the
essential subject, seeming near an end, and then beginning again: that a
poor Tale could not possibly be more mangled, or worse tortured in telling,
then this was; for the persons therein concerned, we^e so abusiuely
nicke-named, their actions and speeches so monstrously misshapen, that nothing
could appear to be more ugly.

Madame Oretta, being a Lady of vnequalled ingenuitie, admirable in judgment,
and most delicate in her speech, was afflicted in foul, beyond all measure;
overcome with many cold sweates, and passionate heart-aking qualmes, to see a
Fool thus in a Pinne-fold, and unable to get out, albeit the door stood wide
open to him, whereby she became so sick; that, converting her distaste to a
kind of pleasing acceptance, merrily thus she spoke. Believe me Sir, your
horse trots so hard, and travels so uneasily; that I entreat you to let me
walk on foot again.

The Knight, being (perchance) a better understander, then a Discourser;
perceived by this witty taunt, that his Bowl had run a contrary bias, and he
as far out of Tune, as he was from the Town. So, lingering the time, until
her company was nearer arrived: he left her with them, and rode on as his
Wisdom could best direct him.

Cistio a Baker, by a witty answer which he gave unto Messer Geri Spina,
caused him to acknowledge a very indiscreete motion, which he had made to the
said Cistio.

The Second Novel.
Approving, that a request ought to be civil, before it should be granted to
any one whatsoever.



THE words of Madame Oretta, were much commended by the men and women; and the
discourse being ended, the Queen gave command to Madam Pampinea, that she
should follow next in order, which made her to begin in this manner.

Worthy Ladies, it exceeds the power of my capacity, to censure in the case
whereof I am to speak, by saying, who sinned most, either Nature, in seating a
Noble soul in a vile body, or Fortune, in bestowing on a body (beautified with
a noble soul) a base or wretched condition of life. As we may observe by
Cistio, a Citizen of our own, and many more beside; for, this Cistio being
endued with a singular good spirit* Fortune has made him no better then a
Baker. And believe me Ladies, I could (in this case) lay as much blame on
Nature, as on Fortune; if I did not know Nature to be most absolutely wise, and
that Fortune has a thousand eyes, albeit fools have figured her to be
blind. But, upon more mature and deliberate consideration, I find, that they
both (being truly wise and judicious) have dealt justly, in imitation of our
best advised mortals, who being uncertain of such inconveniences, as may
happen unto them, do bury (for their own benefit) the very best and choicest
things of esteem, in the most vile and abject places of their houses, as being
subject to least suspicion, and where they may be sure to have them at all
times, for supply of any necessity whatsoever, because so base a conueyance
has better kept them, then the very best chamber in the house could have done.
Even so these two great commanders of the world, do many times hide their most
precious Jewels of worth, under the clouds of Arts or professions of worst
estimation, to the end; that fetching them thence when need requires, their
splendour may appear to be the more glorious. Nor was any such matter noted in
our homely Baker Cistio, by the best observation of Messer Geri Spina, who was
spoken of in the late repeated Novel, as being the husband to Madame Oretta;
whereby this accident came to my remembrance, and which (in a short Tale) I
will relate unto you.

Let me then tell ye, that Pope Boniface (with whom the forenamed Messer Geri
Spina was in great regard) having sent diverse Gentlemen of his Court to
Florence as Ambassadors, about very serious and important business: they were
lodged in the house of Messer Geri Spina, and he employed (with them) in the
said Popes negotiation. It chanced, that as being the most convenient way for
passage, every morning they walked on foot by the Church of Saint Marie d'Vghi,
where Cistio the Baker dwelt, and exercised the trade belonging to him. Now
although Fortune had humbled him to so mean a condition, yet she added a
blessing of wealth to that contemptible quality, and (as smiling on him
continually) no disasters at any time befell him, but still he flourished in
riches, lived like a ^olly Citizen, with all things fitting for honest
entertainment about him, and plenty of the best Wines (both White and Claret)
as Florence or any part thereabout yielded.

Our frolic Baker perceiving, that Messer Geri Spina and the other
Ambassadors, used every morning to pass by his door, and afterward to return
back the same way: seeing the season to be somewhat hot and soultry, he took
it as an action of kindness and courtesy, to make them an offer of tasting
his white wine. But having respect to his own mean degree, and the condition
of Messer Geri: he thought it far unfitting for him, to be so forward in
such presumption; but rather entered into consideration of some such means,
whereby Messer Geri might be the inuiter of himself to taste his Wine. And
having put on him a trusse or thin doublet, of very white and fine Linen
cloth, as also breeches, and an apron of the same; and a white cap upon his
head, so that he seemed rather to be a Miller, then a Baker: at such times as
Messer Geri and the Ambassadors should daily pass by, he set before his door
a new Bucket of fair water, and another small vessel of Bologna earth (as new
and sightly as the other) full of his best and choicest white Wine, with two
small Glasses, looking like silver, they were so clear. Down he sat, with
all this provision before him, and emptying his stomach twice or thrice, of
some clotted flegmes which seemed to offend it: even as the Gentlemen were
passing by, he drank one or two roufes of his Wine so heartily, and with such
a pleasing appetite, as might have moved a longing (almost) in a dead man.

Messer Geri well noting his behavior, and observing the very same course in
him two mornings together; on the third day (as he was drinking) he said unto
him. Well done Cistio, what, is it good, or no? Cistio starting up, forwith
replied: Yes Sir, the wine is good indeed, but how can I make you to believe
me, except you taste of it? Messer Geri, either in regard of the times quality,
or by reason of his pains taken, perhaps more then ordinary, or else, because
he saw Cistio had drunk so sprightly, was very desirous to taste of the Wine,
and turning unto the Ambassadors, in merriment he said. My Lords, me thinks it
were not much amiss, if we took a taste of this honest man's Wine, perhaps it
is so good, that we shall not need to repent our labor.

Hereupon, he went with them to Cistio, who had caused an handsome seat to be
fetched forth of his house, whereon he requested them to sit down, and having
commanded his men to wash clean the Glasses, he said. Fellows, now get you
gone, and leave me to the performance of this service; for I am no worse a
skinker, then a Baker, and tarry you never so long, you shall not drink a
drop. Having thus spoken, himself washed four or five small glasses, fair
and new, and causing a Vial of his best wine to be brought him: he diligently
filled it out to Messer Geri and the Ambassadors, to whom it seemed the very
best Wine, that they had drunk of in a long while before. And having given
Cistio most hearty thanks for his kindness, and the Wine his due
commendation: many days afterward (so long as they continued there) they
found the like courteous entertainment, and with the good liking of honest
Cistio.

But when the affairs were fully concluded, for which they were thus sent to
Florence, and their parting preparation in due readiness: Messer Geri made a
very sumptuous Feast for them, inuiting thereto the most part of the
honourablest Citizens, and Cistio to be one amongst them; who (by no means)
would be seen in an assembly of such State and pomp, albeit he was thereto
(by the said Messer Geri) most earnestly entreated.

In regard of which denial, Messer Geri commanded one of his servants, to
take a small Bottle, and request Cistio to fill it with his good Wine; then
afterward, to serve it in such sparing manner to the Table, that each Gentleman
might be allowed half a glasse-full at their down-sitting. The Seruing-man,
who had heard great report of the Wine, and was half offended, because he
could never taste thereof: took a great Flaggon Bottle, containing four or
five Gallons at the least, and coming therewith unto Cistio, said unto him.
Cistio, because my Master cannot have your company among his friends, he
prays you to Il this Bottle with your best Wine. Cistio looking upon the huge
Flaggon, replied thus. Honest Fellow, Messer Geri never sent thee with such a
Message to me: which although the Seruingman very stoutly maintained, yet
getting no other answer, he returned back therewith to his Master.

Messer Geri returned the Servant back again unto Cistio, saying: Go, and
assure Cistio, that I sent thee to him, and if he make thee any more such
answers, then demand of him, to what place else I should send thee? Being
come again to Cistio, he avouched that his Master had sent him, but Cistio
affirming, that he did not: the Servant asked, to what place else he should
send him? Marry (quoth Cistio) unto the River of Arno, which runs by
Florence, there thou may be sure to fill thy Flaggon. When the Servant had
reported this answer to Messer Geri, the eyes of his understanding began to
open, and calling to see what Bottle he had carried with him: no sooner looked
he on the huge Flaggon, but severely reproving the sauciness of his Servant,
he said. Now trust me, Cistio told thee nothing but truth, for neither did
I send thee with any such dishonest message, nor had the reason to yield or
grant it.



Then he sent him with a bottle of more reasonable competencie, which so soon
as Cistio saw: Yea mary my friend, quoth he, now I am sure that thy Master sent
thee to me, and he shall have his desire with all my h^rt. So, commanding the
Bottle to be filled, he sent it away by the Servant, and presently following
after him, when he came unto Messer Geri, he spoke unto him after this manner.
Sir, I would not have you to imagine, that the huge flaggon (which first came)
did any iotte dismay me; but rather I conceived, that the small Vial whereof
you tasted every morning, yet filled many mannerly Glasses together, was fallen
quite out of your remembrance; it plainer terms, it being no Wine for
Grooms or Peazants, as your self affirmed yesterday. And because I mean to
be a Skinker no longer, by keeping Wine to please any other palate but mine
own: I have sent you half my store, and hereafter think of me as you shall
please. Messer Geri took both his guifte and speeches in most thankful
manner, accepting him always after, as his intimate Friend, because he had so
graced him before the Ambassadors.

Madame Nonna de Pulci, by a sudden answer, did put to silence a Bishop of
Florence, and the Lord Marshall: having moved a question to the said Lady,
which seemed to come short of honesty.

The Third Novel.
W^erein is declared, that mockers do sometimes meet with their matches in
mockery, and to their own shame.



WHen Madame Pampinea had ended her Discourse, and (by the whole company) the
answer and bounty of Cistio, had past with deserved commendation: is pleased
the Queen, that Madame Lauretta should next succeed: whereupon very
chearefully thus she began.

Fair assembly, Madame Pampinea (not long time since) gave beginning, and
Madam Philomena has also seconded the same argument, concerning the slender
virtue remaining in our sex, and likewise the beauty of witty words,
delivered on apt occasion, and in convenient meetings. Now, because it is
needless to proceed any further, then what has been already spoken: let me
only tell you (over and beside) and commit it to memory, that the nature of
meetings and speeches are such, as they ought to nippe or touch the hearer,
like unto the Sheep nibling on the tender grass, and not as the sullen Dog
byteth. For, if their biting be answereable to the Dogs, they deserve not to
be termed witty jests or quips, but foul and offensive language: as plainly
appears by the words of Madame Oretta, and the merry, yet sensible answer of
Cistio.

True it is, that if it be spoken by way of answer, and the answerer biteth
doggedly, because himself was bitten in the same manner before: he is the
less to be blamed, because he makes payment but with coin of the same
stamp. In which respect, an especial care is to be had, how, when, with
whom, and where we jest or gibe, whereof very many prove too unmindful, as
appeared (not long since) by a Prelate of ours, who met with a biting, no less
sharp and bitter, then had first come from himself before, as very briefly
I intend to tell you how.

Messer Antonio d'Orso, being Bishop of Florence, a virtuous, wise, and
reverend Prelate; it fortuned that a Gentleman of Catalogna, named Messer Diego
de la Ratta, and Lord Marshall to King Robert of Naples, came thither to visit
him. He being a man of very comely personage, and a great obseruer of the
choysest beauties in Court: among all the other Florentine Dames, one proved to
be most pleasing in his eye, who was a very fair Woman indeed, and Niece to
the Brother of the said Messer Antonio.

The Husband of this Gentlewoman (albeit descended of a worthy Family) was,
nevertheless, immeasurably covetous, and a very vile harsh natured man. Which
the Lord Marshall understanding, made such a mad composition with him, as to
give him five hundred Ducates of Gold, on condition, that he would let him lie
one night with his wife, not thinking him so base minded as to give consent.
Which in a greedy auaritious humor he did, and the bargain being absolutely
agreeed on; the Lord Marshall prepared to fit him with a payment, such as it
should be. He caused so many pieces of silver to be cunningly gilded, as then
went for current money in Florence, and called Popolines, and after he had lain
with the Lady (contrary to her will and knowledge, her husband had so closely
carried the business) the money was duly paid to the cornuted Coxcombe.
Afterward, this impudent shame chanced to be generally known, nothing
remaining to the wilful Wittoll, but loss of his expected gain, and scorn in
every place where he went. The Bishop likewise (being a discreet and sober
man) would seem to take no knowledge thereof; but bare out all scoffs with a
well settled countenance.

Within a short while after, the Bishop and the Lord Marshal (always
conuersing together) it came to pass, that upon Saint John's day, they riding
through the City, side by side, and viewing the brave beauties, which of them
might best deserve to win the prize: the Bishop espied a young married Lady
(which our late grievous pestilence bereaved us of) she being named Madame
Nonna de Pulci, and Cousine to Messer Alexio Rinucci, a Gentleman well known
unto us all. A very goodly beautiful young woman she was, of delicate language,
and singular spirit, dwelling close by S. Peter's gate. This Lady did the
Bishop show to the Marshall, and when they were come to her, laying his hand
upon her shoulder, he said. Madam Nonna, What think you of this Gallant? Dare
you adventure another wager with him?

Such was the apprehension of this witty Lady, that these words seemed to tax
her honor, or else to contaminate the hearers understanding, whereof there
were great plenty about her, whose judgment might be as vile, as the speeches
were scandalous. Wherefore, never seeking for any further purgation of her
clear conscience, but only to retort taunt for taunt, presently thus she
replied. My Lord, if I should make such a vile adventure, I would look to be
paid with better money.

These words being heard both by the Bishop and Marshall, they felt themselves
touched to the quick, the one, as the Factor or Broker, for so dishonest a
business, to the Brother of the Bishop; and the other, as receiving (in his
own person) the shame belonging to his Brother. So, not so much as looking
each on other, or speaking one word together all the rest of that day, they
rode away with blushing cheeks. Whereby we may collect, that the young Lady,
being so injuriously provoked, did no more then well became her, to bite their
baseness nearly, that so abused her openly.

Chichibio, the Cook to Messer Currado Gianfiliazzi, by a sudden pleasant
answer which he made to his Master; converted his anger into laughter, and
thereby escaped the punishment, that Messer meant to impose on him.

The Fourth Novel.
Whereby plainly appears, that a sudden witty and merry answer, does
oftentimes appease the furious choler of an angry man.

MAdam Lauretta sitting silent, and the answer of Lady Nonna having past with
general applause: the Queen commanded Madame Neiphila to follow next in
order; who instantly thus began. Although a ready wit (fair Ladies) does many
times afford worthy and commendable speeches, according to the accidents
happening to the speaker: yet notwithstanding, Fortune (being a ready helper
diverse ways to the timorous) does often tippe the tongue with such a present
reply, as the party to speak, had not so much leisure as to think on, not
yet to invent; as I purpose to let you perceive, by a pretty short Novel.



Messer Currado Gianfiliazzi (as most of you have both seen and known) living
always in our City, in the estate of a Noble Citizen, being a man
bountiful, magnificent, and within the degree of Knighthoode: continually kept
both Hawks and Hounds, taking no mean delight in such pleasures as they
yielded, neglecting (for them) far more serious employments, wherewith our
present subject presumes not to meddle. Upon a day, having kilde with his
Faulcon a Crane, near to a Village called Peretola, and finding her to be both
young and fat, he sent it to his Cook, a Venetian borne, and named Chichibio,
with command to have it prepared for his supper. Chichibio, who resembled no
other, then (as he was indeed) a plain, simple, honest merry fellow, having
dressed the Crane as it ought to be, put it on the spit, and laid it to the
fire.

When it was well near fully roasted, and gave forth a very delicate pleasing
savor; it fortuned that a young Woman dwelling not far off, named Brunetta,
and of whom Chichibio was somewhat enamored, entered into the Kitchen, and
feeling the excellent smell of the Crane, to please her beyond all savors,
that ever she had felt before: she entreated Chichibio very earnestly, that
he would bestow a leg thereof o^ her. Whereto Chichibio (like a pleasant
companion, and evermore delighting in singing) sung her this answer.

My Brunetta, fair and feata,
Why should you say so?
The meat of my Master,
Allows you for no Taster,
Go from the Kitchen go.
Many other speeches past between them in a short while, but in the end,
Chichibio, because he would not have his Mistress Brunetta angry with him;
cut away one of the Cranes legs from the spit, and gave it to her to eat.
Afterward, when the Foul was served up to the Table before Messer Carrado, who
had invited certain strangers his friends to sup with him, wondering not a
little, he called for Chichibio his Cook; demanding what was become of the
Cranes other leg? Whereto the Venetian (being a liar by Nature) suddenly
answered: Sir, Cranes have no more but one leg each Bird. Messer Currado,
growing very angry, replied. Will thou tell me, that a Crane has no more but
one leg? Did I never see a Crane before this? Chichibio pe^sisting resolutely
in his denial, said. Believe me Sir, I have told you nothing but the truth,
and when you please, I will make good my words, by such Fowls as are living.

Messer Currado, in kind love to the strangers that he had invited to supper,
gave over any further contestation; only he said. Seeing thou assurest me, to
let me see thy affirmation for truth, by other of the same Fowls living (a
thing which as yet I never saw, or heard of) I am content to make proof
thereof to morrow morning, till then I shall rest satisfied: but, upon my word,
if I find it otherwise, expect such a sound payment, as thy knavery justly
deserves, to make thee remember it all thy life time. The contention ceassing
for the night season, Messer Currado, who though he had slept well, remained
still discontented in his mind: arose in the morning by break of day, and
puffing and blowing angerly, called for his horses, commanding Chichibio to
mount on one of them; so riding on toward the River, where (early every
morning) he had s^ene plenty of Cranes, he said to his man; We shall see anon
Sir, whether thou or I lied yesternight.

Chichibio perceiving, that his Masters anger was not (as yet) assuaged, and
now it stood him upon, to make good his lie; not knowing how he should do it,
rode after his Master, fearfully trembling all the way. Gladly he would have
made an escape, but he could not by any possible means, and on every side he
looked about him, now before, and after behind, to espy any Cranes standing on
both their legs, which would have bin an ominous sight to him. But being come
near to the River, he chanced to see (before any of the rest) upon the bank
thereof, about a dozen Cranes in number, each of them standing but upon one
leg, as they use to do when they are sleeping. Whereupon, showing them
quickly to Messer Currado, he said. Now Sir your self may see, whether I told
you true yesternight, or no: I am sure a Crane has but one thigh, and one leg,
as all here present are apparent witnesses, and I have bin as good as my
promise.

Messer Currado looking on the Cranes, and well understanding the knavery of
his man, replied: Stay but a little while sir, and I will show thee, that a
Crane has two thighs, and two legs. Then riding somewhat nearer to them, he
cried out aloud, Shough, shough, which caused them to set down their other
legs, and all fled away, after they had made a few paces against the wind for
their mounting. So going unto Chichibio, he said: How now you lying Knave, has
a Crane two legs, or no? Chichibio being well-neere at his wits end, not
knowing now what answer he should make; but even as it came suddenly into his
mind, said: Sir, I perceive you are in the right, and if you would have done
as much yesternight, and had cried Shough, as here you did: questionless, the
Crane would then have set down the other leg, as these here did: but if (as
they) she had fled away too, by that means you might have lost your Supper.

This sudden and unexpected witty answer, coming from such a logger-headed
Lout, and so seasonably for his own safety: was so pleasing to Messer Currado,
that he fell into a hearty laughter, and forgetting all anger, said.
Chichibio, thou have quit thy self well, and to my contentment: albeit I
advise thee, to teach me no more such tricks hereafter. Thus Chichibio, by
his sudden and merry answer, escaped a sound beating, which (otherwise) his
master had inflicted on him.

Messer Forese da Rabatte, and Master Giotto, a Painter by his profession,
coming together from Mugello, scornfully reprehended one another for their
deformity of body.

The Fifth Novel.
Whereby may be observed, that such as will speak contemptibly of others,
ought (first of all) to look respectively on their own imperfections.



SO soon as Madame Neiphila sat silent (the Ladies having greatly commended
the pleasant answer of Chichibio) Pamphilus, by command from the Queen, spoke
in this manner. Worthy Ladies, it comes to pass oftentimes, that like as
Fortune is observed diverse ways, to hide under vile and contemptible Arts, the
most great and vnvalewable treasures of virtue (as, not long since, was well
discoursed unto us by Madame Pampinea:) so in like manner has appeared; that
Nature has infused very singular spirits into most misshapen and deformed
bodies of men. As has been noted in two of our own Citizens, of whom I
purpose to speak in few words. The one of them was named Messer Forese de
Rabatta, a man of little and low person, but yet deformed in body, with a flat
face, like a Terrier or Beagle, as if no comparison (almost) could be made
more ugly. But notwithstanding all this deformity, he was so singularly
experienced in the Laws, that all men held him beyond any equal, or rather
reputed him as a Treasury of civil knowledge.

The other man, being named Giotto, had a spirit of so great excellency, as
there was not any particular thing in Nature, the Mother and Worke-mistresse of
all, by continual motion of the heavens; but he by his pen and pensell could
perfectly portrait; shaping them all so truly alike and resemblable, that they
were taken for the real matters indeed; and, whether they were present or no,
there was hardly any possibility of their distinguishing. So that many times it
happened, that by the variable devises he made, the visible sense of men became
deceived, in crediting those things to he natural, which were but merely
painted. By which means, he reduced that singular Art to light, which long
time before had lain buried, under the gross error of some; who, in the
mystery of painting, delighted more to content the ignorant, then to please
the judicious understanding of the wise, he justly deserving thereby, to be
termed one of the Florentines most glorious lights. And so much the rather,
because he performed all his actions, in the true and lowly spirit of humility:
for while he lived, and was a Master in his Art, above all other Painters: yet
he refused any such title, which shined the more maiestically in him, as
appeared by such, who knew much less then he, or his Scholars either: yet his
knowledge was extremely coueted among them.

Now, notwithstanding all this admirable excellency in him: he was not
(thereby) a jot the handsommer man (either in person or countenance) then was
our forenamed Lawyer Messer Forese, and therefore my Novel concerns them
both. Understand then (fair Assembly) that the possessions and inheritanees
of Messer Forese and Giotto, lay in Mugello; wherefore, when Holy Days were
celebrated by Order of Court, and in the Summer time, upon the admittance of so
apt a vacation; Forese rode thither upon a very unsightly Jade, such as a man
can can sildome meet with worse. The like did Giotto the Painter, as ill fitted
every way as the other; and having dispatched their business there, they both
returned back toward Florence, neither of them being able to boast, which was
the best mounted.

Riding on a fair and softly pace, because their Horses could go no faster:
and they being well entered into years, it fortuned (as oftentimes the like
befalls in Summer) that a sudden shower of rain ouer-tooke them; for
avoiding whereof, they made all possible haste to a poor Countrey-mans
Cottage, familiarly known to them both. Having continued there an indifferent
while, and the rain unlikely to cease: to prevent all further protraction of
time, and to arrive at Florence in due season; they borrowed twoold cloakes of
the poor man, of ouer-worn and ragged Country gray, as also two hoodes of the
like Complexion, because the poor man had no better) which did more mis^ape
them, then their own ugly deformity, and made them notoriously flouted and
scorned, by all that met or ouertooke them.

After they had ridden some distance of ground, much moyled and bemyred with
their shuffling Iades, flinging the dirt every way about them, that well they
might be termed two filthy companions: the rain gave over, and the evening
looking somewhat clear, they began to confer familiarly together. Messer
Forese, riding a lofty French trot, every step being ready to hoise him out of
his saddle, hearing Giottos discreet answers to every idle question he made
(for indeed he was a very elegant speaker) began to peruse and surueigh him,
even from the foot to the head, as we use to say. And perceiving him to be so
greatly deformed, as no man could be worse, in his opinion: without any
consideration of his own mishaping as bad, or rather more unsightly then he;
in a scoffing laughing humor, he said Giotto, do thou imagine* that a
stranger, who had never seen thee before, and should now happen into our
company, would believe thee to be the best Painter in the world, as indeed
thou art? Presently Giotto (without any further meditation) returned him this
answer. Signior Forese, I think he might then believe it, when (beholding you)
he could imagine that you had learned your A. B. C. Which when Forese heard,
he knew his own error, and saw his payment returned in such Coin, as he sold
his Wares for.

A young and ingenious Scholar, being unkindly reviled and smitten by his
ignorant Father, and through the procurement of an unlearned Vicare; afterward
attained to be doubly revenged on him.

The Sixth Novel.
Serving as an advertisement to unlearned Parents, not to be ouer-rash, in
censuring on Scholars perfections, through any badde or unbeseeming
persuasions.

THE Ladies smiled very heartily, at the ready answer of Giotto; until the
Queen charged Madam Fiammetta, that she should next succeed in order:
whereupon, thus she began. The very greatest infelicity that can happen to a
man, and most insupportable of all other, is Ignorance; a word (I say) which
has bin so general, as under it is comprehended all imperfections whatsoever.
Yet notwithstanding, whosoever can cull (grain by grain) the defects incident
to humane race; will and must confess, that we are not all borne to
knowledge: but only such, whom the heavens illuminating by their bright
radiance (wherein consists the sourse and wellspring of all science) by
little and little, do bestow the influence of their bounty, on such and so
many as they please, who are to express themselves the more thankful for
such a blessing. And although this grace does lessen the misfortune of many,
which were ouer-mighty to be in all; yet some there are, who by saucy
presuming on themselves, do bewray their ignorance by their own speeches;
setting such behavior on each matter, and soothing every thing with such
gravity, even as if they would make comparison: or (to speak more properly)
durst encounter in the Listes with great Solomon or Socrates. But let us leave
them, and come to the matter of our purposed Novel.



In a certain Village of Piccardie, there lived a Priest or Vicar, who being
merely an ignorant block, had yet such a peremptory presuming spirit: as,
though it was sufficiently discerned, yet he beguiled many thereby, until at
last he deceived himself, and with due chastisement to his folly.

A plain Husbandman dwelling in the same Village, possessed of much Land and
Living, but very gross and dull in understanding; by the entreaty of diverse
his Friends and Well-willers, something more intelligable then himself:
became incited, or rather provoked, to send a Son of his to the University of
Paris, to study there as was fitting for a Scholar. To the end (quoth they)
that having but this Son only, and Fortunes blessings abounding in store for
him: he might likewise have the riches of the mind, which are those true
treasures indeed, that Aristippus gives us advice to be furnished withal.

His Friends persuasions having prevailed, and he continued at for the space
of three years: what with the documents he had attained to, before his going
thither, and by means of a happy memory in the time of his being there,
wherewith no young man was more singularly endued (in so short a while) he
attained and performed the greater part of his Studies.

Now, as oftentimes it comes to pass, the love of a Father (surmounting all
other affections in man) made the old Farmer desirous to see his Son: which
caused his sending for him with all convenient speed, and obedience urged his
as forward willingness thereto. The good old man, not a little joyful to see
him in so good condition and health, and increased so much in stature since his
parting thence: familiarly told him, that he earnestly desired to know, if his
mind and body had attained to a competent and equal growth, which within
three or four days he would put in practice.

No other help had he silly simple man, but Master Vicar must be the
questioner and poser of his son: wherein the Priest was very unwilling to
meddle, for fear of discovering his own ignorance, which passed under better
opinion then he deserved. But the Farmer being imimportunate, and the Vicar
many ways beholding to him, durst not return denial, but undertook it very
formally, as if he had been an able man indeed.

But see how Fools are borne to be fortunate, and where they least hope, there
they find the best success; the simplicity of the Father, must be the means
for abusing his Schollerly Son, and a skreene to stand between the Priest and
his ignorance. Earnest is the old man to know, what and how far his Son
had profited at School, and by what note he might best take understanding of
his answers: which iumping fit with the Vicars vanity, and a warrantable
cloak to cover his knavery; he appoints him but one word only, namely Nescio,
wherewith if he answered to any of his demands, it was an evident token, that
he understood nothing. As thus they were walking and conferring in the Church,
the Farmer very careful to remember the word Nescio: it came to pass upon a
sudden, that the young man entered into them, to the great contentment of his
Father, who prayed Master Vicar, to make approbation of his Son, whether he
were learned, or no, and how he had benefited at the University?

After the time of the days salutations had past between them, the Vicar
being subtle and crafty, as they walked along by one of the tombs in the
Church; pointing with his finger to the Tomb, the Priest uttered these words
to the Scholar.

Quis hic est sepultus? The young Scholar (by reason it was erected since his
departure, and finding no inscription whereby to inform him) answered, as well
he might, Nescio. Immediately the Father, keeping the word perfectly in his
memory, grew very angerly passionate; and, desiring to hear no more
demands: gave him three or four boxes on the cares* with many harsh and
injurious speeches, tearming him an Ass and Villain, and that he had not
learned any thing. His Son was pacien^, and returned no answer, but plainly
perceived, that this was a trick intended against him, by the malicious
treachery of the Priest, on whom (in time) he might be revenged.

Within a short while after, the Suffragane of those parts (under whom the
Priest was but a Deputy, holding the benefice of him, with no great charge to
his conscience) being abroad in his visitation, sent word to the Vicar, that he
intended to preach there on the next Sunday, and he to prepare in a
readiness, Bonum and Commodum, because he would have nothing else to his
dinner. Heereat Master Vicar was greatly amazed, because he had never heard
such words before, neither could he find them in all his Breuiarie. Hereupon,
he went to the young scholar, whom he had so lately before abused, and crying
him mercy, with many impudent and shallow excuses, desired him to reveal the
meaning of those words, and what he should understand by Bonum and Commodum.

The Scholar (with a sober and modest countenance) made answer; That he had
bin overmuch abused, which (nevertheless) he took not so impaciently, but
he had already both forgot and forgiven it, with promise of comfort in this
his extraordinary distraction, and grief of mind. When he had perused the
Suffraganes Letter, well observing the blushlesse ignorance of the Priest:
seeming (by outward appearance) to take it strangely, he cried out alowd,
saying; In the name of Virtue, what may be this man's meaning? How? (quoth the
Priest) What manner of demand do you make? Alas, replied the Scholar, you have
but one poor Ass, which I know you love dearly, and yet you must stew his
genitories very daintily, for your Patron will have no other meat to his
dinner. The genitories of mine Ass, answered the Priest? Passion of me, who
then shall carry my Corn to the Mill? There is no remedy, said the
Scholar, for he has so set it down for an absolute resolution.

After that the Priest had considered thereon a while by himself, remembering
the yearly reuennewes, which clearly he put up into his purse, to be ten
times of far greater worth then his Ass: he concluded to have him gelded,
what danger soever should ensue thereon, preparing them in readiness against
his coming. So soon as the Suffragan was there arrived, heavily he
complained to him for his Ass: which kind of Language he not understanding,
knew not what he meant, nor how he should answer. But being (by the Scholar)
acquainted with the whole History, he laughed heartily at the Priests ignorant
folly, wishing that all such bold Bayards (from time to time) might be so
served. Likewise, that all ignorant Priests, Vicars, and other Grasshoppers of
Towns or Villages, who sometimes have only seen Parts ^^ationis quod sunt,
not to stand overmuch on their own sufficiency, grounded soly upon their
Grammar; but to beware whom they jest withal, without out meddling with
Scholars, who take not injuries as dullards do, least they prove infamous by
then disputations.

Madam Phillippa, being accused by her Husband Rinaldo de Puglie^e, because he
took her in Adultery, with a young Gentleman named Lazar^no de Guazzagliotri:
caused her to be cited before the Judge. From whom she delivered her self, by
a sudden, witty, and pleasant answer, and moderated a severe strict Statute,
formerly made against women.

The Seventh Novel.
Wherein is declared, of what worth it is to confess a truth, with a
facetious and witty excuse.



AFter that Madame Fiammetta had given over speaking, and all the Auditory had
sufficiently applauded the Scholars honest revenge, the Queen enjoined
Philostratus, to proceed on next with his Novel, which caused him to begin
thus. Believe me Ladies, it is an excellent and most commendable thing, to
speak well, and to all purposes: but I hold it a matter of much greater worth,
to know how to do it, and when necessity does most require it. Which a
Gentlewoman (of whom I am now to speak) was so well enstructed in, as not
only it yielded the hearers mirthfull contentment, but likewise delivered her
from the danger of death, as (in few words) you shall hear related.

In the City of Pirato, there was an Edict or Statute, no less blameworthy
(to speak uprightly) then most severe and cruel, which (without making any
distinction) gave strict command; That every Woman should be burned with fire,
whose husband found her in the act of Adultery, with any secret or familiar
friend, as one deserving to be thus abandoned, like such as prostituted their
bodies to public sale or hire. During the continuance of this sharp Edict, it
fortuned that a Gentlewoman, who was named Phillippa, was found in her Chamber
one night, in the arms of a young Gentleman of the same City, named Lazarino de
Guazzagliotori, and by her own husband, called Rinaldo de Pugliese, she
loving the young Gallant, as her own life, because he was most complete in
all perfections, and every way as dearly addicted to her.

This sight was so irksome to Rinaldo, that, being ouercom with extreme rage,
he could hardly contain from running on them, with a violent intent to kill
them both: but fear of his own life caused his forbearance, meaning to be
revenged by some better way. Such was the heat of his spleen and fury, as,
setting aside all respect of his own shame: he would needs prosecute the
rigor of the deadly Edict, which he held lawful for him to do, although it
extended to the death of his Wife. Hereupon, having witnesses sufficient, to
approve the guiltiness of her offense: a day being appointed (without
desiring any other counsel) he went in person to accuse her, and required
justice against her.

The Gentlewoman, who was of an high and vndauntable spirit, as all such are,
who have fixed their affection resoluedly, and love upon a grounded
deliberation: concluded, quite against the counsel and opinion of her Parents,
Kindred, and Friends; to appear in the Court, as desiring rather to dye, by
confessing the truth with a manly courage, then by denying it, and her love
unto so worthy a person as he was, in whose arms she chanced to be taken; to
live basely in exile with shame, as an eternal scandal to her race. So,
before the Potestate, she made her appearance, worthily accompanied both with
men and women, all aduising her to deny the act: but she, not minding them or
their persuasions, looking on the Judge with a constant countenance, and a
voice of settled resolve, craved to know of him, what he demanded of her?

The Potestate well noting her brave carriage, her singular beauty and
praiseworthy parts, her words apparently witnessing the height of her mind:
began to take compassion on her, and doubted, least she would confess some
such matter, as should enforce him to pronounce the sentence of death against
her. But she boldly scorning all delays, or any further protraction of time;
demanded again, what was her accusation? Madame, answered the Potestate, I am
sorry to tell you, what needs I must, your husband (whom you see present here)
is the co^plainant against you, auouching, that he took you in the act of
adultery with another man: and therefore he requires, that, according to the
rigor of the Statute here in force with us, I should pronounce sentence
against you, and (consequently) the infliction of death. Which I cannot do, if
you confess not the fact, and therefore be well advised, how you answer me,
and tell me the truth, if it be as your Husband accuses you, or no.

The Lady, without any dismay or dread at all, pleasantly thus replied. My
Lord, true it is, that Rinaldo is my Husband, and that he found me, on the
night named, between the Arms of Lazarino, where many times heretofore he
has embraced me, according to the mutual love re-plighted together, which I
deny not, nor ever will. But you know well enough, and I am certain of it,
that the Laws enacted in any Country, ought to be common, and made with
consent of them whom they concern, which in this Edict of yours is quite
contrary. For it is rigorous against none, but poor women only, who are able
to yield much better content and satisfaction generally, then remains in the
power of men to do. And moreover, when this Law was made, there was not any
woman that gave consent to it, neither were they called to like or allow
thereof: in which respect, it may deservedly be termed, an unjust Law. And if
you will, in prejudice of my body, and of your own soul, be the executioner
of so unlawful an Edict, it consists in your power to do as you please.

But before you proceed to pronounce any sentence, may it please you to favor
me with one small request, namely, that you would demand of my Husband, if at
all times, and whenever he took delight in my company, I ever made any
curiosity, or came to him unwillingly. Whereto Rinaldo, without tarrying for
the Potestate to move the question, suddenly answered; that (undoubtedly) his
wife at all times, and oftener then he could request it, was never sparing of
her kindness, or put him off with any denial. Then the Lady, continuing on
her former speeches, thus replied. Let me then demand of you my Lord, being our
Potestate and Judge, if it be so, by my Husbands own free confession, that he
has always had his pleasure of me, without the least refusal in me, or
contradiction; what should I do with the ouer-plus remaining in mine own
power, and whereof he had no need? Would you have me cast it away to the
Dogs? Was it not more fitting for me, to pleasure therewith a worthy
Gentleman, who was even at deaths door for my love, then (my husbands
surfeiting, and having no need of me) to let him lie languishing, and dye?

Never was heard such an examination before, and to come from a woman of such
worth, the most part of the honorable Pratosians (both Lords and Ladies) being
there present, who hearing her urge such a necessary question, cried out all
aloud together with one voice (after they had laughed their fill) that the Lady
had said well, and no more then she might. So that, before they departed
thence, by comfortable advice proceeding from the Potestate: the Edict (being
reputed ouercruell) was modified, and interpreted to concern them only, who
offered injury to their Husbands for money. By which means, Rinaldo standing
as one confounded, for such a foolish and unadvised enterprise, departed from
the Auditorie: and the Lady, not a little joyful to be thus freed and
delivered from the fire, returned home with victory to her own house.

Fresco da Celatico, counseled and advised his Niece Cesca: That if such as
deserved to be looked on, were offensive to her eyes, as she had often told
him; she should forbear to look on any.

The Eighth Novel.
In just scorn of such unsightly and ill-pleasing surly Sluts, who imagine
none to be fair or well-fauoured, but themselves.



ALL the while as Philostratus was re-counting his Novel; it seemed, that the
Ladies (who heard it) found themselves much moved thereat, as by the wanton
blood monting up into their cheeks, it plainly appeared. But in the end,
looking on each other with strange behavior, they could not forbear smiling:
which the Queen interrupting by a command of attention, turning to Madame
Aemillia, willed her to follow next. When she, puffing and blowing, as if she
had been newly awaked from sleep, began in this manner.

Fair Beauties; My thoughts having wandered a great distance hence, and further
then I can easily collect them together again; in obedience yet to our Queen,
I shall report a much shorter Novel, then otherwise (perhaps) I should have
done, if my mind had been a little nearer home. I shall tell you the gross
fault of a foolish Damsel, well corrected by a witty reprehension of her
Uncle; if she had bin endued but with so much sense, as to have understood it.

An honest man, named Fresco da Celatico, had a good fulsom wench to his Niece,
who for her folly and squemishnes, was generally called Cesta, or nice
Francesca. And although she had stature sufficient, yet none of the handsomest,
and a good hard favored countenance, nothing nere such Angelical beauties as we
have seen: yet she was endued with such height of mind, and so proud an
opinion of her self, that it appeared as a custom bred in her, or rather a
gift bestowed on her by nature (though none of the best) to blame and despise
both men and women, yea whosoever she looked on; without any consideration of
her self, she being as unsightly, ill shaped, and ugly faced, as a worse was
very hardly to be found.

Nothing could be done at any time, to yeilde her liking or content: moreover,
she was so waspish, nice, and squemish, that when she came into the royal Court
of France, it was hateful and contemptible to her. Whenever she went through
the streets, every thing stunke and was noisome to her; so that she never did
any thing but stop her nose; as if all men or women she met withal; and
whatsoever else she looked on, were stinking and offensive. But let us leave all
further relation of her ill conditions, being every way (indeed) so bad, and
hardly becoming any sensible body, that we cannot condemn them so much as we
should.

It chanced upon a day, that she coming home to the house where her Uncle
dwelt, declared her wonted scuruy and scornful behavior; swelling, puffing,
and pouting extremely, in which humor she sat down by her Uncle, who desiring
to know what had displeased her, said. Why how now Francesca? what may the
meaning of this be? This being a solemn festival day, what is the reason of
your so soon returning home? She coily biting the lip, and brideling her head,
as if she had been some man's best Gelding, sprucely thus replied.

Indeed you say true Uncle, I am come home very early, because, since the
day of my birth, I never saw a City so pestered with unhandsome people, both
men and women, and worse this high Holyday then ever I did observe before. I
walked through some store of streets, and I could not see one proper man: and
as for the women, they are the most misshapen and ugly creatures, that, if God
had made me such an one, I should be sorry that ever I was borne. And being no
longer able to endure such unpleasing sights; you will not think (Uncle) in
what an anger I am come home. Fresco, to whom these stinking qualities of his
Niece seemed so insufferable, that he could not (with patience) endure them
any longer, thus short and quickly answered. Francesca, if all people of our
City (both men and women) be so odious in thy eyes, and offensive to thy nose,
as thou have often reported to me: be advised then by my counsel. Stay still
at home, and look upon none but thy self only, and then thou shall be sure
that they cannot displease thee. But she, being as empty of wit as a
pith-lesse Cane, and yet thought her judgment to exceed Salomons, could not
understand the lest part of her Uncles meaning, but stood as senseless as a
sheep. Only she replied, that she would resort to some other parts of the
country, which if she found as weakly furnished of handsome people, as here
she did, she would conceive better of her self, then ever she had done
before.

Signior Guido Caualcante, with a sudden and witty answer, reprehended the
rash folly of certain Florentine Gentlemen, that thought to scorn and flout
him.

The Ninth Novel.
Notably discovering the great difference that is between learning and
ignorance, upon judicious apprehension.



WHen the Queen perceived, that Madame Aemillia was discharged of her Novel,
and none remained now to speak next, but only her self, his privilege
always remembered, to whom it belonged to be the last, she began in this manner.

Fair Company, you have this day disappointed me of two Nouells at the least,
whereof I had intended to make use. Nevertheless, you shall not imagine me so
unfurnished, but that I have left one in store; the conclusion whereof, may
minister such instruction, as will not be reputed for idle and impertinent:
but rather of such material consequence, as better has not this day past
among us.

Understand then (most fair Ladies) that in former times long since past, our
City had many excellent and commendable customs in it; whereof (in these
unhappy days of ours) we cannot say that poor one remains, such has been
the too much increase of Wealth and Covetousness, the only supplanters of all
good qualities whatsoever. Among which lawdable and friendly observations,
there was one well deserving note, namely, that in diverse places of Florence,
men of the best houses in every quarter, had a sociable and neighbourly
assembly together, creating their company to consist of a certain number,
such as were able to supply their expenses; as this day one, and to morrow
another: and thus in a kind of friendly course, each daily furnished the
Table, for the rest of the company. Oftentimes, they did honor to diverse
Gentlemen and strangers, upon their arrival in our City, by inuiting them
into their assembly, and many of our worthiest Citizens beside; so that it grew
to a customary use, and one especially day in the year appointed, in memory of
this so loving a meeting, when they would ride (triumphally as it were) on
horseback through the City, sometimes performing Tilts, Tourneyes, and other
Martial exercises, but they were reserved for Feastiuall days.

Among which company, there was one called, Signior Betto Bruneleschi, who was
earnestly desirous, to procure Signior Guido Caualcante de Caualcanti, to make
one in this their friendly society. And not without great reason: for, over and
beside his being one of the best Logitians as those times could not yield a
better: He was also a most absolute natural Philosopher (which wortby
qualities were little esteemed among these honest meeters) a very friendly
Gentleman, singularly well spoken, and whatsoever else was commendable in any
man, was no way wanting in him, being wealthy withal, and able to return
equal honors, where he found them to be duly deserved, as no man therein could
go beyond him. But Signior Betto, notwithstanding his long continued
importunity, could not draw him into their assembly, which made him and the
rest of his company conceive, that the solitude of Guid^, retiring himself
always from familiar conuersing with men: provoked him to many curious
speculations: and because he retained some part of the Epicurean Opinion, their
vulgar judgment passed on him, that his speculations tended to no other end,
but only to find out that which was never done.

It chanced upon a day, that Signior Guido departing from the Church of Saint
Michaell d'Horta, and passing along by the Adamari, so far as to Saint John's
Church, which evermore was his customarie Walk: many goodly Marble Tombs were
then about the said Church, as now adays are at Saint Reparata, and diverse
more beside. He entering among the Collumbes of Porphiry, and the other
Sepulchers being there, because the door of the Church was shut: Signior Betto
and his company, came riding from S. Reparata, and espying Signior Guido among
the graves and tombs, said. Come, let us go make some jests to anger him. So
putting the spurs to their horses, they rode apace toward him: and being upon
him before he perceived them, one of them said. Guido thou refusest to be one
of our society, and seek for that which never was: when thou have found it,
tell us, what will thou do with it?

Guido seeing himself round engirt with them, suddenly thus replied:
Gentlemen, you may use me in your own house as you please. And setting his
hand on one of the Tombs (which was somewhat great) he took his rising, and
leapt quite over it on the further side, as being of an agile and sprightly
body, and being thus freed from them, he went away to his own lodging. They
stood all like men amazed, strangely looking one upon another, and began
afterward to murmr among themselves: That Guido was a man without any
understanding, and the answer which he had made unto them, was to no purpose,
neither sauoured of any discretion, but merely came from an empty brain
because they had no more to do in the place where now they were, then any of
the other Citizens, and Signior Guido (himself) as little as any of them;
whereto Signior Betto thus replied.

Alas Gentlemen, it is you your selves that are void of understanding: for, if
you had but observed the answer which he made unto us: he did honestly, and
(in very few words) not only notably express his own wisdom, but also
deservedly reprehend us. Because, if we observe things as we ought to do,
Graves and Tombs are the houses of the dead, ordained and prepared to be their
latest dwellings. He told us moreover, that although we have here (in this
life) other habitations and abidings; yet these (or the like) must at last be
our houses. To let us know, and all other foolish, indiscreete, and unlearned
men, that we are worse then dead men, in comparison of him, and other men
equal to him in skill and learning. And therefore, while we are here among
these Graves and Monuments, it may well be said, that we are not far from our
own houses, or how soon we shall be possessors of them, in regard of the
frailty attending on us.

Then every one could presently say, that Signior Guido had spoken nothing but
the truth, and were much ashamed of their own folly, and shallow estimation
which they had made of Guido, desiring never more after to meddle with him so
grossly, and thanking Signior Betto, for so well reforming their ignorance, by
his much better apprehension.

Friar Onyon, promised certain honest people of the Country, to show them a
Feather of the same Phoenix, that was with Noah in his Arc. In ^^ed whereof,
he found Coals, which he avouched to be those very coals, wherewith the same
Phoenix was roasted.

The Tenth Novel.
Wherein may be observed, what palpable abuses do many times pass, under the
counterfeit Cloak of Religion.



WHen all of them had delivered their Nouels, Dioneus knowing, that it remained
in him to relate the last for this day: without attending for any solemn
command (after he had imposed silence on them, that could not sufficiently
commend the witty reprehension of Guido, thus he began. Wise and worthy Ladies,
although by the privilege you have granted, it is lawful for me to speak any
thing best pleasing to my self: yet notwithstanding, it is not any part of my
meaning, to varrie from the matter and method, whereof you have spoken to very
good purpose. And therefore, following your footsteppes, I entend to tell you,
how craftily, and with a Rampiar suddenly raised in his own defense: a
Religious Friar of Saint Anthonies Order, shunned a shame, which two wily
companions had prepared for him. Nor let it offend you, if I run into more
large discourse, then this day has been used by any, for the apter comple^ting
of my Novel: because, if you well observe it, the Sun is as yet in the midst
of heaven, and therefore you may the better forbear me.

Certoldo, as (perhaps) you know, or have heard, is a Village in the Vale of
Elsa, and under the authority and command of our Florence, which although it
be but small: yet (in former times) it has bin inhabited with Gentlemen, and
people of especial respect. A religious Friar of S. Anthonies Order, named
Friar Onyon, had long time used to resort thither, to receive the beneuolent
alms, which those charitably affected people in simplicity gave him, and
chiefly at diverse days of the year, when their bounty and devotion would
extend themselves more largely then at other seasons. And so much the rather,
because they thought him to be a good Pastor of holy life in outward
appearance, and carried a name of much greater matter, then remained in the man
indeed; beside, that part of the country yielded far more plentiful abundance
of Onyons, then all other in Tuscany elsewhere, a kind of food greatly
affected by those Friars, as men always of hungry and good appetite. This
Friar Onyon was a man of little stature, red hair, a cheerful countenance, and
the world afforded not a more crafty companion, then he. Moreover, albeit he
had very little knowledge or learning, yet he was so prompt, ready and voluble
of speech, uttering often he knew not what himself: that such as were not well
acquainted with his qualities, supposed him to be a singular Rhetoritian,
excelling Cicero or Quintilian themselves; and he was a gossip, friend, or
dearly affected, by every one dwelling in those parts. According to his wonted
custom, one time he went thither in the month of August, and on a Sunday
morning, when all the dwellers thereabout, were present to hear Mass, and in
the chiefest Church above all the rest: when the Friar saw time convenient for
his purpose, he advanced himself, and began to speak in this manner.

Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, you know you have kept a commendable custom, in
sending yearly to the poor brethren of our Lord Baron S. Anthony, both of your
Corn and other provision, some more, some less, all according to their power,
means, and devotion, to the end that blessed S. Anthony should be the more
careful of your oxen, sheep, asses, swine, pigs, and other cattle. Moreover,
you have used to pay (especially such as have their names registered in our
Fraternity) those duties which annually you send unto us. For the collection
whereof, I am sent by my Superior, namely our L. Abbot, and therefore (with Gods
blessing) you may come after noone hither, when you shall hear the Bells of the
Church ring: then will I make a predication to you; you shall kiss the Cross,
and beside, because I know you al to be most devout servants to our Lord Baron
S. Anthony, in especial grace and favor, I will show you a most holy and goodly
Relic, which I my self (long since) brought from the holy Land beyond the
seas. If you desire to know what it is, let me tell you, that it is one of the
Feathers of the same Phoenix, which was in the Arc with the Patriarch Noah.
And having thus spoken, he became silent, returning back to hear Mass. While
he delivered these and the like speeches, among the other people then in the
church, there were two shrewde and crafty Companions; the one, named John de
Bragoniero, and the other, Biagio Pizzino. These subtle Fellows, after they
had heard the report of Fry^^ Onyons Relic: although they were his intimate
friends, and came thither in his company; yet they concluded between
themselves, to show him a trick of Legierdumaine, and to steal the Feather
from him. When they had intelligence of Friar Onyons di^ing that day at the
Castle, with a worthy Friend of his: no sooner was he set at the Table, but
away went they in all haste, to the Inn where the Friar frequented, with this
determination, that Biagio should hold conference with the Friars boy, while
his fellow ransackt the Wallet, to find the Feather, and carry it away with
him, for a future observation, what the Friar would say unto the people, when
he found the loss of the Feather, and could not perform his promi^e to them.

The Friars Boy, whom some called Guccio Balena, some Guccio Imbrata, and
others Guccio Porco, was such a knauish Lad, and had so many bad qualities, as
Lippo Topo the cunning Painter, or the most curious Poetical wit, had not any
ability to describe them. Friar Onyon himself did often observe his behavior,
and would make this report among his Friends. My Boy (quoth he) has nine rare
qualities in him, and such they are, as if Solomon, Aristotle, or Seneca had
only but one of them: it were sufficient to torment and trouble all their
virtue, all their senses, and all their sanctity. Consider then, what manner of
man he is like to be, having nine such rarities, yet void of all virtue, wit,
or goodness. And when it was demanded of Friar Onyon, what these nine rare
conditions were: he having them all ready by heart, and in rhyme, thus
answered. Boys I have known, and seen,
And heard of many:
But, For Lying, Loytring, Laziness,
For Facing, Filching, Filthiness;
For Careless, Graceless, all Unthriftiness,
My Boy excels any.


Now, over and beside all these admirable qualities, he has many more such
singularities, which (in favor toward him) I am feign to conceal. But that
which I smile most at in him, is, that he would have a Wife in every place
where he comes, yea, and a good house to boot too: for, in regard his beard
begins to show it self, rising thick in hair, black and amiable, he is
verily persuaded, that all Women will fall in love with him; and if they refuse
to follow him, he will in all have run after them. But truly, he is a notable
servant to me, for I cannot speak with any one, and in never so great
secrecy, but he will be sure to hear his part; and when any question is
demanded of me, he stands in such awe and fear of my displeasure: that he
will be sure to make the first answer, yea or no, according as he thinks it
most convenient.

Now, to proceed where we left, Friar Onyon having left this serviceable youth
at his lodging, to see that no body should meddle with his commodities,
especially his Wallet, because of the sacred things therein contained: Guccio
Imbrata, who as earnestly affected to be in the Kitchen, as Birds to hop from
branch to branch, especially, when any of the Chamber-maides were there,
espied one of the Hostesses Female attendants, a gross fat Trugge, low of
stature, ill faced, and worse formed, with a pair of breasts like two bumbards,
smelling loathsomely of grease and sweat; down she descended into the
Kitchen, like a Kite upon a piece of Carrion. This Boy, or Knave, choose whither
you will style him, having carelessly left Friar Onyons Chamber door open, and
all the holy things so much to be neglected, although it was then the month of
August, when heat is in the highest predominance, yet he would needs sit
down by the sire, and began to confer with this amiable creature, who was
called by the name of Nuta.

Being set close by her, he told her, that he was a Gentleman by Atturniship,
and that he had more millions of Crowns, then all his life time would serve
him to spend; beside those which he paid away daily, as having no convenient
employment for them. Moreover, he knew how to speak, and do such things, as
were beyond wonder or admiration. And, never remembering his old tatterd Friars
Cowle, which was so snottie and greazie, that good store of kitchen stuff
might have been boiled out of it; as also a foul slouenly Trusse or half
doublet, all baudied with bowsing, fat greazie lubbetly sweating, and other
drudgeries in the Convent Kitchen, where he was an Officer in the meanest
credit. So that to describe this sweet youth in his lively colors, both for
natural perfections of body, and artificial composure of his Garments; never
came the fowlest silks out of Tartaria or India, more ugly or unsightly to be
looked upon. And for a further addition to his neat knavery, his breeches were
so rent between his legs, his shoes and stockings had bin at such a
merciless massacre: that the gallantest Commandador of Castile (though he had
never so lately bin releast out of slavery) could have wished for better
garments, then he; or make larger promises, then he did to his Nuta. Protesting
to entitle her as his only, to free her from the Inn and Chamber thraldomes,
if she would live with him, be his Love, partaker of his present possessions,
and so to succeed in his future Fortunes. All which brauadoes, though they were
belcht forth with admirable insinuations: yet they converted into smoke, as
all such braggadochio behauiours do, and he was as wise at the ending, as when
he began.

Our former named two crafty Companions, seeing Guccio Porco so seriously
employed about Nuta, was therewith not a little contented, because their
intended labor was now more then half ended. And perceiving no contradiction
to cross their proceeding, into Friar Onyons chamber entered they, finding it
ready open for their purpose: where the first thing that came into their hand
in search, was the wallet. When they had opened it, they found a small Cabinet,
wrapped in a great many foldings of rich Taffata; and having unfolded it, a
fine formal Key was hanging thereat: wherewith having unlocked the Cabinet, they
found a fair Feather of a Parrots tail, which they supposed to be the very
same, that he meant to show the people of Certaldo. And truly (in those days)
it was no hard matter to make them believe any thing, because the idle vanities
of Egypt and those remoter parts, had not (as yet) bin seen in Tuscany, as
since then they have bin in great abundance, to the utter ruin (almost) of
Italy.

And although they might then be known to very few, yet the inhabitants of the
Country generally, understood little or nothing at all of them. For there, the
pure simplicity of their ancient predecessors still continuing; they had not
seen any Parrots, or so much as heard any speech of them. Wherefore the two
crafty consorts, not a little joyful of finding the Feather, took it thence
with them, and because they would not leave the Cabinet empty, espying
Char-coales lying in a corner of the Chamber, they filled it with them,
wrapping it up again in the Taffata, and in as demure manner as they found it.
So, away came they with the Feather, neither seen or suspected by any one,
intending now to hear what Friar Onyon would say, upon the loss of his
precious Relic, and finding the Coals there placed insted thereof.

The simple men and women of the country, who had bin at morning Mass in the
Church, and heard what a wonderful Feather they should see in the after noone;
returned in all have to their houses, where one telling this news to another,
and gossip with gossip consulting thereon; they made the shorter dinner, and
afterward flocked in maine troops to the Castle, contending who should first
get entrance, such was their devotion to see the holy feather. Friar Onyon
having dined, and reposed a little after his wine, he arose from the table to
the window, where beholding what multitudes came to see the feather, he assured
himself of good store of money. Hereupon, he sent to his Boy Guccio Imbrata,
that upon the Bells ringing, he should come and bring the wallet to him. Which
(with much ado) he did, so soon as his quarrel was ended in the kitchen, with
the amiable Chambermaid Nuta, away then he went with his holy commodities:
where he was no sooner arrived, but because his belly was ready to burst with
drinking water, he sent him to the Church to ring the bells, which not only
would warm the cold water in his belly, but likewise make him run as gaunt as
a Greyhound.

When all the people were assembled in the Church together, Friar Onyon (never
distrusting any injury offered him, or that his close commodities had bin
meddled withal) began his predication, uttering a thousand lies to fit his
purpose. And when he came to show the feather of the Phoenix (having first in
great devotion finished the confession) he caused two goodly torches to be
lighted, and ducking down his head three several times, before he would so
much as touch the Taffata, he opened it with much reverence. So soon as the
Cabinet came to be seen, off went his Hood, lowly he bowed down his body, and
uttering especial praises of the Phoenix, and sacred properties of the
wonderful Relic, the Cover of the Cabinet being lifte^ up, he saw the same
to be full of Coals. He could not suspect his Villain boy to do this deed,
for he knew him not to be endued with so much wit, only he cursed him for
keeping it no better, and cursed himself also, for reposing trust in such a
careless knave, knowing him to be slothful, disobedient, negligent, and void of
all honest understanding or grace. Suddenly (without blushing) lest his loss
should be discerned, he lifted his looks and hands to heaven, speaking out so
loud, as every one might easily hear him, thus: O thou omnipotent providence,
for ever let thy power be praised. Then making fast the Cabinet again, and
turning himself to the people, with looks expressing admiration, he proceeded
in this manner.

Lords, Ladies, and you the rest of my worthy Auditors: You are to understand,
that I (being then very young) was sent by my Superior, into those parts,
where the Sun appears at his first rising. And I had received charge by
express command, that I should seek for (so much as consisted in my power to
do) the especial virtues and privileges belonging to Porcellane, which
although the boiling thereof be worth but little, yet it is very profitable to
any but us. In regard whereof, being upon my journey, and departing from
Venice, passing along the Borgo de Grecia, I proceeded thence (on horseback)
through the Realm of Garbo, so to Baldacca, till I came to Parione; from
whence, not without great extremity of thirst, I arrived in Sardignia.

But why do I trouble you with the repetition of so many countries? I coasted
on still, after I had past Saint Georges Arm, into Truffia, and then into
Buffia, which are Countries much inhabited, and with great people. From thence
I went into the Land of Lying, where I found store of the Brethren of our
Religion, and many other beside, who shunned all pain and labor, only for
the love of God, and cared as litlte, for the pains and travails which others
took, except some benefit arised thereby to them; nor spend they any money in
this Country, but such as is without stamp. Thence I went into the Land of
Abruzza, where the men and women go in Galoches over the Mountains, and make
them garments of their Swines guts. Not far from thence, I found people, that
carried bread in their staves, and wine in Satchels, when parting from them, I
arrived among the Mountains of Bacchus, where all the waters run down with a
deep fall, and in short time, I went on so far, that I found my self to be in
India Pastinaca; where I swear to you by the holy habit which I wear on my
body, that I saw Serpents fly, things incredible, and such as were never seen
before.

But because I would be loath to lie, so soon as I departed thence, I met with
Maso de Saggio, who was a great Merchant there, and whom I found cracking Nuts,
and felling Cockles by retale. Nevertheless, all this while I could not find
what I sought for, and therefore I was to pass from hence by water, if I
intended to travail thither, and so in returning back, I came into the Holy
Land, where cool fresh bread is sold for four pence, and the hot is given
away for nothing. There I found the venerable Father (blame me not I beseech
you) the most worthy Patriarch of Jerusalem, who for the reverence due to the
habit I wear, and love to our Lord Baron Saint Anthony, would have me to see
all the holy Relics, which he had there under his charge: whereof there were so
many, as if I should recount them all to you, I never could come to a
conclusion. But yet, not to leave you discomforted, I will relate some few of
them to you.

First of all, he showed me the finger of the holy Ghost, so whole and perfect,
as ever it was. Next, the nose of the Cherubin, which appeared to Saint
Frances; with the payring of the nail of a Seraphin; and one of the ribs of
Verbum caro, fastened to one of the Windows, covered with the holy garments of
the Catholic Faith. Then he took me into a dark Chapel, where he showed me
diverse beams of the Star that appeared to the three Kings in the East. Also
a Violl of Saint Michaels sweat, when he combatted with the devil: And the
iaw-bone of dead Lazarus, with many other precious things beside. And because I
was liberal to him, giving him two of the Plains of Monte Morello, in the
Vulgar Edition, and some of the Chapters del Caprezio, which he had long
labored in search of; he bestowed on me some of his Relics.

First, he gave me one of the eye-teeth of Santa Crux; and a little Violl,
filled with some part of the sound of those Belles, which hung in the sumptuous
Temple of Solomon. Next, he gave me the Feather of the Phoenix, which was with
Noah in the Arc, as before I told you. And one of the Wooden Pattens, which
the good Saint Gerrard de Magnavilla used to wear in his travails, and which
I gave (not long since) to Gerrardo di Bousy at Florence, where it is respected
with much devotion. Moreover, he gave me a few of those Coals, wherewith the
Phoenix of Noah was roasted; all which things I brought away thence with me.
Now, most true it is, that my Superior would never suffer me to show them any
where, until he was faithfully cer^ified, whether they were the same precious
Relics, or no. But perceiving by sundry Miracles which they have wrought,
and Letters of sufficient credence received from the reverend Patriarch, that
all is true, he has granted me permission to show them, and because I would
not trust any one with matters of such moment, I my self brought them hither
with me.

Now I must tell you, that the Feather of the same Phoenix, I conveyed into a
small Cabinet or Casket, because it should not be bent or broken. And the
Coals where with the said Phoenix was roasted, I put into another Casket, in
all respects so like to the former, that many times I have taken one for
another. As now at this instant it has bin my fortune: for, imagining that I
brought the Casket with the feather, I mistook my self, and brought the other
with the coals. Wherein doubtless I have not offended, because I am certain,
that we of our Order do not any thing, but it is ordered by divine direction,
and our blessed Patron the Lord Baron Saint Anthony. And so much the rather,
because about a senight hence, the Feast of Saint Anthony is to be solemnized,
against the preparation whereof, and to kindle your zeal with the greater
feruencie: he put the Casket with the Coals into my hand, meaning, to let you
see the Feather, at some more fitting season. And therefore my blessed Sons
and Daughters, put off your Bonnets, and come hither with devotion to look
upon them. But first let me tell you, whosoever is marked by any of these
Coals, with the sign of the Cross: he or she shall live all this year
happily, and no fire whatsoever shall come near to touch or hurt them. So,
singing a solemn Antheme in the praise of S. Anthony, he vnveyled the Casket,
and showed the Coals openly.

The simple multitude, having (with great admiration and reverence) a long
while beheld them, they thronged in crowds to Friar Onyon, giving him far
greater offerings, then before they had, and enteating him to mark them each
after other. Whereupon, he taking the coals in his hand, began to mark their
garments of white, and the veyles on the Women's heads, with Crosses of no mean
extendure: affirming to them, that the more the Coals wasted with making those
great crosses, the more they still increased in the Casket, as often before he
had made trial.

In this manner, having crossed all the Certaldanes (to his great benefit) and
their abuse: he smiled at his sudden and dexterious devise, in mockery of
them, who thought to have made a scorn of him, by dispossessing him of the
Feather. For Bragoniero and Pizzino, being present at his Learned predication,
and having heard what a cunning shift he found, to come off cleanly, without
the least detection, and all delivered with such admirable protestations: they
were feign to forsake the Church, least they should have burst with laughing.

But when all the people were parted and gone, they met Friar Onyon at his
Inn, where closely they discovered to him, what they had done, delivering him
his Feather again: which the year following, did yield him as much money, as
now the Coals had done.

THis Novel affoorded equal pleasing to the whole company, Friar Onyons
Sermon being much commended, but especially his long Pilgrimage, and the
Relics he had both seen, and brought home with him. Afterward, the Queen
perceiving, that her reign had now the full expiration, graciously she arose,
and taking the Crown from off her own head, placed on the head of Dioneus,
saying. It is high time Dioneus, that you should taste part of the charge and
pain, which poor women have felt and undergone in their sovereignty and
government: wherefore, be you our King, and rule us with such awefull
authority, that the ending of your dominion may yield us all contentment.
Dioneus being thus invested with the Crown, returned this answer.

I make no doubt (bright Beauties) but you many times have seen as good, or a
better King among the Chesse-men, then I am. But yet of a certainty, if you
would be obedient to me, as you ought in duty unto a true King: I should grant
you a liberal freedom of that, wherein you take the most delight, and without
which, our choicest desires can never be complete. Nevertheless, I mean,
that my government shall be according to mine own mind. So, causing the Master
of the Household to be called for, as all the rest were wont to do for
conference with him: he gave him direction, for all things fitting the time of
his Regiment, and then turning to the Ladies, thus he proceeded.

Honest Ladies, we have already discoursed of variable devises, and so many
several manners of humane industry, concerning the business wherewith Licisca
came to acquaint us: that her very words, have ministered me matter, sufficient
for our morrowes conference, or else I stand in doubt, that I could not have
devised a more convenient Theme for us to talk on. She (as you have all
heard) said, that she had not any neighbor, who came a true Virgin to her
Husband, and added moreover, that she knew some others, who had beguiled their
Husbands, in very cunning and crafty manner. But setting aside the first part,
concerning the proof of children, I conceive the second to be more apt for
our intended argument. In which respect, my will is (seeing Licisca has given
us so good an occasion) that our discoursing to morrow, may only concern such
slye cunning and deceits, as women have heretofore used, for satisfying their
own appetites, and beguiling their Husbands, without their knowledge, or
suspicion, and cleanly escaping with them, or no.

This argument seemed not very pleasing to the Ladies, and therefore they urged
an alteration thereof, to some matter better suting with the day, and their
discoursing: whereto thus he answered. Ladies, I know as well as your selves,
why you would have this instant argument altered: but, to change me from it you
have no power, considering the season is such, as shielding all (both men and
women) from meddling with any dishonest action; it is lawful for us to speak
of what we please. And know you not, that through the sad occasion of the
time, which now ouer-ruleth us, the Judges have forsaken their venerable
benches, the Laws (both divine and humane) ceasing, granting ample license to
every one, to do what best agrees with the conservation of life? Therefore, if
your honesties do strain themselves a little, both in thinking and speaking,
not for prosecution of any immodest deed, but only for familiar and
blameless intercourse: I cannot devise a more convenient ground, at least that
carries apparent reason, for reproof of perils, to ensue by any of you.
Moreover, your company, which has bin most honest, since the first day of our
meeting, to this instant: appears not any jot to be disgraced, by any thing
either said or done, neither shall be (I hope) in the meanest degree.

And what is he, knowing your choice and virtuous dispositions, so powerful in
their own prevailing, that wanton words cannot misguide your ways, no nor the
terror of death it self, that dare insinuate a distempred thought? But admit,
that some slight or shallow judgments, hearing you (perhaps sometimes) talk of
such amorous follies, should therefore suspitiously imagine you to be faulty,
or else you would be more sparing of speech? Their wit and censure are both
alike, sauouring rather of their own vile nature, who would brand others with
their basebred imperfections. Yet there is another consideration beside, of some
great injury offered to mine honor, and whereof I know not how you can acquit
yourselues.

I that have bin obedient to you all, and borne the heavy load of your
business, having now (with full consent) created me your King, you would
wrest the law out of my hands, and dispose of my authority as you please.
Forbear (gentle Ladies) all frivolous suspicions, more fit for them that are
full of bad thoughts, then you, who have true Virtue shining in your eyes; and
therefore, let every one freely speak their mind, according as their humors
best pleases them.

When the Ladies heard this, they made answer, that all should be answerable
to his mind. Whereupon, the King gave them all leave to dispose of themselves
till supper time. And because the Sun was yet very high, in regard all the
re-counted Nouels had bin so short: Dioneus went to play at the Tables with
another of the young Gentlemen, and Madame Eliza, having withdrawn the Ladies
aside, thus spoke unto them. During the time of our being here, I have often
been desirous to let you see a place somewhat near at hand, and which I suppose
you have never seen, it being called The Valley of Ladies. Till now, I could
not find any convenient time to bring you thither, the Sun continuing still
aloft, which fitteth you with the apter leisure, and the sight (I am sure) can
no way discontent you.

The Ladies replied, that they were all ready to walk with her thither: and
calling one of their women to attend on them, they set on, without speaking a
word to any of the men. And within the distance of half a mile, they arrived
at the Valley of Ladies, wherinto they entered by a strait passage at the one
side, from whence there issued forth a clear running River. And they found the
said Valley to be so goodly and pleasant, especially in that season, which
was the hottest of all the year; as all the world was no where able to yield
the like. And, as one of the said Ladies (since then) related to me, there was
a plain in the Valley fo directly round, as if it had been formed by a
compass, yet rather it resembled the Workmanship of Nature, then to be made by
the hand of man: containing in circuit somewhat more then the quarter of a
mile, environed with six small hills, of no great height, and on each of them
stood a little Palace, shaped in the fashion of Castles.

The ground-plots descending from those hills or mountains, grew less and
less by variable degrees, as we observe at entering into our Theaters, from
the highest part to the lowest, succinctly to narrow the circle by order. Now,
concerning these ground-plottes or little Meadows, those which the Sun
Southward looked on, were full of Vines, Oliue-trees, Almond-trees,
Cherry-trees, and Figge-trees, with diverse other Trees beside, so plentifully
bearing fruits, as you could not discern a hands breadth of loss. The other
Mountains, whereon the Northern winds blow, were curiously covered with
small Thickets or Woods of Oaks, Ashes, and other Trees so green and strait,
as it was impossible to behold fairer. The goodly plain it self, not having
any other entrance, but where the Ladies came in, was planted with Trees of
Fur, Cipresse, Laurel, and Pines; so singularly growing in formal order, as
if some artificial or cunning hand had planted them, the Sun hardly piercing
through their branches, from the top to the bottom, even at his highest, or
any part of his course.

All the whole field was richly spread with grass, and such variety of delicate
Flowers, as Nature yielded out of her plenteous Storehouse. But that which
gave no less delight then any of the rest, was a small running Brook,
descending from one of the Valleys, that divided two of the little hills, nd
fell through a Vein of the entire Rock it self, that the fall and murmr
thereof was most delightful to hear, seeming all the way in the descent, like
Quicke-siluer, weauing it self into artificial works, and arriving in the
plain beneath, it was there received into a small Channel, swiftly running
through the midst of the plain, to a place where it stayed, and shaped it
self into a Lake or Pond, such as our Citizens have in their Orchards or
Gardens, when they please to make use of such a commodity.

This Pond was no deeper, then to reach the breast of a man, and having no mud
or soil in it, the bottom thereof showed like small beaten gravel, with
pretty pibble stones intermixed, which some that had nothing else to do, would
sit down and count them as they lay, as very easily they might. And not only
was the bottom thus apparently seen, but also such plenty of Fishes swimming
every way, as the mind was never to be wearied in looking on them. Nor was this
water bounded in with any banks, but only the sides of the plain Meadow, which
made it appear the more sightly, as it arose in swelling plenty. And always
as it super-abounded in his course, least it should ^uerflow disorderly: it
fell into another Channel, which conueying it along the lower Valley, ran
forth to water other needful places.

When the Ladies were arrived in this goodly valley, and upon advised viewing
it, had sufficiently commended it: in regard the heat of the day was great, the
place tempting, and the Pond free from sight of any, they resolved there to
bathe themselves. Wherefore they sent the waiting Gentlewoman to have a
diligent eye on the way where they entered, least any one should chance to
steal upon them. All seven of them being stripped naked, into the water they
went, which hid their delicate white bodies, like as a clear Glass concealeth
a Damask Rose within it. So they being in the Pond, and the water nothing
troubled by their being there, they found much pretty pastime together, running
after the Fishes, to catch them with their hands, but they were ouer-quicke and
cunning for them. After they had delighted themselves there to their own
contentment, and were clothed with their garments, as before: thinking it fit
time for their returning back again, least their ouerlong stay might give
offense, they departed thence in an easy pace, doing nothing else all the way
as they went, but extolling the Valley of Ladies beyond all comparison.

At the Palace they arrived in a due hour, finding the three Gentlemen at
play, as they left them, to whom Madame Pampinea pleasantly thus spoke. Now
trust me Gallants, this day we have very cunningly beguiled you. How now?
answered Dioneus, begin you first to act, before you speak? Yes truly Sir,
replied Madame Pampinea: Relating to him at large, from whence they came, what
they had done there, the beauty of the place, and the distance thence. The
King (upon her excellent report) being very desirous to see it; suddenly
commanded Supper to be served in, which was no sooner ended, but they and
their three servants (leaving the Ladies) walked on to the Valley, which when
they had considered, no one of them having ever bin there before; they thought
it to be the Paradise of the World.

They bathed themselves there likewise, as the Ladies formerlie had done, and
being re-uested, returned back to their Lodgings, because dark night drew on
apace: but they found the Ladies dancing, to a Song which Madame Fiammetta
sung. When the dance was ended, they entertained the time with no other
discourse, but only concerning the Valley of Ladies, whereof they all spoke
liberally in commendations. Whereupon, the King called the Master of the
Household, giving him command, that (on the morrow) dinner should be ready
betimes, and bedding to be thence carried, if any desired rest at mid-time of
the day.

All this being done, variety of pleasing Wines were brought, Banqueting
stuff, and other dainties; after which they fell to Dancing. And Pamphilus,
having received command, to begin an especial dance, the King turned himself
unto Madame Eliza, speaking thus. Fair Lady, you have done me so much honor
this day, as to deliver me the Crown: in regard whereof, be you this night the
Mistress of the song: and let it be such as best may please your self.
Whereunto Madam Eliza, with a modest blush arising in her face, replied; That
his will should be fulfilled, and then (with a delicate voice) she began in
this manner.

The Song.
The CHORUS sung by all.
LOVE, if I can escape free from forth thy hold,
Believe it for a truth,
Never more shall thy falshoode me enfolde.
WHen I was young, I entered first thy fights,
Supposing there to find a solemn peace:
I threw off all my Arms, and with delights
Fed my poore-hopes, as still they did increase.
But like a Tyrant, full of rancorous hate,
Thou tookst advantage:
And I sought refuge, but it was too late.
Love, if I can escape free, etc,
But being thus surprised in thy snares,
To my misfortune, thou madst me her slave;
Was only borne to feed me with despaires.
And keep me dying in a living grave.
For I saw nothing daily fore mine eyes,
But rackes and tortures:
From which I could not get in any wise.
Love, if I can escape free, etc.
My sighs and tears I vented to the wind,
For none would hear or pity my complaints;
My torments still increased in this kind,
And more and more I felt these sharp restraints.
Release me now at last from forth this hell.
Assuage thy rigor,
Delight not thus in cruelty to dwell.
Love, if I can escape free, etc.
If this thou will not grant, be yet so kind,
Release me from those worse then servile bands,
Which new vain hopes have bred, wherein I find;
Such violent fears, as comfort quite withstands.
be now (at length) a little moved to pity,
Be it nere so little:
Or in my death listen my Swan-like Dittie.
Love, if I can escape free from forth thy hold,
Believe it for a truth,
Never more shall thy falsehood me enfolde.
After that Madame Eliza had made an end of her Song, which she sealed up with
an heartbreaking sigh: they all sat amazedly wandering at her moanes, not one
among them being able to conjecture, what should be the reason of her singing
in this manner. But the King being in a good and pleasing temper, calling
Tindaro, commanded him to bring his Bagge-pipe, by the sound whereof they
danced diverse daunces: And a great part of the night being spent in this
manner, they all gave over, and departed to their Chambers.

The End of the Sixth Day.
The Seventh Day.
When the Assembly being met together, and under the Regiment of Dioneus: the
Discourses are directed, for the discovery of such policies and deceites, as
women have used for beguiling of their Husbands, either in respect of their
love, or for the prevention of some blame or scandal, escaping without sight,
knowledge, or otherwise.

The Induction to the Days Discourses.
ALL the Stars were departed out of the East, but only that, which we
commonly call bright Lucifer, or the Day Star, gracing the morning very
gloriously: when the Master of the household, being risen, went with all the
provision, to the Valley of Ladies, to make every thing in due and decent
readiness, according as his Lord ouer-night had commanded him. After which
departure of his, it was not long before the King arose, being awaked with the
noise which the carriages made; and when he was up, the other two Gentlemen and
the Ladies were quickly ready soon after. On they set toward the Valley,
even as the Sun was rising: and all the way as they went, never before had
they heard so many sweet Nightingales, and other pretty Birds melodiously
singing, as they did this morning, which keeping them company thoroughout the
journey, they arrived at the Valley of Ladies, where it seemed to them, that
infinite Quires of delicate Nightingales, and other Birds, had purposely made a
meeting, even as it were to give them a glad welcome thither.

Diverse times they walked about the Valley, never satisfied with viewing it
from one end to the other; because it appeared far more pleasing unto them,
then it had done the precedent day: and because the days splendor was much
more conform to the beauty thereof. After they had broken their fast, with
excellent Wines and Banqueting stuff, they began to tune their instruments
and sing; because (therein) the sweet Birds should not excel them, the Valley
(with delicate Echoes) answering all their notes. When dinner time drew near,
the Tables were covered under the spreading trees, and by the goodly Ponds
side, where they sat down orderly by the Kings direction: and all dinner
while, they saw the Fishes swim by huge shoales in the Pond, which sometimes
gave them occasion to talk, as well as gaze on them.

When dinner was ended, and the Tables withdrawn, in as iocond manner as
before, they renewed again their hermonious singing. In diverse places of this
pleasant Valley, were goodly field-Beds readily furnished, according as the
Master of the Household gave enstruction, enclosed with Pauillions of costly
stuffes, such as are sometimes brought out of France. Such as were so disposed,
were licensed by the King to take their rest: and they that would not, he
permitted them to their wonted pastimes, each according to their minds. But
when they were risen from sleep, and the rest from their other exercises, it
seemed to be more then high time, that they should prepare for talk and
conference. So, sitting down on Turkey Carpets, which were spread abroad on the
green grass, and close by the place where they had dined: the King gave
command, that Madam Aemillia should first begin, whereto she willingly yielding
obedience, and expecting such silent attention, as formerly had bin observed,
thus she began.

John of Lorraine heard one knock at his door in the night time, whereupon
he awaked his Wife Monna Tessa. She made him believe, that it was a Spirit
which knocked at the door, and so they arose, going both together to conjure
the Spirit with a prayer; and afterward, they heard no more knocking.

The First Novel.
Reprehending the simplicity of some sottish Husbands: And discovering the
wanton subtilties of some women, to compass their unlawful desires.



MY Gracious Lord (quoth Madame Aemillia) it had been a matter highly pleasing
to me, that any other (rather then my self) should have begun to speak of
this argument, which it has pleased you to apoint. But seeing it is your
Highness pleasure, that I must make a passage of assurance for all the rest; I
will not be irregular, because obedience is our chief Article. I shall
therefore (Gracious Ladies) strive, to speak something, which may be
aduantageable to you hereafter, in regard, that if other women be as fearful
as we, especially of Spirits, of which all our sex have generally bin timorous
(although, upon my credit, I know not what they are, nor ever could meet with
any, to tell me what they be) you may, by the diligent observation of my
Novel: learn a wholesome and holy prayer, very available, and of precious
power, to conjure and drive them away, whenever they shall presume to assault
you in any place.

There dwelt sometime in Florence, and in the street of Saint Brancazio, a
woollen Weauer, named John of Lorrayne; a man more happy in his Art, then wise
in any thing else beside: because, sauouring somewhat of the Gregory, and (in
very deed) little less then an Idiot; He was many times made Captain of the
Woollen-Weauers, in the quarters belonging to Santa Maria Nouella, and his
house was the School or receptacle, for all their meetings and assemblies. He
had diverse other petty Offices beside, by the dignity and authority whereof,
he supposed himself much exalted or elevated, above the common pitch of other
men. And this humor became the more tractable to him, because he addicted
himself oftentimes (as being a man of an easy inclination) to be a benefactor
to the holy Fathers of Santa Maria Nouella, giving (beside his other charitable
Alms) to some one a pair of Breeches, to another a Hood, and to another a
whole habit. In reward whereof, they taught him (by heart) many wholesome
prayers, as the Pater noster in the vulgar tongue; the Song of Saint Alexis;
the Lamentations of Saint Bernard, the Hymn of Madame Matilda, and many other
such like matters, which he kept charily, and repeated usually, as tending to
the salvation of his soul.

This man, had a very fair and lovely wife, named Monna Tessa, the daughter of
Manuccio della Cuculia, wise and well advised; who knowing the simplicity of
her Husband, and affecting Frederigo di Neri Pegolotti, who was a comely young
Gentleman, fresh, and in the flower of his time, even as she was, therefore
they agreed the better together. By means of her Chambermaid, Frederigo and
she met often together, at a Country Farm of John of Lorraynes, which he
had near to Florence, and where she used to lodge all the Summer time, called
Camerata, whether John resorted sometimes to Supper, and lodge for a night,
returning home again to his City house the next morning; yet often he would
stay there longer with his own companions.

Frederigo, who was no mean man in his Mistresses favor, and therefore these
private meetings the more welcome to him; received a summons or assignation
from her, to be there on such a night, when her husband had no intent of
coming thither. There they supped merrily together, and (no doubt) did other
things, nothing appertaining to our purpose, she both acquainting, and well
instructing him, in a dozen (at the least) of her Husbands devout prayers. Nor
did she make any account, or Frederigo either, that this should be the last
time of their meeting, because (indeed) it was not the first: and therefore
they set down an order and conclusion together (because the Chambermaide must
be no longer the messenger) in such manner as you shall hear.

Frederigo was to observe especially, that always when he went or came from
his own house, which stood much higher then John of Lorraynes did, to look
upon a Vine, closely adjoining to her house, where stood the scull of an Asses
head, advanced upon an high pole; and when the face thereof looked toward
Florence, he might safely come, it being an assured sign, that John kept at
home. And if he found the door fast shut, he should softly knock three
several times, and thereon be admitted entrance. But if the face stood
toward Fiesola; then he might not come, for it was the sign of John's being
there, and then there might be no meddling at all.

Having thus agreed upon this conclusion, and had many merry meetings together:
one night above the rest, where Frederigo was appointed to suppe with Monna
Tessa, who had made ready two fat Capons, dressed in most dainty and delicate
manner: it fell out so unfortunately, that John (whose Kue was not to come that
night came thither very late, yet before Frederigo, wherewith she being not a
little offended, gave John a slight supper, of Lard, Bacon, and such like
coarse provision, because the other was kept for a better guest. In the mean
time, and while John was at supper, the Maid (by her Mistresses direction) had
conueighed the two Capons, with boiled Eggs, Bread and a Bottle of Wine (all
folded up in a fair clean table cloth) into her Garden, that had a passage to
it, without entering into the house, and where she had diverse times supt with
Frederigo. She further willed the Maid, to set all those things under a Peach
tree, which adjoined to the fields side: but, so angry she was at her husbands
unexpected coming, that she for got to bid her tarry there, till Frederigoes
coming, and to tell him of John's being there: as also, to take what he found
prepared ready for his Supper.

John and she being gone to bed together, and the Maid likewise, it was not
long after, before Frederigo came, and knocking once softly at the door, which
was very near to their lodging Chamber, John heard the noise, and so did his
wife. But to the end, that John might not have the least scruple of suspicion,
she seemed to be fast asleep; and Frederigo pausing a while, according to the
order directed, knocked again the second time. John wondering thereat very
much, iogd his wife a little, and said to her: Tessa, hear thou nothing? Me
thinks one knocks at our door. Monna Tessa, who was better acquainted with
the knock, then plain honest meaning John was, dissembling as if she awaked
our of a drowsy dream, said: Alas Husband, do thou know what this is? In
the name of our blessed Lady, be not afraid, this is but the Spirit which
haunts our Country houses, whereof I have often told thee, and it has many
times much dismayed me, living here alone without thy comfort. Nay, such has
bin my fear, that in diverse nights past, so soon as I heard the knockes: I
was feign to hide my self in the bed ouer-head and ears (as we usually
say) never daring to be so bold, as to look out, until it was broad open day.
Arise good wife (quoth John) and if it be such a Spirit of the Country, as
thou talkest of, never be afraid; for before we went to bed, I said the
Telucis, the Intemerata, with many other good prayers beside. Moreover, I made
the sign of the sign of the Cross at every corner of our bed, in the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, so that no doubt at all needs to be made, of
any power it can have to hurt or touch us.

Monna Tessa, because (perhaps) Frederigo might receive some other suspicion,
and so enter into distaste of her by anger or offense: determined to arise
indeed, and to let him covertly understand, that John was there, and therefore
said to her husband. Believe me John, thy counsel is good, and every one of
thy words has wisdom in it: but I hold it best for our own safety, thou
being here; that we should conjure him quite away, to the end he may never
more haunt our house, Conjure him Wife? Quoth John, By what means? and how?
Be patient good man (quoth Tessa) and I will enstruct thee. I have learned an
excellent kind of coniuration; for, the last week, when I went to procure the
pardons at Fiesola, one of the holy recluse Nuns, who (indeed John) is my
indeered Sister and Friend, and the most sanctimonius in life of them all;
perceiving me to be troubled and terrified by Spirits; taught me a wholesome and
holy prayer, and protested withal, that she had often made experiment
thereof, before she became a Recluse, and found it (always) a present help to
her. Yet never durst I adventure to essay it, living here by my self all
alone: but honest John, seeing thou art here with me, we will go both
together, and conjure this Spirit. John replied, that he was very willing; and
being both up, they went fair and softly to the door, where Frederigo stood
still without, and was grown somewhat suspicious of his long attendance.

When they were come to the door, Monna Tessa said to John: Thou must cough
and spet, at such time as I shall bid thee. Well (quoth John) I will not fail
you. Immediately she began her prayer in this manner.

Spirit, that walkst thus in the night,
Poor Country people to affright:
Thou have mistane thy mark and aim,
The head stood right, but John home came,
And therefore thou must pack away,
For I have nothing else to say:
But to my Garden get the gone,
Under the Peach-tree stands alone,
There shall thou find two Capons dressed,
And Eggs laid in mine own Hens nest,
Bread, and a Bottle of good Wine,
All wrapped up in a cloth most fine.
Is not this good Goblins fare?
Pack and say you have your share;
Not doing harm to John or me,
Who this night keeps me company.
No sooner had she ended her devout coniuring prayer, but she said to her
husband: Now John, cough and spet: which John accordingly did. And Frederigo,
being all this while without, hearing her witty coniuration of a Spirit, which
he himself was supposed to be being rid of his former jealous suspicion: in
the middst of all his melancholy, could very hardly refrain from laughing, the
jest appeared so pleasing to him: But when John cought and spet, softly he said
to himself: When next thou spetst, spet out all thy teeth.

The woman having three several times coniured the Spirit, in such manner as
you have already heard; returned to bed again with her husband: and Frederigo,
who came as persuaded to sup with her, being supperlesse all this while;
directed by the words of Monna Tessa in her prayer, went into the Garden. At
the foot of the Peach-tree, there he found the linen cloth, with the two hot
Capons, Bread, Eggs, and a Bottle of Wine in it, all which he carried away
with him, and went to Supper at better leisure. Oftentimes afterward, upon
other meetings of Frederigo and she together, they laughed heartily at her
enchantment, and the honest belief of silly John.

I cannot deny, but that some do affirm, that the Woman had turned the face of
the Asses head toward Fiesola, and a Country Trauailer passing by the Vine,
having a long piked staff on his neck: the staff, (by chance) touched the
head, and made it turn diverse times-about, and in the end faced Florence,
which being the call for Frederigoes coming, by this means he was
disappointed. In like manner some say, that Monna Tessaes prayer for coniuring
the Spirit, was in this order.

Spirit, Spirit, go thy way,
And come again some other day.
It was not I that turned the head,
But some other. In our Bed
Are John and I: Go from our door,
And see thou trouble us no more.
So that Frederigo departed thence, both with the loss of his lahour and
supper. But a neighbor of mine, who is a woman of good years, told me, that
both the one and other were true, as she her self heard, when she was a little
Girl. And concerning the latter accident, it was not to John of Lorrayne, but
to another, named John de Nello, that dwelt at S. Peter's Gate, and of the same
profession as John of Lorrayne was. Wherefore (fair Ladies) it remains in
your own choice, to entertain which of the two prayers you please, or both
together if you will: for they are of extraordinary virtue in such strange
occurrences, as you have heretofore heard, and (upon doubt) may prove by
experience. It shall not therefore be amiss for you, to learn them both by
heart, for (peradventure) they may stand you in good sted, if ever you chance to
have the like occasion.

Peronella hid a young man her friend and Lover, under a great brewing Fat, upon
the sudden returning home of her Husband; who told her, that he had sold the
said Fat, and brought him that bought it, to carry it away. Peronella replied,
that she had formerly sold it unto another, who was now underneath it, to see
whether it were whole and sound, or no. Whereupon, he being come forth from
under it; she caused her Husband to make it neat and clean, and so the last
buryer carried it away.

The Second Novel.
Wherein is declared, what hard and narrow shifts and distresses, such as be
seriously linked in Love, are many times enforced to undergo: According as
their own wit, and capacity of their surprizers, drive them to in extremities.



NOT without much laughter and good liking, was the Tale of Madame Aemillia
listened unto, and both the prayers commended to be sound and sovereign: but
it being ended, the King commanded Philostratus, that he should follow next
in order, whereupon thus he began.

Dear Ladies, the deceites used by men toward your sex, but especially
Husbands, have been so great and many, as when it has sometime happened, or
yet may, that husbands are required in the self-same kind: you need not find
fault at any such accident, either by knowledge thereof afterward, or hearing
the same reported by any one; but rather you should refer it to general
publication, to the end, that immodest men may know, and find it for truth,
that if they have apprehension and capacity; women are therein not a jot
inferior to them. Which cannot but redound to your great benefit, because,
when any one knows, that another is a cunning and subtle as himself; he
will not be so rashly aduenturous in deceit. And who makes any doubt, that if
those sleights and tricks, whereof this days argument may give us occasion to
speak, should afterward be put in execution by men: would it not minister
just reason, of punishing themselves for beguiling you, knowing, that (if you
please) you have the like ability in your own power? Mine intent therefore is
to tell you, what a woman (though but of mean quality) did to her husband,
upon a sudden, and in a moment (as it were) for her own safety.

Not long since, there lived in Naples, an honest mean man, who did take to
Wife, a fair and lusty young Woman, being named Peronella. He professing the
Trade of a Mason, and she Carding and Spinning, maintained themselves in a
reasonable condition, abating and abounding as their Fortunes served. It came
to pass, that a certain young man, well observing the beauty and good parts
of Peronella, became much addicted in affection toward her: and by his often
and secret solicitations, which he found not to be unkindly entertained; his
success proved answerable to his hope, no vnindifferencie appearing in their
purposes, but where her estate seemed weakest, his supplies made an addition of
more strength.

Now, for their securer meeting, to stand clear from all matter of scandal or
detection, they concluded in this order between themselves. Lazaro, for so was
Peronellaes Husband named, being an early riser every morning, either to seek
for work, or to effect it being undertaken: this amorous friend being
therewith acquainted, and standing in some such convenient place, where he
could see Lazaroes departure from his house, and yet himself no way discerned;
poor Lazaro was no sooner gone, but presently he enters the house, which stood
in a very solitary street, called the Auorio. Many mornings had they thus met
together, to their no mean delight and contentation, till one especial
morning among the rest, when Lazaro was gone forth to work, and Striguario (so
was the amorous young man named) visiting Peronella in the house: upon a very
urgent occasion, Lazaro returned back again, quite contrary to his former
wont, keeping forth all day, and never coming home till night.

Finding his door to be fast locked, and he having knocked softly once or
twice, he spoke in this manner to himself. Fortune I thank thee, for albeit
thou have made me poor, yet thou have bestowed a better blessing on me, in
matching me with so good, honest, and loving a Wife. Behold, though I went
early out of my house, her self has risen in the cold to shut the door, to
prevent the entrance of thieves, or any other that might offend us. Peronella
having heard what her husband said, and knowing the manner of his knock, said
fearfully to Striguario. Alas dear friend, what shall we do? I am little
less then a dead Woman: For, Lazaro my Husband is come back again, and I know
not what to do or say. He never returned in this order before now, doubtless,
he saw when you entered the door; and for the safety of your honor and mine:
creep under this brewing Fat, till I have opened the door, to know the reason
of his so soon returning.

Striguario made no delaying of the matter, but got himself closely under the
Fat, and Peronella opening the door for her husbands entetance, with a
frowning countenance, spoke thus unto him. What means this so early returning
home again this morning? It seems, thou intendest to do nothing to day,
having brought back thy tools in thy hands. If such be thine intent, how
shall we live? Where shall we have bread to fill our bellies? Dooest thou
think, that I will suffer thee to pawn my gown, and other poor garments, as
heretofore thou have done? I that card and spinne both night and day, till I
have worn the flesh from my fingers; yet all will hardly find oil to
maintain our Lamp. Husband, husband, there is not one neighbor dwelling by
us, but makes a mockery of me, and tells me plainly, that I may be ashamed to
drudge and moyle as I do; wondering not a little, how I a^^ble to endure it;
and thou returnest home with thy hands in thy hose, as if thou had no work
at all to do this day.

Having thus spoken, she fell to weeping, and then thus began again. Poor
wretched woman as I am, in an unfortunate hour was I borne, and in a much
worse, when I was made thy Wife. I could have had a proper, handsome young man;
one, that would have maintained me brave and gallantly: but, beast as I was,
to forgo my good, and cast my self away on such a beggar as thou art, and
whom none would have had, but such an Ass as I. Other women live at hearts
ease, and in iollity, have their amorous friends and loving Paramours, yea,
one, two, three at once, making their husbands look like a Moon cressent,
whereon they shine Sun-like, with amiable looks, because they know not how to
help it: when I (poor fool) live here at home a miserable life, not daring
once to dream of such follies, an innocent soul, heartlesse and harmless.

Many times, sitting and sighing to my self: Lord, think I, of what metal
am I made? Why should not I have a Friend in a corner, as well as others have? I
am flesh and blood, as they are, not made of brass or iron, and therefore
subject to women's frailty. I would thou should know it husband, and I tell
it thee in good earnest; That if I would do ill, I could quickly find a
friend at a need. Gallants there are good store, who (of my knowledge) love me
dearly, and have made me very large and liberal promises, of Gold, Silver,
Jewels, and gay Garments, if I would extend them the least favor. But my heart
will not suffer me, I never was the daughter of such a mother, as had so much
as a thought of such matters: no, I thank our blessed Lady, and S. Friswid
for it: and yet thou returnest home again, when thou should be at Work.

Lazaro, who stood all this while like a well-beleeuing Logger-head, demurely
thus answered. Alas good Wife! I pray you be not so angry, I never had so much
as an ill thought of you, but know well enough what you are, and have made good
proof thereof this morning. Understand therefore patiently (sweet Wife) that I
went forth to my work as daily I use to do, little dreaming (as I think you
do not) that it had been Holy Day. Wife, this is the Feast day of Saint
Galeone; whereon we may in no wise work, and this is the reason of my so soon
returning. Nevertheless (dear Wife) I was not careless of our Household
provision: For, though we work not, yet we must have food, which I have
provided for more then a month. Wife, I remembered the brewing Fat, whereof we
have little or no use at all, but rather it is a trouble to the house, then
otherwise. I met with an honest Friend, who stays without at the door, to
him I have sold the Fat for ten Gigliatoes, and he tarrieth to take it away
with him.

How Husband? replied Peronella, Why now I am worse offended then before. Thou
that art a man, walk every where, and should be experi^nced in worldly
affairs: would thou be so simple, as to sell such a brewing Fat for ten
Gigliatoes? Why, I that am a poor ignorant woman, a house-Doue, sildome going
out of my door: have sold it already for twelve Gigliatoes, to a very honest
man, who (even a little before thy coming home) came to me, we agreed on the
bargain, and he is now underneath the Fat, to see whether it be sound or no.
When credulous Lazaro heard this, he was better contented then ever, and went
to him that tarried at the door, saying. Good man, you may go your way; for,
whereas you offered me but ten Gigliatoes for the Fat, my loving wife has sold
it for twelve, and I must maintain what she has done: so the man departed,
and the variance ended.

Peronella then said to her husband. Seeing thou art come home so luckily,
help me to lift up the Fat, that the man may come forth, and then you two end
the bargain together. Striguario* who though he was mewed up under the tubbe,
had his ears open enough; and hearing the witty excuse of Peronella, took
himself free from future fear: and being come from under the Fat, pretending
also, as if he had herd nothing, nor saw Lazaro, looking round about him, said.
Where is this good woman? Lazaro stepping forth boldly like a man, replied:
Here am I, what would you have Sir? Thou? quoth Striguario, what art thou? I
ask for the good wife, with whom I made my match for the Fat. Honest Gentleman
(answered Lazaro) I am that honest Woman's Husband, for lack of a better, and I
will maintain whatsoever my Wife has done.

I cry you mercy Sir, replied Striguario, I bargained with your Wife for this
brewing Fat, which I find to be whole and sound: only it is unclean within,
hard crusted with some dry soil upon it, which I know not well how to get off,
if you will be the means of making it clean, I have the money here ready for
it. For that Sir (quoth Peronella) take you no care, although no match at all
had been made, what serves my Husband for, but to make it clean? Yes forsooth
Sir, answered sily Lazaro, you shall have it neat and clean before you pay
the money.

So, stripping himself into his shirt, lighting a Candle, and taking tools
fit for the purpose; the Fat was whelmed over him, and he being within it,
wrought until he sweated, with scraping and scrubbing. So that these poor
Lovers, what they could not accomplish as they would, necessity enforced them to
perform as they might. And Peronella, looking in at the vent-hole, where the
Liquor runs forth for the meshing; seemed to instruct her husband in the
business, as espying those parts where the Fat was fowlest, saying: There,
there Lazaro, tickle it there, the Gentleman pays well for it, and is worthy
to have it: but see thou do thy self no harm good Husband. I warrant thee
Wife, answered Lazaro, hurt not your self with leaning your stomach on the
Fat, and leave the cleansing of it to me. To be brief, the Brewing Fat was
neatly cleansed, Peronella and Striguario both well pleased, the money paid,
and honest meaning Lazaro not discontented.



Friar Reynard, falling in love with a Gentlewoman, Wife to a man of good
account; found the means to become her Gossip. Afterward, he being conferring
closely with her in her Chamber, and her Husband coming suddenly thither: she
made him believe, that he came thither for no other end; but to cure his
God-sonne by a charm, of a dangerous disease which he had by Worms.

The Third Novel.
Serving as a friendly advertisement to married women, that Monks, Friars, and
Priests may be none of their Gossips, in regard of unavoidable perilles ensuing
thereby.

PHilostratus told not this Tale so covertly, concerning Lazaros simplicity,
and Peronellaes witty policy; but the Ladies found a knot in the rush, and
laughed not a little, at his queint manner of discoursing it. But upon the
conclusion, the King looking upon Madam Eliza, willed her to succeed next,
which as willingly she granted, and thus began. Pleasant Ladies, the charm or
coniuration wherewith Madam Aemillia laid her night-walking Spirit, makes me
remember a Novel of another enchantment; which although it carries not
commendation equal to the other, yet I intend to report it, because it suteth
with our present purpose, and I cannot suddenly be furnished with another,
answerable thereto in nature.

You are to understand then, that there lived in Stena, a proper young man, of
good birth and well friended, being named Reynard. Earnestly he affected his
near dwelling neighbor, a beautiful Gentlewoman, and wife to a man of good
esteem: of whom he grew half persuaded, that if he could (without suspicion)
compass private conference with her, he should reach the height of his amorous
desires. Yet seeing no likely means wherewith to further his hope, and she
being great with child, he resolved to become a Godfather to the child, at
such time as it should be brought to Christening. And being inwardly acquainted
with her Husband, who was named Credulano; such familiar entercourses passed
between them, both of Reynards kind offer, and Credulanoes as courteous
acceptance, that he was set down for a Gossippe.

Reynard being thus embraced for Madam Agnesiaes Gossip, and this proving the
only colorable means, for his safer permission of speech with her, to let
her now understand by word of mouth, what long before she collected by his
looks and behavior: it fell out no way beneficial to him, albeit Agnesia
seemed not nice or scrupulous in hearing, yet she had a more precious care of
her honor. It came to pass, within a while after (whether by seeing his labor
vainly spent, or some other urgent occasion moving him thereto, I know not)
Reynard would needs enter into Religion, and whatsoever strictness or
austeritie he found to be in that kind of life, yet he determined to
persevere therein, whether it were for his good or ill. And although within a
short space, after he was thus become a Religious Monk, he seemed to forget
the former love which he bare to his gossip Agnesia, and diverse other enormous
vanities beside: yet let me tell you, success of time tutord him in them
again; and, without any respect to his poor holy habit, but rather in
contempt thereof (as it were) he took an especial delight, in wearing
garments of much richer esteem, yet favored by the same Monastical
profession, appearing (in all respects) like a Court-Minion or Favorite, of a
sprightly and Poetical disposition, for composing Verses, Sonnets, and
Canzons, singing them to sundry excellent instruments, and yet not greatly
curious of his company, so they were some of the best, and Madame Agnesia one,
his former Gossip.

But why do I trouble my self, in talking thus of our so lately converted
Friar, holy Father Reynard, when they of longer standing, and reputed merely
for Saints in life, are rather much more vile then he? Such is the wretched
condition of this world, that they shame not (fat, foggie, and nastie
Abbey-lubbers) to show how full fed they live in their Cloisters, with cherry
cheeks, and smooth shining looks, gay and gaudy garments, far from the least
expression of humility, not walking in the streets like Doves: but high-crested
like Cocks, with well cramd gorges. Nay, which is worse, if you did but see
their Chambers furnished with Gally-pots of Electuaries, precious Unguents,
Apothecary Boxes, filled with various Confections, Conserues, excellent
Perfumes, and other goodly Glasses of artificial Oils and Waters: beside
Rundlers and small Barrels full of Greek Wine, Muscatella, Lachrime Christi,
and other such like most precious Wines, so that (to such as see them) they
seem not to be Chambers of Religious men; but rather Apothecaries Shoppes, or
appertaining to Druggists, Grocers, or Perfumers.

It is no disgrace to them to be Gowty; because when other men know it not,
they allege, that strict fasting, feeding on gross meats (though never so
li^le,) continual studying, and such like restraints from the bodies freer
exercise, makes them subject to many infirmities. And yet, when any one of
them chances to fall sick, the Physician must minister no such counsel to
them, as Chastity, Abstinence from voluptuous meats, Discipline of the body, or
any of those matters appertaining to a modest religious life. For, concerning
the plain, vulgar, and Plebeian people, these holy Fathers are persuaded, that
they know nothing really belonging to a sanctimonious life; as long watching,
praying, discipline and fasting, which (in themselves) are not able, to make
men look lean, wretched, and pale. Because Saint Dominicke, Saint Fraunces,
and diverse other holy Saints beside, observed the selfsame religious orders
and constitutions, as now their careful successors do. Moreover, in example of
those forenamed Saints, who went well clothed, though they had not three
Garments for one, nor made of the finest Woollen excellent cloth: but rather
of the very coarsest of all other, and of the common ordinary color, to expel
cold only, but not to appear brave or gallant, deceyuing thereby infinite
simple credulous souls, whose purses (nevertheless) are their best
pay-masters.

But leave we this, and return we back to virtuous Friar Reynard, who
falling again to his former appetites; became an often visitant of his Gossip
Agnesia, and now he had learned such a blushlesse kind of boldness; that he
durst be more instant with her (concerning his privy suit) then ever formerly
he had bin, yea, even to solicit the enjoying of his immodest desires. The
good Gentlewoman, seeing her self so importunately pursued, and Friar Reynard
appearing now (perhaps) of sweeter and more delicare complexion, then at his
entrance into Religion: at a set time of his secret communing with her; she
answered him in as apt terms, as they use to do, who are not greatly
squeamish, in granting matters demanded of them.

Why how now Friar Reynard? quoth she, Do Godfathers use to move such
questions? Whereto the Friar thus replied. Madam, when I have laid off this
holy habit (which is a matter very easy for me to do) I shall seem in your
eye, in all respects made like another man, quite from the course of any
Religious life. Agnesia, biting the lip with a pretty smile, said; O my fair
Stars! You will never be so unfriendly to me. What? You being my Gossip,
would you have me consent unto such a sin? Our blessed Lady shield me, for
my ghostly Father has often told me, that it is utterly unpardonable: but if
it were, I fear too much confiding on mine own strength. Gossip, Gossip,
answered the Friar, you speak like a Fool, and fear (in this case) is wholly
frivolous, especially, when the motions moved by such an one as my self, who
(upon repentance) can grant you pardon and indulgence presently. But I pray you
let me ask you one question, Who is the nearest Kinsman to your Son; either
I, that stood at the Font for his Baptism, or your Husband that begot him? The
Lady made answer, that it was her Husband. You say very true Gossip, replied
the Friar, and yet notwithstanding, does not your Husband (both at board and
bed) enjoy the sweet benefit of your company? Yes, said the Lady, why should he
not? Then Lady (quoth Reynard) I, who am not so near a Kinsman to your Son,
as your Husband is, why may ye not afford me the like favor, as you do him?
Agnesia, who was no Logitian, and therefore could not stand on any curious
answer, especially being so cuningly moved; believed, or rather made show of
believing, that the Godfather said nothing but truth, and thus answered. What
woman is she (Gossip) that knows how to answer your strange speeches? And,
how it came to pass, I know not, but such an agreement passed between them,
that, for once only (so it might not infrindge the league of Gossip-ship, but
that title to countenance their further intent) such a favor should be
affoorded, so it might stand clear from suspicion.

An especial time being appointed, when this amorous Combat should be fought
in loves field, Friar Reynard came to his Gossips house, where none being
present to hinder his purpose, but only the Nursse which attended on the
child, who was an indifferent fair and proper woman: his holy brother that
came thither in his company (because Friars were not allowed to walk alone)
was sent aside with her into the Pigeon loft, to enstruct her in a new kind of
Pater noster, lately devised in their holy Convent. In the mean while, as
Friar Reynard and Agnesia were entering into her chamber, she leading her little
son by the hand, and making fast the door for their better safety: the Fri^r
laid by his holy habit, Cowle, Hood, Book, and Beads, to be (in all
respects) as other men were. No sooner were they thus entered the Chamber, but
her husband Credulano, being come into the house, and unseen of any, staid not
till he was at the Chamber door, where he knocked, and called for his Wife.

She hearing his voice: Alas Gossip (quoth she) what shall I do? My Husband
knocks at the door, and now he will perceive the occasion of our so familiar
acquaintance. Reynard being stripped into his Trusse and strait Strouses, began
to tremble and quake exceedingly. I hear your Husbands tongue Gossip, said he,
and seeing no harm as yet has bin done, if I had but my garments on again;
we would have one excuse or other to serve the turn, but till then you may
not open the door. As women's wits are sildome gadding abroad, when any
necessity concerns them at home: even so Agnesia, being suddenly provided of
an invention, both how to speak and carry her self in this extreamitie, said
to the Friar. Get on your garments quickly, and when you are clothed, take
your little God-son in your arms, and listening well what I shall say, shape
your answers according to my words, and then refer the matter to me. Credulano
had scarsely ended his knocking, but Agnesia stepping to the door said:
Husband, I come to you. So she opened the door, and (going forth to him) with
a cheerful countenance thus spoke. Believe me Husband, you could not have
come in a more happy time, for our young Son was suddenly extremely sick, and
(as good Fortune would have it) our loving Gossip Reynard chanced to come in;
and questionless, but by his good prayers and other religious pains, we had
utterly lost our child, for he had no life left in him.

Credulano, being as credulous as his name imported, seemed ready to swoune
with sudden conceit: Alas good wife (quoth he) how happened this? Sit down
sweet Husband said she, and I will tell you al. Our child was suddenly taken
with a swouning, wherein I being unskillful, did verily suppose him to be dead,
not knowing what to do, or say. By good hap, our Gossip Reynard came in, and
taking the child up in his arms, said to me. Gossip, this is nothing else but
Worms in the belly of the child, which ascending to the heart, must needs
kill the child, without all question to the contrary. But be of good comfort
Gossip, and fear not, for I can charm them in such sort, that they shall all
die, and before I depart hence, you shall see your Son as healthful as ever.
And because the manner of this charm is of such nature, that it required prayer
and exorcising in two places at once: Nurse went up with his Holy Brother into
our Pigeon loft, to exercise their devotion there, while we did the like here.
For none but the mother of the child must be present at such a mystery, nor
any enter to hinder the operation of the charm; which was the reason of making
fast the Chamber door. You shall see Husband anon the Child, which is
indifferently recovered in his arms, and if Nurse and his holy Brother were
returned from their meditations; he says, that the charm would then be fully
effected: for the child begins to look cheerful and merry.

So dearly did Credulano love the child, that he verily believed, what his
Wife had said, never misdoubting any other treachery: and, lifting up his
eyes, with a vehement sigh, said. Wife, may not I go in and take the child
into my arms? Oh no, not yet good husband (quoth she) in any case, least you
should overthrow all that is done. Stay but a little while, I will go in
again, and if all be well, then will I call you. In went Agnesia again,
making the door fast after her, the Friar having heard all the passed
speeches, by this time he was fitted with his habit, and taking the child in
his arms, he said to Agnesia. Gossip methought I heard your Husbands voice, is
he at your Chamber door? Yes Gossip Reynard (quoth Credulano without, while
Agnesia opened the door, and admitted him entrance) indeed it is I. Come in
Sir, I pray you, replied the Friar, and here receive your child of me, who
was in great danger, of your ever seeing him any more alive. But you must take
order, to make an Image of wax, agreeing with the stature of the child, to be
placed on the Altar before the Image of S. Frances, by whose merires the child
is thus restored to health.

The child, beholding his Father, made signs of coming to him, rejoicing
merrily, as young infants use to do; and Credulano clasping him in his arms,
wept with conceit of joy, kissing him infinitely, and heartily thanking his
Gossip Reynard, for the recovery of his God-son. The Friars brotherly
Companion, who had given sufficient enstructions to the Nurse, and a small
purse full of Sisters white thread, which a Nun (after shrift) had bestowed on
him, upon the husbands admittance into the Chamber (which they easily heard)
came in also to them, and seeing all in very good terms, they help to make a
joyful conclusion, the Brother saying to Friar Reynard: Brother, I have
finished all those four Iaculatory prayers, which you commanded me.

Brother, answered Reynard, you have a better breath then I, and your success
has proved happier then mine, for before the arrival of my Gossip Credulano,
I could accomplish but two Iaculatory prayers only. But it appears, that we
have both prevailed in our devout desires, because the child is perfectly
cured. Credulano calling for Wine and good cheer, feasted both the Friars very
iocondly, and then conducting them forth of his house, without any further
intermission, caused the child's Image of wax to be made, and sent it to be
placed on the Altar of Saint Frances, among many other the like oblations.

Tofano in the night season, did lock his wife out of his house, and she not
prevailing to get entrance again, by all the entreaties she could possibly
use: made him believe that she had thrown her self into a Well, by casting a
great stone into the same Well. Tofano hearing the fall of the stone into the
Well, and being persuaded that it was his Wife indeed; came forth of his house,
and ran to the Wells side. In the mean while, his wife got into the house,
made fast the door against her Husband, and gave him many reproachful
speeches.

The Fourth Novel.
Wherein is manifested, that the malice and subtilty of a woman, surpasses all
the Art or Wit in man,



SO soon as the King perceived, that the Novel reported by Madame Eliza was
finished: he turned himself to Madame Lauretta, and told her it was his
pleasure, that she should now begin the next, whereto she yielded in this
manner. O Love: What, and how many are thy prevailing forces? How strange are
thy foresights? And how admirable thine attempts? Where is, or ever was the
Philosopher or Artist, that could enstruct the wiles, escapes, preuentions, and
demonstrations, which suddenly thou teach such, as are thy apt and
understanding Scholars indeed? Certain it is, that the documents and
eruditions of all other whatsoever, are weak, or of no worth, in respect of
thine: as has notably appeared, by the remonstrances already past, and whereto
(worthy Ladies) I will add another of a simple woman, who taught her husband
such a lesson, as she never learned of any, but Love himself.

There dwelt sometime in Arezzo (which is a fair Village of Tuscany) a rich
man, named Tofano, who enjoyed in marriage a young beautiful woman, called
Oneta: of whom (without any occasion given, or reason known to himself) he
became exceeding jealous. Which his wife perceiving, she grew much offended
thereat, and took it in great scorn, that she should be servile to so vile
and slavish a condition. Oftentimes, she demanded of him, from whence this
jealousy in him received original, he having never seen or heard of any; he
could make her no other answer, but what his own bad humor suggested, and
drove him every day (almost) to deaths door, by fear of that which no way
needed. But, whether as a just scourge for this his gross folly, or a secret
decree, ordained to him by Fortune and the Fates, I am not able to distinguish:
It came so to pass, that a young Gallant made means to enjoy her favor, and
she was so discreetly wise in judging of his worthiness; that affection passed
so far mutually between them, as nothing wanted, but effects to answer
words, suited with time and place convenient, for which order was taken as best
they might, yet to stand free from all suspicion.

Among many other evil conditions, very frequent and familiar in her husband
Tofano; he took a great delight in drinking, which not only he held to be a
commendable quality, but was always so often solicited thereto: that Cheta her
self began to like and allow it in him, feeding his humor so effectually, with
quaffing and carowsing, that (at any time when she listed) she could make him
bowsie beyond all measure: and leaving him sleeping in this drunkenness,
would always get her self to bed. By help hereof, she compassed the first
familiarity with her friend, yea, diverse times after, as occasion served: and
so confidently did she build on her husbands drunkenness, that not only she
adventured to bring her friend home into her own house; but also would as
often go to his, which was somewhat near at hand, and abide with him there,
the most part of the night season.

While Cheta thus continued on these amorous courses, it fortuned, that her
slye suspicious husband, began to perceive, that though she drunk very much
with him, yea, until he was quite spent and gone: yet she remained fresh and
sober still, and thereby imagined strange matters, that he being fast asleep,
his wife then took advantage of his drowsinesse, and might -- and so forth.
Being desirous to make experience of this his distrust, he returned home at
night (not having drunk any thing all the whole day) dissembling both by his
words and behavior, as if he were-notoriously drunk indeed. Which his Wife
constantly believing, said to her self: That he had now more need of
sleep, then drink; getting him immediately into his warm bed; and then going
down the stairs again, softly went out of doors unto her Friends house, as
formerly she had used to do, and there she remained until midnight.

Tofano perceiving that his Wife came not to bed, and imagining to have heard
his door both open and shut: arose out of his bed, and calling his Wife Cheta
diverse times, without any answer returned: he went down the stairs, and
finding the door but closed too, made it fast and sure on the inside, and then
got him up to the window, to watch the returning home of his wife, from whence
she came, and then to make her conditions apparently known. So long there he
stayed, till at the last she returned indeed, and finding the door so surely
shut, she was exceeding sorrowful, essaying how she might get it open by
strength: which when Tofano had long suffered her in vain to approve, thus
he spoke to her. Cheta, Cheta, all thy labor is merely lost, because here
is no entrance allowed for thee; therefore return to the place from whence thou
came, that all thy friends may judge of thy behavior, and know what a
night-walker thou art become.

The woman hearing this unpleasing language, began to use all humble
entreaties, desiring him (for charities sake) to open the door and admit her
entrance, because she had not bin in any such place, as his ielous suspicion
might suggest to him: but only to visit a weak and sickly neighbor, the
nights being long, she not (as yet) capeable of sleep, nor willing to sit
alone in the house. But all her persuasions served to no purpose, he was so
settled in his own opinion, that all the Town should now see her nightly
gading, which before was not so much as suspected. Cheta seeing, that fair
means would not prevail, she entered into roughe speeches and threatenings,
saying: If thou will not open the door and let me come in, I will so shame
thee, as never base man was. As how I pray thee? answered Tofano, what can
thou do to me?

The woman, whom love had inspired with sprightly counsel, ingeniously
enstructing her what to do in this distress, stearnly thus replied. Before I
will suffer any such shame as thou intendest toward me, I will drown my
self here in this Well before our door, where being found dead, and thy
villainous jealousy so apparently known, beside thy more then beastly
drunkenness: all the neighbors will constantly believe, that thou did first
strangle me in the house, and afterward threw me into this Well. So either
thou must fly upon the supposed offense, or lose all thy goods by banishment,
or (which is much more fitting for thee) have thy head smitten off, as a
wilfullmurtherer of thy wife; for all will judge it to be no otherwise. All
which words, moved not Tofano a jot from his obstinat determination: but he
still persisting therein, thus she spoke. I neither can nor will longer endure
this base Villainy of thine: to the mercy of heaven I commit my soul, and stand
there my wheel, a witness against so hard-hearted a murderer.

No sooner had she thus spoke, but the night being so extremely dark, as they
could not discern one another; Cheta went to the Well, where finding a very
great stone, which lay loose upon the brim of the Well, even as if it had been
laid there on purpose, she cried out aloud, saying. Forgive me fair heavens,
and so threw the stone down into the Well. The night being very still and
silent, the fall of the great stone made such a dreadful noise in the Well;
that he hearing it at the Window, thought verily she had drowned her self
indeed. Whereupon, running down hastily, and taking a Bucket fastened to a
strong Cord: he left the door wide open, intending speedily to help her. But
she standing close at the doors entrance; before he could get to the Wels
fide; she was within the house, softly made the door fast on the inside, and
then went up to the Window, where Tofano before had stood talking to her.

While he was thus dragging with his Bucket in the Well, crying and calling
Cheta; take hold good Cheta, and save thy life: she stood laughing in the
Window, saying. Water should be put into Wine before a man drinks it, and not
when he has drunk too much already. Tofano hearing his Wife thus to flout him
out of his Window, went back to the door, and finding it made fast against
him: he willed her to grant him entrance. But she, forgetting all gentle
Language, which formerly she had used to him: in mere mockery and derision
(yet intermixed with some sighs and tears, which women are said to have at
command) out aloud (because the Neighbors should hear her) thus she replied.

Beastly drunken Knave as thou art, this night thou shall not come within these
doors, I am no longer able to endure thy base behauour, it is more then high
time, that thy course of life should be publicly known, and at what drunken
hours thou returnest home to thy house. Tofano, being a man of very impatient
Nature, was as bitter unto her in words on the other side, which the Neighbors
about them (both men and Women) hearing; looked forth of their Windows, and
demanding a reason for this their disquietnesse, Cheta (seeming as if she
wept) said.

Alas my good Neighbors, you see at what unfitting hours, this bad man comes
home to his house, after he has lain in a Tavern all day drunk, sleeping
and snorting like a Swine. You are my honest witnesses, how long I have
suffered this beastliness in him, yet neither your good counsel, nor my too
often loving admonitions, can work that good which we have expected.
Wherefore, to try if shame can procure any amendment, I have shut him out of
doors, until his drunken fit be ouer-past, and so he shall stand to cool his
feet.

Tofano (but in very uncivil manner) told her being abroad that night, and how
she had used him: But the Neighbors seeing her to be within the house, and
believing her, rather then him, in regard of his too well known ill qualities;
very sharply reproved him, gave him gross speeches, pitying that any honest
Woman should be so continually abused. Now my good Neighbors (quoth she) you
see what manner of man he is. What would you think of me, if I should walk the
streets thus in the night time, or be so late out of mine own house, as this
daily Drunkard is? I was afraid least you would have given credit to his
dissembling speeches, when he told you, that I was at the Wells side, and
threw something into the Well: but that I know your better opinion of me, and
how sildome I am to be seen out of doors, although he would induce your
sharper judgment of me, and lay that shame upon me, wherein he has sinned
himself.

The Neighbors, both men and Women, were all very severely incensed against
Tofano, condemning him for his great fault that night committed, and auouching
his wife to be virtuous and honest. Within a little while, the noise passing
from Neighbor to Neighbor, at the length it came to the ears of her Kindred,
who forthwith resorted thither, and hearing how sharply the Neighbors
reprehended Tofano: they took him, soundly bastanadoed him, and hardly left
any bone of him vnbruised. Afterward, they went into the house, took all such
things thence as belonged to her, taking her also with them to their dwelling,
and threatening Tofano with further infliction of punishment, both for his
drunkenness, and causlesse jealousy.

Tofano perceiving how curstly they had handled him, and what crooked means
might further be used against him, in regard her Kindred and Friends were very
mighty: thought it much better, patiently to suffer the wrong already done
him then by obstinate contending, to proceed further, and fare worse. He became
a suter to her Kindred, that al might be forgotten and forgiven, in recompense
whereof; he would not only refrain from drunkenness, but also, never more be
ielous of his wife. This being faithfully promised, and Cheta reconciled to her
Husband, all strife was ended, she enjoyed her friends favor, as occasion
served, but yet with such discretion, as it was not noted. Thus the Coxcombe
fool, was feign to purchase his peace, after a notorious wrong sustained, and
further injuries to be offered.

A Jealous man, clouded with the habit of a Priest, became the Confess^ur to
his own Wife; who made him believe, that she was deeply in love with a
Priest, which came every night, and lay with her. By means of which
confession, while her jealous Husband watched the door of his house; to
surprise the Priest when he came: she that never meant to do amiss, had the
company of a secret Friend, who came over the top of the house to visit her,
while her foolish Husband kept the door.

The Fifth Novel.
In just scorn and mockery of such jealous Husbands, that will be so idle
headed upon no occasion. And yet when they have good reason for it, do least of
all suspect any such injury.



MAdam Lauretta having ended her Novel, and every one commended the Woman, for
fitting Tofano in his kind; and, as his jealousy and drunkenness justly
deserved: the King (to prevent all loss of time) turned to Madame Fiammetta,
commanding her to follow next: whereupon, very graciously, she began in
this manner.

Noble Ladies, the precedent Novel delivered by Madame Lauretta, makes me
willing to speak of another jealous man; as being half persuaded, that
whatsoever is done to them by their Wives, and especially upon no occasion
given, they do no more then well becomes them. And if those grave heads,
which were the first instituters of laws, had diligently observed all things;
I am of the mind, that they would have ordained no other penalty for Women,
then they appointed against such, as (in their own defense) do offend any
other. For jealous husbands, are mere insidiators of their Wives lives, and
most diligent pursuers of their deaths, being locked up in their houses all the
Week long, employed in nothing but domesticke drudging affairs: which makes
them desirous of high Festival days, to receive some little comfort abroad, by
an honest recreation or pastime, as Husbandmen in the fields, Artizans in our
City, or Governors in our judicial Courts; yea, or as our Lord himself,
who rested the seventh day from all his travails. In like manner, it is so
willed and ordained by the Laws, as well divine as humane, which have regard
to the glory of God, and for the common good of every one; making distinction
between those days appointed for labor, and the other determined for rest.
Whereto jealous persons (in no case) will give consent, but all those days
(which for other women are pleasing and delightful) unto such, over whom they
command, are most irksome, sad and sorrowful, because then they are locked up,
and very strictly restrained. And if question were urged, how many good women do
live and consume away in this torturing hell of affliction: I can make no other
answer, but such as feel it, are best able to discover it. Wherefore to
conclude the proheme to my present purpose, let none be over rash in condemning
women: for what they do to their husbands, being jealous without occasion; but
rather commend their wit and providence.

Sometime (fair Ladies) there lived in Arimino, a Merchant, very rich in wealth
and worldly possessions, who having a beautiful Gentlewoman to his wife, he
became extremely ielous of her. And he had no other reason for this foolish
conceit; but, like as he loved her dearly, and found her to be very absolutely
fair: even so he imagined, that although she devised by her best means to give
him content; yet others would grow enamored of her, because she appeared so
amiable to al. In which respect, time might tutor her to affect some other
beside himself: the only common argument of every bad minded man, being weak
and shallow in his own understanding. This ielous humor increasing in him more
and more, he kept her in such narrow restraint: that many persons condemned to
death, have enjoyed larger liberty in their imprisonment. For, she might not
be present at Feasts, Weddings, nor go to Church, or so much as to be seen at
her door: Nay, she durst not stand in her Window, nor look out of her house,
for any occasion whatsoever. By means whereof, life seemed most tedious and
offensive to her, and she supported it the more impatiently, because she knew
her self not any way faulty.

Seeing her husband still persist in this shameful course toward her; she
studied, how she might best comfort her self in this desolate case: by
devising some one mean or other (if any at all were to be found) whereby he
might be requited in his kind, and wear that badge of shame whereof he was now
but only afraid. And because she could not gain so small a permission, as to
be seen at any window, where (happily) she might have observed some one
passing by in the street, discerning a little parcel of her love: she remembered
at length, that, in the next house to her Husbands (they both joining close
together) there dwelt a comely young proper Gentleman, whose perfections carried
correspondencie with her desires. She also considered with her self, that if
there were any partition wall; such a chinke or cranny might easily be made
therein, by which (at one time or other) she should gain a sight of the young
Gentleman, and find an hour so fitting, as to confer with him, and bestow
her lovely favor on him, if he pleased to accept it. If success (in this
case) proved answerable to her hope, then thus she resolved to outrun the rest
of her wearisome days, except the frenzy of jealousy did finish her husbands
loathed life before.

Walking from one room to another, thorough every part of the house; and no
wall escaping without diligent surueying; on a day, when her Husband was absent
from home, she espied in a corner very secret, an indifferent cleft in the
Wall, which though it yielded no full view on the other side, yet she plainly
perceived it to be an handsome Chamber, and grew more then half persuaded,
that either it might be the Chamber of Philippo (for so was the neighboring
young Gentleman named) or else a passage guiding thereto. A Chambermaid of hers,
who compassioned her case very much; made such observance, by her Mistresses
direction, that she found it to be Philippoes bed Chamber, and where always he
used to lodge alone. By often visiting this rift or chinke in the Wall,
especially when the Gentleman was there; and by throwing in little stones,
flowers, and such like things, which fell still in his way as he walked: so
far she prevailed, that he stepping to the chinke, to know from whence they
came; she called softly to him, who knowing her voice, there they had such
private conference together, as was not any way displeasing to either. So that
the chinke being made a little larger; yet so, as it could not be easily
discerned: their mouths might meet with kisses together, and their hands
folded each in other; but nothing else to be performed, for continual fear of
her ielous husband.

Now the Feast of Christmasse drawing near, the Gentlewoman said to her
Husband; that, if it stood with his liking: she would do such duty as fitted
with so solemn a time, by going early in a morning unto Church, there to be
confessed, and receive her Savior, as other Christians did. How now? replied
the jealous Ass, what sins have you committed, that should need confession?
How Husband? quoth she, what do you think me to be a Saint? Who knows not, I
pray you, that I am as subject to sin, as any other Woman living in the
world? But my sins are not to be revealed to you, because you are no Priest.
These words enflamed his jealousy more violently then before, and needs must
he know what sins she had committed, and having resolved what to do in this
case, made her answer: That he was contented with her motion, always
provided, that she went to no other Church, then unto their own Chapel,
betimes in a morning; and their own Chaplain to confess her, or some other
Priest by him appointed, but not any other: and then she to return home
presently again. She being a woman of acute apprehension, presently collected
his whole intention: but seeming to take no knowledge thereof, replied, that
she would not swerue from his direction.

When the appointed day was come, she arose very early, and being prepared
answerable to her own liking, to the Chapel she went as her Husband had
appointed, where her jealous Husband (being much earlier risen then she)
attended for her coming: having so ordered the matter with his Chaplain, that
he was clothed in his Cowle, with a large Hood hanging over his eyes, that she
should not know him, and so he went and sat down in the Confessors place.
She being entered into the Chapel, and calling for the Priest to hear her
confession, he made her answer: that he could not intehd it, but would bring
her to another holy Brother, who was at better leisure then he. So to her
Husband he brought her, that seemed (in all respects) like the Confessor
himself: save only his Hood was not so closely veyled, but she knew his
beard, and said to her self. What a mad world is this, when jealousy can
metamorphose an ordinary man into a Priest? But, let me alone with him, I mean
to fit him with that which he looks for.

So, appearing to have no knowledge at all of him, down she fell at his feet,
and he had conveyed a few Cherry stones into his mouth, to trouble his speech
from her knowledge; for, in all things else, he thought himself to be
sufficiently fitted for her. In the course of her confession, she declared,
that she was married to a most wicked jealous Husband, and with whom she lead a
very hateful life. Nevertheless (quoth she) I am indifferently even with him,
for I am beloved of an Holy Friar, that every night comes and lies with me.
When the jealous Husband heard this, it stabbed him like a dagger to the heart,
and, but for this greedy covetous desire to know more; he would feign have
broke off confession, and got him gone. But, perceiving that it was his wisest
course, he questioned further with his wife, saying: Why good Woman, does not
your husband lodge with you? Yes Sir, quoth she. How is it possible then
(replied the Husband) that the Friar can lodge there with you too?

She, dissembling a far fetched sigh, thus answered. Reverend Sir, I know not
what skillful Art the Friar uses, but this I am sure, every door in our house
will fly open to him, so soon as he does but touch it. Moreover, he told me,
that when he comes unto my Chamber door, he speaks certain words to
himself, which immediately casts my Husband into a dead sleep, and,
understanding him to be thus sleepily entranced: he opens the door, enters
in, lies down by me, and this every night he fails not to do. The jealous
Coxcomb angerly scratching his head, and wishing his wife half hanged, said:
Mistress, this is very badly done, for you should keep your self from all
men, but your husband only. That shall I never do, answered she, because
(indeed) I love him dearly. Why then (quoth our supposed Confessor) I cannot
give you any absolution. I am the more sorry Sir, said she, I came not hither to
tell you any leasings, for if I could, yet I would not, because it is not good
to fable with such Saint-like men as you are. You do therein (quoth he) the
better, and surely I am very sorry for you, because in this dangerous condition,
it will be the utter loss of your soul: nevertheless, both for your
husbands sake and your own, I will take some pains, and use such especial
prayers in your name, which may (perchance) greatly avail you. And I purpose
now and then, to send you a Nouice or young Clearke of mine, whom you may
safely acquaint with your mind, and signify to me, by him, whether they have
done you good, or no: and if they prove helpefull, then will we further proceed
therein. Alas Sir, said she, never trouble your self, in sending any body to
our house; because, if my Husband should know it, he is so extremely jealous,
as all the world cannot otherwise persuade him, but that he comes thither for
no honest intent, and so I shall live worse then now I do. Fear not that, good
woman, quoth he, but believe it certainly, that I will have such a care in this
case, as your Huband shall never speak thereof to you. If you can do so Sir,
said she, proceed I pray you, and I am well contented.

Confession being thus ended, and she receiving such penance as he appointed,
she arose on her feet, and went to hear Mass; while our jealous Woodcocke
(testily puffing and blowing) put off his Religious habit, returning home
presently to his house, beating his brains all the the way as he went, what
means he might best deuie, for the taking of his wife and the Friar together,
whereby to have them both severely punished. His wife being come home from the
Chapel, discerned by her Husbands looks, that he was like to keep but a
sorry Christmasse: yet he used his utmost industry, to conceal what he had
done, and which she knew as well as himself. And he having fully resolved, to
watch his own street door the next night ensuing in person, in expectation of
the Friars coming, said to his Wife. I have occasion both to suppe and lodge
out of my house this night, wherefore see you the street door to be surely
made fast on the inside, and the door at the midst of the stairs, as also
your own Chamber door, and then (in Gods name) get you to bed. Whereto she
answered, that all should be done as he had appointed.

Afterward, when she saw convenient time, she went to the chink in the Wall,
and making such a sign as she was wont to do: Phillippo came thither, to
whom she declared all her mornings affairs, and what directions her husband
had given her. Furthermore she said, certain I am, that he will not depart
from the house, but sit and watch the door without, to take one that comes not
here. If therefore, you can climb over the house top, and get in at our
gutter Window, you and I may confer more familiarly together. The young
Gentleman being no dullard, had his lesson quickly taught him; and when night
was come, Geloso (for so must we term the Cocke-braind husband) arms
himself at all points, with a brown Bill in his hand, and so he sits to watch
his own door. His Wife had made fast all the doors, especially that on the
midst of the stayres, because he should not (by any means) come to her Chamber;
and so, when the hour served, the Gentleman adventured over the house top,
found the gutter Window, and the way conducting him to her Chamber, where I
leave them to their further amorous conference.

Geloso, more then half mad with anger, first, because he had lost his
supper: next, having sitten almost all the night (which was extremely cold and
windy) his Armor much mollesting him, and yet he could see no Friar come: when
day drew near, and he ashamed to watch there any longer; conueighed himself
to some more convenient place, where putting off his Arms, and seeming to come
from the place of his Lodging; about the ninth hour, he found his door open,
ent^ed in, and went up the stayres, going to dinner with his Wife. Within a
while after, according as Geloso had ordered the business, a youth came
thither, seeming to be the Nouice sent from the Confessor, and he being
admitted to speak with her, demanded, whether she were troubled or mollested
that night passed, as formerly she had bin, and whether the party came or no?
The Woman, who knew well enough the Messenger (notwithstanding all his formal
disguise) made answer: That the party expected, came not: but if he had come,
it was to no purpose; because her mind was now otherwise altered, albeit she
changed not a jot from her amorous conclusion.

What should I now further say unto you? Geloso continued his watch many nights
afterward, as hoping to surprise the Friar at his entrance, and his wife kept
still her contented quarter, according as opportunity served. In the
conclusion, Geloso being no longer able to endure his bootlesse watching, nor
some (more then ordinary) pleasing countenance in his wife: one day demanded
of her (with a very stearne and frowning brow) what secret sins she had
revealed to the ghostly Father, upon the day of her shrift? The Woman replied,
that she would not tell him, neither was it a matter reasonable, or lawful for
her to do. Wicked Woman, answered Geloso: I know them all well enough, even
in despite of thee, and every word that thou spakest unto him. But Huswife,
now I must further know, what the Friar is, with whom you are so farte in love,
and (by means o^ his enchantments) lies with you every night; tell me what
and who he is, or else I mean to cut your throat.

The Woman immediately made answer, it was not true, that she was in love with
any Friar. How? quoth Geloso, did not thou confess so much to the Ghostly
Father, the other day when thou wast at shrift? No Sir, said she, but if I
did, I am sure he would not disclose it to you, except he suffered you to be
there present, which is an Article beyond his duty. But if it were so, then I
confess freely, that I did say so unto him. Make an end then quickly Wife
(quoth Geloso) and tell me who the Friar is. The Woman fell into a hearty
laughter, saying. It likes me singularly well, when a wise man will suffer
himself to be led by a simple Woman, even as a Sheep is to the slaughter,
and by the horns. If once thou wast wise, that wisdom became utterly lost,
when thou felst into that devilish frenzy of jealousy, without knowing any
reason for it: for, by this beastlike and no manly humor, thou have eclipsed no
mean part of my glory, and womanly reputation.

Do thou imagine Husband, that if I were so blinded in the eyes of my head,
as thou art in them which should inform thine understanding; I could have
found out the Priest, that would needs be my Confessor? I knew thee Husband to
be the man, and therefore I prepared my wit accordingly, to fit thee with the
foolish imagination which thou soughtest for, and (indeed) gave it thee. For,
if thou had been wise, as thou make the world to believe by outward
appearance, thou would never have expressed such a baseness of mind, to
borrow the color of a sanctified cloak, thereby to undermine the secre^s of
thine honest meaning Wife. Wherefore, to feed thee in thy fond suspicion, I
was the more free in my Confession, and told thee truly, with whom, and how
heinously I had transgressed. Did I not tell thee, that I loved a Friar? And
art not thou he whom I love, being a Friar, and my ghostly Father, though (to
thine own shame) thou madst thy self so? I said moreover, that there is not
any door in our house, that can keep it self shut against him, but (when he
pleases) he comes and lies with me. Now tell me Husband, What door in our
house has (at any time) bin shut against thee, but they are freely thine own,
and grant thee entrance? Thou art the same Friar that confessed me, and lies
every night with me, and so often as thou sentst thy young Nouice or Clearke to
me, as often did I truly return thee word, when the same Friar lay with me.
But (by jealousy) thou have so lost thine understanding, that thou will hardly
believe all this.

Alas good man, like an armed Watchman, thou satst at thine own door all a
cold Winters night, persuading me poor silly credulous woman) that, upon
urgent occasions, thou must needs suppe and lodge from home. Remember thy self
therefore better hereafter, become a true understanding man, as thou should
be, and make not thy self a mocking stock to them, who knows thy jealous
qualities, as well as I do, and be not so watchful over me, as thou art. For I
swear by my true honesty, that if I were but as willing, as thou art
suspicious: I could deceive thee, if thou had an hundred eyes, as Nature
affords thee but two, and have my pleasures freely, yet thou be not a jot the
wiser, or my credit any way impaired.

Our wonderful wise Geloso, who (very advisedly considred) that he had wholly
heard his wives secre confession, and dreamed now on no other doubt beside, but
(perceiving by her speeches) how he was become a scorn to al men: without
returning other answer, confirmed his wife to be both wise and honest, and now
when he had just occasion on to be jealous indeed, he utterly forsware it,
and counted them all Coxcombes that would be so misguided. Wherefore, she
having thus wisely won the way to her own desires, and he reduced into a
more humane temper: I hope there was no more need, of clambring over houses in
the night time like Cats, nor walking in at gutter Windows; but all abuses
were honestly reformed.

Madame Isabella, delighting in the company of her affected Friend, named
Lionello, and she being likewise beloved by Signior Lambertuccio: At the same
time as she had entertained Lionello, she was also visited by Lambertuccio.
Her Husband returning home in the very instant; she caused Lambertuccio to run
forth with a drawn sword in his hand, and (by that means) made an excuse
sufficient for Lionello to her husband.

The Sixth Novel.
Wherein is manifestly discerned, that if Love be driven to a narrow strait in
any of his attempts; yet he can accomplish his purpose by some other supply.



WOndrously pleasing to all the company, was the reported Novel of Madame
Fiammetta, every one applauding the Woman's wisdom, and that she had done no
more, then as the jealous fool her husband justly deserved. But she having
ended, the King gave order unto Madame Pampinea, that now it was her turn to
speak, whereupon, thus she began. There are no mean store of people who say
(though very false and foolishly,) that Love makes many to be out of their
wits, and that such as fall in Love, do utterly loose their understanding. To
me this appears a very idle opinion, as already has been approved by the
related discourses, and shall also be made manifest by another of mine own.

In our City of Florence, famous for some good, though as many bad qualities,
there dwelt (not long since) a Gentlewoman, endued with choice beauty and
admirable perfections, being wife to Signior Beltramo, a very valiant Knight,
and a man of great possessions. As oftentimes it comes to pass, that a man
cannot always feed on one kind of bread, but his appetite will be longing
after change: so fared it with this Lady, named Isabella, she being not
satisfied with the delights of her Husband; grew enamoured of a young
Gentleman, called Lionello, complete of person and commendable qualities,
albeit not of the fairest fortunes, yet his affection every way suitable to
hers. And full well you know (fair Ladies) that where the minds
irreciprocally accorded, no diligence wants for the desires execution: so
this amorous couple, made many solemn protestations, until they should be
friended by opportunity.

It fortuned in the time of their hopeful expectation a Knight, named Signior
Lambertuccio, fell likewise in love with Isabella: but because he was somewhat
unsightly of person, and utterly unpleasing in the eye, she grew regardlesse of
his frequent solicitings, and would not accept either tokens, or letters. Which
when he saw, (being very rich and of great power) he sought to compass his
intent by a contrary course, threatening her with scandal and disgrace to her
reputation, and with his associates to bandie against her best friends. She
knowing what manner of man he was, and how able to abuse any with infamous
imputations, wisely returned him hopeful promises, though never meaning to
perform any, but only (Lady-like) to flatter and fool him therewith.

Some few miles distant from Florence, Beltramo had a Castle of pleasure, and
there his Lady Isabella used to live all Summer, as all other do the like,
being so possessed. On a day, Beltramo being ridden from home, and she having
sent for Lionello, to take the advantage of her Husbands absence; accordingly
he went, not doubting but to win what he had long expected. Signior
Lambertuccio on the other side, meeting Beltramo riding from his Castle, and
Isabella now fit to enjoy his company: gallops thither with all possible
speed* because he would be no longer delayed. Scarcely was Lionello entered
the Castle, and receiving directions by the waiting woman, to her Ladies
Chamber: but Lambertuccio gallopped in at the Gate, which the woman perceiving,
ran presently and acquainted her Lady with the coming of Lambertuccio.

Now was she the only sorrowful woman of the world; for nothing was now to
be feared, but storms and tempests, because Lambertuccio, spoke no other then
Lightning and Thunder, and Lionello, (being no less affraide then she) by her
persuasion crept behind the bed, where he hid himself very contentedly. By
this time Lambertuccio was dismounted from his Courser, which he fastened (by
the bridle) to a ring in the wall, and then the waiting woman came to him, to
guide him to her Lady and Mistress: who stood ready at the stairs head,
graced him with a very acceptable welcome, yet maruelling much at his so
sudden coming. Lady (quoth he) I met your Husband upon the way, which
granting mine access to see you; I come to claim your long delayed promise,
the time being now so favorable for it.

Before he had uttered half these words, Beltramo, having forgot an especial
evidence in his Study, which was the only occasion of his journey, came
gallopping back again into the Castle Court, and seeing such a goodly
Gelding stand fastened there, could not redily imagine who was the own
thereof. The waiting woman, upon the sight of her Masters entering into the
Court, came to her Lady, saying: My Master Beltramo is returned back, newly
alighted, and (questionless) coming up the stairs. Now was our Lady
Isabella, ten times worse affrighted then before, (having two several amourous
suitors in her house, both hoping, neither speeding, yet her credit lying at
the stake for either) by this unexpected return of her Husband. Moreover,
there was no possible means, for the concealing of Signior Lambertuccio,
because his Gelding stood in the open Court, and therefore made a shrewde
presumption against her, upon the least doubtful question urged.

Nevertheless, as women's wits are always best upon sudden constraints,
looking forth of her window, and espying her Husband preparing to come up: she
threw her self on her day Couch, speaking thus (earnestly) to Lambertuccio.
Sir, if ever you loved me, and would have me faithfully to believe it, by the
instant safety both of your own honor, and my life, do but as I advise you.
Forth draw your Sword, and, with a steanre countenance, threatening death and
destruction: run down the stairs, and when you are beneath, say. I swear by
my best fortunes, although I miss of thee now here, yet I will be sure to
find thee some where else. And if my Husband offer to stay you, or move any
question to you: make no other answer, but what you formerly spoke in fury.
Beside, so soon as you are mounted on horseback, have no further conference
with him, upon any occasion whatsoever; to prevent all suspicion in him, of our
future intendments.

Lambertuccio swear many terrible oaths, to observe her directions in every
part, and having drawn forth his Sword, grasping it naked in his hand, and
setting worse looks one the business, then ever nature gave him, because he
had spent so much labor in vain; he failed not in a jot of the Ladies
iniunction. Beltramo having commanded his horse to safe custody, and meeting
Lambertuccio discending down the stairs, so so armed, swearing, and most
extremely storming, wondering extraordinarily as his threatening words, made
offer to embrace him, and understand the reason of his distemper. Lambertuccio
repulsing him rudely, and setting foot in the stirrup, mounted on his Gelding,
and spoke nothing else but this. I swear by the fairest of all my fortunes,
although I miss of thee here: yet I will be sure to find thee some where
else, and so he gallopped mainely away.

When Beltramo was come up into his wines Chamber, he found her cast down
upon her Couch, weeping, full of fear, and greatly discomforted; wherefore he
said unto her, What is he that Signior Lambertuccio is so extremely offended
withal, and threatens in such implacable manner? The Lady arising from her
Couch, and going near to the Beds, because Lionello might the better hear
her; returned her Husband this answer. Husband (quoth she) never was I so
dreadfully affrighted till now; for, a young Gentleman, of whence, or what he
is, I know not, came running into our Castle for rescue, being pursued by
Signior Lambertuccio, with a weapon ready drawn in his hand. Ascending up our
stayres, by what fortune, I know not, he found my Chamber door standing open,
finding me also working on my Sampler, and in wonderful fear and trembling.

Good Madame ( quoth he) for Gods sake help to save my life, or else I shall
be slain here in your Chamber. Hearing his pittious cry, and compassionating
his desperate case; I arose from my work, and in my demanding of whence, and
what he was, that durst presume so boldly into my bedchamber: presently came up
Signior Lambertuccio also, in the same uncivil sort, as before I told you,
swaggering and swearing; where is this traitorous villain? Hereupon, I stepped
(somewhat stoutly to my Chamber door, and as he offered to enter, with a
woman's courage I resisted him, which made him so much enraged against me, that
when he saw me to debar his entrance; after many terrible and vile oaths
and vows, he ran down the stayres again, in such like manner as you
chanced to meet him.

Now trust me dear wife (said Beltramo) you behaved your self very well and
worthily: for, it would have been a most notorious scandal to us, if a man
should be slain in your bedchamber: and Signior Lambertuccio carried
himself most dishonestly, to pursue any man so outragiously, having taken my
Castle as his Sanctuary. But alas wife, what is become of the poor affrighted
Gentleman? In Troth Sir (quoth she) I know not, but (somewhere or other)
heereabout he is hidden. Where art thou honest friend? said plain meaning
Beltramo; Come forth and fear not, for thine enemy is gone.

Lionello, who had heard all the fore-passed discourse, which she had
delivered to her Husband Beitramo, came creeping forth amazedly (as one now
very fearfully affrighted indeed) from under the further side of the bed,
and Beltramo said to him, What a quarrel was this, between thee and furious
Lambertuccio? Not any at all Sir, replied Lionello, to my knowledge, which
verily persuades me; that either he is not well in his wits, or else he
mistaketh me for some other; because, so soon as he saw me on the way,
somewhat near to this your Castle, he drew forth his Sword, and swearing an
horrible oath, said. Traitor thou art a dead man. Upon these rough words, I
stayed not to question the occasion of mine offending him: but fled from him so
fast as possibly I could; but confess my self (indeed) ouer-bold, by
presuming into your Ladies bed chamber, which yet (equalled with her mercy)
has bin the only means at this time, of saving my life.

She has done like a good Lady, answered Beltramo, and I do very much commend
her for it. But, recollect thy dismayed spirit together, for I will see thee
safely secured hence, afterward, look to thy self so well as thou can.
Dinner being immediately made ready, and they having merrily feasted together:
he bestowed a good Gelding on Lionello, and rode along with him to Florence,
where he left him quietly in his own lodging. The selfsame Evening
(according as Isabella had given enstruction) Lionello conferred with
Lambertuccio: and such an agreement passed between them, that though some
rough speeches were noised abroad, to set the better color on the business;
yet al matters were so cleanly carried, that Beltramo never knew this queint
deceitful policy of his Wife.

Lodouico discovered to his Mistress Madame Beatrix, how amorously he was
affected to her. She cunningly sent Egano her Husband into his garden, in all
respects disguised like her self, while (friendly) Lodouico conferred with her
in the mean while. Afterward, Lodouico pretending a lascivious allurement of
his Mistress, thereby to wrong his honest Master, insted of her, beats Egano
soundly in the Garden.

The Seventh Novel.
Whereby is declared, that such as keep many honest seeming servants, may
sometime find a knave among them, and one that proves to be ouer-sawcy with
his Master.



THis so sudden dexterity of wit in Isabella, related in very modest manner
by Madame Pampinea, was not only admired by all the company; but likewise
passed with as general approbation. But yet Madam Philomena (whom the King had
commanded next to succeed) peremptorily said. Worthy Ladies, if I am not
deceived; I intend to tell you another Tale presently; as much to be commended
as the last.

You are to understand then, that it is no long while since, when there dwelt
in Paris a Florentine Gentleman, who falling into decay of his estate, by
ouer-bountifull expenses; undertook the degree of a Merchant, and thriued so
well by his trading, that he grew to great wealth, having one only son by
his wife, named Lodouico. This Son, partaking somewhat in his Fathers former
height of mind, and no way inclineable to deal in Merchandise, had no meaning
to be a Shop-man, and therefore accompanied the Gentlemen of France, in sundry
services for the King; among whom, by his singular good carriage and qualites,
he happened to be not meanly esteemed. While thus he continued in the Court, it
chanced, that certain Knights, returning from Jerusalem, having there visited
the holy Sepulcher, and coming into company where Lodouico was: much familiar
discourse passed amongst them, concerning the fair women of France, England,
and other parts of the world where they had bin, and what delicate beauties
they had seen.

One in the company constantly avouched, that of all the Women by them so
generally observed, there was not any comparable to the Wife of Egano de
Galluzzi, dwelling in Bologna, and her name Madam Beatrix, reputed to be the
only fair woman of the world. Many of the rest maintained as much, having bin
at Bologna, and likewise seen her. Lodouico hearing the woman to be so highly
commended, and never (as yet) feeling any thought of amorous inclination;
became suddenly touched with an earnest desire of seeing her, and his mind
could entertain no other matter, but only of travailing thither to see her,
yea, and to continue there, if occasion so served. The reason for his journey
urged to his Father, was to visit Jerusalem, and the holy Sepulcher, which with
much difficulty, at length he obtained his leave.

Being on his journey toward Bologna, by the name of Anichino, and not of
Lodouico, and being there arrived; upon the day following, and having
understood the place of her abiding: it was his good hap, to see the Lady at
her Window; she appearing in his eye far more fair, then all reports had
made her to be. Hereupon, his affection became so enflamed to her, as he
vowed, never to depart from Bologna, until he had obtained her love. And
devising by what means he might effect his hopes, he grew persuaded (setting
all other attempts aside) that if he could be entertained into her Husbands
service, and undergo some business in the house, time might tutor him to
obtain his desire. Having given his attendants sufficient allowance, to spare
his company, and take no knowledge of him, selling his Horses also, and other
notices which might discover him: he grew into acquaintance with the Host of
the house where he lay, revealing an earnest desire in himself, to serve some
Lord or worthy Gentleman, if any were willing to give him entertainment.

Now believe me Sir (answered the Host) you seem worthy to have a good
service indeed, and I know a Noble Gentleman of this City, who is named
Egano: he will (without all question) accept your offer, for he keeps many
men of very good deserving, and you shall have my furtherance therein so much
as may be. As he promised, so he performed, and taking Anichino with him unto
Egano: so far he prevailed by his friendly protestations, and good opinion of
the young Gentleman; that Anichino was (without more ado) accepted into Eganoes
service, then which, nothing could be more pleasing to him. Now had he the
benefit of daily beholding his hearts Mistress, and so acceptable proved his
service to Egano, that he grew very far in love with him: not undertaking any
affairs whatsoever, without the advice and direction of Anichino, so that he
reposed his most especial trust in him, as a man altogether governed by him.

It fortuned upon a day, that Egano being ridden to fly his Hawke at the
River, and Anichino remaining behind at home, Madame Beatrix, who (as yet) had
taken no notice of Anichinoes love to her (albeit her self, observing his
fair carriage and commendable qualities, was highly pleased to have so seeming
a servant) called him to play at the Chesse with her: and Anichino, coveting
nothing more then to content her, ca^ried himself so dexteriously in the game,
that he permitted her still to win, which was no little joy to her. When all
the Gentle-women, and other friends there present, as spectators to behold
their play, had taken their farewell, and were departed, leaving them all
alone, yet gaming still: Anichino breathing forth an entire sigh, Madame
Beatrix looking merrily on him, said. Tell me Anichino, art not thou angry, to
see me win? It should appear so by that solemn sigh. No truly Madame,
answered Anichino, a matter of far greater moment, then loss of infinite
games at the Chesse, was the occasion why I sighed. I pray thee (replied the
Lady) by the love thou bear me, as being my Servant (if any love at all
remain in thee toward me) give me a reason for that hearty sigh.

When he heard himself so severely coninred, by the love he bare to her, and
loved none else in the world beside: he gave a far more hartsicke sigh, then
before. Then his Lady and Mistress entreated him seriously, to let her know
the cause of those two deep sighs: whereto Anichino thus replied. Madam, if I
should tell you, I stand greatly in fear of offending you: and when I have
told you, I doubt your discovery thereof to some other. Believe me Anichino
(quoth she) therein thou neither can, or shall offend me. Moreover, assure
thy self, that I will never disclose it to any other, except I may do it with
thy consent. Madame (said he) seeing you have protested such a solemn
promise to me, I will reveal no mean secret unto you.

So, with tears standing in his eyes, he told her what he was; where he heard
the first report of her singular perfections, and instantly becam enamored of
her, as the maine motive of his entering into her service. Then, most humbly he
entreated her, that if it might agree with her good liking, she would be
pleased to commisserate his case, and grace him with her private favors. Or,
if she might not be so merciful to him; that yet she would vouchsafe, to let
him live in the lowly condition as he did, and think it a thankful duty in
him, only to love her. O singular sweetness, naturally living in fair
feminine blood! How justly art thou worthy of praise in the like occasions?
Thou could never be won by sighs and tears; but hearty imprecations have
always prevailed with thee, making thee apt and easy to amorous desires. If I
had praises answerable to thy great and glorious deseruings, my voice should
never faint, nor my pen wax weary, in the due and obsequious performance of
them.

Madam Beatrix, well observing Anichino when he spoke, and giving credit to his
so solemn protestations; they were so powerful in prevailing with her, that
her senses (in the same manner) were enchanted; and sighs flew as violently
from her, as before he had vented them: which stormy tempest being a little
ouer-blowne, thus she spoke. Anichino, my hearts dear affected Friend, live in
hope, for I tell thee truly, never could gifts, promises, nor any Courtings
used to me by Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, or other (although I have bin
solicited by many) win the lest grace or favor at my hand, no, nor move me
to any affection. But thou, in a minute of time (compared with their long and
tedious suing) have expressed such a sovereign potency in thy sweet words,
that thou have mad^ me more thine, then mine own: and believe it unfeignedly, I
hold thee to be worthy of my love. Wherefore, with this kiss I freely give it
thee, and make thee a further promise, that before this night shall be fully
past, thou shall in better manner perceive it. Adventure into my Chamber about
the hour of midnight, I will leave the door open: thou know on which side
of the bed I use to rest, come thither and fear not: if I sleep, the least
gentle touch of thy hand will wake me, and then thou shall see how much I love
thee. So, with a kind kiss or two, the bargain was concluded, she licensing
his departure for that time, and he staying in hope of his hearts happiness,
till when, he thought every hour a year.

In the mean while; Egano returned home from Hawking, and so soon as he had
supt (being very weary) he went to bed, and his Lady likewise with him,
leaving her Chamber door open, according as she had promised. At the hour
appointed, Anichino came, finding the door but easily put too, which (being
entered) softly he closed again, in the same manner as he found it. Going to
the beds side where the Lady lay, and gently touching her breast with his hand,
he found her to be awake, and perceiving he was come according unto promise,
she caught his hand fast with hers, and held him very strongly. Then, turning
(as she could) toward Egano, she made such means, as he awaked, whereupon
she spoke unto him as follows.

Sir, yester night I would have had a few speeches with you: but, in regard of
your weariness and early going to bed, I could not have any opportunity. Now,
this time and place being most convenient, I desire to be resolved by you:
Among all the men retained into your service; which of them you do think to be
the best, most loyal, and worthiest to enjoy your love? Egano answered thus:
Wife, why should you move such a question to me? Do not you know, that I never
had any servant heretofore, or ever shall have hereafter, in whom I reposed
the like trust as I have done, and do in Anichino? But to what end is this
motion of yours? I will tell your Sir ( quoth she) and then be Judge your self,
whether I have reason to move this question, or no. Mine opinion every way
equalled yours, concerning Anichino, and that he was more just and faithful to
you, then any could be amongst all the rest: But Husband, like as where the
water runs stillest, the Foord is deepest, even so, his smooth looks have
beguiled both you and me. For, no longer ago, then this very day, no sooner
were you ridden forth on Hauking, but he (belike purposely) tarrying at home,
watching such a leisure as best fitted his intent: was not ashamed to solicit
me, both to abuse your bed, and mine own spotless honor.

Moreover, he prosecuted his impious purpose with such alluring persuasions:
that being a weak woman, and not willing to endure over many Amorous proofs
(only to acquaint you with his most saucy immodestie, and to revenge your
self upon him as best you may; your self being best able to pronounce him
guilty) I made him promise, to meet him in our Garden, presently after
midde-night, and to find me sitting under the Pine Tree; nener meaning (as I
am virtuous) to be there. But, that you may know the deceit and falshoode of
your Servant, I would hane you to put on my Night-gowne, my head Attire, and
Chinne-cloath, and sitting but a short while there underneath the Pine Tree:
such is his insatiate desire, as he will not fail to come, and then you may
proceed, as you find occasion.

When Egano heard these Words, suddenly he started out of Bed, saying. Do I
foster such a Snake in mine own bosom? Gramercie Wife for this politic
promise of thine, and believe me, I mean to follow it effectually. So, on he
put his Ladies Nightgown, her formal head Attire and Chin-cloth, going
presently down into the Garden, to expect Anichinoes coming to the Pine Tree.
But before the matter grew to this issue, let me demand of you fair Ladies, in
what a lamentable condition (as you may imagine) was poor Anichino; to be so
strongly detained by her, hear all his amorous suite discovered, and likely to
draw very heavy afflictions on him? Vndoubredly, he looked for immediate
apprehension by Egano, imprisonment and public punishment for his so malapert
presumption: and had it proved so, she had much renowned her self, and dealt
with him but as he had justly deserved.

But frailty in our feminine sex is too much preualent, and makes us wander
from virtuous courses, when we are well onward in the way to them. Madam
Beatrix, whatsoever passed between her and Anichino, I know not, but, either
to continue this new begun league for further time, or, to be revenged on her
husbands simplicity, in ouer-rashlie giving credit to so smooth a ly; this was
her advise to him. Anichino, quoth she, Take a good Cudgel in thy hand, then
go into the Garden so far as the Pine; and there, as if formerly thou had
solicited me unto this secret meeting, only but by way of approving my
honesty: in my name, revile thy master so bitterly as thou can, bestowing
many sound blows on him with thy cudgel; yet urge the shame still (as it were)
to me, and never leave him, til thou have beaten him out of the garden, to
teach him keep his bed another time. Such an apt Scholar as Anichino was in
this kind, needs no tuturing, but a word is enough to a ready Wit. To the
Garden goes he, with a good willow cudgel in his hand, and coming near to
the Pine Tree, there he found Egano disguised like to his Lady, who arising
from the place where he sat, went with cheerful gesture to welcome him; but
Anichino (in rough and stearne manner) thus spoke unto him. Wicked, shameless,
and most immodest Woman, Art thou come, according to thine unchaste and
lascivious promise? Could thou so easily credit, (though I tempted thee, to
try the virtue of thy continency) I would offer such a damnable wrong to my
worthy Master, that so dearly loves me, and reposeth his especial confidence
in me? Thou art much deceived in me, and shall find, that I hate to be false
to him.

So lifting up the Cudgel, he gave him therewith half a score good
bastinadoes, laying them on soundly, both on his arms and shoulders: and Egano
feeling the smart of them, durst not speak one Word, but fled away from him
so fast as he could, Anichino still following, and multiplying many other
injurious speeches against him, with the Epithites of Strumpet, lustful and
insatiate Woman. Go thou lewd beast (quoth he) most unworthy the title of a
Lady, or to be Wife unto so good a natured man, as my Master is, to whom I
will reveal thy most ungracious inciuility to Morrow, that he may punish thee
a little better then I have done.

Egano being thus well beaten for his Garden walk, got within the door, and
so went up to his Chamber again: his Lady there demanding of him, whether
Anichino came according to his promise, or no? Come? quoth Egano, Yes Wife, he
came, but dearly to my cost: for he verily taking me for thee, has beaten me
most extremely, calling me an hundred Whores and Strumpets, reputing thee to
be the wickedst Woman living. In good sadness Beatrix, I wondered not a little
at him, that he would give thee any such vile speeches, with intent to wrong
me in mine honor. Questioulesse, because he saw thee to be iouiall spirited,
gracious and affable toward all men; therefore he intended to make trial of
thine honest carriage. Well Sir ( said she) it was happy that he tempted me
with words, and let you taste the proof of them by deeds: and let him think,
that I brook those words as distastably, as you do or can, his ill deeds. But
seeing he is so just, faithful, and loyal to you, you may lone him the
better, and respect him as you find occasion.

Whereto Egano thus replied. Now trust me wife, thou have said very well: And
drawing hence the argument of his settled persuasion; that he had the chastest
Woman living to his wife, and so just a Servant, as could not be fellowed:
there never was any further discovery of this Garden-night accident. Perhaps,
Madame Beatrix and Anichino might subtly smile thereat in secret, in regard
that they knew more then any other else beside did. But, as for honest meaning
Egano, he never had so much as the very least mistrust of ill dealing, either
in his Lady, or Anichino; whom he loved and esteemed far more respectively
upon this proof of his honesty toward him, then he would or could possibly
have done, without a trial so plain and pregnant.

Arriguccio Berlinghieri, became immeasurably ielous of his Wife Simonida, who
fastened a thread about her great toe, for to serve as a signal, when her
amorous friend should come to visit her. Arriguccio finds the fallacy, and
while he pursues the amorous friend, she causes her Maid to lie in her bed
against his return: whom he beats extremely, cutting away the locks of her
hair (thinking he had done all this violence to his wife Simonida:) and
afterward fetches her Mother and Brethren, to shame her before them, and so be
rid of her. But they finding all his speeches to be utterly false; and reputing
him to be a drunken jealous fool; all the blame and disgrace falls on
himself.

The Eight Novel.
Whereby appears, that an Husband ought to be very well advised, when he
means to discover any wrong offered his wife; except he himself do rashly
run into all the shame and reproach.



IT seemed to the whole assembly, that Madam Beatrix, dealte somewhat
strangely, in the manner of beguiling her husband; and affirmed also, that
Anichino had great cause of fear, when she held him so strongly by her beds
side, and related all his amorous temptation. But when the King perceived, that
Madame Philomena sat silent, he turned to Madam Neiphila, willing her to
supply the next place; who modestly smiling, thus began.

Fair Ladies, it were an heavy burden imposed on me, and a matter much
surmounting my capacity, if I should vainly imagine, to content you with so
pleasing a Novel, as those have already done, by you so singularly reported:
nevertheless, I must discharge my duty, and take my fortune as it falls,
albeit I hope to find you merciful.

You are to know then, that sometime there lived in our City, a very welthy
Merchant, named Arriguccio Berlinghieri, who (as many Merchants have done)
fondly imagined, to make himself a Gentleman by marriage. Which that he might
the more assuredly do, he took to wife a Gentlewoman, one much above his degree
or element, she being named Simonida. Now, in regard that he delighted (as it
is the usual life of a Merchant) to be often abroad, and little at home,
whereby she had small benefit of his company; she grew very forward in
affection with a young Gentleman, called Signior Roberto, who had solicited her
by many amorous means, and (at length) prevailed to win her favor. Which favor
being once obtained; affection gaddes so far beyond al discretion, and makes
Lovers so heedelesse of their private conuersations: that either they are taken
tardy in their folly, or else subjected to scandalous suspicion.

It came to pass, that Arriguccio, either by rumor, or some other more
sensible apprehension, had received such intelligence concerning his Wife
Simonida, as he grew into extraordinary jealousy of her, refraining travail
abroad, as formerly he was wont to do, and ceassing from his very ordinary
affairs, addicting all his care and endeavor, only to be watchful of his
Wife; so that he never durst sleep, until she were by him in the bed, which
was no mean mollestation to her, being thus curbd from her familiar meetings
with Roberto. Nevertheless, having a long while consulted with her wits, to
find some apt means for conuersing with him, being thereto also very
earnestly still solicited by him; you shall hear what course she undertook.

Her Chamber being on the street side, and somewhat iuttying over it, she
observed the disposition of her Husband, that every night it was long before he
fell asleep: but being once fallen into it, no noise whatsoever, could easily
wake him. This his solemn and sound sleeping, emboldned her so far, as to
meet with Roberto at the street door, which (while her Husband slept) softly
she would open to him, and there in private converse with him.

But, because she would know the certain hour of his coming, without the
least suspicion of any: she hung a thread forth of her Chamber Window,
descending down, within the compass of Robertoes reach in the street, and the
other end thereof, guided from the Window to the bed, being conveyed under the
clothes, and she being in bed, she fastened it about her left great Toe,
wherewith Roberto was sufficiently acquainted, and thus enstructed withal;
that at his coming, he should pluck the thread, and if her husband was in his
dead sleep, she would let go the thread, and come down to him: but if he slept
not, she would hold it strongly, and then his tarrying would prove but in
vain, there could be no meeting that night.

This devise was highly pleasing both to Roberto and Simonida, being the
intelligencer of their often meeting, and many times also aduising the
contrary. But in the end, as the quaintest cunning may fail at one time or
other; so it fortuned one night, that Simonida being in a sound sleep, and
Arriguccio waking, because his drowsy hour was not as yet come: as he
extended forth his leg in the bed, he found the thread, which feeling in his
hand, and perceiving it was tied to his wives great toe; it proved apt tinder
to kindle further Jealousy, and now he suspected some treachery indeed, and
so much the rather because the thread guided (under the clothes) from the bed
to the window, and there hanging down into the street, as a warning to some
further business.

Now was Arriguccio so furiously enflamed, that he must needs be further
resolved in this apparent doubt: and because therein he would not be deceived,
softly he cut the thread from his wives toe, and made it fast about his own; to
try what success would ensue thereon. It was not long before Roberto came,
and according as he used to do, he plucked the thread, which Arriguccio felt,
but because he had not tied it fast, and Roberto pulling it ouer-hardly, it
fell down from the window into his hand, which he understood as his lesson, to
attend her coming, and so he did. Arriguccio stealing softly out of bed from
his wife, and taking his Sword under his arm, went down to the door, to see
who it was, with full intent of further revenge. Now, albeit he was a Merchant,
yet he wanted not courage, and boldness of spirit, and opening the door
without any noise, only as his wife was wont to do: Roberto, there waiting
his entrance, perceived by the doors unfashionable opening, that it was not
Simonida, but her Husband, whereupon he betook himself to flight, and
Arriguccio fiercely followed him. At the length, Roberto perceiving that flight
auayled him not, because his enemy still pursued him: being armed also with a
Sword, as Arriguccio was; he returned back upon him, the one offering to
offend, as the other stood upon his defense, and so in the dark they fought
together.

Simonida awaking, even when her Husband went forth of the Chamber, and
finding the thread to be cut from her toe; coniectured immediately, that her
subtle cunning was discovered, and supposing her Husband in pursuit of
Roberto, presently she arose; and, considering what was likely to ensue
thereon, called her Chamber-maide (who was not ignorant in the business) and
by persuasions prevailed so with her, that she lay down in her place in the
bed, upon solemn protestations and liberal promises, not to make her self
known, but to suffer all patiently, either blows, or other ill usage of her
Husband, which she would recompense in such bountiful sort, as she should
have no occasion to complain. So, putting out the watch-light, which every
night burned in the Chamber, she departed thence, and sat down in a close
corner of the house, to see what would be the end of all this stir, after her
Husbands coming home.

The fight (as you have formerly heard) continuing between Roberto and
Arriguccio, the neighbors hearing of the clashing of their Swords in the
streets; arose out of their beds, and reproved them in very harsh manner. In
which respect Arriguccio, fearing to be known, and ignorant also what his
adversary was (no harm being as yet done on either side) permitted him to
depart; and extremely full of anger, returned back again to his house. Being
come up into his bedchamber, Thus he began; Where is this lewd and wicked
woman? what? have thou put out the light, because I should not find thee? that
shall not avail thee, for I can well enough find a drab in the dark. So,
groping on to the beds side, and thinking he had taken hold on his wife, he
grasped the Chamber-maide, so beating her with his fists, and spurning her with
his feet, that al her face was bloody and bruised. Next, with his knife he cut
off a great deal of her hair, giving her the most villainous speeches as could
be devised: swearing, that he would make her a shame to all the world.

You need make no doubt, but the poor maid wept exceedingly, as she had good
occasion to do: and albeit many times she desired mercy, and that he would
not be so cruel to her: yet notwithstanding, her voice was so broken with
crying, and his impacience so extreme, that rage hindered all power of
distinguishing, or knowing his wives tongue from a strangers. Having thus madly
beaten her, and cut the locks off from her head, thus he spoke to her. Wicked
woman, and no wife of mine, be sure I have not done with thee yet; for,
although I mean not now to beat thee any longer: I will go to thy brethren,
and they shall understand thy dishonest behavior. Then will I bring them home
with me, and they perceiving how much thou have abused both their honor and
thine own; let them deal with thee as they find occasion, for thou art no
more a companion for me. No sooner had he uttered these angry words, but he
went forth of the Chamber, bolting it fast on the outward side, as meaning to
keep her safely enclosed, and out of the house he went alone by himself.

Simonida, who had heard all this tempestuous conflict, perceiving that her
Husband had locked the street door after him, and was gone whether he pleased:
vnbolted the Chamber door, lighted a wax candle, and went in to see her poor
maid, whom she found to be most pitifully misused. She comforted her as well
as she could, brought her into her own lodging Chamber, where washing her face
and hurts in very sovereign waters, and rewarding her liberally with
Arriguccioes own Gold; she held her self to be sufficiently satisfied. So,
leaving the maid in her lodging, and returning again to her own Chamber: she
made up the bed in such former manner, as if no body had lodged therein that
night. Then hanging up her Lampefresh filled with oil, and clearly lighted, she
decked her self in so decent sort, as if she had bin in no bed all that night.

Then taking sowing work in her hand, either shirts or bands of her Husbands;
hanging the Lamp by her, and sitting down at the stayres head, she fell to
work in very serious manner, as if she had undertaken some imposed task.

On the other side, Arriguccio had traveled so far from his house, till he
came at last to the dwelling of Simonidaes brethren: where he knocked so
soundly, that he was quickly heard, and (almost is speedily) let in.
Simonidaes brethren, and her mother also, hearing of Arriguccioes coming
thither so late. Rose from their beds, and each of them having a Wax Candle
lighted came presently to him, to understand the cause of this his so
unseasonable visitation. Arriguccio, beginning at the original of the matter,
the thread found tied about his wives great toe, the fight and household conflict
after following: related every circumstance to them. And for the better proof
of his words, he showed them the thread it self, the locks supposed of his
wives hair, and adding withal; that they might now dispose of Simonida as
themselves pleased, because she should remain no longer in his house.

The brethren to Simonida were exceedingly offended at this relation, in regard
they believed it for truth, and in this fury, commanded Torches to be lighted,
preparing to part thence with Arriguccio home to his house, for the more sharp
rehrehension of their Sister. Which when their mother saw, she followed them
weeping, first entreating one, and then the other, not to be over rash in
crediting such a slander, but rather to consider the truth thereof advisedly:
because the Husband might be angry with his Wife upon some other occasion, and
having outraged her, made this the means in excuse of himself. Moreuer she
said, that she could not choose but wonder greatly, how this matter should thus
come to pass; because she had good knowledge of her daugher, during the whole
course of her education, faultlesse and blameless in every deg^ee; with many
other good words of her beside, as proceeding from natural affection of a
mother.

Being come to the house of Arriguccio, entering in, and ascending up the
stayres: they heard Simonida sweetly singing at her working; but pausing, upon
hearing their rude trampling, she demanded, who was there. One of the angry
brethren presently answered: Lewd woman as thou art, thou shall know soon
enough who is here: Our blessed Lady be with us (quoth Simonida) and sweet
Saint Frances help to defend me, who dare use such unseemly speeches?
Starting up and meeting them on the staire head: Kind brethren, (said she) is
it you? What, and my loving mother too? For sweet Saint Charities sake, what
may be the reason of your coming hither in this manner. She being set down
again to her work, so neatly apparrlled, without any sign of outrage offered
her, her face unblemished, her hair comely ordered, and differing wholly from
the former speeches of her Husband: the Brethren marvelled thereat not a
little; and asswaging somewhat the impetuous torrent of their rage, began to
demand in cool blood, (as it were) from what ground her Husbands complaints
proceeded, and threatening her roughly, if she would not confess the truth
entirely to them.

Ane Maria (quoth Simonida, crossing her self) Alas dear Brethren, I know not
what you say, or mean, nor wherein my Husband should be offended, or make any
complaint at all of me. Arriguccio hearing this, looked on her like a man that
had lost his Senses: for well he remembered, how many cruel blows he had given
her on the face, beside scratches of his nails, and spurns of his feet, as
also the cutting of her hair, the the least show of all which misusage, was
not now to be seen. Her brethren likewise briefly told her, the whole effect
of her Husbands speeches, showing her the thread, and in what cruel manner he
swear he did beat her. Simonida, turning then to her Husband, and seeming as
confounded with amazement, said. How is this Husband? what do I hear? would
you have me supposed (to your own shame and disgrace) to be a bad woman, and
your self a cruel cursed man, when (on either side) there is no such matter?
When were you this night here in the house With me? Or when should you beat
me, and I not feel nor know it. Believe me (sweet heart) all these are
merely miracles to me.

Now was Arriguccio ten times more mad in his mind, then before, saying.
Devil, and no woman, did we not this night go both together to bed? Did not
I cut this thread from thy great toe, tied it to mine, and found the crafty
compact between thee and thy Minnion? Did not I follow and fight with him in
the streets? Came I not back again, and beat thee as a Strumpet should be?
And are not these the locks of hair, which I my self did cut from thy head?

Alas Sir ( quoth she) where have you been? do you know what you say? you did
not lodge in this house this night, neither did I see you all the whole day and
night, till now.

But leaving this, and come to the matter now in question, because I have no
other testimony then mine own words. You say, that you did beat me, and cut
those locks of hair from my head. Alas Sir, why should you slander your
self? In all your life time you did never strike me. And to appoue the truth
of my speeches, do you your self, and all else here present, look on me
advisedly, if any sign of blow or beating is to be seen on me. Nor were it an
easy matter for you to do either to smite, or so much as lay your hand (in
anger) on me, it would cost dearer then you think for. And whereas you say,
that you did cut those locks of hair from my head; it is more then either I
know, or felt, nor are they in color like to mine: but, because my Mother and
brethren shall be my witnesses therein, and whether you did it without my
knowledge; you shall all see, if they be cut, or no. So, taking off her head
attire, she displayed her hair over her shoulders, which had suffered no
violence, neither seemed to be so much as uncivilly or rudely handled.

When the mother and brethren saw this, they began to murmr against
Arriguccio, saying. What think you of this Sir? you tell us of strange matters
which you have done, and all proving falfe, we wonder how you can make good the
rest. Arriguccio looked wild, and confusedly, striving still to maintain his
accusation: but seeing every thing to be flatly against him, he durst not
attempt to speak one word. Simonida took advantage of this distraction in
him, and turning to her brethren, said. I see now the mark whereat he aymeth,
to make me do what I never meante: Namely, that I should acquaint you with his
vile qualities, and what a wretched life I lead with him, which seeing he
will needs have me to reveal; bear with me if I do it upon compulsion.

Mother and Brethren, I am verily persuaded, that those accidents which be
disclosed to you, has doubtless (in the same manner) happened to him, and you
shall hear how. Very true it is, that this seeming honest man, to whom (in a
lucklesse hour) you married me, styles himself by the name of a Merchant,
coveting to be so accounted and credited, as holy in outward appearance, as a
Religious Monk, and as demure in looks, as the modestest Maid: like a
notorious common drunkard, is a Tavern hunter, where making his luxurius
matches, one while with one Whore, then again with another; he causes me
every night to sit tarrying for him, even in the same sort as you found me:
sometimes till midnight, and otherwhiles till broad day light in the morning.

And questionless, being in his wounted drunken humor, he has lain with one
of his sweet Consorts, about whose toe he found the thread, and finding her as
false to him, as he has always been to me: Did not only beat her, but also
cut the hair from her head. And having not yet* recovered his senses, is
verily persuaded, and cannot be altered from it; but that he performed all
this villainy to me. And if you do but advisedly observe his countenance, he
appears yet to be more then half drunk.

But whatsoever he has said concerning me, I make no account at all thereof,
because he spoke it in his drunkenness, and as freely as I forgive him, even
so (good Mother and kind Brethren,) let me entreat you to do the like.

When the Mother had heard these words, and confidently believed her Daughter:
she began to torment her self with anger, saying. By the faith of my body
Daughter, this unkindness is not be endured, but rather let the dog be
hanged, that his qualities may be known, he being utterly unworthy, to have so
good a woman to his wife, as thou art. What could he have done more, if he had
taken thee in the open street, and in company of some wanton Gallants? In an
unfortunate hour wast thou married to him, base jealous Coxecombe as he is,
and it is quite against sense, or reason, that thou should be subject to his
fooleries. What was he, but a Merchant of Eale-skinnes or Orenges; bred in
some paltry country village; taken from Hogge-rubbing; clothed in
Sheepes-Sattin, with Clownish Startops, Leather stockings, and Caddies garters:
His whole habit not worth three shillings: And ye he must have afaire Gentle
Woman to his Wife, of honest fame, riches and reputation; when, comparing his
pedigree with hers, he is far unfit to wipe her shoes.

Oh my dear sons, I would you had followed my counsel, and permitted her to
math in the honorable family of Count Guido, which was much moved, and
seriously pursued. But you would needs bestow her on this goodly Jewel; who,
although she is one of the choysest beauties in Florence, chaste, honest and
truly virtuous: Is not ashamed at midnight, to proclaim her for a common
whore, as if we had no better knowledge of her. But by the blessed mother of
Saint John, if you would be ruled by mine advise; our law should make him
dearly smart for it.

Alas my sons, did I not tell you at home in our own house, that his words
were no way likely to prove true? Have not your eyes observed his unmannerly
behavior to your Sister? If I were as you are, hearing what he has said, and
noting his drunken carriage beside; I should never give over, as long as he had
any life left in him. And were I a man, as I am a woman; none other then my
self should revenge her wrongs, making him a public spectacle to all drabbing
drunkards.

When the brethren had heard and observed all these occurrences; in most bitter
manner they railed on Arriguccio, bestowing some good bastinadoes on him
beside, concluding thus with him in the end. Quoth one of them, We will pardon
this shameful abusing of our Sister, because thou art a notoriom drunkard: but
look to it (on peril of thy life) that we have no more such news hereafter;
for, believe it unfeignedly, if any such impudent rumors happen to our ears,
or so much as a flying fame thereof; thou shall surely be paid for both faults
together.

So home again went they, and Arriguccio stood like one that had neither life
or motion, not knowing (whether what he had done) was true, or no, or if he
dreamed all this while, and so (without uttering any word) he left his Wife,
and went quietly to bed. Thus by her wisdom, she did not only prevent an
imminent peril: but also made a free and open passage, to further contentment
with her amourous friend, yet dreadlesse of any distaste or suspicion in her
Husband.

Lydia, a Lady of great beauty, birth, and honor, being Wife to Nicostratus,
Governor of Argos, falling in love with a Gentleman, named Pyrrhus; was
requested by him (as a true testimony of her unfeigned affection) to perform
three several actions of her self. She did accomplish them all, and embraced
and kissed Pyrrhus in the presence of Nicostratus; by persuading him, that
whatsoever he saw, was merely false.

The Ninth Novel.
Wherein is declared, that great Lords may sometime be deceived by their Wives,
as well as men of meaner condition.



THe Novel delivered, by Madame Neiphila, seemed so pleasing to all the
Ladies; as they could not refrain from hearty laughter, beside much liberality
of speech. Albeit the King did oftentimes urge silence, and commanded Pamphilus
to follow next. So, when attention was admitted, Pamphilus began in this order.
I am of opinion, fair Ladies, that there is not any matter, how uneasy or
doubtful soever it may seem to be; but the man or woman that affects
fervently, dare boldly attempt, and effectually accomplish. And this persuasion
of mine, although it has been sufficiently approved, by many of our passed
Nouels: Yet notwithstanding, I shall make it much apparent to you, by a present
discourse of mine own. Wherein I have occasion to speak of a Lady, to whom
Fortune was more favorable, then either reason or judgment, could give
direction. In which regard, I would not advise any of you, to entertain so
high an imagination of mind, as to tracke her footsteps of whom I am now to
speak: because Fortune contains not always one and the same disposition,
neither can all men's eyes be blinded after one manner. And so proceed we to our
Tale.

In Argos, a most ancient City of Achaya, much more renowned by her precedent
Kings, then wealth, or any other great matter of worth: there lived as
Lieutenant or Governor thereof, a Noble Lord, named Nicostratus, on whom
(albeit he was well stepped into years) Fortune bestowed in a marriage a great
Lady, no less bold of spirit, then choisely beautiful. Nicostratus, abounding
in treasure and wealthy possessions, kept a goodly train of Servants, Horses,
Hounds, Hawks, and what else not, as having an extraordinary felicity in all
kinds of game, as singular exercises to maintain his health.

Among his other Servants and Followers, there was a young Gentleman, graceful
of person, excellent in speech, and every way as active as no man could be
more: his name Pyrrhus, highly affected of Nicostratus, and more intimately
trusted then all the rest. Such seemed the perfections of this Pyrrhus, that
Lydia (for so was the Lady named) began to affect him very earnestly, and in
such sort, as day or night she could take no rest, but devised all means to
compass her hearts desire. Now, whether he observed this inclination of her
toward him, or else would take no notice thereof, it could not be discerned by
any outward apprehension: which moved the more impatiency in her, and drove her
hopes to dispairing passions. Wherein to find some comfort and ease, she
called an ancient Gentlewoman of her Chamber, in whom she reposed especial
confidence, and thus she spoke to her.

Lesca, The good turns and favors thou have received from me, should make
thee faithful and obedient to me: and therefore set a lock upon thy lips,
for revealing to any one whatsoever, such matters as now I shall impart to
thee; except it be to him that I command thee. Thou perceiuest Lesca, how
youthful I am, apt to all sprightly recreations, rich, and abounding in all
that a woman can wish to have, in regard of Fortunes common and ordinary
favors: yet I have one especial cause of complaint: namely, the inequality of
my Marriage, my Husband being ouer-ancient for me; in which regard, my youth
finds it self too highly wronged, being defeated of those duties and delights,
which Women (far inferior to me) are continually cloyed withal, and I am
utterly deprived of. I am subject to the same desires they are, and deserve to
taste the benefit of them, in as ample manner, as they do or can.

Hitherto I have lived with the loss of time, which yet (in some measure) may
be relieved and recompensed: For, though Fortune were mine enemy in Marriage, by
such a disproportion of our conditions: yet she may befriend in another nature,
and kindly redeem the injury done me. Wherefore Lesca, to be as complete in
this case, as I am in all the rest beside; I have resolved upon a private
Friend, and one more worthy then any other, Namely, my Servant Pyrrhus, whose
youth carries some correspondency with mine; and so constantly have I settled my
love to him, as I am not well, but when I think on him, or see him: and
(indeed) shall dye, except the sooner I may enjoy him. And therefore, if my
life and well fare be respected by thee, let him understand the integrity of
mine affection, by such good means as thou find it most expedient to be
done: entreating him from me, that I may have some conference with him, when he
shall thereto be solicited by me.

The Chamber-Gentlewoman Lesca, willingly undertook the Ladies Embassy; and
so soon as opportunity did favor her: having withdrawn Pyrrhus into an apt
and commodious place, she delivered the Message to him, in the best manner she
could devise. Which Pyrrhus hearing, did not a little wonder thereat, never
having noted any such matter; and therefore suddenly conceived, that the Lady
did this only to try him; whereupon, somewhat roundly and roughly, he
returned this answer. Lesca, I am not so simple, as to credit any such
Message to be sent from my Lady, and therefore be better advised of thy words.
But admit that it should come from her, yet I cannot be persuaded, that her
soul consented to such harsh Language, far differing from a form so full of
beuty. And yet admit again, that her heart and tongue herein were relatiues: My
Lord and Master has so far honored me, and so much beyond the least part
of merit in me: as I will rather dye, then any way offer to disgrace him: And
therefore I charge thee, never more to move me in this matter.

Lesca, not a jot danted at his stearne words, presently she said. Pyrrhus,
Both in this and all other Messages my Lady shall command me, I will speak to
thee whenever she pleases, receive what discontent thou can thereby; or
make presumption of what doubts thou may devise. But as I found thee a
senseless fellow, dull, and not shaped to any understanding, so I leave thee:
And in that anger parted from him, carrying back the same answer to her Lady.
She no sooner heard it, but instantly she wished her self to be dead; and
within some few days after, she conferred again with her Chamber-woman,
saying. Lesca, thou know well enough, that the Ox falls not at the first
blow of the Axe, neither is the victory won, upon a silly and shallow
adventure: Wherefore, I think it convenient, that once more thou should make
another trial of him, who (in prejudice to me) stands so strictly on his
loyalty, and choosing such an hour as seems most commodious, soundly
possess him with my tormenting passions. Bestirre thy Wits, and tippe thy
tongue with a Woman's eloquence, to effect what I so earnestly desire: because,
by languishing in this loue-sicke affliction, it well be the danger of my
death, and some severe detriment to him, to be the occasion of so great a loss.

Lesca, comforted her Lady, so much as lay in her power to do, and having
sought for Pyrrhus, whom she found at good leisure; and, in a pleasing humor,
thus she began. Pyrrhus, some few days since I told thee, in what extreme
Agonies thy Lady and mine was, only in regard of her love to thee: and now
again^ I come once more, to give thee further assurance thereof: Wherefore,
believe it unfeignedly, that if thy obstinacy continne still, in like manner
as the other day it did, expect very shortly to hear the tidings of her death.

It is my part therefore, to entreat thee, to comfort her long languishing
desires: but if thou persist in thy harsh opinion, in stead of reputing thee a
wise and fortunate young man, I shall confess thee to be an ignorant Ass.
What a glory is it to thee, to be affected of so fair and worthy a Lady;
beyond all men else what soever? Next to this, tell me, how highly may thou
confess thy self beholding to Fortune, if thou but duly consider, how she
has elected thee as sole sovereign of her hopes, which is a crown of honor
to thy youth and a sufficieut refuge against all wants and necessities? Where
is any to thy knowledge like thy self, that can make such advantage of his
time, as thou may do, if thou were wise? Where can thou find any one to go
beyond thee in Arms, Horses, sumptuous garments, and Gold, as will be heaped
on thee, if Lydia may be the Lady of thy love? Open then thine understanding to
my words, return into thine own soul, and be wise for thy self.

Remember ( Pyrrhus) that Fortune presents her self but once before any one,
with cheerful looks, and her lap wide open of richest favors, where if
choice be not quickly made, before she fold it up, and turn her back; let no
complaint afterward be made of her, if the Fellow that had so fair an offer,
prove to be miserable, wretched, and a Beggar, only through his own
negligence. Beside, what else has formerly bin said, there is now no such
need of loyalty in servants to their Ladies, as shonld be among dear Friends
and Kindred: but servants ought rathee (as best they may) be such to their
Masters, as they are to them. Do thou imagine, that if thou had a fair
Wife, Mother, Daughter, or Sister, pleasing in the eye of our Nicostratus; he
would stand on such nice terms of duty or Loyalty, as now thou do to his
Lady? Thou went a very fool to rest so persuaded. Assure thy self, that if
entreaties and fair means might not prevail, force, and compulsion
(whatsoever ensued thereon) would win the masterie, Let us then use them,
and the commodities unto them belonging, as they would us and ours. Use the
benefit of thy Fortune, and beware of abusing her fauonr. She yet smiles on
thee; but take heed least she turn her back, it will then be ouer-late to
repent thy folly. And if my Lady die through thy disdain, be assured, that
thou can not escape with life, beside open shame and disgrace for ever.

Pyrrhus, who had often considered on Lescaes first message, concluded with
himself; that if any more she moved the same matter: he would return her
another kind of answer, wholly yielding to content his Lady; provided, that
he might remain assured, concerning the intyre truth of the motion, and that
it was not urged only to try him, wherefore, thus he replied. Lesca, do not
imagine me so ignorant, as not to know the certainty of all thy former
allegations, confessing them as freely as thou do, or can. But yet let me
tell thee withal, that I know my Lord to be wise and judicious, and having
committed all his affair (...) my care and trust: never blame me to misdoubt,
least my Lady (by his counsel and advice) make thee the messenger of this
motion; thereby to call my Fidelity in question.

To clear which doubt; and for my further assurance of her well (...) toward
me; if she will undertake the performance of three such things as I must needs
require in this case: I am afterward her own, in any service she can command
me. The first of them, is; that in the presence of my Lord and Master, she kill
his fair Faulcon, which so dearly he affects. The second, to send me a
lock or tuft of his beard, being pulled away with her own hand. The third and
last, with the same hand also, to pluck out one of his best and soundest feth,
and send it me as her loves true token. When I find all these three
effectually performed, I am wholly hers, and not before.

These three strict impositions, seemed to Lesca, and her Lady likewise,
almost beyond the compass of all possibility. Nevertheless Love, being a
powerful Orator in persuading, as also aduenturous even on the most difficult
dangers; gave her courage to undertake them all: sending Lesca back again to
him, with full assurance, of these more then Herculean labors. Moreover, her
self did intend to add a fourth task, in regard of his strong opinion
concerning the great Wisdom of his Lord and Master. After she had effected
all the other three, she would not permit him to kiss her, but before his
Lords face: which yet should be accomplished in such sort, as Nicostratus
himself should not believe it, although apparently he saw it. Well, (quoth
Pyrrhus) when all these wonders are performed, assure my Lady, that I am
truly hers.

Within a short while after, Nicostratus made a solemn Feastiual (according as
yearly he used to do) in honor of his birth day, inuiting many Lords and
Ladies thereto. On which rejoicing day, so soon as dinner was ended, and the
Tables withdrawn: Lydia came into the great Hall. where the Feast was solemnly
kept; very rich and costly apparrelled; and there, in presence of Pyrrhus, and
the whole assembly, going to the Perch whereon the Faulcone sat, wherein her
Husband took no little delight, and having untied her, as if she meant to
bear her on her Fist: took her by the Iesses, and beating her against the
wall, killed her. Nicostratus beholding this, called out aloud unto her, saying.
Alas Madame! What have you done? She making him no answer, but turning to the
Lords and Ladies, which had dined there, spoke in this mander.

Ill should I take revenge on a King, that had offended me, if I had not so
much heart, as to wreake my spleen on a paltry Hawke. Understand then, worthy
Lords and Ladies, that this Faulcone has long time robbed me of those
delights, which men (in mere equity) ought to have with their wives: because
continually, so soon as break of day has appeared, my Husband, starting out
of bed, makes himself ready, presently to Horse, and with this Faulcon on
his Fist, rides abroad to his recreation in the Fields. And I, in such forsaken
sort as you see, am left all alone in my bed, discontented and despised: often
vowing to my self, to be thus revenged as now I am, being withheld from it
by no other occasion, but only want of a fit and apt time, to do it in the
presence of such persons, as might be just Judges of my wrongs, and as I
conceive you all to be.

The Lords and Ladies hearing these words, and believing this deed of hers to
be done no otherwise, but out of her entire affection to Nicostratus, according
as her speeches sounded: compassionately turning toward him (who was
exceedingly displeased) and all smiling, said. Now in good sadness Sir; Madame
Lydia has done well, in acting her just revenge upon the Hawke, that bereft
her of her Husbands kind company; then which nothing is more precious to a
loving wife, and a hell it is to live without it. And Lydia, being suddenly
withdrawn into her chamber; with much other friendly and familiar talk, they
converted the anger of Nicostratus into mirth and smiling.

Pyrrhus. who had diligently observed the whole carriage of this business,
said to himself. My Lady has begun well, and proceeding on with no worse
success, will (no doubt) bring her love to an happy conclusion. As for the
Lady her self, she having thus killed the Hawke, it was no long while after, but
being in the Chamber with her husband, and they conuersing familiarly together:
she began to jest with him, and he in the like manner with her, tickling and
toying each the other, till at the length she played with his beard, and now
she found occasion aptly serving, to effect the second task imposed by
Pyrrhus. So, taking fast hold on a small tuft of his beard, she gave a sudden
snatch, and plucked it away quite from his chin. Whereat Nicostratus being
angerly moved, she (to appease his distaste) pleasantly thus spoke. How now my
Lord? Why do you look so frowningly? What? Are you angry, for a few loose
hairs of your beard? How then should I take it, when you pluck me by the
hair of my head, and yet I am not a jot discontented, because I know you do it
but in jesting manner? These friendly speeches cut off all further contention,
and she kept charily the tuft of her Husbands beard, which (the very
selfsame day) she sent to Pyrrhus her hearts chosen friend.

But now concerning the third matter to be adventured, it drove her to a much
more serious consideration, then those two which she had already so well and
exactly performed. Notwithstanding, like a Lady of unconquerable spirit, and
(in whom) Love enlarged his power more and more: she suddenly conceited, what
course was best to be kept in this case, forming her attempt in this manner.
Upon Nicostratus waited two young Gentlemen, as Pages of his Chamber, whose
Fathers had given them to his service, to learn the manners of honorable
Courtship, and those qualities necessarily required in Gentlemen. One of them,
when Nicostratus sat down to dinner or supper, stood in Office of his Caruer,
delivering him all the meats whereon he fed. The other (as Taster) attended on
his Cup, and he drank no other drink, but what he brought him, and they both
were highly pleasing unto him.

On a day, Lydia called these two youths aside; and, among some other speeches,
which served but as an induction to her intended policy; she persuaded them,
that their mouths yielded an unsavory and il-pleasing smell, whereof their
Lord seemed to take dislike. Wherefore she advised them, that at such times as
they attended on him in their several places: they should (so much as possibly
they could) withdraw their heads aside from him, because their breath might not
be noyous unto him. But withal, to have an especial care, of not disclosing
to any one, what she had told them; because (out of mere love) she had
acquainted them therewith: which very constantly they believed, and followed
the same direction as she had advised, being loath to displease, where service
bound them to obey. Choosing a time fitting for her purpose, when Nicostratus
was in private conference with her, thus she began. Sir, you observe not the
behavior of your two Pages, when they wait on you at the Table? Yes but I do
wife (quoth he) how squemishly they turn their heads aside from me, and it has
often bin in my mind, to understand a reason why they do so.

Seating her self by him, as if she had some weighty matter to tell him; she
proceeded in this manner. Alas my Lord, you shall not need to question them,
because I can sufficiently resolve you therein: which (nevertheless) I have
long concealed, because I would not be offensive to you. But in regard, it is
now manifestly apparent, that others have tasted, what (I immagined) none but
my self did, I will no longer hide it from you. Assuredly Sir, there is a most
strange and unwonted ill-sauour, continually issuing from your mouth, smelling
most noysomely, and I wonder what should be tbe occasion. In former times, I
never felt any such foul breathing to come from you: and you, who do daily
converse with so many worthy persons, should seek means to be rid of so great
an annoyance. You say very true wife ( answered Nicostratus) and I protest to
you on my Credit, I feel no such ill smell, neither know what should cause
it, except I have some corrupted tooth in my mouth. Perhaps Sir ( quoth she) it
may be so and yet you feel not the savor which others do, yea, very
offensiuely.

So, walking with her to a Window, he opened wide his mouth, the which nicely
she surueyed on either side, and, turning her head from him, as seeming unable
to endure the savor: starting, and shrieking out alowd, she said. Santa Maria!
What a sight is this? Alas my good Lord, How could you abide this, and for so
long a while? Here is a tooth on this side, which (so far as I can pereeiue)
is not only hollow and corrupted: but also wholly putrified and rotten, and if
it continue still in your head, believe it for a truth, that it will infect and
spoil all the rest near it. I would therefore counsel you, to let it be
plucked out, before it breed your further, danger. I like your counsel well
Lydia, replied Nicostratus, and presently intend to follow it; Let therefore my
Barber be sent for, and, without any longer delay, he shall pluck it forth
instantly.

How Sir? ( quoth she,) your Barber? Upon mine Honor, there shall come no
Barber here. Why ^ir, it is such a rotten Tooth, and stands so fairly for
my hand: that, without help or advice of any Barber, let me alone for
plucking it forth, without putting you to any pain at all. Moreover, let me
tell you Sir, those Tooth-drawers are so rude and cruel, in performing such
Offices, as my heart cannot endure, that you should come within compass of
their currish courtesy, neither shall you Sir, if you will be ruled by me. If
I should fail in the manner of their facility, yet love and duty has
enstructed me, to forbear your least paining, which no unmannerly Barber will
do.

Having thus spoken, and he well contented with her kind offer, the
instruments were brought, which are used in such occasions, all being commanded
forth of the Chamber, but only Lesca, who evermore kept still in her company.
So, locking fast the door, and Nicostratus being seated, as she thought
fittest for her purpose, she put the Tanacles into his mouth, catching fast
hold on one of his soundest teeth: which, notwithstanding his loud crying,
Lesca held him so strongly, that forth she plucked it, and hid it, having
another tooth ready made hot and bloody, very much corrupted and rotten, which
she held in the Tanacles, and showed to him, who was well-neere half dead
with anguish. See Sir (quoth she) was this Tooth to be suffered in your head,
and to yield so foul a smell as it did? He verily believing what she said,
albeit he had endured extreme pain, and still complained on her harsh and
violent pulling it out: rejoiced yet, that he was now rid of it, and she
comforting him on the one side, and the anguish asswaging him on the other, he
departed forth of the Chamber.

In the mean while, by Lesca she sent the sound tooth to Pyrrhus, who
(wondering not a little at her so many strange attempts, which he urged so
much the rather, as thinking their performance impossible, and in mere loyal
duty to his Lord) seeing them all three to be notably effected; he made no
further doubt of her entire love toward him, but sent her assurance likewise,
of his readiness and serviceable diligence, whenever she would command him.

Now, after the passage of all these adventures, hardly to be undertaken by
any other Woman: yet she held them insufficient for his security, in the
grounded persuasion of her love to him, except she performed another of her
own, and according as she had boldly promised. Hours do now seem days, and
days multiplicitie of years, till the kiss may be given, and received in the
presence of Nicostratus, yet he himself to avouch the contrary.

Madam Lydia (upon a pretended sickness) keeps her chamber, and as women can
hardly be exceeded in dissimulation: so, she wanted no wit, to seem
exquisitely cunning, in all the outward apparances of sickness. One day after
dinner, she being visited by Nicostratus, and none attending on him but
Pyrrhus only: she earnestly entreated, that as a mitigation, to some inward
afflictions which she felt, they would help to guide her into the Garden.

Most gladly was her motion granted, and Nicostratus gently taking her by one
arm, and Pyrrhus by the other, so they conducted her into the Garden, seating
her in a fair floury Grasse-plot, with her back leaning to a Peare-tree.
Having sitten there an indifferent while, and Pyrrhus, being formerly
enstructed, in the directions which she had given him, thus she spoke,
somewhat faintly. Pyrrhus, I have a kind of longing desire upon a sudden, to
taste of these Pears: Wherefore, climb up into the Tree, and cast me down
one or two; which instantly he did. Being aloft in the Tree, and throwing
down some of the best and ripest Pears; at length (according to his
premeditated Lesson) looking down, he said.

Forbear my Lord, Do you not see, in how weak and feeble condition my Lady
is, being shaken with so violent a sickness? And you Madam, how kind and
loving soever you are to my Lord, Are you so little careful of your health,
being ^ut now come forth of your sick Chamber, to be ruffled and tumbled in
such rough manner? Though such dalliances are not amiss in you both; being
fitten for the private Chamber, then an open garden, and in the presence of a
servant: yet time and place should always be respectively considered, for the
avoiding of ill example, and better testimony of your own Wisdoms, which
ever should be like your selves. But if so soon, and even in the heat of a
yet turbulent sickness, your equal love can admit these kisses and embraces:
your private Lodginges were much more convenient, where no Servants eye can see
such Wantonness, nor you be reproved of indiscretion, for being too public
in your Familiarity.

Madame Lydia, suddenly starting, and turning unto her Husband, said. What
does Pyrrhus prate? Is he well in his wits? Or is he frantic? No Madame,
replied Pyrrhus, I am not frantic. Are you so fond as to think that I do not
see your folly? Nicostratus wondering at his Words, presently answered. Now
trust me Pyrrhus, I think thou dreamest. No my Lord, replied Pyrrhus, I dream
not a jot, neither do you, or my Lady: but if this Tree could afford the like
kindness to me, as you do to her, there would not a Pear be le^t upon it.
How now Pyrrhus? (quoth Lydia) this language goes beyond our understanding, it
seems thou know not what thou say. Believe me husband, if I were as well
as ever I have bin, I would climb this tree, to see those idle wonders which
he talks of: for, while he continues thus above, it appears, he can
find no other prattle, albeit he takes his mark amiss.

Hereupon, he commanded Pyrrhus to come down, and being on the ground: Now
Pyrrhus (quoth he) tell me what thou saydst, Pyrrhus, pretending an alteration
into much amazement, straungely looking about him, said, I know not very well
(my Lord) what answer I should make you, fearing least my sight has bin
abused by error: for when I was aloft in that Tree, it seemed manifestly to me:
that you embraced my Lady (though somewhat rudely, in regard of her perilous
sickness, yet lovingly) and as youthfully as in your younger days, with
infinite kisses, and wanton daelliances, such as (indeed) deserved a far more
private place in my poor opinion. But in my descending down, me thought you
gave over that amorous familiarity, and I found you seated as I left you, Now
trust me Pyrrhus, answered Nicostratus, Thy tongue and wit have very strangely
wandered, both from reason and all real apprehension: because we never stirred
from hence, since thou did climb up into the Tree, neither moved otherwise,
then as now thou see us. Alas my Lord ( said Pyrrhus I humbly crave pardon
for my presumption, in reproouing you for meddling with your own: which shall
make me hereafter better advised, in any thing what soever I hear or see.

Marvel and amazement, increased in Nicostratus far greater then before,
hearing him to avouch still so constantly what he had ^eene, no contradiction
being able to alter him, which made him rashly swear and say. I will see my
self, whether this Peare-tree be enchanted, or no: and such wonders to be
seen when a man is up in it, as thou would have us to believe. And being
mounted up so hy, that they were safe from his sudden coming on them, Lydia
had soon forgotten her sickness, and the promised kiss cost her above twenty
more, beside very kind and hearty embraces, as lovingly respected and
entertained by Pyrrhus. Which Nicostratus beholding aloft in the tree; cried
out to her, saying. Wicked woman, What do thou mean? And thou villain
Pyrrhus, Dare thou abuse thy Lord, who has reposed so much trust in thee? So,
descending in haste down again, yet crying so to them still: Lydia replied,
Alas my Lord, Why do you rail and rave in such sort? So, he found her seated
as before, and Pyrrhus waiting with dutiful reverence, even as when he climbed
up the Tree: but yet he thought his ^ight not deceived, for all their demure
and formal behavior, which made him walk up and down, extremely suming and
fretting unto himself, and which in some milder manner to qualify, Pyrrhus
spoke thus to him.

I deny not ( my good Lord) but freely confess, that even as your self, so I,
being above in the Tree, had my fight most falsely deluded: which is so so
apparently confirmed by you, and in the same sort, as there needs no doubt of
both our beguiling; in one and the same suspicious nature. In which case to be
the more assuredly resolved,nothing can be questioned, but whether your belief
do so far misleade you, as to think, that my Lady (who has always been
most wise, loyal, and virtuous,) would so shamefullie wrong you: yea, and to
perform it before your face, wherein I dare gadge my life to the contrary.
Concerning my self, it is not fit for me, to argue or contest in mine own
commendation: you that have ever known the sincerity of my service, are best
able to speak in my behalf: and rather would I be drawn in pieces with four
wild horses, then he such an injurious slave to my Lord and Master.

Now then, it can be no otherwise, but we must needs rest certainly persuaded,
that the guile and offense of this false appearance, was occasioned by thee
only. For all the world could not make me otherwise believe, but but that I
saw you kiss and most kindly embrace my Lady: if your own eyes had not
credited the like behavior in me to her, of which sin, I never conceived so
much as a thought. The Lady (on the other side) seeming to be very angerly
incensed, starting faintly up on her feet, yet supporting her self by the
tree, said. It appears Sir, that you have entertained a goodly opinion of me,
as, if I were so lewd and lasciuiously disposed, or addicted to the very least
desire of wantonness: that I would be so forgetful of mine own honor, as
to adventure it in your sight, and with a servant of my house? Oh Sir, such
women as are so familiarly affected, need learn no wit of men in amourous
matters* their private Chambers shall be better trusted, then an open blabing
and tell-tale Garden.

Nicostratus, who verily believed what they had both said, and that neither of
them would adventure such familiarity before his face: would talk no more of
the matter, but rather studied of the rarity of such a miracle, not seen, but
in the height of the tree, and changing again up on the descent. But Lydia,
containing still her collourable kind of impatience, and angerly frowning upon
Nicostratus, stearnely said. If I may have my will, this villainous and
deceiving tree, shall never more shame me, or any other woman: and therefore
Pyrrhus, run for an Axe, and by felling it to the ground, in an instant,
revenge both thy wrong and mine. Do not thou serve a worthy Lord? And have
not I a wise Husband, who, without any consideration, will suffer the eye of
his understanding to be so dazeled, with a foolish imagination beyond all
possibility? For, although his eyes did apprehend such a folly, and it seemed
to be a truth indeed: yet, in the depth of settled judgment, all the world
should not persuade him, that it was so.

Pyrrhus had quickly brought the Axe, and he wing down the tree, so soon as
the Lady saw it fall; turning her self to Nicostratus, she said. Now that I
have seen mine honor and honesties enemy laid along; mine anger is past, and
Husband, I freely pardon you: entreating you heartily henceforward, not to
presume or imagine, that my love either is, or can be altered from you.

Thus the mocked and derided Nicostratus, returned in again with his Lady and
Pyrrhus; where perhaps (although the Peare-tree was cut down) they could find
as cunning means to ouer-reach him.

Two Citizens of Siena, the one ^amed Tingoccio Mini, and the other Meucio di
Tura, affected hoth one woman, called Monna Mita, to whom the one of them was a
Gossip. The Gossip dyed, and appeared afterward to his companion, according as
he had formerly promised him to do, and told him what strange wonders he had
seen in the other world.

The Tenth Novel.
Wherein such men are covertly reprehended, who make no care or conscience at
all of those things that should preserve them from sin.



NOw there remained none but the King himself, last of all to recount his
Novel; who, after he heard the Ladies complaints indifferently pacified, for
the rash felling down of such a precious Peare-tree; thus he began-Faire
Ladies, it is a case more then manifest, that every King, who will be accounted
just and upright: should first of all, and rather then any other, observe those
Laws which he himself has made; otherwise he ought to be reputed as a
servant, worthy of punishment, and no King. Into which fault and reprehension,
I your King, shall well near be constrained to fall; for yesterday I enacted a
Law, upon the form of our discoursing, with full intent, that this day I would
not use any part of my privilege; but being subject (as you all are) to the
same Law, I should speak of that argument, which already you have done.

Wherein, you have not only performed more then I could wish, upon a subject
so suitable to my mind: but in every Novel, such variety of excellent matter,
such singular illustrations, and delicate eloquence has flowne from you all;
as I am utterly unable to invent any thing (notwithstanding the most curious
search of my brain) apt or fit for the purpose, to paragon the meanest of them
already related. And therefore seeing I must needs sin in the Law established
by my self; I tender my submission, as worthy of punishment, or what amends
else you please to enjoin me. Now, as returned to my wonted privilege, I
say, that the Novel recounted by Madame Eliza, of the Friar Godfather and his
Gossip Agnesia, as also the sottishness of the Senese her Husband, has
wrought in me (worthy Ladies) to such effect; as, forbearing to speak any more
of these wily prancks, which witty wives exercise on their simple Husbands; I
am to tell you a pretty short Tale; which, though there is matter enough in it,
not worthy the crediting, yet partly it will be a pleasing to hear.

Sometime there lived in Sienna two popular men; the one being named Tingoccio,
Mini, and the other Meucio de Tora; Men simple, and of no understanding, both
of them dwelling in Porta Salaia. These two men lived in such familiar
conversation together, and expressed such cordial affection each to other, as
they seldom walked asunder; but (as honest men use to do) frequented Churches
and Sermons, oftentimes hearing, both what miseries and beatitudes were in the
world to come, according to the merits of their souls that were departed out
of this life, and found their equal repaiment in the other. The manifold
repetition of these matters, made them very earnestly desirous to know, by what
means they might have tidings from thence, for their further confirmation. And
finding all their endeauours utterly frustrated, they made a solemn vow and
promise (each to other under oath) that he which first dyed of them two,
should return back again (so soon as possibly he could) to the other
remaining alive, and tell him such tidings as he desired to hear.

After the promise was thus faithfully made, and they still keeping company, as
they were wont to do: It fortuned, that Tingoccio became Gossip to one, named
Ambrosio Anselmino, dwelling in Camporeggio, who by his wise, called Monna
Mita, had a sweet and lovely Son. Tingoccio often resorting thither, and
consorted with his companion Meucio; the she-Gossip, being a woman worthy the
loving, fair and comely of her person: Tingoccio, notwithstanding the
Gossipship between them, had more then a months mind to his God child's
Mother. Meucio also fell sick of the same disease, because she seemed
pleasing in his eye, and Tingoccio gave her no mean commendations; yet,
carefully they concealed their love to themselves, but not for one and the same
occasion. Because Tingoccio kept it closely from Meucio, lest he should hold it
disgraceful in him, to bear amourous affection to his Gossip, and thought it
unfitting to be known. But Meucio had no such meaning, for he knew well
enough that Tingoccio loved her, and therefore conceived in his mind, that if
he discovered any such matter to him: He will (quoth he) be jealous of me, and
being her Gossip (which admits his conference with her when himself
pleases; he may easily make her to distaste me, and therefore I must rest
contented as I am.

Their love continuing on still in this kind, Tingoccio proved so fortunate
in the business, that having better means then his companion, and more
preuayling courses, when, where, and how to Court his Mistress, which seemed
to forward him effectually. All which Meucio plainly perceived, and though it
was tedious and wearisome to him, yet hoping to find some success at length:
he would not take notice of any thing* as fearing to infringe the amity
between him and Tingoccio, and so his hope to be quite supplanted. Thus the
one triumphing in his loves happiness, and the other hoping for his felicity
to come; a lingering sickness seized on Tingoccio, which brought him to so
low a condition, as at the length he dyed.

About some three or four nights after, Meucio being fast asleep in his bed,
the ghost of Tingoccio appeared to him, and called so loud, that Meucio
awaking, demanded who called him? I am thy friend Tingoccio, replied the
ghost, who according to my former promise made, am come again in vision to
thee, to tell thee tidings out of the nether world. Meucio was a while somewhat
amazed; but, recollecting his more manly spirits together, boldly he said. My
brother and friend, thou art heartily welcome: but I thought thou had been
utterly lost. Those things (quoth Tingoccio) are lost, which cannot be
recovered again, and if I were lost, how could I then be here with thee? Alas
Tingoccio, replied Meucio, my meaning is not so: but I would be resolved,
whether thou art among the damned souls, in the painful fire of hell
torments, or no? No (quoth Tingoccio) I am not sent thither, but for diverse
sins by me committed I am to suffer very great and grievous pains. Then
Meucio demanded particularly, the punishments inflicted there, for the
several sins committed here: Wherein Tingoccio fully resolved him. And upon
further question, what he would have to be done for him here, made answer,
That Meucio should cause Masses, Prayers and Almsdeeds to be performed for
him, which (he said) were very helpefull to the souls abiding there, and
Meucio promised to see them done.

As the ghost was offering to depart, Meucio remembered Tingoccioes Gossip Monna
Mita, and raising himself higher upon his pillowe, said. My memory informs
me, friend Tingoccio, of your kind Gossip Monna Mita, with whom (when you
remained in this life) I knew you to be very familiar: let me entreat you then
to tell me, what punishment is inflicted on you there, for that wanton sin
committed here? Oh Brother Meucio, answered Tingoccio, so soon as my soul
was landed there, one came immediately to me, who seemed to know all mine
offenses readily by heart, and forthwith commanded, that I should depart thence
into a certain place, where I must weep for my sins in very grievous
pains. There I found more of my companions, condemned to the same punishment
as I was, and being among them, I called to mind some wanton dalliances, which
had passed between my Gossip and me, and expecting therefore far greater
afflictions, then as yet I felt (although I was in a huge fire, and exceedingly
hot) yet with conceit of fear, I quaked and trembled wondrously.

One of my other Consorts being by me, and perceiving in what an ^xtreame agony
I was; presently said unto me. My friend, what have thou done more, then any of
us here condemned with thee, that thou ^remblest and quakest, being in so hot a
fire? Oh my friend ( quoth I) I am in fear of a greater judgment then this,
for a grievous offense by me heretofore committed while I lived. Then he
demanded of me what offense it was, whereto thus I answered. It was my chance
in the other world, to be Godfather at a child's Christning, and afterward I
grew so affectionate to the child's mother, as (indeed) I kissed her twice or
thrice. My companyon laughing at me in mocking manner, replied thus. Go like
an Ass as thou art, and be no more afraid hereafter, for here is no punishment
inflicted, in any kind whatsoever, for such offenses of frailty committed,
especially with Gossips, as I my self can witness.

Now day drew on, and the Cocks began to crow, a dreadful hearing to walking
spirits, when Tingoccio said to Meucio. Farewell my friendly companion, for I
may tarry no longer with thee, and instantly he vanished away. Meucio having
heard this confession of his friend, and verily believing it for a truth, that
no punishment was to be inflicted in the future world, for offenses of frailty
in this life, and chiefly with Gossips: began to condemn his own folly,
having bin a Gossip to many wives, yet modesty restrained him from such
familiar offending. And therefore being sorry for this gross ignorance, he
made a vow to be wiser hereafter. And if Friar Reynard had been acquainted
with this kind of shrift (as doubtless he was, though his Gossip Agnesia knew
it not) he needed no such Syllogismes, as he put in practice, when he converted
her to his lustful knavery, in the comparison of kindred by him moved,
concerning her husband, the child and himself. But, these are the best fruits
of such Fryerly Confessions, to compass the issue of their inordinate
appetites; yet clouded with the cloak of Religion, which has been the
overthrow of too many.

By this time the gentle blast of Zephirus began to blow, because the Sun
grew near his setting, wherewith the King concluded his Novel, and none
remaining more to be thus employed: taking the Crown from off his own head,
he placed it on Madame Laurettaes, saying, Madame, I Crown you with your own
Crown, as Queen of our Company. You shall henceforth command as Lady and
Mistress, in such occasions as shall be to your liking, and for the
contentment of us all; With which words he set him down. And Madame Lauretta
being now created Queen, she caused the Master of the household to be called,
to whom she gave command, that the Tables should be prepared in the pleasant
valley, but at a more convenient hour, then formerly had been, because they
might (with better ease) return back to the Palace. Then she took order
likewise, for all such other necessary matters, as should be required in the
time of her Regiment: and then turning her self to the whole Company, she
began in this manner.

It was the Will of Dioneus yesternight, that our discourses for this day,
should concern the deceits of wives to their Husbands. And were it not to
avoid taxation, of a spleenitiue desire to be revenged, like the dog being
bitten, biteth again: I could command our to morrows conference, to touch men's
treacheries toward their wives. But because I am free from any such fiery
humor, let it be your general consideration, to speak of such queint
beguylings, as have heretofore past, either of the woman to the man, the man to
the woman, or of one man to another: and I am of opinion, that they will yield
us no less delight, then those related (this day) have done. When she had thus
spoken, she rose; granting them all liberty, to go recreate themselves until
Supper time.

The Ladies being thus at their own disposing, some of them bared their legs
and feet, to wash them in the cool current. Others, not so minded, walked on
the green grass, and under the goodly spreading trees. Dioneus and Madame
Fiammetta, they sat singing together, the loue-warre between Arcit and
Palemon. And thus with diversity of disports, in choice delight and much
contentment, all were employed, till Supper drew near. When the hour was
come, and the Tables covered by the Ponds side: we need not question their diet
and dainties, infinite Birds sweetly singing about them, as no music in the
world could be more pleasing; beside calm winds, fanning their faces from the
neighboring hills (free from flies, or the least annoyance) made a delicate
addition to their pleasure.

No sooner were the Tables withdrawn, and all risen: but they fetched a few
turnings about the valley, because the Sun was not (as yet) quite set. Then in
the cool evening, according to the Queens appointment: in a soft and gentle
pace, they walked homeward: devising on a thousand occasions, as well those
which the days discourses had yielded, as others of their own inuenting
beside. It was almost dark night, before they arrived at the Palace; where,
with variety of choice Wines, and abounding plenty of rare Banqueting, they
out-wore the little toil and weariness, which the long walk had charged them
withal. Afterward, according to their wonted order, the Instruments being
brought and played on, they fell to dancing about the fair Fountain; Tindaro
intruding (now and then) the sound of his Bagpipe, to make the music seem
more melodious. But in the end, the Queen commanded Madame Philomena to sing;
whereupon the Instruments being tuned fit for the purpose, thus she began.

The Song.
The Chorus Sung by the whole Company.
WEarisome is my life to me,
Because I cannot once again return;
Unto the place which made me first to mourn.
NOthing I know, yet feel a powerful fire,
Burning within my breast,
Through deep desire;
To be once more where first I felt unrest,
Which cannot be expressed.
O my sole good! O my best happiness!
Why am I thus restrainde?
Is there no comfort in this wretchedness?
Then let me live content, to be thus painde.
Wearisome is my life to me, etc.
I cannot tell what was that rare delight,
Which first enflamde my soul,
And gave command in spite,
That I should find no ease by day or night,
But still live in control.
I see, I hear, and feel a kind of bliss,
Yet find no form at all:
Other in their desire, feel blessedness,
But I have none, nor think I ever shall.
Wearisome is my life to me, etc.
Tell me, if I may hope in following days,
To have but one poor sight,
Of those bright Sunny rays,
Dazeling my sense, did overcome me quite,
Bequeathed to wandering ways.
If I be poasted off, and may not prove,
To have the smallest grace:
Or but to know, that this proceeds from love,
Why should I live despisde in every place?
Wearisome is my life to me, etc.
Me thinks mild favor whispers in mine ear,
And bids me not despair;
There will a time appear
To quell and quite confound consuming care,
And joy surmount proud fear.
In hope that gracious time will come at length,
To cheer my long dismay:
My spirits reassume yonr former strength,
And never dread to see that joyful day.
Wearisome is my life to me,
Because I cannot once again return;
Unto the place which made me first to mourn.
This Song gave occasion to the whole Company, to imagine, that some new and
pleasing apprehension of Love, constrained Madame Philomena to sing in this
manner. And because (by the discourse thereof) it plainly appeared, that she
had felt more then she saw, she was so much the more happy, and the like was
wished by all the rest. Wherefore, after the Song was ended; the Queen
remembering, that the next day following was Friday, turning her self
graciously to them all, thus she spoke.

You know noble Ladies, and you likewise most noble Gentlemen, that to morrow
is the day consecrated to the Passion of our blessed Lord and Savior, which
(if you have not forgotten it, as easily you cannot) we devoutly celebrated,
Madame Neiphila being then Queen, ceasing from all our pleasant discoursing,
as we did the like on the Saturday following, sanctifiing the sacred Sabbath,
in due regard of it self. Wherefore, being desirous to imitate precedent good
example, which in worthy manner she began to us all: I hold it very decent and
necessary, that we should asttaine to morrow, and the day ensuing, from
recounting any of our pleasant Nouels, reducing to our memories, what was done
(as on those days) for the salvation of our souls. This holy and Religious
motion made by the Queen, was commendably allowed by all the assembly, and
therefore, humbly taking taking their leave of her, and an indifferent part of
the night being already spent; severally they betook themselves to their
Chambers.

The end of the Seventh day.
THE EIGHT DAY.
Whereon all the Discourses, pass under the Rule and Government, of the
Honorable Lady LAVRETTA. And the Argument imposed, is, Concerning such Witty
deceyuings; as have, or may be put in practice, by Wives to their Husbands;
Husbands to their Wives: Or one man toward another.

The Induction.
EARLY on the Sunday Morning, Aurora showing her self bright and lovely; the
Suns Golden beams began to appear, on the tops of the near adjoining
Mountains* so, that Herbs, Plants, Trees, and all things else, were very
evidently to be discerned. The Queen and her Company, being all come forth
of their Chambers, and having walked a while abroad, in the goodly green
Meadows, to taste the sweetness of the fresh and wholesome ayrethey returned
back again into the Palace, because it was their duty so to do.

Afterward, between the hours of seven and eight, they went to hear Mass*
in a fair Chapel ^eere at hand, and thence returned to their Lodgings. When
they had dined merrily together, they fell to their wonted singing and
dancing: Which being done, such as were so pleased (by License of the Queen
first obtained) went either to their rest, or such exercises as they took most
delight in. When midday, and the heat thereof was well ouer-past, so that the
air seemed mild and temperate: according as the Queen had commanded; they
were all seated again about the Fountain, with intent to prosecute their
former pastime. And then Madame Neiphila, by the charge imposed on her, as
first speaker for this day, began as follows.

Gulfardo made a match or wager, with the Wife of Gasparuolo, for the obtaining
of her amorous favor, in regard of a sum of money first to be given her. The
money he borrowed of her Husband, and gave it in payment to her, as in case of
discharging him from her Husbands debt After his return home from Geneway, he
told him in the presence of his Wife, how he had paid the whole sum to her,
with charge of delivering it to her Husband, which she confessed to be true,
albeit greatly against her will.

The First Novel.
Wherein is declared, that such women as will make sale of their honesty, are
sometimes ouer-reached in their payment, and justly served as they should be.



SEeing it is my fortune, Gracious Ladies, that I must give beginning to this
days discoursing, by some such Nouel which I think expedient; as duty binds
me, I am therewith well contented. And because the deceits of Women to men,
have been at large and liberally related; I will tell you a subtle trick of
a man to a Woman. Not that I blame him for the deed, or think the deceyte not
well fitted to the woman: but I speak it in a contrary nature, as commending
the man, and condemning the woman very justly, as also to show, how men can as
well beguile those crafty companions, which least believe any such cunning in
them, as they that stand most on their artificial skill.

Howbeit, to speak more properly, the matter by me to be reported, deserves
not the reproachful title of deceit, but rather of a recompense duly
returned: because women ought to be chaste and honest, and to preserve their
honor as their lives, without yielding to the contamination thereof, for any
occasion whatsoever. And yet (nevertheless (in regard of our frailty) many
times we prove not so constant as we should be: yet I am of opinion, that she
which sells her honesty for money, deserves justly to be burned. Whereas on
the contrary, she that falls into the offense, only through intirc affection
(the powerful laws of Love being above all resistance) in equity meriteth
pardon, especially of a Judge not ouer-rigorous: as not long since we heard
from Philostratus, in revealing what happened to Madam Phillippa de Prato, upon
the dangerous Edict.

Understand then, my most worthy Auditors, that there lived sometime in
Millaine an Almaigne Soldiour, named Gulfardo, of commendable carriage in his
person, and very faithful to such as he served, a matter not common among the
Al^aignes. And because he made just repayment, to every one which lent him
moneys; he grew to such especial credit, and was so familiar with the very
best Merchants; as (many times) he could not be so ready to borrow, as they
were willing always to lend him. He thus continuing in the City of Millaine,
fastened his affection on a very beautiful Gentlewoman, named Mistress
Ambrosia, Wife unto a rich Merchant, who was called Signior Gasparuolo
Sagastraccio, who had good knowledge of him, and respectively used him. Loving
this Gentlewoman with great discretion, without the least apprehension of her
husband: he sent upon a day to entreat conference with her, for enjoying the
fruition of her love, and she should find him ready to fulfill whatsoever she
pleased to command him, as, at any time he would make good his promise.

The Gentlewoman, after diverse of these private solicitings, resolutely
answered, that she was as ready to fulfill the request of Gulfardo, provided,
that two especial considerations might ensue thereon. First, the faithful
concealing thereof from any person living. Next, because she knew him to be
rich, and she had occasion to use two hundred Crowns, about business of
important consequence: he should freely bestow so many on her, and (ever after)
she was to be commanded by him. Gulfardo perceiving the covetousness of this
woman, who (notwithstanding his doting affection) he thought to be entirely
honest to her Husband: became so deeply offended at her vile answer, that his
fervent love converted into as earnest loathing her; determining constantly to
deceive her, and to make her auaritious motion, the only means whereby to effect
it.

He sent her word, that he was willing to perform her request, or any far
greater matter for her: in which respect, he only desired for to know, when
she would be pleased to have him come see her, and to receive the money of him?
No creature he acquainted with his settled purpose, but only a dear friend
and kind companion, who always used to keep him company, in the nearest
occasions that concerned him. The Gentlewoman, or rather most disloyal wife,
upon this answer sent her, was extraordinarily iocond and contented, returning
him a secret Letter, wherein she signified: that Gasparuolo her husband, had
important affairs which called him to Geneway: but he should understand of his
departure, and then (with safety) he might come see her, as also his bringing
of the Crowns.

In the mean while, Gulfardo having determined what he would do, watched a
convenient time, when he went unto Gasparuolo, and said: Sir, I have some
business of maine importance, and shall need to use but two hundred Crowns
only: I desire you to lend me so many Crowns, upon such profit as you were
wont to take of me, at other times when I have made use of you, and I shall
not fail you at my day.

Gasparuolo was well contented with the motion, and made no more ado, but
counted down the Crowns: departing thence (within few days after) for
Geneway, acording to his Wives former message; she giving Gulfardo also
intelligence of his absence, that now (with safety) he might come see her, and
bring the two hundred Crowns with him.

Gulfardo, taking his friend in his company, went to visit Mistress Ambrosia,
whom he found in expectation of his arrival, and the first thing he did, he
counted down the two hundred Crowns; and delivering them to her in the
presence of his friend, said: Mistress Ambrosia, receive these two hundred
Crowns, which I desire you to pay unto your Husband on my behalf, when he is
returned from Geneway. Ambrosia, received the two hundred Crowns, not
regarding wherefore Gulfardo used these words: because she verily believed,
that he spoke in such manner, because his friend should take no notice, of his
giving them to her, upon any covenant passed between them; whereupon, she
said. Sir, I will pay them to my Husband for you; and cause him to give you a
sufficient discharge: but first I will count them over my self, to see whether
the sum be just, or no. And having drawn them over upon the Table, the sum
containing truly two hundred Crowns (wherewith she was most highly contented)
she locked them safe up in her Cuppeboord, and Gulfardoes Friend being gone
(as formerly it was compacted between them) she came to converse more
familiarly with him, having provided a banquet for him. What passed between
them afterward, both then, and oftentimes beside, before her Husband returned
home, is a matter out of my element, and rather requires my ignorance then
knowledge.

When Gasparuolo was come from Geneway, Gulfardo observing a convenient time,
when he was sitting at the door with his Wife; took his Friend with him, and
coming to Gasparuolo, said. Worthy Sir, the two hundred Crowns which you
lent me, before your iourny to Geneway, in regard they could not serve my
turn, to compass the business for which I borrowed them: within a day or
two after, in the presence of this Gentle man my friend, I made repayment of
them to your Wife, and therefore I pray you cross me out of your book.

Gasparuolo turning to his Wife, demanded; Whether it was so, or no? She
beholding the witness standing by, who was also present at her receiving them:
durst not make denial, but thus answered. Indeed Husband, I received two
hundred Crowns of the Gentleman, and never remembered, to acquaint you
therewith since your coming home: but hereafter I will be made no more your
receiver, except I carried a quicker memory.

Then said Gasparuolo: Signior Gulfardo, I find you always a most honest
Gentleman, and will be ready at any time, to do you the like, or a far
greater kindness; depart at your pleasure, and fear not the crossing of my
Book. So Gulfardo went away merrily contented, and Ambrosia was served as she
justly merited; she paying the price of her own lewdness to her Husband,
which she had a more covetous intent to keep, questionless, not caring how
many like lustful matches she could make, to be so liberally rewarded, if
this had succeeded to her mind: whereas he showed himself wise and discreet,
in paying nothing for his pleasure, and requiting a covetous queen in her
kind.

A lusty youthful Priest of Varlungo, fell in love with a pretty woman, named
Monna Belcolore. To compass his amorous desire, he left his Cloak (as a
pledge of further payment) with her. By a subtle slight afterward, he made
means to borrow a Mortar of her, which when he sent home again in the
presence of her Husband; he demanded to have his Cloak sent him, as having
left it in pawn for the Mortar. To pacify her Husband, offended that she did
not lend the Priest the Mortar without a pawn: she sent him back his Cloak
again, albeit greatly against her will.

The Second Novel.
Approving, that no promise is to be kept with such Women as will make sale of
their honesty for coin. A warning also for men, not to suffer Priests to be
over familiar with their wives.



BOth the Gentlemen and Ladies gave equal commendations, of Gulfardoes queint
beguiling the Millaine Gentlewoman Ambrosia, and wishing all other (of her
mind) might always be so served. Then the Queen, smiling on Pamphilus,
commanded him to follow next: whereupon, thus he began.

I can tell you ( fair Ladies) a short Novel, against such as are continually
offensive to us, yet we being no way able to offend him; at least, in the same
manner as they do injury us. And for your better understanding what and who
they be, they are our lusty Priests, who advance their Standard, and make their
public predications against our wives, winning such ad^antage over them, that
they can pardon them both of the sin and punnishment, whenever they are
once subjected unto their persuasions, even as if they brought the Soldane
bound and captiued, from Alexandria to Auignon. Which imperious power, we
(poor souls) cannot exercise on them, considering, we have neither heart nor
courage, to do our deuoire in just revenge on their Mothers, Sisters,
Daughters, and Friends, with the like spirit as they rise in arms against our
wives. And therefore, I mean to tell you a tale of a Country man's wife, more
to make you laugh at the conclusion thereof; then for any singularity of words
or matter: yet this benefit you may gain thereby, of an apparent proof, that
such Sinamon, amorous and persuading Priests, are not always to be credited on
their words or promises.

Let me then tell you, that at Varlungo, which you know to be not far
distant hence, there dwelt an youthful Priest, lusty, gallant, and proper of
person (especially for Women's service) commonly called by the name of sweet Sir
Simon. Now, albeit he was a man of slender reading, yet notwithstanding, he had
store of Latin sentences by heart; some true, but twice so many maimed and
false, Saint-like shows, holy speeches, and ghostly admonitions, which he
would preach under an Oak in the fields, when he had congregated his
Parishioners together. When women lay in childe-bed, he was their daily
comfortable visitant, and would man them from their houses, when they had any
occasion to walk abroad: carrying always a bottle of holy water about him,
wherewith he would sprinkle them by the way, pieces of hallowed Candles, and
Chrisome Cakes, which pleased women extraordinarily, and all the Country
affoorded not such another frolic Priest, as this our nimble and active sweet
Sir Simon.

Among many other of his feminine Parishioners, all of them being hansome and
comely Women: yet there was one more pleasing in his wanton eye, then any of
the rest, named Monna Belcolore, and wife to a plain mecanicke man, called
Bentiuegna del Mazzo And, to speak uprightly, few Country Villages yielded a
Woman, more fresh and lovely of complexion, although not admirable for beauty,
yet sweet Sir Simon thought her a Saint, and feign would be offering at her
shrine. Diverse pretty pleasing qualities she had, as sounding the Cymball,
playing artificially on the Timbrill, and singing thereto as it had been a
Nightingale, dancing also so dexteriously, as happy was the man that could
dance in her company. All which so enflamed sweet Sir Simon, that he lost his
wonted sprightly behavior, walked sullen, sad and melancholy, as if he had
melted all his metal, because he could hardly have a sight of her. But on
the Sunday morning, when he heard or knew that she was in the Church, he
would tickle it with a Kyrie and a Sanctus, even as if he contended to show
his singular skill in singing, when it had been as good to hear an Ass bray.
Whereas on the contrary, when she came not to Church, Mass, and all else were
quickly shaken up, as if his devotion waited only on her presence. Yet he
was so cunning in the carriage of his amorous business, both for her credit
and his own; as Bentiuegna her husband could not perceive it, or any neighbor
so much as suspect it.

But, to compass more familiar acquaintance with Belcolore, he sent her
sundry gifts and presents, day by day, as sometime a bunch of dainty green
Garlic, whereof he had plenty growing in his Garden, which he manured with
his own hands, and better then all the country yielded; otherwhiles a small
basket of Pease or Beans, and Onyons or Scallions, as the season served. But
when he could come in place where she was; then he darted amourous wincks and
glances at her, withbecks, nods, and blushes, Loves private Ambassadors, which
she (being but countrey-bred) seeming by outward appearance, not to see,
retorted disdainefully, and forthwith would absent her self, so that sweet Sir
Simon labored still in vain, and could not compass what he coueted.

It came to pass within a while after, that on a time, (about high noone) Sir
Simon being walking abroad, chanced to meet with Bentiuegna, driving an Ass
before him, laden with diverse commodities, and demanding of him, whither he
went, Bentiuegna, thus answered. In troth Sir Simon, I am going to the City,
about some especial business of mine own, and I carry these things to
Signior Bonacorci da Ginestreto, because he should help me before the Judge,
when I shall be called in question concerning my patrimony. Sir Simon looking
merrily on him, said. Thou do well Bentiuegna, to make a friend sure before
thou need him; go, take my blessing with thee, and return again with good
success. But if thou meet with Laguccio, or Naldino, for yet not to tell them,
that they must bring me my shooe-tyes before Sunday. Bentiuegna said, he would
discharge his errand, and so parted from him, driving his Ass on toward
Florence.

Now began Sir Simon to shrug, and scratch his head, thinking this to be a fit
convenient time, for him to go visit Belcolore, and to make trial of his
fortune: wherefore, setting aside all other business, he stayed no where till
he came to the house, whereinto being entered, he said: All happiness be to
them that dwell here. Belcolore being then above in the Chamber, when she
heard his tongue, replied. Sweet Sir Simon! you are heartely welcome, whether
are you walking, if the question may be demanded? Believe me dainty Ducke,
answered Sir Simon, I am come to sit a while with thee, because I met thy
Husband going to the City. By this time, Belcolore was descended down the
stayres, and having once again given welcome to Sir Simon, she sat down by
him, cleansing of Colewort seeds from such other course chafe, which her
Husband had prepared before his departure.

Sir Simon hugging her in his arms, and fetching a vehement sigh, said. My
Belcolore, how long shall I pine and languish for thy love? How now Sir Simon?
answered she, is this behavior fitting for an holy man? Holy-men Belcolore, (
quoth Sir Simon) are made of the same matter as others be, they have the same
affections, and therefore subject to their infirmities. Santa Maria, answered,
Belcolore, Dare Priests do such things as you talk of? Yes Belcolore ( quoth
he) and much better then other men can, because they are made for the very best
business, in which regard they are restrained from marriage True ( quoth
Belcolore) but much more from meddling with other men's wives. Touch not that
Text Belcolore, replied Sir Simon, it is somewhat above your capacity: talk of
that I come for, namely thy love, my Ducke, and my Dove, Sir Simon is thine, I
pray thee be mine.

Belcolore observing his smirking behavior, his proper person, pretty talk,
and queint insinuating; felt a motion to female frailty, which yet she would
withstand so long as she could, and not be ouer-hasty in her yielding. Sir
Simon promises her a new pair of shoes, garters, ribbands, girdles, or what
else she would request. Sir Simon ( quoth she) all these things which you talk
of, are fit for women: but if your love to me be such as you make choice of,
fulfill what I will motion to you, and then (perhaps) I shall tell you more.
Sir Simons heat made him hasty to promise whatsoever she would desire;
whereupon, thus she replied. On Saturday, said she, I must go to Florence, to
carry home such yarne as was sent me to spinne, and to amend my spinning
wheel: if you will lend me ten Florines, wherewith I know you are always
furnished, I shall redeem from the Usurer my best peticote, and my wedding
gown (both well near lost for lack of repaiment) without which I cannot
beseene at Church, or in any other good place else, and then afterward other
matters may be accomplished.

Alas sweet Belcolore answered Sir Simon, I never bear any such sum about me,
for men of our profession, do seldom carry any money at all: but believe me
on my word, before Saturday come, I will not fail to bring them hither. Oh Sir
( quoth Belcolore) you men are quick promisers, but slow performers. Do you
think to use me, as poor Billezza was, who trusted to as fair words, and
found her self deceived? Now Sir Simon, her example in being made scandal to
the world, is a sufficient warning for me: if you be not so provided, go and
make use of your friend, for I am not otherwise to be moved. Nay Belcolore
(quoth he) I hope you will not serve me so, but my word shall be of better
worth with you. Consider the conueniency of time, we being so privately here
alone: whereas at my returning hither again, some hinderance may thwart me,
and the like opportunity be never obtained. Sir, Sir, ( said she) you have
heard my resolution; if you will fetch the Florines, do; otherwise, walk
about your business, for I am a woman of my word.

Sir Simon perceiving, that she would not trust him upon bare words, nor any
thing was to be done, without Saluum me fac, whereas his meaning was Sine
custodia; thus answered. Well Belcolore, seeing you dare not credit my bringing
the ten Florines, according to my promised day: I will leave you a good
pawn, my very best Cloak, lyned quite thorough with rich Silk, and made up
in the choysest manner.

Belcolore looking on the Cloak, said. How much may this Cloak be worth? How
much? quoth Sir Simon, upon my word Belcolore, it is of a right fine Flanders
Serdge, and not above eight days since, I bought it thus (ready made) of Lotto
the Fripperer, and paid for it six and twenty Florines, a pledge then
sufficient for your te^. Is it possible, said she, that it should cost so
much? Well, Sir Simon, deliver it me first, I will lay it up safe for you
against Saturday, when of you fetch it not; I will redeem ^ine own things
with it, and leave you to release it yourselfe.

The Cloak is laid up by Belcolore, and Sir Simon so forward in his affection;
that (in brief) he enjoyed what he came for; and departed afterward in his
light tripping Cassocke, but yet through by La^ies, and no much frequented
places, smelling on a Nosegay, as if he had been at some wedding in the
Country, and went thus lightly without his Cloak, for his better ease. As
commonly after actions of evil, Repentance knocks at the door of
Conscience, and urges a guilty remembrance, with some sense of sorrow: so was
it now with sweet Sir Simon, who suruaying over all his vailes of offering
Candles, the validity of his yearly benefits, and all coming nothing near
the sum of (scarce half) six and twenty Florines; he began to repent his
deed of darkness, although it was acted in the daytime, and considered with
himself, by what honest (yet unsuspected means) he might recover his Cloak
again, before it went to the Broaker, in redemption of Belcolores pawned
apparel, and yet to send her no Florines neither.

Having a cunning reaching wit, especially in matters for his own advantage,
and pretending to have a dinner at his lodging, for a few of some invited
friends: he made use of a neighbors Boy, sending him to the house of
Belcolore, with request of lending him her Stone Mortar, to make Greene-sawce
in for his guests, because he had meat required such sauce. Belcolore
suspecting no treachery, sent him the Stone Mortar with the Pestell, and about
dinner time, when he knew Bentiuegna to be at home with his wife, by a spy
which was set for the purpose; he called the Clearke (usually attending on
him) and said. Take this Mortar and Pestell, bear them home to Belcolore, and
tell her: Sir Simon sends them home with thanks, they having sufficiently
served his turn, and desire her likewise, to send me my Cloak, which the Boy
left as a pledge for better remembrance, and because she would not lend it
without a pawn.

The Clearke coming to the house of Belcolore, found her sitting at dinner
with her Husband, and delivering her the Pestell and Mortar, performed the rest
of Sir Simons message. Belcolore hearing the Cloak demanded, stepped up to make
answer: But Bentiuegna, seeming (by his looks) to be much offended, roughly
replied. Why how now wife? Is not Sir Simon our especial friend, and cannot he
be pleasured without a pawn? I protest upon my word, I could find in my heart
to smite thee for it. Rise quickly thou were best, and send him back his
Cloak; with this warning hereafter, that whatsoever he will have, be it your
poor Ass, or any thing else being ours, let him have it: and tell him (Master
Clearke) he may command it. Belcolore rose grumbling from the Table, and
fetching the Cloak forth of the Chest, which stood near at hand in the same
room; she delivered it to the Clearke, saying. Tell Sir Simon from me, and
boldly say you heard me speak it: that I make a vow to my self, he shall
never make use of my Mortar hereafter, to beat any more of his sauciness in,
let my Husband say whatsoever he will, I speak the word, and will perform it.

Away went the Clearke home with the Cloak, and told Sir Simon what she had
said, whereto he replied. If I must make use of her Mortar no more; I will not
trust her with the keeping of my Cloak, for fear it go to gage indeed.

Bentiuegna was a little displeased at his wives words, because he thought she
spoke but in jest; albeit Belcolore was so angry with Sir Simon, that she would
not speak to him till vintage time following. But then Sir Simon, what by
sharp threatenings, of her soul to be in danger of hell fire, continuing so
long in hatred of a holy Priest, which words did not a little terrify her;
besides daily presents to her, of sweet new Wines, roasted Chesse-nuts, Figs
and Almonds: all unkindness became converted to former familiarity; the
garments were redeemed: he gave her Sonnets which she would sweetly sing to her
Cimbale, and further friendship increased between her and sweet Sir Simon.

Calandrino, Bruno, and Buffalmaco, all of them being Painters by profession,
traveled to the Plain of Mugnone, to find the preciou^ Stone called
Helitropium. Calandrino persuaded himself to have found it; returned home to
his house heavily laden with stones. His Wife rebuking him for his absence,
he grows into anger, and shrewdly beats her. Afterward, when the case is
debated among his other friends Bruno and Buffalmaco, all is found to be mere
foolery.

The Third Novel.
Justly reprehending, the simplicity of such men, as are too much addicted to
credulity, and will give credit to every thing they hear.



PAmphilus having ended his Novel, whereat the Ladies laughed exceedingly, so
that very hardly they could give over: The Queen gave charge to Madame Eliza,
that she should next succeed in order; when, being scarcely able to refrain
from smyling, thus she began.

I know not (Gracious Ladies) whether I can move you to at hearty laughter,
with a brief Novel of mine own, as Pamphilus lately did with his: yet I dare
assure you, that it is both true and pleasant, and I will relate it in the best
manner I can.

In our own City, which evermore has contained all sorts of people, not long
since there dwelt, a Painter, named Calandrino, a simple man; yet as much
adicted to matters of nouelty, as any man whatsoever could be. The most part of
his time, he spent in the company of two other Painters, the one called Bruno,
and the other Buffalmaco, men of very recreatiue spirits, and of indifferent
good capacity, often resorting to the said Calandrino, because they took
delight in his honest simplicity, and pleasant order of behavior. At the same
time likewise, there dwelt in Florence, a young Gentleman of singular
disposition, to every generous and witty conceit, as the world did not yield a
more pleasant companion, he being named Maso del Saggio, who having heard
somewhat of Calandrinos silliness: determined to jest with him in merry manner,
and to suggest his longing humors after Novelties, with some conceit of
extraordinary nature.

He happening (on a day) to meet him in the Church of Saint John, and seeing
him seriously busied, in beholding the rare pictures, and the curious carved
Tabernacle, which (not long before) was placed on the high Altar in the said
Church: considered with himself, that he had now fit place and opportunity, to
effect what he had long time desired. And having imparted his mind to a very
intimate friend, how he intended to deal with simple Calandrino: they went
both very near him, where he sat all alone, and making show as if they saw
him not; began to consult between themselves, concerning the rare properties of
precious stones; whereof Maso discoursed as exactly, as he had been a most
skillful Lapidarie; to which conference of theirs, Calandrino lent an attentive
ear, in regard it was matter of singular rarity.

Soon after, Calandrino started up, and perceiving by their loud speaking,
that they talked of nothing which required secret Counsel: he went into their
company (the only thing which Maso desired) and holding on still the former
Argument; Calandrino would needs request to know, in what place these precious
stones were to be found, which had such excellent virtues in them? Maso made
answer, that the most of them were to be had in Berlinzona, near to the City
of Bascha, which was in the Territory of a Country, called Bengodi, where the
Vines were bound about with S^^^cidges, a Goose was sold for a penny, and the
Goslings freely given in to boot. There was also an high mountain, wholly
made of Parmezane, grated Cheese, whereon dwelt people, who did nothing else
but make Mocharones and Rauiuolies, boiling them with broth of Capons, and
afterward hurled them all about, to whosoever can or will catch them. Near to
this mountain runs a fair River, the whole stream being pure white
Bastard, none such was ever sold for any money, and without one drop of water
in it.

Now trust me Sir, ( said Calandrino) that is an excellent Country to dwell
in: but I pray you tell me Sir, what do they with the Capons after they have
boyld them? The Baschanes (quoth Maso) eat them all. Have you Sir, said
Calandrino, at any time been in that Country? How? answered Maso, do you
demand if I have been there? Yes man, above a thousand times, at the least.
How far Sir, I pray you ( quoth Calandrino) is that worthy Country, from
this our City? In troth, replied Maso, the miles are hardly to be numbered, for
the most part of them, we travel when we are nightly in our beds, and if
a man dream right; he may be there upon a sudden.

Surely Sir, said Calandrino, it is further hence, then to Abruzzi? Yes
questionless, replied Maso; but, to a vvilling mind, no travel seems
tedious.

Calandrino well noting, that Maso delivered all these speeches, with a
steadfast countenance, no sign of smyling, or any gesture to urge the least
mislike: he gave such credit to them, as to any matter of apparent and manifest
truth, and upon this assured confidence, he said.

Believe me Sir, the journey is ouer-farre for me to undertake, but if it
were nearer; I could afford to go in your Company; only to see how they
make these Macherones, and to fill my belly with them.

But now we are in talk Sir, I pray you pardon me to ask, whether any such
precious stones, as you spoke off, are to be found in that Country, or no? Yes
indeed, replied Maso, there are two kinds of them to be found in those
Territories, both being of very great virtue. One kind, are gritty stones, of
Settignano, and of Montisca, by virtue of which places, when any Millstones or
Grind-stones are to be made, they knede the sand as they use to do meal, and
so make them of what bigness they please. In which respect, they have a common
saying there: that Nature makes common stones, but Montisca Millstones. Such
plenty are there of these Millstones, so slenderly here esteemed among us, as
Emeralds are with them, whereof they have whole mountains, far greater then
our Montemorello, which shine most gloriously at midnight. And how meanly
soever we account of their Millstones; yet there they drill them, and enchase
them in Rings, which afterward they send to the great Soldane, and have
whatsoever they will demand for them.

The other kind is a most precious Stone indeed, which our best Lapidaries
call the Helitropium, the virtue whereof is so admirable; as whosoever bears
it about him, so long as he keeps it, it is impossible for any eye to
discern him, because he walks merely invisible. O Lord Sir ( quoth
Calandrino) those stones are of rare virtue indeed: but where else may a man
find that Helitropium? Whereto Maso thus answered: That Country only does
not contain the Helitropium; for they be many times found upon our plain of
Mugnone. Of what bigness Sir ( quoth Calandrino) is the Stone, and what
color? The Helitropium, answered Maso, is not always of one quality, because
some are big, and others less; but all are of one color, namely black.

Calandrino committing all these things to respective memory, and pretending to
be called thence by some other especial affairs; departed from Maso,
concluding resoluedly with himself, to find this precious stone, if possibly
he could: yet intending to do nothing, until he had acquainted Bruno and
Buffalmaco therewith, whom he loved dearly: he went in all have to seek them;
because, (without any longer trifling the time) they three might be the first
men, that should find out this precious stone, spending almost the whole
morning, before they were all three met together. For they were painting at the
Monastery of the Sisters of Faenza, where they had very serious employment, and
followed their business diligently: where having found them, and saluting them
in such kind manner, as continually he used to do, thus he began.

Loving friends, if you were pleased to follow mine advise, we three will
quickly be the richest men in Florence; because, by information from a
Gentleman (well deserving to be credited) on the Plain of Mugnone: there is a
precious stone to be found, which whosoever carries it about him, walks
invisible, and is not to be seen by any one. Let us three be the first men to
go and find it, before any other hear thereof, and go about it, and assure
our selves that we shall find it, for I know it (by description) so soon as I
see it. And when we have it, who can hinder us from bearing it about us. Then
will we go to the Tables of our Bankers, or money Changers, which we see daily
charged with plenty of gold and silver, where we may take so much as we list,
for they (nor any) are able to descrie us. So, (in short time) shall we all be
wealthy, never needing to drudge any more, or paint muddy walls, as hitherto
we have done; and, as many of our poor profession are forced to do.

Bruno and Buffalmaco hearing this, began to smile, and looking merrily each on
other, they seemed to wonder thereat, and greatly commended the counsel of
Calandrino. Buffalmaco demanding how the stone was named. Now it fortuned,
that Calandrino (who had but a gross and blockish memory) had quite forgot the
name of the stone, and therefore said. What need have we of the name, when we
know, and are assured of the stones virtue? Let us make no more ado, but
(setting aside all other business) go seek where it is to be found. Well my
friend (answered Bruno) you say we may find it, but how, and by what means?

There are two sorts of them ( quoth Calandrino) some big, others smaller,
but all carry a black color: therefore (in mine opinion) let us gather all
such stones as are black, so shall we be sure to find it among them, without
any further loss of time.

Buffalmaco and Bruno, liked and allowed the counsel of Calandrino, which when
they had (by several commendations) given him assurance of, Bruno said. I do
not think it a convenient time now, for us to go about so weighty a business:
for the Sun is yet in the highest degree, and strikes such a heat on the
plain of Mugnone, as all the stones are extremely dried, and the very blackest
will now seem whitest. But in the morning, after the dew is fallen, and before
the Sun shines forth, every stone retains his true color. Moreover, there
be many Laborers now vvorking on the plain, about such business as they are
severally assigned, who seeing us in so serious a search: may imagine what we
seek for, and partake with us in the same inquisition, by which means they
may chance to speed before us, and so we may lose both our trot and amble.
Wherefore, by my consent, if your opinion iumpe with mine, this is an
enterprise only to be performed in an early morning, when the black stones
are to be distinguished from the white, and a Festival day were the best of all
other, for then there will be none to discover us.

Buffalmaco applauded the advice of Bruno, and Calandrino did no less,
concluding all together; that Sunday morning (next ensuing) should be the time,
and then they all three would go seek the Stone. But Calandrino was very
earnest with them, that they should not reveal it to any living body, because
it was told him as an especial secret: disclosing further to them, what he
had heard concerning the Country of Bengodi, maintaining (with solemn oaths
and protestations) that every part thereof was true. Upon this agreement, they
parted from Calandrino, who hardly enjoyed any rest at all, either by night or
day, so greedy he was to be possessed of the stone. On the Sunday morning,
he called up his Companions before break of day, and going forth at S. Galls
Port, they stayed not, till they came to the plain of Mugnone, where they
searched all about to find this strange stone.

Calandrino went stealing before the other two, and verily persuaded himself,
that he was borne to find the Helitropium, and looking on every side about
him, he rejected all other Stones but the black, whereof first he filled his
bosom, and afterward, both his Pockets. Then he took off his large painting
Apron, which he fastened with his girdle in the manner of a sack, and that he
filled full of stones likewise. Yet not so satisfied, he spread abroad his
Cloak, which being also full of stones, he bound it up carefully, for fear
of loosing the very least of them. All which Buffalmaca and Bruno well
observing (the day growing on, and hardly they could reach home by dinner time)
according as merrily they had concluded, and pretending not to see Calandrino,
albeit he was not far from them: What is become of Calandrino? said
Buffalmaco. Bruno gazing strangely every where about him, as if he were
desirous to find him, replied. I saw him not long since, for then he was hard
by before us; questionless, he has given us the slip, is privily gone home
to dinner, and making stark fools of us, has left us to pick up black
stones, upon the parching plains of Mugnone. Well (quoth Buffalmaco) this is
but the trick of an hollow-hearted friend, and not such as he protested
himself to be, to us. Could any but we have bin so sottish, to credit his
frivolous persuasions, hoping to find any stones of such virtue, and here on
the fruitless plains of Mugnone? No, no, none but we would have believed him.

Calandrino (who was close by them) hearing these words, and seeing the whole
manner of their wondering behavior: became constantly persuaded, that he had
not only found the precious stone; but also had some store of them about him,
by reason he was so near to them, and yet they could not see him, therefore he
walked before them. Now was his joy beyond all compass of expression, and
being exceedingly proud of so happy an adventure: did not mean to speak one
word to them, but (heavily laden as he was) to steal home fair and softly
before them, which indeed he did, leaving them to follow after, if they would.
Bruno perceiving his intent, said to Buffalmaco: What remains now for us to
do? Why should not we go home, as well as he? And reason too, replied Bruno,
It is in vain to tarry any longer here: but I solemnly protest, Calandrino
shall no more make an Ass of me: and were I now as near him, as not long
since I was, I would give him such a remembrance on the heel with this Flint
stone, as should stick by him this month, to teach him a lesson for abusing
his friends.

He threw the stone, and hit him shrewdly on the heel therewith; but all was
one to Calandrino, whatsoever they said, or did, as thus they still followed
after him. And although the blow of the stone was painful to him; yet he
mended his pace so well as he was able, in regard of being ouer-loaden with
stones, and gave them not one word all the way, because he took himself to
be invisible, and utterly unseen of them. Buffalmaco taking up another
Flint-stone, which was indifferent heavy and sharp, said to Bruno. See thou
this Flint? Casting it from him, he smote Calandrino just in the back
therewith, saying. Oh that Calandrino had bin so near, as I might have hit him
on the back with the stone. And thus all the way on the plain of Mugnone,
they did nothing else but pelt him with stones, even so far as the Port of S.
Gall, where they threw down what other stones they had gathered, meaning not
to molest him any more, because they had done enough already.

There they stepped before him unto the Port, and acquainted the Warders with the
whole matter, who laughing heartily at the jest, the better to uphold it;
would seem not to see Calandrino in his passage by them, but suffered him to
go on, sore wearied with his burden, and sweating extremely. Without resting
himself in any place, he came home to his house, which was near to the corner
of the Milles, Fortune being so favorable to him in the course of this
mockery, that as he passed along the Rivers side, and afterward through part of
the City; he was neither met nor seen by any, in regard they were all in their
houses at dinner.

Calandrino, every minute ready to sink under his weighty burden, entered
into his own house, where (by great ill luck) his wife, being a comely and
very honest woman, and named Monna Trista, was standing aloft on the stayres
head. She being somewhat angry for his so long absence, and seeing him come in
grunting and groaning, frowningly said. I thought that the devil would never
let thee come home, all the whole City have dined, and yet we must remain
without our dinner, When Calandrino heard this, and perceived that he was not
invisible to his Wife: full of rage and wroth, he began to rail, saying. Ah
thou wicked Woman, where art thou? Thou have utterly undone me: but (as I live)
I will pay thee soundly for it. Up the stairs he ascended into a small
Parlour, where when he had spread all his burden of stones on the floor: he
ran to his wife, catching her by the h^^re of the head, and throwing her at his
feet; giving her so many spurns and cruel blows, as she was not able to
move either arms or legs, notwithstanding all her tears, and humble
submission.

Now Buffalmaco and Bruno, after they had spent an indifferent while, with the
Warders at the Port in laughter, in a fair and gentle pace, they followed
Calandrino home to his house, and being come to the door, they heard the harsh
bickering between him and his Wife, and seeming as if they were but newly
arrived, they called out alowd to him. Calandrino being in a sweat, st^^ping
and rauing still at his Wife: looking forth of the window, entreated them to
ascend up to him, which they did, counter^etting grievous displeasure against
him. Being come into the room, which they saw all covered over with stones,
his Wife sitting in a corner, all the hair (well-neere) torn off her head,
her face broken and blee^ing, and all her body cruelly beaten; on the other
side, Calandrino standing unbraced and vngirded, struggling and wallowing, like
a (...) quite our of breath: after a little pausing, Bruno th^^ spoke.

Why how now Calandrino? What may the m^^^ing of this matter be? What, art thou
preparing for building, that thou have provided such plenty of stones? How
sits thy poor wife? How have thou misvsed her? Are these the behauiours of
a wise or honest man? Calandrino, utterly ouer-spent with travail, and
carrying such an huge burden of stones, as also the toylesome beating of his
Wife, (but much more impatient and offended, for that high good Fortune, which
he imagined to have lost:) could not collect his spirits together, to answer
them one ready word, wherefore he sat fretting like a mad man. Whereupon,
Buffalmaco thus began to him. Calandrino, if thou be angry with any other, yet
thou should not have made such a mockery of us, as thou have done: in
leaving us (like a couple of coxcombes) to the plain of Mugnone, whether thou
leddest us with thee, to seek a precious stone called Helitropium. And could
thou steal home, never bidding us so much as farewell? How can we but take it
in very evil part, that thou should so abuse two honest neighbors? Well,
assure thy self, this is the last time that ever thou shall serve us so.

Calandrino ( by this time) being somewhat better come to himself, with an
humble protestation of courtesy, returned them this answer. Alas my good
frionds, be not you offended, the case is far otherwise then you immagine.
Poor unfortunate man that I am, I found the rare precious stone that you
speak of: and mark me well, if I do not tell you the truth of all. When you
asked one another (the first time) what was become of me; I was hard by you: at
the most, within the distance of two yards length; and perceiving that you saw
me not, (being still so near, and always before you:) I w^^t on, smiling to
my self, to hear you brabble and rage against me.

So, proceeding on in his discourse, he recounted every accident as it happened,
both what they had said and did unto him, concerning the several blows, with
the two Flint-stones, the one hurting him grievously in the heel, and the
other paining him as extremely in the back, with their speeches used then, and
his laughter, notwithstanding he felt the harm of them both, yet being proud
that he did so inuisibly beguile them. Nay more ( quoth he) I cannot forbear
to tell you, that when I passed through the Port, I saw you standing with the
Warders; yet, by virtue of that excellent Stone, undiscovered of you all.
Beside, going along the streets, I met many of my Gossips, friends, and
familiar acquaintance, such as used day lie to converse with me, and drinking
together in every Tauern: yet not one of them spoke to me, neither used any
courtesy or salutation; which (indeed) I did the more freely forgive them,
because they were not able to see me.

In the end of all, when I was come home into mine own house, this devilish
and accursed Woman, being aloft upon my stayres head, by much misfortune
chanced to see me; in regard (as it is not unknown to you) that women cause
all things to lose their virtue. In which respect, I that could have stild my
self the only happy man in Florence, am now made most miserable. And
therefore did I justly beat her, so long as she was able to stand against me,
and I know no reason to the contrary, why I should not yet tear her in a
thousand pieces* for I may well curse the day of our marriage, to hinder and
bereave me of such an invisible blessedness.

Buffalmaco and Bruno hearing this, made show of very much meruailing thereat,
and many times maintained what Calandrino had said; being well near ready to
burst with laughter; considering, how co^fidently he stood upon it, that he had
found the wonderful stone, and lost it by his wives speaking only to him. But
when they saw him rise in fury once more, with intent to beat her again: then
they stepped between them; affirming, That the woman had no way offended in this
case, but rather he himself: who knowing that women cause all things to lose
their virtue, had not therefore expressly commanded her, not to be seen in his
presence all that day, until he had made full proof of the stones virtue. And
questionles, the consideration of a matter so available and important, was
quite taken from him, because such an especial happiness, should not belong
to him only; but (in part) to his friends, whom he had acquainted therewith,
drew them to the plain with him in company, where they took as much pains
in search of the stone, as possibly he did, or could; and yet (dishonestly) he
would deceive them, and bear it away couetously, for his own private benefit.

After many other, as wise and wholesome persuasions, which he constantly
credited, because they spoke them, they reconciled him to his wife, and she to
him: but not without some difficulty in him; who falling into wonderful grief
and melancholy, for loss of such an admirable precious stone, was in danger to
have dyed, within less then a month after.

The Provost belonging to the Cathedral Church of Fiesola, fell in love with a
Gentlewoman, being a widow, and named Piccarda, who hated him as much as he
loved her. He imagining, that he lay with her: by the Gentlewomans Brethren,
and the Bishop under whom he served, was taken in bed with her Maid, an ugly,
soul, deformed Slut.

The Fourth Novel.
Wherein is declared, how love oftentimes is so powerful in aged men, and
drives them to such doting, that it redoundeth to their great disgrace and
punishment.

Lady Eliza having concluded her Novel, notwithout infinite commendations of
the whole company: the Queen turning her looks to Madame Aemillia, gave her
such an express sign, as she must needs follow next after Madame Eliza,
whereupon she began in this manner.

Virtuous Ladies, I very well remember (by diverse Nouels formerly related) that
sufficient has been said, concerning Priests and Religious persons, and all
other carrying shaven Crowns* in their luxurious appetites and desires. But
because no one can at any time say so much, as thereto no more may be added:
beside them already spoken of, I will tell you another concerning the Provost of
a Cathedral Church, who would needs (in despite of all the world) love a
Gentlewoman whether she would or no: and therefore, in due chastisement both
unto his age and folly, she gave him such entertainment as he justly deserved.

It is not unknown unto you all, that the City of Fieosola, the mountain
whereof we may very easily hither discern, has been (in times past) a very
great and most ancient City: although at this day it is well-neere all ruined:
yet nevertheless, it always was, and yet is a Bishops See, albeit not of the
wealthiest. In the same City, and no long while since, near unto the
Cathedral Church, there dwelt a Gentlewoman, being a Widow, and commonly
there styled by the name of Madame Piccarda, whose house and inheritance was
but small, wherewith yet she lived very contentedly (having no wandering eye,
or wanton desires) and no company but her two Brethren, Gentlemen of especial
honest and gracious disposition.

This Gentlewoman, being yet in the flourishing condition of her time, did
ordinarily resort to the Cathedral Church, in holy zeal, and religious
devotion; where the Provost of the place, became so enamored of her, as nothing
(but the sight of her) yielded him any contentment. Which fond affection of
his, was forwarded with such an audacious and bold carriage, as he dared to
acquaint her with his love, requiring her enterchange of affection, and the
like opinion of him, as he had of her. True it is, that he was very far
entered into years, but young and lusty in his own proud conceit, presuming
strangely beyond his capacity, and thinking as well of his ability, as the
youthfullest gallant in the World could do. Whereas (in very deed) his
person was utterly displeasing, his behavior immodest and scandalous, and his
usual Language, sauouring of such sensuality, as, very few or none cared for
his company. And if any Woman seemed respective of him, it was in regard of his
outside and profession, and more for fear, then the least affection, and
always as welcome to them, as the head-ake.

His fond and foolish carriage still continuing to this Gentlewoman; she being
wise and virtuously advised, spoke thus unto him. Holy Sir, if you love me
according as you protest, and manifest by your outward behavior: I am the more
to thank you for it, being bound in duty to love you likewise. But if your
Love have any harshe or unsavory taste, which mine is no way able to endure,
neither dare entertain in any kind what soever: you must and shall hold me
excused, because I am made of no such temper. You are my ghostly and spiritual
Father, an Holy Priest. Moreover, years have made you honorably aged; all
which several weighty considerations, ought to confirm you in continency and
chastity. Remember withal (good sir) that I am but a child to you in years,
and were I bent to any wanton appetites, you should justly correct me by
fatherly counsel, such as most beautifieth your sacred profession. Beside, I
am a Widow, and you are not ign^rant, how requisite a thing honesty is in
widows. Wherefore, pardon me (Holy Father:) for, in such manner as you make
the motion: I desire you not to love me, because I neither can or will at any
time so affect you.

The Prouoste gaining no other grace at this time, would not so give over for
this first repulse, but pursuing her still with unbeseeming importunity; many
private means he used to her by Letters, tokens, and insinuating ambassages;
yea, whenever she came to the Church, he never ceased his wearisome
solicitings. Whereat she growing greatly offended, and perceiving no likelihood
of his desisting; became so tired with his tedious suite, that she considered
with her self, how she might dispatch him as he deserved, because she saw no
other remedy. Yet she would not attempt any thing in this case, without
acquainting her Brethren first therewith. And having told them, how much she
was importuned by the Provost, and also what course she meant to take (wherein
they both counseled and encouraged her:) within a few days after, she went
to Church as she was wont to do; where so soon as the Provost espied her:
forthwith he came to her, and according to his continued course, he fell into
his amorous courting. She looking upon him with a smiling countenance, and
walking aside with him out of any hearing: after he had spent many impertinent
speeches, she (venting forth many a vehement sighe) at length returned him
this answer.

Reverend Father, I have often heard it said: That there is not any Fort or
Castle, how strongly munited soever it be; but by continual assayling, at
length (of necessity) it must and will be surprised. Which comparison, I may
full well allude to my self. For, you having so long time solicited me, one
while with affable language, then again with tokens and entisements, of such
prevailing power: as have broken the very barricado of my former deliberation,
and yielded me up as your prisoner, to be commanded at your pleasure, for
now I am only devoted yours.

Well may you (Gentle Ladies) imagine, that this answer was not a little
welcome to the Provost; who, shrugging with conceyte of joy, presently thus
replied. I thank you Madame Piccarda, and to tell you true, I held it almost
as a miracle, that you could stand upon such long resistance, considering, it
never so fortuned to me with any other. And I have many times said to my
self, that if women were made of silver, they hardly could be worth a penny,
because there can scarsely one be found of so good allay, as to endure the test
and essay. But let us break off this frivolous conference, and resolve upon a
conclusion; How, when and where we may safely meet together. Worthy Sir,
answered Piccard^, your self may appoint the time whenever you please,
because I have no Husband, to whom I should render any account of my absence,
or presence: but I am not provided of any place.

A pretty while the Prouoste stood musing, and at last said. A place Madame?
where can be more priuacie, then in your own house? Alas Sir ( quoth she) you
know that I have two Gentlemen my brethren, who continually are with me, and
other of their friends beside: My house also is not great, wherefore it is
impossible to be there, except you could be like a dumb man, without speaking
one word, or making the very least noise; beside, to remain in darkness, as
if you were blind, and who can be able to endure all these? And yet (without
these) there is no aduenturing, albeit they never come into my Chamber: but
their lodging is so close to mine, as there cannot any word be spoken, be it
never so low or in whispering manner, but they hear it very easily. Madame
said the Prouoste, for one or two nights, I can make hard shift. Why Sir (
quoth she) the matter only remains in you, for if you be silent and
suffering, as already you have heard, there is no fear at all of safty. Let me
alone Madame, replied the Prouoste, I will be governed by your directions:
but, in any case, let us begin this night. With all my heart, said she. So
appointing him how, and when he should come; he parted from her, and she
returned home to her house.

Here I am to tell you, that this Gentlewoman had a servant, in the nature of
an old maid, not endued with any well featured face, but instead thereof, she
had the vgliest and most countefeit countenance, as hardly could be seen a
worse. She had a wrie mouth, huge great lips, foul teeth, great and black,
a monstrous stinking breath, her eyes bleared, and always running, the
complexion of her face between green and yellow, as if she had not spent the
Summer season in the City, but in the parching Country under a hedge; and
beside all these excellent parts, she was crook backed, poult footed, and went
like a lame Mare in Fetters. Her name was Ciuta, but in regard of her flat
nose, lying as low as a Beagles, she was called Ciutazza. Now, notwithstanding
all this deformity in her, yet she had a singular opinion of her self, as
commonly all such foul Sl^ts have: in regard whereof, Madame Piccarda calling
her aside, Thus began.

Ciutazza, if thou will do for me one nights service, I shall bestow on thee a
fair new Smock. When Ciutazza heard her speak of a new Smock, instantly she
answered. Madame, if you please to bestow a new Smock on me, were it to run
through the fire for you, or any business of far greater danger, you only
have the power to command me, and I will do it. I will not ( said Piccarda)
urge thee to any dangerous action, but only to lodge in my bed this night with
a man, and give him courteous entertainment, who shall reward thee liberally
for it. But have an especial care that thou speak not one word, for fear
thou should be heard by my Brethren, who (as thou know) lodge so near by;
do this, and then demand thy Smock of me. Madame ( quoth Ciutazza) if it
were to lie with six men, rather then one; if you say the word, it shall be
done.

When night was come, the Prouoste also came according to appointment, even
when the two brethren were in their lodging, where they easily heard his
entrance, as Piccarda (being present with them) had informed them. In went the
Prouoste without any candle, or making the least noise to be heard, and being
in Piccardaes Chamber, went to bed: Ciutazza tarrying not long from him, but
(as her Mistress had instructed her) she went to bed likewise, not speaking
any word at all, and the Prouoste, imagining to have her there, whom he so
highly affected, fell to embracing and kissing Ciutazza, who was as forward in
the same manner to him, and there for a while I intend to leave them.

When Piccarda had performed this hot piece of business, she referred the
effecting of the remainder to her Brethren, in such sort as it was compacted
between them. Fair and softly went the two brethren forth of their Chamber,
and going to the Market place, Fortune was more favorable to them then they
could wish, in accomplishing the issue of their intent. For the heat being
somewhat tedious, the Lord Bishop was walking abroad very late, with purpose to
visit the Brethren at the Widows house, because he took great delight in
their company, as being good Scholars, and endued with other singular parts
beside. Meeting with them in the open Market place, he acquainted them with his
determination; whereof they were not a little joyful, it iumping so justly
with their intent.

Being come to the Widows house, they passed through a small nether Court,
where lights stood ready to welcome him thither; and entering into a goodly
Hall, there was store of good wine and banqueting, which the Bishop accepted
in very thankful manner: and courteous complement being ouerpassed, one of
the Brethren, thus spoke. My good Lord, seeing it has pleased you to honor
our poor widdowed Sisters house with your presence, for which we shall thank
you while we live: We would entreat one favor more of you, only but to see a
sight which we will show you. The Lord Bishop was well contented with the
motion: so the Brethren conducting him by the hand, brought him into their
Sisters Chamber, where the the Prouoste was in bed with Ciutazza, both soundly
sleeping, but enfolded in his arms, as wearied (belike) with their former
wantonning, and whereof his age had but little need.

The Courtaines being close drawn about the bed, although the season was
exceeding hot, they having lighted Torches in their hands; drew open the
Curtains, and showed the Bishop his Prouoste, close snugging between the
arms of Ciutazza. Upon a sudden the Prouoste awaked, and seeing so great a
light, as also so many people about him: shame and fear so daunted him, that
he shrunk down into the bed, and hid his head. But the Bishop being
displeased at a sight so unseemly, made him to discover his head again, to
see whom he was in bed withal. Now the poor Prouoste perceiving the
Gentlewomans deceit, and the proper hansome person so sweetly embracing him:
it made him so confounded with shame, as he had not the power to utter one
word: but having put on his clothes by the Bishops command, he sent him
(under sufficient guard) to his Palace, to suffer due chastisement for his
sin committed; and afterward he desired to know, by what means he became so
favored of Ciutazza, the whole History whereof, the two brethren related at
large to him.

When the Bishop had heard all the discourse, highly he commended the wisdom
of the Gentlewoman, and worthy assistance of her brethren, who contemning to
soil their hands in the blood of a Priest, rather sought to shame him as he
deserved. The Bishop enjoined him a penance of repentance for forty days
after, but love and disdain made him weep nine and forty. Moreover, it was a
long while after, before he durst be seen abroad. But when he came to walk
the streets, the Boys would point their fingers at him, saying. Behold the
Prouoste that lay with C^utazza: Which was such a wearisome life to him, that
he became (well near) distracted in his wits. In this manner the honest
Gentlewoman discharged her duty, and rid her self of the Prouosts
importunity: Ciutazza had a merry night of it, and a new Smock also for her
labor.

Three pleasant Companions, plaide a merry pranke with a Judge (belonging to
the Marquesate of Ancona) at Florence, at such time as he sat on the Bench,
and hearing criminal causes.

The Fifth Novel.
Giving admonition, that for the mannaging of public affairs, no other
persons are or ought to be appointed, but such as be honest, and meet to sit on
the seat of Authority.



NO sooner had Madam Aemillia finished her Novel, wherein, the excellent
wisdom of Piccarda, for so worthily punishing the luxurious old Prouoste, had
general commendations of the whole Assembly: but the Queen, looking on
Philostratus, said. I command you next to supply the place: whereto he made
answer, that he was both ready and willing, and then thus began. Honorable
Ladies, the merry Gentleman, so lately remembered by Madame Eliza, being named
Maso del Saggio; causes me to passover an intended Tale, which I had resolved
on when it came to my turn: to report another concerning him, and two men
more, his friendly Companions. Which although it may appear to you somewhat
unpleasing, in regard of a little gross and unmannerly behavior: yet it will
move merriment without any offense, and that is the maine reason why I relate
it.

It is not unknown to you, partly by intelligence from our reverend
predecessors, as also some understanding of your own, that many time have
resorted to our City of Florence, Potestates and Officers, belonging to the
Marquesate of Anconia; who commonly were men of low spirit, and their lives so
wretched and penurious, as they rather deserved to be termed Misers, then men.
And in regard of this their natural covetousness and misery, the Judges would
bring also in their company, such Scribes or Notaries, as being paralelde with
their Masters: they all seemed like Swains come from the Plough, or bred up in
some Cobblers quality, rather then Scholars, or Students of Law.

At one time (above all the rest) among other Potestates and Judges, there came
an especial man, as picked out of purpose, who was named Messer Niccolao da San
Lepidio, who (at the first beholding) looked rather like a Tinker, then any
Officer in authority. This hansome man (among the rest) was deputed to hear
criminal causes. And, as often it happens, that Citizens, although no
business inuiteth them to Judicial Courts, yet they still resort thither,
sometimes accidentally: So it fortuned, that Maso del Saggio, being one morning
in search of an especial friend, went to the Courthouse, and being there,
observed in what manner Messer Niccolao was seated; who looking like some
strange Foul, lately come forth of a far Country; he began to suruay him
the more seriously, even from the head to the foot, as we use to say.

And albeit he saw his Gown furred with Miniuer, as also the hood about his
neck, a Pen and Inkehorne hanging at his girdle, and one skirt of his
Garment longer then the other, with more misshapen sights about him, far
unfitting for a man of so civil profession: yet he spyed one error
extraordinary, the most notable (in his opinion) that ever he had seen before.
Namely, a paultry pair of Breeches, wickedly made, and worse worn, hanging
down so low as half his leg, even as he sat upon the Bench, yet cut so
sparingly of the Cloth, that they gaped wide open before, as a wheele-barrow
might have full entrance allowed it. This strange sight was so pleasing to him;
as leaving off further search of his friend, and scorning to have such a
spectacle alone by himself: he went upon another Inquisition; Namely, for two
other merry Lads like himself, the one being called Ribi, and the other
Matteuzza, men of the same mirth-full disposition as he was, and therefore the
fitter for his Company.

After he had met with them, these were his salutations: My honest Boys, if
ever you did me any kindness, declare it more effectually now, in accompanying
me to the Courthouse, where you shall behold such a singular spectacle, as (I
am sure) you never yet saw the like. Forthwith they went along altogether, and
being come to the Court house, he showed them the Judges hansome pair of
Breeches, hanging down in such base and beastly manner; that (being as yet
far off from the Bench) their hearts did ache with extremity of laughter. But
when they came near to the seat whereon Messer Niccolao sat, they plainly
perceived, that it was very eas^e to be crept under, and withal, that the
board whereon he set his feet, was rotten and broken, so that it was no
difficult matter, to reach it, and pull it down as a man pleased, and let him
fall bare Breecht to the ground. Cheer up your spirits (my hearts) quoth Maso,
and if your longing be like to mine; we will have yonder Breeches a good deal
lower, for I see how it may be easily done.

Laying their heads together, plotting and contriuing several ways, which
might be the likelyest to compass their intent: each of them had his peculiar
appointment, to undertake the business without failing, and it was to be
performed the next morning. At the hour assigned, they met there again, and
finding the Court well filled with people, the Plaintiffes and Defendants
earnestly pleading: Matteuzzo (before any body could descry him, was cunningly
crept under the Bench, and lay close by the board whereon the Judge placed his
feet. Then stepped in Maso on the right hand of Messer Niccolao, and took fast
hold on his Gown before; the like did Ribi on the left hand, in all respects
answerable to the other. Oh my Lord Judge (cried Maso out aloud) I humbly
entreat you for charities sake, before th^^ pilfering knave escape away from
hence; that I may have Justice against him, for stealing my drawing-ouer
stockeings, which he stoutly denies, yet mine own eyes beheld the deed, it
being now not above fifteen days since, when first I bought them for mine
own use.

Worthy Lord Judge (cried Ribi, on the other side) do not believe what he
says, for he is a paltry lying fellow, and because he knew I came hither to
make my complaint for a Male or Cloakebag which he stole from me: he urges
this occasion for a pair of drawing Stockeings, which he delivered me with his
own hands. If your Lordship will not credit me, I can produce as witnesses,
Trecco the Shoemaker, with Monna Grassa the Souse-seller, and he that sweepes
the Church of Santa Maria a Verzaia, who saw him when he came posting hither.
Maso haling and tugging the Judge by the sleeue, would not suffer him to hear
Ribi, but cried out still for Justice against him, as he did the like on the
contrary side.

During the time of this their clamourous contending, the Judge being very
willy willing to hear either party: Matteuzzo, upon a sign received from the
other, which was a word in Masoes pleading, laid hold on the broken board, as
also on the Judges low-hanging Breech, plucking at them both so strongly, that
they fell down immediately, the Breeches being only tied but with one Point
before. He hearing the boards breaking underneath him, and such maine pulling
at his Breeches; strove (as he sat) to make them fast before, but the Point
being broken, and Maso crying in his ear on the one side, as Ribi did the like
in the other; he was at his wits end to defend himself. My Lord (quoth Maso)
you may be ashamed that you do me not Justice, why will you not hear me,
but wholly lend your ear to mine Adversary? My Lord (said Ribi) never was
Libell preferred into this Court, of such a paltry trifling matter, and therefore
I must, and will have Justice.

By this time the Judge was dismounted from the Bench, and stood on the ground,
with his slouenly Breeches hanging about his heels: Matteuzzo being cunningly
stolen away, and undiscovered by any body. Ribi, thinking he had shamed the
Judge sufficiently, went away, protesting, that he would declare his cause in
the hearing of a wiser Judge. And Maso forbearing to tugge his Gown any
longer, in his departing, said. Fare you well Sir, you are not worthy to be a
Magistrate, if you have no more regard of your honor and honesty, but will put
off poor men's suites at your pleasure. So both went several ways, and soon
were gone out of public view.

The worshipful Judge Messer Niccolao stood all this while on the ground; and,
in presence of all the beholders, trussed up his Breeches, as if he were new
risen out of his bed: when better bethinking himself on the matters
indifference, he called for the two men, who contended for the drawing
stockings and the Cloakebag; but no one could tell what was become of them.
Whereupon, he rapt out a kind of Judges oath, saying: I will know whether it
be Law or no here in Florence, to make a Judge sit bare Breecht on the Bench
of Justice, and in the hearing of criminal Causes; whereat the chief
Potestate, and all the standers by laughed heartily.

Within few days after, he was informed by some of his especial Friends,
that this had never happened to him, but only to testify, how understanding
the Florentines are, in their ancient constitutions and customs, to embrace,
love and honor, honest discreet worthy Judges and Magistrates; Whereas on the
contrary, they as much condemn miserable knaves, fools, and dolts, who never
merit to have any better entertainment. Wherefore, it would be best for him, to
make no more enquiry after the parties; lest a worse inconvenience should
happen to him.

Bruno and Buffalmaco, did steal a young Brawne from Calandrino, and for his
recovery thereof, they used a kind of pretented coniuration, with Pills made
of Ginger and strong Malmesey. But instead of this application, they gave him
two Pills of a Dogs Dates, or Dowsets, confected in Alloes, which he
received each after the other; by means whereof they made him believe, that
he had robde himself. And for fear they should report this theft to his
wife; they made him to go buy another Brawne.

The Sixth Novel.
Wherein is declared, how easily a plain and simple man may be made a fool,
when he deals with crafty companions.



PHilostratus had no sooner concluded his Novel, and the whole Assembly
laughed heartily thereat: but the Queen gave command to Madame Philomena, that
she should follow next in order; whereupon thus she began. Worthy Ladies, as
Philostratus, by calling to memory the name of Maso del Saggio, has contented
you with another merry Novel concerning him: in the same manner must I entreat
you, to remember once again Calandrino and his subtle Consorts, by a pretty
tale which I mean to tell you; how, and in what manner they were revenged on
him, for going to seek the inusible Stone.

Needless were any fresh relation to you, what manner of people those three
men were, Calandrino, Bruno, and Buffalmaco, because already you have had
sufficient understanding of them. And therefore, as an induction to my
discourse, I must tell you, that Calandrino had a small Country House, in a
Village somewhat near to Florence, which came to him by the marriage of his
Wife. Among other Cattle and Poultry, which he kept there in store, he had a
young Boar ready fatted for Brawne, whereof yearly he used to kill one for
his own provision; and always in the month of December, he and his wife
resorted to their village house, to have a Brawne both killed and salted.

It came to pass at this time concerning my Tale, that the Woman being
somewhat crazie and sickly, by her Husbands unkind usage, whereof you heard so
lately; Calandrino went alone to the killing of his Boar, which coming to the
hearing of Bruno and Buffalmaco, and that the Woman could by no means be
there: to pass away the time a little in merriment, they went to a friendly
Companion of theirs, an honest iouiall Priest, dwelling not far off from
Calandrinoes Country house.

The same morning as the Boar was kilde, they all three went thither, and
Calandrino seeing them in the Priests company: bad them all heartily welcome;
and to acquaint them with his good Husbandry, he showed them his house, and
the Boar where it hung. They perceiving it to be fair and fat, knowing also,
that Calandrino intended to salt it for his own store, Bruno said unto him:
Thou art an Ass Calandrino, sell thy Brawne, and let us make merry with the
money: then let thy wife know no otherwise, but that it was stolen from thee,
by those thieves which continually haunt country houses, especially in such
scattering Villages.

Oh mine honest friends, answered Calandrino, your counsel is not to be
followed, neither is my wife so easy to be persuaded: this were the readiest
way to make your house a hell, and she to become the Master-Diuell: therefore
talk no further, for flatly I will not do it. Albeit they labored him very
earnestly, yet all proved not to any purpose: only he desired them to suppe
with him, but in so cold a manner, as they denied him, and parted thence from
him. As they walked on the way, Bruno said to Buffalmaco. Shall we three (this
night) rob him of his Brawne? Yea marry ( quoth Buffalmaco) how is it to be
done? I have ( said Bruno) already found the means to effect it, if he take
it not from the place where last we saw it. Let us do it then ( answered
Buffalmaco) why should we not do it? Sir Domine here and we, will make good
cheer with it among our selves. The nimble Priest was as forward as the best;
and the match being fully agreed on, Bruno thus spoke. My delicate Sir Domine,
Art and cunning must be our maine helps: for thou know Buffalmaco, what a
covetous wretch Calandrino is, glad and ready to drink always on other men's
expenses: let us go take him with us to the Tauern, where the Priest (for his
own honor and reputation) shall offer to make payment of the whole reckoning,
without receiving a farthing of his, whereof he will not be a little joyful,
so shall we bring to pass the rest of the business, because there is no body
in the house, but only himself: for he is best at ease without company.

As Bruno had propounded, so was it accordingly performed, and when Calandrino
perceived, that the Priest would suffer none to pay, but himself, he drank
the more freely; and when there was no need at all, took his Cups
courageously one after another. Two or three hours of the night were spent,
before they parted from the Tavern, Calandrino going directly home to his
house, and instantly to bed, without any other supper, imagining that he had
made fast his door, which (indeed) he left wide open: sleeping soundly*
without suspicion of any harm intended unto him. Buffalmaco and Bruno went and
supt with the Priest, and so soon as supper was ended, they took certain
Engines, for their better entering into Calandrinoes house, and so went on to
effect their purpose. Finding the door standing ready open, they entered in,
took the Brawne, carried it with them to the Priests house, and afterward went
all to bed.

When Calandrino had well slept after his Wine, he arose in the morning, and
being descended down the stairs; finding the street door wide open, he
looked for the Brawne, but it was gone. Enquiring of the neighbors dwelling
near about him, he could hear no tidings of his Brawne, but became the
wofullest man in the world, telling every one that his Brawne was stolen. Bruno
and Buffalmaco being risen in the morning, they went to visit Calandrino, to
hear how he took the loss of his Brawne: and he no sooner had a sight of
them, but he called them to him; and with the tears running down his cheeks,
said: Ah my dear friends, I am robde of my Brawne. Bruno stepping closely to
him, said in his ear: It is wonderful, that once in thy life time thou can
be wise. How? answered Calandrino, I speak to you in good earnest. Speak so
still in earnest (replied Bruno) and cry it out so loud as thou can, then let
who list believe it to be true.

Calandrino stamped and fretted exceedingly, saying: At I am a true man to God,
my Prince, and Country, I tell thee truly, that my Brawne is stolen. Say so
still I bid thee ( answered Bruno) and let all the world believe thee, if they
list to do so, for I will not. Would thou ( quoth Calandrino) have me damn
my self to the devil? I see thou do not credit what I say: but would I were
hanged by the neck, if it be not true, that my Brawne is stolen. How ca^ it
possible be, replied Bruno? Did not I see it in thy house yester night? Would
thou (...) me believe, that it is flowne away? Although it is not flowne away
( quoth Calandrino) yet I am certain, that it (...) stolen away for which I am
weary of my life, because I dare not go home to mine own house, in regard my
wife will never believe it; and yet if she should credit it, we are sure to
have no peace for a tweluemonths space.

Bruno, seeming as if he were more then half sorrowful, yet supporting still
his former jesting humor, said: Now trust me Calandrino, if it be so; they
that did it are much too blame. If it be so? answered Calandrino, Belike thou
would have me blaspheme Heaven, and all the Saints therein: I tell thee
once again Bruno, that this last night my Brawne was stolen. Be patient good
Calandrino, replied Buffalmaco, and if thy Brawne be stolen from thee, there
are means enough to get it again. Means enough to get it again? said Calandrino,
I would feign hear one likely one, and let all the rest go by. I am sure
Calandrino, answered Buffalmaco, thou art verily persuaded, that no Thief came
from India, to steal thy Brawne from thee: in which respect, it must needs
then be some of thy Neighbors: whom if thou could lovingly assemble
together, I know an experiment to be made with Bread and Cheese, whereby the
party that has it, will quickly be discovered.

I have heard (quoth Bruno) of such an experiment, and held it to be
infallible; but it extends only unto persons of Gentilitie, whereof there
are but few dwelling here about, and in the case of stealing a Brawne, it is
doubtful to inuit them, neither can there be any certainty of their coming.
I confess what you say, answered Buffalmaco, to be very true: but then in
this matter, so nerely concerning us to be done, and for a dear Friend, what
is your advice? I would have Pills made of Ginger, compounded with your best
and strongest Malmsey, then let the ordinary sort of people be invited (for
such only are most to be mistrusted) and they will not fail to come, because
they are utterly ignorant of our intention. Besides, the Pills may as well be
hallowed and consecrated, as bread and cheese on the like occasion. Indeed you
say true (replied Buffalmaco) but what is the opinion of Calandrino? Is he
willing to have this try all made, or no? Yes, by all means, answered
Calandrino, for gladly I would know who has stolen my Brawne; and your good
words have (more then half) comforted me already in this case.

Well then ( quoth Bruno) I will take the pains to go to Florence, to provide
all things necessary for this secret service, but I must be furnished with
money to effect it. Calandrino had some forty, shillings then about him, which
he delivered to Bruno, who presently went to Florence, to a friend of his an
Apothecarie, of whom he bought a pound of white Ginger, which he caused him to
make up in small Pills: and two other beside of a Dogges-dates or Dowsets,
confected all over with strong Aloes, yet well molded in Sugare, as all the
rest were: and because they should the more easily be known from the other,
they were spotted with Gold, in very formal and Physical manner. He bought
moreover, a big Flaggon of the best Malmesey, returning back with all these
things to Calandrino, and directing him in this order.

You must put some friend in trust, to inuit your Neighbors (especially such
as you suspect) to a breakfast in the morning: and because it is done as a
feast in kindness, they will come to you the more willingly. This night will I
and Buffalmaco take such order, that the Pills shall have the charge imposed
on them, and then we will bring them hither again in the morning: and I my
self (for your sake) will deliver them to your guests, and perform whatsoever
is to be said or done. On the next morning, a goodly company being assembled,
under a fair Elm before the Church; as well young Florentynes (who purposely
came to make themselves merry) as neighboring Husbandmen of the Village: Bruno
was to begin the service, with the Pills in a fair Cup, and Buffalmaco followed
him with another Cup, to deliver the wine out of the Flaggon, all the company
being set round, as in a circle; and Bruno with Buffalmaco being in the midst
of them, Bruno thus spoke.

Honest friends, it is fit that I should acquaint you with the occasion, why we
are thus met together, and in this place: because if any thing may seem
offensive to you; afterward you shall make no complaint of me. From Calandrino
(our loving friend here prefent) yesternight there was a new-kild fat Brawne
taken, but who has done the deed, as yet he knows not; and because none
other, but some one (or more) here among us, must needs offend in this case:
he, desiring to understand who they be, would have each man to receive one of
these Pills, and afterward to drink of this Wine; assuring you all, that
whosoever stole the Brawne hence, cannot be able to swallow the Pill: for it
will be so extreme bitter in his mouth, as it will enforce him to Coughe and
spet extraordinarily. In which respect, before such a notorious shame be
received, and in so goodly an assembly, as now are here present: it were much
better for him or them that have the Brawne, to confess it in private to this
honest Priest, and I will abstain from urging any such public proof.

Every one there present answered, that they were well contented both to eat
and drink, and let the shame fall where it deserved; whereupon, Bruno
appointing them how they should sit, and placing Calandrino as one among them:
he began his counterfeite exorcisme, giving each man a Pill, and Buffalmaca a
Cup of Wine after it. But when he came to Calandrino, he took one of them
which was made of the Dogs dates or Dowsets, and delivering it into his hand,
presently he put it into his mouth and chewed it. So soon as his tongue
tasted the bitter Aloes, he began to coughe and spet extremely, as being
utterly unable, to endure the bitterness and noisome smell. The other men that
had received the Pills, began to gaze one upon another, to see whose behavior
should discover him; and Bruno having not (as yet) delivered Pills to them all,
proceeded on still in his business, as seeming not to hear any coughing, till
one behind him, said. What means Calandrino by this spetting and coughing?

Bruno suddenly turning him about, and seeing Calandrino to cough and spet in
such sort, said to the rest. Be not too rash (honest Friends) in judging of
any man, some other matter (then the Pille) may procure this Coughing, wherefore
he shall receive another, the better to clear your belief concerning him. He
having put the second prepared Pill into his mouth, while Bruno went to serve
the rest of the Guests: if the first was exceeding bitter to his taste, this
other made it a great deal worse, for tears streamed forth of his eyes as
big as Cherry-stones, and champing and chewing the Pill, as hoping it would
overcome his coughing; he coughed and spette the more violently, and in grosser
manner then he did before, nor did they give him any wine to help it.

Buffalmaco, Bruno, and the whole company, perceiving how he continued still
his coughing and spetting, said all with one voice, That Calandrino was the
Thief to himself: and gave him many gross speeches beside, all departing
home unto their houses, very much displeased and angry with him. After they
were gone, none remained with him but the Priest, Bruno and Buffalmaco, who
thus spoke to Calandrino. I did ever think, that thou wast the thief thy
self, yet thou imputedst thy robbery to some other, for fear we should once
drink freely of thy purse, as thou have done many times of ours. Calandrino,
who had not yet ended his coughing and spetting, swear many bitter Oaths, that
his Brawne was stolen from him. Talk so long as thou will, quoth Buffalmaco,
thy knavery is both known and seen, and well thou may be ashamed of thy
self. Calandrino hearing this, grew desperately angry; and to incense him
more, Bruno thus pursued the matter.

Hear me Calandrino, for I speak to thee in honest earnest, there was a man
in the company, who did eat and drink here among thy neighbors, and plainly
told me, that thou keptst a young Lad here to do thee service, feeding him
with such victuals as thou could spare, by him thou did send away thy
Brawne, to one that bought it of thee for four Crowns, only to cosen thy
poor wife and us. Can thou not yet learn to leave thy mocking and scorning?
Thou have forgotte, how thou broughtst us to the plain of Mugnone, to seek
for black invisible stones: which having found, thou concealedst them to thy
self, stealing home inuisibly before us, and making us follow like fools
after thee.

Now likewise, by horrible lying Oaths, and perjured protestations, thou
would make us to believe, that the Brawne (which thou have cunningly sold for
ready money) was stolen from thee out of thy house, when thou art only the
Thief to thy self, as by that excellent rule of Art (which never fails)
has plainly, to thy shame, appeared. We being so well acquainted with thy
delusions, and knowing them perfectly; now do plainly tell thee, that we mean
not to be foold any more. Nor is it unknown to thee, what pains we have
taken, in making this singular piece of proof. Wherefore we inflict this
punishment on thee, that thou shall bestow on this honest Priest and us, two
couple of Capons, and a Flaggon of Wine, or else we will discover this knavery
of thine to thy Wife.

Calandrino perceiving, that all his protestations could win no credit with
them, who had now the Law remaining in their own hands, and purposed to deal
with him as they pleased: apparently saw, that sighing and sorrow did nothing
avail him. Moreover, to fall into his wives tempestuous storms of chiding,
would be worse to him then racking or torturing: he gladly therefore gave them
money, to buy the two couple of Capons and Wine, being heartily contented
likewise, that he was so well delivered from them. So the merry Priest, Bruno,
and Buffalmaco, having taken good order for salting the Brawne; closely carried
it with them to Florence, leaving Calandrino to complain of his loss, and
well requited, for mocking them with the invisible stones.

A young Gentleman being a Scholar, fell in love with a Lady, named Helena,
she being a Widow, and addicted in affection to another Gentleman. One whole
night in cold Winter, she caused the Scholar to expect her coming, in an
extreme frost and snow. In revenge whereof, by his imagined Art and skill, he
made her to stand naked on the top of a Tower, the space of a whole day, and
in the hot month of July, to be Sunburned and bitten with Waspes and Flies.

The Seventh Novel.
Serving as an admonition to all Ladies and Gentlewomen, not to mock or scorn
Gentlemen-Schollers, when they make means of love to them: Except they intend
to seek their own shame, by disgracing them.



GReatly did the Ladies commend Madame Philomenaes Novel, laughing heartily at
poor Calandrino, yet grieuing withal, that he should be so knauishly cheated,
not only of his Brawne, but two couple of Capons, and a Flaggon of Wine
beside. But the whole discourse being ended; the Queen commanded Madame
Pampinea, to follow next with her Novel, and presently she thus began. It
happens oftentimes (bright beauties) that mockery falls on him, that intended
the same unto another: And therefore I am of opinion, that there is very little
wisdom declared on him or her, who takes delight in mocking any person. I
must needs confess, that we have smiled at many mockeries and deceits, related
in those excellent Nouels, which we have already ^^ard: without any due revenge
returned, but only in this last of silly Calandrino. Wherefore, it is now my
determination, to urge a kind of compassionate apprehension, upon a very just
retribution, happening to a Gentlewoman of our City, because her scorn fell
deservedly upon her self, remaining mocked, and to the peril of her life. Let
me then assure you, that your diligent attention may redound to your benefit,
because if you keep your selves (henceforward) from being scorned by others:
you shall express the greater wisdom, and be the better warned by their
mishaps.

As yet there are not many years ouer-past, since there dwelt in Florence, a
young Lady, descended of Noble parentage, very beautiful, of sprightly courage,
and sufficiently abounding in the goods of Fortune, she being named Madame
Helena. Her delight was to live in the estate of Widdow-hood, desiring to
match her self no more in marriage, because she bare affection to a gallant
young Gentleman, whom she had made her private election of, and with whom
(having excluded all other amorous cares and cogitations) by means of her
Waiting Woman, she had diverse meetings, and kind conferences.

It chanced at the very same time, another young Gentleman of our City,
called Reniero, having long studied in the Schools at Paris, returned home to
Florence, not to make sale of his Learning and experience, as many do: but to
understand the reason of things, as also the causes and effects of them, which
is meruailously fitting for any Gentleman. Being greatly honored and esteemed
of every one, as well for his courteous carriage toward all in general, as
for his knowledge and excellent parts: he lived more like a familiar Citizen,
then in the nature of a Courtly Gentleman, albeit he was choisely respected in
either estate.

But, as oftentimes it comes to pass, that such as are endued with the best
judgment and understanding in natural occasions, are soonest caught and
entangled in the snares of Love: so fell it out with our Scholar Reniero, who
being invited to a solemn Feast, in company of other his especial Friends;
this Lady Helena, attyred in her black Garments (as Widows commonly use to
wear) was likewise there a Guest. His eye observing her beauty and gracious
demeanor, she seemed in his judgment, to be a Woman so complete and perfect,
as he had never seen her equal before: and therefore, he accounted the man
more then fortunate, that was worthy to embrace her in his arms. Continuing
this amorous observation of her from time to time, and knowing withal, that
rare and excellent things are not easily obtained, but by painful study,
labor, and endeavor: he resolved with himself constantly, to put in
practice all his best parts of industry, only to honor and please her, and
attaining to her contentation, it would be the means to win her love, and
compass thereby his hearts desire.

The young Lady, who fixed not her eyes on inferior subjects (but esteemed her
self above ordinary reach or capacity) could move them artificially, as
curious women well know how to do, looking on every side about her, yet not in
a gadding or gross manner for she was not ignorant in such darting glaunces,
as proceeded from an enflamed affection, which appearing plainly in Reniero;
with a pretty smile, she said to her self. I am not come hither this day in
vain; for, if my judgment fail me not, I think I have caught a Woodcocke by
the Bill. And lending him a cunning look or two, queintly carried with the
corner of her eye; she gave him a kind of persuading apprehension, that her
heart was the guide to her eye. And in this artificial Schoole-tricke of hers,
she carried therewith another consideration, to wit, that the more other eyes
fed themselves on her perfections, and were (well-neere) lost in them beyond
recovery: so much the greater reason had he to account his fortune beyond
comparison, that was the sole master of her heart, and had her love at his
command.

Our witty Scholar having set aside his Philosophical considerations, strove
how he might best understand her carriage toward him, and believing that she
beheld him with pleasing regards; he learned to know the house where she
dwelt, passing daily by the door diverse times, under color of some more
serious occasions: wherein the Lady very proudly gloried, in regard of the
reasons before alleged, and seemed to afford him looks of good liking.
Being led thus with a hopeful persuasion, he found the means to gain
acquaintance with her waiting woman, revealing to her his entire affection,
desiring her to work for him in such sort with her Lady, that his service
might be gracious in her acceptance. The Gentlewoman made him a very willing
promise, and immediately did his errand to her Lady; who heard her with no
small pride and squemishnesse, and breaking forth into a scornful laughter,
thus she spoke.

Ancilla ( for so she was named) do thou not observe, how this Scholar is
come to lose all the wit here, which he studied so long for in the University
of Paris? Let us make him our only Table argument, and seeing his folly
soareth so high, we will feed him with such a diet as he deserves. Yet when
thou speak next with him, tell him, that I affect him more then he can do
me; but it becomes me to be careful of mine honor, and to walk with an
untainted brow, as other Ladies and Gentlewomen do: which he is not to
mislike, if he be so wise as he makes show of, but rather will the more
commend me. Alas good Lady lack-wit, little did she understand (fair assembly)
how dangerous a case it is deal with Scholars.

At his next meeting with the waiting woman, she delivered the message, as her
Lady had command her, whereof poor Reniero was so joyful: that he pursued
his loue-suite the more earnestly, and began to write letters, send gifts, and
tokens, all which were still received, yet without any other answer to give
hope, but only in general, and thus she dallied with him a long while. In
the end, she discovered this matter to her secret chosen friend, who fell
suddenly sick of the head-ake, only through mere conceit of jealousy: which
she perceiving, and grieuing to be suspected without any cause, especially by
him whom she esteemed above all other; she intended to rid him quickly of
that Idle disease. And being more and more solicited by the Scholar, she sent
him word by her maid Ancilla, that (as yet) she could find no convenient
opportunity, to yield him such assurance, as he should not any way be
distrustful of her love.

But the Feast of Christmas was now near at hand, which afforded leisures much
more hopeful, then any other formerly passed. And therefore, the next night
after the first Feasting day, if he pleased to walk in the open Court of her
house: she would soon send for him, into a place much better beseeming, and
where they might freely converse together.

Now was our Scholar the only iocond man of the world, and failed not the
time assigned him, but went unto the Ladies house, where Ancilla was ready to
give him entertainment, conducting him into the base Court, where she locked him
up fast, until her Lady should send for him. This night she had privately
sent for her friend also, and sitting merrily at supper with him, told him,
what welcome she had given the Scholar, and how she further meant to use him,
saying. Now Sir, consider with your self, what hot affection I bear to him,
of whom you became so fondly jealous. The which words were very welcome to him,
and made him extraordinarily joyful; desiring to see them as effectually
performed, as they appeared to him by her protestations.

Here you are to understand (Gracious Ladies) that according to the season of
the year, a great snow had fallen the day before, so as the whole Court was
covered therewith, and being an extreme frost upon it, our S^holler could not
boast of any warm walking, when the teeth quiuered in his head with cold, as a
Dog could not be more discourteously used: yet hope of enjoying Loves
recompense at length, made him to support all this injury with admirable
patience.

Within a while after, Madame Helena said to her friend. Walk with me (dear
heart) into my Chamber, and there at a secret little window, I shall show thee
what he does, that drove thee to such a suspicion of me, and we shall hear
beside, what answer he will give my maid Ancilla, whom I will send to comfort
him in his coldness.

When she had so said, they went to the appointed chamber window, where they
could easily see him, but he not them: and then they heard Ancilla also,
calling to him forth of another window, saying. Signior Reniero, my Lady is
the wofullest woman in the world, because (as yet) she cannot come to you, in
regard that one of her brethren came this evening to visit ^er, and held her
with much longer discourse then she expected: whereby she was constrained to
inuit him to sup with her, and yet he is not gone; but shortly I hope he
will, and then expect her coming presently; till when, she entreats your
genle sufferance.

Poor Reniero, our ouer-credulous Scholar, whose vehement affection to Madame
Helena, so hood-winkt the sight of his understanding, as he could not be
distrustful of any guilt; returned this answer to Ancilla. Say to your Lady
that I am bound in duty, to attend the good hour of her leisure, without so
much as the very least preiudicate conceit in me: Nevertheless, entreat her,
to let it be so soon as she possibly may, because here is miserable walking,
and it begininneth again to snow extremely. Ancilla making fast the Caseme^t,
went presently to bed; when Helena spoke thus to her amorous friend. What say
thou now? Do thou think that I loved him, as thou wast afraid of? If I did,
he should never walk thus in the frost and snow. So, away went they likewise
from their close gazing window, and spent wanton dalliances together, laughing,
and deriding (with many bitter taunts and jests) the lamentable condition of
poor Reniero.

About the Court walked he numberless times, finding such exercises as he
could best devise, to compass warmth in any manner: no seat or shelter had he
any where, either to ease himself by sitting down a while, or keep him from
the snow, falling continually on him, which made him bestow many curses on the
Ladies Brother, for his so long tarrying with her, as believing him verily to
be in the house, or else she would (long before) have admitted his entrance,
but therein his hope was merely deceived. It grew now to be about the hour of
midnight, and Helena had delighted her self with her friend extraordinarily,
til at last, thus she spoke to him. What is thine opinion of my amourous
Scholar? Which do thou imagine to be the greatest, either his sense and
judgment, or the affection I bear to him? Is not this cold sufferance of
this, able to quench the violent ^eat of his loves extremity, and having so
much snow broth to help it? Believe me (sweet Lady) quoth her friend, as he
is a man, and a learned Scholar, I pity that he should be thus ungently
dealt withal: but as he is my rival and loves enemy, I cannot allow him the
least compassion, resting the more confidently assured of your love to me,
which I will always esteem most precious.

When they had spent a long while in this or the like conference, with infinite
sweet kisses and embraces intermixed; then she began again in this manner.
Dear love ( quoth she) cast thy Cloak about thee, as I intend to do with my
night mantle, and let us step to the little window once more, to see whether
the flaming fire, which burned in the Scholars breast (as daily avouched to me
in his love letters) be as yet extinct or no. So going to the window again,
and looking down into the Court; there they saw the Scholar dancing in the
snow, to the cold tune of his teeths quiuering and chattering, and clapping his
arms about his body, which was no pleasing melody to him. How think thou
now sweet heart ( ssaide she) cannot I make a man dance without the sound of
a Taber, or of a Bagpipe? yes believe me Lady ( quoth he) I plain perceive you
can, and would be very loathe, that you should exercise your cunning on me. Nay,
said she, we will yet delight our selves a little more; let us softly descend
down the stayres, even so far as to the Court door: thou shall not speak a
word, but I will talk to him, and hear some part of his quiuering language,
which cannot choose but be passing pleasing for us to hear.

Out of the Chamber went they, and descended down the stayres to the Court
door; where, without opening it, she laid her mouth to a small cranny, and in
a low soft kind of voice, called him by his name: which the Scholar hearing,
was exceeding joyful, as believing verily, that the hour of his deliverance
was come, and entrance now should be admitted him. Upon the heating of her
voice, he stepped close to the door, saying. For charities sake, good Lady, let
me come in, because I am almost dead with cold; whereto thus she answered in
mocking manner. I make no doubt (my dear friend Renioero) but the night is
indifferent cold, and yet somewhat the warmer by the Snowes falling: and I
have heard that such weather as this, is tenne-times more extreme at Paris,
then here in our warmer Country. And trust me, I am exceeding sorrowful,
that I may not (as yet) open the door, because mine unhappy brother, who came
(unexpected) yester-night to suppe with me, is not yet gone, at within a short
while (I hope) he will, and then shall I gladly set open the door to you, for
I made an excuse to steal a little from him, only to cheer you with this
small kind of comfort, that his so long tarrying might be the less offensive
to you.

Alas sweet Madame, answered quaking and quiuering Reniero, be then so
favorable to me, as to free me from forth this open Court, where there is no
shelter or help for me, the snow falling still so exceedingly, as a man might
easily be more then half buried in it: let me be but within your door, and
there I will wait your own good leisure. Alas dear Reniero (answered Helena) I
dare not do it, because the door makes such a noise in the opening, as it
will be too ^asily heard by my Brother: but I will go and use such means, as
shortly he shall get him gone, and then I dare boldly give you entrance. Do
so good Madame, replied Reniero, and let there be a fair fire made ready, that
when I am within, I may the sooner warm my self; for I am so strangely
benumbed with cold, as well-neere I am past all sense of feeling.

Can it be possible ( quoth Helena) that you should be so benumbed with cold?
Then I plainly perceive, that men can lie in their love letters, which I can
show under your own hand, how you fried in flames, and all for my love, and so
have you written to me in every letter. Poor credulous women are often thus
deluded, in believing what men write and speak out of passion: but I will
return back to my Brother, and make no doubt of dispatch, because I would
gladly have your Company.

The amourous Friend to Helena, who stood by all this while, laughing at the
Scholars hard usage, returned up again with her to her Chamber, where they
could not take a jot of rest, for flouting and scorning the betrayed Scholar.
As for him poor man, he was become like the Swanne, coldly chattering his
teeth together, in a strange new kind of harmony to him. And perceiving
himself to be merely mocked, he attempted to get open the door, or how he
might pass forth at any other place: but being no way able to compass it, he
walked up and down like an angry Lion, cursing the hard quality of the time,
the discourtesie of the Lady, the ouer-tedious length of the night; but (most
of all) his own folly and simplicity, in being so basely abused and gulde. Now
began the heat of his former affection to Helena, altered into as violent a
detestation of her; Yea, extremity of hatred in the highest degree; beating his
brains, and ransacking every corner of invention, by what means he might best
be revenged on her, which now he more earnestly desired to effect, then to
enjoy the benefit of her love, or to be embraced between her arms.

After that the sad and discomfortable night had spent it self, and the break
of day was beginning to appear; Ancilla the waiting woman, according as she
was instructed by her Lady, went down and opened the Court door, and seeming
exceedingly to compassionate the Scholars unfortunate night of sufferance,
said unto him.

Alas courteous Gentleman, in an unblessed hour came my Ladies brother hither
yester-night, inflicting too much trouble upon us, and a grievous time of
affliction to you. But I am not ignorant, that you being virtuous, and a
judicious Scholar, have an invincible spirit of patience, and sufficient
understanding withal; that what this night could not afford, another may make
a sound amends for. This I can and dare sufficiently assure you, that nothing
could be more displeasing to my Lady, neither can she well be quieted in her
mind: until she have made a double and treble requital, for such a strange
unexpected inconvenience, whereof she had not the very least suspicion.

Reniero swelling with coffeehouse, yet wisely clouding it from open
apprehension, and knowing well enough, that such golden speeches and promises,
did always savor of what intemperate spleen would more lauishly have vented
forth, and therefore in a modest dissembling manner; without the least show of
any anger, thus he answered.

In good sadness Ancilla, I htue endured the most miserablest night of cold,
frost and snow, that ever any poor Gentleman suffered; but I know well enough,
your Lady was not in any fault thereof, neither meriteth to be blamed, for in
her own person (as being truly compassionate of my distress) she came so
far as the door of this Court, to excuse her self, and comfort me. But as
you said, and very well too, what has failed this night, another hereafter
may more fortunately perform: in hope whereof, commend my love and duteous
service to her, and (what else remains mine) to your gentle self.

So our half frozen Scholar, scarcely able to walk upon his legs, returned
home, (so well as he could) to his own lodging; where, his spirits being
grievously out of order, and his eyes staring ghastly through lack of sleep:
he lay down on his bed, and after a little rest, he found himself in much
worse condition then before, as merely taken lame in his arms and his legs.
Whereupon he was enforced to send for Physicians, to be advised by their
council, in such an extremity of cold received. Immediately, they made
provision for his healthes remedy (albeit his nerves and sinews could very
hardly extend themselves) yet in regard he was young, and Summer swifly drawing
on; they had the better hope of affecting his safty, out of so great and
dangerous a cold.

But after he was become almost well and lusty again, he used to be seldom
seen abroad for an indifferent while; concealing his intended revenge secret
to himself, yet appearing more affectionate to Madame Helena, then formerly he
had been.

Now, it came to pass (within no long while after) that Fortune being
favorable to our injured Scholar, prepared a new accident, whereby he might
fully effect his hearts desire. For the lusty young Gallant, who was Madame
Helenaes dear darling and delight, and (for whose sake) she dealt so
inhumanely with poor Reniero: became weary of her amourous service, and was
fal^^ in liking of another Lady, scorning and disdaining his former Mistress;
whereat she grew exceedingly displeased, and began to languish in sighs and
tears.

But Ancilla her waiting woman, compassionating the perilous condition of her
Lady, and knowing no likely means whereby to conquer this oppressing
melancholy, which she suffered for the loss of her hearts chosen friend: at
length she began to consider, that the Scholar still walked daily by the
door, as formerly he was wont to do, and (by him) there might some good be
done.

A fond and foolish opinion ouerswayed her, that the Scholar was
extraordinarily skillful in the Art of Nigromancy, and could thereby so
overrule the heart of her lost friend, as he should be compelled to love her
again, in as effectual manner as before; herewith immediately she acquainted
her Lady* who being as rashly credulous, as her maid was opinionatiue (never
considring, that if the Scholar had any experience in Negromancy, he would
thereby have procured his own success) gave relief to her surmise, in very
Iouiall and comfortable manner, and entreated her in all kindness, to know of
him, whether he could work such a business, or no, and (upon his undertaking
to effect it) she would give absolute assurance, that (in recompense thereof)
he should unfeignedly obtain his hearts desire. Ancilla was quick and
expeditious, in delivering this message to discontented Reniero, whose soul
being ready to mount out of his body, only by conceit of joy; chearefully thus
he said within himself. Gracious Fortune! how highly am I obliged to thee for
this so great a favor? Now thou have blessed me with a happy time, to be justly
revenged on so wicked a woman, who sought the utter ruin of my life, in
recompense of the unfeigned affection I bare her. Return to thy Lady (quoth
he) and saluting her first on my behalf, bid her to abandon all care in this
business; for, if her amourous Friend were in India, I would make him come (in
mere despite of his heart) and crave mercy of her for his base transgression.
But concerning the means how, and in what manner it is to be done, especially
on her own behalf: I will impart it to her so soon as she pleases: fail
not to tell her so constantly from me, with all my utmost pains at her service.

Ancilla came iocondly home with her answer, and a conclusion was set down
for their meeting together at Santa Lucia del prato, which accordingly was
performed* in very solemn conference between them. Her fond affection had such
power over her, that she had forgot, into what peril she brought his life, by
such an unnatural night walk: but disclosed all her other intention to him,
how loath she was to lose so dear a friend, and desiring him to exercise his
utmost height of skill, with large promises of her manifold favors to him,
whereto our Scholar thus replied.

Very true it is Madam, that among other studies at Paris, I learned the Art of
Negromancy, the depth whereof I am as skillful in, as any other Scholar
whatsoever. But, because it is greatly displeasing unto God, I made a vow never
to use it, either for my self, or any other. Nevertheless, the love I bear
you is of such power, as I know not well how to deny, whatsoever you please
to command me: in which respect, if in doing you my very best service, I were
sure to be seized on by all the devils: I will not fail to accomplish your
desire, you only having the power to command me. But let me tell you Madame,
it is a matter not so easy to be performed, as you perhaps may rashly imagine,
especially, when a Woman would repeal a man to love her, or a man a woman:
because, it is not to be done, but by the person whom it properly concerns.
And therefore it behooves, that such as would have this business effected,
must be of a constant mind, without the least scruple of fear: because it is
to be accomplished in the dark night season, in which difficulties I do not
know, how you are able to vvarrant your self, or whether you have such courage
of spirit, as (with boldness) to adventure.

Madame Helena, more hot in pursuit of her amorous contentment, then any way
governed by temperate discretion, presently thus answered. Sir, Love has set
such a keen edge on my unconquerable affection, as there is not any danger so
difficult, but I dare resolutely undertake it, for the recovery of him, who
has so shamefullie refused my kindness: wherefore (if you please) show me,
wherein I must be so constant and dreadlesse. The Scholar, who had (more then
half) caught a right Ninny-hammer by the beak, thus replied. Madame, of
necessity I must make an image of Tin, in the name of him whom you desire to
recall. Which when I have sent you, the Moon being then in her full, and your
self stripped stark naked: immediately after your first sleep, seven times
you must bathe your self with it in a swift running River. Afterward, naked as
you are, you must climb up upon some tree, or else upon an uninhabited house
top, where standing dreadlesse of any peril, and turning your face to the
North, with the Image in your hand, seven times you must speak such words,
as I will deliver to you in writing.

After you have so often spoken them, two goodly Ladies (the very fairest that
ever you beheld) will appear unto you, very graciously saluting you, and
demanding what you would have them to perform for you. Safely you may speak
unto them, and orderly tell them what you desire: but ^e very careful, that you
(...) not one man insted of another. When you have uttered your mind, they will
depart from you, and then you may descend again to the place where you did
leave your g^^^ents, which ^^uing put on, then return to your house. And
undoubtedly, before the midst of the next night following, your friend will come
in tears to you, and humbly crave your pardon on his knees; being never able
afterward to be false to you, or leave your Love for any other whatsoever.

The Lady hearing these words, gave very settled belief to the^, imagining
unfeignedly, that she had (more then half) recovered her friend already, and
held him embraced between her arms: in which iocond persuasion, the cheerful
blood mounted up into her cheeks, and thus she replied. Never make you any
doubt Sir, but that I can sufficiently perform whatsoever you have said, and
am provided of the only place in the world, where such a weighty business is
to be effected. For I have a Farm or dairy house, near adjoining to the vale
of Arno, and closely bordering upon the same River. It being now the month of
July, the most conuenientest time of all the year to bathe in; I can be the
easier induced thereunto.

Moreover, there is hard by the Rivers side a small Tower or Turret uninhabited;
whereinto few people do sildome enter, but only Heardsmen or Flocke-keepers,
who ascend up (by the help of a wodden Ladder) to a Tarrasse on the top of
the said Tower, to look all about for their beasts, when they are wandered
astray: it standing in a solitary place, and out of the common way or resort.
There dare I boldly adventure to mount up, and with the invincible courage of a
wronged Lady (not fearing to look death himself in the face) do all that you
have prescribed, yea, and much more, to recover my dear lost Lover again,
whom I value equal with my own Life.

Reniero, who perfectly knew both the Dairy Farm, and the old small Turret, not
a little joyful, to hear how forward she was to shame her self, answered in
this manner. Madame, I was never in those parts of the Country, albeit they are
so near to our City, and therefore I must needs be ignorant, not only of your
Farm, but the Turret also. But if they stand in such convenient manner as you
have described, all the world could not yield the like elsewhere, so apt and
suitable to your purpose: wherefore, with such expedition as possibly I can
use, I will make the Image, and send it you, as also the charm, very fairly
written. But let me entreat you, that when you have obtained your hearts
desire, and are able to judge truly of my love and service: not to be
unmindful of me, but (at your best leisure) to perform what you have with
such protestations promised; which she gave him her hand and faith to do,
without any impeach or hinderance: and so parting, she returned home to her
house.

Our ouer-ioyed Scholar, applauding his happy Stars, for furthering him with
so fair a way to his revenge; immagining that it was already half executed,
made the Image in due form, and wrote an old Fable, insted of a Charm; both
which he sent to the Lady, so soon as he thought the time to be fitting: and
this admonition withal, that the Moon being entering into the full, without
any longer delay, she might venture on the business the next night following,
and remain assured to repossesse her friend. Afterward for the better pleasing
of himself, he went secretly attended, only by his servant, to the house of a
trusty friend of his, who dwelt somewhat near to the Turret, there to expect the
issue of this Lady-like enterprise. And Madam Helena accompanied with none but
Ancilla, walked on to her dairy Farm, where the night ensuing, pretending to
take her rest sooner then formerly she used to do, she commanded Ancilla to go
to bed, referring her self to her best liking.

After she had slept her first sleep (according to the Scholars direction)
departing softly out of her chamber, she went on toward the ancient Tower,
standing hard by the river of Arno, looking every way heedfully about her,
least she should be spied by any person. But perceiving her self to be so
secure as she could desire; putting off all her garments, she hid them in a
small brake of bushes: afterward, holding the Image in her hand, seven times
she bathd her body in the river, and then returned back with it to the Tower.
The Scholar, who at the nights closing up of day, had hid himself among the
willowes and other trees, which grew very thick about the Tower, saw both her
going and returning from the River, and as she passed thus naked by him, he
plainly perceived, that the nights obscurity could not cloud the delicate
whitenes of her body, but made the Stars themselves to gaze amorously on her,
even as if they were proud to behold her bathing, and (like so many twinkling
Tapers) showed her in emulation of another Diana. Now, what conflicts this
sight caused in the mind of our Scholar, one while, quenching his hateful
spleen toward her, al coveting to embrace a piece of such perfection: another
while, thinking it a purchase fit for one of Cupids soldiers, to seize and
surprise her upon so fair an advantage, none being near to yield her rescue:
in the fiery trial of such temptations, I am not able to judge, or to say,
what resistance flesh and blood could make, being opposed with such a sweet
enemy.

But he well considering what she was, the greatness of his injury, as also how,
and for whom: he forgot all wanton allurements of Love, scorning to entertain
a thought of compassion, continuing constant in his resolution, to let her
suffer, as he himself had done. So, Helena being mounted up on the Turret, and
turning her face toward the North; she repeated those idle frivolous words
(composed in the nature of a charm) which she had received from the Scholar.
Afterward, by soft and stealing steps, he went into the old Tower, and took
away the Ladder, whereby she ascended to the Tarras, staying and listening, how
she proceeded in her amorous exorcisme.

Seven times she rehearsed the charm to the Image, looking still when the two
Ladies would appear in their likeness, and so long she held on her
imprecations (feeling greater cold, then willingly she would have done) that
break of day began to show it self, and half despairing of the Ladies
coming, according as the Scholar had promised, she said to her self: I much
misdoubt, that Reniero has quitted me with such another piece of
night-seruice, as it was my luck to bestow on him: but if he have done it in
that respect, he was but ill advised in his revenge, because the night wants
now three parts of the length, as then it had: and the cold which he suffered,
was far superior in quality to mine, albeit it is more sharp now in the
morning, then all the time of night it has bin.

And, because daylight should not discover her on the Tarrasse, she went to
make her descent down again: but finding the Ladder to be taken away, and
thinking how her public shame was now inevitable, her heart dismayed, and she
fell down in a swoune on the Tarras: yet recovering her senses afterward, her
grief and sorrow exceeded all capacity of utterance. For, now she became fully
persuaded, that this proceeded from the Scholars malice, repenting for her
unkind usage toward him, but much more condemning her self, for reposing any
trust in him, who stood bound (by good reason) to be her enemy.

Continuing long in this extreme affliction, and surueighing all likely means
about her, whereby she might descend from the Tarras, whereof she was wholly
disappointed: she began to sighe and weep exceedingly, and in this heavy
perplexity of spirit, thus she complained to her self. Miserable and
unfortunate Helena, what will be said by thy Brethren, Kindred, Neighbors,
and generally throughout all Florence, when they shall know, that thou wast
found here on this Turret, stark naked? Thine honorable carriage, and
honesty of life, heretofore free from a thought of suspicion, shall now be
branded with detestation; and if thou would cloud this mishappe of thine, by
such lies and excuses, as are not rare amongst women: yet Reniero that wicked
Scholar, who knows all thy privy compacting, will stand as a thousand
witnesses against thee, and shame thee before the whole City, so both thine
honor and loved friend are lost for ever.

Having thus consulted with her self, many desperate motions entered her mind,
to throw her self headlong from off the Tarras; till better thoughts wone
possession of her soul. And the Sun being risen, she went to every corner
of the Tarras, to espy any Lad come abroad with his beasts, by whom she might
send for her waiting woman. About this instant, the Scholar who lay sleeping
(all this while) under a bush, suddenly awaking; saw her look over the wall,
and she likewise espied him; whereupon he said unto her. Good morrow Madame
Helena, What? are the Ladies come yet or no? Helena hearing his scorning
question, and grieuing that he should so delude her: in tears and
lamentations, she entreated him to come near the Tower, because she desired to
speak with him. Which courtesy he did not deny her, and she lying groueling
upon her breast on the Tarras, to hide her body that no part thereof might be
seen, but her head; weeping, she spoke thus to him.

Reniero, upon my credit, if I gave thee an ill nights rest, thou have well
revenged that wrong on me; for, although we are now in the month of July, I
have been plagued with extremity of cold (in regard of my nakedness) even
almost frozen to death: beside my continual tears and lamenting, that folly
persuaded me to believe thy protestations, wherein I account it well-neere
miraculous, that mine eyes should be capable of any sight. And therefore I pray
thee, not in respect of any love which thou can pretend to bear me; but for
regard of thine own self, being a Gentleman and a Scholar, that this
punishment which thou have already inflicted upon me, may suffi^e for my former
injuries toward thee, and to hold thy self revenged fully, as also permit my
garments to be brought me, that I may descend from hence, without taking that
from me, which afterward (although thou would) thou can never restore me, I
mean mine honor. And consider with thy self, that albeit thou did not
enjoy my company that unhappy night, yet thou have power to command me at any
time whenever, with making many diversities of amends, for one nights offense
only committed. Content thy self then good Reniero, and as thou art an honest
Gentleman, say thou art sufficiently revenged on me, in making me dearly
confess mine own error. Never exercise thy malice upon a poor weak woman,
for the Eagle disdaineeh to pray on the yielding Dove: and therefore in mere
pity, and for manhoods sake, be my release from open shame and reproach.

The Scholar, whose envious spleen was swollen very great, in remembering such
a malicious cruelty exercised on him, beholding her to weep and make such
lamentations; found a fierce conflict in his thoughts, between content and
pity. It did not a little joy and content him that the revenge which he so
earnestly desired to compass, was now by him so effectually inflicted. And yet
(in mere humanity) pity provoked him, to commisserate the Ladies distressed
condition: but clemency being ouer-weake to withstand his rigor, thus he
replied. Madam Helena, if mine entreaties (which, to speak truly, I never knew
how to steep in tears, nor wrap up my words in sugar Candy, so cuningly as
you women know how to do) could have prevailed, that miserable night, when I
was well-neere frozen to death with cold, and merely buried with snow in your
Court, not having any place of rescue or shelter; your complaints would now
the more easily overrule me. But if your honor in estimation, be now more
precious to you the^ heretofore, and it seems so offensive to stand there
naked: convert your persuasions and prayers to him, in whose arms you were
that night embraced, both of your triumphing in my misery, when poor I, trotted
about your Court, with the teeth quiuering in my head, and beating mine arms
about my body, finding no compassion in him, or you. Let him bring thee thy
Garments, let him come help thee down with the Ladder, and let him have the
care of thine honor, on whom thou have been so prodigal heretofore in
bestowing it, and now have unwomanly thrown thy self in peril, only for the
maintenance of thine immodest desires.

Why do thou not call on him to come help thee? To whom does it more
belong, then to him? For thou art his, and he thine. Why the^ should any other
but he help thee in this distress? Call him (fool as thou art) and try, if
the love he bears thee, and thy best understanding joined with his, can
deliver thee out of my sottish detaining thee. I have not forgot, that when you
both made a pastime of my misery, thou did demand of him, which seemed
greatest in his opinion, either my sottish simplicity, or the love thou barest
him. I am not now so liberal or courteous, to desire that of thee, which thou
would not grant, if I did request it: No, no, reserve those night favors for
thy amorous friend, if thou do escape hence alive to see him again. As for
my self, I leave thee freely to his use and service: because I have
sufficiently paid for a woman's falsehood, and wisemen take such warning, that
they scorn to be twice deceived, and by one woman. Proceed on still in thy
flattering persuasions, terming me to be a Gentleman and a Scholar, thereby to
win such favor from me, that I should think thy villainy toward me, to be
already sufficiently punished* No, treacherous Helena, thy blandishments cannot
now hoodwink the eyes of my understanding, as when thou did out-reach me with
thy disloyal promises and protestations. And let me now tell thee plainly,
that all the while I continued in the University of Paris, I never attained
unto so perfect an understanding of my self, as in that one miserable night
thou did enstruct me. But admit, that I were inclined unto a merciful and
compassionate mind, yet thou art none of them, on whom mild and gracious
mercy should any way declare her effects. For, the end of penance among savage
beasts, such as thou art, and likewise of due vengeance, ought to be death:
whereas among men, it should suffice according to thine own saying. Wherefore,
in regard that I am neither an Eagle, nor thou a Dove, but rather a most
venomous Serpent: I purpose with my utmost hatred, and as an ancient enemy to
all such as thou art, to make my revenge famous on thee.

I am not ignorant, that whatsoever I have already done unto thee, cannot
properly be termed revenge, but rather chastisement; because revenge ought
always to exceed the offense, which (as yet) I am far enough from. For, if
I did intend to revenge my wrongs, and remembered thy monstrous cruelty to me:
thy life, if I took it from thee, and an hundred more such as thy self, were
far insufficient, because in killing thee, I should kill but a vile inhumane
beast, yea, one that deserved not the name of a Woman. And, to speak truly,
Art thou any more, or better (setting aside thy borrowed hair, and painted
beauty, which in few years will leave thee wrinkled and deformed) then the
basest beggarly Chamber-stuffe that can be? Yet thou soughtest the death of a
Gentleman and Scholar as (in scorn) not long since, thou did term me:
whose life may hereafter be more beneficial unto the world, then millions of
such as thou art, to live in the like multiplicity of ages. Therefore, if this
anguish be sensible to thee, learn what it is to mock men of apprehension,
and (amongst them especially) such as are Scholars: to prevent thy falling
hereafter into the like extremity, if it be thy good luck to escape out of
this.

It appears to me, that thou art very desirous to come down hither on the
ground; the best counsel that I can give thee, is to leap down headlong,
that by breaking thy neck (if thy fortune be so fair) thy life and loathsome
qualities ending together, I may sit and smile at thy deserved destruction. I
have no other comfort to give thee, but only to boast my happiness, in
teaching thee the way to ascend that Tower, and in thy descending down (even
by what means thy wit can best devise) make a mockery of me, and say thou have
learned more, then all my Schollership could instruct thee.

All the while as Reniero uttered these speeches, the miserable Lady sighed and
wept very grievously, the time running on, and the Sun ascending higher and
higher; but when she heard him silent, thus she answered. Unkind and cruel
man, if that wretched night was so grievous to thee, and mine offense appeared
so great, as neither my youth, beauty, tears, and humble intercessious, are
able to derive any mercy from thee; yet let the last consideration move thee
to some remorse: namely, that I reposed new confidence in thee (when I had
little or no reason at all to trust thee) and discovered the integrity of my
soul unto thee, whereby thou did compass the means, to punish me thus
deservedly for my sin. For, if I had not reposed confidence in thee, thou
could not (in this manner) have wrought revenge on me, which although thou
did earnestly covet, yet my rash credulity was thy only help. Assuage then
thine anger, and graciously pardon me, wherein if thou will be so merciful to
me, and free me from this fatal Tower: I do here faithfully promise thee, to
forsake my most false and disloyal friend, electing thee as my Lord and
constant Love for ever.

Moreover, although thou condemnest my beauty greatly, esteeming it as a
trifle, momentary, and of slender continuance; yet, such as it is (being
comparable with any other woman's whatsoever) I am not so ignorant, that were
there no other reason to induce liking thereof: yet men in the vigor of their
youth (as I am sure you think your self not aged) do hold it for an especial
delight, ordained by nature for them to admire and honor. And notwistanding
all thy cruelty extended to me, yet I cannot be persuaded, that thou art so
flinty or Iron-hearted, as to desire my miserable death, by casting my self
headlong down (like a desperate mad woman) before thy face so to destroy
that beuty, which (if thy Letters lied not) was once so highly pleasing in
thine eyes. Take pity then on me for charities sake, because the Sun
begins to heat extremely: and as overmuch cold (that unhappy night) was
mine offense, so let not ouer-violent warmth be now my utter ruin and death.

The Scholar, who (only to delight himself) maintained this long discoursing
with her, returned her this answer. Madame, you did not repose such confidence
in me, for any good will or affection in you toward me, but in hope of
recovering him whom you had lost; wherein you merit not a jot of favor, but
rather the more sharp and severe infliction. And whereas you infer, that
your ouer-rash credulity, gave the only means to my revenge: Alas! therein
you deceive your self; for I have a thousand crochets working continually in
my brain, whereby to entrap a wiser creature then a woman, yet veiled all under
the cunning cloak of love, but sauced with the bitter Wormwood of hate. So
that, had not this happened as now it does, of necessity you must have fallen into
another: but, as it has pleased my happy stars to favor me therein, none
could prove more to your eternal scandal and disgrace, then this of your
own devising; which I made choice of, not in regard of any ease to you, but
only to content my self.

But if all other devises else had failed, my pen was and is my preuayling
Champion, where with I would have written such and so many strange matters,
concerning you in your very dearest reputation; that you should have cursed the
hour of your conception, and wished your birth had bin abortiue. The powers of
the pen are too many and mighty, whereof such weak wits as have made no
experience, are the less able to use any relation. I swear to you Lady, by my
best hopes, that this revenge which (perhaps) you esteem great and
dishonorable, is no way compareable to the wounding Lines of a Pen, which
can carracter down so infinite infamies (yet none but guilty and true
taxations) as will make your own hands immediate instruments, to tear the
eyes from forth your head, and so bequeath your after days unto perpetual
darkness.

Now, concerning your lost lover, for whose sake you suffer this unexpected
penance; although your choice has proved but bad, yet still continue your
affection to him: in regard that I have another Lady and Mistress, of higher
and greater desert then you, and to whom I will continue for ever constant.
And whereas you think, the warm beams of the Sun, will be too hot and
scorching for your nice body to endure: remember the extreme cold which you
caused me to feel, and if you can intermixe some part of that cold with the
present heat, I dare assure you, the Sun (in his highest heat) will be far
more temperate for your feeling.

The disconsolate Lady perceiving, that the Scholars words sauoured of no
mercy, but rather as covering her desperate ending; with the tears streaming
down her cheeks, thus she replied. Well Sir, seeing there is no matter of
worth in me, whereby to derive any compassion from you: yet for that Ladies
sake, whom you have elected worthy to enjoy your love, and so far excels
me in Wisdom; vouchsafe to pardon me, and suffer my garments to be brought
me, wherewith to cover my nakedness, and so to descend down from this Tower,
if it may stand with your gentle Nature to admit it.

Now began Reniero to laughe very heartily, and perceiving how swiftly the
day ran on in his course, he said unto her. Believe me Madame Helena, you have
so coniured me by mine endeered Lady and Mistress, that I am no longer able
to deny you; wherefore, tell me where your garments are, and I will bring them
to you, that you may come down from the Turret. She believing his promise,
told him where she had hid them, and Reniero departing from the Tower,
commanded his servant, not to stir thence: but to abide still so near it, as
none might get entrance there till his returning. Which charge was no sooner
given to his man, but he went to the house of a near neighboring friend,
where he dined well, and afterward laid him down to sleep.

In the mean while, Madame Helena remaining still on the Tower, began to
comfort her self with a little vain hope, yet sighing and weeping
incessantly, seating her self so well as she could, where any small shelter
might yield the least shade, in expectation of the Scholars returning: one
while weeping, then again hoping, but most of all despairing, by his so long
tarrying away with her Garments; so that being ouer-wearied with anguish and
long watching, she fell into a little slumbering. But the Sun was so
extremely hot, the hour of noone being already past, that it merely parched
her delicate body, and burnt her bare head so violently: as not only it seared
all the flesh it touched; but also cleft and chinkt it strangely, beside
blisters and other painful scorchings in the flesh which hindered her sleeping,
to help her self (by all possible means) waking. And the Turret being covered
with Lead, gave the greater addition to her torment; for, as she removed from
one place to another, it yielded no mitigation to the burning heat, but
parched and wrinkled the flesh extraordinarily, even as when a piece of
parchment is thrown into the fire, and recovered out again, can never be
extended to his former form.

Moreover, she was so grievously payned with the head-ake, as it seemed to
split in a thousand pieces, whereat there needed no great marvel, the Lead of
the Turret being so exceedingly hot, that it affoorded not the least defense
against it, or any repose to qualify the torment: but drove her still from one
place to another, in hope of ease, but none was there to be found.

Nor was there any wind at all stirring, whereby to assuage the Suns violent
scalding, or keep away huge swarms of Waspes, Hornets, and terrible biting
Flies, which vexed her extremely, feeding on those parts of her body, that
were rifte and chinkt, like crannies in a mortered wall, and pained her like so
many points of pricking Needles, laboring still with her hands to beat them
away, but yet they fastened on one place or other, and afflicted her in grievous
manner, causing her to curse her own life, her amorous friend, but (most of
all) the Scholar, that promised to bring her Garments, and as yet returned
not. Now began she to gaze upon every side about her, to espy some laboring
Husbandmen in the fields, to whom she might call or cry out for help, not
fearing to discover her desperate condition: but Fortune therein also was
adverse to her, because the heats extremity, had driven all the village out of
the fields, causing them to feed their Cattle about their own houses, or in
remote and shadie Valleys: so that she could see no other creatures to
comfort her, but Swannes swimming in the River of Arno, and wishing her self
there a thousand times with them, for to cool the extremity of her thirst,
which so much the more increased, only by the sight thereof, and utterly
disabled of having any.

She saw beside in many places about her, goodly Woods, fair cool shades, and
Country houses here and there dispersed; which added the greater violence to
her affliction, that her desires (in all these) could no way be accomplished.
What shall I say more concerning this disastrous Lady? The parching beams of
the Sun above her, the scalding heat of the Lead beneath her, the Hornets and
Flies every way stinging her, had made such an alteration of her beautiful
body: that, as it checked and controlled the precedent nights darkness, it
was now so metamorphosed with redness, yea, and blood issuing forth in
infinite places, as she seemed (almost) loathsome to look on, continuing still
in this agony of torment, quite void of all hope, and rather expecting death,
then any other comfort.

Reniero, when some three hours of the afternoon were ouerpast, awaked from
sleeping: and remembering Madame Helena, he went to see in what estate she was;
as also to send his servant unto dinner, because he had fasted all that day.
She perceiving his arrival, being altogether weak, faint, and wonderously
ouer-wearied, she crept on her knees to a corner of the Turret, and calling to
him, spoke in this manner. Reniero, thy revenge exceeds al manhood and
respect: For, if thou wast almost frozen in my Court, thou have roasted me all
day long on this Tower, yea, merely broyled my poor naked body, beside
staruing me thorough want of Food and drink. Be now then so merciful (for
manhoods sake) as to come up hither, and inflict that on me, which mine own
hands are not strong enough to do, I mean the ending of my loathed and
wearisome life, for I desire it beyond all comfort else, and I shall honor
thee in the performance of it. If thou deny me this gracious favor; at least
send me up a glass of Water, only to moisten my mouth, which my tears
(being all merely dried up) are not able to do, so extreme is the violence of
the Suns burning heat.

Well perceived the Scholar, by the weakness of her voice, and scorching of
her body by the Suns parching beams, that she was brought now to great
extremity: which sight, as also her humble intercession, began to touch him
with some compassion, nevertheless, thus he replied. Wicked woman, my hands
shall be no means of thy death, but make use of thine own, if thou be so
desirous to have it: and as much water shall thou get of me to assuage thy
thirst, as thou gave me fire to comfort my freezing, when thou wast in the
luxurious heat of thy immodest desires, and I wel-neere frozen to death with
extremity of cold. Pray that the Evening may rain down Rose Water on thee,
because that in the River of Arno is not good enough for thee: for as little
pity do I take on thee now, as thou did extend compassion to me then.

Miserable Woman that I am, answered Helena; Why did the heavens bestow beauty
on me, which others have admired and honored, and yet (by thee) is utterly
despised? More cruel art thou then any savage Beast; thus to vex and torment
me in such merciless manner. What greater extremity could thou inflict on
me, if I had bin the destruction of all thy Kindred, and left no one man
living of thy race? I am verily per^waded, that more cruelty cannot be used
against a Traitor, who was the subversion of an whole City, then this tyranny
of thine, roasting me thus in the beams of the Sun, and suffering my body to
be devoured with Elies, without so small a mercy, as to give me a little
cool water, which murderers are permitted to have, being condemned by
Justice, and led to execution: yea Wine also, if they request it.

But, seeing thou art so constant in thy pernicious resolve, as neither thine
own good Nature, nor this lamentable sufferance in me, are able to alter thee:
I will prepare my self for death patiently, to the end, that Heaven may be
merciful to my soul, and reward thee justly, according to thy cruelty. Which
words being ended, she withdrew her self toward the midst of the Tarras,
despairing of escaping (with life) from the heates violence; and not once
only, but infinite times beside (among her other grievous extreamities) she
was ready to dye with drought, bemoaning incessantly her dolorous condition.

By this time the day was well near spent, and night began to hasten on
apace: when the Scholar (immagining that he afflicted her sufficiently) took
her Garments, and wrapping them up in his man's Cloak, went thence to the
Ladies house, where he found Ancilla the Waiting Woman sitting at the door,
sad and disconsolate for her Ladies long absence, to whom thus he spoke. How
now Ancilla? Where is thy Lady and Mistress? Alas Sir (quoth she) I know not. I
thought this morning to have found her in her bed, as usually I was wont to do,
and where I left her yesternight at our parting: but there she was not, nor in
any place else of my knowledge, neither can I imagine what is become of her,
which is to me no mean discomfort.

But can you (Sir) say any thing of her? Ancilla, said he, I would thou had
bin in her company, and at the same place where now she is, that some
punishment for thy fault might have fallen upon thee, as already it has done
on her. But believe it assuredly, that thou shall not freely escape from my
fingers, till I have justly paid thee for thy pains, to teach thee to abuse
any Gentleman, as thou did me.

Having thus spoken, he called to his servant, saying. Give her the Garments,
and bid her go look her Lady, if she will. The Seruingman fulfilled his
Masters command, and Ancilla having received her Ladies clothes, knowing them
perfectly, and remembering (withal) what had bin said: she waxed very
doubtful, least they had slain her, hardly refraining from exclaiming on
them, but that greet and heavy weeping overcame her; so that upon the
Scholars departing, she ran in all have with the garments toward the Tower.

Upon this fatal and unfortunate day to Madame Helena, it chanced, that a
Clown or Country Peazant belonging to her Farm or Dairy house, having two of
his young Heyfers wandered astray, and he laboring in diligent search to find
them: within a while after the Scholars departure, came to seek them in Woods
about the Tower, and, notwithstanding all his crying and calling for his
beasts, yet he heard the Ladies grievous moanes and lamentations. Wherefore, he
cried out so loud as he could, saying: Who is it that mourns so aloft on the
Tower? Full well she knew the voice of her peazant, and therefore called unto
him, and said in this manner.

Go (quoth she) I pray thee for my Waiting Woman Ancilla, and bid her make some
means to come up hither to me. The Clown knowing his Lady, said. How now
Madame? Who has carried you up there so high? Your Woman Ancilla has sought
for you all this day, yet no one could ever have immagined you to be there. So
looking about him, he espied the two sides of the Ladder, which the Scholar
had pulled in sunder; as also the steps, which he had scattered thereabout;
placing them in due order again as they should be, and binding them fast with
Withies and Willowes.

By this time Ancilla was come thither, who so soon as she was entered into
the Tower, could not refrain from tears and complaints, beating her hands each
against other, and crying out. Madam, Madam, my dear Lady and Mistress! Alas,
Where are you? So soon as she heard the tongue of Ancilla, she replied (so
well as she could) saying: Ah my sweet Woman, I am here aloft upon the
Tarras; weep not, neither make any noise, but quickly bring me some of my
Garments. When she heard her answer in such comfortable manner, she mounted up
the Ladder, which the peazant had made very firm and strong, holding it fast
for her safer ascending; by which means she went up on the Tarras. Beholding
her Lady in so strange a condition, resembling no humane body, but rather the
trunk of a Tree half burned, lying flat on her face, naked, scorched and
strangely deformed: she began to tear the locks of her own hair, rauing
and raging in as pitiful manner, as if her Lady had been quite dead. Which
storming tempest, Madame Helena soon pacified, entreating her to use silence,
and help to put on her garments.

Having understood by her, that no one knew of her being there, but such as
brought her clothes, and the poor peazant, attending there still to do her
any service: she became the better comforted, entreating them by all means,
that it might be concealed from any further discovery, which was on either
side, most faithfully protested.

The poor Clown help to bear down his Lady upon his back, because the
Ladder stood not conveniently enough for her descending, neither were her
limbs pliable for her own use, by reason of their rifts and smarting. Ancilla
following after, and being more respective of her Lady, then her own security
in descending, missing the step in the midst of the Ladder, fell down to the
ground, and quite brake her leg in the fall, the pain whereof was so
grievous to her, that she cried and roared extraordinarily, even like a Lion in
the desert.

When the Clown had set his Lady safe on a fair green bank, he returned to
see what the waiting woman ayled, and finding her leg to be quite broken: he
carried her also to the same bank, and there seated her by her Lady: who
perceiving what a mischance had happened, and she (from whom she expected her
only best help, to be now in far greater necessity her self: she lamented
exceedingly, complaining on Fortunes cruel malice toward her, in thus heaping
one misery upon another, and never ceasing to torment her, especially now in
the conclusion of all, and when she thought all future perils to be past.

Now was the Sun upon his setting, when the poor honest countryman, because
dark night should not overtake them, conducted the Lady home to his own
house: and gaining the assistance of his two brethren and wife, setting the
waiting woman in a Chair, thither they brought her in like manner. And
questionles, there wanted no diligence and comfortable language, to pacify the
Ladies continual lamentations. The good wife, led the Lady into her own poor
lodging, where (such cates as they had to feed on) lovingly she set before
her: conueying her afterward into her own bed, and taking such good order,
that Ancilla was carried in the night time to Florence, to prevent all further
ensuing danger, by reason of her legs breaking.

Madame Helena, to color this misfortune of her own: as also the great mishap
of her woman: forged an artificial and cunning tale, to give some formal
appearance of her being in the Tower, persuading the poor simple Country
people, that in a strange accident of thunder and lightning, and by the
illusions of wicked spirits, all this adventure happened to her. Then Physicians
were sent for; who, not without much anguish and affliction to the Lady (by
reason of her fleshes flaying off, with the Medicines and Emplaysters applied
to the body) was glad to suffer whatsoever they did, beside falling into a very
dangerous Fever; out of which she was not recovered in a long while after, but
continued in daily despair of her life; beside other accidents happening in her
time of Physic, utterly unavoidable in such extreamities: and hardly had
Ancilla her leg cured.

By this unexpected penance imposed on Madame Helena, she utterly forgot her
amorous friend; and (from thence forward) carefully kept her self from fond
loves allurements, and such scornful behavior, wherein she was most
disorderly faulty. And Reniero the Scholar, understanding that Ancilla had
broken her leg, which he reputed as a punishment sufficient for her, held
himself satisfied, because neither the Mistress nor her Maid, could now make
any great boast, of his nights hard entertainment, and so concealed all matters
else.

Thus a wanton-headed Lady, could find no other subject to work her mocking
folly on, but a learned Scholar, of whom she made no more respect, then any
other ordinary man. Never remembering, that such men are expert (I cannot say
all, but the greater part of them) to help the frenzy of foolish Ladies, that
must enjoy their loose desires, by Negromancy, and the Diuelles means. Let it
therefore (fair Ladies) be my loving admonition to you, to detest all
unwomanly mocking and scorning, but more especially to Scholars.

Two near dwelling Neighbors, the one being named Spineloccio Tauena, and
the other Zeppa di Mino, frequenting each others company daily together;
Spinelloccio Cuckolded his Friend and Neighbor. Which happening to the
knowledge of Zeppa, he prevailed so well with the Wife of Spinelloccio, that he
being locked up in a Chest, he revenged his wrong at that instant, so that
neither of them complained of his misfortune.

The Eight Novel.
Wherein is approved, that he which offers shame and disgrace to his
Neighbor; may receive the like injury (if not in worse manner) by the same man.



Grievous, and full of compassion, appeared the hard Fortunes of Madame Helena
to be, having much discontented, and (well-neere) wearied all the Ladies in
hearing them recounted. But because they were very justly inflicted upon her,
and according as (in equity) she had deserved, they were the more moderate in
their commisseration: howbeit, they reputed the Scholar not only
ouer-obstinate, but also too strict, rigorous and severe. Wherefore, when
Madame Pampinea had finished her Novel, the Queen gave command to Madame
Fiammetta, that she should follow next with her discourse; whereto she showing
obedience, thus began.

Because it appears in my judgment (fair Ladies) that the Scholars cruelty
has much displeased you, making you more melancholy then this time requires:
I hold it therefore very convenient, that your contristed spirits should be
cheerfully revived, with matter more pleasing and delightful. And therefore, I
mean to report a Novel of a certain man, who took an injury done him, in
much milder manner, and revenged his wrong more moderately, then the furious
incensed Scholar did. Whereby you may comprehend, that it is sufficient for
any man, and so he ought to esteem it, to serve another with the same sauce,
which the offending party caused him first to taste of: without coveting any
stricter revenge, then agrees with the quality of the injury received.

Know then (Gracious assembly) that, as I have heretofore heard, there lived
not long since in Sienna, two young men, of honest parentage and equal
condition, neither of the best, nor yet the meanest calling in the City: the
one being named Spinelloccio Tauena, and the other termed Zeppa di Mino, their
houses Neighboring together in the street Camollia. Seldom the one walked
abroad without the others Company, and their houses allowed equal welcome to
them both; so that by outward demonstrations, and inward mutual affection, as
far as humane capacity had power to extend, they lived and loved like two
Brethren, they both being wealthy, and married unto two beautiful women.

It came to pass, that Spinelloccio, by often resorting to the house of Zeppa,
as well in his absence, as when he abode at home; began to glance amorous
looks on Zeppaes wife, and pursued his vnneighbourly purpose in such sort: that
he being the stronger perswader, and she (belike) too credulous in believing,
or else ouer-feeble in resisting; from private imparlance, they fell to action;
and continued their close fight a long while together, unseen and without
suspicion, no doubt to their equal joy and contentment.

But, whether as a just punishment, for breaking so loving a league of
friendship and neighborhood, or rather a fatal infliction, evermore
attending on the closest Cuckoldry, their felicity still continuing in this
kind: it fortuned on a day, Zeppa abiding within doors, contrary to the
knowledge of his wife, Spinelloccio came to enquire for him, and she answering
(as she verily supposed) that he was gone abroad: up they went both together
into the Hall, and no body being there to hinder what they intended, they fell
to their wonted recreation without any fear, kissing and embracing as Lovers
use to do.

Zeppa seeing all this, spoke not one word, neither made any noise at all; but
kept himself closely hidden, to observe the issue of this amorous conflict. To
be brief, he saw Spinelloccio go with his wife into the Chamber, and make the
door fast after them, whereat he could have been angry, which he held to be
no part of true wisdom. For he knew well enough, that to make an out cry in
this case, or otherwise to reveal this kind of injury, it could no way make
it less, but rather give a greater addition of shame and scandal: he thought
this no course for him to take; wiser considerations entered his brain, to have
this wrong fully revenged, yet with such a discreet and orderly carriage, as
no neighbors knowledge should by any means apprehend it, or the least sign
of discontent in himself blabbe it, because they were two dangerous evils.

Many notable courses wheeled about his conceit, every one promising fairly,
and ministering means of formal appearance, yet one (above the rest) won his
absolute allowance, which he intended to prosecute as best he might. In which
resolution, he kept still very close, so long as Spinelloccio was with his
Wife; but he being gone, he went into the Chamber, where he found his wife,
amending the form of her head attire, which Spinelloccio had put into a
disordred fashion. Wife (quoth he) what art thou doing? Why? Do you not see
Husband? answered she. Yes that I do wife, replied Zeppa, and something else
happened to my sight, which I could wish that I had not seen. Rougher Language
growing between them, of his auouching, and her as stout denying, with
defending her cause ouer-weakely, against the manifest proofs both of eye and
ear: at last she fell on her knees before him, weeping incessantly, and no
excuses now auailing, she confessed her long acquaintance with Spinelloccio, and
most humbly entreated him to forgive her. Upon the which penitent confession
and submission, Zeppa thus answered.

Wife, if inward contrition be answerable to thy outward seeming sorrow, then I
make no doubt, but faithfully thou do acknowledge thine own evil doing:
for which, if thou expectest pardon of me; determine then to fulfill
effectually, such a business as I must enjoin, and thou perform. I command
thee to tell Spinelloccio, that to morrow morning, about nine of the clock, we
being both abroad walking, he must find some apt occasion to leave my company,
and then come hither to visit thee. When he is here, suddenly will I return
home, and upon thy hearing of my entrance: to save his own credit, and thee
from detection, thou shall require him to enter this Chest, until such time as
I am gone forth again; which he doing, for both your safeties, so soon as he
is in the chest, take the key and lock him up fast. When thou have effected
this, then shall I acquaint thee with the rest remaining, which also must be
done by thee, without dread of the least harm to him or thee, because there is
no malicious meaning in me, but such as (I am persuaded) thou can not justly
mislike. The wife, to make some satisfaction for her offense committed,
promised that she would perform it, and so she did.

On the morrow morning, the hour of nine being come, when Zeppa and
Spinelloccio were walking abroad together, Spinelloccio remembering his promise
unto his Mistress, and the clock telling him the appointed hour, he said
to Zeppa. I am to dine this day with an especial friend of mine, who I would
be loath should tarry for my coming; and therefore hold my departure excused.
How now? answered Zeppa, the time for dinner is yet far enough off, wherefore
then should we part so soon? Yea but Zeppa, replied Spinelloccio, we have
weighty matters to confer on before dinner, which will require three hours
space at the least, and therefore it behooves me to respect due time.

Spinelloccio being departed from Zeppa (who followed fair and softly after
him) being come to the house, and kindly welcomed by the wife: they were no
sooner gone up the stairs, and entering in at the Chamber door; but the Woman
heard her Husband cough, and also his coming up the stairs. Alas dear
Spinelloccio (quoth she) what shall we do? My Husband is coming up, and we
shall be both taken tardie, step into this Chest, lie down there and stir
not, till I have sent him forth again, which shall be within a very short
while. Spinelloccio was not a little joyful for her good advice; down in the
Chest lay he, and she locked him in: by which time Zeppa was entered the Chamber.
Where are you Wife? said he, (speaking so loud, as he in the Chest might hear
him) What, is it time to go to dinner? It will be anon Sir, answered she, as
yet it is ouerearly; but seeing you are come, the more have shall be made, and
every thing will be ready quickly.

Zeppa, sitting down upon the Chest, wherein Spinelloccio lay not a little
affrighted, speaking still aloud, as formerly he did: Come hither Wife (quoth
he) how shall we do for some good company to dine with us? Mine honest kind
neighbor Spinelloccio is not at home, because he dineth forth to day with a
dear friend of his, by which means, his wife is left at home alone: give her
a call out at our Window, and desire her to come dine with us: for we two can
make no merry Music, except some more come to fill up the consort.

His Wife being very timorous, yet diligent to do whatsoever he commanded, so
prevailed with the Wife of Spinelloccio: that she came to them quickly, and so
much the rather, because her Husband dined abroad. She being come up into the
Chamber, Zeppa gave her most kind entertainment, taking her gently by the
hand, and winking on his Wife, that she should betake her self to the kitchen,
to see dinner speedily prepared, while he sat conuersing with his neighbor in
the Chamber.

His wife being gone, he shut the door after her; which the newcome Neighbor
perceiving, she said. Our blessed Lady defend me. Zeppa, What is your meaning
in this? Have you caused me to come hither to this in tent? Is this the love
you bear to Spinelloccio, and your professed loyalty in friendship? Zeppa,
seating her down on the Chest, wherein her Husband was enclosed, entreating
her patience, thus began. Kind and loving Neighbor, before you adventure too
far in anger, vouchsafe to hear what I shall tell you.

I have loved, and still do love, Spinelloccio as my brother, but yesterday
(albeit he knows it not) I found, the honest trust I reposed in him, deserved
no other, or better recompense, but even to be bold with my wife, in the
selfsame manner as I am, and as he ought to do with none but you. Now, in
regard of the love which I bear him, I intend to be no otherwise revenged on
him, but in the same kind as the offense was committed. He has bin more then
familiar with my wife, I must borrow the selfsame courtesy of you, which in
equity you cannot deny me, weighing the wrong you have sustained by my wife.
Our injuries are alike, in your Husband to me, and in my wife to you: let then
their punishment and ours be alike also; as they, so we; for in this case there
can be no iuster revenge.

The Woman hearing this, and perceiving the manifold confirmations thereof,
protested (on solemn oath) by Zeppa; her belief grew settled, and thus she
answered. My loving neighbor Zeppa, seeing this kind of revenge is (in mere
justice) imposed on me, and ordained as a due scourge, as well to the breach
of friendship and neighborhood, as abuse of his true and loyal wife: I am
the more willing to consent: always provided, that it be no imbarrement of
love between your wife and me, albeit I have good reason to allege, that she
began the quarrel first: and what I do is but to right my wrong, as any other
woman of spirit would do: Afterward, we may the more easily pardon one
another. For breach of peace (answered Zeppa) between my wife and you, take my
honest word for your warrant. Moreover, in requital of this favor to me, I
will bestow a dear and precious Jewel on you, excelling all the rest which
you have beside.

In delivering these words, he sweetly kissed and embraced her, as she sat on
the Chest wherein her husband lay: now, what they did else beside, in
recompense of the wrong-receiued, I leave to your imagination, as rather
deserving silence, then immodest blabbing. Spinelloccio, being all this while
in the Chest, hearing easily all the words which Zeppa had uttered, the answer
of his wife, as also what Music they made over his head: you may guess in
what a case he was, his heart being ready to split with rage, and, but that he
stood in fear of Zeppa, he would have railde and exclaimed on his wife, as
thus he lay shut up in the Chest. But entering into better consideration, that
so great an injury was first begun by himself, and Zeppa did no more, then in
reason and equity he might well do (having evermore carried himself like a
kind neighbor and friend toward him, without the least offer of distaste) he
faithfully resolved, to be a firmer friend to Zeppa then formerly he had bin,
if it might be embraced and accepted on the other side.

Delights and pleasures, be they never so long in contenting and continuance,
yet they come to a period and conclusion at last: So Zeppa, having ended his
amorous combat, and over the head of his perfidious friend, thought himself
sufficiently revenged. But now, in consideration of a further promise made on
the bargain; Spinelloccioes wife challenges the Jewel, then which kind of
recompense, nothing can be more welcome to women. Hereupon, Zeppa calling for
his own wife, commanded her to open the Chest; which she did, and he merrily
smiling, said. Well wife, you have given me a Cake insted of bread, and you
shall lose nothing for your labor. So Spinelloccio coming forth of the Chest,
it requires a better wit then mine, to tell you, which of them stood most
confounded with shame, either Spinelloccio seeing Zeppa, and knowing well
enough what he had done: or the woman beholding her husband, who easily heard
all their familiar conference, and the action thereupon so deservedly performed.

See neighbor, is not this your dearest Jewel? Having kept it awhile in my
wives custody; according to my promise, here I deliver it you. Spinelloccio
being glad of his deliverance out of the Chest, albeit not a little ashamed of
himself; without using many impertinent words, said. Zeppa, our wrongs are
equally requited on each other, and therefore I allow thy former speeches to my
Wife, that thou wast my friend, as I am the like to thee, and so I pray thee
let us still continue. For nothing else is now to be divided between us,
seeing we have shared alike in our wives, which none knowing but our selves,
let it be as closely kept to our selves. Zeppa was well pleased with the motion,
and so all four dined lovingly together, without any variance or
coffeehouse. And thence forward, each of the Women had two Husbands, as
either Husband enjoyed two Wives, without further contention or debate.

Maestro Simone, an ydle-headed Doctor of Physic, was thrown by Bruno and
Buffalmaco, into a common Leystall of Filth: The Physician fondly believing,
that (in the night time) he should he made one of a new created Company, who
usually went to see wonders at Corsica; and there in the Leystall they left
him.

The Ninth Novel.
Wherein is approved, that Titles of Honor, Learning, and Dignity, are not
always bestowne on the wisest men.



AFter that the Ladies had a while considered, on the communication between
the two Wives of Sienna, and the falsehood in friendship of their Husbands: the
Queen, who was the last to recount her Novel, without offering injury to
Dioneus, began to speak thus.

The reward for a precedent wrong committed, which Zeppa retorted upon
Spinelloccio, was answerable to his desert, and no more then equity required,
in which respect, I am of opinion, that such men ought not to be ouer-sharpely
reproved, as do in jury to him, who seeks for it, and justly should have it,
although Madam Pampinea (not long since) avouched the contrary. Now, it
evidently appears, that Spinelloccio well deserved what was done to him, and
I purpose to speak of another, who needs would seek after his own disgrace.
The rather to confirm my former speeches, that they which beguile such wilful
foolish men; are not to be blamed, but rather commended. And he unto whom the
shame was done, was a Physician, which came from Bologna to Florence; and
returned thither again like unto a Beast, notoriously baffulled and disgraced.

It is a matter well known to us, and (almost) observed day by day, that
diverse of our Citizens, when they return from their studying at Bologna: one
becomes an Advocate, another a Physician, and a third a Notarie, with long
and large gowns, some of Scarlet, and hoods furred with Mineuer, beside diverse
other great apparances, succeeding effectually daily in their several kinds.
Among whom, there returned (not long since) thence, one Master Simon da Villa,
more rich in possessions left him by his parents, then any knowledge thereto
obtained: yet clothed in Scarlet, with his Miniuer hood, and styled a Doctor
of Physic, which title he only bestowed on himself, and took a goodly
house for his dwelling, in the street which we commonly call La via del
Cocomero. This Master Doctor Simon, being thus newly come thither, among other
notable qualities in him, had one more especial then any of the rest, namely,
to know the names and conditions of such persons, as daily passed by his door,
and what professions they were of, whereby any likelihood might be gathered of
needing his help, and being his patients, observing them all with very
vigilant care.

But, among all the rest by him thus warily noted, he most observed two
Painters, of whom we have heretofore twice discoursed, Bruno and Buffalmaco,
who walked continually together, and were his near dwelling neighbors. The
matter which most of al he noted in them, was; that they lived metrily, and
with much less care, then any else in the City beside, and verily they did
so in deed. Wherefore, he demanded of diverse persons, who had good
understanding of them both, of what estate and condition they were. And
hearing by every one, that they were but poor men and Painters: he greatly
meruailed, how it could be possible for them, that they should live so
iocondly, and in such poverty. It was related to him further beside, that they
were men of a quick and ingenious apprehension, whereby he politikely
imagined, that their poor condition could not so well maintain them; without
some courses else, albeit not publicly known unto men, yet redounding to
their great commodity and profit. In which regard, he grew exceeding
desirous, by what means he might become acquainted, and grow into familiarity
with them both, or any of them, at the least: wherein (at the length) he
prevailed, and Bruno proved to be the man.

Now Bruno plainly perceiving (within a short while of this new begun
acquaintance) that the Physician was a Logger-head, and merely no better then
a Gregorian Animal: he began to have much good pastime with him, by telling
him strange and incredible Tales, such as none but a Coxcombe would give credit
too; yet they delighted Doctor Dunce extraordinarily, and Brunoes familiarity
was so highly pleasing to him, that he was a daily guest at dinner and supper
with him, and he was not meanly proud of enjoying his company. One day, as
they sat in familiar conference together, he told Bruno that he wondered not a
little at him and Buffalmaco, they being both so poor people, yet lived far
more iouially then Lords, and therefore desired to understand, by what secret
means they compassed such mirthful maintenance. Bruno, hearing the Doctors
demand, and perceiving that it sauoured more of the fool, then any the very
least taste of wisdom: smiled unto himself, and determined to return him
such an answer, as might be fitting for his folly, whereupon, thus he replied.

Believe me Master Doctor, I would not impart to many people, what private
helps we have for our maintenance: but yet I dare boldly acquaint you
therewith, in regard you are one of our most intimate friends, and of such
secrecy, as (I know) you will not reveal it to any. True it is, that mine
honest neighbor and my self, do lead our lives in such merry manner as you
see, and better then all the world is aware of, for I cannot imagine you to be
so ignorant, but are certainly persuaded: that if we had no better means, then
our poor manual trade and profession; we might sit at home with bread and
water, and be nothing so lively spirited as we are. Yet Sir, I would not have
you to conceive, that we do either rob or steal, or use any other unlawful
courses: only we travail to Corsica, from whence we bring (without the least
prejudice to any other) all things we stand in need of, or whatsoever we can
desire. Thus do we maintain our selves well and honestly, and live in this
mirthfull disposition.

Master Doctor hearing this Discourse, and believing it constantly, without any
further instruction or intelligence: became possessed with very much
admiration, and had the most earnest desire in the world, to know what this
Travailing to Corsica might mean: entreating Bruno with very great instances,
to tell him what it was, and made many protestations never to disclose it to
any one. How now Master Doctor? answered Bruno, What a strange motion do you
make to me? It is too great a secret, which you desire to know, yea, a matter
of mine own ruin, and an utter expulsion out of this World, with
condemnation into the mouth of Lucifer da San Gallo, if any man whatsoever
should know it from me, wherefore I pray you to urge it no more. O my deer and
honest neighbor Bruno (quoth the Doctor) assure thy self upon my soul, that
whatsoever thou reuealest to me, shall be under seal from all, but only our
selves. Fie, fie Master Doctor, answered Bruno, you are too pressing and
importunate. So sitting smiling to himself, shaking his head, and beating his
breast, as if he were in some strange distraction of mind, stamping with his
feet, and beating his Fiste oftentimes on the Table, at last he started up,
and spoke in this manner.

Ah Master Doctor, the love I bear to your capricious and rarely circumcised
experience, and likewise the confidence I repose in your scrutinous
taciturnitie, are both of such mighty and prevailing power; as I cannot
conceal any thing from you, which you covet to know. And therefore, if you will
swear unto me by the cross of Monteson, that never (as you have already
faithfully promised) you will disclose a secret so admirable; I will relate it
unto you, and not otherwise. The Doctor swear, and swear again, and then Bruuo
thus began.

Know then my learned and judicious Doctor, that it is not long time since,
when there lived in this City of ours, a man very excellent in the Art of
Nigromancie, who named himself Michale Scoto, because he was a Scottishman
borne, of many worthy Gentlemen (very few of them being now living) he was
much honored and respected. When he grew desirous to depart from hence, upon
their earnest motion and entreaty; he left here two of his Scholars behind
him, men of absolute skill and experience: giving them especial charge and
command, to do all possible services they could devise, for those Gentlemen who
had so highly honored him. The two famous Scholars, were very helpefull to
those Gentlemen, in diverse of their amorous occasions, and very many other
matters besides.

Not long after, they finding the City, and behavior of the people
sufficiently pleasing to them; they resolved on their continuance here,
entering into a league of love and friendship with diverse, never regarding,
whether they were Gentlemen, or no, or distinguishing the poor from the rich:
but only in being conform to their complexions, sociable and fit for
friendship.

They created a kind Society, consisting of about five and twenty men, who
should meet together twice in a month, and in a place reputed conueuient for
them: where being so assembled, every man uttered his mind to those two
Scholars, in such cases as they most desired, to have wherewith they were all
satisfied the self-same night. It came so to pass, that Buffalmaco and I, grew
into acquaintance with those two worthy Scholars, and our private familiarity
together proved so prosperous, that we were admitted into the same Society, and
so have ever since continued. Now Sir, I am to tell you matter deserving
admiration, and which (in very good judgments) would seem to exceed all
belief.

For, at every time when we were assembled together: you are not able to
imagine, what sumptuous hangings of Tapistrie, did adorn the Hall where we
sat at meat, the Tables covered in such Royal manner, waited on by
numberless Noble and goodly attendants, both Women and Men, serving readily,
at each man's command of the company. The Basins, Ewers, Pots, Flaggons, and all
the vessels else which stood before, and for the service of our diet, being
composed only of Gold and Silver, and out of no worse did we both eat and
drink: the viands being very rare and dainty, abounding in plenty and variety,
according to the appetite of every person, as nothing could be wished for, but
it was instantly obtained.

In good sadness Sir, I am not able to remember and tell you (within the
compass of a thousand years) what, and how many several kinds of Musical
Instruments, were continually played on before us; what multiplicity of Wax
lights burned in all parts of the rooms; neither the excessive store of rich
Drugs, Marchpanes, Comfites, and rare Banqueting stuff, consumed there at one
Feasting, wherein there wanted no bounty of the best and purest wines. Nor do I
(Master Doctor) repute you so weakly witted, as to think, that in the time of
our being thus assembled there, any of us al were clothed in such simple and
mean Garments, as ordinarily are worn in the streets on men's bodies, or any
so silly as the very best you have: No Sir, not any one man among us, but
appeared by his apparel, equal to the greatest Emperor on the earth, his
robe most sumptuously imbroidered with precious stones, Pearls, and
Carbuncles, as all the world affoordeth not the like. But above all the rest,
the delights and pleasures there, are beyond my capacity to express, or
(indeed) any comparison: as namely, store of goodly and beautiful women,
brought thither from all parts of the world; always provided, if men be
desirous of their company: but for your easier comprehension, I will make some
brief relation of them to you, according as I heard them there named.

There is the great Lady of Barbanicchia; the Queen of Baschia; the Wife to
the great Soldane, the Empress of Osbeccho; the Ciancianfera of Norniera; the
Semistante of Berlinzona; and the Scalpedra of Narsia. But why do I break my
brain, in numbering up so many to you? All the Queens of the world are there,
even so far as to the Schinchimurra of Prester John, that has a horn in the
midst of her posteriores, albeit not visible to every eye.

Now I am further to tell you, that after we have tasted a Cup of precious
Wine, fed on a few delicate Comfits, and danced a dance or two to the rare
Music: every one takes a Lady by the hand, of whom he pleases to make his
election, and she conducteth him to her Chamber, in very grave and gracious
manner. Concerning the Chambers there, each of them resembles a Paradise to
look on, they are so fair and goodly; and no less odorifferous in smell,
then the sweetest perfumes in your Apothecaries shoppes, or the rare compounds
of Spices, when they are beaten in an open Mortar. And as for the Beds, they
are infinitely richer, then the very costliest belonging to the Duke of
Venice: yet (in such) each man is appointed to take his rest, the Music of
rare Cymbals lasting all night long, much better to be by you considered, then
in my rude eloquence expressed.

But of all those rich and sumptuous Beds (if pride of mine own opinion do not
deceive me) them two provided for Buffalmaco and me, had hardly any equal: he
having the Queen of France as his Lady and Mistress, and I, the renowned
Queen of England, the only two choice beauties of the whole World, and we
appeared so pleasing in their eyes, as they would have refused the greatest
Monarkes on the earth, rather then to be rejected by us. Now therefore, you
may easily consider with your self, what great reason we have to live more
merrily, then any other men can do: in regard we enjoy the gracious favor of
two such Royal Queens, receiving also from them (whenever we please to
command them) a thousand or two thousand Florines at the least, which are both
truly and duly sent us. Enjoying thus the benefit of this high happiness, we
that are companions of this Society, do term it in our vulgar Language, The
Pirates voyage to Corsica. Because, as Rouers or Pirates rob and take away the
goods of such as they meet withal, even so do we: only there remains this
difference between us, that they never restore what they have taken: which we
do immediately afterward, whether it be required or no. And thus Master Doctor,
as to my most endeered friend, I have now revealed the meaning of sailing to
Corsica, after the manner of our private Pyracie, and how important the close
retention of the voyage is, you are best able your self to judge: In which
regard, remember your Oaths and faithful promises, or else I am undone for
ever.

Our worthy wise Doctor, whose best skill scarsely extended so far, as to
cure the itch in Children; gave such sound belief to the relation of Bruno, as
any man could do, to the most certain truth of life or death: having his
desire immeasurably enflamed, to be made a member of this strange Society,
which he more coueted, then any thing in the world beside, accounting it a
felicity far beyond all other.

Whereupon he answered Bruno, that it was no great matter of marvel, if he
lived so merrily as he did, having such a singular supply, to avoid all
necessities whatsoever: and very hardly could he refrain from immediate
request, to be accepted into the company. But yet he thought fit to defer it
further, until he had made Bruno more beholding to him, by friendly
entertainments and other courtesies, when he might (with better hope) be bold
to move the motion.

Well may you conceive, that nothing more hammerd in the Doctors head, then
this rare voyage to Corsica, and Bruno was his daily guest at dinner and
supper, with such extraordinary apparances of kindness and courtesy, as if
the Physician could not live, except he had the company of Bruno. Who seeing
himself to be so lovingly respected, and hating ingratitude, for favors so
abundantly heaped on him: he painted the whole story of Lent about his Hall,
and an Agnus Dei fairly gilt, on the portall of his Chamber, as also a goodly
Vrinall on his street door, to the end, that such as had need of his
counsel, might know where so judicious a Doctor dwelt. In a Gallery likewise
by his Garden, he painted the furious Battle between the Rats and Cats,
which did (not a little) delight Master Doctor.

Moreover, at such times as Bruno had not supt with our Physician, he would be
sure to tell him on the morrow, that the night passed, he had bin with the
Company which he did wot of. And there (quoth he) the Queen of England having
somewhat offended me, I commanded, that the Gomedra, belonging to the Grand
Cham of Tartaria, should be brought me, and instantly she was. What may be the
meaning of Gomedrabe? said the Doctor, I understand not those difficult names.
I believe you Sir, answered Bruno, nor do I need to marvel thereat: and yet I
have heard Porcograsso speak, and also Vannacenna, and both unexperienced in
our Language. You would say (replied the Doctor) Hippocrates and Auicenna, who
were two admirable Physicians. It may be so (said Bruno) and as hardly do I
understand your names, as you mine: but Gomedra, in the Grand Chams language,
signifies Empress in ours. But had you once seen her Sir, she would make you
forget all Physical observations, your arguments, receipts and medicines, only
to be in her heavenly presence, which words he used (perceiving his forward
longing) to inflame him the more. Not long after, as the doctor was holding the
candle to Bruno, at the perfecting the bloody Bat^ayle of the Cattes and
Rattes, because he could never be wearied in his Company, and therefore was
the more willing, to undergo the office of the Candle-holder: he resolved to
acquaint him with his mind, and being all alone by themselves, thus be began.

Bruno, as heaven knows, there is not this day any creature living, for whom
I would gladly do more, then for thee, and the very least word of thy mouth,
has power to command me to go barefooted, even from hence so far as to
Peretola, and account my labor well employed for thy sake: wherefore, never
wonder at my continual kindness toward thee, using thee as my Domesticke
companion, and embracing thee as my bosom friend, and therefore I am the
bolder in moving one request unto thee. As thou well know, it is no long
while since, when thou did acquaint me with the behavior of the Corsicane
Rouing Company, to be one in so rare and excellent a Society, such has bin my
earnest longing ever since, as day nor night have I enjoyed any rest, but
should think my felicity beyond all compare, if I could be entertained in
fellowship among you.

Nor is this desire of mine but upon great occasion, as thou thy self shall
perceive, if I prove accepted into your Society, and let me then be made a
mocking stock for ever, if I cause not to come thither, one of the most
delicate young women, that ever any eye beheld, and which I my self saw (not
above a year since) at Cacauinciglia, on whom I bestowed my intirest
affection, and (by the best Vrinall that ever I gazed on) would have given her
ten fair Bologninaes, to yield the matter I moved to her, which yet I could
not (by any means) compass. Therefore, with all the flowing faculties of my
soul I entreat thee, and all the very uttermost of my all indeed; to
instruct me in those ways and means, whereby I may hope to be a member of
you. Which if thou dooest accomplish for me, and I may find it effectually
performed: I shall not only be thy true and loyal friend for ever, but will
honor thee beside, beyond all men living.

I know thee to be a man of judgment, deeply informed in all well-grounded
experience: thou see what a propper, portly, and comely man I am, how fitly
my legs are answerable to my body, my looks amiable, lovely, and of Rosy
color: beside I am a Doctor of Physic, of which profession (being only most
expedient) I think you have not one in your Society. I have many commendable
qualities in me, as, playing on diverse instruments, exquisite in singing, and
composing rare ditties, whereof I will instantly sing thee one. And so he began
to sing.

Bruno was swollen so big with desire of laughter, that he had scarsely any
power to refrain from it: nevertheless, he made the best means he could
devise: and the Song being ended, the Physician said. How now Bruno? What is
thine opinion of my singing? Believe me Sir, replied Bruno, the Vialles of
Sagginali, will loose their very best times, in contending against you, so
mirilifficially are the sweet accents of your voice heard. I tell thee truly
Bruno (answered Master Doctor) thou could not by any possibility have
believed it, if thou had not heard it. In good sadness Sir (said Bruno) you
speak most truly. I could (quoth the Doctor) sing thee infinite more beside,
but at his time I must forbear them. Let me then further inform thee Bruno,
that beside the complete perfections thou see in me, my father was a
Gentleman, although he dwelt in a poor Country village, and by my mothers side,
I am derived from them of Vallecchio. Moreover, as I have formerly shown thee,
I have a goodly Library of Books, yea, and so fair and costly garments, as
few Physicians in Florence have the like. I protest to thee upon my faith, I
have one gown, which cost me (in ready money) almost an hundred pounds in
Bagattinoes, and it is not yet above ten years old. Wherefore let me prevail
with thee, good Bruno, to work so with the rest of thy friends, that I may be
one of your singular Society; and, by the honest trust thou reposest in me,
be boldly sick whenever thou will, my pains and Physic shall be freely
thine, without the payment of one single penny. Bruno hearing his importunate
words, and knowing him (as all men else did beside) to be a man of more words
then wit, said. Master Doctor, snuff the candle I pray you, and lend me a
little more light with it hitherward, until I have finished the tails of these
Rats, and then I will answer you.

When the Rats tails were fully finished, Bruno declaring by outward
behavior, that he greatly distasted the matter moved, thus answered. Worthy
Master Doctor, the courtesies you have already extended toward me, and the
bountiful favors promised beside, I know to be exceeding great, and far
beyond the compass of any merit in me. But concerning your request, albeit in
respect of your admired brain and Wisdom, it is of little or no moment at
all; yet it appears ouer-mighty to me, and there is not any man now living
in the world, that has the like Authority over me, and can more command me,
then you (with one poor syllable) easily may do: as well in regard of my
Love and Duty, as also your singular and sententious speeches, able not only
to make me break a sound and settled resolution, but (almost) to move
Mountains out of their places, and the more I am in your Learned company, so
much the faster am I lincked unto you, in immooueable affection, so far am I
in love with your admirable qualities. And had I no other reason, to affect you
in such endeared manner, as I do; yet because you are enamoured of so rare a
beauty, as you have already related to me, it only were a motive sufficient to
compel me. But indeed I must need tell you, that I have not so much power in
this case, as you (perhaps) do imagine, which barreth me from such forward
readiness, as otherwise needed not to be urged. Nevertheless, having so
solemnly engaged your faith to me, and no way misdoubting your faithful
secrecy, I shall instruct you in some means to be observed; and it appears
plainly to me, that being furnished with such plenty of Books, as you are, and
other rich endowments, as you have before rehearsed, you cannot but attain to
the full period of your longing desire.

Speak boldly thy mind Bruno, answered the Doctor: for, I perceive thou have
no perfect knowledge of me as yet, neither what an especial gift I have of
secrecy. Messer Gasparino da Salicete, when he was Judge and Potestat over the
people of Forlini, made choice of me (among infinite of his dearest friends)
to acquaint with a secret of no mean moment. And such a faithful Secretary he
found me, as I was the only man, that knew his marriage with Bergamino; why
then should any distrust be made of me? If it be so as you say Sir (answered
Bruno) your credit is the sounder, and I dare the better adventure on your
fidelity: the means then which you are to work by, I shall now direct you in.

We have always in this noble Society of ours, a Captain, and two
Counselors, which are changed at every six months end. And now at Christmas
next (so near drawing on) Buffalmaco shall be elected Captain, and my self
one of the Counselors, for so it is already agreed on, and orderly set down.
Now, he that is Captain, may do much more then any other can, and appoint
matters as himself pleases, Wherefore I think it very expedient, that so
soon as possibly you may, you procure acquaintance with Buffalmaco, entreating
him with all respective courtesy. He is a man, who when he perceyueth you to
be so wonderfully Wise and discreet, he will be immediately in love with you:
so, when you have your best senses about you, and your richest wearing Garments
on (always remembered, that your acquaintance first be fully confirmed) then
never fear to urge your request, for he can have no power at all to deny you;
because I have already spoken of you to him, and find him to stand affected
unto you very entirely: thus when you have begun the business, leave me to
deal with him in the rest.

Now trust me kind friend Bruno, replied the Physician, I like your advice
exceeding well. For, if he be a man, that takes delight to converse with men
of skill and judgment, and you have made the way for his knowing me: he will
him thirst, and long to follow after me, to understand the incredible
eloquence flowing from me, and the rare composition of my Musical Ditties, out
of which he may learn no mean wisdom. When the matter was thus agreed on
between them, Bruno departed thence, and acquainted Buffalmaco with every
circumstance: which made him think every day a year, until he might join
in the fooling of Master Doctor, according to his own fancy. Who being
also as desirous on the other side, to make one in the Corsicane Voyage; could
take no manner of rest either by day or night, till he was linked in friendship
with Buffalmaco, which very quickly after he compassed.

For now there wanted no costly dinners and suppers, with all delicates could be
devised, for the entertainment of Buffalmaco and Bruno; who, like Guests very
easy to be invited, where rich wines and good cheer are never wanting) needed
little sending for, be-because his house was as familiar to them, as their
own. In the end, when the Physician espied an opportunity apt for the
purpose, he made the same request to Buffalmaco, as formerly he had done to
Bruno. Whereat Buffalmaco, suddenly starting, and looking frowningly on Bruno,
as if he were extraordinarily incensed against him: clapping his hand furiously
on the Table, he said. I swear by the great God of Pasignano, that I can
hardly refrain from giving thee such a blow on the face, as should make thy
Nose to fall at thy heels: vile Traitor as thou art: for none beside thy
self, could discover so rare and excellent a secret unto this famous
Physician. The Doctor, with very plausible and pleasing terms, excused the
matter very artificially; protesting, that another had revealed it unto him:
and after many wise circumstantiall Allegations, at length he prevailed so
far, that Buffalmaco was pacified; who afterward turning in kind manner,
thus he began.

Master Doctor, you have lived both at Bologna, and here in these parts with
us, having (no doubt) sufficiently understood, what it is to carry a close
mouth, I mean the true Charracter of taciturnitie. Questionless, you never
learned the A. B. C. as now foolish Idiots do, blabbing their lessons all about
the town, which is much better apprehended by rumination; and surely (if I be
not much deceived) your Nativity happened on a Sunday morning, Sol being at
that time, Lord of the ascendent, joined with Mercury in a fiery Triplicitie.
By such conference as I have had with Bruno, I conceived (as he himself also
did) that you were very singular in Physic only: but it seems, your
Studies reached a higher strain, for you have learned, and know very
skilfullie, how to steal men's hearts from them, yea, to bereave them of their
very souls, which I perceive that you can far better do, then any man else
living to my knowledge, only by your wise, witty, judicious, and more then
mere Mercurian eloquence, such as I never heard before.

The Physician interrupting him bashfully, turned himself unto Bruno, saying.
Did not I tell thee this before? Observe what a notable thing it is, to speak
well, and to frequent the company of the Wise. A thousand other, merely
blocks and dullardes by Nature, could never so soon comprehend all the
particularities of my knowledge, as this honest and apprehensiue man has done.
Thou did not search into it half so soon, nor (indeed) did I express a
quarter of my ingenuity to thee, as (since his coming) has prodigally flowne
from me.

Well do I remember thy words, that Buffalmaco delighted to be among men of
Wisdom: and have I not now fitted him unto his own desire? How think thou
Bruno? The best (quoth Bruno) that any man living in the World could do. Ah
worthy Buffalmaco, answered the Physician: What would thou then have said,
if thou had seen me at Bologna, where there was neither great nor small,
Doctor nor Scholar, but thought themselves happy by being in my company? If I
ought any debts, I discharged them with my very witty words: and whenever I
spoke, I could set them al on a hearty laughter, so much pleasure they took in
hearing me. And when I departed thence, no men in the world could be more
sorrowful then they, as desiring nothing more then my remaining among them;
which they expressed so apparently, that they made humble suite and
intercession to me, to be chief Reader of the Physicke-Lecture, to all the
Scholars studying our profession. But I could not be so persuaded, because my
mind was wholly addicted hither, to enjoy those Goods, Lands, and
Inheritances, belonging lineally to them of our house, and accordingly I did
perform it.

How now Buffalmaco (quoth Bruno) what is thine opinion now? Thou would not
believe me when I told thee, that there is not a Doctor in all these parts,
more skillful in distinguishing the Urine of an Ass, from any other, then this
most expert and singular man: and I dare boldly maintain it, that his fellow
is not to be found, from hence to the very gates of Paris. Go then, and do
the uttermost endeavor that thou can, to grant the request which he has
made.

Believe me Buffalmaco, said the Doctor, Bruno has spoken nothing but truth,
for I am scarsely known here in this City, where (for the most part) they are
all grosse-wit^ed people, rather then any jot judicious: but I would thou had
seen me among the Doctors, in manner as I was wont to be. In Troth Sir, replied
Buffalmaco, you are much more Learned then ever I imagined, in which respect,
speaking unto you as it becomes me, to a man so excellent in wit and
understanding: I dare assure you, that (without any fail) I will procure you to
be one of our Company.

After this promise thus made, the good chea^e, favors and kindnesses done by
the Doctor to them, was beyond the compass of all relation: whereof they made
no more then a mere mockery, flouting him to his face, and yet his Wisdom
could not discern it. Moreover, they promised, that they would give him to
Wife, the fair Countess di Ciuillari, who was the only goodliest creature to
be found in the whole Culattario of humane generation. The Doctor demanded,
what Countess that was? Oh Sir, answered Buffalmaco, she is a great Lady, one
worthy to have issue by; and few houses are there in the world, where she has
not some jurisdiction and command: so that not mean people only, but even the
greatest Lords, at the sound of her Trumpets, do very gladly pay her tribute.
And I dare boldly affirm, that whenever she walks to any place, she
yields a hot and sensible savor, albeit she keeps most of all close. Yet
once every night, she duly observes it (as a Custom) to pass from her own
house, to bathe her feet in the River of Arno, and take a little of the
sweeter Air: albeit her continual residencie, is within the Kingdom of
Laterino.

She seldom walks abroad, but goes with her attending Officers about her,
who (for more demonstration of her greatness) do carry the Rod and plummet of
Lead. Store of her Lords and Barons are every where to be seen; as the
Tamagnino della porta, Don Meta di Sirropa; Manico di Scopa; Signior
Squacchera, and others beside, who are (as I suppose) oftentimes your daily
visitants, when of necessity they must be remembered. All our care and courtesy
shall extend so far (if we do not fail in our enterprise) to leave you in
the arms of so Maiestick a Lady, quite forgetting her of Cacauinciglia.

The Physician, who was borne and brought up at Bologna, and therefore
understood not these Florentine terms: became fully contented to enjoy the
Lady; and, within some few days following, the Painters brought him tidings,
that they had prepared the way for his entertainment into the Society of
Rouers. The day being come, when the supposed assembly was to be made the night
following: the Physician invited them both to dinner; when he demanding, what
provision he should make for his entrance into their company, Buffalmaco
returned him this answer, whereto he gave very heedfull attention.

Master Doctor, you must be first of all, strongly armed with resolution and
confidence: for, if you be not, you may not only receive hindrance, but also do
us great harm beside: and now you shall hear, in what manner, and how you are
to be bold and constant. You must procure the means, this instant night, when
all the people are in their soundest sleep, to stand upon one of those high
exalted Tombs or Monuments, which are in the Churchyard of Santa Maria Nouella,
with the very fairest gown you have about you, because you may appear in the
more honorable condition, before the assembly seated together, and likewise to
make good our speeches already delivered of you, concerning your quality and
profession: that the Countess, perceiving you to be a worthy Gentleman, may
have you first honored with the Bathe, and afterward Knighted at her own cost
and charge. But you must continue still upon the Tomb (dreadlesse of nightly
apparitions and visions) until such time as we send for you.

And for your better information in every particulare; a Beast, black and
horned, but of no great stature, will come to fetch you: perhaps he will use
some ghastly noises, strange leapes, and lofty tricks, only to terrify and
affright you: but when he perceives that he cannot daunt you, he will gently
come near you, which when he has done, you may descend from off the Tomb;
and, without naming or thinking on God, or any of his Saints, mount boldly on
his back, for he will stand ready to receive you. Being so seated, cross your
arms over your breast, without presuming to touch or handle the Beast, for he
will carry you thence softly, and so bring you along to the company. But if in
all this time of your travail, you call on heaven, any Saint, or be possessed
with the least thought of fear: I must plainly tell you, that either he will
cast you dangerously, or throw you into some noysom place. And therefore, if
you know your self, not to be of a constant courage, and sprightly bold, to
undertake such an adventure as this: never presume any further, because you may
do us a great deal of injury, without any gain or benefit to your self,
but rather such wrong, as we would be very sorry should happen happen unto so
dear a Friend.

Alas honest Buffalmaco, answered the Physician, thou art not half acquainted
with me as yet: because I walk with gloves upon my hands, and in a long Gown,
thou perhaps do imagine me a faint-hearted fellow. If thou did know,
what I have heretofore done at Bologna in the night time, when I and my
Consorts went to visit pretty wenches, thou would wonder at my courageous
attempts. As I am a Gentleman, one night, we met with a young Bona Roba, a
paltry greene-sicknesse baggage, scarsely above a Cubite in height, and because
she refused to go with us willingly, I gave her a kick on the bum, and spurnde
her more then a Crosse-bowe shoot in distance from me, and made her walk with
us whether she would, or no. Another time I remember, when having no other
company but my boy, I went through the Churchyard of the Friars Minors, after
the sounding of Aue Maria: a woman had been buried there the very same day,
and yet I was not a iotte afraid.

Wherefore, never be distrustful of me, but resoluedly build upon my
courage. And in regard of my more honorable entertainment, I will then wear
my Scarlet Gown and Hood, wherein I received my graduation; and then do both
of you observe, what a rejoicing will be among the whole company, at the
entertaining of such as a man as I am, enough to create me Captain immediately.
You shall perceive also how the case will go, after I have been there but a
while, in regard that the Countess (having as yet never seen me) is so
deeply enamored of me: she cannot choose but bestow the Bathe and Knighthood
on me, which she shall have the more honor of, in regard I am well able to
maintain it, therefore refer all the rest to me, and never misdoubt your
injury or mine.

Spoken like a Gallant, replied Buffalmaco, and I fear not now, but we shall
win credit by your company. But be careful I pray you, that you make not a
mockery of us, and come not at all, or fail to be there, when the Beast shall
be sent for you; I speak it the rather, because it is cold weather, and you
Gentlemen Physicians can hardly endure it. You are careful of me (quoth the
Doctor) and I thank you for it, but I applaud my fair Stars, I am none of
your nice or easie-frozen fellows, because cold weather is very familiar to
me. I dare assure you, when I arise in the night time for that natural office
whereto all men are subject, I wear no warmer defense, then my thin wastcoat
over my shirt, and find it sufficient for the coldest weather at any time.

When Bruno and Buffalmaco had taken their leave, the Physician, so soon as
night drew near, used many apt excuses to his wife, stealing forth his Scarlet
Gown and Hood unseen of any, wherewith being clothed: at the time appointed,
he got upon one of the Marble Tombs, staying there (quaking with cold)
awaiting when the Beast should come. Buffalmaco, being a lusty tall man of
person, had got an ugly masking suite, such as are made use of in Tragedies and
Plays, the outside being of black shagged hair, wherewith being clothed, he
seemed like a strange deformed Bear, and a Devils vizard over his face, with
two ghastly horrible horns, and thus disguised, Bruno following him, they went
to behold the issue of the business, so far as the new Market place, closely
adioining to Santa Maria Nouella.

Having espied Master Doctor upon the Tomb, Buffalmaco in his misshapen
habit, began to bound, leap, and carriere, snuffling and blowing in mad and
raging manner: which when the Physician saw, his hair stood on end, he quaked
and trembled, as being more fearful then a Woman, wishing himself at home
again in his house, rather then to behold a sight so dreadful. But because he
was come forth, and had such an earnest desire, to see the wonders related to
him; he made himself so coragious as possibly he could, and bare all out in
formal manner. After that Buffalmaco had (an indifferent while) plaide his
horse-trickes, ramping and stamping somewhat strangely: seeming as become of
much milder temper, he went near to the Tomb whereon the Physician stood, and
there appeared to stay contentedly.

Master Doctor, trembling and quaking still extremely, was so far dismayed,
as he knew not what was best to be done, either to mount on the beasts back,
or not to mount at all. In the end, thinking no harm could happen to him, if
he were once mounted, with the second fear, he expelled the former, and
descending down softly from the Tomb, mounted on the beast, saying out a
loud: God, Saint Dominicke, and my good Angel help to defend me. Seating
himself so well as he could, but trembling still exceedingly; he crossed his
arms over his stomach, according to the Lesson given him.

Then did Buffalmaco shape his course in mild manner, toward Santa Maria della
Scala, and groping to find his way in the dark, went on so far as the
Sisters of Ripole, commonly called the Virgin Sanctuary. Not far off from
thence, were diverse trenches and ditches, wherein such men as are employed in
necessary night-seruices, used to empty the Countess di Cimillari, and
afterward employed it for manuring Husbandmens grounds. Buffalmaco, being come
near one of them, he stayed to breath himself awhile, and then catching fast
hold on one of the Doctors feet, raised him somewhat higher on his back, for
the easier discharging of his burden, and so pitched him (with his head
forwards) into the Laystall.

Then began he to make a dreadful kind of noise, stamping and trampling with
his feet, passing back again to Santa Maria della Scala, and to Prato
d'Ognissanti, where he met with Bruno, who was constrained to forsake him,
because he could not refrain from loud Laughter, then both together went
back once more, to see how the Physician would behave himself, being so
sweetly embrued.

Master Doctor, seeing himself to ben in such an abominable stinking place,
labored with all his utmost endeuou^, to get himself released thence: but the
more he contended and strove or getting forth, he plunged himself the further
in, being most pitifully myred from head to foot* sighing and sorrowing
extraordinarily, because much of the foul water ent^ed in at his mouth. In the
end, being forced to leave his hood behind him, scr^mbling both with his hands
and feet, he got landing out of his stinking Labyrinth, and having no other
means, home he returned to his own house, where knocking at the door, he was
at length admitted entrance. The door being scarce made fast again after his
letting in, Buffalmaco and Bruno were there arrived, listening how M. Doctor
should be welcomd home by his angry wife: who scolding and railing at him with
wonderful impatience, gave him most hard and bitter speeches, terming him the
vilest man living.

Where have you bin Sir? quoth she. Are you become a night-walker after other
Women? And could no worse garments serve your turn, but your Doctors gown of
Scarlet? Am I to suffer this behavior? Or am not I sufficient to content you,
but you must be longing after change? I would thou had bin stifled in that
foul filth, where thy fouler life did justly cast thee. Behold goodly Master
Doctor of the Leystall, who being married to an honest woman must yet go abroad
in the night time, insatiatly lusting after whores and harlots. With these and
the like intemperate speeches, she ceased not to afflict and torment him, till
the night was almost spent, and the Doctor brought into a sweeter savor.

The next morning, Bruno and Buffalmaco, having colored their bodies with a
strange kind of painting, resembling blisters, swellings, and bruises, as if
they had bin extremely beaten; came to the Physicians house, finding him to be
newly up, all the house yet smelling of his foul savor (although it had bin
very well perfumed) and being admitted to him in the Garden, he welcomed them
with the mornings salutations. But Bruno and Buffalmaco (being otherwise
provided for him) delivering stearne and angry looks, stamping and chafing,
Bruno thus replied.

Never speak so fair and flattering to us, for we are moved beyond all
compass of patience. All misfortunes in the world fall upon you, and an evil
death may you dye, like the most false and perfidious Traitor living on the
earth. We must beat our brains, and move all our most endeared friends, only
for your honor and advancement: while we were well near starued to death in
the cold like Dogs, and, by your breach of promise, have bin this night so
extremely beaten, as if (like Asses) we should have been driven to Rome.

But that which is most grievous of all, is danger of excluding out of the
Society, where we took good order for your admittance, and for your most
honorable entertainment. If you will not credit us, behold our bodies, and let
your own eyes be witnesses, in what cruel manner we have bin beaten. So
taking him aside under the Gallery, where they might not be discovered by
overmuch light, they opened their bosoms, showed him their painted bodies, and
suddenly closed them up again.

The Physician labored to excuse himself, declaring his misfortunes at large,
and into what a filthy place he was thrown. It makes no matter (answered
Buffalmaco) I would you had bin thrown from off the Bridge into Arno, where
you might have been recommended to the Devil, and all his Saints. Did not I
tell you so much before. In good sadness (quoth the Doctor) I neither
commended my self to God, nor any of his Saints. How? said Buffalmaco, I am
sure you will maintain an untruth, you used a kind of recommendation: for
our messenger told us, that you talked of God, S. Dominicke, and your good
Angel, whom you desired to assist you, being so affrighted with fear, that
you trembled like a leaf upon a tree, not knowing indeed where you were. Thus
have you unfaithfully dealt with us, as never any man shall do the like
again, in seeking honor, and losing it through your own negligence.

Master Doctor humbly entreated pardon, and that they would not revile him any
more, laboring to appease them by the best words he could use, as fearing
least they should publish this great disgrace of him. And whereas (before) he
gave them gracious welcomes; now he redoubled them with far greater
courtesies, feasting them daily at his own table, and evermore delighting in
their company. Thus (as you have heard) two poor Painters of Florence, taught
Master Doctor better Wit, then all the Learned at Bologna.

A Cicilian Courtezane, named Madame Biancafiore, by her crafty wit and
policy, deceived a young Merchant, called Salabetto, of all the money he had
taken for his Wares at Palermo. Afterward, he making show of coming hither
again, with far richer Merchandises then he brought before: made the means
to borrow a great sum of Money of her, leaving her so base a pawn, as well
requited her for her former cozenage.

The Tenth Novel.
Whereby appears, that such as meet with cunning Harlots, and suffer
themselves to be deceived by them: must sharpen their Wits, to make them
requital in the selfsame kind.



Needless it were to question, whether the Novel related by the Queen, in
diverse passages thereof, moved the Ladies to hearty laughter, and likewise to
compassionate sighs and tears; as pitying Madame Helena in her hard
misfortune, and yet applauding the Scholar for his just revenge. But the
discourse being ended, Dioneus, who knew it was his Office to be the last
speaker every day, after silence was commanded, he began in this manner.

Worthy Ladies, it is a matter very manifest, that deceits do appear so much
the more pleasing, when (by the selfsame means) the subtle deceyuer is
artificially deceived. In which respect, though you all have reported very
singular deceits: yet I mean to tell you one, that may prove as pleasing to
you, as any of your own. And so much the rather, because the woman deceived,
was a great and cunning Mistress in beguiling others; equalling (if not
excelling) any of your former beguilers.

It has been observed heretofore, and (happily) at this very day it is as
frequent, that in all Cities and Towns upon the Seacoasts, having Ports for
the benefit and venting Merchandises; Merchants use to bring their wealthy
laden Vessels thither. And when they unlade any Ship of great fraught, there
are prepared Storehouses, which in many places are called Magazines or
Doganaes, at the charge of the Communalty, or Lord of the Town or City, for
the use whereof, they receive yearly gain and benefit. Into those warehouses,
they deliver (under writing, and to the owners of them in especial charge) all
their goods and merchandises, of what price or value soever they are.

Such as be the Owners of these Magazines, when the Wares are thus stored up
in them, do safely lock them up there with their keys, having first
registered down truly all the goods, in the Register belonging to the
Custom House, that the Merchant may have a just account rendered him, and the
rights paid to the Custom House, according to the Register, and as they are
either in part, or in all made sale of.

Brokers are continually there attending, being informed in the quality of the
Merchandises stored, and likewise to what Merchants they appertain: by means
of these men, and according as the goods come to their hands, they devise to
have them exchaunged, trucked, vented, and such other kinds of dispatches,
answerable to the men's minds, and worth of the Commodities. As in many other
Kingdoms and Countries, so was this custom observed at Palermo in Sicily,
where likewise then were, and (no doubt) now adays are, store of Women, fair
and comely of person, but yet vowed enemies to honesty.

Nevertheless, by such as know them not, they are held and reputed to be
blameless Women, and by yiedling their bodies unto general use, are the
occasion of infinite misfortunes to men. For so soon as they espy a
Merchant-stranger there arrived, they vvin information from the Book belonging
to the Magazin, what wares are therein stored, of what value they be, and who
is the Owner of them. Afterward, by amorous actions, and affable speeches,
they allure young Merchants to take knowledge of them, to be familiar in their
company, till from some they get most part of their wealth, from others all.
Nay, diverse have gone so far, as to make Port-sale of Ship, Goods, and
Person, so cunningly they have been shaven by these Barbers, and yet without
any Razor.

It came to pass, and no long time since, that a young Florentine of ours,
named Niccolo d^ Cignano, but more usually called Salabetto, employed as Factor
for his Master, arrived at Palermo; his Ship stored with many Woollen
Clothes, a remainder of such as had bin sold at the Mart of Salerno, amounting
in value to above five hundred Florines of Gold. When he had given in his
packet to the Custom House, and made them up safe in his Warehouse; without
making show of desiring any speedy dispatch, he delighted to view all parts of
the City, as men's minds are continually addicted to Novelties. He being a very
fair and affable young man, easy to kindle affection in a very modest eye: it
fortuned, that a Courtezane, one of our before remembered shauers, who termed
her self Madame Biancafiore, having heard somewhat concerning his affairs,
began to dart amorous glances at him. Which the indiscreete youth perceiving,
and thinking her to be some great Lady: began also to grow half persuaded,
that his comely person was pleasing to her, and therefore he would carry this
good fortune of his somewhat cautelously.

Without imparting his mind unto any one, he would daily pass too and fro
before her door; which she observing, and having indifferently wounded him
with her wanton piercing looks: she began to use the first trick of her
Trade, by pretending her enflamed affection toward him, which made her pine
and consume away in care, except he might be moved to pity her. Whereupon, she
sent one of her Pandoraes unto him, perfectly instructed in the Art of a
Maquerella, who (after many cunning counterfetted sighs, and tears, which she
had always ready at command, told him; that his comely person and complete
perfections, had so wounded the very soul of her Mistress, as she could enjoy
no rest in any place, either by day or night. In regard whereof, she desired
(above all things else) to meet with him privately in a Bathe: with which
Words, she straightway took a Ring forth of her pursse, and in most humble
manner, delivered it unto him, as a token from her Mistress.

Salabetto having heard this Message, was the only joyful man that could be:
and having received the Ring, looking on it advisedly; first kissed it, and
then put it upon his finger. Then in answer to the Messenger, he said: That if
her Mistress Biancafiore affected him, she sustained no loss thereby, in
regard he loved her as fervently, and was ready to be commanded by her, at any
time whenever she pleased.

She having delivered this message to her Mistress, was presently returned
back again to him, to let him understand, in which of the Bathes she meant to
meet him, on the next morrow in the evening. This being counsel for himself
only to keep, he imparted it not to any friend whatsoever; but when the hour
for their meeting was come, he went unto the place where he was appointed, a
Bathe (belike) best agreeing with such business.

Not long had he tarried there, but two Women slaves came laden to him, the one
bearing a Mattresse of fine Fustian on her head, and the other a great Basket
filled with many things. Having spread the Mattresse in a fair Chamber on a
Couch-bed, they covered it with delicate white Linen sheets, all about
embroidred with fair Fringes of gold, then laid they on costly quilts of rich
Silks, artificially wrought with gold and silver knots, having pearls and
precious stones interwouen among them, and two such rich pillowes, as sildome
before had the like bin seen. Salabetto putting off his garments, entered the
Bath prepared for him, where the two Slaves washed his body very neatly. Soon
after came Biancafiore hirselfe, attended on by two other women slaves, and
seeing Salabetto in the Bathe; making him a lowly reverence, breathing forth
infinite dissembled sighs, and tears trickling down her cheeks, kissing and
embracing him, thus she spoke.

I know not what man else in the world, beside thy self, could have the power
to bring me hither: the fire flew from thy fair eyes (O thou incompareable
lovely Tuscane) that melted my soul, and makes me only live at thy command.
Then hurling off her light wearing garment (because she came prepared for the
purpose) she stepped into the bathe to him, and, not permitting the Slaves a
while to come near, none but her self must now laue his body, with Musk
compounded Soap and Gilly-floures. Afterward, the slaves washed both him and
her, bringing two goodly sheets, soft and white, yielding such a delicate
smell of Roses, even as if they had been made of Rose-leaues. In the one, they
folded Salabetto, and her in the other, and so conveyed them on their shoulders
unto the prepared Bed-Couch, where because they should not sweat any longer,
they took the sheets from about them, and laid them gently in the bed.

Then they opened the Basket, wherein were diverse goodly Silver bottles, some
filled with Rosewaters, others with flowers of Orenges, and Waters distilled of
Gelsomine, Musk, and Ambergris, wherewith (again) the slaves bathed their
bodies in the bed, and afterward presented them with variety of Comfites, as
also very precious Wines, serving them in stead of a little Collation.
Salabetto supposed himself to be in Paradise: for this appeared to be no
earthly joy, bestowing a (...) (questionles se) was a (...) the Slaves, seemed
millions of year^ to him, (...) freely (...) the (...) Salabetto, bestowed
those further favors on him, which he came for, and she was not (...) was
exceedingly joyful, because he imagined, that they proceeded from the
integrity of her affection toward him.

When she thought it convenient time to depart thence, the slaves returned;
they clothed themselves, and had a Banquet standing ready prepared for them;
wherewith they cheared their wearye^ spirits, after they had first washed in
odorifferous w^ters. At parting: Salabetto (quoth she) whenever thy leysures
shall best serve thee, I will repute it as my cheifest happiness, that thou will accept a Supper and Lodging in my house, which let it be this instant
night, if thou can. He being absolutely caught, both by hi^ beauty and
flattering behavior: believed faithfully, that he was as entirely beloved of
her, as the heart is of the body: whereupon he thus answered. Madame,
whatsoever pleases you, must needs be much more acceptable unto me: and
therefore, not only may command my service this night, but likewise the whole
employment of my life, to be only yours in my very best studies and endeauours.

No sooner did she hear this answer, but she returned home to her own house,
which she decked in most sumptuous manner, and also made ready a costly Supper,
expecting the arrival of Satabetto: who when the dark night was indifferently
well entered, went thither, and was welcomed with wonderful kindness, wanting
no costly Wines and Delicates all the Supper (...). Being afterward conducted
into a goodly Chamber, he (...) here admirable sweet senting sauors, such as
might well beseem a Princes Palace. He beheld a most costly Bed, and very
rich (...) round about the room: which when he had duly considered to himself,
he was constantly persuaded, that she was a Lady of infinite wealth, And
although he had heard diverse flying reports concerning (...) life, yet he
would not credit any thing (...) of her, for (...) she might (perhaps)
beguile some other; yet she affected (...) (he thought) in better manner, and
no such misfortune could happen to him.

Having spent all the night with her in want on (...) being risen in the
morning; to inflame his affection more and (...) toward her, and to prevent
any (...) opinion he might (...) her, she bestowed a rich and (...) on him, as
also a (...) most curiously wrought, saying to him. My sweet Salabetto, with
these testimonies of my true affection to thee, I give thee faithfully to
understand, that as my person is only subjected thine; so this house and all
the riches in it, remains absolutely at thy disposition, or whatsoever
hereafter shall happen within the compass of my power.

He being not a little proud of this her bountiful offer (having never
bestowed any gift on her, because by no means she would admit it) after many
sweet kisses and embraces; departed thence, to the place where the Merchants
usually frequented: resorting to her (from time to time) as occasion served,
and paying not one single penny for all his wanton pleasure, by which cunning
baytes (at length) she caught him.

It came to pass, that having made sale of all his Clothes, whereby he had
great gains, and the moneys justly paid him at the times appointed:
Biancafiore got intelligence thereof; yet not by him, but from one of the
Brokers. Salabetto coming one night to sup with her, she embraced and kissed
him as she was wont to do, and seemed so wonderfully addicted in love to him,
even as if she would have dyed with delight in his arms. Instantly, she
would needs bestow two goodly gilt standing Cups on him, which Salabetto by
no means would receive, because she had formerly bin very bountiful to him,
to above the value of an hundred Crowns, and yet she would not take of him so
much as a mite. At length, pressing still more tokens of her love and bounty on
him, which he as courteously denied, as she kindly offered: one of her*
Womenslaues (as she had before cunningly appointed) suddenly calling her,
forthwith she departed out of her Chamber. And when she had continued a pretty
while absent, she returned again weeping, and throwing her self down upon
her Pallet, breathed forth such sighs and woeful lamentations, as no Woman
could possibly do the like.

Salabetto amazedly wondering thereat, took her in his Arms, and weeping also
with her, said. Alas my dear Love, what sudden accident has befalne you, to
urge this lamentable alteration? If you love me, hide it not from me. After he
had often entreated her in this manner, casting her arms about his neck, and
sighing as if her heart would break, thus she replied.

Ah Salabetto, the only Jewel of my joy on earth, I know not what to do, or
say, for (even now) I received Letters from Messi^a, wherein my Brother writes
to me, that although it cost the sale of all my goods, or whatsoever else I
have beside, I must (within eight days space) not fail to send him a thousand
Florins of gold, or else he must have his head smitten off, and I know not by
what means to procure them so soon. For, if the limitation of fifteen days
might serve the turn, I could borrow them in a place, where I can command a
far greater sum, or else I would sell some part of our Lands. But being no
way able to furnish him so soon, I would I had died before I heard these
dismal tidings. And in the uttering of these words, she graced them with such
cunning dissembled sorrow, as if she had meant truly indeed.

Salabetto, in whom the fury of his amorous flames, had consumed a great part
of his necessary understanding, believing these counterfetted tears and
complaints of hers, to proceed from an honest meaning soul; rashly and
foolishly thus replied. Dear Biancafiore, I cannot furnish you with a thousand
golden Florines, but am able to lend you five hundred, if I were sure of their
repayment at fifteen days, wherein you are highly beholding to Fortune, that
I have made sale of all my Clothes; which if they had lain still on my hand,
my power could not stretch to lend you five Florines. Alas dear heart (quoth
she) would you be in such want of money, and hide it from her that loves you so
loyally? Why did you not make your need known to me? Although I am not
furnished of a thousand Florines; yet I have always ready three or four
hundred by me, to do any kind office for my friend. In thus wronging me, you
have robbed me of all boldness, to presume upon your offer made me. Salabetto, far
faster inveigled by these words then before, said. Let not my folly (bright
Biancafiore) cause you to refuse my friendly offer, in such a case of extreme
necessity: I have them ready prepared for you, and am heartily sorry, that my
power cannot furnish you with the whole sum.

Then catching him fast in her arms, thus she answered. Now I plainly
perceive, my dearest Salabetto, that the love thou bear me is true and
perfect; when without expectation of being requested, thou art ready to
succor me in such an urgent need, and with so fair a sum of Florines.
Sufficiently was I thine own before, but now am much more engaged by so high
deserving; with this particular acknowledgement for ever, that my Brothers head
was redeemed by thy goodness only. Heaven bears me record, how unwilling I
am to be beholding in this kind, considring that you are a Merchant, and
Merchants furnish al their affairs with ready monis: but seeing necessity
constrains me, and I make no doubt of repaiment at the time appointed: I
shall the more boldly accept your kindness, with this absolute promise beside,
that I will rather sell all the houses I have, then break my honest word with
you

Counterfeit tears still drayning down her cheeks, and Salabetto kindly
comforting her; he continued there with her all that night, to express
himself her most liberal servant. And, without expecting any more requesting,
the next morning he brought her the five hundred Florines, which she received
with a laughing heart, but outward dissembled weeping eyes; Salabetto never
demanding any other security, but only her single promise.

Biancafiore, having thus received the five hundred Florines, the indiction of
the Almanacke began to alter: and whereas (before) Salabetto could come see her
whenever he pleased, many occasions now happened, whereby he came seven times
for once, and yet his entrance was scarsely admitted, neither was his
entertainment so affable, or his cheer so bountiful, as in his former
accesses thither. Moreover, when the time for repaiment was come, yea a month
or two ouer-past, and he demanded to have his money; he could have nothing but
words for payment. Now he began to consider on the craft and cunning of this
wicked Woman, as also his own shallow understanding, knowing he could make no
proof of his debt, but what her self listed to say, having neither witness,
specialty, bill or bond to show: which made his folly so shameful to him, that
he durst not complain to any person, because he had received some
aduertisements before, whereto he would by no means listen, and now should have
no other amends, but public infamy, scorn and disgrace, which made him
almost weary of his life, and much to bemoane his own unhappiness. He
received also diverse Letters from his Master, to make return of the 500.
Florines over by way of bank, according as he had used to do: but now could
perform no such matter.

Hereupon, because his error should not be discovered, he departed in a small
vessel thence, not making for Pisa, as he should have done, but directly for
Naples he shaped his course. At that instant lodged there, Don Pietro della
Conigiano, Treasurer of the Empress of Constantinople, a man of great wisdom
and understanding, as also very ingenious and politic, he being an especial
Favorer of Salabetto and all his friends, which made him presume the more
boldly (being urged thereto by mere necessity, the best corrector of wandering
wits) to acquaint him with his lamentable misfortune, in every particular as it
had happened, requesting his aid and advice, how he might best wear out the rest
of his days, because he never meant to visit Florence any more.

Conigiano being much displeased at the repetition of his Folly, sharply
reproved him, saying. Thou have done leudly, in carrying thy self so loosely,
and spending thy Masters goods so carelessly, which though I cannot truly term
spent, but rather art merely cous^ned and cheated of them, yet thou see at
what a dear rate thou have purchased pleasure, which yet is not utterly
helpless, but may by one means or other be recovered. And being a man of
wonderful apprehension, advised him instantly what was to be done,
furnishing him also with a sum of money, wherewith to adventure a second
loss, in hope of recovering the first again: he caused diverse Packes to be
well bound up, with the Merchants marks orderly made on them, and bought about
twenty Buttes or Barrelles, all filled (as it were) with Oil, and these
pretended commodities being shipped, Salabetto returned with them to Palermo.
Where having given in his packets to the Custom House, and entered them all
under his own name, as being both owner and factor: all his Wares were locked
up in his Magizine, with open publication, that he would not vent any of them,
before other merchandises (which he daily expected) were there also arrived.

Biancafiore having heard thereof, and understanding withal, that he had
brought Merchandises now with him, amounting to above two thousand Florins,
staying also in expectation of other commodities, valewing better then three
thousand more, she began to consider with her self, that she had not yet
gotten money enough from him, and therefore would cast a figure for a far
bigger booty. Which that she might the more fairly effect, without so much as
an imagination of the least mistrust: she would repay him back his five
hundred Florines, to win from him a larger portion of two or three thousand
at the least, and having thus settled her determination, she sent to have him
come speak with her. Salabetto, having been soundly bitten before, and
therefore the better warranted from the like ranckling teeth; willingly went to
her, not showing any sign of former discontent: and she, seeming as if she
knew nothing of the wealth he brought with him, gracing him in as loving manner
as ever she had done, thus she spoke.

I am sure Salabetto, you are angry with me, because I restored not your
Florines at my promised day. Salabetto smiling, presently answered. Believe me
Lady (quoth he) it did a little distaste me, even as I could have bin offended
with him, that should pluck out my heart to bestow it on you, if it would
yield you any contentment. But to let you know unfeignedly, how much I am
incensed with anger against you: such and so great is the affection I bear
you, that I have sold the better part of my whole estate, converting the same
into Wealthy Merchandises, which I have already brought hither with me, and
valewing above two thousand Florines, all which are stored up in my Magazine.
There must they remain, till another Ship come forth of the Western parts,
wherein I have a much greater adventure, amounting unto more then three
thousand Florines. And my purpose is, to make my aboade here in this City,
which has won the sole possession of my heart, only in regard of my
Biancafiore, to who^ I am so entirely devoted, as both my self, and whatsoever
else is mine (now or hereafter) is dedicated only to her service; whereto thus
she replied.

Now trust me Salabetto, whatsoever redoundeth to thy good and benefit, is the
cheifest comfort of my soul, in regard I prize thy love dearer then mine own
life, and am most joyful of thy rerurne hither again; but much more of thy
still abiding here, because I intend to live only with thee, so soon as I
have taken order for some business of import. In the mean while, let me
entreat thee to hold me excused, because before thy departure hence, thou
came sometimes to see me, without thy entrance admitted; and other-whiles
again, found not such friendly entertainment, as formerly had been affoorded.
But indeed, and above all the rest, in not re-paying thy money according to my
promise. But consider good Salabetto, in what great trouble and affliction of
mind I then was, both in regard of my Brothers danger, and other important
occurrences beside, which mollestations do much distract the senses, and hinder
kind courtesies, which otherwise would be extended liberally.

Last of all consider also, how difficult a thing it is for a woman, so
suddenly to raise the sum of a thousand golden Florines, when one friend
promises, and performs not; another protests, yet has no such meaning; a
third swears, and yet proves a false Liar: so that by being thus ungently
used, a breach is made between the best friends living. From hence it
proceeded, and no other defect else, that I made not due return of your five
hundred Florins. No sooner were you departed hence, but I had them ready, and
as many more, and could I have known whither to send them, they had been with
you long time since, which because I could not (by any means) compass, I kept
them still for you in continual readiness, as hoping of your coming hither
again. So causing a purse to be brought, wherein the same Florines were, which
he had delivered her; she gave it into his hand, and prayed him to count them
over, whether there were so many, or no.

Never was Salabettoes heart half so joyful before; and having counted them,
found them to be his own five hundred Florines: then, putting them up into his
pocket, he said. Comfort of my life, Full well I know that whatsoever you have
said, is most certain; but let us talk no more of falsehood in friendship, or
casual accidents happening unexpected: you have dealt with me like a most
loyal Mistress, and here I protest vnsainedly to you, that as well in
respect of this kind courtesy, as also the constancy of mi^e affection to
you, you cannot request hereafter a far greater sum of me, to supply any
necessary occasion of yours; but (if my power can perform it) you shall
assuredly find it certain: make proof thereof whenever you please, after
my other goods are Landed, and I have established my estate here in your City.

Having in this manner renewed his wonted amity with her, and with words far
enough off from all further meaning: Salabetto began again to frequent her
company, she expressing all former familiarity, and showing her self as
lauishly bountiful to him, in all respects as before she had done, nay, many
times in more magnificent manner.

But he intending to punish her notorious treachery toward him, when she left
him as an open scorn to the World, wounded with disgrace, and quite out of
credit with all his friends: she having (on a day) solemnly invited him, to
suppe and lodge in her house all night; he went, both with sad and melancholy
looks, seeming as overcome with extremity of sorrow. Biancafiore meruayling
at this strange alteration in him, sweetly kissing and embracing him: would
needs know the reason of his passionate affliction, and he permitting her to
urge the question oftentimes together, without returning any direct answer; to
quit her in her kind, and with coin of her own stamp, after a few dissembled
sighs, he began in this manner.

Ah my dearest Love, I am utterly undone, because the Ship containing the
rest of mine expected Merchandises, is taken by the Pirates of Monago, and put
to the ransom of ten thousand Florines of Gold, and my part particularly, is
to pay one thousand. At this instant I am utterly destitute of money, because
the five hundred Florines which I received of you, I sent hence the next day
day following to Naples, to buy more clothes, which likewise are to be sent
hither. And if I should now make sale of the Merchandises in my Magazine (the
time of general utterance being not yet come) I shall not make a pennyworth
for a penny. And my misfortune is the greater, because I am not so well known
here in your City, as to find some succor in such an important distress;
wherefore I know not what to do or say. Moreover, if the money be not speedily
sent, our goods will be carried into Monago, and then they are past all
redemption utterly.

Biancafiore appearing greatly discontented, as one verily persuaded, that this
pretended loss was rather hers, then his, because she aimed at the mainest
part of all his wealth: began to consider with her self, which was the
likeliest course to be taken, for saving the goods from carriage to Monago:
whereupon thus she replied. Heaven knows (my dearest Salabetto) how thy love
makes me sorrowful for this misfortune, and it greeueth me to see thee any
way distressed: for if I had money lying by me (as many times I have) thou
should find succor from my self only, but indeed I am not able to help
thee. True it is, there is a friend of mine, who did lend me five hundred
Florines in my need, to make up the other sum which I borrowed of thee: but
he demands extreme interest, because he will not abate any thing of thirty in
the hundred, and if you should be forced to use him, you must give him some
good security. Now for my part, the most of my goods here I will pawn for
thee: but what pledge can you deliver in to make up the rest? Well did Salabetto
conceive, the occasion why she urged this motion, and was so diligent in doing
him such a pleasure: for it appeared evidently to him, that herself was to
lend the money, whereof he was not a little joyful, seeming very thankful to her.
Then he told her, that being driven to such extremity, how unreasonable soever
the usury was, yet he would gladly pay for it. And for her Friends further
security, he would pawn him all the goods in his Magazine, entering them
down in the name of the party, who lent the money. Only he desired to keep
the Keys of the Warehouse, as well to show his Merchandises, when any
Merchant should be so desirous: as also to preserve them from ill using,
transporting or changing, before his redemption of them.

She found no fault with his honest offer, but said, he showed himself a
well-meaning man, and the next morning she sent for a Broker, in whom she
reposed especial trust; and after they had privately consulted together, she
delivered him a thousand Golden Florines, which were carried by him presently to
Salabetto, and the Bond made in the Brokers name, of all the goods remaining in
Salabettoes warehouse, with composition and absolute agreement, for the
prefixed time of the moneys repaiment. No sooner was this trick fully
accomplished, but Salabetto seeming as if he went to redeem his taken goods:
set sail for Naples toward Pietro della Canigiano, with fifteen hundred
Florines of Gold: from whence also he sent contentment to his Master at
Florence (who imployd him as his Factor at Palermo) beside his own packes of
Clothes. He made repayment likewise to Canigniano, for the moneys which
furnished him in this last voyage, and any other to whom he was indebted. So
there he stayed awhile with Canigniano, whose counsel thus help him to
out-reach the Sicillian Courtezane: and meaning to deal in Merchandise no
more, afterward he returned to Florence and there lived in good reputation.

Now as concerning Biancafiore, when she saw that Salabetto returned not again
to Palermo, she began to grow somewhat a^^shed, as half suspecting that
which followed. After she had (...) for him above two months space, and
perceived he came not, nor any tidings heard of him: she caused the Broker to
break open the Magazine, casting forth the Buttes or Barrels, which she
believed to be full of good Oils. But they were all filled with Seawater,
each of them having a small quantity of Oil floating on the top, only to
serve when a trial should be made. And then unbinding the Packes, made up in
formal and Merchantable manner: there was nothing else in them, but Logges and
stumpes of Trees, wrapped handsomely in hurdles of Hemp and Tow; only two had
Clothes in them. So that (to be brief) the whole did not value two hundred
Crowns: which when she saw, and observed how cunningly she was deceived: a
long while after she sorrowed, for repaying back the five hundred Florines,
and folly in lending a thousand more, using it as a Proverb always after to
her self: That whosoever dealt with a Tuscane, had need to have sound sight
and judgment. So remaining contented (whither she would or no) with her loss:
she plainly perceived, that although she lived by cheating others, yet now at
the length she had met with her match.

SO soon as Dioneus had ended his Novel, Madame Lauretta also knew, that the
conclusion of her Regiment was come; whereupon, when the counsel of Canigiano
had past with general commendation, and the wit of Salabetto no less
applauded, for fitting it with such an effectual prosecution; she took the
Crown of Laurel from her own head, and set it upon Madame Aemilliaes,
speaking graciously in this manner. Madam, I am not able to say, how pleasant a
Queen we shall have of you, but sure I am, that we shall enjoy a fair one:
let matters therefore be so honorably carried; that your government may be
answerable to your beautiful perfections; which words were no sooner
delivered, but she sat down in her mounted seat.

Madame Aemillia being somewhat bashful, not so much of her being created
Queen, as to hear her self thus publicly praised, with that which Women do
most of all desire: her face then appearing, like the opening of the Damask
Rose, in the goodlyest morning. But after she had a while dejected her looks,
and the Vermillion blush was vanished away: having taken order with the Master
of the household, for all needful occasions befitting the assembly, thus she
began.

Gracious Ladies, we behold it daily, that those Oxen which have labored in
the yoke most part of the day, for their more convenient feeding, are let
forth at liberty, and permitted to wander abroad in the Woods. We see moreover,
that Gardens and Orchards, being planted with variety of the fairest fruit
Trees, are equalled in beauty by Woods and Forests, in the plentiful enjoying
of as goodly spreading branches. In consideration whereof, remembering how many
days we have already spent (under the severity of Laws imposed) shaping all
our discourses to a form of observation: I am of opinion, that it will not
only well become us, but also prove beneficial for us, to live no longer
under such restraint, and like enthralled people, desirous of liberty, we
should no more be subjected to the yoke, but recover our former strength in
walking freely.

Wherefore, concerning our pastime purposed for to morrow, I am not minded to
use any restriction, or tie you unto any particular ordination: but rather do
liberally grant, that every one shall devise and speak of arguments agreeing
with your own dispositions.

Besides, I am verily persuaded, that variety of matter uttered so freely, will
be much more delightful, then restraint to one kind of purpose only. Which
being thus granted by me, whosoever shall succeed me in the government, may (as
being of more power and pre-eminence) restrain all back again to the
accustomed laws. And having thus spoken, she dispensed with their any longer
attendance, until it should be Supper time.

Every one commended the Queens appointment, allowing it to relish of good
wit and judgment; and being all risen, fell to such exercises as they pleased.
The Ladies made Nosegaies and Chaplets of Flowers, the men played on their
Instruments, singing diverse sweet Ditties to them, and thus were busied until
Supper time. Which being come, and they supping about the beautiful
Fountain: after Supper, they fell to singing and dancing. In the end, the
Queen, to imitate the order of her predecessors, commanded Pamphilus, that
notwithstanding all the excellent songs formerly sung: he should now sing one,
whereunto dutifully obeying, thus he began.

THE SONG.
The Chorus sung by all.
LOVE, I found such felicity,
And joy, in thy captivity:
As I before did never prove,
And thought me happy, being in Love.
COmfort abounding in my heart,
Joy and Delight
In soul and spright
I did possess in every part;
O Sovereign Love by thee.
Thy Sacred fires,
Fed my desires,
And still aspires,
Thy happy thrall to be.
Love, I found such felicity, etc.
My Song wants power to relate,
The sweets of mind
Which I did find
In that most blissful state,
O Sovereign Love by thee.
No sad despair,
Or killing care
Could me prepare;
Still thou did comfort me.
Love, I found such felicity, etc.
I hate all such as do complain,
Blaspheming thee
With Cruelty,
And sleights of coy disdain.
O Sovereign Love, to me
Thou have been kind:
If others find
Thee worse inclinde,
Yet I will honor thee.
LOVE, I found such felicity,
And joy in thy Captivity:
As I before did never prove,
But thought me happy, being in Love.
Thus the Song of Pamphilus ended, whereto all the rest (as a Chorus) answered
with their Voices, yet every one particularly (according as they felt their
Loue-sicke passions) made a curious construction thereof, perhaps more then
they needed, yet not Divining what Pamphilus intended. And although they were
transported with variety of imaginations; yet none of them could ariue at his
true meaning indeed. Wherefore the Queen, perceiving the Song to be fully
ended, and the Ladies, as also the young Gentlemen, willing to go take their
rest: she commanded them severally to their Chambers.

The End of the Eight Day.
THE NINTH DAY.
Whereon, under the Government of Madame AEMILLIA, the Argument of each
several Discourse, is not limited to any one peculiar subject: but every one
remains at liberty, to speak of whatsoever themselves best pleases.

The Induction.
Fair Aurora, from whose bright and cheerful looks, the duskie dark night
flies as an utter enemy, had already reached so high as the eight Heaven,
converting it all into an Azure color, and the pretty Flowrets began to
spread open their Leaves: when Madame Aemillia, being risen, caused all her
female attendants, and the young Gentlemen likewise, to be summoned for their
personal appearance. Who being all come, the Queen leading the way, and they
following her Maiesticke pace, walked into a little Wood, not far off distant
from the Palace.

No sooner were they there arrived, but they beheld store of Wild Beasts, as
Hindes, Hares, Goats, and such like; so safely secured from the pursuit of
Huntsmen (by reason of the violent Pestilence then reigning) that they stood
gazing boldly at them, as dreadlesse of any danger, or as if they were become
tame and Domesticke.

Approaching nearer them, first to one, then unto another, as if they purposed
to play gently with them, they then began to skippe and run, making them
such pastime with their pretty tripping, that they conceived great delight in
beholding of them.

But when they beheld the Sun to exalt it self, it was thought convenient to
return back again, shrouding themselves under the Trees spreading arms, their
hands full of sweet Flowers and Odorifferous Herbs, which they had gathered
in their Walking. So that such as chanced to meet them, could say nothing
else: but that death knew not by what means to conquer them, or else they had
set down an absolute determination, to kill him with their Iouiall disposition.

In this manner, singing, dancing, or prettily prattling, at length they arrived
at the Palace, where they found all things readily prepared, and their Servants
duly attending for them. After they had reposed themselves awhile, they would
not (as yet) sit down at the Table, until they had sung half a dozen of
Canzonets, some more pleasant then another, both the women and men together.

Then they fell to washing hands, and the Master of the Household caused them
to sit down, according as the Queen had appointed, and Dinner was most
sumptuously served in before them. Afterward, when the Tables were with-drawne,
they all took hands to dance a Roundelay: which being done, they played on
their Instruments a while; and then, such as so pleased, took their rest. But
when the accustomed hour was come, they all repaired to the place of
discoursing, where the Queen, looking on Madam Philomena, gave her the honor of
beginning the first Novel for that day: whereto she dutifully condiscending,
began as follows.

Madam Francesca, a Widow of Pistoya, being affected by two Florentine
Gentlemen, the one named Rinuccio Palermini, and the other Alessandro
Chiarmontesi, and she bearing no good will to either of them; ingeniously freed
her self from both their importunate suites. One of them she caused to lie as
dead in a grave, and the other to fetch him from thence: so neither of them
accomplishing what they were enjoined, failed of obtaining his hoped
expectation.

The First Novel.
Approving, that chaste and honest Women, ought rather to deny importunate
suitors, by subtle and ingenious means, then fall into the danger of scandal
and slander.



MAdame, it can no way discontent me (seeing it is your most gracious
pleasure) that I should have the honor, to break the first staff of freedom
in this fair company (according to the iniunction of your Majesty) for liberty
of our own best liking arguments: wherein I dismay not (if I can speak well
enough) but to please you all as well, as any other that is to follow me. Nor
am I so obliuious (worthy Ladies) but full well I remember, that many times
has been related in our passed demonstrations, how mighty and variable the
powers of love are: and yet I cannot be persuaded, that they have all been so
sufficiently spoken of, but something may be further added, and the bottom of
them never diued into, although we should sit arguing a whole year together.
And because it has been already approved, that Lovers have been led into
diverse accidents, not only inevitable dangers of death, but also have entered
into the very houses of the dead, thence to convey their amorous friends: I
purpose to acquaint you with a Novel, beside them which have been discoursed;
whereby you may not only comprehend the power of Love, but also the wisdom
used by an honest Gentlewoman, to rid her self of two importunate suitors, who
loved her against her own liking, yet neither of them knowing the others
affection.

In the City of Pistoya, there dwelt sometime a beautiful Gentlewoman, being a
Widow, whom two of our Florentines (the one named Rinuccio Palermini, and the
other Alessandro Chiarmontesi, having withdrawn themselves to Pistoya)
desperately affected, the one ignorant of the others intention, but each
carrying his case closely, as hoping to be possessed of her. This Gentlewoman,
named Madame Francesca de Lazzari, being often solicited by their messages, and
troublesomely pestered with their importunities: at last (less advisedly then
she intended) she granted admittance to hear either of them speak. Which she
repenting, and coveting to be rid of them both, a matter not easy to be done:
she wittily devised the only means, namely, to move such a motion to them, as
neither would willingly undertake, yet within the compass of possibility; but
they failing in the performance, she might have the more honest occasion, to
be free from all further mollestation by them, and her politic intention was
thus proiected.

On the same day, when she devised this piece of service, a man was buried in
Pistoya, and in the Churchyard belonging unto the gray Friars, who being
descended of good and worthy parentage: yet himself was very infamous, and
reputed to be the vilest man living, not only there in Pistoya, but throughout
the whole World beside. Moreover, while he lived, he had such a strange
misshapen body, and his face so ugly deformed, that such as knew him not, would
stand ghastly affrighted at the first sight of him. In regard whereof, she
considered with her self, that the foul deformity of this loathed fellow,
would greatly avail in her determination, and consulting with her
Chambermaid, thus she spoke.

Thou know (my most true and faithful servant) what trouble and affliction
of mind I suffer daily, by the messages and Letters of the two Florentines,
Rinuccio and Alessandro, how hate-their importunity is to me, as being utterly
unwilling to hear them speak, or yield to any thing which they desire.
Wherefore, to free myself from them both together, I have devised (in regard
of their great and liberal offers) to make trial of them in such a matter, as
I am assured they will never perform.

It is not unknown to thee, that in the Churchyard of the Gray Friars, and
this instant morning, Scannadio (for so was the ugly fellow named) was buried;
of whom, when he was living, as also now being dead, both men, women, and
children, do yet stand in fear, so ghastly and dreadful always was his
personal appearance to them. Wherefore, first of all go thou to Alessandro,
and say to him thus. My Mistress Francesca has sent me to you, to tell you,
that now the time is come, wherein you may deserve to enjoy her love, and gain
the possession of her person, if you will accomplish such a motion as she
makes to you. For some especial occasion, wherewith hereafter you shall be
better acquainted, a near Kinsman of hers, must needs have the body of
Scannadio (who was buried this morning) brought to her house. And she, being as
much afraid of him now he is dead, as when he was living, by no means would
have his body brought thither.

In which respect, as a Token of your unfeigned love to her, and the latest
service you shall ever do for her: she earnestly entreats you, that this
night, in the very deadest time thereof, you would go to the grave, where
Scannadio lies yet uncovered with earth until to morrow, and attyring your
self in his garments, even as if you were the man himself, so to remain
there until her kinsman do come.

Then, without speaking any one word, let him take you forth of the grave, and
bring you thence (insted of Scannadio) to her house: where she will give you
gentle welcome, and disappoint her Kinsman in his hope, by making you Lord of
her, and all that is hers, as afterward shall plainly appear. If he say he will
do it, it is as much as I desire: but if he trifle and make denial, then
boldly tell him, that he must refrain all places wheresoever I am, and
forbear to send me any more Letters, or messages.

Having done so, then repair to Rinuccio Palermini, and say. My Mistress
Francesca is ready to make acceptance of your love; provided, that you will do
one thing for her sake. Namely, this ensuing night, in the midst and stillest
season thereof, to go to the grave where Scannadio was this morning buried, and
(without making any noise) or speaking one word, whatsoever you shall hear or
see: to take him forth of the grave, and bring him home to her house, where you
shall know the reason of this strange business, and enjoy her freely as your
own for ever. But if he refuse to do it, then I command him, never hereafter
to see me, or move further suite unto me, by any means whatsoever.

The Chamber-maide went to them both, and delivered the several messag^s from
her Mistress, according as she had given her in charge; whereunto each of them
answered, that they would (for her sake) not only descend into a Grave, but
also into hell, if it were her pleasure.

She returning with this answer unto her Mistress, Frances^a remained in
expectation, what the issue of these fond attemptes in them, would sort unto.
When night was come, and the middle hour thereof already past, Alessandro
Chiarmontesi, having put off all other garments to his doublet and hose;
departed secretly from his lodging, walking toward the Churchyard, where
Scannadio lay in his grave: but by the way as he went, he became surprised
with diverse dreadful conceits and imaginations, and questioned with himself
thus.

What a beast am I? What a business have I undertaken? And whither am I going?
What do I know, but that the Kinsman unto this Woman, perhaps understanding
mine affection to her, and crediting some such matter, as is nothing so: has
laid this politic train for me, that he may murder me in the grave? Which
(if it should so happen) my life is lost, and yet the occasion never known
whereby it was done. Or what know I, whether some secret enemy of mine
(affecting her in like manner, as I do) have devised this stratagem (out of
malice) against me, to draw my life in danger, and further his own good
Fortune? Then, contrary motions, ouerswaying these suspicions, he questioned
his thoughts in another nature.

Let me (quoth he) admit the case, that none of these surmises are intended,
but her Kinsman (by and in this manner devised) must bring me into her house: I
am not therefore persuaded, that he or they do covet, to have the body of
Scannadio, either to carry it thither, or present it to her, but rather do aim
at some other end. May not I conjecture, that my close murdering is purposed,
and this way acted, as on him that (in his life time) had offended them? The
Maid has straightly charged me, that whatsoever is said or done unto me, I am
not to speak a word. What if they pull out mine eyes, tear out my teeth, cut
off my hands, or do me any other mischief: Where am I then? Shall all these
extremities bar me of speaking? On the other side, if I speak, then I shall
be known, and so much the sooner (perhaps) be abused. But admit that I
sustain no injury at all, as being guilty of no transgression: yet
(perchance) I shall not be carried to her house, but to some other baser place,
and afterward she shall reprove me, that I did not accomplish what she
commanded, and so all my labor is utterly lost.

Perplexed with these various contradicting opinions, he was willing diverse
times to turn home back again: yet such was the violence of his love, and
the power thereof prevailing against all sinister arguments; as he went to the
grave, and removing the boordes covering it, whereinto he entered; and having
despoiled Scannadio of his garments, clothed himself with them, and so laid
him down, having first covered the grave again. Not long had he tarryed
there, but he began to bethink him, what manner of man Scannadio was, and what
strange reports had been noised of him, not only for ra^s^cking dead men's
graves in the night season, but many other abominable Villainies committed by
him, which so fearfully assaulted him; that his hair stood on end, every
member of him quaked, and every minute he imagined Scannadio rising, with
intent to strangle him in the grave. But his fervent affection ouercorning all
these idle fears, and lying stone still, as if he had been the dead man
indeed; he remained to see the end of his hope.

On the contrary side, after midnight was past, Rinuccio Palermini departed
from his lodging, to do what he was enjoined by his hearts Mistress, and as
he went along, diverse considerations also ran in his mind, concerning
occasions possible to happen. As, falling into the hands of Justice, with the
body of Scannadio upon his back, and being condemned for sacrilege, in
robbing graves of the dead; either to be burned, or otherwise so punished, as
might make him hateful to his best friends, and merely a shame to himself.

Many other the like conceits mollested him, sufficient to alter his former
determination: but affection was much more preuayling in him, and made him use
this consultation. How now Rinuccio? Will thou dare to deny the first request,
being moved to thee by a Gentlewoman, whom thou dearly love, and is the
only means, whereby to gain assurance of her gracious favor? Undoubtedly,
were I sure to die in the attempt, yet I will accomplish my promise. And so he
went on with courage to the grave.

Alessandro hearing his arrival, and also the remouall of the bords, although
he was exceedingly afraid; yet he lay quietly still, and stirred not, and
Rinuccio being in the grave, took Alessandro by the feet, haling him forth,
and (mounting him upon his back) went on thus laden, toward the house of
Madam Francesca. As he passed along the streets, unseen or vnmet by any,
Alessandro suffered many shrewd rushings and punches, by turnings at the
streets corners, and iolting against bulkes, po^sts, and stalles, which
Rinuccio could not avoid, in regard the night was so wonderfully dark, as he
could not see which way he went.

Being come somewhat near to the Gentlewomans house, and she standing ready
in the Window with her Maid, to see when Rinuccio should arrive there with
Alessandro, provided also of an apt excuse, to send them thence like a couple
of Coxcombes; it fortuned, that the Watchmen, attending there in the same
street, for the apprehension of a banished man, stolen into the City contrary
to order; hearing the trampling of Rinuccioes feet, directed their course as
they heard the noise, having their Lantern and light closely covered, to see
who it should be, and what he intended, and beating their weapons against the
ground, demanded, Who goes there? Rinuccio knowing their voices, and that now
was no time for any long deliberation: let fall Alessandro, and ran away as
fast as his legs could carry him.

Alessandro being risen again (although he was clothed in Scannadioes
Garments, which were long and too big for him) fled away also as Rinuccio
did. All which Madame Francesca easily discerned by help of the Watchmens
Lantern, and how Rinuccio carried Alessandro on his back, being attired in
the Garments of Scannadio: whereat she meruailed not a little, as also the great
boldness of them both. But in the midst of her meruailing, she laughed very
heartily, when she saw the one let the other fall, and both to run away so
manfully. Which accident pleasing her beyond all comparison, and applauding her
good Fortune, to be so happily delivered from their daily mollestation: she
betook her self to her Chamber with the Maid, auouching solemnly to her,
that (questionless) they both affected her dearly, having undertaken such a
strange imposition, and very near brought it to a final conclusion.

Rinuccio, being sadly discontented, and curssing his hard fortune, would not
yet return home to his Lodging: but, when the watch was gone forth of that
street, came back to the place where he let fall Alessandro, purposing to
accomplish the rest of his enterprise. But not finding the body, and remaining
fully persuaded, that the Watchmen were possessed thereof; he went away,
greeuing extremely. And Alessandro, not knowing now what should become of him:
confounded with the like grief and sorrow, that all his hope was thus utterly
overthrown, retired thence unto his own house, not knowing who was the Porter
which carried him.

The next morning, the grave of Scannadio being found open, and the body not in
it, because Alessandro had thrown it into a deep ditch near adjoining: all the
people of Pistoya were possessed with sundry opinions, some of the more foolish
sort verily believing, that the devil had carried away the dead body.
Nevertheless, each of the Lovers, severally made known to Madam Francesca,
what he had done, and how disappointed, either excusing himself, that though
her command had not bin fully accomplished, yet to continue her favor toward
him. But she, like a wise and discreet Gentlewoman, seeming not to credit
either the one or other: discharged her self honestly of them both, with a
cutting answer, That she would never (afterward) expect any other service
from them, because they had failed in their first iniunction.

Madame Vsimbalda, Lady Abbess of a Monastery of Nu^s in (...) bardie, arising
hastily in the night time without a Candle, to (...) one of her Daughter Nu^^es
in bed with a young Gentleman, whereof she was enuiously accused, by certain of
her other Sisters (...) Abbess her self (being at the same time in bed with a
Priest) (...) to have put or her head her plaited veil, put on the Priest
breeches. Which when the poor Nun perceived; by causing the Abbess to see
her own error, she got her self to be absolved, and had the freer liberty
afterward, to be more familiar with her friend, then formerly she had bin.

The Second Novel.
Whereby is declared, that whosoever is desirous to reprehend sin in other
men, should first examine himself, that he be not guilty of the same crime.



BY this time, Madame Philomena sat silent, and the wit of Francesca, in
freeing her self from them whom she could not fancy, was generally commended
(...) also on the contrary, the bold presumption of the two amorous suitors,
was reputed not to be love, but merely folly. And then the Queen, with a
gracious admonition, gave way for Madam Eliza to follow next, who presently
thus began.

Worthy Ladies, Madame Francesca delivered her self discreetly from trouble,
as already has bin related: but a young Nun, by the help and favor of
Fortune, did also free her self (in speaking advisedly) from an inconvenience
suddenly falling on her. And as you well know, there wants none of them, who
(like bold Bayards) will be very forward in checking other men's misdemeanors,
when themselves, as my Novel will approve, deserve more justly to be
corrected. As happened to a Lady Abbess, under whose government the same young
Nun was, of whom I am now to speak.

You are then to understand (Gracious Auditors) that in Lombardie there was a
goodly Monastery, very famous for Holiness and Religion, where, among other
sanctified Sisters, there was a young Gentlewoman, endued with very singular
beauty, being named Isabella, who on a day, when a Kinsman of hers came to see
her at the grate, became enamored of a young Gentleman, being then in his
company.

He likewise, beholding her to be so admirably beautiful, and conceyuing by
the pretty glances of her eye, that they appeared to be silent intelligencers,
of the hearts meaning, grew also as affectionately inclined toward her, and
this mutual love continued thus concealed a long while, but not without great
affliction unto them both. In the end, either of them being circumspect and
provident enough, the Gentleman contrived a means, whereby he might secretly
visit his Nun, wherewith she seemed no way discontented: and this visitation
was not for once or twice, but very often, and closely concealed to themselves.

At length it came to pass, that either through their own indiscreete
carriage, or ielous suspicion in some others: it was espied by one of the
Sisters, both the Gentleman's coming and departing, yet unknown to him or
Isabella. The said Sister, disclosing the same to two or three more: they
agreed together, to reveal it to the Lady Abbess, who was named Madame
Vsimbalda, a holy and devout Lady, in common opinion of all the Nuns, and
whosoever else knew her.

They further concluded (because Isabella should not deny their accusation) to
contriue the business so cunningly: that the Lady Abbess should come her
self in person, and take the young Gentleman in bed with the Nun. And upon
this determination, they agreed to watch nightly by turns, because by no
means they would be prevented: so to surprise poor Isabella, who being
ignorant of their treachery, suspected nothing. Presuming thus still on this
secret felicity, and fearing no disaster to befall her: it chanced (on a
night) that the young Gentleman being entered into the Nuns Dorter, the Scowts
had descried him, and intended to be revenged on her.

After some part of the night was ouerpast; they diuied themselves into two
bands, one to guard Isabellaes Dorter door, the other to carry news to the
Abbess, and knocking at her Close^ door, said. Rise quickly Madame, and use
all the have you may, for we have seen a man enter our Sister Isabellaes
Dorter, and you may take her in bed with him. The Lady Abbess, who (the very
same night) had the company of a lusty Priest in bed with her self, as
oftentimes before she had, and he being always brought thither in a Chest:
hearing these tidings, and fearing also, lest the Nuns hasty knocking at her
door, might cause it to fly open, and so (by their entrance) have her own
shame discovered: arose very hastily, and thinking she had put on her plaited
veil, which always she walked with in the night season, and used to term
her Psalter; she she put the Priests breeches upon her head, and so went away
in all have with them, supposing them verily to be her Psalter: but making fast
the Closet door with her keye, because the Priest should not be discovered.

Away she went in all haste with the Sisters, who were so forward in the
detection of poor Isabella, as they never regarded what manner of veil the
Lady Abbess wore on her head. And being come to the Dorter door, quickly they
lifted it off from the hooks, and being entered, found the two Lovers sweetly
embracing: but yet so amazed at this sudden surprisall, as they durst not
stir, nor speak one word. The young Nun Isabella, was raised forthwith by
the other Sisters, and according as the Abbess had commanded, was brought by
them into the Chapter House: the young Gentleman remaining still in the Chamber,
where he put on his garments, awaiting to see the issue of this business, and
verily intending to act severe revenge on his betrayers, if any harm were done
to Isabella, and afterward to take her thence away with him, as meaning to make
her amends by marriage.

The Abbess being seated in the Chapter house, and all the other Nuns then
called before her, who minded nothing else but the poor offending Sister: she
began to give her very harsh and vile speeches, as never any transgressor
suffered the like, and as to her who had (if it should be openly known abroad)
contaminated by (...) lewd life and actions, the sanctity and good renown of
the whole Monastery, and threatened her with very severe chastisement. Poor
Isabella, confounded with fear and shame, as being no way able to excuse her
fault, knew not what answer to make, but standing silent, made her case
compassionable to all the rest, even those hard-hearted Sisters which betrayed
her.

And the Abbess still continuing her harsh speeches, it fortuned, that
Isabella raising her head, which before she dejected into her bosom, espied
the breeches on her head, with the stockings hanging on either side of her; the
sight whereof did so much encourage her, that boldly she said. Madam, let a
poor offender advise you for to mend your veil, and afterward say to me what
you will.

The Abbess being very angry; and not understanding what she meant, frowningly
answered. Why how now saucy companion? What veil are you prating of? Are you
so malapert, to be chatting already? Is the deed you have done, to be answered
in such immodest manner? Isabella not a jot danted by her stern behavior,
once again said. Good Madam let me persuade you to fette your veil right, and
then chide me as long as you will. At these words, all the rest of the Nuns
exalted their looks, to behold what veil the Abbess wore on her head,
wherewith Isabella should find such fault, and she her self lift up her hand
to feel it: and then they all perceived plainly, the reason of Isabellas
speeches, and the Abbess saw her own error.

Hereupon, when the rest observed, that she had no help to cloud this palpable
shame withal, the tide began to turn, and her tongue found another manner of
Language, then her former fury to poor Isabella, growing to this conclusion,
that it is impossible to resist against the temptations of the flesh. And
therefore she said: Let all of you take occasion, according as it offers it
self, as both we and our predecessors have done: to be provident for your
selves, take time while you may, having this sentence always in remembrance,
Si non cast, tamen caute.

So, having granted the young Nun Isabella free absolution: the Lady Abbess
returned back again to bed to the Priest, and Isabella to the Gentleman. As
for the other Sisters, who (as yet) were without the benefit of friends; they
intended to provide themselves so soon as they could, being enduced thereto by
so good example.

Master Simon the Physician, by the persuasions of Bruno, Buffalmaco, and a
third Companion, named Nello, made Calandrino to believe, that he was conceived
great with child. And having Physic ministered to him for the disease: they
got both good fat Capons and money of him, and so cured him, without auy
other manner of deliverance.

The Third Novel.
Discovering the simplicity of some silly witted men, and how easy a matter it
is to abuse and beguile them.



AFter that Madame Eliza had concluded her Novel, and every one of the company
given thanks to Fortune, for delivering poor Isabella the fair young Nun,
from the bitter reprehensions of the as faulty Abbess, as also the malice of
her envious Sisters: the Queen gave command unto Philostratus, that he should
be the next in order, and he (without expecting any other warning) began in
this manner.

Fair Ladies, the paltry Judge of the Marquisate, whereof yesterday I made
relation to you; hindered me then of another Novel, concerning silly
Calandrino, wherewith I purpose now to acquaint you. And because whatsoever
has already bin spoken of him, tended to no other end but matter of meriment,
he and his companions duly considered: the Nouel which I shall nown report,
keeps within the selfsame compass, and aims also at your contentment,
according to the scope of imposed variety.

You have already heard what manner of man Calandrino was, and likewise the
rest of his pleasant Companions, who likewise are now again to be remembered,
because they are actors in our present discourse. It came so to pass, that an
Aunt of Calandrinoes dying, left him a legacy of two hundred Florines,
wherewith he purposed to purchase some small Farme-house in the country, or
else to enlarge the other, whereof he was possessed already. And, as if he
were to disburse some ten thousand Florines, there was not a Broker in all
Florence, but understood what he intended to do: and all the worst was, that
the strings of his purse could stretch no higher. Bruno, and Buffalmaco (his
ancient Confederates) who heard of this good Fortune befalne him, advised him
in such manner as they were wont to do; allowing it much better for him, to
make merry with the money in good cheer among them, then to lay it out in
paltry Land, whereto he would not by any means listen, but rid himself of
them with a dinners cost, as loath to be at any further charge with them.

These merry Laddes meant not to leave him so; but sitting one day in serious
consultation, and a third man in their company, named Nello; they all three
lay de their brains in steep, by what means to wash their mouths well, and
Calandrino to be at the cost thereof.

And having resolved what was to be done, they met together the next morning,
even as Calandrino was coming forth of his house, and sundering themselves,
to avoid all suspicion, yet being not far distant each from other; Nello
first met him, and said unto him, Good Morrow Calandrino: which he requited
back again with the same salutation. But then Nello standing still, looked
him steadfastly in the face: whereat Calandrino meruailing, said. Nello, why
do thou behold me so advisedly? Whereunto Nello answered, saying Have thou
felt any pain this last night past? Thou look nothing so well, as thou
did yesterday. Calandrino beganinstantly to wax doubtful, and replied thus.
Do thou see any alteration in my face, whereby to imagine, I should feel
some pain? In good faith Calandrino (quoth Nello) me thinks thy countenance is
strangely changed, and surely it proceeds from some great cause, and so he
departed away from him.

Calandrino being very mistrustfull, scratched his head, yet felt he no
grieuance at all, and going still on; Buffalmaco suddenly en-encountred him,
upon his departure from Nello, and after salutations passing between them; in
a manner of admiration, demanded what he ayled?

Truly ( quoth Calandrino) well enough to mine own thinking, yet
notwithstanding, I met with Nello but even now; and he told me, that my
countenance was very much altered; Is it possible that I should be sick, and
feel no pain or distaste in any part of me? Buffalmaco answered; I am not so
skillful in judgment, as to argue on the Nature of distemper in the body: but
sure I am, that thou have some dangerous inward impediment, because thou
lookst (almost) like a man more then half dead.

Calandrino began presently to shake, as if he had had a Fever hanging on
him, and then came Bruno looking fearfully on him, and before he would utter
any words, seemed greatly to bemoane him, saying at length. Calandrino? Art
thou the same man, or no? How wonderfully art thou changed since last I saw
thee, which is no longer then yester day? I pray thee tell me, How dooest thou
feel thy health?

Calandrino hearing, that they all agreed in one opinion of him; he began
verily to persuade himself, that some sudden sickness, had seized upon him,
which they could discern, although he felt no anguish at all: and therefore,
like a man much perplexed in mind, demanded of them, What he should do?
Believe me Calandrino (answered Bruno) if I were worthy to give thee counsel,
thou should return home presently to thy house, and lay thee down in thy
warm Bed, covered with so many clothes as thou can well endure. Then to
Morrow morning, send thy Water unto Learned Master Doctor the Physician, who
(as thou know) is a man of most singular skill and experience: he will
instruct thee presently what is the best course to be taken, and we that have
ever been thy loving friends, will not fail thee in any thing that lies in
our power.

By this time, Nello being come again unto them, they all returned home with
Calandrino unto his own house, whereinto he entering very faintly, he said
to his Wife: Woman, make my Bed presently ready, for I feel my self to be
grown extremely sick, and see that thou layest clothes enough upon me. Being
thus laid in his Bed, they left him for that night, and returned to visit
him again the very next morning, by which time, he had made a reservation of
his Water, and sent it by a young Damsel unto Master Doctor, who dwelt then
in the old market place, at the sign of the Musk Mellone. Then said Bruno
unto his Companions; Abide you here to keep him company, and I will walk
along to the Physician, to understand what he will say: and if need be, I can
procure him to come hither with me. Calandrino very kindly accepted his offer,
saying withal. Well Bruno, thou shewst thy self a friend in the time of
necessity, I pray thee know of him, how the case stands with me, for I feel a
very strange alteration within me, far beyond all compass of my conceit.

Bruno being gone to the Physician, he made such expedition, that he arrived
there before the Damsel, who carried the Water, and informed Master Simon
with the whole trick intended: wherefore, when the Damsel was come, and he
had passed his judgment concerning the water, he said to her.

Maid, go home again, and tell Calandrino, that he must keep himself very
warm: and I my self will instantly be with him, to enstruct him further in
the quality of his sickness.

The Damsel delivered her message accordingly, and it was not long before
Master Doctor Simon came, with Bruno also in his company, and sitting down on
the beds side by Calandrino, he began to taste his pulse, and within a small
while after, his Wife being come into the Chamber, he said. Observe me well
Calandrino, for I speak to thee in the nature of a true friend; thou have no
other disease, but only thou art great with child.

So soon as Calandrino heard these words, in dispairing manner he began to
rage, and cry out aloud, saying to his wife. Ah thou wicked woman, this is long
of thee, and thou have done me this mischief: for always thou will be upon
me, ever railing at me, and fighting, until thou have gotten me under thee.
Say thou devilish creature, do I not tell thee true? The Woman, b^ing of very
honest and civil conversation, hearing her husband speak so foolishly:
blushing with shame, and hanging down her head in bashful manner; without
returning any answer, went forth of her Chamber.

Calandrino continuing still in his angry humor, wringing his hands, and
beating them upon his breast, said: Wretched man that I am, What shall I do? How
shall I be delivered of this child? Which way can it come from me into the
world? I plainly perceive, that I am none other then a dead man, and all
through the wickedness of my Wife: heaven plague her with as many mischiefs,
as I am desirous to find ease. Were I now in as good health, as heretofore I
have been, I would rise out of my bed, and never cease beating her, until I
had broken her in a thousand pieces. But if Fortune will be so favorable to
me, as to help me out of this dangerons agony: hang me, if ever she get me
under her again, or make me such an Ass, in having the mastery over me, as
diverse times she has done.

Bruno, Buffalmaco and Nello, hearing these rauing speeches of Calandrino, were
swollen so big with laughter, as if their ribs would have burst in sunder;
nevertheless, they abstained so well as they were able; but Doctor Simon gaped
so wide with laughing as one might easily have plucked out all his teeth. In the
end, because he could tarry there no longer, but was preparing to depart:
Calandrino thanked him for his pains, requesting that he would be careful of
him, in aiding him with his best advise and counsel, and he would not be
unmindful of him. Honest neighbor Calandrino, answered the Physician, I would
not have you to torment your self, in such an impatient and tempestuous
manner, because I perceive the time so to hasten on, as we shall soon perceive
(and that within very few days space) your health well restored, and without
the sense of much pain; but indeed it will cost expenses. Alas Sir, said
Calandrino, make not any spare of my purse, to procure that I may have safe
deliverance. I have two hundred Florines, lately fallen to me by the death of
mine Aunt, wherewith I intended to purchase a Farm in the Country: take them
all if need be, only reserving some few for my lying in Childbed. And then
Master Doctor, Alas, I know not how to behave my self, for I have heard the
grievous complaint of women in that case, oppressed with bitter pangs and
throws; as questionless they will be my death, except you have the greater
care of me.

Be of good cheer neighbor Calandrino, replied Doctor Simon, I will provide
an excellent distilled drink for you, marueilously pleasing in taste, and of
sovereign virtue, which will resolve all in three mornings, making you as
whole and as sound as a Fish newly spawned. But you must have an especial care
afterward, being prouidently wise, least you fall into the like follies again.
Concerning the preparation of this precious drink, half a dozen of Capons,
the very fairest and fattest, I must make use of in the distillation: what
other things shall be employed beside, you may deliver forty Florines to one
of these your honest friends, to see all the necessaries bought, and sent me
home to my house. Concerning my business, make you no doubt thereof, for I
will have all distilled against to morrow, and then do you drink a great
Glass full every morning, fresh and fasting next your heart. Calandrino was
highly pleased with his words, returning master Doctor infinite thanks, and
referring all to his disposing. And having given forty Florines to Bruno, with
other money beside, to buy the half dozen of Capons: he thought himself
greatly beholding to them all, and protested to requite their kindness.

Master Doctor being gone home to his house, made ready a bottel of very
excellent Hypocrasse, which he sent the next day according to his promise: and
Bruno having bought the Capons, with other iunkets, sit for the turn, the
Physician and his merry Companions, fed on them heartily for the giuers sake. As
for Calandrino, he liked his diet drink excellently well, quaffing a large
Glassefull off three mornings together: afterward Master Doctor and the rest
came to see him, and having felt his pulse, the Physician said. Calandrino,
thou art now as sound in health, as any man in all Florence can be: thou
need not to keep within doors any longer, but walk abroad boldly, for all
is well and the child gone.

Calandrino arose like a joyful man, and walked daily through the streets, in
the performance of such affairs as belonged to him: and every acquaintance he
met withal, he told the condition of his sudden sickness; and what a rare
cure Master Doctor Simon had wrought on him, delivering him (in three days
space) of a child, and without the feeling of any pain. Bruno, Buffalmaco,
and Nello, were not a little iocond, for meeting so well with covetous
Calandrino: but how the Wife liked the folly of her Husband, I leave to the
judgment of all good Women.

Francesco Fortarigo, played away all that he had at Buonconuento, and likewise
the money of Francesco Aniolliero, being his Master. Then running after him in
his shirt, and auouching that he had robbed him: he caused him to be taken by
Pezants of the Country, clothed himself in his Masters wearing garments, and
(mounted on his horse) rode thence to Sienna, leaving Aniolliero in his shirt,
and walked barefooted.

The fourth Novel.
Serving as an admonition to all men, for taking Gamesters and Drunkards into
their service.



THe ridiculous words given by Calandrino to his Wife, all all the whole
company heartily laughed at: but Philostratus ceassing, Madame Neiphila (as it
pleased the Queen to appoint) began to speak thus. Virtuous Ladies, if it
were not more hard and uneasy for men, to make good their understanding and
virtue, then apparent publicarion of their disgrace and folly; many would not
labor in vain, to curb in their idle speeches with a bridle, as you have
manifestly observed by the weak wit of Calandrino. Who needed no such
fantastic circumstance, to cure the strange disease, which he imagined (by
sottish persuasions) to have: had he not been so lavish of his tongue, and
accused his Wife of ouer-mastering him. Which makes me remember a Novel,
quite contrary to this last related, namely, how one man may strive to surmount
another in malice; yet he to sustain the greater harm, that had (at the
first) the most advantage of his enemy, as I will presently declare unto you.

There dwelt in Sienna, and not many years since, two young men of equal age,
both of them bearing the name of Francesco: but the one was descended of the
Aniollieri, and the other likewise of the Fortarigi; so that they were commonly
called Aniolliero, and Fortarigo, both Gentlemen, and well derived. Now,
although in many other matters, their complexions did differ very much: Yet
notwithstanding, they varied not in one bad quality, namely too great neglect
of their Fathers, which caused their more frequent conversation, as very
familiar and respective friends. But Aniolliero (being a very goodly and fair
conditioned young Gentleman) apparently perceiving, that he could not maintain
himself at Sienna, in such estate as he liked, and upon the pension allowed
him by his Father, hearing also, that at the Marquisate of Ancona, there lived
the Popes Legate, a worthy Cardinal, his much indeared good Lord and friend:
he intended to go visit him, as hoping to advance his fortunes by him.

Having acquainted his Father with this determination, he concluded with him,
to have that from him in a moment which might supply his wants for many
months, because he would be clothed gallantly, and mounted honorably. And
seeking for a servant necessary to attend on him, it chanced that Fortarigo
hearing thereof, came presently to Aniolliero, entreating him in the best
manner he could, to let him wait on him as his serving man, promising both
dutiful and diligent attendance: yet not to demand any other wages, but only
payment of his ordinary expenses. Aniolliero made him answer, that he durst
not give him entertainment, not in regard of his insufficiency, and unaptness
for service: but because he was a great Gamester, and diverse times would be
beastly drunk? whereto Fortarigo replied that he would refrain from both
those foul vices, and addict all his endeavor wholly to please him, without
just taxation of any gross error; making such solemn vows and protestations
beside, as conquered Aniolliero, and won his consent.

Being entered upon his journey, and arriving in a morning at Buonconuento,
there Aniolliero determined to dine, and afterward, finding the heat to be
unfit for travail; he caused a bed to be prepared, wherein being laid to rest
by the help of Fortarigo, he gave him charge, that after the heates violence
was ouerpast, he should not fail to call and awake him. While Aniolliero
slept thus in his bed, Fortarigo, never remembering his solemn vows and
promises: went to the Tavern, where having drunk indifferently, and finding
company fit for the purpose, he fell to play at the dice with them. In a very
short while, he had not only lost his money, but all the clothes on his back
likewise, and coveting to recover his losses again; naked in his shirt, he
went to Aniollieros Chamber, where finding him yet soundly sleeping, he took
all the money he had in his purse, and then returned back to play, speeding in
the same manner as he did before, not having one poor penny left him.

Aniolliero chancing to awake,, arose and made him ready, without any servant
to help him; then calling for Fortarigo, and not hearing any tidings of him:
he began immediately to imagine, that he was become drunk, and so had fallen
asleep in one place or other, as very often he was wont to do. Wherefore,
determining so to leave him, he caused the male and Saddle to be set on his
horse, and so to furnish himself with a more honest servant at Corsignano.

But when he came to pay his host, he found not any penny left him:
whereupon (as well he might) he grew greatly offended, and raised much trouble
in the house, charged the hoasts people to have robde him, and threatening to
have them sent as prisoners to Sienna. Suddenly entered Fortarigo in his shirt,
with intent to have stolen Aniollieroes garments, as formerly he did the money
out of his purse, and seeing him ready to mount on horseback, he said.

How now Aniolliero? What shall we go away so soon? I pray you Sir tarry a
little while, for an honest man is coming hither, who has my Doublet engaged
for eight and thirty shillings; and I am sure that he will restore it me back
for five and thirty, if I could presently pay him down the money.

During the speeches, an other entered among them, who assured Aniolliero, that
Fortarigo was the Thief which robde him of his money, showing him also how
much he had lost at the Dice: Wherewith Aniolliero being much moved, very
angerly reproved Fortarigo, and, but for fear of the Law, would have offered
him outrage, thretning to have him hanged by the neck, or else condemned to the
Galleys belonging to Florence, and so mounted on his horse. Fortarigo making
show to the standers by, as if Aniolliero menaced some other body, and not him,
said. Come Aniolliero, I pray thee let us leave this friuilous prating, for
(indeed) it is not worth a Button, and mind a matter of more importance: my
Doublet will be had again for five and thirty shillings, if the money may be
tendered down at this very instant, whereas if we defer it till to morrow,
perhaps he will then have the whole eight and thirty which he lent me, and he
does me this pleasure, because I am ready (at another time) to afford him the
like courtesy; why then should we loose three shillings, when they may so
easily be saved.

Aniolliero hearing him speak in such confused manner, and perceiving also,
that they which stood gazing by, believed (as by their looks appeared) that
Fortarigo had not played away his Masters money at the Dice, but rather that he
had some stock of Fortarigoes in his custody; angerly answered, Thou saucy
companion, what have I to do with thy Doublet? I would thou were hanged, not
only for playing away my money, but also by delaying thus my journey, and yet
boldly thou stand out-facing me, as if I were no better then thy fellow.
Fortarigo held on still his former behavior, without using any respect or
reverence to Aniolliero, as if all the accusations did not concern him, but
saying, Why should we not take the advantage of three shillings profit?
Think thou, that I am not able to do as much for thee? why, lay out so much
money for my sake, and make no more haste then needs we must, because we have
daylight enough to bring us (before night) to Torreniero. Come, draw thy
purse, and pay the money, for upon mine honest word, I may enquire throughout
all Sienna, and yet not find such another Doublet as this of mine is. To say
then, that I should leave it, where it now lies pawned, and for eight and
thirty shillings, when it is richly more worth then fifty, I am sure to suffer
a double endammagement thereby.

You may well imagine, that Aniolliero was now enraged beyond all patience, to
see himself both robde of his money, and ouerborne with presumptuous language:
wherefore, without making any more replications, he gave the spur to his
horse, and rode away toward Torreniero. Now fell Fortarigo into a more knauish
intention against Aniolliero, and being very speedy in running, followed apace
after him in his shirt, crying out still aloude to him all the way, to let him
have his Doublet again. Aniolliero riding on very fast, to free his ears from
this idle importunity, it fortuned that Fortarigo espied diverse country
Pezants, laboring in the fields about their business, and by whom Aniolliero
(of necessity) must pass: To them he cried out so loud as he could; Stay the
Thief, Stop the Thief, he rides away so fast, having robde me.

They being provided, some with Prongges, Pitchforkes and Spades, and others
with the like weapons fit for Husbandry, stepped into the way before Aniolliero:
and believing undoubtedly, that he had robde the man which pursued him in his
shirt, stayed and apprehended him. Whatsoever Aniolliero could do or say,
prevailed not any thing with the unmannerly Clownes, but when Fortarigo was
arrived among them, he braued Aniolliero most impudently, saying.

What reason have I to spoil thy life (thou traitorous Villain) to rob that
spoil thy Master thus on the high way? Then turning to the Country Boores:
How much dear friends (quoth he) am I beholding to you for this unexpected
kindness? You behold in what manner he left me in my Lodging, having first
played away all my money at the Dice, and then deceiving me of my horse and
garments also: but had not you (by great good luck) thus help me to stay
him; a poor Gentleman had bin undone for ever, and I should never have found
him again.

Aniolliero avouched the truth of his wrong received, but the base peazants,
giving credit only to Fortarigoes lying exclamations: took him from his
horse, despoyled him of all his wearing apparel, even to the very Boots from
off his Legs: suffered him to ride away from him in that manner, and
Aniolliero left so in his shirt, to dance a bare-foote Galliard after him,
either toward Sienna, or any place else.

Thus Aniolliero, purposing to visit his Cousin the Cardinal like a Gallant,
and at the Marquisate of Ancona, returned back poorly in his shirt unto
Buonconuento, and durst not (for shame) repair to Sienna. In the end, he
borrowed money on the other horse which Fortarigo rode on, and remained there
in the Inn, whence riding to Corsignano, where he had diverse Kinsmen and
Friends, he continued there so long with them, till he was better furnished
from his Father.

Thus you may perceive, that the cunning Villainies of Fortarigo, hindered the
honest intended enterprise of Aniolliero, howbeit in fit time and place,
nothing afterward was left unpunished.

Calandrino became extraordinarily enamoured of a young Damsel, named
Nicholetta. Bruno prepared a Charm or writing for him, auouching constantly to
him, that so soon as he touched the Damsel therewith, she should follow him
whither soever he would have her. She being gone to an appointed place with
him, he was found there by his wife, and dealt withal according to his
deserving.

The Fifth Novel.
In just reprehension of those vaine-headed fools, that are led and governed
by idle persuasions.



BEcause the Novel reported by Madame Neiphila was so soon concluded, without
much laughter, or commendation of the whole Company: the Queen turned her
self toward Madam Fiammetta, enioyning her to succeed in apt order; and she
being as ready as suddenly commanded, began as follows. Most gentle Ladies, I
am persuaded of your opinion in judgment with mine, that there is not any
thing, which can be spoken pleasingly, except it be conveniently suited with
apt time and place: in which respect, when Ladies and Gentlewomen are bent to
discoursing, the due election of them both are necessarily required. And
therefore I am not unmindful, that our meeting here (aiming at nothing more,
then to out-weare the time with our general contentment) should tie us to the
course of our pleasure and recreation, to the same conueniency of time and
place; not sparing, though some have bin nominated oftentimes in our passed
arguments; yet, if occasion serve, and the nature of variety be well
considered, we may speak of the selfsame persons again.

Now, notwithstanding the actions of Calandrino have been indifferently
canuazed among us; yet, remembering what Philostratus not long since said, That
they intended to nothing more then matter of mirth: I presume the bodlier, to
report another Novel of him, beside them already past. And, were I willing to
conceal the truth, and cloth it in more circumstantiall manner: I could make
use of contrary names, and paint it in a poetical fiction, perhaps more
probable, though not so pleasing. But because wandering from the truth of
things, does much diminish (in relation) the delight of the hearers: I will
build boldly on my fore-alledged reason, and tell you truly how it happened.

Niccholao Cornacchini was once a Citizen of ours, and a man of great wealth;
who, among other his rich possessions in Camerata, builded there a very goodly
house, which being perfected ready for painting: he compounded with Bruno and
Buffalmaco, who because their work required more help then their own, they
drew Nello and Calandrino into their association, and began to proceed in their
business. And because there was a Chamber or two, having old moueables in
them, as Bedding, Tables, and other Housholdstuffe beside, which were in the
custody of an old Woman that kept the house, without the help of any other
servants else, a Son unto the said Niccholao, being named Phillippo, resorted
thither diverse times, with one or other pretty Damsel in his company (in
regard he was unmarried) where he would abide a day or two with her, and then
convey her home again.

At one time among the rest, it chanced that he brought a Damsel thither
named Nicholetta, who was maintained by a wily companion, called Magione, in a
dwelling which he had at Camaldoli, and (indeed) no honester then she should
be. She was a very beautiful young woman, wearing garments of great value, and
(according to her quality) well spoken, and of commendable carriage. Coming
forth of her Chamber one day, covered with a White veyle, because her hair
hung loose about her, which she went to wash at a Well in the middle Court,
bathing there also her face and hands: Calandrino going (by chance) to the same
Well for water, gave her a secret salutation. She kindly returning the like
courtesy to him, began to observe him advisedly: more, because he looked like
a man newly come thither, then any handsomnesse she perceived in him.

Calandrino threw wanton glances at her, and seeing she was both fair and
lovely, began to find some occasion of tarrying, so that he returned not with
water to his other associates, yet neither knowing her, or daring to deliver
one word. She, who was not to learn her lesson in alluring, noting what
affectionate regards (with bashfulnesse) he gave her: answered him more boldly
with the like; but merely in scorning manner, breathing forth diverse dissembled
sighs among them: so that Calandrino became foolishly inueigled with her love,
and would not depart out of the Court, until Phillippo, standing above in his
Chamber window called her thence.

When Calandrino was returned back to his business, he could do nothing else,
but shake the head, sigh, puff, and blow, which being observed by Bruno (who
always sitted him according to his folly, as making a mere mockery of his very
best behavior) suddenly he said. Why how now Calandrino? Sigh, pusse, and blow
man? What may be the reason of these unwonted qualities? Calandrino immediately
answered, saying: My friendly Companion Bruno, if I had one to lend me a little
help, I should very quickly become well enough. How? quoth Bruno, does any
thing offend thee, and will thou not reveal it to thy friends? Dear Bruno,
said Calandrino, there is a proper handsome woman here in the house, the
goodliest creature that every any eye beheld, much fairer then the Queen of
Fairies her self, who is so deeply fallen in love with me, as thou would
think it no less then a wonder; and yet I never saw her before, till yet
while when I was sent to fetch water. A very strange case, answer^d Bruno, take
heed Calandrino, that she be not the lovely friend to Phillippo, our young
Master, for then it may prove a dangerous matter.

Calandrino stood scratching his head an indifferent while, and then suddenly
replied thus. Now trust me Bruno, it is to be doubted, because he called her
at his Window, and she immediately went up to his Chamber. But what do I care
if it be so? Have not the Gods themselves been beguiled of their Wenches, who
were better men then ever Phillippo can be, and shall I stand in fear of him?
Bruno replied: Be patient Calandrino, I will enquire what Woman she is, and if
she be not the wife or friend to our young master Phillippo, with fair
persuasions I can overrule the matter, because she is a familiar acquaintance
of mine. But how shall we do, that Buffalmaco may not know hereof? I can
never speak to her, if he be in my company. For Buffalmaco (quoth Calandrino)
I have no fear of all, but rather of Nello, because he is a near Kinsman to my
wife, and he is able to undo me quite, if once it should come to his hearing.
Thou say well, replied Bruno, therefore the matter has need to be very
cleanly carried.

Now let me tell you, the Woman was well enough known to Bruno, as also her
quality of life, which Phillippo had acquainted him withal, and the reason of
her resorting thither. Wherefore, Calandrino going forth of the room where
they wrought, only to gain another sight of Nicholetta, Bruno revealed the
whole history to Buffalmaco and Nello; they all concluding together, how this
amorous fit of the fool was to be followed. And when Calandrino was returned
back again; in whispering manner Bruno said to him. Have thou once more seen
her? Yes, yes Bruno, answered Calandrino: Alas, she has slain me with her
very eye, and I am no better then a dead man. Be patient said Bruno, I will go
and see whether she be the same woman which I take her for, or no: and if it
prove so, then never fear, but refer the business unto me.

Bruno descending down the stairs, found Phillippo and Nicholetta in
conference together, and stepping unto them, discoursed at large, what manner
of man Calandrino was, and how far he was fallen in love with her: so that
they made a merry conclusion, what should be performed in this case, only to
make a pastime of his ^ot begun love. And being come back again to
Calandrino, he said. It is the same woman whereof I told thee, and therefore
we must work wisely in the business: for if Phillippo perceive any thing,
all the water in Arno will hardly serve to quench his fury. But what would
thou have me say to her on thy behalf, if I compass the means to speak with
her? First of all (quoth Calandrino) and in the prime place, tell her, that I
wish infi^ite bushels of those blessings, which makes Maids Mothers, and
begets children. Next, that I am only hers, in any service she will command
me. Dooest thou understand me what I say? Sufficiently answered Bruno, leave
all to me.

When supper time was come, that they gave over working, and were descended
down into the Court: there they found Phillippo and Nicholetta readily
attending to expect some beginning of amorous behavior, and Calandrino glanced
such leering looks at her, coughing and spetting with hummes and haes, yea in
such close and secret manner, that a stark blind sight might very easily
have perceived it.

She also on the other side, returned him such queint and cunning carriage, as
enflamed him far more furiously, even as if he were ready to leap out of
himself. In the mean while, Phillippo, Buffalmaco and the rest that were
there present, seeming as if they were seriously consulting together, and
perceived nothing of his fantastic behauior, according as Bruno had appointed,
could scarce refrain from extremity of laughter, they noted such antic
tricks in Calandrino.

Having spent an indifferent space in this foppish folly, the hour of parting
came, but not without wonderful affliction to Calandrino; and as they were
going toward Florence, Bruno said closely to Calandrino. I dare assure thee,
that thou have made her to consume and melt, even like ice against the warm
Sun. On my word, if thou would bring thy Gitterne, and sit down by us,
singing some few amorous songs of thine own making, when we are beneath about
our business in the Court: she would presently leap out of the Window, as
being unable to tarry from thee.

I like thy counsel well Bruno, answered Calandrino; but shall I bring my
Gitterne thither indeed? Yes, in any case, replied Bruno, for Music is a
matter of mighty prevailing. Ah Bruno (quoth Calandrino) thou would not
credit me in the morning, when I told thee, how the very sight of my person
had wounded her: I perceived it at the very first look of her own, for she
had no power to conceal it. Who but my self could so soon have enflamed her
affection, and being a woman of such worth and beauty as she is? There are
infinite proper handsome fellows, that daily haunt the company of dainty
Damsels, yet are so shallow in the affairs of love, as they are not able to
win one wench of a thousand, no, not with all the wit they have, such is their
extreme folly and ill fortune.

Then pausing a while, and suddenly rapping out a Lovers Oath or two, thus he
proceeded. My dearest Bruno, thou shall see how I can tickle my Gitterne, and
what good sport will ensue thereon. If thou do observe me with judgment, why
man, I am not so old as I seem to be, and she could perceive it at the very
first view; yea, and she shall find it so too, when we have leisure to consult
upon further occasions: I find my self in such a free and frolic io^unditie
of spirit, that I will make her to follow me, even as a fond woman does after
her child.

But beware, said Bruno, that thou do not gripe her ouer-hard, and in kissing,
be careful of biting, because the teeth stand in thy head like the pegges of
a Lute, yet make a comely show in thy fair wide mouth, thy cheeks looking
like two of our artificial Roses, swelling amiably, when thy jaws are well
filled with meat. Calandrino hearing these hansome commendations, thought
himself a man of action already, going, singing, and frisking before his
company so lively, as if he had not bin in his skin.

On the morrow, carrying his Gitterne thither with him, to the no little
delight of his companions, he both played and sung a whole Bed-role of Songs,
not addicting himself to any work all the day: but loitering fantastically,
one while he gazed out at the window, then ran to the gate, and oftentimes
down into the Court, only to have a sight of his Mistress. She also (as
cunningly) encountered all his follies, by such directions as Bruno gave her,
and many more beside of her own devising, to quicken him still with new
occasions: Bruno played the Ambassador between them, in delivering the messages
from Calandrino, and then returning her answers to him. Sometimes when she was
absent thence (which often happened as occasions called her) then he would write
letters in her name, and bring them, as if they were sent by her, to give him
hope of what he desired, but because she was then among her kindred, yet she
could not be unmindful of him.

In this manner, Bruno and Buffalmaco (who had the managing of this amorous
business) made a mere Gregory of poor Calandrino, causing him sometimes to
send her, one while a pretty piece of Iuory, then a fair wrought purse, and a
costly pair of knives, with other such like friendly tokens: bringing him
back again, as in requital of them, counterfetted Rings of no value, Bugles
and bables, which he esteemed as matters of great moment. Moreover, at diverse
close and sudden meetings, they made him pay for many dinners and suppers,
amounting to indifferent charges, only to be careful in the furtherance of his
loue-suit, and to conceal it from his wife.

Having worn out three or four months space in this fond and frivolous
manner, without any other success then as has been declared; and Calandrino
perceiving, that the work undertaken by him and his fellows, grew very near
upon the finishing, which would bar him of any longer resorting thither: he
began to solicit Bruno more importunately, then all the while before he had
done. In regard whereof, Nicholetta being one day come thither, and Bruno
having conferred both with her and Phillippo, with full determination what was
to be done, he began with Calandrino, saying. My honest Neighbor and Friend,
this Woman has made a thousand promises, to grant what thou art so desirous
to have, and I plainly perceive that she has no such meaning, but merely
plays with both our noses. In which respect, seeing she is so perfidious, and
will not perform one of all her faithfull-made promises: if thou will consent
to have it so, she shall be compelled to do it whether she will or no. Yea
marry Bruno, answered Calandrino, that were an excellent course indeed, if it
could be done, and with expedition.

Bruno stood musing awhile to himself, as if he had some strange stratagem in
his brain, and afterward said. Have thou so much courage Calandrino, as but to
handle a piece of written parchment, which I will give thee? Yes, that I have
answered Calandrino, I hope that needed not to be doubted. Well then, said
Bruno, procure that I may have a piece of Virgin Parchment brought me, with a
living Bat or Reremouse; three grains of Incense, and an hallowed Candle, then
leave me to effect what shall content thee. Calandrino watched all the next
night following, with such preparation as he could make, only to catch a Bat;
which being taken at the last, he brought it alive to Bruno (with all the other
materials appointed) who taking him alone into a backer Chamber, there he
wrote diverse follies on the Parchment, in the shape of strange and unusual
Charracters, which he delivered to Calandrino, saying: Be bold Calandrino, and
build constantly upon my words, that if thou can but touch her with this
sacred Charractred charm, she will immediately follow thee, and fulfill
whatsoever thou please to command her. Wherefore, if Phillippo do this day
walk any whither abroad from this house, presume to salute her, in any manner
whatsoever it be, and touching her with the written lines, go presently to the
barn of hay, which thou perceiuest so near adjoining, the only convenient
place that can be, because few or none resort thither. She shall (in despite
of her blood) follow thee; and when thou have her there, I leave thee then to
thy valiant victory. Calandrino stood on tiptoe, like a man newly molded by
Fortune, and warranted Bruno to fulfill all effectually.

Nello, whom Calandrino most of all feared and mistrusted, had a hand as deep
as any of the rest in this deceit, and was as forward also to have it
performed, by Brunoes direction, he went unto Florence, where being in company
with Calandrinoes Wife, thus he began.

Cousine, thine unkind usage by thine husband, is not unknown to me, how he
did beat thee (beyond the compass of all reason) when he brought home stones
from the plain of Mugnone; in which regard, I am very desirous to have thee
revenged on him: which if thou will not do, never repute me hereafter for thy
Kinsman and Friend. He is fallen in love with a Woman of the common gender, one
that is to be hired for money: he has his private meetings with her, and the
place is partly known to me, as by a secret appointment (made very lately) I
am credibly given to understand; wherefore walk presently along with me, and
thou shall take him in the heat of his knavery.

All the while as these words were uttering to her, she could not dissemble
her inward impatience, but starting up as half frantic with fury, she said.
O notorious villain! Dare thou abuse thine honest wife so basely? I swear
by blessed Saint Bridge^, thou shall be paid with coin of thi^^ ownestampe. So
casting a light wearing Cloak about her, and taking a young woman in her
company; she went away with Nell^ in no mean haste. Bruno seeing her coming
a far off, said to Phillippo: You Sir, you know what is to be done, act your
part according to your appointment. Phillippo went immediately into the room,
where Calandrino and his other Consorts were at work, and said to them. Honest
friends, I have certain occasions which command mine instant being at
Florence: work hard while I am absent, and I will not be unthankful for it.
Away he departed from them, and hid himself in a convenient place, where he
could not be descryed, yet see whatsoever Calandrino did: who when he imagined
Phillippo to be far enough off, descended down into the Court, where he
found Nicholetta sitting alone, and going toward her, began to enter into
discoursing with her.

She knowing what remained to be done on her behalf, drew somewhat near him,
and showed her self more familiar then formerly she had done: by which
favorable means, he touched her with the charmed Parchment, whibh was no
sooner done; but with out using any other kind of language, he went to the
hay-Barne, whither Nicholletta followed him, and both being entered, he closed
the Barn door, and then stood gazing on her, as if he had never seen her
before. Standing still as in a study, or bethinking himself what he should say:
she began to use affable gesture to him, and taking him by the hand, made show
as if she meant to kiss him, which yet she reframed, though he (rather then
his life) would gladly have had it. Why how now dear Calandrino (quoth she)
jewel of my joy, comfort of my heart, how many times have I longed for thy
sweet Company? And enjoying it now, according to mine own desire, do thou
stand like a Statue, or man alla morte? The rare tunes of the Gitterne, but
(much more) the melodious accents of thy voice, excelling Orpheus or Amphion,
so ravished my soul, as I know not how to express the depth of mine
affection; and yet have thou brought me hither, only to look babies in mine
eyes, and not so much as speak one kind word to me?

Bruno and Buffalmaco, having hid themselves close behind Philippo, they both
heard and saw all this amourous conflict, and as Calandrino was quickening his
courage, and wiping his mouth, with intent to kiss her: his wife and Nello
entered into the Barn, which caused Nicholetta to get her gone presently,
sheltring her self where Philippo lay scouting. But the enraged woman ran
furiously upon poor daunted Calandrino, making such a pitiful massacre with
her nails, and tearing the hair from his head, as he merely looked like an
infected Anatomy. Foul loathsome dog (quoth she) must you be at your minions,
and leave me hungerstarued at home? An old knave with (almost) never a good
tooth in thy head, and yet art thou neighing after young wenches? have thou not
work enough at home, but must be gadding in to other men's grounds? Are these
the fruits of wandering abroad?

Calandrino being in this pitiful perplexity, stood like one neither alive
nor dead, nor daring to use any resistance against her; but fell on his knees
before his Wife, holding up his hands for mercy, and entreating her (for
charities sake) not to torment him any more: for he had committed no harm at
all, and the Gentlewoman was his Masters Wife, who came with no such intent
thither, as she fondly imagined. Wife, or wife not (quoth she) I would have
none to meddle with my Husband, but I that have the most right to him.

Bruno and Buffalmaco, who had laughed all this while heartily at this pastime,
with Phillippo and Nicholetta; came running in haste to know the reason of this
loud noise, and after they had pacified the woman with gentle persuasions:
they advised Calandrino, to walk with his Wife to Florence, and return no
more to work there again, least Phillippo hearing what had happened, should be
revenged on him with some outrage. Thus poor Calandrino miserably misused and
beaten, went home to Florence with his Wife, scoulded and raild at all the way,
beside his other molestations (day and night) afterward: his Companions,
Phillippo and Nicholetta, making themselves merry at his misfortune.

Two young Gentlemen, the one named Panuccio, and the other Adriano, lodged one
night in a poor Inn, where one of them went to bed to the Hosts Daughter,
and the other (by mistaking his way in the dark) to the Hosts Wife. He which
lay with the daughter, happened afterward to the Hosts bed, and told him what
he had done, as thinking he spoke to his own companyon. Coffeehouse growiug
between them, the Mother perceiving her error, went to bed to her daughter,
and with discreet language, made a general pacification.

The Sixth Novel.
Wherein is manifested, that an offense committed ignorantly, and by mistaking;
ought to be covered with good advise, and civil discretion.



CAlandrino, whose mishaps had so many times made the whole assembly merry, and
this last passing among them with indifferent commendations: upon a general
silence commanded, the Queen gave order to Pamphilus, that he should follow
next, as indeed he did, beginning thus. Praiseworthy Ladies, the name of
Nicoletta, so fondly affected by Calandrino, puts me in mind of a Novel,
concerning another Nicoletta, of whom I purpose to speak: to the end you may
observe how by a sudden wary foresight, a discreet woman compassed the means
to avoid a notorious scandal.

On the plain of Mugnone, near to Florence, dwelt (not long since) an honest
mean man, who kept a poor Inn or Ostery for travelers, where they might
have some slender entertainment for their money. As he was but a poor man, so
his house affoorded but very small receipt of guests, not lodging any but on
necessity, and such as he had some knowledge of. This honest poor host had a
woman (sufficiently fair) to his wife, by whom he had also two children, the
one a comely young maiden, aged about fifteen years, and the other a son,
not fully (as yet) a year old, and sucking on the mothers breast.

A comely youthful Gentleman of our City, became amorously affected to the
Damsel, resorting thither diverse times as he traveled on the way, to
express how much he did respect her. And she accounting her fortune none of
the meanest, to be beloved by so youthful a Gallant, declared such virtuous
and modest demeanor, as might deserve his best opinion of her: so that their
love grew to an equal simpathy, and mutual contentment of them both, in
expectation of further effects; he being named Panuccio, and she Nicholletta.

The heat of affection thus increasing day by day, Panuccio grew exceedingly
desirous to enjoy the fruits of his long continued liking, and diverse devises
mustred in his brain, how he might compass one nights lodging in her fathers
house, whereof he knew every part and parcel, as not doubting to effect what
he desired, yet undiscovered by any, but the maid her self.

According as his intention aimed, so he longed to put it in execution, and
having imparted his mind to an honest loyal friend, named Adriano, who was
acquainted with the course of his love: hyring two horses, and having
Portmantues behind them, filled with matters of no moment, they departed from
Florence, as if they had some great journey to ride. Having spent the day time
where themselves best pleased, dark night being entered, they arrived on the
plain of Mugnone, where, as if they were come from the parts of Romanio, they
rode directly to this poor Inn, and knocking at the door, the honest Host
(being familiar and friendly to all comers) opened the door, when Panuccio
spoke in this manner to him. Good man, we must request one nights lodging with
you, for we thought to have reached so far as Florence, but dark night
preventing us, you see at what a late hour we are come hither. Signior
Panuccio, answered the host, it is not unknown to you, how vnfiting my poor
house is, for entertaining such guests as you are: Nevertheless, seeing you
are overtaken by so unseasonable an hour, and no other place is near for your
receite; I will gladly lodge you so well as I can.

When they were dismounted from their horses, and entered into the simple Inn:
having taken order for feeding their horses, they accepted such provision, as
the place and time afforded, requesting the Host to suppe with them. Now I am
to tell you, that there was but one small Chamber in the house, wherein stood
three beds, as best the Host had devised to place them, two of them standing
by the walls side, and the third fronting them both, but with such close and
narrow passage, as very hardly could one step between them. The best of these
three beds was appointed for the Gentlemen, and therein theyd lay them down to
rest, but sleep they could not, albeit they dissembled it very formally. In
the second Bed was Nicholetta the daughter, lodged by her self, and the father
and mother in the third, and because she was to give the child suck in the
night time, the Cradle (wherein it lay) stood close by their beds side, because
the childs crying or any other occasion concerning it, should not disquiet the
Gentlemen.

Panuccio having subtily observed all this, and in what manner they went to
bed; after such a space of time, as he imagined them to be all fast asleep, he
arose very softly, and stealing to the bed of Nicholetta, lay down gently by
her. And albeit she seemed somewhat afraid at the first, yet when she perceived
who it was, she rather bad him welcome, then showed her self any way
discontented. Now while Panuccio continued thus with the maid, it fortuned
that a Cat threw down somewhat in the house, the noise whereof awaked the wife,
and fearing greater harm, then (indeed) had happened, she arose without a
Candle, and went groping in the dark, toward the place where she heard the
noise. Adriano, who had no other meaning but well, found occasion also to rise,
about some natural necessity, and making his passage in the dark, stumbled on
the childs Cradle (in the way) where the woman had set it, and being unable to
pass by, without removing it from the place: took and set it by his own beds
side, and having done the business for which he rose, returned to his bed
again, never remembering to set the Cradle where first he found it.

The Wife having found the thing thrown down being of no value or moment,
cared not for lighting any candle; but rating the Cat, returned back, feeling
for the bed where her Husband lay, but finding not the Cradle there, she said
to her self. What a foolish woman am I, that cannot well tell my self what I
do? Instead of my Husbands bed, I am going to both my guests.

So, stepping on a little further, she found the childs Cradle, and laid her
self down by Adriano, thinking she had gone right to her Husband. Adriano
being not yet fallen asleep, feeling the hostess in bed with him: took
advantage of so fair an occasion offered, and what he did, is no business of
mine, (as I heard) neither found the woman any fault. Matters coming to pass
in this strange manner, and Panuccio fearing, lest sleep seazing on him, he
might disgrace the maids reputation: taking his kind farewell of her, with
many kisses and sweet embraces: returned again to his own Bed, but meeting
with the Cradle in his way, and thinking it stood by the hosts Bed, (as truly
it did so at the first) went back from the Cradle, and stepped into the hosts
Bed indeed, who awaked upon his very entrance, albeit he slept very soundly
before.

Panuccio supposing that he was laid down by his loving friend Adriano,
merrily said to the Host. I protest to thee, as I am a Gentleman, Nicholetta
is a dainty delicate wench, and worthy to be a very good man's wife: this night
she has given me the sweetest entertainment, as the best Prince in the
world can wish no better, and I have kissed her most kindly for it. The Host
hearing these news, which seemed very unwelcome to him, said first to himself:
What make such a devil here in my Bed? Afterward being more rashly angry,
then well advised, he said to Panuccio. Can thou makes vaunt of such a
mounstrous villainy? Or think thou, that heaven has not due vengeance in
store, to requite all wicked deeds of darkness? If all should sleep, yet I
have courage sufficient to right my wrong, and yet as old as I am thou shall
be sure to find it.

Our amorous Panuccio being none of the wisest young men in the world,
perceiving his error; sought not to amend it, (as well he might have done)
with some queint strain of wit, carried in quick and cleanly manner, but
angerly answered. What shall I find that thou dare do to me? am I any way
afraid of thy threatenings? The Hosts imagining she was in bed with her
Husband, said to Adriano: Hark Husband, I think our Guests are quarrelling
together, I hope they will do no harm to one another. Adriano laughing
outright, answered. Let them alone, and become friends again as they fell out:
perhaps they drank too much yesternight.

The woman perceiving that it was her husband that quarrelled, and
distinguishing the voice of Adriano from his: knew presently where she was,
and with whom; wherefore having wit at will, and desirous to cloud an error
unadvisedly committed, and with no willing consent of her self: without
returning any more words, presently she rose, and taking the Cradle with the
child in it, removed it thence to her daughters bed side, although she had no
light to help her, and afterward went to bed to her, where (as if she were but
newly awaked) she called her Husband, to understand what angry speeches had
past between him and Panuccio. The Host replied, saying. Did thou not hear
him wife, brag and boast, how he has lain this night with our daughter
Nicholetta? Husband (quoth she) he is no honest Gentleman; if he should say
so, and believe me it is a manifest lie, for I am in bed with her my self, and
never yet closed mine eyes together, since the first hour I laid me down: it
is unmannerly done of him to speak it, and you are little less then a
logger-head, if you do believe it. This proceeds from your bibbing and
swilling yesternight, which (as it seems) makes you to walk about the room
in your sleep, dreaming of wonders in the night season: it were no great sin
if you brake your necks, to teach you keep a fairer quarter; and how comes
it to pass, that Signior Panuccio could not keep himself in his own bed?

Adriano (on the other side) perceiving how wisely the woman excused her own
shame and her daughters; to back her in a business so cunningly begun, he
called to Panuccio, saying. Have not I told thee an hundred times, that thou
art not fit to lie any where, out of thine own lodging? What a shame is this
base imperfection to thee, by rising and walking thus in the nightime,
according as thy dreams do wantonly delude thee, and cause thee to forsake
thy bed, telling nothing but lies and fables, yet auouching them for manifest
truths? Assuredly this will procure no mean peril unto thee: Come hither,
and keep in thine own bed for mere shame.

When the honest meaning Host heard, what his own Wife and Adriano had
confirmed: he was verily persuaded, that Panuccio spoke in a dream all this
while: And to make it the more constantly apparent, Panuccio (being now grown
wiser by others example) lay talking and blundring to himself, even as if
dreams or perturbations of the mind did much molest him, with strange
distractions in frantic manner. Which the Host perceiving, and
compassionating his case, as one man should do another: he took him by the
shoulders, iogging and hunching him, saying. Awake Signior Panuccio, and get
you gone hence to your own bed.

Panuccio, yawning and stretching out his limbs, with unusual groans and
respirations, such as (better) could be hardly dissembled: seemed to wake as
out of a trance, and calling his friend Adriano, said.

Adriano, is it day, that thou do waken me? It may be day or night replied
Adriano, for both (in these fits) are alike to thee. Arise man for shame, and
come to thine lodging. Then faining to be much troubled and sleepie, he arose
from the host, and went to Adrianoes bed.

When it was day, and all in the house risen, the host began to smile at
Panuccio, mocking him with his idle dreaming and talking in the night.

So, falling from one merry matter to another, yet without any mislike at all:
the Gentlemen, having their houses prepared, and their Portmantues fastened
behind, drinking to their host, mounted on horseback, and they road away
toward Florence, no less contented with the manner of occasions happened,
then the effects they sorted to. Afterward, other courses were taken, for the
continuance of this begun pleasure with Nicholetta, who made her mother
believe, that Panuccio did nothing else but dream. And the mother her self
remembering how kindly Adriano had used her (a fortune not expected by her
before:) was more then half of the mind, that ^he did then dream also, while
she was waking.

Talano de Molese dreamed, That a Wolf rent and tore his wives face and
throat. Which dream he told to her, with advise to keep her self out of
danger; which she refusing to do, received what followed.

The Seventh Novel.
Whereby (with some indifferent reason) it is concluded, that Dreams do not
always fall out to be leasings.



BY the conclusion of Pamphilus his Nouel, wherein the woman's ready wit, at a
time of such necessity, carried deserved commendations: the Queen gave command
to Madam Pampinea, that she should next begin with hers, and so she did, in
this manner. In some discourses (gracious Ladies) already past among us, the
truth of apparitions in dreams has partly bin approved, whereof very many
have made a mockery. Nevertheless, whatsoever has heretofore bin said, I
purpose to acquaint you with a very short Novel, of a strange accident
happening unto a neighbor of mine, in not crediting a Dream which her Husband
told her.

I cannot tell, whether you knew Talano de Molese, or no, a man of much honor,
who took to wife a young Gentlewoman, named Margarita, as beautiful as the
best: but yet so peevish, scornful, and fantastical, that she disdained any
good advice given her; neither could any thing be done, to cause her
contentment; which absurd humors were highly displeasing to her husband: but in
regard he knew not how to help it, constrainedly he did endure it. It came to
pass, that Talano being with his wife, at a summer house of his own in the
country, he dreamed one night, that he saw his Wife walking in a fair wood,
which adjoined near unto his house, and while she thus continued there, he
seemed to see issue forth from a corner of the said Wood, a great and furious
Wolf, which leaping suddenly on her, caught her hy the face and throat,
drawing her down to the earth, and offering to drag her thence. But he crying
out for help, recovered her from the Wolf, yet having her face and throat
very pitifully rent and torn.

In regard of this terrifying dream, when Talano was risen in the morning, and
sat conuersing with his wife, he spoke thus unto her. Woman, although thy
froward wilful Nature be such, as has not permitted me one pleasing day with
thee, since first we becam man and wife, but rather my life has been most
tedious to me, as fearing still some mischief should happen to thee: yet let
me now in loving manner advise thee, to follow my counsel, and (this day) not
to walk abroad out of this house. She demanded a reason for this advice of
his. He related to her every particular of his dream, adding with all these
speeches.

True it is Wife (quoth he) that little credit should be given to dreams:
nevertheless, when they deliver advertisement of harms to ensue, there is
nothing lost by shunning and avoiding them. She fleering in his face, and
shaking her head at him, replied. Such harms as thou wishest, such thou
dreamest of. Thou pretendest much pity and care of me, but all to no other
end: but what mischeefes thou dreamest happening unto me, so would thou see
them effected on me. Wherefore, I will well enough look to my self, both this
day, and at all times else: because thou shall never make thy self merry, with
any such misfortune as thou wishest unto me.

Well Wife, answered Talano, I knew well enough before, what thou would say:
An unsound head is soon scratcht with the very gentlest Comb: but believe as
thou please. As for my self, I speak with a true and honest meaning soul,
and once again I do advise thee, to keep within our doors all this day: at
least wise beware, that thou walk not into our wood, be it but in regard of
my dream. Well sir (quoth she scoffingly) once you shall say, I followed your
counsel: but within her self she fell to this murmuring. Now I perceive my
husbands cunning coloring, and why I must not walk this day into our wood: he
has made a compact with some common Queen, closely to have her company there,
and is afraid least I should take them tardy. Belike he would have me feed
among blind folk, and I were worthy to be thought a stark fool, if I
should not prevent a manifest treachery, being intended against me. Go thither
therefore I will, and tarry there all the whole day long; but I will meet with
him in his merchandise, and see the Pink wherein he adventures.

After this her secret consultation, her husband was no sooner gone forth at
one door, but she did the like at another, yet so secretly as possibly she
could devise to do, and (without any delaying) she went to the Wood, wherein
she hid her self very closely, among the thickest of the bushes, yet could
discern every way about her, if any body should offer to pass by her. While
she kept her self in this concealment, suspecting other mysterious matters,
as her idle imagination had tutord her, rather then the danger of any Wolf:
out of a brakie thicket by her, suddenly rushed a huge and dreadful Wolf, as
having found her by the sent, mounting up, and grasping her throat in his
mouth, before she saw him, or could call to heaven for mercy.

Being thus seized of her, he carried her as lightly away, as if she had bin
no heavier then a Lamb, she being (by no means) able to cry, because he held
her so fast by the throat, and hindered any helping of her self. As the Wolf
carried her thus from thence he had quite strangled her, if certain Shepherds
had not met him, who with their outcries and exclaimes at the Wolf, caused him
to let her fall, and have away to save his own life. Notwithstanding the harm
done to her throat and face, the shepherds knew her, and carried her home to
her house, where she remained a long while after, carefully attended by
Physicians and Chirurgians.

Now, although they were very expert and cunning men all, yet could they not so
perfectly cure her, but both her throat, and part of her face were so
blemished, that whereas she seemed a rare creature before, she was now deformed
and much unsightly. In regard of which strange alteration, being ashamed to
show her self in any place, where formerly she had been seen: she spent her
time in sorrow and mourning, repenting her insolent and scornful carriage, as
also her rash running forth into danger, upon a foolish and jealous surmise,
believing her husbands dreams the better for ever after.

Blondello (in a merry manner) caused Guiotto to beguile himself of a good
dinner: for which deceit, Guiotto became cunningly revenged, by procuring
Blondello to be unreasonably beaten and misused.

The Eight Novel.
Whereby plainly appears, that they which take delight in deceiving others,
do well deserve to be deceived themselves.



IT was a general opinion in the whole Iouiall Company, that whatsoever
Talano saw in his sleep, was not any dream, but rather a vision:
considering, every part thereof fell out so directly, without the lest failing.
But when silence was enjoined, then the Queen gave forth by evident
demonstration, that Madam Lauretta was next to succeed, whereupon she thus
began. As all they (judicious hearers) which have this day spoken before me,
derived the ground or project of their Nouels, from some other argument spoken
of before: even so, the cruel reuendge of the Scholar, yesterday discoursed
at large by Madame Pampinea, makes me to remember another Tale of like nature,
somewhat grievous to the sufferer, yet not in such cruel measure inflicted,
as that on Madam Helena.

There dwelt sometime in Florence, one who was generally called by the name of
Guiotto, a man being the greatest Gourmand, and grossest feeder, as ever was
seen in any Country, all his means and procurements merely unable to
maintain expenses for filling his belly. But otherwise he was of sufficient
and commendable carriage, fairly demea^ed, and well discoursing on any
argument: yet, not as a curious and spruce Courtier, but rather a frequenter of
rich men's Tables, where choice of good cheer is sildome wanting, and such
should have his company, albeit not invited, yet (like a bold intruder) he had
the courage to bid himself welcome.

At the same time, and in our City of Florence also, there was another man,
named Blondello, very low of stature, yet comely formed, quick witted, more
neat and brisk then a Butter fly, always wearing a wrought silk cap on his
head, and not a hair staring out of order, but the tuft flourishing above the
forehead, and he such another trencher-fly for the table, as our forenamed
Guiotto was. It so fell out on a morning in the Lent time, that he went into
the Fishmarket, where he bought two goodly Lampreyes, for Messer Viero de
Cherchi, and was espied by Guiotto, who (coming to Blondello) said. What is
the meaning of this cost, and for whom is it? Whereto Blondello thus answered.
Yesternight, three other Lampries, far fairer and fatter then these, and a
whole Sturgeon, were sent unto Messer Corso Donati, and being not sufficient to
feed diverse Gentlemen, whom he has invited this day to dine with him, he
caused me to buy these two beside: Do not thou intend to make one among
them? Yes I warrant thee, replied Guiotto, thou know I can inuit my self
thither, without any other bidding.

So parting; about the hour of dinner time, Guiotto went to the house of the
said Messer Corso, whom he found sitting and talking with certain of his
neighbors, but dinner was not (as yet) ready, neither were they come thither to
dinner. Messer Corso demanded of Guiotto, what news with him, and whither he
went? Why Sir (said Guiotto) I come to dine with you, and your good company.
Whereto Messer Corso answered, That he was welcome, and his other friends being
gone, dinner was served in, none else thereat present but Messer Corso and
Guiotto: all the diet being a poor dish of Pease, a little piece of Tunny, and a
few small fishes fried, without any other dishes to follow after. Guiotto seeing
no better fare, but being disapointed of his expectation, as longing to feed on
the Lampries and Sturgeon, and so to have made a full dinner indeed was of a
quick apprehension, and apparently perceived, that Blondello had merely guld
him in a knavery, which did not a little vex him, and made him vow to be
revenged on Blondello, as he could compass occasion afterward.

Before many days were past, it was his fortune to meet with Blondello, who
having told this jest to diverse of his friends, and much good merriment made
thereat: he saluted Guiotto in ceremonious manner, saying. How did thou like
the fat Lampreyes and Sturgeon, which thou fedst on at the house of Messer
Corso Donati? Well Sir (answered Guiotto) perhaps before eight days pass over
my head, thou shall meet with as pleasing a dinner as I did. So, parting away
from Blondello, he met with a Porter or burthen-bearer, such as are usually
sent on errands; and hyring him to deliver a message for him, gave him a glass
bottle, and bringing him near to the Halhouse of Cauicciuli, showed him there
a knight, called Signior Phillipo Argenti, a man of huge stature, stout,
strong, vainglorious, fierce and sooner moved to anger then any other man. To
him (quoth Guiotto) thou must go with this bottle in thy hand, and say thus to
him. Sir, Blondello sent me to you, and courteously entreats you, that you
would enrubinate this glass bottle with your best Claret Wine; because he
would make merry with a few friends of his. But beware he lay no hand on thee,
because he may be easily induced to misuse thee, and so my business be
disappointed. Well Sir replied the Porter, shall I say any thing else unto him?
No (quoth Guiotto) only go and deliver this message, and when thou art
returned, I Will pay thee for thy pains.

The Porter being gone to the house, delivered his message to the knight, who
being a man of no great civil breeding; but furious, rash, and inconsiderate:
presently conceived, that Blondello (whom he knew well enough) sent this
message in mere mockage of him, and starting up with fiery looks, said: What
enrubination of Claret should I send him? and what have I to do with him, or
his drunken friends? Let him and thee go hang your selves together. So he stepped
to catch hold on the Porter, but he (being well warnd before) was quick and
nimble, and escaping from him, returned back to Guiotto (who observed all) and
told him the answer of Signior Phillippo. Guiotto not a little contented, paid
the Porter, and tarried not in any place til he met with Blondello, to whom he
said. When wast thou at the Hall of Cauicciuli? Not a long while, answered
Blundello, but why do thou demand such a question? Because (quoth Guiotto)
Signior Phillippo has sought about for thee, yet know not I what he would
have with thee. Is it so? replied Blondello, then I will walk thither
presently, to understand his pleasure.

When Blondello was thus parted from him, Guiotto followed not far off behind
him, to behold the issue of this angry business; and Signior Phillippo,
because he could not catch the Porter, continued much distempred, fretting and
fuming, in regard he could not comprehend the meaning of the Porters message:
but only surmized, that Blondello (by the procurement of some body else) had
done this in scorn of him. While he remained thus deeply discontented, he
espied Blondello coming toward him, and meeting him by the way, he stepped
close to him, and gave him a cruel blow on the face, causing his nose to fall
out a bleeding. Alas Sir, said Blondello, wherefore do you strike me? Signior
Phillippo, catching him by the hair of the head, trampled his wrought
nightcap in the dirt, and his cloak also; when, laying many violent blows on
him, he said. Villainous Traitor as thou art, I Will teach thee what it is to
enrubinate with Claret, either thy self, or any of thy cupping companions: Am
I a child, to be iested withal?

Nor was he more furious in words, then in strokes also, beating him about the
face, hardly leaving any hair on his head, and dragging him along in the mire,
spoiling all his garments, and he not able (from the first blow given) to
speak a word in defense of himself. In the end, Signior Phillippo having
extremely beaten him, and many people gathering about them, to succor a man so
much misused, the matter was at large related, and manner of the message
sending. For which, they all present, did greatly reprehend Blondello,
considering he knew what kind of man Phillippo was, not any way to be iested
withal. Blondello in tears constantly maintained, that he never sent any such
message for wine, or intended it in the least degree: so, when the tempest was
more mildly calmed, and Blondello (thus cruelly beaten and durtied) had gotten
home to his own house, he could then remember, that (questionles) this was
occasioned by Guiotto.

After some few days were passed over, and the hurts in his face indifferently
cured; Blondello beginning to walk abroad again, chanced to meet with
Guiotto: who laughing heartily at him, said. Tell me Blondello, how do thou
like the enrubinating Clarret of Signior Phillippo? As well (quoth Blondello)
as thou did the Sturgeon and Lampreyes at Messer Corso Donaties. Why rhen
(said Guiotto, let these two tokens continue familiar between thee and me,
when thou would bestow such another dinner on me, then will I enrubinate thy
nose with a bottle of the same Claret. But Blondello perceived (to his cost)
that he had met with the worser bargain, and Guiotto got cheer, without any
blows: and therefore desired a peaceful atonement, each of them (always
after) abstaining from flouting one another.

Two young Gentlemen, the one named Melisso, borne in the City of Laiazzo: and
the other Giosefo of Antioche, travailed together unto Solomon, the famous King
of Great Britain. The one desiring to learn what he should do, whereby to
compass and win the love of men. The other craved to be enstructed, by what
means he might reclaim an headstrong and unruly wife. And what answers the
wise King gave unto them both, before they departed away from him.

The Ninth Novel.
Containing an excellent admonition, that such as covet to have the love of
other men, must first learn themselves, how to love: Also, by what means such
women as are cursed and self-willed, may be reduced to civil obedience.



Upon the conclusion of Madame Laurettaes Novel, none now remained to succeed
next in order, but only the Queen her self, the privilege reserved, granted
to Dioneus; wherefore, after they had all smiled at the folly of Blondello,
with a cheerful countenance thus the Queen began.

Honorable Ladies, if with advised judgment, we do duly consider the order of
all things, we shall very easily perceive, That the whole universal
multiplicitie of Women, by Nature, custom, and laws, are and ought to be
subject to men, yea, and to be gouernd by their discretion. Because every one
desiring to enjoy peace, repose and comfort with them, under whose charge they
are; ought to be humble, patient and obedient, over and beside her spotless
honesty, which is the crown and honor of every good woman. And although those
laws, which respect the common good of all things, or rather use and custom
(as our wonted saying is) the powers whereof are very great, and worthy to be
reverenced, should not make us wise in this case. Yet Nature has given us a
sufficient demonstration, in creating our bodies more soft and delicate, yea,
and our hearts timorous, fearful, benign and compassionable, our strength
feeble, our voices pleasing, and the motion of our members sweetly plyant; all
which are apparent testimonies, that we have need of others government.

Now, it is not to be denied, that whosoever has need of help, and is to be
governed: merely reason commands, that they should be subject and obedient
to their governor. Who then should we have for our helps and governors, if
not men? Wherefore, we should be entirely subject to them, in giving them due
honor and reverence, and such a one as shall depart from this rule: she (in
mine opinion) is not only worthy of grievous reprehension, but also severe
chastisement beside. And to this exact consideration (over and above diverse
other important reasons) I am the rather induced, by the Nouel which Madame
Pampinea so lately reported, concerning the froward and wilful wife of Talano,
who had a heavier punishment inflicted on her, then her Husband could devise to
do. And therefore it is my peremptory sentence, that all such women as will
not be gracious, benign and pleasing: do justly deserve (as I have already
said) rude, rough and harsh handling, as both nature, custom and laws have
commanded.

To make good what I have said, I will declare unto you the counsel and advise,
given by Solomon, the wise and famous King of Great Britain, as a most
wholesome and sovereign medicine for the cure of such a dangerous disease, in
any woman so foully infected. Which counsel (notwithstanding) all such women as
have no need of this Physic, I would not have them to imagine, that it was
meant for them, albeit men have a common Proverb, to wit.

As the good horse and bad horse, do both need the spur.
So a good wife and bad wife, a wand will make stir.
Which saying, whosoever does interpret ioin such pleasing manner as they
ought, shall find it (as you al will affirm no less) to be very true: especially
in the moral meaning, it is beyond all contradiction. Women are naturally all
unstable, and easily enclining to misgouernment; wherefore to correct the
iniquity of such a distemperature in them that out-step the terms and bounds
of womanhood, a wand has been allowed for especial physic. As in the like
manner, for support of virtue, in those of contrary condition, shaming to be
sullyed with so gross a sin: the correcting Wand may serve as a walking
staff, to protect them from all other fears. But, forbearing to teach any
longer; let me proceed to my purpose, and tell you my Novel.

In those ancient and reverend days, whereof I am now to speak, the high
renown and admirable wisdom of Solomon, King of Great Britain, was most
famous throughout all parts of the world; for answering all doubtful questions
and demands whatsoever, that possibly could be propounded to him. So that many
resorted to him, from the most remote and furthest off countries, to hear his
miraculous knowledge and experience, yea, and to crave his counsel, in matters
of greatest importance. Among the rest of them which repaired thither, was a
rich young Gentleman, honorably descended, named Melisso, who came from the
City of Laiazzo, where he was both borne, and dwelt.

In his riding toward France, as he passed by Naples, he ouertooke another
young Gentleman, a native of Antioch, and named Giosefo, whose journey lay the
same way as the others did. Having ridden in company some few days together,
as it is a custom commonly observed among Travelers, to understand one
another Country and condition, as also to what part his occasions call him:
so happened it with them, Giosefo directly telling him, that he iourneyed
toward the wise King Solomon, to desire his advise what means he should
observe, in the reclaiming of a wilful wife, the most froward and selfe-willed
woman that ever lived; whom neither fair persuasions, nor gentle courtesies
could in any manner prevail withal. Afterward he demanded of Melisso, to
know the occasion of his travel, and whither.

Now trust me Sir, answered Melisso, I am a native of Laiazzo, and as you are
vexed with one great misfortune, even so am I offended with another. I am
young, wealthy, well derived by birth, and allow liberal expenses, for
maintaining a worthy table in my house, without distinguishing persons by their
rank and quality, but make it free for all comers, both of the city, and all
places else. Notwithstanding all which bounty and houourable entertainment, I
cannot meet with any man that loves me. In which respect, I journey to the
same place as you do, to crave the counsel of so wise a King, what I should
do, whereby I might procure men to love me. Thus like two well-met friendly
companions, they rode on together, until they arrived in Great Britain,
where, by means of the Noble Barons attending on the King; they were brought
before him. Melisso delivered his mind in very few words, whereto the King
made no other answer, but this: Learn to love. Which was no sooner spoken,
but Melisso was dismissed from the Kings presence.

Giosefo also relating, wherefore he came thither; the King replied only thus:
Go to the Goose Bridge: and presently Giosefo had also his dismission from the
King. Coming forth, he found Melisso attending for him, and revealed in what
manner the King had answered him: whereupon, they consulted together,
concerning both their answers, which seemed either to exceed their
comprehension, or else was delivered them in mere mockery, and therefore (more
then half discontented) they returned homeward again.

After they had ridden on a few days together, they came to a River, over
which was a goodly Bridge, and because a great company of Horses and Mules
(heavily laden, and after the manner of a Carauan of Camels in Egypt) were
first to pass over the said Bridge; they gladly stayed to permit their pass.
The greater number of them being already past over, there was one shie and
skittish Mule (belike subject to fearful starting, as oftentimes we see
horses have the like ill quality) that would not pass over the Bridge by any
means, wherefore one of the Muletters took a good Cudgel, and smote her at
the first gently, as hoping so to procure her passage. Notwithstanding,
starting one while backward, then again forward, side-wayes, and every way
indeed, but the direct Road way she would not go.

Now grew the Muletter extremely angry, giving her many cruel strokes, on
the head, sides, flancks and all parts else, but yet they proved to no purpose,
which Melisso and Giosefo seeing, and being (by this means) hindered of their
passage, they called to the Muletter, saying. Foolish fellow, what do thou?
Intendest thou to kill the Mule? why do thou not lead her gently, which is
the likelier course to prevail by, then beating and misusing her as thou do?
Content your selves Gentlemen (answered the Muletter) you know your horses
qualities, as I do my Mules, let me deal with her as I please. Having thus
spoken, he gave her so many violent strokes, on head, sides, hippes, and every
where else, as made her at last pass over the Bridge quietly, so that the
Muletter won the Mastery of his Mule.

When Melisso and Giosefo had past over the Bridge, where they intended to part
each from other; a sudden motion happened into the mind of Melisso, which
caused him to demand of an aged man (who sat craving alms of Passengers at
the Bridge foot) how the Bridge was called: Sir, answered the old man, this is
called, The Goose Bridge. Which words when Giosefo heard, he called to mind
the saying of King Solomon, and therefore immediately said to Melisso. Worthy
friend, and partner in my travel, I dare now assure you, that the counsel
given me by King Solomon, may fall out most effectall and true: For I plainly
perceive, that I knew not how to handle my selfe-will'd-wife, until the
Muletter did instruct me. So, requesting still to enjoy the others Company,
they iourneyed on, till at the length they came to Laiazzo, where Giosefo
retained Melisso still with him, for some repose after so long a journey, and
entertained him with very honorable respect and courtesy.

One day Giosefo said to his Wife: Woman, this Gentleman is my intimate friend,
and has borne me company in all my travel: such diet therefore as thou will
welcome him withal, I would have it ordered (in dressing) according to his
direction. Melisso perceiving that Giosefo would needs have it to be so; in few
words directed her such a course, as (for ever) might be to her Husbands
contentment. But she, not altring a jot from her former disposition, but
rather far more froward and tempestuous: delighted to vex and cross him,
doing every thing quite contrary to the order appointed. Which Giosefo
observing, angerly he said unto her. Was it not told you by my friend, in what
manner he would have our Supper dressed? She turning fiercely to him, replied. Am
I to be directed by him or thee? Supper must and shall be dressed as I will have
it: if it pleases me, I care not who does dislike it; if thou would have it
otherwise, go seek both your Suppers where you may have it.

Melisso maruelling at her froward answer, rebuked her for it in very kind
manner: whereupon, Giosefo spoke thus to her. I perceive wife, you are the same
woman as you were wount to be: but believe me on my word, I shall quite alter
you from this cursed complexion. So turning to Melisso, thus he proceeded. Noble
friend, we shall try anon, whether the counsel of King Solomon be
effectual, or no; and I pray you, let it not be offenssiue to you to see it;
but rather hold all to be done in merriment. And because I would not be
hindered by you, do but remember the answer which the Muletter gave us, when
we took compassion on his Mule. Worthy friend, replied Melisso, I am in your
own house, where I purpose not to impeach whatsoever you do.

Giosefo, having provided a good Holly-wand, went into the Chamber, where his
wife sat railing, and despitefully grumbling, where taking her by the hair of
her head, he threw her at his feet, beating her entreamely with the wand. She
crying, then cursing, next railing, lastly fighting, biting and scratching,
when she felt the cruel smart of the blows, and that all her resistance
served to no end: then she fell on her knees before him, and desired mercy for
charities sake. Giosefo fought still more and more on head, arms, shoulders,
sides, and all parts else, pretending as if he heard not her complaints, but
wearied himself well near out of breath: so that (to be brief) she that never
felt his fingers before, perceived and confessed, it was now too soon. This
being done, he returned to Melisso, and said: To morrow we shall see a
miracle, and how available the council is of going to the Goose Bridge. So
sitting a while together, after they had washed their hands, and supt, they
withdrew to their lodgings.

The poor beaten woman, could hardly raise her self from the ground, which
yet (with much ado) she did, and threw her self upon the bed, where she took
such rest as she could: but arising early the next morning, she came to her
Husband, and making him a very low courtesy, demanded what he pleased to
have for his dinner; he smiling heartely thereat, with Melisso, told her his
mind* And when dinner time came, every thing was ready according to the
direction given: in which regard, they highly commended the counsel, whereof
they made such an harsh construction at the first.

Within a while after, Melisso being gone from Giosefo, and returned home to
his own house: he acquainted a wise and reverend man, with the answer which
king Solomon gave him, whereto he he received this reply. No better or truer
advise could possibly be given you, for well you know, that you love not any
man; but the bountiful banquets you bestow on them, is more in respect of your
own vaineglory, then any kind affection you bear to them: Learn then to love
men, as Solomon advised, and you shall be beloved of them again. Thus our
unruly Wife became mildely reclaimed, and the young Gentleman, by loving others,
found the fruits of reciporall affection.

John de Barolo, at the instance and request of his Gossip Pietro da Tresanti,
made an enchantment, to have his wife become a Mule. And when it came to the
fastening on of the tail; Gossip Pietro by saying she should have no tail at
all, spoiled the whole enchantment.

The Tenth Novel.
In just reproof of such foolish men, as will be governed by ouer-light
belief.



THis Novel reported by the Queen, caused a little murmuring among the
Ladies, albeit the men laughed heartely thereat: but after they were all grown
silent, Dioneus began in this manner. Gracious Beauties, among many white
Doves, one black Crow will seem more sightly, then the very whitest Swanne
can do. In like manner, among a multitude of wise men, sometimes one of much
less wisdom and discretion, shall not only increase the splendor and
Majesty of their maturity, but also give an addition of delight and solace.

In which regard, you all being modest and discreet Ladies, and my self more
much defective in brain, then otherwise able: in making your virtues shine
gloriously, through the evident appearance of mine own weakness, you should
esteem the better of me, by how much I seem the more cloudy and obscure. And
consequently, I ought to have the larger scope of liberty, by plainly
expressing what I am, and be the more patiently endured by you all, in saying
what absurdly I shall; then I should be if my speeches sauoured of absolute
wisdom. I will therefore tell you a Tale, which shall not be of any great
length, whereby you may comprehend, how carefully such things should be
observed, which are commanded by them, as can effect matters by the power of
enchantment, and how little delayance also ought to be in such, as would not
have an enchantment to be hindered.

About a year already past since, there dwelt at Barletta, an honest man,
called John de Barolo, who because he was of poor condition; for maintenance
in his contented estate, provided himself of a Mule, to carry commodities from
place to place, where Faires and Markets were in request, but most especially
to Apuglia, buying and selling in the nature of a petty Chapman. Traveling
thus through the Countries, he grew into great and familiar acquaintance, with
one who named himself Pietro da Tresanti, following the same Trade of life as
he did, carrying his commodities upon an Ass. In sign of amity, according to
the Countries custom, he never termed him otherwise, then by the name of
Gossip Pietro and always when he came to Barletta, he brought him to his own
house, taking it as his Inn, entreating him very friendly, and in the best
manner he could devise to do. On the other side, Gossip Pietro being very
poor, having but one simple habitation in the village of Tresanti, hardly
sufficient for him, and an handsome young woman which he had to his wife, as
also his Ass: evermore when John de Barolo came to Tresanti, he would bring
him to his poor abiding, with all his uttermost ability of entertainment, in
due acknowledgement of the courtesy he afforded to him at Barletta. But when
he came to take repose in the night season, Gossip Pietro could not lodge him
as gladly he would: because he had but one silly bed, wherein himself and his
wife lay; so that John de Barolo was faigne to lie on a little straw, in a
small stable, close adjoining by his own Mule and the Ass.

The woman understanding, what good and honest welcome, Gossip John afforded
her husband, when he came to Barletta, was often very willing to go lodge with
an honest neighbor of hers, called Carapresa di Giudice Leo, because the two
Gossips might both lie together in one bed; wherewith diverse times she
acquainted her Husband, but by no means he would admit it.

At one time among the rest, as she was making the same motion again to her
Husband, that his friend might be lodged in better manner: Gossip John thus
spoke to her. Good Zita Carapresa, never molest your self for me, because I
lodge to mine own contentment, and so much the rather, in regard that
whenever I list: I can convert my Mule into a fair young woman, to give me
much delight in the night-season, and afterward make her a Mule again: thus am
I never without her company.

The young woman wondering at these words, and believing he did not fable in
them: she told them to her Husband, with this addition beside, Pietro (quoth
she) if he be such a dear friend to thee, as thou have often avouched to me;
wish him to instruct thee in so rare a cunning, that thou may make a Mule of
me; then shall thou have both an Ass and a Mule to travel withal about thy
business, whereby thy benefit will be double: and when we return home to our
house, then thou may make me thy wife again, in the same condition as I was
before. Gossip Pietro, who was (indeed) but a very Coxecombe; believed also the
words to be true, yielding therefore the more gladly to her advise; and moving
the matter to his Gossip John, to teach him such a wonderful secret, which
would redound so greatly to his benefit: but John began to dissuade him from
it, as having spoken it in merriment, yet perceiving, that no contradiction
would serve to prevail, thus he began.

Seeing you will needs have it so, let us rise to morrow morning before day, as
in our travel we use to do, and then I will show you how it is to be done:
only I must and do confess, that the most difficult thing of all the rest,
is, to fasten on the tail, as thou shall see.

Gossip Pietro and his wife, could hardly take any rest all the night long, so
desirous they were to have the deed done; and therefore when it drew toward
day, up they arose, and calling Gossip John, he came presently to them in his
shirt, and being in the Chamber with them, he said. I know not any man in the
world, to whom I would disclose this secret, but to you, and therefore because
you so earnestly desire it, I am the more willing to do it. Only you must
consent, to do whatsoever I say, if you are desirous to have it done.
Faithfully they promised to perform all, whereupon John delivering a lighted
Candle to Gossip Pietro, to hold in his hand, said. Mark well what I do, and
remember all the words I say: but be very careful, that whatsoever thou
hear or see, thou do not speak one word, for then the enchantment will
be utterly overthrown, only wish that the tail may be well set on, for
therein consists all the cunning.

Gossip Pietro holding the Candle, and the woman being prepared as John had
appointed her, she bowed her self forwards with her hands set to the ground,
even as if she stood upon four feere. First with his hands he touched her head
and face, saying, Here is the goodly head of a Mule: then handling her
disheueld hair, termed them the goodly mane of a Mule. Afterward, touching
the body, arms, legs, and feet, gave them all the apt names (for those parts)
belonging to a Mule, nothing else remaining, but only the forming of the
tail, which when Pietro perceived, how John was preparing to fasten it on
(having no way misliked all his former proceeding:) he called to him, saying:
Forbear Gossippe John, my Mule shall have no tail at all, I am contented to
have her without a tail. How now Gossip Pietro? answered John, What have thou
done? Thou have mard all by this unadvised speaking, even when the work was
almost fully finished. It is no matter Gossip (answered Pietro) I can like my
Mule better without a tail, then to see it set on in such manner.

The fond young woman, more couetously addicted to gain and commodity, then
looking into the knauish intention of her Gossip John; began to grow greatly
offended. Beast as thou art (quoth she to her Husband) why have thou
overthrown both thine own good Fortune and mine? Did thou ever see a Mule
without a tail? Would thou have had him made me a monster? Thou art
wretchedly poor, and when we might have bin enriched for ever, by a secret
known to none but our selves, thou art the Ass that have defeated all, and
made thy friend to become thine enemy. Gossippe John began to pacify the
woman, with solemn protestations of his still continuing friendship, albeit
(afterward) there was no further desiring of any more Mule-making: but Gossip
Pietro fell to his former Trading only with his Ass, as he was no less
himself, and he went no more with Gossip John to the Faires in Apuglia,
neither did he ever request, to have the like piece of service done for him.

ALthough there was much laughing at this Novel, the Ladies understanding it
better, then Dioneus intended that they should have done, yet himself scarsely
smiled. But the Nouels being all ended, and the Sun beginning to loose his
heat; the Queen also knowing, that the full period of her government was
come: dispossessing herself of the Crown, she placed it on the head of
Pamphilus, who was the last of all to be honored with this dignity; wherefore
(with a gracious smile) thus she spoke to him.

Sir, it is no mean charge which you are to undergo, in making amends
(perhaps) for all the faults committed by my self and the rest, who have gone
before you in the same authority; and, may it prove as prosperous unto you, as
I was willing to create you our King. Pamphilus having received the Honor with
a cheerful mind, thus answered. Madam, your sacred virtues, and those (beside)
remaining in my other Subjects, will (no doubt) work so effectually for me,
that (as the rest have done) I shall deserve your general good opinion. And
having given order to the Master of the Household (as all his predecessors had
formerly done, for every necessary occasion; he turned to the Ladies, who
expected his gracious favor, and said.

Bright Beauties, it was the discretion of your late Sovereign and Queen, in
regard of ease and recreation unto your tired spirits, to grant you free
liberty, for discoursing on whatsoever your selves best pleased: wherefore,
having enjoyed such a time of rest, I am of opinion, that it is best to return
once more to our wonted Law, in which respect, I would have every one to speak
in this manner to morrow. Namely, of those men or women, who have done any
thing bountifully or magnificently, either in matter of amity, or otherwise.
The relation of such worthy arguments, will (doubtless) give an addition to
our very best desires, for a free and forward inclination to good actions,
whereby our lives (how short soever they be) may perpetuate an everliving
renown and fame, after our mortal bodies are converted into dust, which
(otherwise) are no better then those of brute beasts, reason only
distinguishing this difference, that as they live to perish utterly, so we
respire to reign in eternity.

The Theme was exceedingly pleasing to the whole Company; who being all risen,
by permission of the new King, every one fell to their wonted recreations, as
best agreed with their own disposition; until the hour for Supper came,
wherein they were served very sumptuously. But being risen from the Table, they
began their dances, among which, many sweet Sonnets were enterlaced, with such
delicate Tunes as moved admiration. Then the King commanded Madam Neiphila, to
sing a song in his name, or how her self stood best affected. And immediately
with a clear and rare voice, thus she began.

THE SONG.
The Chorus sung by all the Company.
IN the Spring season,
Maids have best reason,
To dance and sing;
With Chaplets of Flowers,
To deck up their Bowers,
And all in honor of the Spring.
I Heard a Nymph that sat alone,
By a Fountains side:
Much her hard Fortune to bemone,
For still she cride:
Ah! Who will pity her distress,
That finds no foe like fickleness?
For truth lives not in men:
Poor soul, why live I then?
In the Spring season, etc.
Oh, How can mighty Love permit,
Such a faithless deed,
And not in justice punish it
As treasons meed?
I am undone through perjury,
Although I loved constantly:
But truth lives not in men,
Poor soul, why live I then?
In the Spring season, etc.
When I did follow Dyans train,
As a loyal Maid,
I never felt oppressing pain,
Nor was dismaide.
But when I listened Loves alluring,
Then I wandered from assuring.
For truth lives not in men:
Poor soul, why live I then?
In the Spring season, etc.
Adieu to all my former joys,
When I lived at case,
And welcome now those sad annoies
Which do most displease.
And let none pity her distress,
That fell not, but by fickleness.
For truth lives not in men,
Alas! why live I then?
IN the Spring season,
Maids have best reason,
To dance and sing;
With Chaplets of Flowers,
To deck up their Bowers,
And all in honor of the Spring.
This Song, most sweetly sung by Madame Neiphila, was especially commended,
both by the King, and all the rest of the Ladies. Which being fully finished,
the King gave order, that every one should repair to their Chambers, because
a great part of the night was already spent.

The end of the Ninth Day.
THE Tenth and last Day.
Whereon, under the Government of Pamphilus, the several Arguments do concern
such persons, as either by way of Liberality, or in Magnificent manner,
performed any worthy action, for love, favor, friendship, or any other
honorable occasion.

The Induction.
ALready began certain small Clouds in the West, to blush with a Vermillion
tincture, when those in the East (having reached to their full height) looked
like bright burnished Gold, by splendor of the Sun beams drawing near unto
them: when Pamphilus being risen, caused the Ladies, and the rest of his
honorable companions to be called. When they were all assembled, and had
concluded together on the place, whither they should walk for their mornings
recreation: the King led on the way before, accompanied with the two Noble
Ladies Philomena and Fiammetta, all the rest following after them, devising,
talking, and answering to diverse demands both what that day was to be don, as
also concerning the proposed imposition.

After they had walked an indifferent space of time, and found the rays of the
Sun to be ouer-piercing for them: they returned back again to the Palace,
as fearing to have their blood immoderately heated. Then rinsing their Glasses
in the cool clear running current, each took their mornings draught, and
then walked into the mild shades about the Garden, until they should be
summoned to dinner. Which was no sooner ouer-past, and such as slept, returned
waking: they met together again in their wonted place, according as the King
had appointed, where he gave command unto Madame Neiphila, that she should
(for that day) begin the first Novel, which she humbly accepting, thus began.

A Florentine knight, named Signior Rogiero de Figiouanni, became a servant to
Alphonso, King of Spain, who (in his own opinion) seemed but slightly to
respect and reward him. In regard whereof, by a notable experiment, the King
gave him a manifest testimony, that it was not through any defect in him, but
only occasioned by the Knights ill fortune; most bountifully recompencing him
afterward.

The First Novel.
Wherein may evidently be discerned, that Servants to Princes and great Lords,
are many times recompensed, rather by their good fortune, then in vny regard of
their dutiful services.



I Do accept it (Worthy Ladies) as no mean favor, that the King has given me
the first place, to speak of such an honorable Argument, as Bounty and
Magnificence is, which precious Jewel, even as the Sun is the beauty, or
ornament and bright glory of al heaven; so is bounty and magnificence the
Crown of all virtues. I shall then recount to you a short Novel, sufficiently
pleasing, in mine own opinion, and I hope (so much I dare rely on your
judgments) both profitable, and worthy to be remembered.

You are to know then, that among other valiant Knights, which of long have
lived in our City, one of them, and (perhaps) of as great merit as any, was
one, named Signior Rogiero d'Figiouanni. He being rich, of great courage, and
perceiving, that (in due consideration) the quality belonging to life, and the
customs observed among our Tuscanes, were not answerable to his expectation,
nor agreed with the disposition of his valor; determined to leave his native
Country, and belong in service (for some time) to Alfonso, King of Spain,
whose fame was generally noised in all places, for excelling all other Princes
in those times, for respect of men's well deseruings, and bountiful requital
of their pains. Being provided in honorable order, both of Horses, Arms, and
a competent train, he traveled to Spain, where he was worthily entertained.

Signior Rogiero continuing there, living in honorable manner, and performing
many admirable actions of arms; in short time he made himself sufficiently
known, for a very valiant and famous man. And having remained there an
indifferent long while, observing diverse behauiours in the king: he saw, how he
inclined himself first to one man, then to another, bestowing on one a Castle,
a Town on another, and Baronnies on diverse, som-what indiscreetly, as giving
away bountifully to men of no merit. And restraining all his favors from him,
as seeming close fisted, and parting with nothing: he took it as a diminishing
of his former reputation, and a great ^mpayring of his fame, wherefore he
resolved on his departure thence, and made his suit to the king that he might
obtain it. The king did grant it, bestowing on him one of the very best Mules,
and the goodliest that ever was backed, a gift most highly pleasing to Rogiero,
in regard of the long iourny he intended to ride. Which being deliuerd, the
king gave charge to one of his Gentlemen, to compass such convenient means,
as to ride through the country, and in the company of Signior Rogiero, yet in
such manner, as he should not perceive, that the King had purposely sent him so
to do. Respectively he should observe whatsoever he said concerning the king,
his gesture, smiles, and other behauior, shaping his answers accordingly, and
on the next morning, to commaud his return back with him to the King.

Nor was the Gentleman slack in this command, but noting Rogieroes departing
forth of the city, he mounted on horseback likewise, and immediately after came
into his company, making him believe, that he iournied toward Italy. Rogiero
rode on the Mule which the king had given him, with diversity of speeches
passing between the^. About three of the clock in the afternoon, the
Gentleman said. It were not amiss Sir, (having such fit opportunity) to
Stable our horses for a while, till the heat be a little more ouerpast. So
taking an Inn, and the horses being in the stable, they all staled except the
Mule.

Being mounted again; and riding on further, the Gentleman duly observed
whatsoever Rogiero spoke, and coming to the passage of a small River or
Blooke: the rest of the beasts drank, and not the Mule, but staled in the
River: which Signior Rogiero seeing, clapping his hands on the Mules mane, he
said. What a wicked beast art thou? thou art just like thy Master that gave
thee to me. The Gentleman committed the words to memory, as he did many other
passing from Rogiero, riding along the rest of the day, yet none in
disparagement of the King, but rather highly in his commendation. And being the
next morning mounted on horseback, seeming to hold on still the way for
Tuscane: the Gentleman fulfilled the Kings command, causing Signior Rogiero to
turn back again with him, which willingly he yielded to do.

When they were come to the Court, and the King made acquainted with the words,
which Rogiero spoke to his Mule; he was called into the presence, where the
King showed him a gracious countenance, and demanded of him, why he had
compared him to his Mule? Signior Rogiero nothing daunted, but with a bold and
constant spirit, thus answered. Sir, I mad^ the comparison, because, like as
you give, where there is no conueniency, and bestow nothing where reason
requires: even so, the Mule would not stale where she should have done, but
where was water too much before, there she did it. Believe me Signior Rogiero,
replied the King, if I have not given you such gifts, as (perhaps) I have done
to diverse other, far inferior to you in honor and merit; this happened not
thorough any ignorance in me, as not knowing you to be a most valiant Knight,
and well-worthy of special respect: but rather through your own ill fortune,
which would not suffer me to do it, whereof she is guilty, and not I, as the
truth thereof shall make it self apparent to you. Sir, answered Rogiero, I
complain not, because I have received no gift from you, as desiring thereby
couetously to become the richer: but in regard you have not as yet any way
acknowledged, what virtue is remaining in me. Nevertheless, I allow your
excuse for good and reasonable, and am heartely contented, to behold whatsoever
you please; although I do confidently credit you, without any other testimony.

The King conducted him then into the great Hall, where (as he had before
given order) stood two great Chests, fast locked; and in the presence of all his
Lords, the King thus spoke. Signior Rogiero, in out of these Chests is mine
imperial Crown, the Scepter Royal, the Mound, and many more of my richest
girdles, rings, plate, and Jewels, even the very best that are mine: the other
is full of earth only. Choose one of these two, and which thou make election
of; upon my Royal word thou shall enjoy it. Hereby shall thou evidently
perceive, who has bin ingreatful to the deseruings, either I, or thine own
bad fortune. Rogiero seeing it was the kings pleasure to have it so; chose one
of them, which the King caused presently to be opened, it approving to be the
same that was full of earth, whereat the King smyling, said thus unto him.

You see Signior Rogiero, that what I said concerning your ill fortune, is very
true: but questionless, your valor is of such desert, as I ought to oppose my
self against all her maleuolence. And because I know right, that you are not
minded to become a Spaniard; I will give you neither Castle nor dwelling place:
but I will bestow the Chest on you (in mere despite of your malicious fortune)
which she so unjustly took away from you. Carry it home with you into your
Country, that there it may make an apparent testimoney, in the sight of all
your well-willers, both of your own virtuous deseruings, and my bounty.
Signior Rogiero humbly receiving the Chest, and thanking his Majesty for so
liberal a gift, returned home joyfully therewith, into his native Country of
Tuscane.

Ghinotto di Tacco; took the Lord Abbot of Clugni as his prisonors, and cured
him of a grievous disease, which he had in his stomach, and afterward set him
at liberty. The same Lord Abbot, when he returned from the Court of Rome,
reconciled Ghinotto to Pope Boniface; who made him a Knight, and Lord Prior of
a goodly Hospital.

The second Novel.
Wherein is declared that good men do sometimes fall into bad conditions,
only occasioned thereto by necessity: And what means are to be used, for
their reducing to goodness again.



THe magnificence and Royal bounty, which King Alphonso bestowed on the
Florentine knight, passed through the whole assembly with no mean applause, and
the King (who gave it the greatest praise of al) commanded Madame Eliza, to
take the second turn in order; whereupon, thus she began.

Fair Ladies, if a king showed himself magnificently minded, and expressed
his liberal bounty to such a man, as had done him good and honorable
services: it can be termed no more then a virtuous deed well done, and
becoming a King But what will we say, when we hear that a Prelate of the
Church, showed himself wondrously magnificent, and to such a one as was his
enemy: can any malicious tongue speak ill of him? Undoubtedly, no other
answer is to be made, but the action of the King was merely virtue, and that
of the Prelate, no less then a miracle: for how can it be otherwise, when they
are more greedily covetous then women, and deadly enemies to all liberality?
And although every man (naturally) desires revenge for injuries and abuses
done unto him: yet men of the Church, in regard that daily they preached
patience, and command (above all things else) remission of sins: it would
appear a mighty blemish in them, to be more froward and furious then other
men. But I am to speak of a reverend Prelate of the Church, as also concerning
his munificent bounty, to one that was his enemy, and yet became his reconciled
friend, as you shall perceive by my Novel.

Ghinotto di Tacco, for his insolent and stout robberies, became a man very
far famed, who being banished from Sienna, and an enemy to the Countes
Disanta Fiore: prevailed so by his bold and headstrong persuasions, that the
Town of Raticonfani rebelled against the Church of Rome, wherein he remaining;
all passengers whatsoever, traveling any way thereabout, were robde and rifled
by his theeuing Companions. At the time whereof now I speak, Boniface the
eight, governed as Pope at Rome, and the Lord Abbot of Clugni (accounted to be
one of the richest Prelates in the world) came to Rome, and there either by
some surfeit, excess of feeding, or otherwise, his stomach being grievously
offended and pained; the Physicians advised him, to travel to the Bathes at
Sienna, where he should receive immediate cure. In which respect, his departure
being licenced by the Pope, to set onward thither, with great and pompous
Cariages, of Horses, Mules, and a goodly train, without hearing any rumor of
the theeuish Consorts.

Ghinotto di Tacco, being advertised of his coming, spread about his scouts and
nets, and without missing so much as one Page, shut up the Abbot, with all
his train and baggage, in a place of narrow restraint, out of which he could
by no means escape. When this was done, he sent one of his most sufficient
attendants, (well accompanied) to the Lord Abbot, who said to him in his
Masters name, that if his Lordship were so pleased, he might come and visit
Ghinotto at his Castle. Which the Abbot hearing, answered chollerickly, that he
would not come thither, because he had nothing to say to Ghinotto: but meant
to proceed on in his iourny, and would feign see, who durst presume to hinder
his pass. To which rough words, the messenger thus mildely answered. My Lord
(quoth he) you are arrived in such a place, where we fear no other force, but
the all-controlling power of heaven, clearly exempted from the Popes thunder
cracks, of maledictions, interdictions, excommunications, or whatsoever else:
and therefore it would be much better for you, if you pleased to do as
Ghinotto advises you.

During the time of this their interparlunce, the place was suddenly round
ingirt with strongly armed thieves, and the Lord Abbot perceiving, that both he
and all his followers were surprised: took his way (though very impatiently)
toward the Castle, and likewise all his company and carriages with him. Being
dismounted, he was conducted (as Ghinotto had appointed) all alone, into a
small Chamber of the Castle, it being very dark and uneasy: but the rest of
his train, every one according to his rank and quality, were all well lodged
in the Castle, their horses, goods and all things else, delivered into secure
keeping, without the least touch of injury or prejudice. All which being
orderly done, Ghinotto himself went to the Lord Abbot, and said. My Lord,
Ghinotto, to whom you are a welcome guest, requesteth, that it might be your
pleasure to tell him, whither you are traveling, and upon what occasion?

The Lord Abbot being a very wise man, and his angry distemper more moderately
qualified; revealed whither he went, and the cause of his going thither. Which
when Ghinotto had heard, he departed courteously from him, and began to
consider with himself, how he might cure the Abbot; yet without any Bathe. So,
commanding a good fire to be kept continually in his small Chamber, and very
good attendance on him: the next morning, he came to visit him again,
bringing a fair white Napkin on his arm, and in it two slices or toasts of
fine Manchet, a goodly clear Glass, full of the purest white-Bastard of
Corniglia (but indeed, of the Abbots own provision brought thither with him)
and then he spoke to him in this manner.

My Lord, when Ghinotto was younger then now he is, he studied Physic, and he
commanded me to tell you, that the very best medicine, he could ever learn,
against any disease in the stomach, was this which he had provided for your
Lordship, as an especial preparatiue, and which he should find to be very
comfortable. The Abbot, who had a better stomach to eat, then any will or
desire to talk: although he did it somewhat disdainfully, yet he eat up
both the toastes, and roundly drank off the Glass of Bastard. Afterward,
diverse other speeches passed between them, the one still aduising in Physical
manner, and the other seeming to care little for it: but moved many questions
concerning Ghinotto, and earnestly requesting to see him. Such speeches as
sauoured of the Abbots coffeehouse, and came from him in passion; were
clouded with courteous acceptance, and not the least sign of any mislike: but
ring his Lordship, that Ghinotto intended very shortly to see him, and so they
parted for that time.

Nor returned he any more, till the next morning with the like two toastes of
bread, and such another Glass of white Bastard, as he had brought him at the
first, continuing the same course for diverse days after: till the Abbot had
eaten (and very hungerly too) a pretty store of dried Beans, which Ghinotto
purposely, (yet secretly) had hidden in the Chamber. Whereupon he demanded of
him (as seeming to be so enjoined by his pretended master) in what temper he
found his stomach now? I should find my stomach well enough (answered the
Lord Abbot) if I could get forth of thy masters fingers, and then have some
good food to feed on: for his medicines have made me so soundly stomackt, that
I am ready to starve with hunger.

When Ghinotto was gone from him, he then prepared a very fair Chamber for
him, adorning it with the Abbots own rich hangings, as also his Plate and
other moueables, such as were always used for his service. A costly dinner he
provided likewise, whereto he invited diverse of the Town, and many of the
Abbots chiefest followers: then going to him again the next morning, he said.
My Lord, seeing you do feel your stomach so well, it is time you should come
forth of the Infirmary. And taking him by the hand, he brought him into the
prepared Chamber, where he left him with his own people, and went to give
order for the dinners serving in, that it might be performed in magnificent
manner.

The Lord Abbot recreated himself a while with his own people, to whom he
recounted, the course of his life since he saw them; and they likewise told
him, how kindly they had bin initeated by Ghinotto. But when dinner time was
come, the Lord Abbot and all his company, were served with costly viands and
excellent Wines, without Ghinottoes making himself known to the Abbot: till
after he had been entertained some few days in this order: into the great
Hall of the Castle, Ghinotto caused all the Abbots goods and furniture to be
brought, and likewise into a spacious Court, whereon the windows of the said
Court gazed, all his mules and horses, with their sumpters, even to the very
silliest of them, which being done, Ghinotto went to the Abbot, and demanded
of him, how he felt his stomach now, and whether it would serve him to venture
on horse back as yet, or no? The Lord Abbot answered, that he found his
stomach perfectly recovered, his body strong enough to endure travel, and all
things well, so he were delivered from Ghinotto.

Hereupon, he brought him into the hall where his furniture was, as also all
his people, and commanding a window to be opned, whereat at he might behold his
horses, he said. My Lord; let me plainly give you to understand, that neither
cowardice, or baseness of mind, induced Ghinotto di Tacco (which is my self)
to become a lurking robber on the highways, an enemy to the Pope, and so
(consequently) to the Roman Court: but only to save his own life and honor,
knowing himself to be a Gentleman cast out of his own house, and having
(beside) infinite enemies. But because you seem to be a worthy Lord, I will
not (although I have cured your stomachs disease) deal with you as I do to
others, whose goods (when they fall into my power) I take such part of as I
please: bet rather am well contented, that my necessities being considered by
your self, you spare me out a proportion of the things you have here,
answerable to your own liking. For all are present here before you, both in
this Hall, and in the Court beneath, free from any spoil, or the least
impairing. Wherefore, give a part, or take all, if you please, and then depart
hence when you will, or abide here still, for now you are at your own free
liberty.

The Lord Abbot wondered not a little, that a robber on the high ways, should
have such a bold and liberal spirit, which appeared very pleasing to him; and
instantly, his former hatred and spleen against Ghinotto, became converted
into cordial love and kindness, so that (embracing him in his arms) he said I
protest upon my vow made to Religion, that to win the love of such a man, as I
plainly perceive thee to be: I would undergo far greater injuries, then those
which I have received at thy hands. Accursed be cruel destiny, that forced
thee to so base a kind of life, and did not bless thee with a fairer fortune.
After he had thus spoken, he left there the greater part of all his goods, and
returned back again to Rome, with few horses, and a meaner train.

Durig these passed accidents, the Pope had received intelligence of the Lord
Abbots surprizall, which was not a little displeasing to him: but when he saw
him returned, he demanded, what benefit he received at the Bathes? Whereto the
Abbot, merrily smyling, thus replied. Holy Father, I met with a most skillful
Physician nearer hand, whose experience is beyond the power of the Bathes, for
by him I am very perfectly cured: and so discoursed all at large. The Pope
laughing heartely, and the Abbot continuing on still his report; moved with an
high and magnificent courage, he demanded one gracious favor of the Pope: who
imagining that he would request a matter of greater moment, then he did, freely
offered to grant, whatsoever he desired.

Holy Father, answered the Lord Abbot, all the humble suit which I make to you,
is, that you would be pleased to receive into your grace and favor, Ghinotto di
Tacco my Physician, because among all the virtuous men, deserving to have
especial account made of them I never met wi-h any equal to him both in honor
and honesty. Whatsoever injury he did to me, I impute it as a greater
in-fortune, then any way he deserves to be charged withal. Which wretched
condition of his, if you were pleased to alter, and bestow on him some better
means of maintenance, to live like a worthy man, as he is no less: I make no
doubt, but (in very short time) he will appear as pleasing to your holiness,
as (in my best judgment) I think him to be.

The Pope, who was of a magnanimious spirit, and one that highly affected men
of virtue, hearing the commendable motion made by the Abbot; returned answer,
that he was as willing to grant it, as the other desired it, sending. Letters
of safe conduct for his coming thither. Ghinotto receiving such assurance from
the Court of Rome, came thither immediately, to the great joy of the Lord Abbot:
and the Pope finding him to be a man of valor and worth, upon reconciliation,
remitted all former errors, creating him knight, and Lord Prior of the very
chiefest Hospital in Rome. In which Office he lived long time after, as a
loyal servant to the Church, and an honest thankful friend to the Lord Abbot
of Clugny.

Mithridanes envying the life and liberality of Nathan, and traveling thither,
with a settled resolution to kill him: chances to confer with Nathan
unknown. And being instructed by him, in what manner he might best perform
the bloody deed, according as he gave direction, he meets with him in a
small Thicket or Wood, where knowing him to be the same man, that taught him
how to take away his life: Confounded with shame, he acknowledges his
horrible intention, and becomes his loyal friend.

The third Novel.
Showing in an excellent and lively demonstration, that any especial
honorable virtue, perseuering and dwelling in a truly noble soul, cannot be
violenced or confounded, by the most politic attemptes of malice and envy.



IT appeared to the whole assembly, that they had heard a matter of marvel,
for a Lord Abbot to perform any magnificent action: but their admiration
ceasing in silence, the King commanded Philostratus to follow next, who
forthwith thus began.

Honorable Ladies, the bounty and magnificense of Alphonso King of Spain, was
great indeed, and that done by the Lord Abbot of Clugny, a thing (perhaps)
never heard of in any other. But it will seem no less marvelous to you, when
you hear, how one man, in expression of great liberality to another man, that
earnestly desired to kill him; should be secretly disposed to give him his
life, which had bin lost, if the other would have taken it, as I purpose to
acquaint you withal, in a short Novel.

Most certain it is, at least, if Faith may be given to the report of
certain Genewayes, and other men resorting to those remote parts, that in the
Country of Cathaya, there lived sometime a Gentleman, rich beyond comparison,
and named Nathan. He having his living adjoining to a great common rode-way,
whereby men trauayled from the East to the West (as they did the like from the
West unto the East, as having no other means of passage) and being of a
bountiful and cheerful disposition, which he was willing to make known by
experience: he summoned together many Master Masons and Carpenters, and there
erected (in a short time) one of the greatest, goodliest, and most beautiful
houses (in manner of a Princes Palace) that ever was seen in all those
quarters.

With mouables and all kind of furnishment, befitting a house of such outward
appearance, he caused it to be plentifully stored, only to receive,
entertain, and honor all Gentlemen or other Trauailers whatsoener, as had
occasion to pass that way, being not unprovided also of such a number of
servants, as might continually give attendance on all comers and goers. Two
and fifty several gates, standing always wide open, and over each of them in
great golden carracters was written, Welcome, welcome, and gave free admission
to all comers whatsoever.

In this honorable order (observed as his estated custom) he perseuered so
long a while, as not only the East parts, but also those in the west, were
every where acquainted with his fame and renown. Being already well stepped into
years, but yet not weary (therefore) of his great charge and liberality: it
fortuned, that the rumor of his noble Hospitality, came to the ear of another
gallant Gentleman, named Mithridanes, living in a Country not far off from
the other.

This Gentleman, knowing himself no less wealthy then Nathan, and enuiously
repining at his virtue and liberality, determined in his mind, to dim and
obscure the others bright splendour, by making himself far more famous. And
having built a Palace answerable to that of Nathans, with like windings of
gates, and welcome inscriptions; he began to extend immeasurable courtesies,
unto all such as were dispoted to visit him: so that (in a short while) he
grew very famous in infinite places. It chanced on a day, as Mithridanes sat
all alone within the goodly Court of his Palace: a poor woman entered at one
of the gates, craving an alms of him, which she had; and returned in again at
a second gate, coming also to him, and had a second alms, continuing sostill
a dozen times; but at the thirteenth returning, Mithridanes said to her: Good
Woman, you go and come very often, and still you are served with alms. When
the old Woman heard these words, she said. O the liberality of Nathan! How
honorable and wonderful is that? I have past through two and thirty gates of
his Palace, even such as are here, and at every one I received an alms,
without any knowledgement taken of me, either by him, or any of his followers:
and here I have past but through thirteen gates, and am there both
acknowledged and taken. Farewell to this house, for I never mean to visit it
any more; with which words she departed thence, and never after came thither
again.

When Mithridanes had a while pondered on her speeches, he waxed much
discontented, as taking the words of the old woman, to extol the renown of
Nathan, and darken or eclipse his glory, whereupon he said to himself.
Wretched man as I am, when shall I attain to the height of liberality, and
perform such wonders, as Nathan does? In seeking to surmount him, I cannot
come near him in the very meanest. Undoubtedly, I spend all my endeavor but
in vain, except I rid the world of him, which (seeing his age will not make an
end of him) I must needs do with my own hands. In which furious and bloody
determination (without revealing his intent to any one) he mounted on
horseback, with few attendants in his company, and after three days journey,
arrived where Nathan dwelt. He gave order to his men, to make no show of being
his servants, or any way to acknowledge him: but to provide them selves of
convenient lodgings, until they heard other tidings from him.

About Evening, and (in this manner) alone by himself, near to the Palace of
Nathan, he met him solitarily walking, not in pompous apparel, whereby to be
distinguished from a meaner man: and, because he knew him not, neither had
heard any relation of his description, he demanded of him, if he knew where
Nathan then was? Nathan, with a cheerful countenance, thus replied. Fair Sir,
there is no man in these parts, that knows better how to show you Nathan then
I do; and therefore, if you be so pleased, I will bring you to him. Mithridanes
said, therein he should do him a great kindness: albeit (if it were possible)
he would be neither known nor seen of Nathan. And that (quoth he) can I also
do sufficiently for you, seeing it is your will to have it so, if you will go
along with me.

Dismounting from his horse, he walked on with Nathan, diversely discoursing,
until they came to the Palace, where one of the servants taking Mithridanes
his horse, Nathan rounded the fellow in the care, that he should give warning
to all throughout the House, for revealing to the Gentleman, that he was
Nathan; as accordingly it was performed. No sooner were they within the
Palace, but he conducted Mithridanes into a goodly chamber, where none (as yet)
had seen him, but such as were appointed to attend on him reverently; yea, and
he did himself greatly honor him, as being loath to leave his company.

While thus Mithridanes conuersed with him, he desired to know (albeit he
respected him much for his years) what he was. In Troth Sir, answered Nathan, I
am one of the meanest servants to Nathan, and from my childhood, have made my
self thus old in his service: yet never has he bestowed any other
advancement on me, then as you now see; in which respect, howsoever other men
may commend him, yet I have no reason at all to do it. These Words, gave some
hope to Mithridanes, that with a little more counsel, he might securely put in
execution his wicked determination. Nathan likewise demanded of him (but in
very humble manner) of whence, and what he was, as also the business inuiting
him thither: offering him his utmost aid and counsel, in what soever
consisted in his power.

Mithridanes sat an indifferent while meditating with his thoghts before he
would return any answer: but at the last, concluding to repose confidence in
him (in regard of his pretended discontentme^t) with many circumstantial
persuasions, first for fidelity, next for constancy, and lastly for counsel
and assistance, he declared to him truly what he was, the cause of his coming
thither, and the reason urging him thereto. Nathan hearing these words, and the
detestable deliberation of Mithridanes, became quite changed in himself: yet
wisely making no outward appearance thereof, with a bold courage and settled
countenance, thus he replied.

Mithridanes, thy Father was a Noble Gentleman, and (in virtuous qualities)
inferior to none, from whom (as now I see) thou desire not to degenerate,
having undertaken so bold and high an enterprise, I mean, in being liberal
and bountiful to all men. I do greatly commend the envy which thou bear to
the virtue of Nathan: because if there were many more such men, the world that
is now wretched and miserable, would become good and conformable. As for the
determination which thou have disclosed to me, I have sealed it up secretly in
my soul: wherein I can better give thee counsel, then any especial help or
furtherance: and the course which I would have thee to observe, follows thus
in few words.

This window, which we now look forth at, shows thee a small wood or thicket
of trees, being little more then the quarter of a miles distance hence; whereto
Nathan usually walks every morning, and there continues time long enough:
there may thou very easily meet him, and do whatsoever thou intendest to him.
If thou kilst him, because thou may with safety return home unto thine own
abiding, take not the same way which guided thee thither, but another, lying on
the left hand, and directing speedily out of the wood, as being not so much
haunted as the other, but rather free from all resort, and surest for visiting
thine own country, after such a dismal deed is done.

When Mithridanes had received this instruction, and Nathan was departed from
him, he secretly gave intelligence to his men, (who likewise were lodged, as
welcome strangers, in the same house) at what place they should stay for him the
next morning. Night being passed over, and Nathan risen, his heart altered not a
jot from his counsel given to Mithridanes, much less changed from any part
thereof: but all alone by himself, walked on to the wood, the place appointed
for his death. Mithridanes also being risen, taking his Bow and Sword (for
other weapons had he none) mounted on horsbacke, and so came to the wood, where
(somewhat far off) he espied Nathan walking, and no creature with him.
Dismounting from his horse, he had resolved (before he would kill him) not
only to see, but also to hear him speak: so stepping roughly to him, and
taking hold of the bonnet on his head, his face being then turned from him, he
said. Old man, thou must dye. Whereunto Nathan made no other answer, but thus:
Why then (belike) I have deserved it.

When Mithridanes heard him speak, and looked advisedly on his face, he knew
him immediately to be the same man, that had entertained him so lovingly,
conuersed with him so familiarly, and counseled him so faithfully: all which
ouercomming his former fury, his harsh nature became merely confounded with
shame: So throwing down his drawn sword, which he held readily prepared for
the deed: he prostrated himself at Nathans feet, and in tears, spoke in this
manner. Now do I manifestly know (most loving Father) your admired bounty and
liberality; considering, with what industrious providence, you made the means
for your coming hither, prodigally to bestow your life on me, which I have no
right unto, although you were so willing to part with it. But those high and
supreme powers, more careful of my duty, then I my self: even at the very
instant, and when it was most needful, opened the eyes of my better
understanding, which infernal envy had closed up before. And therefore, look
how much you have bin forward to pleasure me; so much the more shame and
punishment, I confess my heinous transgression has justly deserved: take
therefore on me (if you please) such revenge, as you think (in justice)
answerable to my sin.

Nathan lovingly raised Mithridanes from the ground, then kissing his cheek,
and tenderly embracing him, he said. Son, thou need not to ask, much
less to obtain pardon, for any enterprise of thine, which thou can not yet
term to be good or bad: because thou soughtest not to bereave me of my life,
for any hatred thou barest me, but only in covering to be reputed the
Woorthier man. Take then this assurance of me, and believe it constantly, that
there is no man living, whom I love and honor, as I do thee: considering the
greatness of thy mind, which consists not in the heaping up of money, as
wretched and miserable Worldlings make it their only felicity; but, contending
in bounty to spend what is thine, did hold it for no shame to kill me, thereby
to make thy self so much the more worthily famous.

Nor is it any matter to be wondered at, in regard that Emperors, and the
greatest Kings, had never made such extendure of their Dominions, and
consequently of their renown, by any other Art, then killing; yet not one man
only, as thou would have done: but infinite numbers, burning whole
Countries, and making desolate huge Towns and Cities, only to enlarge their
dominion, and further spreading of their fame. Wherefore, if for the increasing
of thine own renown, thou wast desirous of my death: it is no matter of
nouelty, and therefore deserving the less marvel, seeing men are slain
daily, and all for one purpose or other.

Mithridanes, excusing no further his maleuolent deliberation, but rather
commending the honest defense, which Nathan made on his behalf; proceeded so
far in after discoursing, as to tell him plainly, that it did wondrously
amaze him, how he durst come to the fatal appointed place, himself having so
exactly plotted and contrived his own death: whereunto Nathan returned this
answer.

I would not have thee Mithridanes, to wonder at my counsel or determination;
because, since age has made me Master of mine own will, and I resolved to
do that, wherein thou have begun to follow me: never came any man to me, whom
I did not content (if I could) in any thing he demanded of me. It was thy
fortune to come for my life, which when I saw thee so desirous to have it, I
resolved immediately to bestow it on thee: and so much the rather, because thou
should not be the only man, that ever departed hence, without enjoying
whatsoever he demanded. And, to the end thou might the more assuredly have
it, I gave thee that advice, least by not enjoying mine, thou should chance
to loose thine own. I have had the use of it full fourscore years, with the
consummation of all my delights and pleasures: and well I know, that according
to the course of Nature (as it fares with other men, and generally all things
else) it cannot be long before it must leave me.

Wherefore, I hold it much better for me to give it away freely, as I have
always done my goods and treasure; then be curious in keeping it, and suffer
it to be taken from me (whether I will or no) by Nature. A small gift it is, if
time make me up the full sum of an hundred years: how miserable is it then,
to stand beholding but for four or five, and all of them vexation too? Take it
then I entreat thee, if thou will have it; for I never met with any man before
(but thy self) that did desire it, nor (perhaps) shall find any other to
request it: for the longer I keep it, the worse it will be esteemed: and before
it grow contemptible, take it I pray thee.

Mithridanes, being exceedingly confounded with shame, bashfully said: Fortune
fore-fend, that I should take away a thing so precious as your life is, or once
to have so vile a thought of it as lately I had; but rather then I would
diminish one day thereof, I could wish, that my time might more amply enlarge
it. Forthwith answered Nathan, saying. Would thou (if thou could) shorten
thine own days, only to lengthen mine? Why then thou would have me to do
that to thee, which (as yet) I never did unto any man, namely, rob thee, to
enrich my self. I will enstruct thee in a much better course, if thou will be
advised by me. Lusty and young, as now thou art, thou shall dwell here in my
house, and be called by the name of Nathan. Aged, and spent with years, as
thou see I am, I will go live in thy house, and be called by the name of
Mithridanes. So, both the name and place shall illustrate thy Glory, and I
live contentedly, without the very least thought of envy.

Dear Father, answered Mithridanes, if I knew so well how to direct mine own
actions, as you do, and always have done, I would gladly accept your most
liberal offer: but because I plainly perceive, that my very best endeauours,
must remain darkened by the bright renown of Nathan: I will never seek to
impair that in another, which I cannot (by any means) increase in my self,
but (as you have worthily taught me) live contented with my own condition.

After these, and many more like loving speeches had passed between them;
according as Nathan very instantly requested, Mithridanes returned back with
him to the Palace, where many days he highly honored and respected him,
comforting and counselling him, to persevere always in his honorable
determination. But in the end, when Mithridanes could abide there no longer,
because necessary occasions called him home: he departed thence with his men,
having found by good experience, that he could never go beyond Nathan in
liberality.

Signior Gentile de Carisendi, being come from Modena, took a Gentlewoman,
named Madam Catharina, forth of a grave, wherein she was buried for dead: which
act he did, in regard of his former honest affection to the said Gentlewoman.
Madame Catharina remaining afterward, and delivered of a goodly Son: was (by
Signior there Gentile) delivered to her own Husband, named Signior Nicoluccio
Caccianimico, and the young infant with her.

The Fourth Novel.
Wherein is shown, That true love has always bin, and so still is, the
occasion of many great and worthy courtesies.



BY judgment of all the honorable assembly, it was reputed wonderful, that a
man should be so bountiful, as to give away his own life, and to his hateful
enemy. In which respect, it passed with general affirmation, that Nathan (in
the virtue of liberallity) had exceeded Alphonso. King of Spain, but
(especially) the Abbot of Clugny. So, after every one had delivered their
opinion, the King, turning himself to Madame Lauretta, gave her such a sign,
as well instructed her understanding, that she should be the next in order,
whereto she gladly yielding, began in this manner.

Youthful Ladies, the discourses already past, have been so worthy and
magnificent, yea, reaching to such a height of glorious splendor; as (me
thinks) there remains no more matter, for us that are yet to speak, whereby
to enlarge so famous an Argument, and in such manner as it ought to be: except
we lay hold on the actions of love, wherein is never any want of subject, it is
so fair and spacious a field to walk in. Wherefore, as well in behalf of the
one, as advancement of the other, whereto our instant age is most of all
inclined: I purpose to acquaint you with a generous and magnificent act, of an
amourous Gentleman, which when it shall be duly considered on, perhaps will
appear equal to any of the rest. At least, if it may pass for current, that
men may give away their treasures, forgive mighty injuries, and lay down life
it self, honor and renown (which is far greater) to infinite dangers, only
to attain any thing esteemed and affected.

Understand then (Gracious hearers) that in Bologna, a very famous City of
Lombardie, there lived sometime a Knight, most highly respected for his
virtues, named Signior Gentile de Carisendi, who (in his younger days) was
enamoured of a Gentlewoman, called Madam Catharina, the Wife of Signior
Nicoluccio Caccianimico. And because during the time of his amourous pursuit,
he found but a sorry enterchange of affection from the Lady; he went (as
hopeless of any success) to be Potestate of Modena, whereto he was called by
place and order.

At the sametime, Signior Nicoluccio being absent from Bologna, and his Lady at
a Farme-house of his in the Country (about three miles distant from the City)
because she was great with child, and somewhat near the time of her teeming:
it came to pass, that some dangerous accident befell her, which was so
powerful in operation, as no sign of life appeared remained in her, but she
was reputed (even in the judgment of the best Physicians, whereof she wanted
no attendance) to be verily dead. And because in the opinion of her parents and
nearest kindred, the time for her deliverance was yet so far off, as the
Infant within her, wanted much of a perfect creature: they made the less
mourning; but in the next Church, as also the vault belonging to her Ancestors;
they gave her burial very speedily.

Which tidings coming to the hearing of Signior Gentile, by one that was his
endeared friend: Although (while she lived) he could never be gracious in her
favor, yet her so sudden death did greatly grieve him, whereupon he discoursed
in this sort with himself. Dear Madame Catharina, I am not a little sorry for
thy death, although (during thy lifetime) I was scarcely worthy of one kind
look: Yet now being dead, thou can not prohibit me, but I may rob thee of
a kiss. No sooner had he spoke the words, but it being then night, and
taking such order, as none might know of his departure: he mounted on
horseback, accompanied only with one servant, and stayed no where, till he
came to the vault where the Lady was buried. Which when he had opened, with
instruments convenient for the purpose, he descended down into the vault, and
kneeled down by the Beer whereon she lay, and in her wearing garments,
according to the usual manner; with tears trickling mainly down his cheeks,
he bestowed infinite sweet kisses on her.

But as we commonly see, that men's desires are never contented, but still will
presume on further advantages, especially such as love entirely: so fared it
with Gentile, who being once minded to get him gone, as satisfied with the
oblation of his kisses; would needs yet step back again, saying. Why should I
not touch her yuory breast, the Adamant that drew all desires to adore her? Ah
let me touch it now, for never hereafter can I be half so happy. Overcome
with this alluring appetite, gently he laid his hand upon her breast, with the
like awefull respect, as if she were living, and holding it so an indifferent
while: either he felt, or his imagination so persuaded him, the heart of the
Lady to beat and pant. Casting off all fond fear, and the warmth of his
increasing the motion: his inward soul assured him, that she was not dead
utterly, but had some small sense of life remaining in her, whereof he would
needs be further informed.

So gently as possible he could, and with the help of his man, he took her
forth of the monument, and laying her softly on his horse before him,
conueighed her closely to his house in Bologna. Signior Gentile had a worthy
Lady to his Mother, a woman of great wisdom and virtue, who understanding by
her Son, how matters had happened; moved with compassion, and suffering no
one in the house to know what was done, made a good fire, and very excellent
Bathe, which recalled back again wrong-wandering life. Then fetching a
vehement sigh, opening her eyes, and looking very strangly about her, she said.
Alas! where am I now? whereto the good old Lady kindly replied, saying. Comfort
your self Madame, for you are in a good place.

Her spirits being in better manner met together, and she still gazing every
way about her, not knowing well where she was, and seeing Signior Gentile
standing before her: he entreated his mother to tell her by what means she
came thither; which the good old Lady did, Gentile himself helping to relate
the whole history. A while she grieved and lamented, but afterward gave them
most hearty thanks, humbly requesting, that, in regard of the love he had
formerly borne her, in his house she might find no other usage, varying from
the honor of her self and her Husband, and when day was come, to be
conueighed home to her own house. Madame, answered Signior Gentile, whatsoever
I sought to gain from you in former days, I never mean, either here, or any
where else, to motion any more. But seeing it has been my happy fortune, to
prove the blessed means, of reducing you from death to life: you shall find no
other entertainment here, then as if you were mine own Sister. And yet the
good deed which I have this night done for you, does well deserve some
courteous requital: in which respect, I would have you not to deny me one
favor, which I will presume to crave of you. Whereto the Lady lovingly
replied, that she was willing to grant it; provided, it were honest, and in her
power: whereto Signior Gentile thus answered.

Madame, your parents, kindred and friends, and generally all throughout
Bologna, do verily think you to be dead, wherefore there is not any one, that
will make any inquisition after you: in which regard, the favor I desire from
you, is no more but to abide here secretly with my Mother, until such time as
I return from Modena, which shall be very speedily. The occasion why I move
this motion, aymeth at this end, that in presence of the chiefest persons of
our City, I may make a gladsome present of you to your Husband. The Lady
knowing her self highly beholding to the Knight, and the request he made to be
very honest: disposed her self to do as he desired (although she earnestly
longed, to glad her parents and kindred with seeing her alive) and made her
promise him on her faith, to effect it in such manner, as he pleased to appoint
and give her direction.

Scarcely were these words concluded, but she felt the custom of women to come
upon her, with the pains and throws incident to childing: wherefore, with
help of the aged Lady, Mother to Signior Gentile, it was not long before her
deliverance of a goodly Son, which greatly augmented the joy of her and
Gentile, who took order, that all things belonging to a woman in such a case,
were not wanting, but she was as carefully respected, even as if she had been
his own Wife. Secretly he repaired to Modena, where having given direction for
his place of authority; he returned back again to Bologna, and there made
preparation for a great and solemn feast, appointing who should be his invited
guests, the very chiefest persons in Bologna, and (among them) Signior
Nicoluccio Caccianimico the especial man.

After he was dismounted from horseback, and found so good company attending
for him (the Lady also, more fair and healthful then ever, and the Infant
lively disposed) he sat down at the Table with his guests, causing them to be
served in most magnificent manner, with plenty of all delicates that could be
devised, and never before was there such a Iouiall feast. About the ending of
dinner, closely he made the Lady acquainted with his further intention, and
likewise in what order every thing should be done, which being effected, he
returned to his company, and used these speeches.

Honorable friends, I remember a discourse sometime made unto me, concerning
the Country of Persia, and a kind of custom there observed, not to be
misliked in mine opinion. When any one intended to honor his friend in
effectual manner, he invited him home to his house, and there would show him
the thing, which with greatest love he did respect; were it Wife, Friend,
Son, Daughter, or any thing else whatsoever; wherewithal he spared not to
affirm, that as he showed him those choice delights, the like view he should
have of his heart, if with any possibility it could be done; and the very same
custom I mean now to observe here in our City. You have vouchsafed to honor
me with your presence, at this poor homely dinner of mine, and I will welcome
you after the Persian manner, in showing you the Jewel, which (above all
things else in the world) I ever have most respectively esteemed. But before I
do it, I crave your favorable opinions in a doubt, which I will plainly
declare unto you.

If any man having in his house a good and faithful servant, who falling into
extremity of sickness, shall be thrown forth into the open street, without
any care or pity taken on him: A stranger chances to pass by, and (moved
with compassion of his weakness) carries him home to his own house, where
using all charitable diligence, and not sparing any cost, he recouereth the
sick person to his former health. I now desire to know, if keeping the said
restored person, and employing him about his own business: the first Master
(by pretending his first right) may lawfully complain of the second, and yield
him back again to the first master, albeit he do make challenge of him?

All the Gentlemen, after many opinions passing among them, agreed altogether
in one sentence, and gave charge to Signior Nicoluccio, Caccianimico, (because
he was an excellent and elegant speaker) to give answer for them all. First,
he commended the custom observed in Persia, saying, he iumpt in opinion with
all the rest, that the first Master had no right at all to the servant, having
not only (in such necessity) forsaken him, but also cast him forth into the
comfortless street. But for the benefits and mercy extended to him; it was
more then manifest, that the recovered person, was become justly servant to the
second Master, and in detayning him from the first, he did not offer him any
injury at all. The whole Company sitting at the Table (being all very wise and
worthy men) gave their verdict likewise with the confession of Signior
Nicoluccio Caccianimico. Which answer did not a little please the Knight; and
so much the rather, because Nicoluccio had pronounced it, affirming himself to
be of the same mind.

So, sitting in a pretended musing a while, at length he said. My honorable
guests, it is now more then high time, that I should do you such honor, as
you have most justly deserved, by performing the promise made unto you. Then
calling two of his servants, he sent them to Madame Catharina (whom he had
caused to adorn her self in excellent manner) entreating her, that she would
be pleased to grace his guests with her presence. Catharina, having decked her
child in costly habiliments, laid it in her arms, and came with the seruauts
into the dyning Hall, and sat down (as the Knight had appointed) at the upper
end of the Table, and then Signior Gentile spoke thus. Behold, worthy
Gentlemen, this is the Jewel which I have most affected, and intend to love
none other in the world; be you my Judges, whether I have just occasion to do
so, or no? The Gentlemen saluting her with respective reverence, said to the
Knight; that he had great reason to affect her: And viewing her advisedly, many
of them thought her to be the very same woman (as indeed she was) but that they
believed her to be dead.

But above all the rest, Nicoluccio Caccianimico could never be satisfied with
beholding her; and, enflamed with earnest desire, to know what she was, could
not refrain (seeing the Knight was gone out of the room) but demanded of
her, whether she were of Bologna, or a stranger? when the Lady heard her self
to be thus questioned, and by her Husband, it seemed painful to her, to
contain from answering: Nevertheless, to perfect the Kinghts intended
purpose, she sat silent. Others demanded of her, whether the sweet Boy were
hers, or no; and some questioned, if she were Gentiles Wife, or no, or else his
Knisewoman; to all which demands, she returned not any answer. But when the
Knight came to them again, some of them said to him. Sir, this woman is a
goodly creature, but she appears to be dumb, which were great pity, if it
should be so. Gentlemen (quoth he) it is no small argument of her virtue, to
sit still and silent at this instant. Tell us then (said they) of whence, and
what she is. Therein (quoth he) I will quickly resolve you, upon your
conditional promise: that none of you do remove from his place, whatsoever
shall be said or done, until I have fully delivered my mind. Every one bound
himself by solemn promise, to perform what he had appointed, and the Tables
being voided, as also the Carpets laid; then the Knight (sitting down by the
Lady) thus began.

Worthy Gentlemen, this Lady is that true and faithful servant, whereof I moved
the question to you, whom I took out of the cold street, where her parents,
kindred and friends (making no account at all of her) threw her forth, as a
thing vile and unprofitable. Nevertheless, such has been my care and cost,
that I have rescued her out of deaths griping power; and, in a mere charitable
disposition, which honest affection caused me to bear her; of a body, full of
terror and affrighting (as then she was) I have caused her to become thus
lovely as you see. But because you may more apparently discern, in what manner
this occasion happened; I will lay it open to you in more familiar manner. Then
he began the whole history, from the original of his unbeseeming affection to
her (in regard she was a worthy man's wife) and consequently, how all had
happened to the instant hour, to the no mean admiration of all the hearers,
adding withal. Now Gentlemen (quoth he) if you varry not from your former
opinion, and especially Signior Nicoluccio Caccianimico: this Lady (by good
right) is mine, and no man else, by any just title, can lay any claim to her.

All sat silent, without answering one word, as expecting what he intended
further to say: but in the mean while, Nicoluccio, the parents and kindred,
but chiefly the Lady her self, appeared as half melted into tears with
weeping. But Signior Gentile, starting up from the Table, taking the Infant in
his arm, and leading the Lady by the hand, going to Nicoluccio, thus spoke.
Rise Sir, I will not give thee thy wife, whom both her kindred and thine, threw
forth into the street: but I will bestow this Lady on thee, being my Gossip,
and this sweet Boy my God-sonne, who was (as I am verily persuaded) begotten by
thee, I standing witness for him at the Font of Baptism, and give him mine
own name Gentile. Let me entreat thee, that, although she has lived here in
mine house, for the space of three months, she should not be less welcome to
thee, then before: for I swear to thee upon my soul, that my former affection
to her (how unjust soever) was the only means of preserving her life: and
more honestly she could not live, with Father, Mother, or thy self, then she
has done here with mine own Mother.

Having thus spoken, he turned to the Lady, saying. Madame, I now discharge you
of all promises made me, delivering you to your Husband frank and free: And
when he had given him the Lady, and the child in his arms, he returned to his
place, and sat down again. Nicoluccio, with no mean joy and hearty
contentment received both his wife and child, being before far from
expectation of such an admirable comfort; returning the Knight infinite thanks
(as all the rest of the Company did the like) who could not refrain from
weeping for mere joy, for such a strange and wonderful accident: every one
highly commending Gentile, and such also as chanced to hear thereof. The Lady
was welcomed home to her own house, with many months of Iouiall feasting,
and as she passed through the streets, all beheld her with admiration, to be so
happily recovered from her grave. Signior Gentile lived long after, a loyal
friend to Nicoluccio and his Lady, and all that were well-willers to them.

What think you now Ladies? Can you imagine, because a King gave away his
Crown and Scepter; and an Abbot (without any cost to himself) reconciled a
Malefactor to the Pope; and an old idle-headed man, yielding to the mercy of
his enemy: that all those actions are comparable to this of Signior Gentile?
Youth and ardent affection, gave him a just and lawful title, to her who was
free (by imagined death) from Husbands, Parents, and all friends else, she
being so happily won into his own possession. Yet honesty not only
ouer-swayed the heat of desire, which in many men is violent and immoderate:
but with a bountiful and liberal soul, that which he coueted beyond all
hopes else, and had within his own command; he freely gave away. Believe me
(bright Beauties) not any of the other (in a true and impartial judgment) are
worthy to be equalled with this, or styled by the name of magnificent actions.

Madame Dianora, the Wife of Signior Gilberto, being immodestly affected by
Signior Ansaldo, to free her self from his tedious importunity, she appointed
him to perform (in her judgment) an act of impossibility; namely, to give her
a Garden, as plentifully stored with fragrant Flowers in lanuary, as in the
flourishing month of May. Ansaldo, by means of a bond which he made to a
Magitian, performed her request. Signior Gilberto, the Ladies Husband, gave
consent, that his Wife should fulfill her promise made to Ansaldo. Who hearing
the bountiful mind of her Husband; released her of her promise: And the
Magitian likewise discharged Signior Ansaldo, without taking any thing of him.

The Fifth Novel.
Admonishing all Ladies and Gentlewomen, that are desirous to preserve their
chastity, free from all blemish and taxation: to make no promise of yielding to
any, under a compact or covenant, how impossible soever it may seem to be.



NOt any one in all the Company, but extolled the worthy Act of Signior Gentile
to the skies; till the King gave command to Madame Aemillia, that she should
follow next with her Tale, who boldly stepping up, began in this order.

Gracious Ladies, I think there is none here present among us, but (with good
reason) may maintain, that Signiour Gentile performed a magnificent deed: but
whosoever says, it is impossible to do more; perhaps is ignorant in such
actions, as can and may be done, as I mean to make good unto you, by a Novel
not ouerlong or tedious.

The Country of Fretulium, better known by the name of Forum Iulij; although
it be subject to much cold, yet it is pleasant, in regard of many goodly
Mountains, Rivers, and clear running Springs, wherewith it is not meanly
stored. Within those Territories, is a City called Vdina, where sometime lived
a fair and Noble Lady, named Madame Dianora, Wife to a rich and worthy
Knight, called Signior Gilberto, a man of very great fame and merit.

This beautiful Lady, being very modest and virtuously inclined, was highly
affected by a Noble Baron of those parts, termed by the name of Signior
Ansaldo Gradense; a man of very great spirit, bountiful, active in Arms, and
yet very affable and courteous, which caused him to be the better respected.
His love to this Lady was extraordinary, hardly to be contained within any
moderate compass, striving to be in like manner affected of her: to which
end, she wanted no daily solicitings, Letters, Ambassages and Louetokens, all
proving to no purpose.

This virtuous Lady, being wearied with his often temptations, and seeing, that
by denying whatsoever he demanded, yet he would not give over his suite, but so
much the more importunatly still pursued her: began to bethink her self, how
she might best be rid of him, by imposing some such task upon him, as should
be impossible (in her opinion) for him to effect. An old woman, whom he
employed for his continual messenger to her, as she came one day about her
ordinary errand, with her she communed in this manner. Good woman (quoth she)
thou have so often assured me, that Signior Ansaldo loves me above all other
Women in the world, offering me wonderful gifts and presents in his name,
which I have always refused, and so still will do, in regard I am not to be won
by any such allurements: yet if I could be soundly persuaded, that his
affection is answerable to thy peremptory protestations, I should (perhaps) be
the sooner won, to listen to his suite in milder manner, then hitherto I have
done. Wherefore, if he will give me assurance, to perform such a business as I
mean to enjoin him, he shall the speedier hear better answer from me* and I
will confirm it with mine oath.

Wonderfully pleased was Mistress Maquerella, to hear a reply of such
comfortable hope; and therefore desired the Lady, to tell her what she would have
done. Listen to me well (answered Madam Dianora) the matter which I would have
him to effect for me, is; without the walls of our City, and during the month of
January next ensuing, to provide me a Garden, as fairly furnished with all
kind of fragrant flowers, as the flourishing month of May can yield no better.
If he be not able to accomplish this imposition, then I command him, never
hereafter to solicit me any more, either by thee, or any other whatsoever:
for, if he do importune me afterward, as hitherto I have concealed his secret
conspiring, both from my husband, and all my friends; so will I then lay his
dishonest suite open to the world, that he may receive punishment accordingly,
for offering to wrong a Gentleman in his wife.

When Signior Ansaldo heard her demand, and the offer beside thereuppon made
him (although it seemed no easy matter, but a thing merely impossible to be
done) he considered advisedly, that she made this motion to no other end, but
only to bereave him of all his hope, ever to enjoy what so earnestly he
desired: nevertheless, he would not so give it utterly over, but would needs
approve what could be done. Hereupon, he sent into diverse parts of the
world, to find out any one that was able to advise him in this doubtful case.
In the end, one was brought to him, who being well recompensed for his pains,
by the Art of Nigromancie would under take to do it. With him Signior Ansaldo
couenanted, binding himself to pay a great sum of money, upon performance of
so rare a deed, awaiting (in hopeful expectation) for the month of Ianuaries
coming.

It being come, and the weather then in extremity of cold, every thing being
covered with ice and snow, the Magitian prevailed so by his Art, that after the
Christmas Holy days were past, and the Calends of January entered: in one
night, and without the City Walls, the goodliest Garden of flowers and
fruits, was suddenly sprung up, as (in opinion of such as beheld it) never
was the like seen before. Now Ladies, I think I need not demand the question,
whether Signior Ansaldo were well pleased, or no, who going to behold it, saw
it most plenteously stored, with all kind of fruit trees, flowers, herbs and
plants, as no one could be named, that was wanting in this artificial garden.
And having gathered some pretty store of them, secretly he sent them to Madam
Dianora, inuiting her to come see her Garden, perfected according to her own
desire, and upon view thereof, to confess the integrity of his love to her,
considering and remembering withal, the promise she had made him under solemn
oath, that she might be reputed for a woman of her word.

When the Lady beheld the fruits and flowers, and heard many other things
re-counted, so wonderfully growing in the same Garden: she began to repent her
rash promise made; yet notwithstanding her repentance, as Women are covetous to
see all rarities; so, accompanied with diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen more, she
went to see the Garden; and having commended it with much admiration, she
returned home again, the most sorrowful Woman as ever lived, considering what
she had tied her self to, for enjoying this Garden. So excessive grew her
grief and affliction, that it could not be so clouded or concealed: but her
Husband took notice of it, and would needs understand the occasion thereof.
Long the Lady (in regard of shame and modesty) sat without returning any
answer; but being in the end constrained, she disclosd the whole History to him.

At the first, Signior Gilberto waxed exceeding angry, but when he further
considered withal, the pure and honest intention of his Wife; wisely he
pacified his former distemper, and said. Dianora, it is not the part of a wise
and honest woman, to lend an ear to ambassages of such immodest nature, much
less to compound or make agreement for her honesty, with any person, under any
condition whatsoever. Those persuasions which the heart listeneth to, by
allurement of the ear, have greater power then many do imagine, and nothing is
so uneasy or difficult, but in a lovers judgment it appears possible. Ill
did thou therefore first of all to listen, but worse (afterward) to contract.

But, because I know the purity of thy soul, I will yield (to disoblige thee
of thy promise) as perhaps no wise man else would do: moved thereto only by
fear of the Magitian, who seeing Signior Ansaldo displeased, because thou
make a mockage of him; will do some such violent wrong to us, as we shall be
never able to recover. Wherefore, I would have thee go to Signior Ansaldo, and
if thou can (by any means) obtain of him, the safe-keeping of thy honor,
and full discharge of thy promise; it shall be an eternal fame to thee, and the
crown of a most victorious conquest. But if it must needs be otherwise, lend
him thy body only for once, but not thy will: for actions committed by
constraint, wherein the will is no way guilty, are half pardonable by the
necessity.

Madame Dianora, hearing her husbands words, wept exceedingly, and avouched,
that she had not deserved any such especial grace of him, and therefore she
would rather dye, then do it. Nevertheless, it was the will of her Husband to
have it so, and therefore (against her will) she gave consent. The next morning,
by the break of day, Dianora arose, and attiring her self in her very meanest
garments, with two seruingmen before her, and a waiting Woman following, she
went to the lodging of Signior Ansaldo, who hearing that Madam Dianora was come
to visit him, greatly meruailed, and being risen, he called the Magitian to
him* saying. Come go with me, and see what effect will follow upon thine Art.
And being come into her presence, without any base or inordinate appetite, he
did her humble reverence, embracing her honestly, and taking her into a goodly
Chamber, where a fair fire was readily prepared, causing her to sit down by
him, he said unto her as follows.

Madam, I humbly entreat you to resolve me, if the affection I have long time
borne you, and yet do still, deserve any recompense at all: you would be pleased
then to tell me truly, the occasion of your instant coming hither, and thus
attended as you are. Dianora, blushing with modest shame, and the tears
trickling mainly down her fair cheeks, thus answered. Signior Ansaldo, not
for any Love I bear you, or care of my faithful promise made to you, but
only by the command of my husband (who respecting more the pains and travels
of your inordinate love, then his own reputation and honor, or mine;) has
caused me to come hither: and by virtue of his command, am ready (for once
only) to fulfill your pleasure, but far from any will or consent in my self.
If Signior Ansaldo were abashed at the first, he began now to be more
confounded with admiration, when he heard the Lady speak in such strange
manner: and being much moved with the liberal command of her husband, he began
to alter his inflamed heat, into most honorable respect and compassion,
returning her this answer.

Most noble Lady, the Gods forbid (if it be so as you have said) that I should
(Villain-like) soil the honor of him, that takes such unusual compassion of
my unchaste appetite. And therefore, you may remain here so long as you
please, in no other condition, but as mine own natural borne Sister; and
likewise, you may depart freely when you will: conditionally, that (on my
behalf) you render such thanks to your husband, as you think convenient for
his great bounty toward me, accounting me for ever hereafter, as his loyal
Brother and faithful servant. Dianora having well observed his answer, her
heart being ready to mount out at her mouth with joy, said. All the world
could never make me believe (considering your honorable mind and honesty)
that it would happen otherwise to me, then now it has done, for which noble
courtesy, I will continually remain obliged to you. So, taking her leave, she
returned home honorably attended to her husband, and relating to him what had
happened, it proved the occasion of begetting entire love and friendship,
between himself and the Noble Lord Ansaldo.

Now concerning the skillful Magitian, to whom Ansaldo meant to give the
bountiful recompense agreed on between them, he having seen the strange
liberality, which the husband expressed to Signior Ansaldo, and that of Ansaldo
to the Lady, he presently said. Great Jupiter strike me dead with thunder,
having my self seen a husband so liberal of his honor, and you Sir of true
noble kindness, if I should not be the like of my recompense: for, perceiving
it to be so worthily employed, I am well contented that you shall keep it. The
Noble Lord was modestly ashamed, and strove (so much as in him lay) that he
should take all, or the greater part thereof: but seeing he labored merely in
vain, after the third day was past, and the Magitian had destroyed the Garden
again, he gave him free liberty to depart, quite controlling all fond and
unchaste affection in himself, either toward Dianora, or any Lady else, and
living (ever after) as best becomes any Nobleman to do.

What say you now Ladies? Shall we make any account of the woman wel-neere
dead, and the kindness grown cold in Signiour Gentile, by loss of his former
hopes, comparing them with the liberality of Signior Ansaldo, affecting more
fervently, then ever the other did? And being (beyond hope) possessed of the
booty, which (above all things else in the world) he most desired to have, to
part with it merely in fond compassion? I protest (in my judgment) the one is
no way comparable to the other, that of Gentile, with this last of Signior
Ansaldo.

Victorious King Charles, surnamed the Aged, and first of that Name, fell in
love with a young Maiden, named Geneuera, daughter to an ancient Knight, called
Signior Neri degli Vberti. And waxing ashamed of his amorous folly, caused both
Geneuera, and her fair Sister Isotta, to be joined in marriage with two Noble
Gentlemen; the one named Signior Maffeo da Palizzi, and the other, Signior
Gulielmo della Magna.

The Sixth Novel.
Sufficiently declaring, that how mighty soever the power of Love is: yet a
magnanimous and truly generous heart, it can by no means fully conquer.



WHo is able to express ingeniously, the diversity of opinions, which happened
among the Ladies, in censuring on the act of Madame Dianora, and which of them
was most liberal, either Signior Gilberto the Husband, Lord Ansaldo the
importunate suitor, or the Magitian, expecting to be bountifully rewarded.
Surely, it is a matter beyond my capacity: but after the King had permitted
their disputation a long while, looking on Madam Fiammetta, he commanded that
she should report her Nouel to make an end of their controversy; and she
(without any further delaying) thus began. I did always (Noble Ladies) hold it
fit and decent, that in such an assembly as this of ours is, every one ought to
speak so succinctly and plainly: that the obscure understanding, concerning
the matters spoken of, should have no cause of disputation. For disputes do
much better become the Colleges of Scholars, then to be among us, who hardly
can manage our Distaues or Samplers. And therefore I, do intend to relate
something, which (peradventure) might appear doubtful: will forbear (seeing
you in such a difference; for that which has bin spoken already) to use any
difficult discourse; but will speak of one, a man of no mean rank or
quality, being both a valiant and virtuous King, and what he did, without any
impeach or blemish to his honor.

I make no doubt, but you have often heard report, of king Charles the Aged, and
first of that name, by reason of his magnificent enterprises, as also his most
glorious victory, which he obtaind against King Manfred, when the Ghibellines
were expulsed forth of Florence, and the Guelphes returned thither again. By
which occasion, an ancient knight, named Signior Neri degli Vberti; forsaking
then the City, with all his family and great store of wealth, would live under
any other obedience, then the awful power or command of King Charles. And
coveting to be in some solitary place, where he might finish the remainder of
his days in peace, he went to Castello da Mare; where, about a Bow shoot
distance from all other dwelling houses, he bought a parcel of ground,
plentifully stored with variety of Trees, bearing Olives, Chestnuts, Orenges,
Lemons Pomcitrons, and other excellent frutages, wherewith the Country
flourishes abundantly. There he built a very fair and commodious house, and
planted (close by it) a pleasant Garden, in the middst whereof, because he had
great plenty of water: according as other men use to do, being in the like case
so well provided; he made a very goodly Pond, which forthwith had all kind of
Fish swimming in it, it being his daily care and endeavor, to tend his Garden,
and increase his Fish Pond.

It fortuned, that King Charles (in the Summer time) for his pleasure and
recreation, went to repose himself (for some certain days) at Castello de
Mare, where having heard report of the beauty and singularity of Signiour
Neries Garden; he grew very desirous to see it. But when he understood to
whom it belonged, then he entered into consideration with himself, that he
was an ancient Knight, maintaining a contrary faction to his: wherefore, he
thought it fit to go in some familiar manner, and with no train attending on
him. Whereupon he sent him word, that he would come to visit him, with four
Gentlemen only in his company, meaning to sup with him in his Garden the next
night ensuing. The news was very welcome to Signior Neri, who took order in
costly manner for all things to be done, entertaining the King most joyfully
into his beautiful Garden.

When the King had suruayed all, and the house likewise, he commended it beyond
all other comparison, and the Tables being placed by the Ponds side, he washed
his hands therein, and then sat down at the table, commanding the Count, Sir Guy
de Montforte (who was one of them which came in his company) to sit down by
him, and Signior Neri on his other side. As for the other three of the train,
he commanded them to attend on his service, as Signior Neri had given order.
There wanted no exquisite Viandes and excellent Wines, all performed in most
decent manner, and without the least noise or disturbance, wherein the King
took no little delight.

Feeding thus in this contented manner, and facying the solitude of the place:
suddenly entered into the garden, two young Damsels, each aged about some
fifteen years, their hair resembling wyars of Gold, and curiously curled,
having Chaplets (made like provincial Crowns) on their heads, and their
delicate faces, expressing them to be rather Angels, then mortal creatures,
such was the appearance of their admired beauty. Their vnder-garments were of
costly Silk, yet white as the finest snow, framed (from the girdle upward)
close to their bodies, but spreading largely downward, like the extendure of a
Pauillion, and so descending to the feet. She that first came in sight, carried
on her shoulder a couple of fishing Netts, which she held fast with her
left hand, and in the right she carried a long staff. The other following her,
had on her left shoulder a Drying Pan, and under the same arm a small Faggot
of woodde, with a Treuit in her hand; and in the other hand a pot of Oil, as
also a brand of fire flaming.

No sooner did the King behold them, but he greatly wondered what they should
be; and, without uttering one word, attended to listen what they would say. Both
the young damsels, when they were come before the King, with modest and
bashful gesture, they performed very humble reverence to him, and going to the
place of entrance into the Pond, she who held the Treuit, set it down on the
ground, with the other things also; and taking the staff which the other
Damsel carried: they both went into the Pond, the water whereof reached so
high as to their bosoms. One of the Servants to Signior Neri, presently
kindled the fire, setting the Treuit over it, and putting Oil into the
Frying-panne, held it upon the Treuit, awaiting until the Damsels should
cast him up Fish. One of them did beat a place with the staff, where she
was assured of the Fishes resort, and the other had lodged the Nets so
conveniently, as they quickly caught great store of Fish, to the Kings high
contentment, who observed their behavior very respectively.

As the Fishes were thrown up to the servant, alive as they were, he took the
best and fairest of them, and brought them to the Table, where they skipt and
mounted before the King, Count Guy de Montfort and the Father: some leaping
from the Table into the Pond again, and others, the King (in a pleasing
humor) voluntarily threw back to the Damsels. Jesting and sporting in this
manner, till the servant had dressed diverse of them in exquisite order, and
served them to the Table, according as Signior Neri had ordained. When the
Damsels saw the Fishes service performed, and perceived that they had fished
sufficiently: they came forth of the water, their garments then (being wet)
hanging close about them, even as if they hid no part of their bodies. Each
having taken those things again, which at first they brought with them, and
saluting the king in like humility as they did before, returned home to the
mansion house.

The King and Count likewise, as also the other attending Gentlemen, having
duly considered the behauior of the Damsels: commended extraordinarily their
beauty and fair feature, with those other perfections of Nature so gloriously
shining in them. But (beyond all the rest) the King was boundless in his
praises given of them, having observed their going into the water, the equal
carriage there of them both, their coming forth, and gracious demeanor at
their departing (yet neither knowing of whence, or what they were) he felt his
affection very violently flamed, and grew into such an amourous desire to them
both, not knowing which of them pleased him most, they so choisely resembled
one another in all things.

But after he had dwelt long enough upon these thoughts, he turned him self to
Signior Neri, and demanded of him, what Damsels they were. Sir (answered Neri)
they are my Daughters, both brought into the world at one birth, and Twins,
the one being named Geneuera the fair, and the other Isotta the amiable. The
King began again to commend them both, and gave him advise to get them both
married: wherein he excused himself, alleging, that he wanted power to do
it. At the same time instant, no other service remaining to be brought to the
table, except Fruit and Cheese, the two Damsels returned again, attyred in
goodly Roabes of Carnation Satin, formed after the Turkish fashion, carrying
two fair Silver dishes in their hands, filled with diverse delicate Fruies,
such as the season then afforded, setting them on the Table before the King.
Which being done, they retired a little backward, and with sweet melodious
voices, sung a ditty, beginning in this manner.

Where Love presumes into place:
Let no one sing in Loves disgrace.
So sweet and pleasing seemed the Song to the King (who took no small delight,
both to hear and behold the Damsels) even as if all the Hirarchies of Angels,
were descended from the Heavens to sing before him. No sooner was the Song
ended, but (humbly on their knees) they craved favor of the King for their
departing. Now, although their departure was greatly grieuing to him, yet (in
outward appearance) he seemed willing to grant it.

When Supper was concluded, and the King and his Company remounted on
horseback: thankefully departing from Signior Neri, the King returned to his
lodging, concealing there closely his affection to himself, and whatsoever
important affairs happened: yet he could not forget the beauty, and gracious
behavior of Geneuera the fair (for whose sake he loved her Sister likewise)
but became so linked to her in vehement manner, as he had no power to think on
any thing else. Pretending other urgent occasions, he fell into great
familiarity with Signior Neri, visiting very often his goodly Garden; only to
see his fair Daughter Geneuera, the Adamant which drew him thither.

When he felt his amourous assaults, to exceed all power of longer sufferance:
he resolved determinately with himself, (being unprovided of any better
means) to take her away from her Father, and not only she, but her Sister
also; discovering both his love and intent to Count Guy de Montforte, who being
a very worthy and virtuous Lord, and meet to be a Counselor for a King,
delivered his mind in this manner.

Gracious Lord, I wonder not a little at your speeches, and so much the greater
is my admiration, because no man else can be subject to the like, in regard I
have known you from the time of your infancy; even to this instant hour, and
always your carriage to be one and the same. I could never perceive in your
youthful days (when love should have the greatest means to assail you) any
such oppressing passions: which is now the more novel and strange to me, to
hear it but said, that you being old, and called the Aged; should be grown
amorous, surely to me it seems a miracle. And if it appertained to me to
reprehend you in this case, I know well enough what I could say. Considering,
you have yet your Armor on your back, in a Kiugdome newly conquered, among a
Nation not known to you, full of falsehoods, breaches, and treasons; all which
are no mean motives to care and needful respect. But having now wone a little
leisure, to rest your self a while from such serious affairs; can you give
way to the idle suggestions of Love? Believe me Sir, it is no act becoming a
magnanimious King; but rather the giddy folly of a young brain.

Moreover you say (which most of all I mislike) that you intend to take the two
Virgins from the Knight, who has given you entertainment in his house beyond
his ability, and to testify how much he honored you, he suffered you to have
a sight of them, merely (almost) in a naked manner: witnessing thereby, what
constant faith he reposed in you, believing verily, that you were a just King,
and not a ravenous Woolfe. Have you so soon forgot, that the rapes and violent
actions, done by King Manfred to harmless Ladies, made your only way of
entrance into this Kingdom? What treason was ever committed, more worthy of
eternal punishment, then this will be in you: to take away from him (who has
so highly honored you) his chiefest hope and consolation? What will be said by
all men, if you do it?

Peradventure you think, it will be a sufficient excuse for you, to say: I did
it, in regard he was a Ghihelline. Can you imagine this to be justice in a
King, that such as get into their possession in this manner (whatsoever it be)
ought to use it in this sort? Let me tell you Sir, it was a most worthy victory
for you, to conquer King Manfred: but it is far more famous victory, for a
man to con^uer himself. You therefore, who are ordained to correct vices in
(...) men, learn first to subdue them in your self, and (by brideling this
inordinate appetite) set not a foul blemish on so fair a fame, as will be
honor to you to preserve spotless.

These words pierced the heart of the King deeply, and so much the more
afflicted him, because he knew them to be most true: wherefore, after he had
ventred a very vehement sigh, thus he replied. Believe me noble Count, there is
not any enemy, how strong soever he be, but I hold him weak and easy to be
vanquished, by him who is skillful in the war, where a man may learn to
conquer his own appetite. But because he shall find it a laborious task,
requiring inestimable strength and courage: your words have so touched me to the
quick, that it becomes me to let you effectually perceive (and within the
compass of few days) that as I have learned to conquer others, so I am not
ignorant, in expressing the like power upon my self.

Having thus spoken, within some few days after, the King being returned to
Naples, he determined, as well to free himself from any the like ensuing
folly, as also to recompense Signior Neri, for the great kindness he had
shown to him (although it was a difficult thing, to let another enjoy, what he
rather desired for himself) to have the two Damsels married, not as the
Daughters of Signior Neri, but even as if they were his own. And by consent of
the Father, he gave Geneuera the fair, to Signior Maffeo da Palizzi, and
Isotta the amiable, to Signior Gulielmo della Magna, two Noble Knights and
honorable Barons. After he had thus given them in marriage, in sad mourning he
departed thence into Apuglia, where by following worthy and honorable actions,
he so well overcame all inordinate appetites: that shaking off the enthralling
fetters of love, he lived free from all passions, the rest of his life time,
and dyed as an honorable King.

Some perhaps will say, it was a small matter for a King, to give away two
Damsels in marriage, and I confess it: but I maintain it to be great, and
more then great, if we say, that a King, being so earnestly enamoured as this
King was; should give her away to another, whom he so dearly affected himsefe,
without receiving (in recompense of his affection) so much as a leaffe, flower,
or the least fruit of love. Yet such was the virtue of this magnificent King,
expressed in so highly recompencing the noble Knights courtesy, honoring the
two daughters so royally, and conquering his own affections so virtuously.

Lisana, the Daughter of a Florentine Apothecary, named Bernardo Puccino, being
at Palermo, and seeing Piero, King of Aragon run at the Tilt; fell so
affectionately enamored of him, that she languish^^ in an extreme and long
sickness. By her own devise, and means of a Song, sung in the hearing of the
King: he vouchsafed to visit her, and giving her a kiss, terming himself
also to be her Knight for ever after, he honorably bestowed her in marriage
on a young Gentleman, who was called Perdicano, and gave him liberal
endowments with her.

The Seventh Novel.
Wherein is covertly given to understand, that howsoever a Prince may make use
of his absolute power and authority, toward Maids or Wives that are his
Subjects: yet he ought to deny and reject all things, as shall make him
forgetful of himself, and his true honor.

MAdame Fiammetta being come to the end of her Novel, and the great
magnificence of King Charles much commended (howbeit, some of the Company,
affecting the Ghibelline faction, were otherwise minded) Madame Pampinea, by
order given from the King, began in this manner.

There is no man of good understanding (honorable Ladies) but will maintain
what you have said of victorious Charles; except such as cannot wish well to
any. But because my memory has instantly informed me, of an action (perhaps)
no less commendable then this, done by an enemy of the said King Charles, and
to a young Maiden of our City, I am the more willing to relate it, upon your
gentle attention vouchsafed, as hitherto it has been courteously granted.

At such time as the French were driven out of Sicilie, there dwelt at Palermo
a Florentine Apothecary, named Bernardo Puccino, a man of good wealth and
reputation, who had by his Wife one only Daughter, of marriageable years, and
very beautiful. Piero, King of Arragon, being then become Lord of that
Kingdom, he made an admirable Feast Royal at Palermo, accompanied with his
Lords and Barons. In honor of which public Feast, the King kept a triumphall
day (of Iusts and Turnament) at Catalana, and whereat it chanced, that the
Daughter of Bernardo, named Lisana, was present. Being in a window, accompanied
with other Gentlewomen, she saw the King run at the Tilt, who seemed so
goodly a person in her eye; that being never satisfied with beholding him, she
grew enamoured, and fell into extremity of affection toward him.

When the Feastiuall was ended, she dwelling in the house of her Father, it was
impossible for her to think on any thing else, but only the love, which she
had fixed on a person of such height. And that which most tormented her in this
case, was the knowledge of her own condition, being but mean and humble in
degree; whereby she confessed, that she could not hope for any successful
issue of her proud love. Nevertheless, she would not refrain from affecting
the King, who taking no note of this kindness in her, by any perceiuable
means; must needs be the more regardles, which procured (by wary observation)
her afflictions to be the greater and intolerable.

Whereon it came to pass, that this earnest love increasing in her more and
more, and one melancholy conceit taking hold on another: the fair Maid, when
she could bear the burden of her grief no longer; fell into a languishing
sickness, consuming away daily (by evident appearance) even as the Snow
melts by the warm beams of the Sun.

The Father and Mother, much dismayed and displeased at this hapless accident,
applying her with continual comforts, Physic, and the best skill remaining
in all the Physicians, sought all possible means ways to give her succor:
but all proved to no effect, because in regard of her choice (which could sort
to none other then a desper ate end) she was desirous to live no longer. Now it
fortuned, that her parents offering her whatsoever remained in their power to
perform, a sudden apprehension entered her mind, to wit, that (if it might
possible be done) before she dyed, she would first have the King to know, in
what manner she stood affected to him. Wherefore, one day she entreated her
Father, that a Gentleman, named Manutio de Arezza, might be permitted to come
see her. This Manutio was (in those times) held to be a most excellent
Musician, both for his voice in singing, and exquisite skill in playing on
Instruments, for which he was highly in favor with King Piero, who made
(almost) daily use of him, to hear him both sing and play.

Her tender and loving father conceived immediately, that she was desirous to
hear his playing and singing, both being comfortable to a body in a
languishing sickness, whereupon, he sent presently for the Gentleman, who
came accordingly, and after he had comforted Lisana with kind and courteous
speeches; he played dexteriously on his Lute, which purposely he had brought
with him, and likewise he sung diverse excellent Ditties, which insted of his
intended consolation to the Maid, did nothing else but increase her fire and
flame.

Afterward, she requested to have some conference with Manutio alone, and every
one being gone forth of the Chamber, she spoke unto him in this manner.

Manutio, I have made choice of thee, to be the faithful Guardian of an
especial secret, hoping first of al, that thou will never reveal it to any
living body, but only to him whom I shall bid thee: And n^xt, to help me so
much as possibly thou can, because my only hope relyeth in thee. Know then
my dearest friend Manutio, that on the solemn festival day, when our
Sovereign Lord the King honored his exaltation, with the noble exercises of
Tilt and Turney; his brave behavior kindled such a spark in my soul, as
since brake forth into a violent flame, and brought me to this weak condition
as now thou see. But knowing and confessing, how far unbeseeming my love
is, to aim so ambitiously at a King, and being unable to control it, or in
the least manner to diminish it: I have made choice of the only and best
remedy of all, namely, to dye, and so I am most willing to do.

True it is, that I shall travail in this my latest journey, with endless
torment and affliction of soul, except he have some understanding thereof
before, and not knowing by whom to give him intelligence, in so often and
convenient order, as by thee* I do therefore commit this last office of a
friend to thy trust, desiring thee, not to refuse me in the performance
thereof. And when thou have done it, to let me understand what he says, that I
may dye the more contentedly, and disburdened of so heavy an oppression, the
only comfort to a parting spirit: and so she ceased, her tears flowing forth
abundantly.

Manutio did not a little wonder at the Maids great spirit, and her desperate
resolution, which moved him to exceeding commiseration, and suddenly he
conceived, that honectly he might discharge this duty for her, whereupon, he
returned her this answer. Lisana, here I engage my faith to thee, that thou
shall find me firm and constant, and die I will, rather then deceive thee.
Greatly I do commend thy high attempt, in fixing thy affection on so Potent a
King, wherein I offer thee my utmost assistance: and I make no doubt (if thou
would be of good comfort) to deal in such sort, as, before three days are
fully past, to bring such news as will content thee, and because I am loath to
loose the least time, I will go about it presently. Lisana the young Maiden,
once again entreated his care and diligence, promising to comfort her self so
well as she could, commending him to his good fortune. When Manutio was gone
from her, he went to a Gentleman, named Mico de Sienna, one of the best Poets
in the composing of verses, as all those parts yielded not the like. At his
request, Mico made for him this ensuing Dittie.

The Song sung in the hearing of King Piero, on the behalf of Louesicke Lisana.
Go Love, and tell the torments I endure,
Say to my Sovereign Lord, that I must die
Except he come, some comfort to procure,
For tell I may not, what I feel, and why.
WIth heaued hands Great Love, I call to thee,
Go see my Sovereign, where he does abide,
And say to him, in what extremity,
Thou have (for him) my firm affection tried.
To die for him, it is my sole desire,
For live with him I may not, nor a spire,
To have my fortunes thereby dignified,
Only his sight would lend me life a while:
Grant it (great love) mine anguish to beguile.
Go love and tell the torments, etc.
Since the first hour that love enthralled me,
I never had the heart, to tell my grief,
My thoughts did speak, for thoughts be always free,
Yet hopeful thoughts do find but poor relief.
When Gnats will mount to Eagles in the air,
Alas! they scorn them, for full well they know,
They were not bred to prey so base and low,
Aloft they look, to make their flight more fair.
And yet his sight would lend me life a while:
Grant it (great love) mine anguish to beguile.
Go love, and tell the torments, etc.
If sight shall be denied, then tell them plain,
His high triumphall day procurd my death,
The Lance that won him Honor, has me slain.
For instantly it did bereave my breath.
That speak I could not, nor durst be so bold,
To make the Air acquainted with my woe:
Alas! I looked so high, and doing so,
Justly deserve by death to be controld.
Yet mercies sight would lend me life a while,
Grant it (great love) mine anguish to beguile.
Go love, and tell the torments I endure,
Say to my Sovereign Lord, that I must die:
Except he come, some comfort to procure,
For tell I may not, what I feel, and why.
The lines contained in this Ditty, Manutio fitted with noates so moving and
singularly musical, that every word had the sensible motion of life in it,
where the King being (as yet) not risen from the Table, he commanded him to use
both his Lute and voice.

This seemed a happy opportunity to Manutio, to sing the dittie so purposely
done and devised: which he delivered in such excellent manner, the voice and
Instrument concording so extraordinary pleasing; that all the persons then in
the Presence; seemed rather Statues, then living men, so strangely they were
wrapped with admiration, and the King himself far beyond all the rest,
transported with a rare kind of alteration.

When Manutio had ended the Song, the King demanded of him, whence this Song
came, because he had never heard it before? My gracious Lord, answered Manutio,
it must needs seem strange to your Majesty, because it is not fully three
days, since it was invented, made, and set to the note. Then the King asked,
whom it concerned? Sir (quoth Manutio) I dare not disclose that to any but
only your self. Which answer made the King much more desirous, and being
risen from the Table, he took him into his Bedchamber, where Manutio related
all at large to him, according to the trust reposed in him. Wherewith the King
was wonderfully well pleased, greatly commending the courage of the Maid, and
said, that a Virgin of such a valiant spirit, did well deserve to have her case
commiserated: and commanded him also, to go (as sent from him) and comfort
her, with promise, that the very same day, in the evening, he would not fail
to come and see her.

Manutio, more then contented, to carry such glad tidings to Lisana; without
staying in any place, and taking his Lute also with him, went to the
Apothecaries house, where speaking alone with the Maid: he told her what he
had done, and afterward sung the song to her, in as excellent manner as he had
done before, wherein Lisana conceived such joy and contentment, as even in the
very same moment, it was observed by apparent signs, that the violence of her
fits forsook her, and health began to get the upper hand of them. So, without
suffering any one in the house to know it, or by the least means to suspect
it; she comforted her self till the evening, in expectation of her Sovereigns
arrival.

Piero being a Prince, of most liberal and benign nature, having afterward
diverse times considered on the matters which Manutio had revealed to him,
knowing also the young Maiden, to be both beautiful and virtuous: was so much
moved with pity of her extremity, as mounting on horse back in the evening,
and seeming as if he rode abroad for his private recreation; he went directly
to the Apothecaries house, where desiring to see a goodly garden, appertaining
then to the Apothecarie, he dismounted from his horse. Walking into the garden,
he began to question with Bernardo, demanding him for his Daughter, and
whether he had (as yet) married her, or no? My Gracious Lord, answered
Bernardo, as yet she is not married, neither likely to be, in regard she
has had a long and tedious sickness: but since Dinner time, she is
indifferently eased of her former violent pain, which we could not discern
the like alteration in her, a long while before.

The King understood immediately, the reason of this so sudden alteration, and
said. In good faith Bernardo, the world would sustain a great maine and
imperfection, by the loss of thy fair daughter; wherefore, we will go our
self in person to visit her. So, with two of his Lords only, and the Father,
he ascended to the Maids Chamber and being entered, he went to the Beds side,
where she sat, somewhat raised, in expectation of his coming, and taking her
by the hand, he said. Fair Lisana, how comes this to pass? You being so
fair a Virgin, young, and in the delicacy of your days, which should be the
chiefest comfort to you, will you suffer your self to be ouer-awed with
sickness? Let us entreat you, that (for our sake) you will be of good
comfort, and thereby recover your health the sooner, especially, when it is
requested by a King, who is sorry to see so bright a beauty sick, and would
help it, if it consisted in his power.

Lisana, feeling the touch of his hand, whom she loved above all things else in
the world, although a bashful blush mounted up into her cheeks: yet her heart
was seized with such a rapture of pleasure, that she thought her self
translated into Paradise, and, so well as she could, thus she replied. Great
King, by opposing my feeble strength, against a burden of ouer-ponderous
weight, it became the occasion of this grievous sickness: but I hope that the
violence thereof is (almost) already killed, only by this sovereign mercy in
you* and doubtless it will cause my speedy deliverance. The King did best
understand this so well palliated answer of Lisana, which as he did much
commend, in regard of her high aduenturing; so he did again as greatly
condemn Fortune, for not making her more happy in her birth.

So, after he had stayed there a good while, and given her many comfortable
speeches, he returned back to the Court. This humanity in the King, was
reputed a great honor to the Apothecary and his daughter, who (in her own
mind) received as much joy and contentment thereby, as ever any wife could have
of her own Husband.

And being assisted by better hopes, within a short while after, she became
recovered, and far more beautiful (in common judgment) then ever she was
before.

Lisana being now in perfect health, the King consulted with his Queen, what
meet recompense he should gratify her withal, for loving and affecting him
in such fervent manner. Upon a day determined, the King mounting on horseback,
accompanied with many of his cheifest Lords and Barons, he rode to the
Apothecaries house, where walking in his beautiful Garden, he called for
Bernardo and his daughter Lisana. In the mean space, the Queen also came
thither, Royally attended on by her Ladies, and Lisana being admitted into
their company, they expressed themselves very gracious to her. Soon after, the
King and the Queen called Lisana, and the King spoke in this manner to her.

Fair Virgin, the extraordinary love which you bare to us, calls for as
great honor from us to you; in which respect, it is our Royal desire, by one
means or other to requite your kind Love. In our opinion, the chiest honor
we can extend to you, is, that being of sufficient years for marriage, you
would grace us so much, as to accept him for your Husband, whom we intend to
bestow on you. Beside this further grant from us, that (nowithstanding
whatsoever else) you shall call us your Knight; without coveting any thing else
from you, for so great favor, but only one kiss, and think not to bestow it
nicely on a King, but grant it the rather, because he begges it.

Lisana, whose looks, were dyed with a vermillian tincture, or rather
converted into a pure maiden blush, reputing the Kings desire to be her own;
in a low and humbled voice, thus answered. My Lord, most certain am I, that if
it had been publicly known, how none but your highness, might serve for me to
fix my love on, I should have been termed the fool of all fools: they
perhaps believing, that I was forgetful of my self, in being ignorant of mine
own condition, and much less of yours. But the Gods are my witnesses (because
they know the secrets of all hearts) that even in the very instant, when Loves
fire took hold on my yielding affection: I knew you to be a King, and my self
the daughter of poor Bernardo the Apothecary: likewise, how far unfitting it
was for me, to be so ambitious in my loves presuming. But I am sure your
Majesty does know (much better then I am able to express) that no one
becomes amourous, according to the duty of election, but as the appetite
shapeth his course, against whose laws my strength made many resistances,
which not prevailing, I presumed to love, did, and so for ever shall do, your
Majesty.

Now Royal Sovereign, I must needs confess, that so soon as I felt my
self thus wholly conquered by loving you, I resolved for ever after, to make
your will mine own, and therefore, am not only willing to accept him for my
Husband, whom you shall please to appoint, befitting my honor and degree: but
if you will have me to live in a flaming fire, my obedience shall sacrifice it
self to your will, with the absolute conformity of mine own. To style you by
the name of my Knight, whom I know to be my lawful King and Sovereign; you
are not ignorant, how far unfitting a word that were for me to use: As also
the kiss which you request, in requital of my love to you; to these two I will
never give consent, without the Queens most gracious favor and license first
granted. Nevertheless, for such admirable benignity used to me, both by your
Royal self, and your virtuous Queen: heaven shower down all boundless
graces on you both, for it exceeds all merit in me, and so she ceased
speaking, in most dutiful manner.

The answer of Lisana pleased the Queen exceedingly, in finding her to be so
wise and fair, as the King himself had before informed her: who instantly
called for her Father and Mother, and knowing they would be well pleased with
whatsoever he did; he called for a proper young Gentleman, but somewhat poor,
being named Perdicano, and putting certain Rings into his hand, which he
refused not to receive, caused him there to espouse Lisana. To whom the King
gave immediately (besides Chains and Jewels of inestimable value, delivered by
the Queen to the Bride) Ceffala and Calatabelotta, two great territories
abounding in diverse wealthy possessions, saying to Perdicano. These we give
thee, as a dowry in marriage with this beautiful Maid, and greater gifts we
will bestow on thee hereafter, as we shall perceive thy love and kindness to
her.

When he had ended these words, he turned to Lisana, saying: Here do I
freely give over all further fruits of your affection toward me, thanking you
for your former love: so taking her head between his hands, he kissed her
fair forhead, which was the usual custom in those times. Perdicano, the
Father and Mother of Lisana, and she her self likewise, extraordinarily
joyful for this so fortunate a marriage, returned humble and hearty thanks
both to the King and Queen, and (as many credible Authors do affirm) the
King kept his promise made to Lisana, because (so long as he lived) he always
termed himself by the name of her Knight, and in all actions of Chiualry by him
undertaken, he never carried any other devise, but such as he received still
from her.

By this, and diverse other like worthy deeds, not only did he win the hearts
of his subjects; but gave occasion to the whole world beside, to renown his
fame to all succeeding posterity. Whereto (in these more wretched times of
ours) few or none bend the sway of their understanding: but rather how to be
cruel and tyrranous Lords, and thereby win the hatred of their people.

Sophronia, thinking her self to be the married wife of Gisippus, was (indeed)
the wife of Titus Quintus Fuluius, and departed thence with him to Rome. Within
a while after, Gisippus also came thither in very poor condition, and thinking
that he was despised by Titus, grew weary of his life, and confessed that he
had murdered a man, with full intent to die for the fact. But Titus taking
knowledge of him, and desiring to save the life of Gisippus, charged himself to
have done the bloody deed. Which the murderer himself (standing then among the
multitude) seeing, truly confessed the deed. By means whereof, all three were
delivered by the Emperor Octauius; and Titus gave his Sister in marriage to
Gisippus, giving them also the most part of his goods and inheritances.

The eight Novel.
Declaring, that notwithstanding the frowns of Fortune, diversity of
occurrences, and contrary accidents happening: yet love and friendship ought to
be preciously preserved among men.

BY this time Madam Philomena, at command of the King, (Madam Pampinea ceasing)
prepared to follow next in order, whereupon thus she began. What is it
(Gracious Ladies) that Kings cannot do (if they list) in matters of greatest
importance, and especially unto such as most they should declare their
magnificence? He then that performe^h what he ought to do, when it is within
his own power, does well. But it is not so much to be admired, neither
deserves half the commendations, as when one man does good to another, when
least it is expected, as being out of his power, and yet performed. In which
respect, because you have so extolled king Piero, as appearing not meanly
meritorious in your judgments; I make no doubt but you will be much more
pleased, when the actions of our equals are duly considered, and shall parallel
any of the greatest Kings. Wherefore I purpose to tell you a Nouel, concerning
an honorable courtesy of two worthy friends.

At such time as Octauius Caesar (not as yet named Augustus, but only in the
office called Triumueri) governed the Roman Empire, there dwelt in Rome a
Gentleman, named Publius Quintus Fuluius, a man of singular understanding, who
having one son, called Titus Quintus Fuluius, of towardly years and
apprehension, sent him to Athens to learn Philosophy, but with letters of
familiar commendations, to a Noble Athenian Gentleman, named Chremes, being his
ancient friend, of long acquaintance. This Gentleman lodged Titus in his own
house, as companion to his son, named Gisippus, both of them studying together,
under the tutoring of a Philosopher, called Aristippus. These two young
Gentlemen living thus in one City, House, and School, it bred between them
such a brother-hoode and amity, as they could not be severed from one another,
but only by the accident of death; nor could either of them enjoy any content,
but when they were both together in company.

Being each of them endued with gentle spirits, and having begun their studies
together: they arose (by degrees) to the glorious height of Philosophy, to
their much admired fame and commendation. In this manner they lived, to the no
mean comfort of Chremes, hardly distinguishing the one from the other for his
Son, and thus the Scholars continued the space of three years. At the ending
whereof (as it happens in all things else) Chremes died, whereat both the young
Gentlemen conceived such hearty grief, as if he had bin their common father;
nor could the kindred of Chremes discern, which of the two had most need of
comfort, the loss touched them so equally.

It chanced within some few months after, that the kindred of Gisippus came to
^ee him, and (before Titus) auised him to marriage, and with a young Gentlewoman
of singular beauty, derived from a most noble house in Athens, and she named
Sophronia, aged about fifteen years. This marriage drawing near, Gisippus on a
day, entreated Titus to walk along with him thither, because (as yet) he had
not seen her. Coming to the house, and she sitting in the midst between
them, Titus making himself a considerator of beauty, and especially on his
friends behalf; began to observe her very iudicially, and every part of her
seemed so pleasing in his eye, that giving them al a private praise, yet
answerable to their due deserving; he becam so enflamed with affection to her,
as never any lover could be more violently surprised, so suddenly does beauty
beguile our best senses.

After they had sat an indifferent while with her, they returned home to their
lodging, where Titus being alone in his chamber, began to bethink himself on
her, whose perfections had so powerfully pleased him: and the more he entered
into this consideration, the fiercer he felt his desires enflamed, which being
unable to quench, by any reasonable persuasions, after he had vented forth
infinite sighs, thus he questioned with himself.

Most unhappy Titus as thou art, whether do thou transport thine
understanding, love, and hope? Dooest thou not know as well by the honorable
favors, which thou have received of Chremes and his house, as also the entire
amity between thee and Gisippus (unto whom fair Sophronia is the affianced
friend) that thou should hold her in the like reverent respect, as if she
were thy true borne Sister? Dare thou presume to fancy her? Whether shall
beguiling Love allure thee, and vain immaging hopes carry thee? Open the eyes
of thy better understanding, and acknowledge thy self to be a most miserable
man. Give way to reason, bridle thine in temperate appetites, reform all
irregulare desires, and guide thy fancy to a place of better direction. Resist
thy wanton and lasciuio^s will in the beginning, and be master of thy self,
while thou have opportunity, for that which thou aimest at, is neither
reasonable nor honest. And if thou were assured to prevail upon this pursuit,
yet thou oughtst to avoid it, if thou have any regard of true friendship, and
the duty therein justly required. What will thou do then Titus? Fly from this
inordinate affection, if thou will be reputed to be a man of sensible judgment.

After he had thus discoursed with himself, remembering Sophronia, and
converting his former allegations, into a quite contrary sense, in utter
detestation of them, and guided by his idle appetite, thus he began again. The
laws of love are of greater force, then any other whatsoever, they not only
break the bands of friendship, but even those also of more divine consequence.
How many times has it bin noted, the father to affect his own daughter, the
brother his sister, and the step mother her son in law, matters far more
monstrous, then to see one friend love the wife of another, a case happening
continually? Moreover, I am young, and youth is wholly subjected to the passions
of Love: is it reasonable then, that those should be bard from me, which are
fitting and pleasing to Love? Honest things, belong to men of more years and
maturity, then I am troubled withal; and I can covet none, but only those
wherein Love is directer. The beauty of Sophronia is worthy of general love,
and if I that am a yongman do love her, what man living can justly reprove me
for it? Should not I love her, because she is affianced to Gisippus? That is no
matter to me, I ought to love her, because she is a woman, and women were
created for no other occasion, but to be Loved. Fortune had sinned in this
case, and not I, in directing my friends affection to her, rather then any
other; and if she ought to be loved, as her perfections do challenge, Gisippus
understanding that I affect her, may be the better contented that it is I,
rather then any other.

With these, and the like cross entercourses, he often mocked himself, falling
into the contrary, and then to this again, and from the contrary, into another
kind of alteration, wasting and consuming himself, not only this day and the
night following, but many more afterward, til he lost both his feeding and
sleep, so that through debility of body, he was constrained to keep his bed.
Gisippus, who had diverse days noted his melancholy disposition, and now his
falling into extreamitie of sickness, was very sorry to behold it: and with
all means and inventions he could devise to use, he both questioned the cause
of this strange alteration, and essayed every way, how he might best comfort
him, never ceassing to demand a reason, why he should become thus sad and
sickely. But Titus after infinite importuning (which still he answered with
idle and frivolous excuses, far from the truth indeed, and (to the no mean
affliction of his friend) when he was able to use no more contradictions; at
length, in sighs and tears, thus he replied.

Gisippus, were the Gods so well pleased, I could more gladly yield to dye, then
continue any longer in this wretched life, considering, that Fortune has
brought me to such an extremity, as proof is now to be made of my constancy
and virtue; both which I find conquered in me, to my eternal confusion and
shame. But my best hope is, that I shall shortly be requited, as I have in
justice deserved, namely with death, which will be a thousand times more
welcome to me, then a loathed life, with remembrance of my base deiection in
courage, which because I can no longer conceal from thee; not without blushing
shame, I am well contented for to let thee know it.

Then began he to recount, the whole occasion of this strange conflict in
him, what a maine battle he had with his private thoughts, confessing that
they got the victory, causing him to die hourly for the love of Sophronia, and
affirming withal, that in due acknowledgement, how greatly he had
transgressed against the laws of friendship, he thought no other penance
sufficient for him, but only death, which he willingly expected every hour,
and with all his heart would gladly bid welcome.

Gisippus hearing this discourse, and seeing how Titus bitterly wept, in
agonies of most moving afflictions: sat an indifferent while sad and pensive,
as being wounded with affection to Sophronia, but yet in a well-gouerned and
temperate manner. So, without any long delaying, he concluded with himself;
that the life of his friend ought to be accounted much more dear, then any
love he could bear unto Sophronia: And in this resolution, the tears of
Titus forcing his eyes to flow forth like two Fountains, thus he replied.

Titus, if thou had not need of comfort, as plainly I see thou have, I would
justly complain of thee to my self, as of the man who has violated our
friendship, in keeping thine extreamitie so long time concealed from me, which
has been ouer-tedious for thee to endure. And although it might seem to thee
a dishonest case, and therefore kept from the knowledge of thy friend, yet I
plainly tell thee, that dishonest courses (in the league of amity) deserve no
more concealment, then those of the honestest nature. But leaving these
impertinent wanderings, let us come to them of much greater necessity.

If thou do earnestly love fair Sophronia, who is betroathed and affianced
to me, it is no matter for me to marvel at: but I should rather be much
abashed, if thou could not intyrely affect her, knowing how beautiful she
is, and the nobility of her mind, being as able to sustain passion, as the
thing pleasing is fullest of excellence. And look how reasonably thou fanciest
Sophronia, as unjustly thou complainest of thy fortune, in ordaining her to be
my wife, although thou do not speak it expressly: as being of opinion, that
thou might with more honesty love her, if she were any others, then mine. But
if thou art so wise, as I have always held thee to be, tell me truly upon thy
faith, to whom could Fortune better guide her, and for which thou ought to
be more thankful, then in bestowing her on me? Any other that had enjoyed her,
although thy love were never so honest, yet he would better affect her
himself, then for thee, which thou can not (in like manner) look for from
me, if thou do account me for thy friend, and as constant now as ever.

Reason is my warrant in this case, because I cannot remember, since first our
entrance into friendship, that ever I enjoyed any thing, but it was as much
thine, as mine. And if our affairs had such an equal course before, as
otherwise they could not subsist; must they not now be kept in the same manner?
Can any thing more perticularly appertain to me, but thy right therein is as
absolute as mine? I know not how thou may esteem of my friendship, if in any
thing concerning my self, I can plead my privilege to be above thine. True it
is, that Sophronia is affianced to me, and I love her dearly, daily expecting
when our nuptials shall be celebrated. But seeing thou do more fervently
affect her, as being better able to judge of the perfections, remaining in so
excellent a creature as she is, then I do: assure thy self, and believe it
constantly, that she shall come to my bed, not as my wife, but only thine. And
therefore leave these despairing thoughts, shake off this cloudy disposition,
reassume thy former Iouiall spirit, with comfort and what else can content
thee: in expectation of the happy hour, and the just requital of thy long,
loving, and worthy friendship, which I have always valued equal with mine
own life.

Titus hearing this answer of Gisippus, look how much the sweet hope of that
which he desired gave him pleasure, as much both duty and reason affronted him
with shame; setting before his eyes this du consideration, that the greater the
liberality of Gisippus was, far greater and unreasonable it appeared to him
in disgrace, if he should unmannerly accept it. Wherefore, being unable to
refrain from tears, and with such strength as his weakness would give leave,
thus he replied.

Gisippus, thy bounty and firm friendship suffers me to see apparently, what
(on my part) is no more then ought to be done. All the Gods forbid, that I
should receive as mine, her whom they have adjudged to be thine, by true
respect of birth and desert. For if they had thought her a wife fit for me, do
not thou or any else imagine, that ever she should have been granted to thee.
Use freely therefore thine own election, and the gracious favor wherewith
they have blessed thee: leave me to consume away in tears, a mourning garment
by them appointed for me, as being a man unworthy of such happiness; for
either I shall conquer this disaster, and that will be my crown, or else will
vanquish me, and free me from all pain: whereto Gisippus presently thus
answered.

Worthy Titus, if our amity would give me so much license, as but to contend
with my self, in pleasing thee with such a thing as I desire, and could also
induce thee therein to be directed: it is the only end whereat I aim, and am
resolved to pursue it. In which regard, let my persuasions prevail with thee,
and thereto I conjure thee, by the faith of a friend, suffer me to use mine
authority, when it extends both to mine own honor, and thy good, for I will
have Sophronia to be only thine. I know sufficiently, how far the forces of
love do extend in power, and am not ignorant also, how not once or twice, but
very many times, they have brought lovers to unfortunate ends, as now I see
thee very near it, and so far gone, as thou art not able to turn back
again, nor yet to conquer thine own tears, but proceeding on further in this
extremity, thou will be left vanquished, sinking under the burden of loves
tyrannical oppression, and then my turn is next to follow thee. And
therefore, had I no other reason to love thee, yet because thy life is dear to
me, in regard of mine own depending thereon; I stand the nearer thereto
obliged. For this cause, Sophronia must and shall be thine, for thou can not
find any other so conform to thy fancy: albeit I who can easily convert my
liking to another wife, but never to have the like friend again, shall hereby
content both thee, and my self.

Yet perhaps this is not a matter so easily done, or I to express such
liberality therein, if wives were to be found with the like difficulty, as
true and faithful friends are: but, (being able to recover another wife)
though never such a worthy friend; I rather choose to change, I do not say
loose her (for in giving her to thee, I loose her not my self) and by this
change, make that which was good before, ten times better, and so preserve
both thee and my self. To this end therefore, if my prayers and persuasions
have any power with thee, I earnestly entreat thee, that, by freeing thy self
out of this affliction, thou will (in one instant) make us both truly
comforted, and dispose thy self (living in hope) to embrace that happiness,
which the fervent love thou bear to Sophronia, has justly deserved.

Now although Titus was confounded with shame, to yield consent, that Sophronia
should be accepted as his wife, and used many obstinate resistances: yet
notwithstanding, Love pleading on the one side powerfully, and Gisippus as
earnestly persuading on the other, thus he answered. Gisippus, I know not what
to say, neither how to behave my self in this election, concerning the fitting
of mine contentment, or pleasing thee in thy importunate persuasion. But seeing
thy liberality is so great, as it surmounteth all reason or shame in me, I will
yield obedience to thy more then noble nature. Yet let this remain for thine
assurance, that I do not receive this grace of thine, as a man not
sufficiently understanding, how I enjoy from thee, not only her whom most of
all I do affect, but also do hold my very life of thee. Grant then you
greatest Gods (if you be the Patrones of this mine unexpected felicity) that
with honor and due respect, I may hereafter make apparently known: how highly
I acknowledge this thy wonderful favor, in being more merciful to me, then I
could be to my self.

For abridging of all further circumstances, answered Gisippus, and for easier
bringing this matter to full effect, I hold this to be our only way. It is not
unknown to thee, how after much discourse had between my kindred, and those
belonging to Sophronia, the matrimonial conjunction was fully agreed on, and
therefore, if now I shall fly off, and say, I will not accept thee as my wife:
great scandal would arise thereby, and make much trouble among our friends,
which could not be greatly displeasing to me, if that were the way to make her
thine. But I rather stand in fear, that if I forsake her in such peremptory
sort, her kindred and friends will bestow her on some other, and so she is
utterly lost, without all possible means of recovery. For prevention therefore
of all sinister accidents, I think it best, (if thy opinion iumpe with mine)
that I still pursue the business, as already I have begun, having thee always
in my company, as my dearest friend and only associate. The nuptials being
performed with our friends, in secret manner at night (as we can cunningly
enough contriue it) thou shall have her maiden honor in bed, even as if she
were thine own wife. Afterward, in apt time and place, we will publicly make
known what is done; if they take it well, we will be as iocond as they: if
they frown and wax offended, the deed is done, ouer-late to be recalled, and
so perforce they must rest contented.

You may well imagine, this advise was not a little pleasing to Titus, whereupon
Gisippus received home Sophronia into his house, with public intention to make
her his wife, according as was the custom then observed, and Titus being
perfectly recovered, was present at the Feast very ceremonially observed. When
night was come, the Ladies and Gentlewomen conducted Sophronia to the
Bride-chamber, where they lest her in her Husbands bed, and then departed all
away. The Chamber wherein Titus used to lodge, joined close to that of
Gisippus, for their easier access each to the other, at all times whenever
they pleased, and Gisippus being alone in the Bride-chamber, preparing as if he
were coming to bed: extinguishing the light, he went softly to Titus, willing
him to go to bed to his wife. Which Titus hearing, overcome with shame and
fear, became repentant, and denied to go. But Gisippus, being a true intyre
friend indeed, and confirming his words with actions: after a little lingering
dispute, sent him to the Bride, and so soon as he was in the bed with her,
taking Sophronia gently by the hand, softly he moved the usual question to
her, namely, if she were willing to be his wife.

She believing verily that he was Gisippus, modestly answered. Sir, I have
chosen you to be my Husband, reason requires then, that I should be willing to
be your wife. At which words, a costly Ring, which Gisippus used daily to
wear, he put upon her finger, saying. With this Ring, I confess my self to
be your Husband, and bind you (for ever) my Spouse and Wife; no other kind of
marriage was observed in those days, and so he continued all the night with
her, she never suspecting him to be any other then Gisippus, and thus was the
marriage consumated, between Titus and Sophronia, albeit the friends (on
either side) thought otherwise.

By this time, Publius, the father of Titus, was departed out of this mortal
life, and letters came to Athens, that with all speed he should return to
Rome, to take order for occasions there concerning him; wherefore he concluded
with Gisippus about his departure, and taking Sophronia thither with him, which
was no easy matter to be done, until it were first known, how occasions had
bin carried among them. Whereupon, calling her one day into her Chamber, they
told her entirely, how all had past, which Titus confirmed substantially, by
such direct passages between themselves, as exceeded all possibility of
denial, and moved in her much admiration; looking each on other very
discontentedly, she heavily weeping and lamenting, and greatly complaining of
Gisippus, for wronging her so unkindly.

But before any further noise was made in the house, she went to her Father,
to whom, as also to her Mother, she declared the whole treachery, how much
both they and their other friends were wronged by Gisippus, auouching her self
to be the wife of Titus, and not of Gisippus, as they supposed. These news
were highly displeasing to the Father of Sophronia, who with her kindred, as
also those of Gisippus, made great complaints to the Senate, very dangerous
troubles and commotions arising daily between them, drawing both Gisippus and
Sophronia into harsh reports; he being generally reputed, not only worthy of
all bitter reproof, but also the seuerest punishment. Nevertheless, he
maintained publicly what he had done, auouching it for an act both of honor
and honesty, wherewith Sophronia's friends had no reason to be offended, but
rather to take it in very thankful part, having married a man of far greater
worth and respect, than himself was, or could be.

On the other side, Titus hearing these uncivil acclamations, became much
moved and provoked at them, but knowing it was a custom observed among the
Greeks, to be so much the more hurried away with rumors and threatenings, as
less they find them to be answered, and when they find them, show themselves
not only humble enough, but rather as base men, and of no courage; he resolved
with himself, that their braueries were no longer to be endured, without some
some bold and manly answer. And having a Roman heart, as also an Athenian
understanding, by politic persuasions, he caused the kindred of Gisippus and
Sophronia, to be assembled in a Temple, and himself coming thither,
accompanied with none but Gisippus only, he began to deliver his mind before
them all, in this manner following.

The Oration uttered by Titus Quintus Fuluius, in the hearing of the Athenians,
being the kindred and friends to Gisippus and Sophronia.
MAny Philosophers do hold opinion, that the actions performed by mortal men,
do proceed from the disposing and ordination of the immortal gods. Whereupon
some do maintain, that things which be done, or never are to be done, proceed
of necessity: howbeit some other do hold, that this necessity is only
referred to things done. Both which opinions (if they be considered with mature
judgment) do most manifestly approve, that they who reprehend any thing which
is irreuocable, do nothing else but show themselves, as if they were wiser
then the Gods, who we are to believe, that with perpetual reason, and void of
any error, do dispose and govern both us, and all our actions; In which
respect, how foolish and beast-like a thing it is, presumptuously to check or
control their operations, you may very easily consider; and likewise, how
justly they deserve condign punishment, who suffer themselves to be
transported in so temerarious a manner.

In which notorious transgression, I understand you all to be guilty, if
common fame speak truly, concerning the marriage of my self and Sophronia,
whom you imagined as given to Gisippus; for you never remember that it was so
ordained from eternity, she to be mine, and no Wife for Gisippus, as at this
instant is made manifest by full effect. But because the kind of speaking,
concerning divine providence, and intention of the Gods, may seem a difficult
matter to many, and somewhat hard to be understood: I am content to
presuppose, that they meddle not with any thing of ours, and will only stay my
self on humane reasons, and in this nature of speech, I shall be enforced to
do two things, quite contrary to my natural disposition. The one is, to
speak somewhat in praise and commendation of my self: And the other, justly
to blame and condemn other men's seeming estimation. But because both in the
one and the other, I do not intend to swerue a jot from the Truth, and the
necessity of the present case in question, does not only require, but also
command it, you must pardon what I am to say.

Your complaints do proceed, rather from fury then reason, and (with
continual murmurings, or rather seditious) slander, backe-bite and condemn
Gisippus, because (of his own free will and noble disposition) he gave her to
be my Wife, whom (by your election) was made his; wherein I account him most
highly praiseworthy: and the reasons inducing me thereunto, are these. The
first, because he has performed no more then what a friend ought to do: And
the second, in regard he has dealt more wisely, then you did. I have no
intention, to display (at this present) what the sacred law of amity
requires, to be acted by one friend toward another, it shall suffice me
only to inform you, that the league of friendship (far stronger then the
bond of blood and kindred) confirmed us in our election of either at the first,
to be true, loyal and perpetual friends; whereas that of kindred, comes
only by fortune or chance. And therefore if Gisippus affected more my life,
then your benevolence, I being ordained for his friend, as I confess my self
to be; none of you ought to wonder thereat, in regard it is no matter of
marvel.

But let us come now to our second reason, wherein, with far greater instance
I will show you, that he has (in this occasion) shown himself to be much
more wise, then you did, or have done: because it plainly appears, that you
have no feeling of the divine providence, and much less knowledge in the
effects of friendship. I say, that your foresight, council and deliberation,
gave Sophronia to Gisippus, a young Gentleman, and a Philosopher: Gisippus
likewise has given her to a young Gentleman, and a Philosopher, as himself is.
Your discretion gave her to an Athenian; the gift of Gisippus, is to a Roman.
Yours, to a Noble and honest man; that of Gisippus, to one more Noble by race,
and no less honest then himself. Your judgment has bestowed her on a rich
young man: Gisippus has given her to one far richer. Your wisdom gave her
to one who not only loved her not, but also one that had no desire to know
her: Gisippus gave her unto him, who, above all felicity else, yea, more than
his own life, both entirely loved and desired her.

Now, for proof of that which I have said, to be most true and infallible, and
that his deed deserves to be much more commended then yours, let it be
duly considered on, point by point. That I am a young man and a Philosopher,
as Gisippus is; my years, face, and studies, without seeking after further
proof, does sufficiently testify: One selfsame age is both his and mine, in
like quality of course have we lived and studied together. True it is, that
he is an Athenian, and I am a Roman. But if the glory of these two Cities
should be disputed on: then let me tell you, that I am of a City that is
Francke and Free, and he is of a Tributarie City. I say, that I am of a
City, which is chief Lady and Mistress of the whole World, and he is of a
City subject to mine. I say that I am of a City, that is strong in Arms,
Empire, and studies: whereas his can commend it self but for Studies only.
And although you seem here to be a Scholar, in appearance mean enough, yet
I am not descended of the simplest stock in Rome.

My houses and public places, are filled with the ancient Statues of my
Predecessors, and the Annals record the infinite triumphs of the Quintij,
brought home by them into the Roman Capitole, and years cannot eat out the
glory of our name, but it will live and flourish to all posterity.

Modest shame makes me silent in my wealth and possessions, my mind truly
telling me, that honest contented poverty, is the most ancient and richest
inheritance, of our best and Noblest Romans, which opinion, if it be
condemned by the understanding of the ignorant multitude, and herein we shall
give way to them by preferring riches and worldly treasures, then I can say
that I am abundantly provided, not as ambitious, or greedily covetous, but
sufficiently stored with the goods of Fortune.

I know well enough, that you held it as a desired benefit, Gisippus being a
Native of your City; should also be linked to you by alliance: but I know no
reason, why I should not be as near and dear to you at Rome, as if I lived
with you here. Considering, when I am there, you have a ready and well wishing
friend, to stead you in all beneficial and serviceable offices, as careful
and provident for your support, yea, a protector of you and your affairs, as
well public as particular. Who is it then, not transported with partial
affection, that can (in reason) more approve your act, then that which my
friend Gisippus has done? Questionless, not any one, as I think. Sophronia
is married to Titus Quintus Fuluius, a Noble Gentleman by antiquity, a rich
Citizen of Rome, and (which is above all) the friend of Gisippus: therefore,
such a one as thinks it strange, is sorry for it, or would not have it to be;
knows not what he does.

Perhaps there may be some, who will say, they do not so much complain, that
Sophronia is the wife to Titus; but of the manner whereby it was done, as being
made his wife secretly, and by theft, not any of her parents, kindred or friends
called thereto: no, nor so much as advertised thereof Why Gentlemen, this is no
miraculous thing, but heretofore has oftentimes happened, and therefore no
novelty.

I cannot count unto you, how many there have been, who (against the will of
their Fathers) have made choice of their husbands; nor them that have fled away
with their lovers into strange Countries, being first friends, before they were
wives: nor of them who have sooner made testimony of marriage by their
bellies, then those ceremonies due to matrimony, or publication thereof by the
tongue; so that mere necessity and constraint, has forced the parents to
yield consent: which has not so happened to Sophronia, for show was given to
me by Gisippus discreetly, honestly, and orderly.

Others also may say, that she is married to him, to whom it belonged no to
marry her. These complaints are foolish, and womanish, proceeding from very
little, or no consideration at all. In these days of ours, Fortune makes no
use of novel or inconsiderate means, whereby to bring matters to their
determined effect. Why should it offend me, if a Cobbler, rather than a
Scholar, has ended a business of mine, either in private or public, if the
end be well made? Well I may take order, if the Cobbler be indiscreet, that he
meddle no more with any matters of mine, yet I ought, in courtesy, to thank
him for that which he did.

In like mauner, if Gisippus has married Sophronia well, it is foolish and
superfluous, to find fault with the manner he used in her marriage. If you
mislike his course in the case, beware of him hereafter, yet thank him because
it is no worse.

Nevertheless, you are to understand, that I sought not by fraud or deceit,
(but only by wit) any opportunity, whereby any way to sullie the honesty
and clear Nobility of your blood, in the person of Sophronia: for although in
secret I made her my wife, yet I came not as an enemy, to take her perforce,
nor (like a rauisher) wronged her virginity, to blemish your noble titles, or
despising your alliance. But fervently, enflamed by her bright beauty, and
incited also by her unparalleled virtues, I shaped my course; knowing well
enough, that if I took the ordinary way of wiuing, by moving the question to
you, I should never win your consent, as fearing, lest I would take her with
me to Rome, and so conneigh out of your sight, a Jewel by you so much
esteemed, as she is.

For this, and no other reason, did I presume to use the secret cunning which
now is openly made known unto you: and Gisippus disposed himself thereunto,
which otherwise he never determined to have done, in contracting the marriage
for me, and she consenting to me in his name.

Moreover, albeit most earnestly I affected her, I sought to procure your
union, not like a lover, but as a true husband, nor would I immodestly touch
her, till first (as her self can testify) with the words becoming wedlock,
and the Ring also I espoused her, demanding of her, if she would accept me as
her husband, and she answered me, with her full consent. Wherein, if it may
seem that she was deceived, I am not any way to be blamed, but she, for not
demanding, what, and who I was.

This then is the great evil, the great offense, and the great injury
committed by my friend Gisippus, and by me as a Lover: that Sophronia is
secretly become the wife of Titus Quintus Fuluius. And for this cause, like
spies you watch him, threaten him daily, as if you intended to tear him in
pieces. What could you do more, if he had given her to a man of the very
vilest condition? to a villain, to a slave? What prisons? what fetters? Or
what torments are sufficient for this fact? But leaving these frivolous
matters, let us come to discourse of more moment, and better beseeming your
attention.

The time is come, that I may no longer continue here, because Publius my
Father is dead, and I must needs return to Rome, wherefore being minded to
take Sophronia thither with me, I was the more willing to acquaint you
therewith, as also what else I have said, which otherwise had still been
concealed from you. Nor can you but take it in good part, if you be wise, and
rest well contented with what is done: considering, if I had any intention
either to deceive, or otherwise wrong you; I could have basely left her, and
made a scorn both of her and you, you not having any power to stay me here.
But the Gods will never permit that any courageous Roman, should ever
conceive so vile and degenerate a thought.

Sophronia, by ordination of the Gods, by force of humane Laws, and by the
laudable consent of my friend Gisippus, as also the powerful command of Love
is mine. But you perchance, imagining your selves to be wiser then the Gods, or
any other men whatsoever; may think ill of it, and more brutishly then beasts,
condemn their working in two kinds, which would be offensive to me. The one
is, your detaining of Sophronia from me, of whom you have no power, but what
pleases me. The other, is your bitter threatenings against Gisippus my dear
friend, to whom you are in duty obliged. In both which cases, how vnreasonablie
soever you carry your selves, I intend not at this time to press any further.
But rather let me counsel you like a friend, to cease your hatred and
disdain, and suffer Sophronia to be delivered me, that I may depart
contentedly from you as a kinsman, and (being absent) remain your friend:
assuring you, that whether what is done shall please or displease you, if you
purpose to proceed any otherwise: I will take Gisippus along with me, and when
I come to Rome, take such sure order, to fetch her hence, who in Justice is
mine, even in mere despite of you all, and then you shall feel by sound
experience, how powerful is the just indignation of the wronged Romans.

WHen Titus had thus concluded his Oration, he arose with a stern and
discontented countenance, and took Gisippus by the hand, plainly declaring,
that he made small account of all the rest that were in the Temple; and shaking
his head at them, rather menaced then any other wise seemed to care for them.

They which tarried, when they were gone, considering partly on the reasons
alleged by Titus, and partly terrified by his latest speeches; became
induced, to like well of his alliance and amity, as (with common consent) they
concluded: that it was much better to accept Titus as their kinsman (seeing
Gisippus had made manifest refusal thereof) than to lose the kindred of the
one, and procure the hatred of the other. Wherefore they went to seek Titus,
and said unto him, they were very well contented that Sophronia should be his
Wife, he their dear and loving kinsman, and Gisippus to remain their much
respected friend. And embracing one another, making a solemn feast, such as in
the like cases is necessarily required, they departed from him, presently
sending Sophronia to him, who making a virtue of necessity, converted her love
(in short time after) to Titus, in as effectual manner, as formerly she had
done to Gisippus, and so was sent away with him to Rome, where she was received
and welcomed with very great honor.

Gisippus remaining still at Athens, in small regard of either theirs or his
own friends: not long after by means of sundry troublesome Citizens; and
partialities happening among the common people, was banished from Athens, and
he, as also all his family, condemned to perpetual exile: during which
tempestuous time, Gisippus was become not only wretchedly poor, but wandered
abroad as a common beggar; in which miserable condition he traveled to Rome,
to try if Titus would take any acknowledgement of him. Understanding that he
was living, and one most respected among the Romans, as being a great
Commander and a Senator: he enquired for the place where he dwelt, and going
to be near about his house, stayed there so long, till Titus came home, yet
not daring to manifest himself, or speak a word to him, in regard of his
poor and miserable estate, but strove to have him see him, to the end, that
he might acknowledge and call him by his name; notwithstanding, Titus passed
by him without either speech, or looking on him. Which when Gisippus perceived,
and making full account, that (at the least) he would remember him, in regard
of former courtesies, done to him: confounded with grief and desperate
thoughts, he departed thence, never meaning to see him any more.

Now, in regard it was night, he having eaten nothing all that day, nor
provided of one penny to buy him any food, wandered he knew not whether,
desiring rather to die than live; he came at last to an old ruinous part of
the City, ouer-spred with briers and bushes, and seldom resorted unto by any:
where finding a hollow Cave or vault, he entered into it, meaning there to wear
away the comfortless night, and laying himself down on the hard ground,
almost stark naked, and without any warm garments, ouer-wearied with weeping,
at last he fell into a sleep.

It fortuned that two men, who had been abroad the same night, committing
thefts and robberies together; somewhat very early in the morning, came to the
same Cave, intending there to share and divide their booties, and difference
happening between them about it, he that was the stronger person, slew there
the other, and then went away with the whole purchase.

Gisippus having heard and seen the manner of this accident, was not a little
joyful, because he had now found a way to death, without laying any violent
hand on himself; for life being very loathsome to him, it was his only desire
to die. Wherefore, he would not budge from the place, but tarried there so long,
till the Sergeants and Officers of Justice (by information of him that did the
deed) came thither well attended, and furiously led Gisippus thence to
prison.

Being examined concerning this bloody fact, he plainly confessed, that he
himself had committed the murder, and afterward would not depart from the
Cave, but purposely stayed for apprehension, as being truly touched with
compunction for so foul an offense: upon which peremptory confession, Marcus
Varro being then Praetor, gave sentence that he should be crucified on a
Cross, as it was the usual manner of death in those days. Titus chancing to
come at the same time into Praetorium, advisedly beholding the face of the
condemned man (as he sat upon the bench) knew him to be Gysippus, not a
little wondering at this strange accident, the poverty of his estate, and what
occasion should bring him thither, especially in the questioning for his life,
and before the Tribunal of Justice.

His soul earnestly thirsting, by all possible means to help and defend him,
and no other course could now be taken for safety of his life, but by accusing
himself, to excuse and clear the other of the crime: he stepped from off the
judgment bench, and crouding through the throng to the Bar, called out to
the Praetor in this manner. Marcus Varro, recall thy sentence given on the
condemned man sent, away because he is truly guiltless and innocent: With
one bloody blow have I offended the Gods, by killing that wretched man, whom
the Serieants found this morning slain, wherefore Noble Praetor, let no
innocent man's blood be shed for it, but only mine that have offended.

Marcus Varro stood like a man confounded with admiration, being very sorry,
for that which the whole assistants had both seen and heard, yet he could not
(with honor) desist from what must needs be done, but would perform the Laws
severe iniunction. And sending for condemned ^isippus back again, in the
presence of Titus, thus he spoke to him. How becamest thou so madly incensed,
as (without any torment inflicted on thee) to confess an offense by thee never
committed? Art thou weary of thy life? Thou chargest thy self falsely, to be
the person who this last night murdered the man in the Cave, and there is
another that voluntarily also does confess his guiltiness.

Gisippus lifting up his eyes, and perceiving it was Titus, conceived
immediately, that he had done this only for his deliverance, as one that
remembered him sufficiently, and would not be ungrateful for former kindnesses
received. Wherefore, the tears flowing abundantly down his cheeks, he said to
the Judge Varro, it was none but I that murdered the man, wherefore, I
commiserate the case of this Noble Gentleman Titus, who speaks now too late
for the safety of my life. Titus on the other side, said. Noble Praetor, this
man (as thou see) is a stranger here, and was found without any weapon, fast
asleep by the dead body: thou may then easily perceive, that merely the
miserable condition wherein he is, has made him desperate, and he would make
mine offense the occasion of his death. Absolve him, and send me to the Cross,
for none but I have deserved to die for this fact.

Varro was amazed, to observe with what earnest instance each of them strove to
excuse the other, which half persuaded him in his soul, that they were both
guiltless. And as he was starting up, with full intent to acquaint them: a
young man, who had stood there all this while, and observed the hard pleading on
either side; he crowded into the Bar, being named Publius Ambustus, a fellow
of lewd life, and utterly out of hopes, as being debauched in all his fortunes,
and known among the Romans to be a notorious thief, who verily had
committed the murder. Well knew his conscience, that none of them were guilty
of the crime, wherewith each so wilfully charged himself: being therefore
truly touched with remorse, he stepped before Marcus Varro, saying.

Honorable Praetor, mine own horrid and abominable actions, have induced me
thus to intrude my self, for clearing the strict contention between these two
persons. And questionless, some God or greater power, has tormented my
wretched soul, and so compunctually solicited me, as I cannot choose, but make
open confession of my sin. Here therefore, I do apparently publish, that
neither of these men is guilty of the offense, wherewith so wilfully each
charge himself. I am the villain, who this morning murdered the man in the
Cave, one of no greater honesty then my self, and seeing this poor man lie
there sleeping, while we were dividing the stolen booties between us; I slew
my Companyon, because I would be the sole possessor. As for Noble Lord Titus,
he had no reason thus to accuse himself, because is a man of no such base
quality: let them both then be delivered, and inflict the sentence of death on
me.

Octauius Caesar, to whom tidings was brought of this rare accident, commanding
them al three to be brought before him; would needs understand the whole
History, in every particular as all had happened, which was substantially
related to him. Whereupon, Octauius pleased them all three: the two noble
friends, because they were innocent, and the third, for openly revealing the
very truth.

Titus took home with him his friend Gisippus, and after he had sharply
reproved him for his distrust, and cold credence of his friendship: he brought
him to Sophronia, who welcomed him as lovingly, as if he had bin her natural
borne brother, bemoaning his hard and disastrous fortune, and taking especial
care, to convert all passed distresses, into as happy and comfortable a change,
fitting him with garments and attendants, beseeming his degree both in Nobility
and virtue* Titus, out of his honorable bounty, imparted half his lands and
rich possessions to him, and afterward gave him in marriage, his own Sister, a
most beautiful Lady, named Fuluia, saying to him beside. My dear friend
Gisippus, it remains now in thine own election, whether thou will live live
here still with me, or return back to Athens, with all the wealth which I
have bestowed on thee. But Gisippus, being one way constrained, by the sentence
of banishment from his native City, and then again, in regard of the constant
love, which he bare to so true and thankful friend as Titus was: concluded to
live there as a loyal Roman, where he with his Fuluia, and Titus with his
fair Sophronia, lived long after together in one and the same house,
augmenting daily (if possible it might be) their amity beyond all other
equalizing.

A most sacred thing therefore is cordial amity, worthy not only of singular
reverence, but also to be honored with eternal commendation, as being the
only wise Mother of all magnificence and honesty, the Sister of Charity and
Gratitude, the enemy to hatred and avarice, and which is always ready (without
attending to be requested) to extend all virtuous actions to others, which she
would have done to her self. Her rare and divine effects, in these contrary
times of ours, are not to be found between two such persons, which is a mighty
fault, and greatly checketh the miserable covetousness of men, who respecting
nothing but only their particular benefit; have banished true Amity, to the
utmost confines of the whole earth, and sent her into perpetual exile.

What love, what wealth, or affinity of kindred, could have made Gisippus feel
(even in the intyrest part of his soul) the fervent compassion, the tears,
the sighs of Titus, and with such efficacy as plainly appeared: to make him
consent, that his fair elected Spouse, by him so dearly esteemed, should
become the wife of his Companion, but only the precious league of Amity? What
Laws, what threatenings, what fears, could cause the young arms of Gisippus to
abstain embraces, betaking himself to solitary walks, and obscure places,
when in his own bed, he might have enjoyed so matchless a beauty (who
perhaps desired it so much as himself) but only the gracious title of Amity?
What greatness, what merits or precedence, could cause Gisippus not to care,
for the loss of his kindred, those of Sophronia, yea, of Sophronia her self,
not respecting the dishonest murmurings of base minded people, their vile and
contemptible language, scorns and mockeries, and all to content and satisfy a
friend, but only Divine Amity?

Come now likewise to the other side. What occasions could compel Noble Titus,
so promptly and deliberatly, to procure his own death, to rescue his friend
from the cross, and inflict the pain and shame upon himself, pretending not
see or know Gisippus at all, had it not bin wrought by powerful Amity? What
cause else could make Titus so liberal, in dividing (with such willingness)
the larger part of his patrimony to Gisippus, when Fortune had dispossessed him
of his own, but only heauen-borne Amity? What else could have procured Titus,
without any further dilation, fear or suspicion, to give his Sister Fuluia in
marriage to Gisippus, when he saw him reduced to such extreme poverty,
disgrace and mi^ery, but only infinite Amity? To what end do men care then,
to covet and procure great multitudes of kindred, store of brethren, numbers of
children, and to increase (with their own monyes) plenty of servants: when by
the least loss and damage happening, they forget all duty to Father, Brother,
or Master? Amity and true friendship is of a quite contrary nature, satisfying
(in that sacred bond) the obligation due to all degrees, both of parentage, and
all alliences else.

Saladine, the great Sultan of Babylon, in the habit of a Merchant, was
houourably received and welcomed, into the house of Signior Thorello d'Istria.
Who traveling to the Holy Land, prefixed a certain time to his Wife, for his
return back to her again, wherein, if he failed, it was lawful for her to
take another Husband. By clouding himself in the disguise of a Faulkner, the
Sultan took notice of him, and did him many great honors. Afterward, Thorello
falling sick, by Magical Art, he was conueighed in one night to Pauia, when
his Wife was to be married on the morrow: where making himself known to her,
all was disappointed, and she went home with him to his own house.

The Ninth Novel.
Declaring what an honorable virtue Courtesy is, in them that truly know how
to use them.

MAdame Philomena having concluded her discourse, and the rare acknowledgement,
which Titus made of his esteemed friend Gisippus, extolled justly as it
deserved by all the Company: the King, reserving the last office to Dioneus (as
it was at the first granted him) began to speak thus. Without all question to
the contrary (worthy Ladies) nothing can be more truly said, then what Madame
Philomena, has delivered, concerning Amity, and her complaint in the
conclusion of her Novel, is not without great reason, to see it so slenderly
reverenced and respected (now a days) among all men. But if we had met here in
duty only for correcting the abuses of iniquity, and the maleuolent courses of
this preposterous age; I could proceed further in this just cause of complaint.
But because our end aims at matters of other nature, it comes to my memory
to tell you of a History, which (perhaps) may seem somewhat long, but
altogether pleasant, concerning a magnificent act of great Saladine: to the
end, that by observing those things which you shall hear in my Novel, if we
cannot (by reason of our manifold imperfections) entirely compass the amity of
any one; yet (at least) we may take delight, in stretching our kindness (in
good deeds) so far as we are able, in hope one day after, some worthy reward
will ensue thereon, as thereto justly appertaining.

Let me tell you then, that (as it is affirmed by many) in the time of the
Emperor Frederick, first of that name, the Christians, for the better recovery
of the holy land, resolved to make a general voyage over the Seas. Which being
understood by Saladine, a very worthy Prince, and then Sultan of Babylon: he
concluded with himself, that he would (in person) go see, what preparation
the Christian Potentates made for this War, that he might the better provide
for himself. Having settled all things orderly in Egypt for the business, and
making an outward appearance, as if he purposed a pilgrimage to Mecha: he set
onward on his journey, habited like a Merchant, attended only with two of his
most Noble and wisest Baschaes, and three waiting servants.

When he had visited many Christian Provinces, and was riding through Lombardie,
to pass the mountains; it fortuned, in his iourneying from Millaine to Pauia,
and the day being very far spent, so that night hastened speedily on him: he
met with a Gentleman, named Signior Thorella d'Istria, but dwelling at Pauia,
who with his men, Hawks and Hounds, went to a house of his, seated in a
singular place, and on the River of Ticinum. Signior Thorello seeing such men
making toward him, presently imagined, that they were some Gentle-strangers,
and such he desired to respect with honor.

Wherefore, Saladine demanding of one of Thorelloes men, how far (as then) it
was to Pauia, and whether they might reach thither by such an hour, as would
admit their entrance into the City: Thorello would not suffer his servant to
return the answer, but replied thus himself. Sir (quoth he) you cannot reach
Pauia, but night will abridge you of any entrance there. I beseech you then
Sir, answered Saladine, favor us so much (because we are all strangers in
these parts) as to tell us where we may be well lodged. That shall I Sir, said
Thorello, and very gladly too.

Even at the instant Sir, as we met with you, I had determined in my mind, to
send one of my servants somewhat near to Pauia, about a business concerning
my self: he shall go along with you, and conduct you to a place, where you
will be very well entertained. So, stepping to him, who was of best discretion
amongst his men, he gave order to him what should be done, and sent him with
them. Himself, making have by a far nearer way, caused Supper to be prepared
in worthy manner, and the Tables to be covered in his Garden; and all things
being in good readiness, he sat down at his door, to attend the coming of
his guests. The Seruingman, discoursing with the Gentlemen on diverse occasions,
guided them by such unusual passages, as (before they could discern it) he
brought them to his Masters house; where so soon as Thorello saw them arrived,
he went forth to meet them, assuring them all of most hearty welcome.

Saladine, who was a man of accute understanding, did well perceive, that this
Knight Thorello misdoubted his going with him, if (when he met him) he should
have invited him; and therefore, because he would not be denied, of
entertaining him into his house; he made choice of this kind and honorable
course, which caused him to return this answer. Gentle Sir, if courtesy in
one man to another, do deserve condemning, then may we justly complain of you,
who meeting us upon the way, which you have shortened by your kindness and
which we are no way able to deserve, we are constrained to accept, taking you
to be the mirror of courtesy. Thorello being a Knight of ingenious
apprehension, and well languaged, replied thus.

Gentlemen; this courtesy (seeing you term it so) which you rereceiue of me,
in regard of that justly belonging to you, as your faces do sufficiently
inform me, is matter of very slender account. But assuredly out of Pauia, you
could not have any lodging, deserving to be termed good. And therefore, let it
not be displeasing to you, if you have a little gone forth of the common rode
way, to have your entertainment somewhat bettered, as many trauaylers are
easily induced to do.

Having thus spoken, all the people of the house showed themselves, in
serviceable manner to the Gentlemen, taking their horses as they dismounted,
and Thorello himself, conducted the three Gentlemen, into three several fair
Chambers, which in costly manner were prepared for them, where their boots were
plucked off, fair Napkins with Manchets lay ready, and delicate Wines to
refresh their wearied spirits, much pretty conference being entercoursed, til
Supper time invited them thence.

Saladine, and they that were with him, spoke the Latin tongue very readily,
by which means they were the better understood; and Thorello seemed (in their
judgment) to be the most gracious, complete, and best spoken Gentleman, as
ever they met with in all their journey. It appeared also (on the other side)
to Signiour Thorello, that his guests were men of great merit, and worthy of
much more esteem, then there he could use toward them: wherefore, it did
highly distaste him, that he had no more friends there this night to keep them
company, or himself better provided for their entertainment, which he
intended (on the morrow) to recompense with larger amends at dinner.

Hereupon, having instructed one of his men with what he intended, he sent
him to Pauia, which was not far off (and where he kept no door shut) to his
Wife, named Madam Adialetta; a Woman singularly wise, and of a Noble spirit,
needing little or no direction, especially when she knew her husbands mind. As
they were walking in the Garden, Thorello desired to understand, of whence, and
what they were? Whereto Saladine thus answered. Sir, we are Cyprian Merchants,
coming now from Cyprus, and are travailing to Paris, about affairs of
importance. Now trust me Sir, replied Thorello, I could heartily wish, that
this Country of ours would yield such Gentlemen, as your Cyprus affords
Merchants. So, falling from one discourse unto another, Supper was served in;
and look how best themselves pleased, so they sat at the Table, where (we
need make no doubt) they were respected in honorable order.

So soon as the Tables were withdrawn, Thorello knowing they might be weary,
brought them again to their Chambers, where committing them to their good
rest, himself went to bed soon after. The Servant sent to Pauia, delivered
the message to his Lady; who, not like a woman of ordinary disposition, but
rather truly Royal, sent Thorelloes servants into the City, to make
preparation for a Feast indeed, and with lighted Torches (because it was
somewhat late) they invited the very greatest and noblest persons of the City,
all the rooms being hanged with the richest Ar^s, Clothes of Gold work,
Veluets, Silks, and all other rich adornments, in such manner as her husband
had commanded, and answerable to her own worthy mind, being no way to learn,
in what manner to entertain strangers.

On the morrow morning, the Gentlemen arose, and mounting on horseback with
Signior Thorello, he called for his Hawks and Hounds, brought them to the
River, where he showed two or three fair flights: but Saladine desiring to
know, which was the fairest Hostery in all Pauia, Thorello answered. Gentlemen,
I will show you that my self, in regard I have occasion to ride thither. Which
they believing, were the better contented, and rode on directly unto Pauia,
arriving there about nine of the clock, and thinking he guided them to the
best Inn, he brought them to his own house; where, above fifty of the
worthiest Citizens, stood ready to welcome the Gentlemen, embracing them as
they lighted from their Horses. Which Saladine, and his associates perceiving,
they guessed as it was indeed, and Saladine said. Believe me worthy Thorello,
this is not answerable to my demand; you did too much yester-night, and much
more then we could desire or deserve: Wherefore, you might well be the sooner
discharged of us, and let us travail on our journey.

Noble Gentlemen, replied Thorello (for in mine eye you seem no less) that
courtesy which you met with yester-night, I am to thank Fortune for, more
then you, because you were then straited by such necessity, as urged your
acceptance of my poor Country house. But now this morning, I shall account my
self much beholding to you (as the like will all these worthy Gentlemen here
about you) if you do but answer kindness with kindness, and not refuse to take a
homely dinner with them.

Saladine and his friends, being conquered with such potent persuasions, and
already dismounted from their horses, saw that all denial was merely in vain:
and therefore thankfully condiscen^ing (after some few ceremonious complements
were ouer-past) the Gentlemen conducted them to their Chambers, which were most
sumptuously prepared for them, and having laid aside their riding garments,
being a little refreshed with Cakes and choice Wines; they descended into the
dining Hall, the pomp whereof I am not able to report.

When they had washed, and were seated at the Tables, dinner was served in most
magnificent sort; so that if the Emperor himself had bin there, he could not
have bin more sumptuously served. And although Saladine and his Baschaes were
very Noble Lords, and wonted to see matters of admiration: yet could they do no
less now, but rather exceeded in marvel, considering the quality of the
Knight, whom they knew to be a Citizen, and no Prince or great Lord. Dinner
being ended, and diverse familiar conferences passing amongst them: because it
was exceeding hot, the Gentlemen of Pauia (as it pleased, Thorello to appoint)
went to repose themselves awhile, and he keeping company with his three guests,
brought them into a goodly Chamber, where, because he would not fail in the
least scruple of courtesy, or conceal from them the richest Jewel which he
had; he sent for his Lady and wife, because (as yet) they had not seen her.

She was a Lady of extraordinary beauty, tall stature, very sumptuously
attired, and having two sweet Sons (resembling Angels) she came with them
waiting before her, and graciously saluted her guests. At her coming, they
arose, and having received her with great reverence, they seated her in the
midst, kindly cherishing the two Children. After some gracious Language past on
either side, she demanded of whence, and what they were, which they answered in
the same kind as they had done before to her husband. Afterward, with a modest
smiling countenance, she said. Worthy Gentlemen, let not my weak Womanish
discretion appear distastable, in desiring to crave one especial favor from
you, namely, not to refuse or disdain a small gift, wherewith I purpose to
present you. But considering first, that women (according to their simple
faculty) are able to bestow but silly gifts: so you would be pleased, to
respect more the person that is the giver, then the quality or quantity of the
gift.

Then causing to be brought (for each of them) two goodly gowns or Robes (made
after the Persian manner) the one lyned thorough with cloth of Gold, and the
other with the costlyest Fur; not after such fashion as Citizens or Merchants
use to wear, but rather beseeming Lords of greatest account, and three light
vnder-wearing Cassocks or Mandillions, of Carnatian Satin, richly Imbroidred
with Gold and Pearls, and lined through with White Taffata, presenting these
gifts to him, she said. I desire you Gentlemen to receive these mean trifles,
such as you see my Husband wears the like, and these other beside, considering
you are so far from your Wives, having travailed a long way already, and many
miles more yet to overtake; also Merchants (being excellent men) affect to be
comely and handsome in their habits; although these are of slender value, yet
(in necessity) they may do you service.

Now was Saladine and his Baschaes half astonyed with admiration, at the
magnificent mind of Signiour Thorello, who would not forget the least part of
courtesy toward them, and greatly doubted (seeing the beauty and riches of
the Garments) least they were discovered by Thorello. Nevertheless, one of
them thus answered the Lady. Believe me Madame, these are rich guiftes, not
lightly either to be given, or received: but in regard of your strict
imposition, we are not able to deny them. This being done, with most gracious
and courteous demeanor, she departed from them, leaving her Husband to keep
them still company; who furnished their servants also, with diverse worthy
necessaries fitting for their journey.

Afterward, Thorello (by very much importunity) won them to stay with him
all the rest of the day; wherefore, when they had rested themselves awhile,
being attyred in their newly given robes; they rode on Horseback through the
City. When supper time came, they supt in most honorable and worthy company
being afterward Lodged in most fair and sumptuous Chambers, and being risen
in the morning, in exchange of their ho^ses (ouer-wearied with Travail) they
found three other very richly furnished, and their men also in like manner
provided. Which when Saladine had perceived, he took his Baschaes aside, and
spoke in this manner.

By our greatest Gods, I never met with any man, more complete in all noble
perfections, more courteous and kind then Thorello is. If all the Christian
Kings, in the true and heroical nature of Kings, do deal as honorably as I
see this Knight does, the Soldane of Babylon is not able to endure the coming
of one of them, much less so many, as we see preparing to make head against
us. But beholding, that both refusal and acceptance, was all one in the mind
of Thorello: after much kind Language had bin intercoursed between them,
Saladine (with his Attendants) mounted on horseback.

Signiour Thorello, with a number of his honorable Friends (to the number of
an hundred Horse) accompanied them a great distance from the City, and
although it grieved Saladine exceedingly, to leave the company of Thorello, so
dearly he was affected to him: but necessity (which controlleth the power of
all laws whatsoever) must needs divide them: yet requesting his return again
that way, if possibly it might be granted; which Saladine promised but did not
perform. Well Gentlemen (quoth Thorello at parting) I know not what you are,
neither (against your will) do I desire it: but whether you be Merchants or no,
remember me in your kindness, and so to the heavenly powers I commend you.
Saladine, having taken his leave of all them that were with Thorello, returned
him this answer. Sir, it may one day hereafter so happen, as we shall let you
see some of our Marchandises, for the better confirmation of your belief, and
our profession.

Thus parted Signior Thorello and his friends, from Saladine and his company,
who verily determined in the height of his mind, if he should be spared with
life, and the war (which he expected) concluded: to requite Thorello with no
less courtesy, then he had already declared to him; conferring a long while
after with his Baschaes, both of him and his beauteous Lady, not forgetting any
of their courteous actions, but gracing them all with deserved commendation.
But after they had (with very laborious pains) surueyed most of the Western
parts, they all took Shipping, and returned into Alexandria: sufficiently
informed, what preparation was to be made for their own defense. And Signior
Thorello being come back again to Pauia, consulted with his private thoughts
(many times after) what these three trauailers should be, but came far short
of knowing the truth, till (by experience) he became better informed.

When the time was come, that the Christians were to make their passage, and
wonderful great preparations, in all places performed: Signiour Thorello,
notwithstanding the tears and entreaties of his Wife, determined to be one in
so worthy and honorable a voyage: and having made his provision ready,
nothing wanting but mounting on Horseback, to go where he should take
shipping; to his Wife (whom he most entirely affected) thus he spoke. Madame,
I go as thou see in this famous Voyage, as well for mine Honor, as also the
benefit of my soul; all our goods and possessions, I commit to thy virtuous
care. And because I am not certain of my returning back again, in regard of
a thousand accidents which may happen, in such a Country as I go unto: I
desire only but one favor of thee, whatsoever danger shall befall me;
Namely, when any certain tidings shall be brought me of my death; to stay no
longer before thy second marriage, but one year, one month, and one day; to
begin on this day of my departing from thee.

The Lady, who wept exceedingly, thus answered. Alas Sir: I know not how to
carry my self, in such extremity of grief, as now you leave me; but if my
life surmount the fortitude of sorrow, and whatsoever shall happen to you for
certainty, either life or death: I will live and dye the Wife of Signiour
Thorello, and make my obsequies in his memory only.

Not so Madame (replied her Husband) not so; Be not ouerrash in promising any
thing, albeit I am well assured, that so much as consists in thy strength, I
make no question of thy performance. But consider withal (dear heart) thou
art a young woman, beautiful, of great parentage, and no way thereto inferior
in the blessings of Fortune.

Thy Virtues are many, and universally both divulged and known, in which
respect, I make no doubt; but diverse and sundry great Lords and Gentlemen (if
but the least rumor of my death be noysed) will make suite for thee to thy
parents and brethren, from whose violent solicitings, would thou never so
resolutely make resistance, yet thou can not be able to defend thy self; but
whether thou will or no, thou must yield to please them; and this is the only
reason, why I would tie thee to this limited time, and not one day or minute
longer.

Adalietta, sweetly hugging him in her arms, and melting her self in kisses,
sighs, and tears on his face, said. Well Sir, I will do so much as I am able,
in this your most kind and loving imposition: and when I shall be compelled
to the contrary: yet rest thus constantly assured, that I will not break this
your charge, so much as in thought. Praying ever heartily to the heavenly
powers, that they will direct your course home again to me, before your
prefixed date, or else I shall live in continual languishing. In the knitting
up of this woeful parting, embracing and kissing either infinite times, the Lady
took a Ring from off her finger, and giving it to her husband, said. If I
chance to die before I see you again, remember me when you look on this. He
receiving the Ring, and bidding all the rest of his Friends farewell, mounted
on horseback, and rode away well attended.

Being come unto Geneway, he and his company boorded a Galley, and (in few
days after) arrived at Acres, where they joined themselves with the Christian
Army, wherein there happened a very dangerous mortality: During which time of
so sharp visitation (the cause unknown whence it proceeded) whether thorough
the industry, or rather the good Fortune of Saladine, well-neere all the rest
of the Christians (which escaped death) were surprised his prisoner (without a
blow stricken) and sundred and imprisoned in diverse Towns and Cities.
Amongst the which number of prisoners, it was Signior Thorelloes chance to be
one, and walked in bonds to Alexandria, where being unknown, and fearing least
he should be discovered: constrained thereto merely by necessity, he showed
himself in the condition of a Faulconer; wherein he was very excellently
experienced, and by which means his profession was made known to Saladine, he
delivered out of prison, and created the Soldans Faulconer.

Thorello (whom the Soldane called by no other name, then the Christian,
neither of them knowing the other) sadly now remembered his departure from
Pauia, devising and practicing many times, how he might escape thence, but
could not compass it by any possible means. Wherefore, certain Ambassadors
being sent by the Genewayes, to redeem diverse Citizens of theirs, there
detained as prisoners, and being ready to return home again: he purposed to
write to his Wife, that he was living, and would repair to her so soon as he
could, desiring the still continued rememberance of her limited time. By close
and cunning means he wrote the Letter, earnestly entreating one of the
Ambassadors (who knew him perfectly, but made no outward appearance thereof) to
deal in such sort for him, that the Letter might be delivered to the hands of
the Abbot Di San Pietro ni Ciel d'Oro, who was (indeed) his Uncle.

While Thorello remained in this his Faulconers condition, it fortuned upon a
day, that Saladine, conuersing with him about his Hawks: Thorello chanced to
smile, and used such a kind of gesture or motion with his Lips, which
Saladine (when he was in his house at Pauia) had heedfully observed, and by
this note, instantly he remembered Signior Thorello, and began to eye him very
respectively, persuading himself that he was the same man. And therefore
falling from their former kind of discoursing: Tell me Christian (quoth
Saladine) what Countryman art thou of the West? Sir, answered Signiour
Thorello, I am by Country a Lombard, borne in a City called Pauia, a poor
man, and of as poor condition.

So soon as Saladine had heard these Words; becoming assured in that which
(but now) he doubted, he said within himself. Now the Gods have given me
time, wherein I may make known to this man, how thankefully I accepted his
kind courtesy, and cannot easily forget it. Then, without saying any thing
else, causing his Guard-robe to be set open, he took him with him thither, and
said. Christian, observe well all these Garments, and quicken thy remembrance,
in telling me truly, whether thou have seen any of them before now, or no.
Signiour Thorello looked on them all advisedly, and espied those two especial
Garments, which his wife had given one of the strange Merchants; yet he durst
not credit it, or that possibly it could be the same, nevertheless he said.
Sir, I do not know any of them, but true it is, that these two do resemble
two such Robes, as I was wont to wear my self, and these (or the like) were
given to three Merchants, that happened to visit my poor house.

Now could Saladine contain no longer, but embracing him joyfully in his
arms, he said. You are Signior Thorello d'Istria, and I am one of those three
Merchants, to whom your Wife gave these Roabes: and now the time is come to
give you credible intelligence of my Merchandise, as I promised at my departing
from you, for such a time (I told you) would come at length. Thorello, was both
glad, and bashful together: glad, that he had entertained such a Guest, and
bashfully ashamed, that his welcome had not exceeded in more bountiful manner.
Thorello, replied Saladine, seeing the Gods have sent you so happily to me:
account your self to be soly Lord here, for I am now no more then a private
man.

I am not able to express their counterchanges of courtesy, Saladine
commanding him to be clothed in Royal garments, and brought into the presence
of his very greatest Lords, where having spoken liberally in his due
commendation, he commanded them to honor him as himself, if they expected any
grace or favor from him, which every one did immediately, but (above all the
rest) those two Baschaes, which accompanied Saladine at his house. The
greatness of this pomp and glory, so suddenly thrown on Signior Thorello,
made him half forget all matters of Lomberdie; and so much the rather, because
he had no doubt at all, but that his letters, were safely come to the hands of
his Uncle.

Here I am to tell you, that in the Camp or Army of the Christians, on the day
when Saladine made his surprizall, there was a Provincial Gentleman dead and
buried, who was Signior Thorello de Dignes, a man of very honorable and great
esteem, in which respect (Signior Thorello d'Istria, known throughout the
Army, by his Nobility and valor) whosoever heard that Signior Thorello was
dead: believed it to be Thorello d'Istria, and not he of Dignes, so that
Thorello d'Istriaes unknown surprizall and thraldom, made it also to pass
for an assured truth.

Beside, many Italians returning home, and carrying this report for credible;
some were so audaciously presumptuous, as they avouched upon their oaths, that
not only they saw him dead, but were present at his burial likewise. Which
rumor coming to the ear of his Wife, and likewise to his kindred and hers:
procured a great and grievous mourning among them, and all that happened to
hear thereof.

Guer-tedious time it would require, to relate at large, the public grief
and sorrow, with the continual lamentations of his Wife, who (within some few
months after) became tormented with new marriage solicitings, before she had
half sighed for the first: the very greatest persons of Lomberdie making the
motion, being daily followed and furthered by her own brothers and friends.
Still (drowned in tears) she returned denial, till in the end, when no
contradiction could prevail, to satisfy her parents, and the importunate
pursuers: she was constrained to reveal, the charge imposed on her by her
Husband, which she had vowed infallibly to keep, and till that very time, she
would in no wise consent.

While wooing for a second wedding with Adalietta, proceeded in this manner at
Pauia, it chanced on a day, that Signior Thorello had espied a man in
Alexandria, whom he saw with the Geneway Ambassadors, when they set thence
toward Geneway with their Galleys. And causing him to be sent for, he
demanded of him, the success of the voyage, and when the Galleys arrived at
Geneway; whereto he returned him this answer. My Lord, our Galleys made a very
fatal voyage, as it is (already) too well known in Creete, where my dwelling
is. For when we drew near Sicilie, there suddenly arose a very dangerous
North-West-winde, which drove us on the quicke-Sands of Barbary, where not any
man escaped with life, only my self excepted, but (in the wrack) two of my
brethren perished.

Signior Thorello, giving credit to the man's words, because they were most true
indeed, and remembering also, that the time limited to his Wife, drew near
expiring within very few days, and no news now possibly to be sent thither of
his life, his Wife would questionless be married again: he fell into such a
deep conceited melancholy, as food and sleep forsook him, whereupon, he
kept his bed, setting down his peremptory resolution for death. When Saladine
(who dearly loved him) heard thereof, he came in all haste to see him, and
having (by many earnest persuasions and entreaties) understood the cause of his
melancholy and sickness: he very severely reproved him, because he could no
sooner acquaint him therewith. Many kind and comfortable speeches, he gave him,
with constant assurance, that (if he were so minded) he would so order the
business for him; as he should be at Pauia, by the same time as he had
appointed to his Wife, and revealed to him also the manner how.

Thorello verily believed the Soldanes promise, because he had often heard the
possibility of performance, and others had effected as much, diverse times
elsewhere: whereupon he began to comfort himself, soliciting the Sultan
earnestly that it might be accomplished. Saladine sent for one of his Sorcerers
(of whose skill he had formerly made experience) to take a direct course, how
Signior Thorello should be carried (in one night) to Pauia, and being in his
bed. The Magitian undertook to do it, but, for the Gentleman's more ease, he
must first be possessed with an entraunced dead sleep. Saladine being thus
assured of the deeds full effecting, he came again to Thorello, and finding
him to be settled for Pauia (if possibly it might be accomplished by the
determined time, or else no other expectation but death) he said unto him as
follows.

Signior Thorello, if with true affection you love your Wife, and misdoubt her
marriage to some other man: I protest unto you, by the supreme powers, that you
deserve no reprehension in any manner whatsoever. For, of all the Ladies that
ever I have seen, she is the only woman, whose carriage, virtues, and civil
speaking (setting aside beauty, which is but a fading flower) deserves most
graciously to be respected, much more to be affected in the highest degree. It
were to me no mean favor of our Gods, (seeing Fortune directed your course so
happily hither) that for the short or long time we have to live, we might
reign equally together in these Lingdomes under my subjection. But if such
grace may not be granted me, yet, seeing it stands mainly upon the peril of
your life, to be at Pauia again by your own limited time, it is my chiefest
comfort, that I am therewith acquainted, because I intended to have you
conueighed thither, yea, even into your own house, in such honorable order as
your virtues do justly merit, which in regard it cannot be so conveniently
performed, but as I have already informed you, and as the necessity of the case
vrgently commands; accept it as it may be best accomplished,

Great Saladine (answered Thorella) effects (without words) have already
sufficiently warranted your Gracious disposition toward me, far beyond any
requital remaining in me; your word only being enough for my comfort in this
case, either dying or living. But in regard you have taken such order for my
departure hence, I desire to have it done with all possible expedition, because
to morrow is the very last day, that I am to be absent. Saladine protested that
it should be done, and the same evening in the great Hall of his Palace,
commanded a rich and costly Bed to be set up, the mattras formed after the
Alexandrian manner, of Velvet and cloth Gold, the Quilts, counter-points and
couerings, sumptuously imbroydered with Orient Pearls and Precious Stones,
supposed to be of inestimable value, and two rarely wroug^* Pillowes, such as
best beseemed so stately a Bed, the Curtains and Vallans every way equal to
the other pomp.

Which being done, he commanded that Thorello (who was indifferently recovered)
should be attyred in one of his own sumptuous Saracine Roabes, the very
fairest and richest that ever was seen, and on his head a Maiesticall Turbant,
after the manner of his own wearing, and the hour appearing to be somewhat
late, he with many of his best Baschaes, went to the Chamber where Thorello
was, and sitting down a while by him, in tears thus he spoke. Signior
Thorello, the hour for sundering you and me, is now very near, and because I
cannot bear you company, in regard of the business you go about, and which
by no means will admit it: I am to take my leave of you in this Chamber, and
therefore am purposely come to do it. But before I bid you farewell, let me
entreat you, by the love and friendship confirmed between us, to be mindful
of me, and to take such order (your affairs being fully finished in Lombardie)
that I may once more enjoy the sight of you here, for a mutual solace and
satisfaction of our minds, which are now divided by this urgent have. Till
which may be granted, let me want no visitation of your kind letters,
commanding thereby of me, whatsoever here can possibly be done for you:
assuring your self, no man living can command me as you do.

Signior Thorello could not forbear weeping, but being much hindered thereby,
answered in few words. That he could not possibly forget, his Gracious favors
and extraordinary benefits used toward him, but would accomplish whatsoever
he commanded, according as heaven did enable him.

Hereupon, Saladine embracing him, and kissing his forehead, said. All my Gods
go with you, and guard you from any peril, departing so out of the Chamber
weeping, and his Baschaes (having likewise taken their leave of Thorello)
followed Saladine into the Hall, whereas the Bed stood readily prepared.
Because it waxed very late, and the Magitian also there attending for his
dispatch: the Physician went with the potion to Thorello, and persuading him,
in the way of friendship, that it was only to strengthen him after his great
weakness: he drank it off, being thereby immediately entraunced, and so
presently sleeping, was (by Saladines command) laid on the sumptuous and costly
Bed, whereon stood an Imperial Crown of infinite value, appearing (by a
description engraven on it) that Saladine sent it to Madame Adalietta, the wife
of Thorello. On his finger also he put a Ring, wherein was enchased an
admirable Carbuncle, which seemed like a flaming Torche, the value thereof not
to be estimated. By him likewise he laid a rich sword, with the girdle,
hangers, and other furniture, such as seldom can be seen the like. Then he
laid a Jewel on the Pillow by him, so sumptuously embelished with Pearls and
precious Stones, as might have beseemed the greatest Monarch in the World to
wear. Last of all, on either side of them, he set two great Basins of pure
Gold, full of double ducates, many cords of Orient Pearls, Rings, Girdles, and
other costly Jewels (ouer-tedious to be recounted) and kissing him once more
as he lay in the bed, commanded the Magitian to dispatch and be gone.

Instantly, the bed and Thorello in it, in the presence of Saladine, was
inuisibly carried thence, and while he sat conferring with his Baschaes, the
bed, Signior Thorello, and all the rich Jewels about him, was transported and
set in the Church of San Pietro in Ciel d' Ore in Pauia, according to his own
request, and soundly sleeping, being placed directly before the high Altar.
Afterward, when the bells rung to Mattines, the Sexton entering the Church with
a light in his hand (where he beheld a light of greater splendour) and suddenly
espied the sumptuous bed there standing: not only was he smitten into
admiration, but he ran away also very fearfully. When the Abbot and the
Monks met him thus running into the Cloister, they became amazed, and
demanded the reason why he ran in such haste, which the Sexton told them.
How? quoth the Abbot, thou art no child, or a new-come hither, to be so
easily affrighted in our holy Church, where Spirits can have no power to
walk, God and Saint Peter (we hope) are stronger for us then so: wherefore
turn back with us, and let us see the cause of thy fear.

Having lighted many Torches, the Abbot and his Monks entered with the Sexton
into the Church, where they beheld the wonderful rich bed, and the Knight
lying fast a-sleepe in it. While they stood all in amazement, not daring to
approach near the bed, whereon lay such costly Jewels: it chanced that
Signior Thorello awaked, and breathed forth a vehement sigh. The Monks and the
Abbot seeing him to stir, ran all away in fear, crying aloud, God and S.
Peter defend us.

By this time Thorello had opened his eyes, and looking round about him,
perceived that he was in the place of Saladines promise, whereof he was not a
little joyful. Wherefore, sitting up in the bed, and particularly observing
all the things about him: albeit he knew sufficiently the magnificence of
Saladine, yet now it appeared far greater to him, and imagined more largely
thereof, then he could do before. But yet, without any other ceremony, seeing
the flight of the Monks, hearing their cry, and perceiving the reason; he
called the Abbot by his name, desiring him not to be afraid, for he was his
Nephew Thorello, and no other.

When the Abbot heard this, he was ten times worse affrighted then before,
because (by public fame) he had been so many months dead and buried; but
receiving (by true arguments) better assurance of him, and hearing him still
call him by his name: blessing himself with the sign of the Cross, he went
somewhat nearer to the bed, when Thorello said. My loving Uncle, and religious
holy Father, whereof are you afraid? I am your loving Nephew, newly returned
from beyond the Seas. The Abbot, seeing his beard to be grown long, and his
habit after the Arabian fashion, did yet collect some resemblance of his former
countenance; and being better persuaded of him, took him by the hand, saying:

Son thou art happily returned, yet there is not any man in our City, but
does verily believe thee to be dead, and therefore do not much wonder at our
fear. Moreover; I dare assure thee, that thy Wife Adalietta, being conquered
by the controuling command, and threatenings of her kindred (but much against her
own mind) is this very morning to be married to a new husband, and the
marriage feast is solemnly prepared, in honor of this second nuptials.

Thorello arising out of the bed, gave gracious salutations to the Abbot and
his Monks, entreating earnestly of them all, that no word might be spoken of
his return, until he had completed an important business. Afterward, having
safely secured the bed, and all the rich Jewels, he fully acquainted the
Abbot with all his passed fortunes, whereof he was immeasurably joyfully, and
having satisfied him, concerning the new elected husband, Thorello said unto
the Abbot. Uncle, before any rumor of my return, I would gladly see my wives
behauior at this new briding feast, and although men of religion are seldom
seen at such Iouiall meetings: yet (for my sake) do you so order the matter,
that I (as an Arabian strange^) may be a guest under your prorection* whereto
the Abbot very gladly condescended.

In the morning, he sent to the Bridegroom, and advertised him, that he (with a
stranger newly arrived) intented to dine with him, which the Gentleman accepted
in thankful manner. And when dinner time came, Thorello in his strange
disguise went with the Abbot to the Bridegroomes house, where he was looked on
with admiration of all the guests, but not known or suspected by any one;
because the Abbot reported him to be a Sarracine, and sent by the Soldane (in
Embassage) to the King of France. Thorello was seated at a by-table, but
directly opposite to the new Bride, whom he much delighted to look on, and
easily collected by her sad countenance, that she was scarcely well pleased
with this new nuptials. She likewise beheld him very often, not in regard of
any knowledge she took of him: for the bushiness of his beard, strangeness of
habit, (but most of all) firm belief of his death, was the maine preuentio^.

At such time as Thorello thought it convenient, to approve how far he was
fallen out of her remembrance; he took the ring which she gave him at his
departure, and calling a young Page that waited on none but the Bride, said to
him in Italian: Fair youth, go to the Bride, and saluting her from me, tell
her, it is a custom observed in my Country, that when any Stranger (as I am
here) sits before a new married Bride, as now she is, in sign that he is
welcome to her feast, she sends the same Cup (wherein she drinks her self)
full of the best wine, and when the stranger has drunk so much as him
pleases, the Bride then pledgeth him with all the rest. The Page delivered the
message to the Bride, who, being a woman of honorable disposition, and
reputing him to be a Noble Gentleman, to testify that his presence there was
very acceptable to her, she commanded a fair Cup of gold (which stood
directly before her) to be neately washed, and when it was filled with
excellent Wine, caused it to be carried to the stranger, and so it was done.

Thorello having drunk a hearty draught to the Bride, conveyed the Ring into
the Cup, before any person could perceive it, and having left but small store
of Wine in it, covered the Cup, and sent it again to the Bride, who received
it very graciously, and to honor the Stranger in his Countries custom, drank
up the rest of the Wine, and espying the Ring, she took it forth vndescried
by any: Knowing it to be the same Ring which she gave Signior Thorello at his
parting from her; she fixed her eyes often on it, and as often on him, whom she
thought to be a stranger, the cheerful blood mounting up into her cheeks, and
returning again with remembrance to her heart, that (howsoever thus disguised)
he only was her husband.

Like one o^ Bacchus Froes, up furiously she started, and throwing down the
Table before her, cried out aloud: This is my Lord and Husband, this truly is
my Lord Thorello. So running to the Table where he sat, without regard of all
the riches thereon, down she threw it likewise, and clasping her arms about
his neck, hung so mainly on him (weeping, sobbing, and kissing him) as she
could not be taken off by any of the company, nor showed any moderation in this
excess of passion, till Thorello spoke, and entreated her to be more patient,
because this extremity was ouer-dangerous for her. Thus was the solemnity much
troubled, but every one there very glad and joyful for the recovery of such a
famous and worthy Knight, who entreated them all to vouchsafe him silence, and
so related all his fortunes to them, from the time of his departure, to the
instant hour. Concluding withal, that he was no way offended with the new
Bridegroom, who upon the so constant report of his death, deserved no blame
in making election of his wife.

The Bridegroom, albeit his countenance was somewhat cloudie, to see his hope
thus disappointed: yet granted freely, that Adalietto was Thorello's wife in
equity, and he could not justly lay any claim to her. She also resigned the
Crown and Rings which she had so lately received of her new Spouse, and put
that on her finger which she found in the Cup, and that Crown was set upon her
head, in honor sent her from great Saladine. In which triumphant manner, she
left the new Bridegrooms abiding, and repaired home to Thorello's house, with
such pomp and magnificence as never had the like been seen in Pauia before,
all the Citizens esteeming it as a miracle, that they had so happily recovered
Signior Thorello again.

Some part of the Jewels he gave to him, who had been at cost with the
marriage feasting, and some to his Uncle the Abbot, beside a bounty bestowed
on the Monks. Then he sent a messenger to Saladine, with Letters of his whole
success, and confessing himself (for ever) his obliged servant: living many
years (after) with his wife Adalietta, and using greater courtesies to
strangers, then ever before he had done.

In this manner ended the troubles of Signior Thorello, and the afflictions of
his dearly affected Lady, with due recompense to their honest and ready
courtesies. Many strive (in outward show) to do the like, who although they
are sufficiently able, do perform it so basely, as it rather redoundeth to
their shame, then honor. And therefore if no merit ensue thereon, but only
such disgrace as justly should follow; let them lay the blame upon themselves.

The Marquess of Saluzzo, named Gualtiero, being constrained by the
importunate soliciting of his Lords, and other inferior people, to join
himself in marriage; took a woman according to his own liking, called
Grizelda, she being the daughter of a poor Countriman, named Ianiculo, by whom
he had two children, which he pretended to be secretly murdered. Afterward,
they being grown to years of more stature, and making show of taking in
marriage another wife, more worthy of his high degree and Calling: made a
seeming public liking of his own daughter, expulsing his wife Grizelda
poorly from him. But finding her incomparable patience; more dearly (then
before) he received her into favor again, brought her home to his own
Palace, where (with her children) he caused her and them to be respectively
honored, in despite of all her adverse enemies.

The Tenth Novel.
Set down as an example or warning to all wealthy men, how to have care of
marrying themselves. And likewise to poor and mean women, to be patient in
their fortunes, and obedient to their husbands.

QVestionlesse, the Kings Novel did not so much exceed the rest in length, but
it proved as pleasing to the whole assembly, and past with their general
approbation, till Dioneus (in a merry jesting humor) said. The plain honest
simple man, that stood holding the Candle, to see the setting on of his Mules
tail; deserved two pennyworth of more praise, then all our applauding of
Signior Thorello: And knowing himself to be left for the last speaker, thus
he began.

Mild and modest Ladies, for ought I can perceive to the contrary, this day
was dedicated to none but Kings, Soldanes, and great Potentates, not in favor
of any inferior or meaner persons. And therefore, because I would be loath to
dis-ranke my self from the rest, I purpose to speak of a Lord Marquess, not
any matter of great magnificence, but rather in a more humble nature, and
sorted to an honest end: which yet I will not advise any to immitate, because
(perhaps) they cannot so well digest it, as they did whom my Novel concerns;
thus then I begin.

It is a great while since, when among those that were Lord Marquesses of
Saluzzo, the very greatest and worthiest man of them al, was a young Noble
Lord, named Gualtiero, who having neither wife nor child, spent his time in
nothing else but hawking and hunting: nor had he any mind of marriage, or to
enjoy the benefit of children, wherein many did repute him the wiser. But this
being distasteful to his subjects, they very often earnestly solicited him, to
match himself with a wife, to the end, that he might not decease without an
heir, nor they be left destitute of a succeeding Lord; offering themselves to
provide him of such a one, so well descended by Father and Mother, as not only
should confirm their hope, but also yield him high contentment; whereto the
Lord Marquess thus answered.

Worthy friends, you would constrain me to the thing, wherewith I never had
any intent to meddle, considering, how difficult a case it is to meet with such
a woman, who can agree with a man in all his conditions, and how great the
number is of them, who daily happen on the contrary: but most (and worst of
all the rest) how wretched and miserable proves the life of man, who is bound
to live with a wife not fit for him. And in saying, you can learn to understand
the custom and qualities of children, by behavior of the fathers and mothers,
and so to provide me of a wife, it is a mere argument of folly: for neither
shall I comprehend, or you either, the secret inclinations of parents; I mean
of the Father, and much less the complexion of the mother. But admit it were
within compass of power to know them; yet it is a frequent sight, and observed
every day; that daughters do resemble neither father nor mother, but that they
are naturally governed by their own instinct.

But because you are so desirous to have me fettered in the chains of wedlock;
I am contented to grant what you request. And because I would have no complaint
made of any but my self, if matters should not happen answerable to
expectation; I will make mine own eyes my electors, and not see by any others
sight. Giving you this assurance before, that if she whom I shall make choice
of, be not of you honored and respected as your Lady and Mistress: it will
ensue to your detriment, how much you have displeased me, to take a wife at
your request, and against mine own will.

The Noble men answered, that they were well satisfied, provided that he took
a wife.

Some indifferent space of time before, the beauty, manners, and well-seeming
virtues, of a poor Countrie-mans daughter, dwelling in no far distant
village, had appeared very pleasing to the Lord Marquess, and gave him full
persuasion, that with her he should lead a comfortable life. And therefore
without any further search or inquisition, he absolutely resolved to marry her,
and having conferred with her Father, agreed, that his daughter should be his
wife. Whereupon, the Marquess made a general convocation Convocation of all
his Lords, Barons, and other of his especial friends, from all parts of his
Dominion; and when they were assembled together, he then spoke unto them in
manner as follows.

Honorable friends, it appeared pleasing to you all, and yet (I think) you
are of the same mind, that I should dispose my self to take a wife: and I
thereto condescended, more to yield you contentment, then for any particular
desire in my self. Let me now remember you of your solemn made promise, with
full consent to honor and obey her (whosoever) as your Sovereign Lady and
Mistress, that I shall elect to make my wife: and now the time is come, for my
exacting the performance of that promise, and which I look you must constantly
keep. I have made choice of a young virgin, answerable to mine own heart and
liking, dwelling not far off hence, whom I intend to make my wife, and
(within few days) to have her brought home to my Palace. Let your care and
diligence then extend so far, as to see that the feast may be sumptuous, and
her entertainment to be most honorable: to the end that I may receive as much
contentment in your promise performed, as you shall perceive I do in my choice.

The Lords and all the rest, were wondrously joyful to hear him so well
inclined, expressing no less by their shouts and iocund suffrages: protesting
cordially, that she should be welcomed with pomp and majesty, and honored
of them all, as their Liege Lady and Sovereign. Afterward, they made
preparation for a princely and magnificent feast, as the Marquess did the
like, for a marriage of extraordinary state and quality, inuiting all his
kindred, friends, and acquaintance in all parts and Provinces, about him. He
made also ready most rich and costly garments, shaped by the body of a comely
young Gentlewoman, who he knew to be equal in proportion and stature, to her
of whom he hade made his election.

When the appointed nuptial day was come, the Lord Marquis, about nine of the
clock in the morning, mounted on horseback, as all the rest did, who came to
attend him honorably, and having all things in due readiness with them, he
said: Lords, it is time for us to go fetch the Bride. So on he rode with his
train, to the same poor Village whereas she dwelt, and when he was come to
her Fathers house, he saw the maiden returning very hastily from a Well, where
she had been to fetch a paile of water, which she set down, and stood
(accompanied with other maidens) to see the passage by of the Lord Marquess
and his train. Gualtiero called her by her name, which was Grizelda, and asked
her, where her Father was: who bashfully answered him, and with an humble
courtesy, saying. My gracious Lord, he is in the house.

Then the Marquess dismounted from his horse, commanding every one to attend
him, then all alone he entered into the poor Cottage, where he found the
maids father, being named Ianiculo, and said unto him. God speed good Father,
I am come to espouse thy daughter Grizelda: but first I have a few demands to
make, which I will utter to her in thy presence. Then he turned to the maid,
and said.

Fair Grizelda, if I make you my wife, will you do your best endeavor to
please me, in all things which I shall do or say? will you also be gentle,
humble, and patient? with diverse other the like questions: whereto she still
answered, that she would, so near as heaven (with grace) should enable her.

Presently he took her by the hand, so led her forth of the poor homely
house, and in the presence of all his company, with his own hands, he took off
her mean wearing garments, smock and all, and clothed her with those Robes
of State which he had purposely brought thither for her, and plaiting her hair
over her shoulders, he placed a Crown of gold on her head, whereat every one
standing as amazed, and wondering not a little, he said: Grizelda, will thou
have me to thy husband. Modestly blushing, and kneeling on the ground, she
answered. Yes my gracious Lord, if you will accept so poor a maiden to be your
wife. Yes Grizelda, quoth he, with this holy kiss, I confirm thee for my
wife; and so espoused her before them all. Then mounting her on a milkewhite
Palfray, brought thither for her, she was thus honorably conducted to her
Palace.

Now concerning the marriage feast and triumphs, they were performed with no
less pomp, then if she had been daughter to the King of France. And the
young Bride apparently declared, that (with her garments) her mind and
behauior were quite changed. For indeed she was (as it were shame to speak
otherwise) a rare creature, both of person and perfections, and not only was
she absolute for beauty, but so sweetly amiable, gracious, and goodly; as
if she were not the daughter of poor Ianiculo, and a Country Shepherdess,
but rather of some Noble Lord, whereat every one wondered that formerly had
known her. Beside all this, she was so obedient to her husband, so fervent in
all dutiful offices, and patient, without the very least provoking: as he
held himself much more then contented, and the only happy man of the world.

In like manner, toward the subjects of her Lord and Husband, she showed her
self always so benign and gracious; as there was not any one, but the more
they looked on her, the better they loved her, honoring her voluntarily, and
praying to the heavens, for her health, dignity and well-fa^^ long continuance.
Speaking now (quite contrary to their former opinion of the Marquess)
honorably and worthily, that he had shown him self a singular wise man, in
the election of his Wife, which few else (but he) in the world would have done:
because their judgment might fall far short, of discerning those great and
precious virtues, veiled under a homely habit, and obscured in a poor
Country cottage. To be brief, in very short time, not only the Marquisate it
self, but all neighboring Provinces round about, had no other common talk,
but of her rare course of life, devotion, charity, and all good actions else;
quite quailing all sinister Instructions of her Husband, before he received her
in marriage.

About four or five years after the birth of her daughter, she conceived
with child again, and (at the limited hour of deliverance) had a goodly
Son, to the no little liking of the Marquess. Afterward, a strange humor
entered into his brain, namely, that by a long continued experience, and
courses of intolerable quality; he would needs make proof of his fair Wives
patience. First he began to provoke her by injurious speeches, showing fierce
and frowning looks to her, intimating; that his people grew displeased with
him, in regard of his Wives base birth and education, and so much the rather,
because she was likely to bring children, who (by her blood) were no better
then beggars, and murmured at the daughter already borne. Which words when
Grizelda heard, without any alteration of countenance, for the least
distemperature in any appearing action, she said.

My honorable and gracious Lord, dispose of me, as you think best, for your
own dignity and contentment, for I shall therewith be well pleased: as she
that knows her self, far inferior to the meanest of your people, much
less worthy of the honor, whereto you liked to advance me.

This answer was very welcome to the Marquess, as apparently perceiving
hereby, that the dignity whereto he had exalted her, or any particular favors
beside, could not infect her with any pride, coyness, or disdain. Not long
after, having told her in plain and open speeches, that his subjects could not
endure her so late borne daughter: he called a trusty servant of his, and
having instructed him what he should do, sent him to Grizelda, and he being
alone with her, looking very sad, and much perplexed in mind, he said.
Madame, except I intend to loose mine own life, I must accomplish what my Lord
has strictly enjoined me, which is, to take this your young daughter, and then
I must: So breaking off abruptly, the Lady hearing his words, and noting his
frowning looks, remembering also what the Marquess himself had formerly said;
she presently imagined, that he had commanded his servant to kill the child.
Suddenly therefore, she took it out of the Cradle, and having sweetly kissed,
and bestowne her blessing on it (albeit her heart throbbed, with the inward
affection of a Mother) without any alteration of countenance, she tenderly laid
it in the servants arms, and said. Here friend, take it, and do with it as
thy Lord and mine has commanded thee: but leave it in no rude place, where
birds or savage beasts may devour it, except it be his will to have it so.

The servant departing from her with the child, and reporting to the Marquess
what his Lady had said; he wondered at her incomparable constancy. Then he sent
it by the same servant to Bologna, to an honorable Lady his kinsewoman,
requesting her (without revealing whose child it was) to see it both nobly and
carefully educated.

At time convenient afterward, being with child again, and delivered of a
Princely Son (then which nothing could be more joyful to the Marquess) yet
all this was not sufficient for him; but with far ruder language then before,
and looks expressing harsh intentions, he said unto her. Grizelda, though thou
please me wonderfully, by the birth of this Princely Boy, yet my subjects are
not therewith contented, but blunder abroad maliciously; that the grandchild
of Ianiculo, a poor country pezant, when I am dead and gone, must be their
Sovereign Lord and Master. Which makes me stand in fear of their expulsion,
and to prevent that, I must be rid of this child, as well as the other, and
then send thee away from hence, that I may take another wife, more pleasing to
them.

Grizelda, with a patient sufferent soul, hearing what he had said, returned
no other answer but this. Most Gracious and Honorable Lord, satisfy and
please your own Royal mind, and never use any respect of me: for nothing is
precious or pleasing to me, but what may agree with your good liking. Within a
while after, the Noble Marquess in the like manner as he did before for the
Daughter, so he sent the same servant for the Son, and seeming as if he had
sent it to have been slain, conueighed it to be nursed at Bologna, in company
of his sweet Sister. Whereat the Lady showed no other coffeehouse in any
kind, then formerly she had done for her Daughter, to the no mean marvel of
the Marquess, who protested in his soul, that the like woman was not in all
the world beside. And were it not for his heedfull observation, how loving and
careful she was of her children, prizing them as dearly as her own life:
rash opinion might have persuaded him, that she had no more in her, then a
carnal affection, not caring how many she had, so she might thus easily be
rid of them; but he knew her to be a truly virtuous mother, and wisely liable
to endure his seuerest impositions.

His Subjects believing, that he had caused the children to be slain, blamed
him greatly, thought him to be a most cruel man, and did highly compassionate
the Ladies case: who when she came in company of other Gentlewomen, which
mourned for their deceassed children, would answer nothing else: but that they
could not be more pleasing to her, then they were to the father that begot them.

Within certain years after the birth of these children, the Marquess
purposed with himself, to make his last and final proof of fair Grizeldaes
patience, and said to some near about him: that he could no longer endure, to
keep Grizelda as hi wife, confessing, he had done foolishly, and according to
a young giddie brain, when he was so rash in the marriage of her. Wherefore he
would send to the Pope, and purchase a dispensation from him, to repudiate
Grizelda, and take another Wife. Wherein although they greatly reproved him;
yet he told them plainly, that it must needs be so.

The Lady hearing these news, and thinking she must return again to her
poor fathers house, and (perhaps) to her old occupation of keeping sheep, as
in her younger days she had done, understanding withal, that another woman
must enjoy him, whom she dearly loved and honored; you may well think
(worthy Ladies) that her patience was now put to the maine proof indeed.
Nevertheless, as with an invincible true virtuous courage, she had outstood
all the other injuries of Fortune; so did she constantly settle her soul, to
bear this with an undaunted countenance and behavior.

At such time as was prefixed for the purpose, counterfeit Letters came to the
Marquess (as sent from Rome) which he caused to be publicly read in the
hearing of his subjects: that the Pope had dispensed with him, to leave
Grizelda, and marry with another Wife, wherefore, sending for her immediately,
in presence of them all, thus he spoke to her. Woman, by concession sent me
from the Pope, he has dispensed with me, to make choice of another Wife, and
to free my self from thee. And because my predecessors have been Noblemen,
and great Lords in this Country, thou being the daughter of a poor Country
Clown, and their blood and mine notoriously imbased, by my marriage with thee:
I intend to have thee no longer my Wife, but will return thee home to thy
Fathers house, with all the rich Dowry thou broughtest me; and then I will take
another Wife, with whom I am already contracted, better beseeming my birth, and
far more contenting and pleasing to my people.

The Lady hearing these words (not without much pain and difficulty)
restrained her tears, quite contrary to the natural inclination of women, and
thus answered. Great Marquess, I never was so empty of discretion, but did
always acknowledge, that my base and humble condition, could not in any manner
suit with your high blood and Nobility, and my being with you, I ever
acknowledged, to proceed from heaven and you, not any merit of mine, but only
as a favor lent me, which you being now pleased to recall back again, I
ought to be pleased (and so am) that it be restored. Here is the Ring,
wherewith you Espoused me; here (in all humility) I deliver it to you. You
command me, to carry home the marriage Dowry which I brought with me: there is
no need of a Treasurer to repay it me, neither any new purse to carry it in,
much less any Sumpter to be laden with it. For (Noble Lord) it it was never
out of my memory, that you took me stark naked, and if it shall seem sightly
to you, that this body which has borne two children, and be gotten by you,
must again be seen naked; willingly must I depart hence naked. But I humbly
beg of your Excellency, in recompense of my Virginity, which I brought you
blameless, so much as in thought: that I may have but one of my wedding
Smocks, only to conceal the shame of nakedness, and then I depart rich
enough.

The Marquess whose heart wept bloody tears, as his eyes would likewise
gladly have yielded their natural tribute; covered all with a dissembled angry
countenance, and starting up, said. Go, give her a Smock only, and so send
her gadding. All there present about him, entreated him to let her have a
petticote, because it might not be said, that she who had been his Wife
thirteen years and more, was sent away so poorly in her Smock: but all
their persuasions prevailed not with him. Naked in her Smock, without hose or
shoes, bareheaded, and not so much as a Cloth about her neck, to the great
grief and mourning of all that saw her, she went home to her old fathers house.

And he (good man) never believing, that the Marquess would long keep his
daughter as his Wife, but rather expected daily, what now had happened: safely
laid up the garments, whereof the Marquess despoyled her, the same morning
when he espoused her. Wherefore he delivered them to her, and she fell to her
fathers household business, according as formerly she had done; sustayning with
a great and unconquerable spirit, all the cruel assaults of her enemy Fortune.

About such time after, as suited with his own disposition, the Marquess made
publicly known to his subsects, that he meant to join in marriage again,
with the daughter to one of the Counts of Panago, and causing preparation to be
made for a sumptuous wedding; he sent for Grizelda, and she being come, thus he
spoke to her. The Wife that I have made the new election of, i^to arrive here
within very few days, and at her first coming, I would have her to be most
honorably entertained. Thou know I have no women in my house, that can
deck up the Chambers, and set all requisite things in due order, befitting for
so solemn a Feast: and therefore I sent for thee, who knowing (better then any
other) all the parts, provision and goods in the house, set every thing in
such order, as thou shall think necessary.

Inuit such Ladies and Gentlewomen as thou will, and give them welcome, even
as if thou were the Lady of the house: and when the marriage is ended, return
then home to thy father again.

Although these words pierced like wounding daggers, the heart of poor (but
Noble patient) Grizelda, as being unable to forget the vnequal'd love she bare
to the Marquess, though the dignity of her former fortune, more easily slipped
out of her remembrance; yet nevertheless, thus she answered.

My Gracious Lord, I am glad I can do you any service; wherein you shall find
me both willing and ready. In the same poor garments, as she came from her
fathers house, (although she was turned out in her Smock) she began to sweep
and make clean the Chambers, rub the stools and benches in the Hall, and
ordered things in the Kitchen, as if she were the worst maid in all the house,
never ceasing or giving over, till all things were in due and decent order as
best beseemed in such a case. After all which was done, the Marquess, having
invited all the Ladies of the Country, to be present at so great a Feast: when
the marriage day came, Grizelda, in her gown of Country gray, gave them
welcome, in honorable manner, and graced them all with very cheerful
countenance.

Gualtiero the Marquess, who had caused his two children to be nobly nourished
at Bologna, with a near kinswoman of his, who had married with one of the
Counts of Panago, his daughter being now aged twelve years old, and somewhat
more, as also the Son about six or seven. He sent a Gentleman expressly to his
kindred, to have them come and visit him at Saluzza, bringing his daughter and
Son with them, attended in very honorable manner, and publishing every where
as they came along, that the young Virgin (known to none but himself and
them) should be the Wife to the Marquess, and that only was the cause of her
coming. The Gentleman was not slack, in the execution of the trust reposed in
him: but having made convenient preparation; with the kindred, Son, daughter,
and a worthy company attending on them, arrived at Saluzza about dinner time,
where wanted no resort, from all neighboring parts round about, to see the
coming of the Lord Marquesses new Spouse.

By the Lords and Ladies she was joyfully entertained, and coming into the
great Hall, where the Tables were readily covered: Grizelda, in her homely
Country habit, humbled her self before her, saying. Gracious welcome, to the
new elected Spouse of the Lord Marquess.

All the Ladies there present, who had very earnestly importuned Gualtiero (but
in vain) that Grizelda, might either be shut up in some Chamber, or else to
lend her the wearing of any other garments, which formerly had been her own,
because she should not be so poorly seen among strangers: being seated at the
Tables, she waited on them very seruiceably. The young Virgin was observed by
every one, who spared not to say; that the Marquess had made an excellent
change: but above them all, Grizelda did most commend her, and so did her
brother likewise, as young as he was, yet not knowing her to be his Sister.

Now was the Marquess sufficiently satisfied in his soul, that he had seen
so much as he desired, concerning the patience of his Wife, who in so many heart
grieuing trials, was never noated so much as to alter her countenance. And
being absolutely persuaded, that this proceeded not from any want of
understanding in her, because he knew her to be singularly wise: he thought it
high time now, to free her from these afflicting oppressions, and give her such
assurance as she ought to have. Wherefore, commanding her into his presence,
openly before all his assembled friends, smiling on her, he said. What think
thou Grizelda of our new chosen Spouse? My Lord (quoth she) I like her
exceeding well, and if she be so wise, as she is fair (which verily I think
she is) I make no doubt but you shall live with her, as the only happy man of
the world. But I humbly entreat your Honor (if I have any power in me to
prevail by) that you would not give her such cutting and unkind language, as
you did to your other wife: for I cannot think her armed with such patience,
as should (indeed) support them: as well in regard she is much younger, as also
her more delicate breeding and education, whereas she who you had before, was
brought up in continual toil and travail.

When the Marquess perceived, that Grizelda believed verily, this young
daughter of hers should be his wife, and answered him in so honest and modest
manner: he commanded her to sit down by him, and said. Grizelda, it is now
more then fit time, that thou should taste the fruit of thy long admired
patience, and that they who have thought me cruel, harsh and uncivil natured,
should at length observe, that I have done nothing basely, or unadvisedly. For
this was a work premeditated before, for enstructing thee, what it is to be a
married wife, and to let them know (whosoever they be) how to take and keep a
wife. Which has begotten (to me) perpetual joy and happiness, so long as I
have a day to live with thee: a matter whereof I stood before greatly in
fear, and which (in marriage I thought) would never happen to me.

It is not unknown to thee, in how many kinds (for my first proof) I gave thee
harsh and unpleasing speeches, which drawing no coffeehouse from thee,
either in looks, words, or behavior, but rather such comfort as my soul
desired, and so in my other succeedings afterward: in one minute now, I purpose
to give thee that consolation, which I bereft thee of in many tempestuous
storms, and make a sweet restoration, for all thy former sower sufferinges.
My fair and dearly affected Grizelda, she whom thou supposest for my new
elected Spouse, with a glad and cheerful heart, embrace for thine own
daughter, and this also her Brother, being both of them thy children and mine,
in common opinion of the vulgar multitude, imagined to be (by my command) long
since slain. I am thy honorable Lord and Husband, who does, and will love
thee far above all women else in the world; giving thee justly this deserved
praise and commendation, That no man living has the like Wife, as I have.

So, sweetly kissing her infinitely, and hugging her joyfully in his arms (the
tears now streaming like new-let-loose Rivers, down her fair face, which no
disaster before could force from her) he brought her, and seated her by her
daughter, who was not a little amazed at so rare an alteration. She having (in
zeal of affection) kissed and embraced them both, all else there present being
clearly resolved from the former doubt which too long deluded them; the Ladies
arose iocondly from the tables, and attending on Grizelda to her Chamber, in
sign of a more successful augury to follow: took off her poor contemptible
rags, and put on such costly robes, which (as Lady Marchioness) she used to
wear before.

Afterward, they waited on her into the Hall again, being their true
Sovereign Lady and Mistress, as she was no less in her poorest Garments;
where all rejoicing for the new restored Mother, and happy recovery of so noble
a son and daughter, the Festival continued many months after. Now every one
thought the Marquess to be a noble and wise Prince, though somewhat sharp and
insufferable, in the severe experiences made of his wife: but (above al) they
reputed Grizelda, to be a most wise, patient, and virtuous Lady. The Count of
Panago, within few days after returned back to Bologna; and the Lord Marquis,
fetching home old Ianiculo from his country drudgery, to live with him (as his
Father in law) in his Princely Palace, gave him honorable maintenance, wherein
he long continued, and ended his days. Afterward, he matched his daughter in
a Noble marriage: he and Grizelda living long time together, in the highest
honor that possibly could be.

What can now be said to the contrary, but that poor Country Cottages, may
yield as divine and excellent spirits, as the most stately and Royal mansions,
which breed and bring up some, more worthy to be Hog-rubbers, then hold any
sovereignty over men? Where is any other (beside Grizelda) who not only without
a wet eye, but imboldned by a valiant and invincible courage: that can suffer
the sharp rigors, and (never the like heard of proofs) made by the Marquess?
Perhaps he might have met with another, who would have quitted him in a
contrary kind, and for thrusting her forth of doors in her smock, could have
found better succor somewhere else, rather then walk so nakedly in the cold
streets.

DIoneus having thus ended his Nouel, and the Ladies delivering their several
judgments, according to their own fancies, some holding one conceit, others
leaning to the contrary; one blaming this thing, and another commending that,
the King lifting his eyes to heaven, and seeing the Sun begin to fallow, by
rising of the Evening Star; without arising from his seat, spoke as
follows. Discreet Ladies, I am persuaded you know sufficiently, that the
sense and understanding of us mortals, consists not only (as I think) by
preserving in memory things past, or knowledge of them present; but such as
both by the one and other, kuow how to foresee future occasions, are worthily
thought wise, and of no common capacity.

It will be (to morrow) fifteen days, since we departed from the City of
Florence, to come hither for our pastime and comfort, the conservation of our
lives, and support of our health, by avoiding those melanchollies, griefs and
anguishes, which we beheld daily in our City, since the pestilentiall
visitation began there, wherein (by my judgment) we have done well and
honestly. Albeit some light Nouels, perhaps attractiue to a little wantonness,
as some say, and our Iouiall feasting with good cheer, singing and dancing,
may seem matters inciting to inciuility, especially in weak and shallow
understandings. But I have neither seen, heard, or known, any act, word, or
whatsoever else, either on your part or ours, justly deserving to be blamed:
but all has bin honest, as in a sweet and hermonious concord, such as might
well beseem the community of Brethren and Sisters; which assuredly, as well
in regard of you, as us, has much contented me.

And therefore, least by ouer-long consuetude, something should take life,
which might be converted to a bad construction, and by our country demourance
for so many days, some captious conceit may wrest out an ill imagination; I am
of the mind (if yours be the like) seeing each of us has had the honor, which
now remains still on me: that it is very fitting for us, to return thither
from whence we came. And so much the rather, because this sociable meeting of
ours, which already has won the knowledge of many dwellers here about us,
should not grow to such an increase, as might make our purposed pastime
offensive to us. In which respect (if you allow of my advise) I will keep the
Crown till our departing hence; the which I intend shall be to morrow: but if
you determine otherwise, I am the man ready to make my resignation.

Many imaginations passed amongst the Ladies, and likewise the men, but yet in
the end, they reputed the Kings counsel to be the best and wisest, concluding
to do as he thought convenient. Whereupon, he called the Master of the
household, and conferred with him, of the business belonging to the next
morning, and then gave the company leave to rise. The Ladies and the rest, when
they were risen, fell some to one kind of recreation, and others as their
fancies served them, even as (before) they had done. And when Supper time came,
they dispatched it in very loving manner. Then they began to play on
instruments, sing and dance, and Madame Lauretta leading the dance: the King
commanded Madame Fiammetta to sing a song, which pleasantly she began in this
manner.

THE SONG.
The Chorus sung by all the rest of the Company.
IF Love were free from Jealousy,
No Lady living,
Had less heart-greeuing,
Or lived so happily as I.
If gallant youth
In a fair friend, a woman could content,
If virtues prize, valor and hardiment,
Wit, carriage, purest eloquence,
Could free a Woman from impatience:
Then I am she can vaunt (if I were wise)
All these in one fair flower,
Are in my power,
And yet I boast no more but truth.
If Love were free from jealousy, etc.
But I behold
That other Women are as wise as I
Which killes me quite,
Fearing false sirquedrie.
For when my fire begins to flame
Others desires misguide my aim,
And so bereaues me of secure delight.
Only through fond mistrust, he is unjust:
Thus are my comforts hourly hot and cold.
If Love were free, etc.
If in my friend,
I found like faith, as manly mind I know;
Mistrust were slain.
But my fresh griefs still grow,
By sight of such as do allure,
So I can think none true, none sure,
But all would rob me of my golden gain.
Lo thus I dye, in Jealousy,
For loss of him, on whom I most depend.
If Love were free, etc.
Let me advise
Such Ladies as in Love are bravely bold,
Not to wrong me, I scorn to be controld.
If any one I chance to find,
By winkes, words, smiles, in crafty kind,
Seeking for that, which only mine should be:
Then I protest, to do my best,
And make them know, that they are scarsly wise.
If Love were free from jealousy,
I know no Lady living,
Could have less heart-greeuing,
Or live so happily as I.
So soon as Madam Fiammetta had ended her Song; Dioneus, who sat by her,
smiling said. Truly Madam, you may do us a great courtesy, to express your
self more plainly to us all, least (through ignorance) the possession may be
imposed on your self, and so you remain the more offended. After the Song was
past, diverse other were sung beside, and it now drawing wel-neere midnight, by
the Kings command, they all went to bed. And when new day appeared, and all the
world awaked out of sleep, the Maste of the Household having sent away the
carriages; they returned (under the conduct of their discreet King) to
Florence, where the three Gentlemen left the seven Ladies at the Church of
Santa Maria Nouella, from whence they went with them at the first. And having
parted with kind salutations; the Gentlemen went whether themselves best
pleased, and the Ladies repaired home to their houses.

The End of the Tenth and Last Day.

