MICHAELS COMBAT WITH THE DEVIL: OR, MOSES his FUNERAL. Delivered in a Sermon
Preached in St PAUL'S Church, on Sunday Morning, being the Feast of St Michael,
1639. By JOHN BLENKOVV, LL. B. sometime Fellow of S. John Bap. Coll. in OXFORD.

Bernard. in Epist. Dom. 2. Sermon. Quanto sublimitas notior, tanto humilitas
pretiosior.

Resist the Devil, and he will fly from thee. Iam. 4.7.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper. 1640.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir HENRY MARTIN Knight, Judge of his Majesty's
Court of Admiralty, and the Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
Right Worshipful,
MAY it please you to take into your hand, that, which not long since you
receyved into your ear, with undeserved attention and favorable censure: (the
which only, next your private favors, encouraged me to fix your Name.) And
to let it shrowde under your Protection, which otherwise would be loath to
walk at all abroad. It desires to baulke the common eye, as too unworthy an
object; only content to visit private friends: some, I presume it may find;
your Name may make it many: your self is instar omnium. If you please to
accept it, as first or chief, it shall embolden the Author to subscribe
himself

The meanest of your obliged JOHN BLENKOVV.

Epistle of Saint Jude, verse 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending
with the Devil, he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring a railing
accusation against him, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.


NOW I have read my Text, let me call upon you to hear the word of God. For
these words, either through the ignorance or peevishness of some, were not
commonly taken for such. This verse, with some others, in this parcel of
sacred Writ, being generally held Apocryphal; insomuch that the whole Epistle
was called in question, and scarcely obtained to be accounted within the verge
of the Canon. Perhaps not without some ground: for that this story of Michael,
and that Prophecy of Enoch, mentioned in the 14 verse, are not to be found any
where in Scripture. And although Saint Peter (out of whom our sacred Plagiary,
Saint Jude has taken most of his Epistle) have the same sense in general
terms, 2. Pet. 2. That the Angels which are greater in power and might, bring
not a railing accusation, etc. Yet that Michael did ever contend with the
Devil, and contending did use such moderation, we read not any where recorded,
but by our Apostle in this place. Some say therefore, that this story was a
common tradition amongst the Hebrews, and from them our Apostle had it.
Others, that it might be some Book then extant, which is since perished.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Athanasius, name one entitled (...); the Ascension
of Moses: out of which probably it might be taken. And why not so, since Saint
Paul before him, quoted Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides. Certain it is; that
many books of Scripture are lost: As the books of the Battles of the Lord,
Number. 21.14. Jos. 10.13,
mentioned by Moses. The book of the Righteous cited by Joshua, the books of
Shemaiah the Prophet, Iddo the Seer, and Nathan the Prophet: many of the works
of Solomon, and much of the Chronicles. Out of one or other of which this story
might be inserted, and receive like authority with those which are of as
obscure antiquity. Moses does no where report how Iannes and Iambres withstood
him, Saint Paul does, 2. Tim. 2.3. and more then that too: for he says, that
our Savior was seen of more then of five hundred brethren at once, 1. Cor.
15. And that tacentibus Evangelistis, the Evangelists saying no such thing.
Saint Luke bids us remember what our Savior sometime said, It is better to
give then to receive: but yet makes no quotation for it, Act. 20.35. And it is
easily to be supposed (says Justinian) that the Apostle would not use a
feigned instance in so serious a matter, In Loc.
or not rather an undoubted truth, wheresoever received. I will not follow the
matter so hard upon my Author, as scrupulously to question where he had it,
since I find it here. I conclude with him (and that no mean Author) both
modestly and confidently: Vt ut est ex Judah certum est hanc Historiam esse
Canonicam: Cor. a Lapide in Loc.
From whence soever it be taken, it is in Jude Canonical. Truth is truth,
where ever found, which distild from the pen of the holy Ghost, becomes divine
verity. A story by tradition, or Apocryphal, may be true, many times is, to
which if the sacred Spirit please to set his hand, and deliver it to us as his
act and deed, must necessarily be authentical.

Not to hold you long in a perchance unnecessary Quaere. The words in general,
are an Historical narration of a certain contention, occasionally had
between Michael the Archangel, and the Devil, at the funeral of Moses. And
they offer themselves to your consideration, under these particulars: First,
The contention it self, He strove against the Devil, and disputed about the
body of Moses. Secondly, His demeanor, or behavior in this contention, He
durst not bring a railing accusation, etc.

In the first of these, observe, 1. The persons striving, Michael the
Archangel, and the Devil. 2. The matter of their strife, or about what they
strove, The body of Moses. 3. The manner of their striving, how they strove, and
that is by way of disputation or discourse, They disputed. The second General.
His behavior it self, He durst not etc. and that is set down, 1. Negatively,
He durst not bring a railing, etc 2. Affirmatively, He said, The Lord rebuke
thee. Of which, in order, as God shall assist me, your Christian patience
encourage me, and my weak memory suffer me.

First, of the Contention it self: and therein, first of the persons
contending, Michael etc.

First, of the first person contending, Michael the Archangel.

This name is one of those six names of Angels, which some have reckoned to
be found expressed in Scripture. It imports, according to Etymology, Power or
fortitude. Michael interpretatur quis ut Deus: Who is so strong as our God?
Whether this be the Archangels proper name, or no, may be a question. Since
some have doubted whether Angels have any proper or particular names whereby to
be distinguished, assigned them by God: and have concluded the contrary. viz.
that those blessed spirits have not any proper or peculiar names. The which
opinion Zanchy has thought most probable, and seems to maintain. And as for
those names which were given them in Scripture, 1. they were given them only
for a time, to be distinguished by, while they were in employment among men: 2.
to denote and imply their office, and message, about which they were sent: and
so Gabriel signifies, the fortitude of God: even that fortitude, he would have
him to exercise at this or that present time, about this or that peculiar
design. So Raphael has his name from healing or curing diseases, which was
the main intent of his coming to Tobit. Tob. 3.17. And the Angel of the Lord,
namely Raphael, was sent to heal them both. So Michael signifying power, is
brought in as a Champion of the Church of God, Dan. 12.1. And under that name
he defends the Elect against the Dragon, Apoc. 12.7. And so of the rest. And
thus as they are names of office, so were they not appropriate or perpetual;
but either continued to them for the same purpose, or transferred to some who
should perform the same office, at the good will and pleasure of Almighty God.
Neque enim unus tantum Angelus curandis morbis praefectus est, sed alii etiam
ad idem faciendum mitti aut solent aut possunt. Nomen igitur Raphaelis unius
Angeli proprium esse credendum non est: and idem de aliis dicendum esse, quis
dubitet? Zanch. l. 3. de Oper. Dei, c. 1.

And that they have names in Heaven, may seem improbable, in this respect,
because the same reason holds not. It might be requisite, that whilst they
were on Earth, they should have names, in regard of the weak capacity of
humane Nature, who cannot otherwise or well distinguish things but by their
names; which was the reason why Adam at the first, imposed names upon all
creatures. As likewise to confirm the reality of their appearance, which
otherwise might be thought fantastical, or a mere deceptio visus, or to
confirm their predictions, by the name of him that foretold them; and so the
Angel tells Mary his name, I am Gabriel. And Manoah did at least desire the name
of the Angel which appeared to him for that purpose. Or rather for some reason
best known to him that imposed them. But this reason cease in Heaven, where
not only God himself knows every Angel, but every Angel knows every of his
fellows in particular. Besides, neither have they any voice, as being spirits,
whereby names are to be expressed; inasmuch as all things in Heaven are done
after a spiritual manner, by divine revelation, or otherwise in an expressible
sort. Thus far goes Zanchy. And thus far I lead the Curious, whom I leave
to their leisure to determine of so unnecessary a quaere. And if any will be
further troublesome, I must answer him as the Angel did Manoah, Judge. 13.18.
about the same question; Why ask thou thus after their names, since they are
secret? Neither whether they have or not, can be known: and in the silence of
the Holy Ghost, to determine any thing, may be rash and unwarrantable.

The Arcbangel.

This name is observed to be always given to the better Angel, and is still
found in the singular number; which has given occasion to some, to doubt,
whether there are more the^ on Archangel, or no: That there are many or more,
may be without question. The general and more proper collection hence, is this,
that there are orders and degrees in Heaven amongst those blessed and glorious
spirits: an Archangel supposes an Angel, and so of the rest. However in this
particular, the Schools may seem to have been too curious, Who out of Saint
Paul have added Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Principalities, Coloss. 1. Out
of Ezekiel Cherubims. Out of Esaias Seraphims: and this done, take their pen and
definitively set down nine orders or degrees. But how they will make them
good, that's the Question: for that the deduction is weak and unwarrantable,
not able to oversway the contrary opinion of many other Learned, who though
they hold some kind of order and subordination amongst the Angels, yet they
are not so bold as to assign in particular their degrees and orders: and to
affirm a thing so remote from our understanding, were necessary either some
evident reason, or more firm authority then can be alleged for so
determinate a number: Esse Seeds, Dominationes, etc. That there are Thrones,
and Dominations, and Principalities, etc. I do firmly believe, says S.
Austin; and that they differ in some sort, but how I know not, nor do I think
my self disparaged by that ignorance. And for my own part, when I should have
occasion to occupy my business in such great waters as these, I would rather
desire to be commended for my neat stroke in swimming over them, then for my
skill in diving into them.

Well, an Archangell he is, Vnus de Principibus, De Romans Pont l. 1. c. 9. S
Post casum.
a chief or principal Angel, as Vatablus there, Dan. 10.13. The great Prince,
Dan. 12.1. Bellarmine affirms, that Michael ever since the fall of Lucifer, is
Head of the glorious Angels: but he does not tell us how he came to be chosen
in Lucifers room. Others, that he is the tutelar Angel of the Church Catholic,
and of the Head thereof, the Pope; with many other offices which they put upon
him without warrant, and to little purpose. Some more probable then any of
these, have thought that he was that very same Angel, which conducted the
children of Israel over the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, in their voyage to
the land of Canaan. This I am sure of, notwithstanding these opinions, he was
reputed by Daniel, the chief Patron of the Jews, and the Defender of Gods
people; and therein a type of Christ, the true Savior of his Church. And so
we may conclude him here as being now set in opposition against the Devil, in
a cause tending to the same purpose. And so much of the one party contending,
Michael the Archangell. The other is the Devil: Lucifer, as, it is supposed, and
so the Prince of Devils, to be the Antagonist to the Prince of the Angels.
However there is impar congressus, an unequal match, and not likely to
prevayle. He was once a puissant spirit, and of redoubted prowess, whilst he
stood entire; but having caught so damnable a fall as he did, he was never
since able to recover the strength he then lost, and obtain conquest in what
ever quarrel he did engage himself, as the issue of this present conflict
will prove. I shall therefore pass over his person, with the observation of
his malice and boldness; who, as if not conscious of his own weakness by
his fall, dare yet bear up, and affront the Captain of the Heavenly Host. His
malice will not suffer him but to contend, though without hope of victory:
strive the will, be it at never so great disadvantage. Our Savior himself must
not baulke his assault, though he get nothing by the attempt, Mat. 4. As for
Saint Michael and he, it seems contention was ordinary between them; we
still find them fighting together. Michael and his Angels, against the Devil
and his Angels, in a solemn set Battle. And if we will understand there, by
Michael, Christ, as S. Austin does; Per Michaelem intellige Christum. It may
confirm the care of our Savior over his Church, who will never suffer it to
want a Champion, though himself go in person to the Battle. And by that
means, the Devil and his forces shall still be routed and put to flight: And
in this stands our comfort, that maugre all his malice, we shall be able to be
conquerours, yea more then conquerours, in him that loves us, and gave himself
for us. Roar he may, Lion as he is; fasten he cannot: seek his pray he must,
if happily he can so find it, readily fetch it he cannot: wait he must upon
God for what he has; Gods permission is the Devils commission: where he
pleases to give up his right, there only the Devil takes possession: and of
this we are sure, that he will never fail those who put themselves under the
shadow of his wings. And thus much of the persons contending. Come we now to
the matter of their contention, in the next words: The body of Moses.

There are that hold that Moses never died, and interpret Gods burying of him,
Deuteronomy. 34.6. of his Translation or (...); and some of the Fathers have made
mention of a Book entitled to that purpose, (...) the ascension or assumption
of Moses into Heaven, as after we read of Elijah. The which they rather
believe, because they are said both of them to appear, Matt. 17.2.
and talk with Christ in the transfiguration. Others have thought, that though
Moses indeed died, yet God did not bury him, but that God appointed him the
place of his Sepulcher, and he there made a Cave, into the which he entered and
dyed, according to the word of the Lord, and had no other manner or ceremony of
interring or inhumation: and so it came to pass, that no man ever yet knew of
his Sepulcher. But it is certain, that both these are false: For first, that
Moses died is evident, So Moses the servant of the Lord died, Deuteronomy. 34.5. And
that being dead, he buried not himself, is likewise plain in the words that
follow, that The Lord buried him. Verse 6.
And had it not been so, his Sepulcher had never continued to this day
unknown. Let Moses bury himself never so secretly, the Devil would have
been privy to it, (as we see he is here notwithstanding) and no doubt would
have easily acquainted those with it, whom it might concern for the future. It
is certain enough then, that God buried him: that is, as Interpreters
generally agree, by the Ministry of the Archangell in the Text, or at least
together with some other appointed for that purpose, Michael yet having the
chiefest hand in the design. And surely some need there was: Moses is no
sooner dead, and going to his grave, but the Devil would have arrested the
corpse: and hence grew the present contention between Michael and him.

The contents of this strife, has bred a various conceit amongst Interpreters,
and as it ordinarily falls out in matters of this nature, one says one
thing, another, another. Ten several opinions are cited by Lorinus concerning
this matter. I forbear to cite them. The most general and settled
determination is: That whereas Michael would have buried Moses privately, as
God commanded, the Devil would have him buried openly and in public view. And
whereas Michael would not have his Sepulcher known, the Devil labored by all
means to publish it. Upon this, Michael resists him: the Devil urges the
contrary, and hence arose the strife.

The Devils intent, as it could not be good, so it might easily be ghest: viz.
to wit, that thereby he might draw the people of Israel to Idolatry, which were
happily too prone already. Which God knowing, prevented them in This, as a
further occasion, conveying his body away from them.

It is easy to be conceived, that they who worshipped the Brazen Serpent, might
in time to come, worship the setter up of it. Neither could those many signs
and wonders which he did amongst them, choose but heighten the conceit of a
deity, and cause them to worship him as a God after his death, whom they so
extraordinarily honored in his life. Their present estimation must needs be
easily improoved into future superstition. Besides they had sometime heard that
of God to Moses, Exodus 7.1. I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron shall be
thy Prophet. And what comment they might have made upon those words, may
probably be imagined. And though a dead body may seem but a cold argument to
persuade divinity, and a spectacle of Mortality might well have dashed the
conceit of a Deity; Yet considering how foolish superstition has ever been,
Superstitio semper stolida: Superstition was ever foolish. Illos pro diis
venerantur quorum sepulchra habent. Lact.
And how feazable a thing it is in it self; it will not be hard to conceive
how the body of Moses might easily have become an Idol. What were all those
numberless Deities, Antiquity so fondly and devoutly worshipped? Were they not
men, famous in their generations, and the glory of their times? as the Wiseman
speaks, Good Kings, Honorable Parents, Noble Benefactors, Courageous
Warriors. And to this Arnobius and Lactantius have ascribed the first original
of all Idolatry. viz. the superstitious having of men's persons in admiration
after their deaths. Jupiter, Mercury, Saturn, etc. what were they but men, who
for their benefits and deserts came at the first to be accounted for deities.
And what? Was Moses behind any of these, yea what were they in respect of him?
There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face
to face. In all the signs and wonders which the LORD sent him to do in the
Land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, and in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses showed in the
sight of all Israel. Deuteronomy. ult. v. 10. 11. 12. Could all Israel know this and
not be rapt with more then an ordinary conceit of his person, after his death,
whom they welnigh adored in his life. To put this out of question, it was,
without doubt, the cause why God hid his body. Neither can there be any reason
assigned why he should so do, says Cor. a Lapide, but lest the Jews should
worship him. This the Devil well knew, In Loc.
and that made him so earnestly contend for his body, only that he might make
an Idol of it.

And if this may yet be thought incredible, let his daily practice prove it by
experience. What greater superstition has he brought in, in these later
days, then by these means? What pilgrimages; prayers, devotions, have been
given in way of homage to the Shrines of deceased Martyrs? What a treasure of
precious relics has he raked out of the dusty graves of departed Saints,
with which he besots the misled fancyes of these days? We cannot but see to
what excellent purpose the body of Moses would have served; when we see so many
arms, legs, hands, feet, and fingers of Martyrs, to be had in such reverent
if not divine estimation. Good reason there was therefore, that Michael should
stand up in the defense of it, and vindicate it out of his hands who would so
have prostituted it to idolatrous uses.

Thus we see what the Devil would have done had he had his will. Yet see the
diligence of the cunning deceyver: Omnem movebit lapidem: He will not leave
any stone unmooved, to promote his intentions, no not a grave stone. The Devil
would feign be trying experiments on Moses body. The grave shall not be free
from his malice, if he can prevayle: neither at least shall they be free from
Impusture, where realities fail. If God will not let him touch the dead bodies
of his Saints, yet he does often make use of their shapes: If the substance be
denied him, the apparition shall serve turn to deceive. If Saul stand in need,
Samuel shall come up in the very mantle he used to wear in his life time. But
let it be our wisdom to know these sleights, and our Christian courage to
resist them. And thus much of the matter about which they contended, The body
of Moses. I proceed to the manner, how they contended, and that was by way of
disputation or discourse; Altercabantur, They disputed.

Touching Angelical locution (to which this particular of my Text has
reference;) It has been an ancient question among the Fathers, and occasioned
by diverse places of Holy Writ. The Seraphims stood upon it, etc. Esaias 6.2.3.
And one Cried to the other, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of Hosts. Out of
which that of Saint Ambrose in his Te Deum, To thee all Angels Cry aloud, etc.
To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry. So Zach. 2. Behold the Angel
which spoke in me, went forth, and another Angel went forth to meet him, and
Said unto him. More expressly in the new Testament. Saint Paul says, If I
shall speak with the tongues of men and Angels, 1. Cor. 13. Which words have
given much occasion of dispute about this matter. However the words in
themselves are interpreted as spoken hyperbolically, or by way of concession,
that is supposing the Angels had tongues. But in this point Saint Hierome
seems to have gone as far as sobriety may safely venture, and I conclude
with him: Illud immobiliter tenendum esse nullo modo in silentio agi militiae
coelestis officia, etc. This is to be holden, without doubt, from the
forenamed places of Scripture. That the services of the Heavenly Host are not
performed in silence, and that the Angels have their manner of tongues, though
far different from all humane. Now, as for their manner of spiritual speech,
or expression of their Angelical thoughts one to another, that's the difficulty.
And I hope there is none here that will desire any satisfaction in a matter of
so sublime speculation. As for my own part, I think that most true which
Saint Austin pronounces concerning this doubt: Neque sciri, neque affirmari
posse, quanam ratione Angeli vel ad aurem forinsecus vel in animo intus
loquantur hominibus, aut aliquando locuti sunt: That it cannot be known or
declared any way, how they speak; either outwardly in our ears, or inwardly in
our hearts, or amongst themselves one with another. Multa nobis cognoscenda in
coelo reservavit: says Zanchy very well, God has reserved many things to be
then known when we come to heaven; and of which sort is this Quaere.

It may suffice for our present purpose to know that this contention or
disputation, was real, not imaginary or feigned. And as for what past in their
discourse, though we know nothing, yet we may well suspect the contention to be
very sharp on both sides: Michael standing in the cause of God, in the
fulfilling of his command: and the Devil standing in his own, the advancement
of his malicious desires. Who, notwithstanding the badnesse of his cause, yet
being defeated of his intent, must needs be especially enraged, to have a
limitation set on his power, in a matter that so much concerned him to effect;
and to be enjoined silence in a secret, the disclosing of which, must needs
have been so advantageous. Hereupon we may necessarily conceive him (as his
nature is) to have burst out into bitter blasphemies and cursed speaking. And
as it is commonly known to be the practice of those that be of the weaker
side, and are put to the worst, to make up that in opprobrious slanders,
ignominious taunts, and blasphemous railing, which his weakness and impotency
could not bring to pass against so potent an Adversary. And this must also be
very remarkable, as it seems to be the ground of the Holy Ghosts
observation; who much co^mends the Archangel in that he did not, par pari
refer, return the like for the like, evil for evil, railing for railing,
reviling for reviling, but rather said mildely, The Lord rebuke thee.

The Holy Ghost wittingly conceales the scandalous and blasphemous language of
the Devil, as being not to be imitated by us, and to which we are prone enough
of our own selves. And expresses the patient answer of Michael at large, to
remain upon record for a pattern for all men to follow. And of which in the
next place I have undertaken to treat of: to wit, the behavior of the
Archangel in this contention, He durst not bring a railing accusation against
him, but said, The Lord rebuke thee: which is my second General.

(...); He durst not bring a railing acccusation. In these words lie the force
and substance of the Text: And they contain in them a perfect pattern of
Evangelicall modesty: The which I shall commend unto you according as the
circumstances which may be gathered out of the Text have set it forth. And
first, I shall consider it as seated in the subject of the Text, in the
Pronoune Ille, He. The which that he may appear the more eminent, the Holy
Ghost sets him forth with all his titles, and writes his name at length,
Michael the Archangel: or as the Original more expressively, and emphatically,
(...), with a double Article. A mighty and powerful Angel, no doubt; yet in
the exercise of that power, how calm, how patient. The Devil himself with
all his railing cannot force a bitter speech from him. The accuser of mankind,
the scorn of Angels, with all his urging invectives, cannot extract from him
any other, but The Lord rebuke thee.

I cannot better express this extraordinary virtue in him, then by looking how
far the contrary does prevayle in our selves. With whom it is usual in this
case, in stead of suffering terms of reproach, to vie railing with railing,
and reviling with reviling, from which we seldom desist till our tart
language has fretted off the skin of our Brothers reputation. How does a poor
word misplaced oftentimes like a stone thrown into the water, multiply it
self into almost numberless billows of contention; and of one word in the
speech, become a hundred in the reply. It were well to be imagined what we
would do, if we had somewhat of Saint Michaels power, who have so little of
his patience. Which if we chance to get at any time, good God, how do we lord
it? We are presently at our senties qui vir siem, you shall know what a manner
of man I am. And in conclusion, and as if we had our power for no other end,
but to serve our own turns in this kind, we employ it to little other use,
then to revenge our selves upon our weaker brother. In this general defect, I
can but guide you to the example here set before us. Michael did not so, who
being an Archangel, and of greater power then we (in the words of Saint Peter)
durst not bring so much as a railing accusation. So much for the person.

Secondly consider in the time, when it was shown, in these words, When
contending.

The Sea is calm when no wind blows upon it, and the roughest dispositions
are temperate, when not provoked. Contention stirs up wrath, and what will
we not do when we are angry? To be angry and not fin, est plus quam hu,
manum: more then man's nature is now supposed, capable of. Let but a matter of
variance happen betwixt us, How quickly are we moved? Let us but fall out, and
then we tell one another their own: and that in such reproachful speeches, as
if we meant to right our selves by railing, just like young gamesters who throw
away their cudgels, and go to hand blows: we leave our legal way of defense,
and fall foul upon each others persons: and who commonly so violent, as they
(who like the Devil in my Text) have the worst cause. Fool and Raca, as if we
past neither for Hell, nor the Council, may be taken for civil terms,
amongst us at such a time. Then is commonly the time, we bring our railing
accusation against our brother: then effluet, all shall out. Then whatsoever
favor, friendship, or familiarity, has betrayed to our knowledge, makes
escape into the ear of the stander by, to the disgrace of each other. This and
the like, if not worse, is the effect of our contention. But what does Michael:
this did not he. He contends, but reviles not; reasons, but railes not;
disputes, but exclaimes not; yea prevails against his adversary, yet meddles
not with his person. And how well were it if our variances and disagreements
could be debated with the like moderation? In the mean time I leave those
that are guilty herein, to consider, since they are not Michaels, who they
must needs be? and while they follow not him, whose imitators they must
necessarily acknowledge themselves. I pass to the next particular, in which
the patience of Michael is shown, and that is in regard of the person he
contended withal, The Devil. If any thing might be likely to move him, it
were to be ghest the unworthiness of his Adversary might. Let us be herein
our own judges, what we our selves would do in the like case: what do we
disdain more, then that our inferior should affront us? Should we see a base
beggar dare to contend with us, in any matter that concerns us, how hardly
should we forbear to set upon him with contumelious words, and tell him his
own in down right terms. And yet there is some comparison between him and
us, where as there was none betwixt him and the Devil. Admit a peasant should
rail on a mighty Prince, would we not admire his patience? or would there not
be sons of Zerviah enough by, to call him dead dog for his pains. And
certainly, what could be more unworthy this glorious Saint, then the
opposition of a damned spirit: the power of darkness set against the power of
God, the accuser of the brethren, against the Champion of the Church: Hell to
vaunt it self against Heaven: and how could Michael choose but tell him so?
Thou enemy of Mankind, thou minister of darkness, thou heir of perdition,
thou vassal, thou murderer, thou tempter, thou destroyer, who art thou that
opposest thy self against the messenger of the living God? And yet Michael
forbeares. And what shall I now add to perfect the commendations of so high
deserts? What can I further add to illustrate the unparaleld patience of the
Archangel?

And yet I may seem to have said too much by all I have said hitherto already
by that that follows: He Durst not bring a railing accusation. That he did not
was a marvel: but if he durst not, no wonder if he did not. And this may
seem, indignum Michaele, unworthy of Michael, and derogate from his worthy
example. Fear is little better then patience perforce. But this is as praise
worthy as the rest. He durst not, because he would not, Estius in loc.
Et ideo nollet cum posset ne nos faciles essemus ad maledicendum cuiquam:
Therefore he would not when he could, that he might not be an example to us
of doing the like. And Saint Hierome more emphatically: Merebatur quidem
diabolus maledictum, sed per Archangeli os blasphemia exire, non debuit: The
Devil indeed deserved malediction, but it became not an Archangel to pronounce
it: He deserved a railing accusation, but it stood not with the dignity of so
great a person to bring it. Blasphemy and cursed speaking ought not to proceed
from sacred lips: Michael will regard his own person before his revenge, which
how just soever, yet was not he a fit instrument to inflict it.

And now, Beloved, let the same mind be in you which was in him. It concerns
us likewise to stand upon eur reputation. Let us consider what we are,
Christians: an honorable title, and not to be staynd with blasphemy. When the
frowardness of our nature would prompt us to uncivil language, meminerimus
nos Christianos esse, remember we that we are Christians: and then say,
Merentur quidem impii maledicta, sed per os Christianorum exire non debent:
Wicked men deserve cursing for cursing, but that must not proceed out of
Christians mouths. We are Christians, and ought therefore rather to learn of
Christ, to be lowly and meek; Learn of me for I am lowly and meek; Mat.
11.29.
not rendering evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke, 1. Pet. 3.9. We are
heirs of blessing, 1. Pet. 8.9. And therefore bless them that curse you,
Matt. 5.44. Yea bless, I say, and curse not, Romans 12.14. Let your patient
mind be known to all men, Phil. 4.5. We are reviled, and yet we bless,
says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 4.12. And all this because we are Christians:
Memento nominis tui. I have heard of some, that have forgotten it: remember thy
name which thou so often forgettest, it is Christian. Speak but Christian from
thy heart, and then revile if thou can. Michael could have rayled; but stay,
Ego sum Michael: and then (...); He durst not bring a railing accusation.

But yet another reason remaynes; why Michael would not curse. He remembers,
as he was now Michael, so the Devil was once Lucifer. And therefore he would
not do it: Lorinus in Loc.
Ob excellentiam naturae quam agnoscebat in diabolo: for the excellency of that
nature he acknowledged in the person of the Devil. Quamvis alioqui jure posset
maledicere, although otherwise for his sin and defection from God, he could
have deservedly reviled him. The Devil was once an Angel of glorious
excellency: at cecidit, but he fell from that estate. Once he was in the height
of splendor, and had his name from it, The bright morning star; at ceciedit
ista stella, but that star is fallen. As a creature, so yet he is excellent,
though accursed as a Devil; he is an Angel still though an evil one.

And according to this is that of a good Author true, Maledicere est adeo
illicitum, ut peccatum sit maledicere diabolo: It is so far unlawful to
curse, that it is a sin to curse the Devil. Yea the Son of Syrach himself
says: When the ungodly curses the Devil, he curses his own soul, Ecclus.
21.27. And the reason hereof is well rendered by Lorinus: Quia similis est ipsi
Diabolo impio, nec dignus est hic maledicto nisi propter impietatem, etc.
Because in regard of sin, he, that is the ungodly man, is like the Devil, and
He deserves not to be cursed but for his sin: and what man is he that sins
not? so that so far as a man judges the Devil, so far he condemns himself.
And whereas we curse him as a cause of our sin, (as too many do) and yet
nevertheless obey him, we may be thought to return the malediction on our
selves, as being accessory to our own sin. Let us not therefore rail on the
Devil, but resist him: let us not accuse him, but defy him. If we will curse
him as the author and cause of our sin, let us not obey him when he tempts us
to it.

And if this must be our demeanor and behavior toward the Devil, It may
teach us also a further lesson, namely how to deal with our brethren; that we
ought to distinguish between the person and the offense, the man and his sin.
The person of our brother should be sacred with us, and therefore inviolable,
however his manners be wicked and intolerable. And although the wicked have
deserved evil at our hands, let us not revile them, as being men, and bearing
the same stamp and image of the Creator. And yet they are more then so too,
they are Christians, so also to be forborne. If their sins offend us, that's
all we can plead; Well, let him that first finds fault, cast the first stone.
Certainly in many things we offend all, as says Saint James. James. 3.2.
And if any man dare be so bold as to say with the proud Pharisie, I am not as
this Publican my brother; I will say with the Publicane, Lord be merciful to me
a sinner.

And therefore as for those whose heat will not suffer them to let pass by
injuries done unto them by their ungodly brethren, Let them take heed how they
encroach upon Gods right: we may be too violent in our own cause, and many
times meet with an Adversary that may be too potent for us. And the safest way
in this case is, to commit our cause to God, who is able, and to whom properly
it belongs to wreake our injuries, and require them at the hands of the
wicked that rise up against us. 1 Samuel. 24.12.13.
David will say, The Lord Judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me
etc. let us refer our cause to God. And as he did in the like case, being
slanderously entreated of his enemies, Psalm. 55. So let us cast our burden upon
the Lord: It is the last particular observable in Michaels behavior, He durst
not bring a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

The Archangel, though a mighty one, as his name imports: the power of God: yet
when he would rebuke the Devil, he calls to mind then, he was a Servant, and
so it was not in his commission: and though one of his names gave him power to
do his office, yet the other might put him in mind of his service: Though he
were an Archangel, yet but a ministering spirit, a delegate, or at most a
Captain of those that were in the same Commission with him. And being so, it
was his office only to bury Moses. If any should resist him in the execution of
it, the matter was to be referd to the higher power: the servants injury is the
masters to revenge, not his own; so he accounts it. He durst not bring a
railing accusation himself, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

The Application is pregnant. As it will not be for our honor, who take upon
us the title of Christians, to revile: so will it not be for Gods honor, that
we should take the sword out of his hands. Though we are Christians, yet
remember we that we are but servants: and if any shall disturb us in his
service, it is our Masters injury as well as our own; yea and his only, as much
as belongs to revenge. Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, yea mine, and I will
repay it. In the mean time, let our arms be our patience; our shield our
suffering; our guard our silence. Let the wicked curse, it is their nature: let
us hold our peace, it is our grace. If Rabshekah rail, it is the King: yea the
King of Heaven that commands, answer him not a word. If Shemei curse it is
David, yea it is the God of David, that says, Let him alone, and let him
curse, I will requite thee good for his cursing, if not this, yet another day.
In the mean space, if our tongues must needs be speaking, let them be
blessing: if we must needs be answering, let us be praying: if we needs must
be revenging, let us be reconciling. Let us love our enemies, let us bless
them that curse us, let us pray for them that despitefully use us: so shall we
be children of our Father which is in Heaven, and consequently heirs of that
Kingdom which he has prepared for us; and not only for us, but for all those
that in patience and well doing expect his appearing; when our Savior shall say
unto us, Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the World.

Now to God our heavenly Father, to Christ our merciful Redeemer, to the holy
Ghost our ever blessed Comforter, be all praise, power, might, majesty and
dominion, etc.

Imprimatur,

December. 8. 1639. THO. WYKES.

ERRATA.
Page 2. line 10. Read, might be in some. 7. 20. Dominions. Ibid. in marg. c.
9.. 10. 20. And that dying. 14. 7. Imposture. 17. 15. Angelical.


