A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF UNIVERSAL MAPPES AND CARDS, AND OF THEIR USE: AND
ALSO THE USE OF PTHOLEMEY his Tables. Necessary for those that DELIGHT IN
READING OF Histories: and also for Traueilers by Land or Sea.

Newly set forth by THOMAS BLVNDEVILLE, of Newton Flotman in the County of
Norffolke. Gent.

LONDON Printed by Roger Ward, for Thomas Cadman. Anno. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL M. Francis Windam, one of the Judges her Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas.
GOOD Sir, vouchsafe to receive this poor little Pamphlet, partly as in lieu
of a richer Nevvyeares gift, and partly as a token of my thankful mind,
which is more vvilling then able to deserve any one iotte of the great favor,
friendship, and diverse benefits that I have from time to time received at your
hands: for want of which ability I neither can, nor will loosen my self from
any of those bonds, wherewith you have most straightly bound me, but rather
to increase the same, humbly praying you to continue in your good love and
favor toward me, until I shall willingly deserve the contrary: In the
mean time I pray God to prosper you in all your doings, and long to preserve
you.

From my poor Swans nest. 17. Decembris. 1588. Your old vvelvviller, bound to
be always at your commandment. Thomas Blundeuille.

To the Reader.
I Daily see many that delight to look on Mappes, and can point to England,
France, Germany, and to the East and West Indies, and to diverse other places
therein described: but yet for want of skill in Geography, they know not with
what manner of lines they are traced, nor what those lines do signify, nor yet
the true use of Mappes in deed: Wherefore, somewhat to instruct those that have
not studied Geographie (without the knowledge whereof me thinks that the
necessary reading of Histories is half lame, and is neither so pleasant, nor
so profitable as otherwise it would be) I thought good to write this little
Treatise: in reading whereof, if you reap any profit thereby, I pray you be
thankeful to the Right Worshipful, and my especial good friend, M. Francis
Windam, one of the Judges of her Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, who first
motioned me thereunto, and by whose persuasion I have the more willingly put
the same in Print. Vale.

CERTAIN TERMS OF COSMOGRAgraphie, briefly expounded, for those that are
not learned in that science, to the intent they may the better understand this
Treatise.
THe Axle tree of the World is a right line, The Axle trre of the world.
imagined to pass through the Center or midst of the earth, from the one end
of heaven to the other: the upper end of which Axle tree is called the Pole
Artike, that is to say, the North Pole: The two Poles.
and the nether end, the Pole Antartike, that is, the South Pole: upon which
two Poles, otherwise called the hooks or hengils of the world, the heavens do
turn round about the earth. Moreover the Cosmographers do divide the world
into diverse parts by certain Circles, whereof some are called greater, and
some lesser.

The greater are those which do divide the world into 2 equal parts: The
greter Circle.
whereof there be 6: that is, the Equinoctial, the Zodiake, the Meridian, the
Horizon, and the 2 Colures.

The Equinoctial is a great Circle, The Equinoctial.
girding the world in the very midst betwixt the 2 Poles, by reason whereof
there are two latitudes, the one Northern, and the other Southern.

The Northern latitude is that space, The north latitude.
which is contained betwixt the Equinoctial and the North Pole.

The Southern latitude is that space, The South latitud.
which is contained betwixt the Equinoctial and the South Pole: and either of
these two spaces contains in breadth 90 degrees.

A Degree.
A Degree is one part of a Circle, being divided into 360 parts called degrees.

Longitude.
Again, the circuit of the Equinoctial, containing 360 degrees, is the very
longtitude of the Earth: the first degree of which longitude begins at the
the first Meridian, placed in the West, and so proceeds Eastward unto the 180
degree of the Equinoctial, and from thence returns by the West until you
come again to the 360 degree, which is the last degree of longitude. And note
by the way that every degree of the Equinoctial contains 60 English miles,
so as the longitude of the whole Earth is 21600 miles.

The Zodiake,
The Zodiake is a great, broad, and slope or shoring Circle, carrying the 12
Signs: in the midst whereof is a line called the Ecliptike line, from which
the Sun never swarueth.

The Meridian
The Meridian is a great Circle, passing over our heads, in what part of the
World soever we be, and also through both the Poles: which line when the Sun
touches it above the Horizon, it is Noonetide or midday to those that dwell
under the same.

The Horison.
The Horizon is a great Circle, dividing the upper half of the World which we
see, from the nether half which we see not: in the the very midst or Center
of which Circle, if in a plain field you look round about you, you shall
always find your self to be.

The 2 Colures
Now as touching the two Colures, because they differ not in effect, though in
name, from two Meridians, I leave to speak of them, as well for that I have
spoken of them at large in my Sphere, as also for that they are not mentioned
in this Treatise.

4 lesser circles
Of the lesser Circles there be four: that is, the two Polar Circles, The
Circles Artike and Antartike.
and the two Tropikes. Of the two Polar Circles, the one enuironeth the North
Pole, and therefore is called the Circle Artike, and the other enuironeth the
South Pole, and is called the Circle Antartike, because it is opposite to the
other.

Again, of the two Tropiques, the one is placed betwixt the Equinoctial and
the Circle Artike, The Tropike of Cancer.
and is called the Tropike of Cancer: and the other is placed betwixt the
Equinoctial and the Circle Antartike, and is called the Tropike of Capricorn:
The Tropike of Capricorn.
and each of these Tropikes is distant from the Equinoctial 23 degrees and a
half, which is the greatest declination of the Sun from the Equinoctial, The
greatest declination of the Sun.
for he never mounteth higher then the Tropique of Cancer, nor descends lower
then the Tropike of Capricorn, and these two Circles are Paralels to the
Equinoctial.

Paralels are 2 lines or Circles, Paralels.
equally distant in all places one from another. And by these four lesser
Circles the Earth is divided into 5 Zones or broad spaces, Zones.
whereof there be two cold. 2 temperate, and one hot described both in my
Sphere and also in this treatise.

A Parallel of the longest day, A Parallel of ye longest day.
is a space of the Earth, wherein the day increases by one quarter of an
hour, proceeding from Equinoctial toward any of the Poles. A Clyme.


A Clime is a space of the Earth, containing two such Paralells wherein the day
increases by half an hour, of which Clymes according to the old Writers,
there be 7 declared at the full in my Sphere, and also somewhat touched in this
Treatise.

A Brief Description of universal Mappes and Cards, and of their use, and
also the use of Ptholomey his Tables.
THis word Mappa in latin signifies a Table cloth of lynnen to cover a board:
of the shape and likeness whereof universal tables, containing the description
of the earth, are commonly called Mappes. And first you have to understand,
that every such Map is chiefly traced with ij. sorts of lines or circles,
that is Meridians and paralels. The Meridians are either right or circular
lines passing through both the Poles of the world, and are imagined to be
drawn right up and down from the head to the foot of the Map, and are
called Meridians, of this Latin word meridies, which is as much to say as
midday or noonetyde. Because that when the Sun comes to touch any of those
lines, it is mydday to those that dwell right under the same. Again, Paralells
are either right or circular lines imagined to be equally distant one from
another, which do cross the foresaid Meridians with right angles. Now in the
very midst of the Map is most commonly drawn from head to foot a right line
which signifies not only the first Meridian, but also the Axle tree of the
world, the upper end of which line is called the poole Artique, that is to say
the North Pole, and the nether end the Pole Antartique, that is the South
Poole, and this line is crossed in the very midst betwixt the ij. Pooles with
another great circle or right line called the Equinoctial, because that when
the Sun comes to touch this line or circle, the day and night is equal
throughout the world. The one half of which line toward the right hand shows
the east part, and the other half toward the left hand shows the west part of
the world: so as these ij. lines, the first Meridian and the Equinoctial do
point out the iiij. quarters of the world, North, South, East, and West, from
whence the four principal wyndes do blow betwixt: which wyndes are set down
in most Mappes together with their Latin or Italian names in the outermost
skirt or border thereof viij. other wyndes, so as in all there be xij. wyndes,
whereby the ancient Greeks and Romans were wont to sail. The names whereof
both Greek, Latin and English are heretofore set down in the latter end of
our Sphere.

But now to return to our first two lines, that is the first Meridian and the
Equinoctial, you have to note that both these lines or circles are divided
each of them into 360. degrees, so as every quarter of them contains 90.
degrees. And in the Equinoctial are set down the degrees of longitude, which
is the length of the world, round about from West to East, and again from
East by West home again: The first degree whereof begins, whereas the first
aforesaid Meridian crosses the Equinoctial in the very midst of the Map,
and so proceeds Eastward unto the number of 90 degrees, which is as far as
you can go Eastward, since from thence by reason of the roundnesse of the
Earth, you must needs turn back again by the back side of the Sphere, or
ball Westward, until you come to the 270 degree, which is the farther point
westward you can go, from whence you must return Eastward until you come to
the 360 degree, which is the last degree of longitude, and ends where the
first degree begins.

Moreover in the said first Meridian, or in some other Meridian hard by it, are
set down the degrees of latitude, that is to say, the breadth of the world,
both Northern and Southern: for from the Equinoctial to the North Pole are
contained in the foresaid Meridian 90. degrees, and that is called the North
latitude, and from the Equinoctial to the South Pole, are contained in ye said
Meridian, other 90 degrees, which is called the South latitude: and in most
Mappes the Equinoctial line is divided and crossed with 18 Meridians on each
side of the first Meridian, dividing the Equinoctial into 36 several spaces
or distances, every space containing 10 degrees, and every degree contains
60 Italian miles of length.

Moreover betwixt the Equinoctial and each of the Poles are drawn certain
Circles or lines, called (as I said before) Paralels: of which most commonly 4
are painted with red ink, signifying the 4 lesser Circles before described in
our Sphere, whereof the highest toward the North Pole, is called the Circle
Artique, being distant from the Pole 23 degrees and a half, and the lowest
toward the South Pole is called the Circle Antartique, being also distant
from the Pole 23 degrees and a half.

Now as touching the other two red Circles, the one lying betwixt the Circle
Artique, and the Equinoctial is called the Tropique of Cancer, and the other
lying betwixt the Equinoctial and the Circle Antartique is called the Tropique
of Capricorn, and each of these two Tropiques is distant from the Equinoctial
23 degrees and a half, which is the greatest declination of the Sun, for
betwixt these ij. Tropiques the Sun continually makes his course and
return, as this word Tropique signifies, mounting never higher then the
Tropique of Cancer: nor discending lower then the Tropique of Capricorn: for
which cause some do set down in their Maps betwixt the said two Tropiques an
overthwart line, signifying the ecliptique line, under which the Sun
continually walks. Now by help of the foresaid 4 circles, the earth is
divided into 5 zones, that is, one whotte, 2 temperate, and 2 cold. The whotte
is contained betwixt the 2 Tropiques, in the midst of which whotte zone, is the
Equinoctial line, and of the 2 temperate zones, the one lies betwixt the
Tropique of Cancer and the circle Artique, and the other betwixt the Tropique
of Capricorn and the circle Antartique.

Again, of the 2 cold zones, the one lies betwixt the North Pole and the
circle Artique, and the other betwixt the South Pole, and the circle
Antartique* Now besides these four special Paralels, there be diverse other
Paralels drawn on each side of the Equinoctial, both Northward and Southward,
which crossing in certain points the first Meridian marked with degrees, do
show the true latitude of every place, and under what Clime or Parallel it is,
and also how many hours the longest day of any place under every Parallel is,
beginning to account the same, either from the Equinoctial upward toward
the North Pole, along the first Meridian marked with degrees of Northern
latitudes, or else from the said Equinoctial downe-warde toward the South
Pole, marked with degrees of Southern latitude.

Notwithstanding, they use most commonly to set down the number and just
distaunces of the Clymes, Paralels, and hours in the North latitude only,
willing the like numbers of Clymes, Paralels, and hours to be accounted in
the South latitude, even as they are in the North latitude and with like
distances. And note that in proceeding toward the Pole from the Parallel,
whereas the longest day is 24. hours, they account the Parallel of the
longest day no longer by hours, but by months, that is to say, from one
month to six months, whereof we have spoken before in our sphere. The
numbers of the aforesaid Clymes, Paralels and hours you shall find set forth
in Vopellius Map alongest the first Meridian on the left hand. But he
sets down the numbers of the longest days increasing by months in the
uttermost border of his Map on the right hand betwixt the North Pole, and the
circle Artique. And in that border he sets down the number of leagues and
miles answerable to every Parallel, whereas also he shows the three
differences of Inhabitants according to their shadows, that is to say. the
Periscij, Heteroscij, and Amphiscij.

Periscij are those that dwell in any of the two cold zones, whose shadow
goes round about them.

Heteroscij be those that dwell in any of the two temperate zones whose
shadow tends at noone-tide but one way, that is either North or South.

Amphiscij be those that inhabit the whotte zone, whose shadow tends both
ways, that is sometime North and sometime South, as is before declared at
large in our sphere.

But in the Map of Gemma Frizius, you shall find all these things set forth
on the left hand of his Map amongst the uttermost circles, whereas upon the
circle Artique, he sets down the twelve signs, having certain compassed
lines, running down to the Equinoctial, meeting and concurring all in one
point: at the end whereof upon the Equinoctial, you shall find the number of
hours, at which the sun rises in every degree of latitude.

Also at the nether end of his Map on the left hand, he places a half
quadrant, which he calls Directorium nauticum, whereof we shall speak
hereafter.

And because he would have his Map to serve both sea and land, he sets
down a certain number of mariners compasses divided with 32 lines signifiyng
ye 32. winds, which do show how every place bears one from the other, and
by what wind a Ship is to be directed from one part to another, which thing
is also observed in Mercators Map and others that have written more lately,
and yet nothing serviceable for the Sea, because (as M Borowgh, Controller of
her Majesty's Navy, a man most skilful in the Art of sailing says) no
consideration is had in the said Maps or Cards touching ye variation of the
Compass, without the which they can never set down any true or just direction.

Now as touching the division and order of the parts of the Earth, most
commonly described in universal Mappes, you shall understand that the ancient
Cosmographers, not knowing then the West Indies, nor many other places
situated both Northward and Southward (which have been since discovered)
divided the whole Earth only into three parts, that is, Europe, Aphrike and
Asia, in the description whereof, their Mappes never extended in latitude
Northwards further then to 63 degrees, as I have said before in my Sphere, and
Southward no further then to 20 degrees of the Northern latitude, or there
about, but in longitude from West to East, beginning the same at the Islands
called Insulae Canariae or Fortunatae, which are situated at the West end of
Aphrike, in the Sea called Mare Atlanticum: their descriptions do extend to
180 degrees. But because a whole world almost has been found out since those
times, our modern Cosmographers do divide the whole Earth into 4 parts: that
is Europe, Aphrike, Asia and America, which we now call the West Indies. And
because men of diverse Nations have sailed round about the world, East and West,
their late descriptions do extend in longitude the whole content of the
Equinoctial, which is 360 degrees: and in latitude Northwards, the same
descriptions do extend to 80 degrees: and Southwards to 66. as you may see in
the universal Mappes lately set forth by Mercator, and by Barnardus Puteanus
and others.

But the ancient and modern do greatly differ in the division of the parts
of latitude, as well Northern as Southern, and also in longitude: for,
whereas the ancient Cosmographers do divide each latitude into 90. degrees by
certain Paralels making 9. equal spaces, every space containing 10. equal
degrees: in the latter Mappes last mentioned, you shall find those spaces and
the degrees thereof altogether unequal, the first 3 spaces next the
Equinoctial only excepted, for those differ not above one half degree at the
most: but from thence Northward, every space is greater then other, and every
degree in every such space is greater then other, insomuch as the fourth space
contains 11 degrees and a half of those degrees which are set down in the
first space, and the fifth space contains of such degrees 13 degrees, the 6
space contains of the said degrees 16 degrees: ye 7 contains of the same
degrees 20 degrees, so as the space is is twice so broad as the first space
and one half degree more: the eight space contains of the said first degrees
36: further then which 8 spaces containing 80 degrees of latitude, their Mappes
extend not Northward: and they observe the like proportion in the Southern
latitude, saving that they extend no farther Southward then to 66 degrees and
a half.

Again, they differ in longitude thus: for the modern Cosmographers do make
the first Meridian to pass through the Isles called Azores, which do stand 5
degrees more Westward then the Fortunate Islands do: through which Fortunate
Islandes, Ptolomey and his followers do appoint the first Meridian to pass.

The cause of which transposing the said first Meridian is, because that the
mariners Compass does never show the right North and South, in any other
place, but only under that Meridian. Yea M. Borowgh thinks that it would
show it more truly, if the said Meridian were placed somewhat more Westward.
But in those Cards and mappes that are made according to the rules of
Ptolomey: the spaces of Paralels containing the 90. degrees of latitude, both
Northwarde and Southward, are equal, and all the degrees of every such space,
are also equal. And yet the spaces of Paralels that show the longest day in
any place, are toward the Pole, every one more narrow then other: for as I
have said before in my sphere, there are 3 kinds of paralels, that is Paralels
of the Sun, Paralels of the latitude, and Paralels of the longest day. The
causes why in these latter Maps, the degrees of latitude are made greater and
greater toward the Poles, are set down by Barnardus in his universal Map,
who says there, that in making the said Map, he had 3. special cares:
First, that the places might be so situated, as they may have both true
direction and distance, and also due longitude and latitude, and as nigh as may
be, the same very shape which they have in the sphere or globe, to which end
he has invented a new proportion or habitude of the Meridians to the
paralels, affirming that the Maps before made, are not fit for Navigations, by
reason of the crookednes and bowing of the meridians, which by their oblique
and overthwart falling into the Paralels, do so much disfigure in the
uttermost parts, the true shape of the Regions as they can skant be known. And
as for the mariners Cards, because their Paralels of latitude are also of
equal distance from the Equinoctial to the very Pole; he says that they must
needs misfashion the Regions and make the directions, distances, longitudes,
and latitudes to be untrue, and thereby cause great errors. Which to avoid, he
makes the spaces of his Paralels and degrees of latitude to increase by little
and little toward the Pole, affirming that thereby all places shall have
their true shape, and also their true directions, distaunces, longitudes, and
latitudes.

His second care was, that the Regions and places, might have their true
quantity and greatness, and also true distance one from another, wherein he has
taken as he says, greatest pains whilst he did confer the Tables of the
Castilians and Portugales as well amongst themselves, as with diverse other
Nauigations both printed and written. His third care was to show what parts of
the world were known to the ancient men, that the limits and bounds of their
Geographie might not be unknown, to the intent they might have their due
honor and praise. And having showed what places they did in their time
describe both East, West, North, and South, in the end of his speech, he
affirms, that ancient Cosmographers have set down in the East Indians more
places, then ever the Portugales have as yet discovered or attained unto.

This Barnardus Puteanus borne in Bruges, is by his own confession a Cutter or
Grauer in brass, and also a Cosmographer, whose Map set forth in the year
of our Lord 1579. does not differ in any one point that I can find from the
last universal Map of Mercator that famous Cosmographer, who as I understand
was himself also sometime a Cutter and Grauer of such Maps and Globes as Gemma
Frizius did cause to be printed in his time, from whom Mercator learned great
part of his most excellent skill in Cosmographie. But of one thing I am sure,
ye Ptolomey was first Master to them all, who has set down so good and
perfect rules of describing the Earth, be it whole or part, as in the opinion
of most learned men, no better can be invented.

Truly when I did first behold these latter Maps, and saw that the Paralels
toward the Pole were as long as the very Equinoctial it self, it seemed to
me somewhat strange, for then I said that a Ship in sailing about the world
under the Parallel of 60 degrees, should by this means make as long a voyage
as that which saileth about the world right under the Equinoctial, which
voyage is twice as long. For this contains in longitude 21600 miles, which is
the whole compass of the Earth, and the other contains in longitude 10800
miles, which is just half so much and no more. But after that I had taken
better aduisement thereof, I found by measuring with my compass, that one
degree of the Meridian next to the 60 degree of latitude, did comprehend two of
such degrees, as are set down in the Equinoctial, and that one degree of the
Meridian, crossing the the Parallel that has 70 degrees of latitude, did
comprehend 3 degrees of the Equinoctial line, and so I found the degrees
toward the Pole; to wax greater and greater, by which degrees I perceived
their meaning was to have the longitude of their paralels to be measured, and
not by the degrees of the Equinoctial. And by ye means their paralels should
have each one as nigh as might be his due longitude proporcionally, even as they
have in the globe.

Moreover the shape, quantities, and distances of such Countries as have been
found out of late days must needs be more perfectly set forth in these
Mappes, then in those yt have been made hertofore, because the true longitudes
and latitudes of those places were not so well known then as they are now.
Albeit I fear me that of many places in the Indies, there are as yet but few
true longitudes known. For it is not so easy a thing to get the true longitude
of every place, as the true latitude thereof. And had not the late makers of
Maps been greatly helped by the Maps and Cards of such learned Pilots as have
traueiled those Countries. I doubt not, but that they should have committed as
great errors as those that wrote before them. And of one thing I do assure my
self, that in these latter Mappes, more places are described, then ever were
known or discovered: as for example, the North-parts of Groyneland, Crockland,
and America, all which they make Islands, and yet never sailed about them, and
specially on the North side, as it may well be gathered by the vain attempting
of diverse Nations, to find out new ways in the North seas to the Molucas
both by East and West. For being a little entered into those seas, they are
quickly driven back, either by extreme cold, by great Yses, or by the raging
floods bred of snow, and falling from the mountains of the next continent,
and making in some places such Whirlepooles in the Sea, as if any Ship chance
to come nigh them, it is soon swallowed vpppe. Neither do I think, that King
Arthur in his time, ever sent (as it is reported) any of his people to inhabit
those Islands, being places in mine opinion, more meet for Whales and
monstrous fishes to dwell in, then for men: and specially for English men,
which are not able to suffer the cold winter at Wardhouse: to which place some
of our Mariners do sail in Summer season every year. And yet Wardhouse has
skant in latitude 71 degrees, much less then are they able to winter in those
places that have 77 degrees of latitude, as the North side of Groynland and
Crockland has. Moreover the North side of the promontorye Tabin has 76
degrees of latitude, which place, whatsoever Pliny says thereof in his fourth
book of Histories, yet I believe that no Roman came ever there to describe ye
Promontory. Neither do I believe that the Friar of Oxford, by virtue of his
Art Magic ever came so nigh the Pole to measure with his Astrolabe those
cold parts together with the four floods, which Mercator and Barnardus do
describe both in the front, and also in the nether end of their Maps, unless
he had some cold devil out of the middle Region of the air to be his guide.
And therefore I take them in mine opinion to be mere fables. Truly if any men
should discover those parts, me thinks that the people of Finmarke and of
Wardhouse or such like people bordering upon the North seas, should best do
it, having bodies used to extreme cold. But then being bred in so gross an
air, their wits perhaps are too gross for such a purpose.

I remember that William Boorne in his book called the Regiment of the Sea,
secteth down five sundry ways to sail into Cathay, whereof the first way is
by the Cape of good hope in the outermost south part of Affrike: The second by
the Sea called Mare Magellanicum. The third way is to sail betwixt the North
part of America and the Isles of Groynland and Crockland. The fourth is by Noua
Zemla, whereas Sir Hughe Willoughby in seeking that way was frozen to death.
The firt way is to sail right under the Pole, that is first from South to
North, until you be right under the Pole, and then from North to South,
alleging there certain reasons to prove the three last ways possibly to be
as passable, as the first ij. ways well* known in these days and usually
haunted.

The strongest reason that Boorne uses to make the foresaid Seas Nauigable,
is, for that the Sun by his long tarriyng above the horizon, so warmeth both
land and Sea, as it cannot be over soon cold again. But I pray you what
heat can the Sun yield to that place above whose Horizon he is never
elevated more then 23. degrees and a half, a very cold winterlie heat GOD
wotte. And though the cold were not so extreme as I take it to be indeed, yet
in desert places, where is there any safe harborow, fresh water, or any other
necessary succor to be had? For in taking such a iorny, let no man think to go
through without a bait, unless he sail in Pegasus, and has both wind and
tide at will.

Notwithstanding, I can greatly commend those valiant minds that do attempt
such desperate voyages, and the rather when they do it for knowledge sake, and
to profit their Country, and not altogether for private gain and lucre.

But truly for mine own part, I think it impossible that any man bred in any
of the temperate zones or in the hot zone is ever able to continue the whole
journey in any of those 3 ways: no, though they were much more passable then I
take them to be indeed. But if they were passable in all respects, saving for
cold, then I think no Nation or people so meet to attempt those ways as those
which I have already named, or such like, borne and bred nigh unto the North
Seas. But leaving these matters, let us now show how every one of the 4
foresaid parts of the Earth, that is, Europe, Affrike, Asia, and America is
bounded, and how many miles each part contains as well in longitude as in
latitude, according to such longitude and latitude as Mercator and Puteanus do
set down in their Maps.

Europe is bounded on the North with the North Ocean Sea, Europa.
and on the South with the Sea called Mare Mediterraneum, on the East with the
flood Tanais, and on the west with the West Ocean Sea. Europe in measuring with
a right line from the furthest part of Ireland on the West unto the flood
Tanais, on the East both places having 52 degrees of latitude, has in
longitude. 2166. miles, and in measuring with a right line from the furthest
part of Morea on the South, whose latitude is 35 degrees, unto the North Sea
side having 72 degrees of latitude, has in latitude 2220. miles.

Affrike is bounded on the North with the straight Sea Gibralter and with the
Sea called Mare Mediterraneum, Africa.
on the South with a sea which deuideth Affrike from the south land not yet
fully known, and on the east with the red sea or gulf of Arabia, and on the
west with the great Ocean Atlantique. Affrike in measuring with a right line
from Gambra on the west unto the Cape de Gardasa on the East, both places
having 10 degrees of North latitude, or there about has in longitude 4155.
miles.

And in measuring with a right line from the 50 degree of the Equinoctial unto
the sea called Mare mediterraneum, it has in north latiude 32 degrees, which
being multiplied by 60 makes 1920 miles. In South latitude measuring with a
right line, from th 50 degree of the Equinoctial unto the Cape of good hope,
it has 35 degrees, which being multiplied by 60 makes 2100 miles.

Asia.
Asia is bounded on the North, with the North Ocean sea, and on the South
partly with the red sea, which Sea according to Pomponius Mela, extends to
the Isle sometime called Taprobana now Sumatra: which is a famous market place
of all manner of spices. Also Asia is bounded on the South with diverse other
gulphes and seas, as you may see in the Map: Again on the East it is bounded
with the East Indian Ocean, and with the straight sea of Anian, and on the
West, it has the flood Tanais and the Fenne of Meotis, and diverse seas, as
Bosphorus Cimmerius the sea called Mare Euxinum, ye sea Bosphorus Thracius and
Propontis, and part of the sea Mediterraneum, and part of the red sea or gulf
of Arabia, which deuideth Affrike from Arabia Felix. Asia in measuring with a
right line from the flood Tanais to the promo^torie Tamos, both places having
50 degrees of latitude, has in longitude 4284 miles, and in measuring with a
right line from the 150 degree of the Equinoctial unto the promontory Tabin,
Asia has in North latitude 76 degrees, which being multiplied by 60 makes
4560 miles.

America.
America is bounded on ye North, with the North Ocean sea, and on the south,
with ye sea called Mare Magellanicum, on the East with the great Ocean
Atlantique, and on ye west with the West Indian Ocean, and the strait sea of
Anian* America in measuring with a right line from the strait of Anian to the
furthest part of Estotilant upon ye 64 degree of latitude, has in longitude
4342 miles, and in measuring with a right line from the 270 degree of the
Equinoctial unto the North sea, it has in North latitude 76 degrees, which
makes 4560 miles, and yet the quantity of the ground described in the Map,
is not so great as the other by a seventh part: wherein I can very well excuse
the Mappe-makers, not having perhaps as yet the true longitude of that part
of America.

Finally, in measuring with a right line from the 310 degree of the
Equinoctial unto the sea called Mare Magellanicum, it has in the South
latitude 52 degrees, which makes 3120 miles.

Now if you would know what kingdoms, Regions, Cities, Mountains, Fluds,
Lakes, also what seas together with their Islands, Ports, Capes, Points, and
baies do belong to every one of the foresaid four parts, then study well
these modern Maps: and with your eye you shall behold, not only the whole
world at one view, but also every particular place contained therein. Which to
describe at the full, in writing would require a long time Wherefore leaving
that to your own Industry, I will show you how to find out the longitude and
latitude of any place in the Map.

Also to know how one place lies from another, and with what wind you have to
sail from one place to another. And finally how to find out the true
distaunce betwixt place and place, in which things the chief use of Mappes
does consist.

And first you have to understand, that the Meridians which you see in the
Map, do serve for diverse purposes. For you learn thereby that it is
noone-tide or midday sooner to one place then to another, by marking what
Meridian is more toward the East, which the Sun always touches sooner
then that Meridian which is more toward the West. Also by the Meridians you
know how the Eclipse of the Moon appears sooner to one place then to
another, and with what variety of time.

For they whose Meridian is toward the West, do seem to see the Eclipse of
the Moon sooner then they whose Meridian is more toward the East, whereas in
very truth the Eclipse of the moon is seen to all places (where it can be
seen) at one very instant of like greatness, and yet seems to be seen later
or sooner, by reason of the diversity of the time of the day, in places
standing one East or West from another. And if the distance betwixt those two
Meridians do contain 15 degrees of the Equinoctial, then the Eclips
appears to be sooner to the one then to the other by one whole hour. For
every 15 degrees makes an hour, and therefore look how many 15 degrees you
find betwixt the two Meridians, so many hours are to be accounted. And if you
find fewer degrees, then the time of the Eclips is to be shortened accordingly,
and by attributing 4 minutes of an hour to one degree, (for four times 15
makes 60 minutes, which is also one hour) you may make your account so small
or great as you will. And note also that you may conceive to be in the Map as
many Meridians as there are degrees in the Equinoctial.

As for the Eclipse of the Sun, it is seen, neither generally, nor fully at
the self same time, nor yet of the same greatness in all places. Indeed it
appears sooner to the Western Countries, then to the Eastern. But the
diversity of the time of appearance does depend not only of the number of
Meridians betwixt the two places, but also of the swift or slow motion of the
Moon, which coming betwixt us and the Sun, takes the sight of the Sun
from us.

Moreover, by the Meridians you shall know what longitude any place in the Map
has, by doing thus. First set the one foot of your compass in the place it
self, and the other in some Meridian that is next unto it, whether it be on
the left or right hand, it makes no matter: and from thence draw down your
compass following still that Meridian until you come to the Equinoctial
line, and there mark upon what degree of the Equinoctial that foot of your
compass which you did first put in the place, does rest and there make a
prick. That done, count how many degrees that is distant from the first
Meridian, and that is the true longitude of the place: and that longitude
serves to all the places that be under that Merian, though they be never so
far distant one from another North and South.

Now if you would know the latitude of any place in ye Map, that is to say, how
far it is distant from the Equinoctial, either Northward or southward, either
of which latitudes contains 90 degrees. then do thus: set ye one foot of your
Compass upon the very place, and the other upon that Parallel which is next
it, whether the Parallel be above it or beneath, it makes no matter, and draw
your Compass from that place following still that Parallel until you come to
that Meridian, which is marked with the degrees of latitude, which Meridian in
the latter Maps, stands somewhat more West then the first Meridian does. And
mark upon what degree that foot of your Compass which you did draw from the
place does rest, and there make a prick. That done, count how many degrees
that prick is distant from the Equinoctial, and that is the true latitude of
that place. And the like latitude have all they that dwell under that Parallel,
how far so ever they dwell asunder, East and West. And by knowing the
latitude of any place, you may quickly find also in some Mappes under what
Clime or Parallel such place is situated, and of how many hours the longest
day is there, as in the Map of Vopellius, of Gemma Frizius and diverse others.
But in these latter Mappes such things are not set forth, wherefore not having
the other maps, you may resort to the tables set down in my sphere, which do
show all such things at the full.

Now to know how one place bears from another, and with what a ship is to be
directed from one port to another, and also what distance is betwixt 2 places,
that is, how many miles one place is distant from another, the latter
Cosmographers, as Mercator, Barnardus, Puteanus, and diverse others have
invented a new instrument called Organum directorium, which they set down in
their Maps together with the use thereof. Organum directorium
But in mine opinion not plainly enough for most men's capacity. This
Instrument contains 2 Quadrants of a Circle, having the names of the winds
written therein: And they call the upper Quadrant Organum Superius, and the
nether Quadrant Organum Inferius. Which 2 Quadrants have 2 lines marked with
degrees, and are joined together with a right angle, of which 2 lines the
standing or hanging line on the left hand does signify the first Meridian, and
is marked with 75 unequal degrees of latitude, in such proportion as ye middle
Meridia^ of the Map has. The other line which lies overthwart, signifies the
Equinoctial, and is marked with 90 equal degrees of longitude. But the spaces
of the Paralels of latitude are in number 7 and a half, every whole space
containing 10 degrees, and the half space but 5 degrees. Which spaces are
wider and wider toward the Pole, and of like proportion to those of the Map.

And note by the way that the highest right line that goes from the first
Meridian toward your right hand, is the East line, and the nethermost line
signifiyng the Equinoctial is the West line. For the upper Quadrant comes
toward you from East to South, and the nether Quadrant goes from you toward
the left hand from west to south, and in the center of each Quadrant must be put
a long thread to show the direction from place to place. The use of this
Instrument is thus: first having found out in the Map the several longitudes,
and latitudes of 2 places in such order as is before taught, seek the latitude
of the first place in the first Meridian, and there make a mark. I call here
the first place, that from whence you go, and the second that to which you go.
That done, seek out in the said Meridian the latitude of the second place, and
there make another mark. And from that mark of the second place draw a right
line toward your right hand, so as it may be a Parallel to the Equinoctial
line. Then take the difference of the 2 longitudes by substracting the lesser
out of the greater, and seek out the degrees of that difference in the
Equinoctial line, and there make a mark from which mark draw a right line
that may be a Parallel to the first Meridian. And whereas this line crosses the
first line there set down a mark, then draw a right line from the mark of
the first place, so as it may pass through the crossing point. That done, if
the latitude of the first place be greter then that of the second place, make a
Parallel to that line with the thread of the upper quadrant, but if the
latitude of the first be lesser then the second, then make a Parallel unto the
said line with the thread of the nether Quadrant, which with the help of your
Compass you shall easily do. And that thread being stretched out amongst the
winds, will show by what wind the second place bears from the first. And the
opposite wind is the director whereby you have to sail: yet neither Mercator
nor Barnardus do plainly show how to find out the true distance of 2 places by
this instrument, nor yet do set down in their Maps, either skale or tronke to
take the distance betwixt 2 places with the compass, as most commonly al other
Maps and Mariners Cards have, but do refer the plain declaration thereof to
other their books and tables which I have not yet seen, and therefore in the
mean time I thought good to set down according to Barnardes rule, this brief
way of finding out the distance of any 2 places whatsoever is set down in their
Maps. First with your Compass, take the just distance of the two latitudes
upon the first Meridian, which is otherwise called the difference of the
latitude. And having laid a ruler or thread to the places, look how many
times the foresaid distance, or difference taken with your Compass, is
comprehended in the space that lies betwixt the two places, and by so many
times multiply the said difference, the product whereof being multiplied
again by 60, will show how many miles the one place is distant from the
other. As for example, the distance or difference betwixt the two latitudes of
London and Jerusalem, is 19 degrees or there abouts, which being taken with
your compass you find to be two times contained in the space betwixt
Jerusalem and London. Wherefore in multiplying 19 degrees by 2 you find the
product to be 38 which being multiplied by sixty, makes 2280 miles, and so
far is Jerusalem from London by a right line. But if in measuring the
distance betwixt 2 places with your Compass there remain any odd space not
fully answering the first widenes of your Compass, then take that od space
with your Compass being straightned and made fit thereunto, and look how
many degrees the said odd space comprehends in the first Meridian, about the
midst of the degrees of the foresaid difference of latitude, add those degrees
also to the rest which you have already measured and multiplied, and by
multiplying the whole sum by 60 you shall have the true distance.

Again, it may be that the two places do not differ at all in latitude but
only in longitude, for as I have said in my sphere, 2 places may differ three
manner of ways, that is in latitude only, in longitude only, or in both. And
there I do show how every one is to be measured.

But because that order of measuring is somewhat busy to such as are not very
well exercised in Arethmeticke, and also do know the use of the tables of
sines called in Latin Tabulae Sinuum, I thought good to set down here a more
easy way of measuring, though perhaps not altogether so iustlye, and yet
without any great error. Wherefore if the two places do differ both in
longitude and latitude, then you must do as before is taught. But if they
differ only in latitude, then you have no more to do but to multiply the
difference of the two latitudes by 60 miles, and if there be any odd minutes,
then to allow for every minute one mile. As for example, Compostella and
Lisbone, two towns, the one in Spain, the other in Portugale have one self
same longitude differing only in latitude, which difference is four degrees,
and 20 minutes.

Here if you multiple 4 by 60 it amounts to 240 miles, whereunto by adding 20
miles for the 20 minutes, you shall find the whole sum to be 260 miles,
which is the distaunce by a right line betwixt Compostella and Lisbona.

But if the two places having one self latitude, do differ only in
longitude, then look how many such degrees as are of equal quantity to the
last degree of the same latitude are contained betwixt the two places by a
right line, and by allowing for every degree 60 miles, you shall have the true
distance, or at the least not much differing from the truth. And if you see
that the two places in the map do stand far a sunder, then for the more
speedines, take with your compass five such degrees at once, being first
pricked upon a piece of paper which is just 300 miles, and at the widenes
measure the said space, and if there remain at the last any od space, then
straighten your Compass and fit them to that odd space, and look how many of
the foresaid degrees that comprehends, and having multiplied the same by 60
add the product thereof to the former sum. As for example, Compostella and
Constantinople, having one self same latitude, that is 43 degrees of North
latitude do differ only in longitude: Here with my Compass I prick upon a
piece of paper 5 degrees like in quantitye to the last and uppermost degree of
the foresaid 43 degrees, and measuring with the widenes of my compass the
space betwixt the two places by a ruler or right line I find that space to
comprehend the foresaid widenes of my compass 6 times, which makes 1800
miles, and that there remains an odd space containing 3 of the foresaid
degrees, that is, 180 miles, which being added to the former sum, makes in
all 1980 miles, which is the distance betwixt Compostella and Constantinople.
Also if you would know the distance betwixt two towns in Affrike, the one
called Budonell standing upon Capo viride, and the other called Ercoco,
standing hard by the red sea, both places having one self same latitude, that
is to say 14 degrees of North latitude, or there abouts, and do differ only
in longitude. Then prick with your Compass upon a piece of paper 5 degrees,
every one equal to the last degree of the foresaid latitude. And in measuring
the space betwixt those two places with that widenes of your Compass, you
shall find the same to be comprehended in the said space 12 times, which by
allowing 300 miles to every widenes amounts to 3600 miles, and the overplus
of the odd space being 2 degrees, is 120 miles, which being added to the
former sum, makes in all 3720 miles: and that is the distance betwixt
Budonell and Ercoco.

And if this way like you not, then multiply the difference of the 2
longitudes, by the miles answerable to the latitude of the said places, which
you shall find in a special table made for that purpose, and is set down in
my sphere, together with the rule and order that is to be observed therein. The
hardest of which 2 ways in mine opinion, is much more easy than that which is
to be done by the former Instrument called Organum directorium. Which
instrument Mercator and Barnardus did borrow as it seems to me from that
which Gemma Frizius calls his Quadratum Nauticum, inverted by him many years
since: the shape, description and use whereof, I thought it not amiss to set
down here and the rather for that in mine opinion it shows both the true
course and direction to any place more speedily, and with more facility then
the other.

Here follows the Mariners Quadrant.


A DESCRIPTION OF GEMMA FRIZIus his Instrument called Quadratum Nauticum.
THis square by 2 right lines called Diameters crossing one another with right
angles in the very Center is divided into four Equal quarters, and within the
said square upon the said Center is drawn a Circle, which by means of the two
foresaid Diameters is also divided into four Quadrants, and every Quadrant is
subdivided with right lines into 8 parts, so as in all, there be 32 lines,
signifiyng the 32 winds of the Mariners Compass. Every line having his proper
name of wind written thereon. And note that the right line which is drawn right
down in the midst of the square, signifies the Meridian, showing the
Northpoint above, and the South point beneath, and the other right line,
crossing the same in the Center, signifies the Equinoctial line, which shows
the East point on the right hand, and the West point on the left hand, and the
Circle it self signifies the Horizon.

Now you have to understand, that from the Equinoctial line upwards the 2
sides of the square are divided each of them into 90 degrees of North latitude,
and the other two sides from the Equinoctial downward, are likewise divided
on both hands into 90 degrees of south latitude. Then the head or front, and
also the base of the said square is divided in the midst by the foresaid
Meridian line into 2 equal parts, whereof the first proceeding from the said
Meridian toward the right hand is divided as well above as beneath into 90
degrees of longitude, and that is called the East longitude, and the other part
proceeding from the said Meridian toward the left hand is likewise divided as
well above as beneth into 90 degrees of longitude, and is called the West
longitude. The use of which instrument is thus: first knowing by some table or
Map, the longitude and latitude of two places, take the difference of both by
substracting the lesser out of the greter. And if the longitude of the second
place be greater then the first, seek the difference thereof in the front,
and also in the base of the East longitude on the right hand. But if the
longitude of the second place be less then the first, then seek the
difference thereof in the West longitude on the left hand. And here as before I
mean by the first place that from whence you go, of which 2 places, the first
is always supposed to be in the very center of the Circle, and the other is
to be found out thus: first, having sought out the degrees of the difference of
the longitude, as well in the upper part as in the nether part, and marked the
same with one prick above, and another beneath, apply your Ruler or a thread
to those 2 pricks, or else draw a secret right line from the one prick to the
other by a ruler. That done, seek out the difference of the 2 latitudes on
both sides of the square, that is to say, if the second place has greater
latitude then the first, then you must seek the difference in the North
latitude, if less, then seek that in the South latitude. And having marked
the same on both hands, by setting down on each side a prick, draw a secret
right line from mark to mark, and where the last line crosses the first
line, there make a mark, for there stands the place whereto you would go.
Which if you would know how it bears from the first place, then lay your
ruler both to the Center and also to that mark, drawing a right line passing
through the Center, and also through the said mark from the one side of the
circle to the other, or else stretch a thread through the Center and the mark,
and on that side that the mark is, you shall see the name of the wind that
shows how the second place bears from you, the opposite point whereof is
the wind whereby you have to sail. As for example, if you would know how
Venice bears from London.

Now if you seek in the Map, you shall find London to have in longitude 23
degrees and 0 minutes, and in latitude 51 degrees, and 32 minutes. Again, you
shall find Venice to have in longitude 36 degrees, and 30 minutes, and in
latitude 45 degrees and 15. minutes or there abouts.

The difference of the longitudes is 13 degrees and 30 minutes, which because
the longitude of Venice is greater then the longitude of London, you must seek
it out in the East longitude on the right hand, and mark the same both above
and beneath. Again, the difference of latitude is 6 degrees and 17 minutes.
Which because Venice has the lesser latitude, seek that out in the South
latitude, marking the same on both hands. That done, lay two threads, or else
draw two right cross lines from the foresaid marks, and where those two
threads or lines do cross, make a mark, which mark signifies the place
whereunto you would go* which is Venice.

Then from the one side of the Circle to the other, lay a ruler or thread
passing through the center, and the said mark made for Venice, at the end of
which thread, ruler, or line on the right hand you shall see the wind which
shows how Venice bears from London, and on the left hand ye wind, whereby
you have to sail, if ye space betwixt ye 2 places were al sea. For in sailing
by sea, you may not think to go always by a right line, but often to change
your course according as either mainland, hedlands, Isles Currents, Sands,
Rocks, or such like impedimentes shall give occasion: and therefore though your
right course from London to Venice is to go Southwest and by East, yet being
come out of the Thames to Dover, your course from thence to the Cape of
Britain is west Southwest. And from thence to the Cape Finis terrae in Spain,
it is Southwest and by South. And from thence to the cape saint Vincent in
Portugale you go right South: and from thence to Gibralter almost East
Southeast. Again from Gibralter to the South point of Sardignia, your course
is almost East and by North. And from thence to the south point of Sicilia
almost East Southeast: and from thence to Corfu, your course is just Northeast,
and from thence to Venice, you turn again Northwest.

Thus you see that in going by Sea, one course does not hold, no nor yet in
going by Land, since Mountains, Rivers, and lakes may put you out of your right
course, and yet it is necessary to know how the place whereto you go, bears
from you to the intent that being out of your way, you may always the better
direct your course right again to the same.

Moreover, Gemma Frizius says, that by this Instrument you may also find out
the difference of longitude betwixt the two places from whence and whither you
go, so as you know before how the second place bears from the first, and
also the difference of their latitudes. As for the latitude of each place, you
may easily find the same with your Astrolabe, Quadrant, or cross staff, by
taking therewith the Meridian altitude of the Sun, or the highest altitude of
some star that you know: The order whereof I have set down in my Sphere. And
the Coast of the Country and place whereunto the Ship is to be directed, is
commonly well known to the Mariners how it bears from the first, and
specially having a prosperous wind.

Then knowing these two things, you must do thus: First having drawn a secret
line or thread, from the difference of the two latitudes, placed according to
the rule of greater and lesser before set down, and marked on both sides of
the Instrument: draw another thread, or else lay a ruler so as it may pass
thorough the Center, and the line of the wind, or coast whereby the second place
bears from the first. And whereas those two lines or threads do touch, make a
mark, and then lay a ruler, or extend a thread from the upper line to the
nether line of longitude, so as it may pass hard by the last mark, and then
the thread or ruler so laid, will show you the difference of longitude betwixt
the two places. And by this means Gemma Frizius says, that the Mariners may
easily correct the longitudes of places as they sail: but how truly, I
refer that to the skillful Pilots.

But for mine own part, having to seek out in these latter Mappes the way by
Sea or Land to any place I would use none other Instrument of direction then
half a Circle divided with lines like a Mariners Fly, in such sort as you see
in this Figure.

THE FLY, THE USE Whereof here follovveth.


THis Fly contains two quarters of the Mariners Compass* the middle line
whereof marked with a Cross, signifies the line which runs East and West.
For if the place whereto you go, be on your right hand, then the Cross
signifies the east point, but if it be on your left hand, then turning the
Fly toward your left hand, the Cross does signify the West point, and the
right down line crossing the foresaid middle line with right angles in the
very Center, is the Meridian line showing the North and South, according as you
turn the Cross East or West.

The use of which Fly is thus; first with a pin or a needle, being thrust
through the center of the Fly, prick the pin down in the very place from
whence you go, called before the first place, and if the second place be on
your right hand, then turn the cross of your Fly that way, but so as the
Meridian of the Fly may be a true Parallel to the next Meridian of the Map
that is on your left hand, which your compass will quickly perform by taking
therewith a just space at both ends of the Fly betwixt the two foresaid
Meridians. That done, extend your thread so as it may pass through both the
Center of the Fly hard by the pin, and also through the second place, and
then look upon what wind or coast of the Fly the thread lies, and that
wind shows how the second place bears from you. And the opposite wind
thereof shows by what wind you have to sail thither.

But if the second place be on your left hand, then you must turn the cross
of the Fly toward your left hand, and having set down the Center of the Fly
in the first place, and with your Compass made the Meridian of the Fly a just
Parallel to the next Meridian of the Map that is on your right hand, lay your
thread to the two places as before, and mark upon what wind of the Fly it
strikes, and you shall have your desire. The lesser that your fly be, the
better, for being great it would cover too many places of the Card or Map.
But if the two places stand so nigh together, as the Fly does cover them both,
then having set down your pin in the first place, make your thread with a
Noose, and having put the same over the pin, draw the thread through ye second
place somewhat beyond the Compass of the Fly, and hold it there fast until
you have also put the Center of the Fly over the said pin or needle, and duly
placed the same in such form as is before taught: and in so doing, that line
of the Fly which lies upon the thread will show your course and direction
as well as if the thread lay above the Fly.

Truly I do think the use of this Fly a more easy and speedy way of
direction, then the manifold tracing of the Mappes or Mariners cards with such
a number of cross lines, as commonly are drawn therein, causing rather a
confusion then otherwise: for in such Cards as are made with right Meridians,
you shall find the Fly to to be much more seruice-able then these manifold
lines.

The use of Ptolomeis Tables.
THus much touching the use of Mappes and Cards, now according to my promise, I
will briefly show you the the use of Ptolomeis Tables, or of any other table
made in the form. The chiefest point whereof is redily to find out any place
that you seek, and to know where it stands. For the accomplishment whereof,
you must first know what longitude and latitude that place has.

The longitudes and latitudes of all places described by Ptolomey, are set
down in his second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh book of
Geographie. For in his second book he describes the West part of Europe,
containing Ireland, England, and Scotland, Hispania, Gallia, Germany,
Hungary, and Slauony. In his third book, he describes the East part of
Europe, as Italy, Sicilia, Corsica, Sardignia, Sarmatia, Taurica, Peninsula,
Datia, Misia, Thracia, Macedonia, Achaia, Peloponesus, Candia, Rubia, and
diverse other Lands and Islands. And he contains all Europe in ten Tables. In
his fourth book he describes Affrike, that is to say, so much as was known in
his time, containing the same in 4 Tables. In his 5.6. and 7. book he
describes all Asia and the East Indians, whereof he makes 12 Tables, and in
describing any Region or province, he shows how it is bounded both North,
South, East, and West. And also what notable Cities, Floods, Lakes, or
Mountains be in every Region, and therewith sets down the longitude and
latitude of every place: To which his book, diverse have made certain
Alphabeticall tables, containing the names of all the places that are mentioned
in the foresaid books, showing in what leaf to find the same: to the intent
that you may the more readily find out, not only the place, but also the
longitude and latitude thereof, and in what Table it is contained.

Notwithstanding, I know by good trial, that there are a number of places
mentioned in the said books, which you shall not find in the foresaid
Alphabet.

Werefore I wish that Mercator, Ortellius, Barnardus, Brugensis, or any other
of the latter Cosmographers and setters forth of Mappes and Cards, would take
the pain to make a general Alphabet, containing all the names that are to be
found and known, both ancient and modern, of Regions, Cities, Seas, Floods,
Lakes, Rivers, Ports, Baies, Hedlandes, Ca^es, Mountains, and all other
notorious places contained in their Maps and Cards, together with the true
longitude and latitude annexed to every place, and agreeable to their Maps, to
the intent, that every man delighted with the reading of Histories, may in
their Mappes both general and special, easily find out any place that he
seeks. Which work in mine opinion would be most thankfully received of all
those that delight in Geographie, to the great commendation and praise of the
Authors thereof.

For though Ptolomey, Appian, Gemma Frizius, Gastaldus, Orontius, Munsterus,
Ortellius and others have set down certain names, both ancient and modern
together with their longitudes and latitudes, yet they are but very few in
comparison of all the names that are wanting, yea or of those that are
comprehended in their own Cards and Mappes, all which Maps I would wish to
agree in their longitudes and latitudes: for otherwise a man shall hardly find
the place which he seeks.

Wherefore I pray God with all my heart, that some good man that is a skillful
Cosmographer may shortly traueile hearein to the profit of all Students in
Geographie.

But now to return to my matter, which is to show how to find out any place
contained in Ptolomeis tables, I say that you must first find out the name of
the place in the Alphabet, and that will direct you to the book wherein it is
set down, together with the longitude and latitude thereof. And there also you
shall find in what table it is contained.

Then having taken a note of the longitude and latitude, and also the number of
the table wherein it is to be sought, resort to that table, be it in Europe,
Affrike or Asia. In the front of every which table, and also in the base are
set down certain numbers of longitudes, in such sort as the uttermost and
nethermost be like numbers, and do directly answer one another. Again, on
both sides of the table are set down certain numbers of latitude like in
quantity, and directly answering one another.

Then seek out the longitude of the place which you would find in the front,
and also in the base, and mark the same with two pricks, one above, another
beneath. From which two pricks, lay a ruler or extend a thread, holding it fast
there until you have found out the latitude of the place on both sides of the
table, which being also marked on each side with a prick, extend another
thread from those two last pricks, and in that very point whereas the two
threads do cross, you shall find the place to be which you seek, or at least
should be there. Moreover, on the right hand of every table, Ptolomey sets
down most commonly under what Clime and Parallel every place is, and by that
means you may also know the longest day that any Parallel has. For as I have
said before in my Sphere, every Parallel proceeding from the Equinoctial
toward the Pole, increases by one quarter of an hour, and every Clime
containing two Paralels, increases by half an hour.

Of which Climes Ptolomey sets down but seven, but of Paralels he makes 21
in such order as this table following shows, which Table consists of four
Columns, whereof the first contains the seven Climes together with their
names, and also how many miles every Clime has in breadth. And the second
contains 63 degrees of latitude, further then which Northward, Ptolomey his
Tables do not extend.

The third contains the numbers of the 21 Paralels, and the fourth the hours
and minutes of the longest day in every Parallel.

The seven Climes, their names, and miles in breadth. The degrees of latitude.
The 21. Paralels. Of the longest day in every Parallel. The hours and m. 63 *
21 19 30 60 20 19 0 19 18 30 18 18 0 7 Dia Riphios. 195. Miles. 50 17 17 30 16
17 0 6 Dia Boristenes. 225 15 16 30 14 16 0 13 15 30 5 Dia Romes. 240. 12 15 0
40 11 14 45 4 Dia Rhodou. 350. 10 14 30 9 14 15 3 Dia Alexandrias. 370. 8 14 0
30 7 13 45 2 Dia Sienes. 420. 6 13 30 5 13 15 1 Dia Meroes. 465 20 4 13 0 765.
3 12 45 2 12 30 10 1 12 15 *The Equinonctiall line, under which those that
dwell have no Latitude, and therefore they have always 12. hours day, and 12
hours night.

But you have to understand, that whereas Ptolomey makes the furthest North
part of his seventh Clime called Dia Ripheos to have but 50 degrees and 30
minutes of latitude, the modern Cosmographers do allow to those mountains
70 degrees of latitude, affirming the same to be those self Mountains which
are otherwise called Montes Hiperborei, which because they enclose a great part
of the North side of the world, are called Orbis terrae cingulum, that is to
say, the girdle of the world, the wrong latitude whereof and of diverse other,
I think Ptolomey had from others and not from himself.

For being brought up in so warm a soil as Alexandria stands in, he could
never endure to go so far northward, to take the latitude of those cold
Riphean Mountains, and therefore if you list to know what latitude does truly
belong unto every Clime and Parallel, then resort to Orontius his Table of
Climes and Paralels set down in my Sphere, which shows how many degrees of
latitude every Parallel has, together with the longest day, even from the
Equinoctial to the very Pole, wherefore I leave to speak here any further
thereof, and so for this time end this Treatize, which if I shall perceive to
be thankfully taken, I mind (God willing) to put in print, the description
and use of the Sphere and of the Globe, both Celestial and Terrestiall. Also a
very plain and brief Arithmetike, together with the description, and
certain uses of the Tables of Sines, called in Latin Tabulae Sinuum. And
finally, the principles of Navigations more plainly (I believe) than ever there
have been heretofore taught, only to help and further such as be desirous
to traueile by Sea, and have not been exercised in the Mathematical
Disciplines, without some knowledge whereof, it is hard to be skillful in that
Art.

FINIS.

