The true order and Method of writing and reading Hystories, according to the
precepts of Francisco Patricio, and Accontio Tridentino, two Italian writers,
no less plainly than briefly* set forth in our vulgar speech, to the great
profit and commoditye of all those that delight in Hystories. By Thomas
Blundeuill of Nevvton Flotman in Norfolk.

Anno. 1574. Imprinted at London by William Seres.

Firmo Appoggio

HONI: SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE:

1574



To the most Noble Earl of Leycester.
Knowing your Honor amongst other your good delyghtes, to delyght most in
reading of Hystories, the true Image and portrature of Man's life, and that not
as many do, to pass away the time, but to gather thereof such judgment and
knowledge as you may thereby be the more able, as well to direct your private
actions, as to give Counsel like a most prudent Counselor in publyke causes,
be it matters of war, or peace: I that have no other mean to show my
thankful mind toward your Honor from time to time, but with yncke and
Paper: thought I could not write of any thing more pleasing, or more
grateful, than of those precepts that belong to the order of writing and
reading Hystories, which precepts I partly collected out of the ten
Dialogues of Francisco Patricio, a Methodicall writer of such matter, and
partly out of a little written Treatise, which mine old friend of good
memory, Accontio did not many years since present to your Honor in the
Italian tongue, of which my labor and good will, I most humbly beseech your
Honor to allow* with that fauourablle judgment, which you have always
heretofore used toward me, and therewith to continue my good Lord until I
shall deserve the contrary.

Most bound to your Honor, Thomas Blundeuill.

The true order and method of writing and reading hystoryes. etc.
AN Hystorye ought to declare the things in such order, as they were done.
And because every thing has his beginning augmentacion, state, declinacion,
and end: The writer ought therefore to tell the things, so as thereby a man may
perceive and discern, that which apparteyneth to every degree, and that, not
only as touching the Country or City: but also as touching the rule or
dominion thereof. For the beginning, augmentacion, state, declynacion, and end
of a Country or City, and of the empire thereof, be not all one, but diverse
things.

Four things would be disparsed thoroughout the history, that is to say, the
trade of life, the public reuenevves, the force, and the manner of
government. By knowing what trade of life, the Country or City in every time
and season has used, we learn how to have like in like times. Again, by
knovving the reuenews and what things have been done therewith, we come to know
what the Country or City is able to do. The force consists in Soldiers,
in the manner, of the militar discipline, in the Nauies, in Munition, and
instruments of war. And the writer must not forget to show vvhither the
soldiers be hired foreners, or home Soldiers, for lack whereof Polibius
has given great cause of wonder unto this age, because all Italy at this
present, is not able to leauie the tenth part of the number of Soldiers,
which the Romans leauied in his time, enioy^ing all that time, neither Liguria,
Lombardie, Romania, nor Marcapianarite And yet as the foresaid Polibius
vvryteth, they were able to set forth four score thousand footmen, and
three score thousand horsemen. And in their first vvarres against Carthage,
being only Lords of Italy, they did send a navy to the sea of three hundred
and thirty great Gallyes, called Quinqueremi, and now the Turk for all his
greatness is scant able to send to the sea, so many small Gallyes.

The writer also must shevve what kind of government the Country or City
had in her beginning, augmentation, state, declynation, and end. And whither
there were any change of government, for what cause, and how the same
was done, and what good or evil ensued thereof.

Hystories be made of deeds done by a public weal, or against a public
weal, and such deeds, be either deeds of war, of peace, or else of
sedition and conspiracy. Again, every deed, be it private, or public must
needs be done by some person, for some occasion, in sometime, and place, with
means and order, and with instruments, all which circumstaunces are not to
be forgotten of the writer, and specially those that have accompanied and
brought the deed to effect Every deed that man does, springs either of some
outvvarde cause, as of force, or fortune, (which properlye ought not to be
referred to man:) or else of some inward cause belonging to man: of which
causes there be two, that is, reason and appetite. Of reason springs
counsel and election, in affairs of the life, which not being let, do
cause deeds to ensue. Of appetite do spryng, passions of the mind, which
also do cause men to attempt enterprises. Again, of deeds some have sometimes
such parts as be also deeds, and sometimes parts that be no deeds. And
because that every deed is done by some person, for some cause, in time, and
place, with means and instruments: we will therefore suppose that to be
alvvayes true, as well in the principal deed, as in the mean and smallest
deeds of all. And as the qualities, offices, and placyng of the members of a
man's body, be diverse, and yet tend all to one end, that is to say, to the
preservation of life, and of the whole body: even so all meaner deeds ought
to be applied to the accomplyshinge of the principal deed. And if there be a
principal deed, unto the which all other inferior deeds ought to be
referred as to their final end: there must needs be also a principal doer,
whom all other inferior doers must obey. Again, if there be a principal
dooer, there is also a principal cause, ruling all other inferior causes, and
also a principal time, place, mean, and instrument. And as deeds have
outwardly belonging unto them all the foresaid circumstances, so inwardly
they do comprehend three special things, which do run thoroughout all
the circumstaunces from the beginning to the ending. And they be these,
possibility, occasion, and success. Which things the writer must declare,
even as they were.

And as touching the dooer, to be known what he is, and to be known as
chief dooer, is two things, and requires two manner of proceedings. For we
learn what he is, and what manner of man, by knovving his name, the name of
his family, the country where he was borne and bredde, and such like
things: but he is known as chief doer, by his power, skill, and industry.
For these three things do bring to effect the possibility, occasion, and
success, of the deed. For the power and ability of the doer, causes the
thing which is possible, to be done in deed. Again, his skill, causes him
to take occasion when it is offered, and to use the meetest means to bring it
to pass. Finally, his industry and earnest follovving of the matter, brings
the success of the deed to perfection.

Power consists chieflye in three things, that is, in riches, in public
authority, and in pryuate estimacion.

Skyll also consists in bodily force, in the boldness of natural courage,
in the sudden motions of affectes, and in the steadfast habytes of the mind.
For let no man think to do any vvoorthie enterprise, or to bring any notable
thing to good effect, unless he be moved thereunto by all or some of the
qualities above said, which the writer must declare at the full, if he
minds that others should receive any good by his vvriting. And as it is not
meet that the vvryter fail in describing the deed, and the doer, together
with all those parts whereby the deed was brought to effect: Even so it
behooves in any wise that amongst the reast of the chiefest outvvarde
parts, he consider well the cause that moved the doer to enterprise the
deed, and to declare the same accordingly. And note here, that by the cause, I
mean the end. For the matter whereon the doer works, is the deed of
peace, of war, or of sedicion. And the shape or form thereof, is the means
and manner of doing, which the doer uses therein. And the cause efficient is
the doer himself.

Affections also have a fynall cause, as the end of wrath, is revenge: of
love, the fruition of the thing beloved: and of mercy, the end is help and
comfort.

Now as touching the time, the writer ought to shevve the very moment as
well of the beginning as of the ending of the deed, to the intent that the
reader may know the continuance of the principal deed, and also of the
inferior deeds. And for the better knowledge of the opportunity of
affairs: It shall be needful sometime to note the days according as they be
either vvhote, or cold, clear or clovvdye, dry or moist, vvindye or snowye,
holy days or vvorking days, and vvhither it be in the morning, at noonetyde,
or in the evening, and likewise the nights together with the differences of
the times and seasons thereof, and finally the very hour. For as the hour
imports much for doing of the deed, so it is very necessary that we know
the same.

The place may be either general, especial, or particular, as England,
Norfolk, and Norwich.

The means be diverse, for every thing is done either secretelye, or openly,
orderly, or without order. And hereto appertains all means and vvayes, that
be used in governing states, in making laws, in creating Magistrates, in
deliberating, in judging, in appointing places, in providing victuals, in
gathering up the public revenues, and a thousand such like things, of all
which things, it behooves that the writer have consideracion, and when
need is, that he declare the same at large. And in speaking of conspiracies,
he must tell how the conspiratours came together, how they got fautours, and
how they ended their enterprise, how they were chastised, or how perhaps
they escaped free, and such like. And in matters of war he must shevve in
what sort the same was made, and how the Soldiers were leauyed, paid,
exercised, and governed, and how the host was ordered in marching through
the Countries in being encamped, in skirmuching, in fighting battles, either in
plain field, or in place strongly trenched, or otherwise fortified, and how
they passed Mountains, Rivers, and Marrishes, how they conveyed their
cariages, artillery, and munition, all which things, are very necessary to be
known, for to avoid all evil happes that may hereafter chance in like
cases. Of instruments whereby man's life is mayntayned in time of peace, yea,
and also in time of sedition, there be in a manner infinite kinds: but of such
as men use in time of war, there are but four principal, that is,
footmen, horsemen, armor, and nauye, all which, according to the diversity
of times and countries are diversely used. For the Macedonians, Grecians,
Persians, and Romans, did use these things diversely in diverse times, and
daily as occasion, time, and place, required: changed the manner of their
armor asvvell offensive, as defensive, and we do the like at this present
wherefore it is necessary that the writer declare all such particularities at
the full

Whose lives ought to be chronicled.
ALl those persons whose lives have been such as are to be follovved for
their excellency in virtue, or else to be fled for their excellency in
vice, are meet to be chronicled. And if they were public personages or
governors, then they are to be considered in as many diverse vvayes, as there
be diverse kinds of government. Whereof according to Aristotle, there be
six, that is, a kingdom, a Tyriannye, the rule of many good men, the rule of
few, mighty in power: a commonwealth, and the rule of the base sort of
people, for every one of these gouernements has his excellency proper to
himself, and diverse one from an other.

It is meet that the lives of Princes should be chronicled that it may
appear how things were governed under every kind of Prince, were he good
or bad.

To government belong two civil virtues, Prudence, and Justice, and two
mylitar virtues, that is, prudence, and fortitude. And whosoever by means of
the two mylitar virtues has done any notable acts, good, or evil, is meet
to be chronicled: but the two civil virtues are otherwise to be considered
of. For injustice the contrary vice to justice if it be open and manifest, it
is of small force in civil actions, and the greater it is, the less power it
has to hurt. Again, on the other side, mere justice without prudence and
fortitude, does fevve things vvorthie of memory, but if both the civil and
mylitar virtues be joined together, they be of great force, and do bring to
pass works of excellency, and vvorthie of fame and memory, and they may be
mixed or compounded three manner of vvayes, for either they are both in the
person of whom the history is made, or else in the government of the city
or common wealth, or else the one in the one, and the other in the other.
Amongst the civil sort are to be reckened Princes and Lords of states, as
Kings and Tirants, and also the Magistrates of common weals. And as touching
the vvarryours they be of two sorts for either they be home Soldiers,
bredde and borne in the same country, or else forryners that serve for hyer.

In vvriting the life of any man, you ought first to show his proper name,
the name of his family, and of what country he is, and then to declare his
acts and deeds. And whatsoever enterprise any man takes in hand, he does it
being moved and provoked thereunto, either by some outvvarde principle, or by
some inward principle, if outvvarde, it is either by destiny, by force, or
by fortune, if inward, then it is either by nature, by affection, or by
choice and election, and such election springs either of nature, or of some
passion of the mind, of custom, or else of the discourse of reason.

The acts which we do, being forced by outvvarde occasion, deserve neither
blame nor praise, neither are they to be follovved or fled since they proceed
not of our own courage or covvardlynesse. And therefore it shall suffice to
make mention of these, so far as they may either further or hinder those
actions that spring of inward causes, which actions are most worthy to be
written. I mean those acts which the person of whom you write, did
himself, and not the acts of his Auncetours, or that were done parhaps in
his time, he deserving to have no part thereof: neither are all his acts to
be written, but those only which are notable and may serve to some good
example.

And as touching the inward causes: I mean here, by nature, that inclynacion
which a man has from his cradle and by affections: I mean certain liuelye
motions, as anger, love, hatred put in execution. For so they bring forth
actions, either by sudden motions without election, or else by some passion
bred by custom, and grown to hab te. Some again do spring of bare and
simple discourse, accompanied neither with passion or custom. And some do
spring of discourse accustomed, either to vice or virtue. And therefore the
writer in tellyng the acts and deeds, ought to show of which of these causes
above said such acts proceeded, and specially those that were done with
choice and election.

And to do this well he ought to consider, that though the discourse and
affection from whence the action springs, proceeds for the most part of
nature: yet they be sometimes greatly increased and augmented, by other things
that are not natural* as by the educatio^ and nurture which man has from his
tender years, or by the studies and exercises hereto he is given in his ripe
age. And these two things do work three effects. First they do confirm a
man in that wherein he has been trained, exercised and brought up. Secondly,
they frame his affections thereunto: And finally they breed by custom such a
perfect habit in the mind, as being once gotten, is vvorthie either of praise
or disprayse.

To bring therefore into a brief sum those things which are chiefly to be
considered by the vvryter, who has to chronicle any man's life: I say that
they be these. The name of the man, his family, his parents, and his
Country, and also his destiny, fortune, and force or necessity, (if they
seem manifestly to appertain to the action) his nature, affections, and
election, proceeding either of wisdom, passion, or custom, his education,
exercises, deeds, and speeches, and also the age, and time, wherein every
notable act was done, and the qualities of his body, vvhither they were
signs and tokens of his mind, or else helps to the actions. And as the
writer is bound to show the educatio^ of the person chronicled, and those
exercises, and studyes, whereby he has formed his manners: so also he is
bound to tell every deed, word, sign, or token, that may signify either
his manners, his nature, his affections, thoughts, or any manner of motion of the
mind.

For, since that the mind is the fountain and father of all actions, it
behooves us to know that, as perfectly as is possible, to the intent that in
measuring thereby his deeds, and speeches, both profitable and hurtful, we may
be able to judge of their goodness or naughtiness, both by that, which is
honest or dishonest, profitable, or hurtful in deed, and also by the
appearance thereof.

And since that to profit others we observe in man's life none other thing but
deeds and speeches: It is needful not only to consider the things that go
before, which we have heretofore rehearsed: but also those things, which of
necessity do accompany such deeds or speeches, that is to save the doer, the
causes, the time, the place, the mean, and instruments and such like, in such
sort as, the writer in duelye observing these circumstances, may set forth a
true and lyuelye Image of both life and man, whereof he makes his history.

What Profit hystories do yield.
EVery City or Country stands upon three principal pyonts, unto one of
which all public actions do appertain, that is, peace, sedition, and
war, and the first is the end of the two last* in the which end, the
happiness of our life consists and the accomplishment of three desires,
which we naturally have first to live, secondly to live contentedly, or
blessedly, and thyrdly, to live alvvayes in that happiness, so far as is
possible to man's nature, which three things the latt^ns do briefly utter in
this sort Esse, been esse, and semper esse.

And as touching peace, first it is meet to know the way unto it. And then
to follow that way that we may attain it. And by this word peace, I
mean not only that which consists in outvvarde actions, but also inwardly
in the mind. For, the outward peace (thanks be unto God, and to our most
gracious Queen with her honorable Counsel,) we do quietly enjoy here in
England at this present, and have done many years: But the inward peace of
the heart, and mind, how small it is, God knovveth best.

The way to come to that peace vvherof I speak, is partly taught by the
Philosophers in general precepts and rules, but the Historiographers do
teach it much more plainly by particular examples and experiences, and
specially if they be written with that order, diligence, and judgment, that
they ought to be.

And as the true peace stands chiefly upon the contentment of the minds of
the Citizins, as upon her proper foundation: even so that co^tentment is
grounded upon the civil discipline, education laws, offices and duties, of
every order and company in the City. And such peace is broken either by some
inward co^motion, or else by outvvarde war. If by inward stir: then
the cause thereof is sometime the lack of things necessary for the
maintenance of life, as of food, apparel, and habitacion, or dwelling,
vvherevvith those that are pinched, do rise either against they own Citizens,
that do abound and have plenty, or else against their neighbors, and
borderers. And sometime the cause of such stir may be for that they be not
suffered to participate of the honors and dignities of the City, or common
weal. And sometime they rise for excessive tributes, and payme^ts leauied by
the chief heads. Again, sometime for injuries and wrongs done by one to
another, all which occasions being taken away, the peace is easilye
preserved, unto which end, all good laws, orders and decrees, ought to
tend, so as a man may rightly say, that peace wholy consists in laws
well made and well kept.

And as for outvvard war to be offered by the stranger, it is either open,
or by the way of treason. The way to be preserved from treason, consists
in having good espyall, and true intelligence in well revvarding the
discouerers of the treason, and in sharply punishing the Traitors.

Open war is either made to defend, or to offend, which we ought
alvvayes to flee, unless in not beginning it one way, we should be forced to
begin it a another way to our disaduauntage.

Again, in open war we have to deal either with those that be stronger,
or those that be weaker then our selves, or else that be of equal power and
force, to our selves. The weaker we need not to fear, nor yet greatly our
equals, unless some other accidente chance. Wherefore we have chiefelye to
withstand those that are more mighty than we be. Against whom we have to
work so as either they may not assail us, or else in assailing us, that they
may not hurt us. The first is to be done either by love, or by fear: by love,
as when we procure peace, by payeing some trybute, and by acknovvledging their
superiority, in receiving such impositions as they will lay upon us, or by
appeasing them with pleasures, with guyftes, and rewards, or with granting
traffic and trade of marchaundise, by marriage, and such like.

We shall drive them from assayling us by fear, in preparing or in seeming to
have prepared all things necessary as well to offend, as to defend.

Again if the enemy do assail us, he will either beat and waste our
frontires, or else enter into the main land. Against both which dangers it
shall be needful to make the fro^tires strong, and to fournish them well with
men, and Munition, so as he shall not be able to enter at all, or at the least
in entering he shall have small assurance of himself, leaving his enemies
behind at his back. And being entered we have to vvithstande him two vvays,
that is, either by famine, or by fraud, otherwise called wily policy, for by
force we can not, having all ready presupposed his force to be greater than
ours.

The action of war consists in three principal points, that is, in
lodging or incamping, in marching, and in fighting.

To incamping do belong four considerations, that is, that the place be
commodious for water, for victual, for safety, and for health.

In marching we have to pass either through our own country, or through a
strange country, the inhabitants whereof are either our friends, our foes,
or suspecte, yea, and sometime perhaps having our enimyes at our backs.

Of fighting, there be also three kinds, that is, skirmuching, a pitched
field, or the assaulting of some fortified place, be it camp, or town:
which also are wont to be defended by some, or by all of these three vvayes,
that is, either by nature, by art, or by force of men. And as all other things
that have a beginning have an end, so likewise has war. For by one of
these four means all vvarres for the most part are ended, either by victory,
by great overthrow, by accord and agreement, or else by pouertye and for
lack of power and force, chauncing either to the one side, or to both, and so
at length war resorteth again to peace, as to his final end.

Now as touching sedition, it is alvvayes moved either by the inferior
sort, which seek to be made equal to their superiors, or else by those
that being equal, vvoulde be superior to the reast: which sedition is to be
suppressed, either by fair means, or by foul means, by gentleness, or by
sharpness, as when the faultours, and first beginners thereof, are sharplye
punished, either by the Magistrates according to law, or else by the force of
the other Citizens. Again such sedition may be appeased by gentilenesse two
manner of vvayes, that is, either by the authority of some grave personage,
that is beloved, and had in admiration amongst the people, or else by
grau^ting them the things which were the cause of their rising.

These be the three general actions of any City, Prince, or common weal,
and be divided into many particular parts, which we ought diligently to
observe in histories with such consideracion, as we may learn thereby, how
one self effect springs of one self cause, and how the contrary
proceeds of his contrary. And the like of his like, for the diversity of
things being a thing infinite, can not be observed.

Of the duty and office of hystoriographers, and what order and disposition in
writing hystories, they ought to use.
OF those that make any thing, some do make much of nothing, as God did in
creating the World of naught, and as Poets in some respect also do, vvhilest
they feign fables and make thereof their poesies, and poetical Hystories: some
again of more do make less, as keruers and grauers of Images, and other such
like artificers, some of little do make much, and of much little, as the
Orators vvhylest sometime they extol small things, and sometime abase great
things. And some do make of so much as much, as true Philosophers and
Hystoriographers, whose office is to tell things as they were done without
either augmenting or diminishing them, or svvaruing one jot from the truth.
Whereby it appears that the hystoriographers ought not to feign any
Orations nor any other thing, but truly to report every such speech, and
deed, even as it was spoken, or done.

In hystories things vvoulde be disposed according to their own proper nature,
and therefore since in every action there must needs be a dooer, or worker, the
history must first make mention of him, and then shevve the cause that moved
him to do, to what intent and end, in what place, and with what means and
instruments. And because time does accompany all manner of actions, and every
action has his proper and peculier time, the writer must give to every action
his dew time accordingly.

And if the deed or action be compounded of diverse parts, which be also
actions, the like order is to be observed in every such part as ought to be
kept in one simple action, and specially when the parts follow one after
another. But if many actions appertayning as parts to one self end, shall be
done in one self time, since it is impossible to tell them all at once, they
must needs be told one after another. And since they may be declared either
broken by piece meal, or else whole together, it is best to tell them whole,
noting in every one the time, wherein such deed was done. For to tell them
otherwise vvoulde breed both darcknesse and tediousness to the reader.

If many actions are to be written which do belong to one self end, and are
some way lynked together one with an other, the writer ought first to bring
one alone to such terms and bounds, as without fear of causing any
darckenesse or troubling the readers memory, he may fitly stay there, until
he has brought every one of the other actions to the like terms, and then
begin again with the first, proceeding so orderly from one to an other,
until he has made an end of all. But having to tell diverse acts not tending
to one self end, then who doubts, but that he ought to tell every act
entyer as it is, even from the beginning to the ending. Thus much touching the
order of vvriting Hystories.

What order and method is to be observed in reading hystories.
WHo so is desirous to know how hystories are to be readde, had need first
to know the ends and purposes for which they are written. Whereof though
there be diverse as some to win fame to the writer and some to delighte the
readers ears that read only to pass away the time and such like: yet in my
opinion there are but three chief and principal. First that we may learn
thereby to acknovvledge the providence of God, vvherby all things are governed
and directed. Secondly, that by the examples of the wise, we may learn
wisdom vvysely to behave our selves in all our actions, as well private as
public, both in time of peace and war.

Thirdly, that we may be stirred by example of the good to follow the good,
and by example of the evil to flee the evil.

As touching the providence of God, we have to note for what causes and by
what means he overthrows one kingdom and sets up an other. For though
things many times do succeed according to the discourse of ma^s reason: yet
man's wisdom is oftentimes greatly deceived. And with those accede^ts which
man's wisdom rejects and little regards: God by his providence uses,
when he thinks good, to work marvelous effects. And though he suffers
the wicked for the most part to live in prosperity* and the good in
adversity: yet we may see by many notable examples, declaring asvvell his
wrath, and revenge toward the wicked, as also his pity and clemency
toward the good, that nothing is done by chance, but all things by his
foresight, counsel, and divine providence.

Humane vvisdome has three principal parts, the first whereof teaches us
rightlye to judge of all things, what is to be desired, and what is to be
fled. The second, how and by what means we may best attain to the things
which we desire. The third teaches us to take occasion when it is offered
and to foresee all peril that may hap. And the first part requires two
consideracions. First to know by the examples of others, vvhyther those
things which we desire and seem to us good, be good in deed or not: and
secondlye what the obtaining thereof will cost. For many times those things
which seem good, have been cause of great evil, as riches* honor, and
greatness, which evil proceeds either of the nature of the things
themselves, or by evil using the same, as for example, by their own nature,
honor, and greatness, causes envy. And riches sometime causes both envy,
murder, and robbery. Again, riches by evil using them, do cause the owner
many times to be disdaynfull, proud, arrogant, and to lead a dissolute life,
hating all virtuous exercises. Contrariwise, those things that seem evil
are many times causes of great good, partly by their own nature, and partly
for being well employed, and turned to good use. As poverty of her own
nature makes a man industrious. Again, if a man be defamed or slaundered by
his foes, he takes occasion thereby, to correct his own fault, and so
turns their slander to his great gain and commodity. The other
consideracion of the first part of humane wisdom, is as I said before, to
consider how much the thing which we desire will cost. For the cost may
be such as we were better to be without our desire, than to have it. And
therefore in valueing this cost, we have to consider our labor, and
traueyle, our expenses, and loss of time, also what perilles, displeasures
and griefs might chance unto us by having it, and what commodities we may
enjoy in being without it. Again, to way the certainty of the evils
whereon we venture, and the incertayntie of obtaining the good which we
seek, which is made manifest unto us by the examples of many which have long
sought, dear bought, and yet obtained naught. Moreover, it shall be needful
to compare the long time of our traueyle, and great charges, with the short
time of enjoying the thing which we are to obtain. It imports also not a
little to remember that many times, things do seem unto us more precious and
more goodly why lest we seek them, than when we have gotten the^. And in
seeking them by unlawful means, we have to note what revenge God is wont
to take of such doings, and how short a time and with what trouble, he
suffers us to enjoy them. So co^traryvvise, we have to note with how
small travel, and with how little charges, a most great good benefit, is
many times obtained. As touching the second part of humane wisdom, since some
easily, and some hardlye, do attain the thing which they seek. It is
needful in reading Hystories, to observe well every thing that has been
done, by whom, to what end, and what means were used for the
accomplishment thereof, and vvhyther such ends by such means, are alvvayes,
or for the most part, or seldom or never obtained, and vvhither all men did
use therein like means or diverse, and if diverse, which took effect, and
which did not, and what manner of things those be, without the which, the
end cannot be obtained. And by what accidents the same is hindered, and
which are wont to chance often, and which more seldom, also which may be
forseene and which cannot. And of every mean we have to consider all the
qualities and circumstaunces that make to the purpose, and from whence every
one sprange, vvhither of industry or of chance. In the observing of means to
attain the end, it is meet to mark well the order of those means, and
how they are linked together, which order may proceed three manner of
ways, that is, either in beginning with the very first thing that tends
to any end, and so forwards from one thing to an other, until you come to the
last, or else contrariwise in beginning with the last mean, next to the
end, and so backevvarde from mean to mean until you come to the first, or
leaving both these ways, you may take the third, which is to divide all the
means into their general kinds, and to consider of all the means contained in
every kind, apart by themselves, of all which three vvayes, lo here the
examples in one self matter of war, had with some foreign Nation. VVherin
if you do first note the establishment of truce, and peace with your mighty
neighbors, and with those that might harm you at home, and then the
provision of money and of armor, the choice of chiefetaines, the leauiyng of
soldiers, the order of their government in marching, in incamping, and in
fighting, and so forth from one mean to an other, even to the victory, you
shall follovv the first order, but if you begin at the victory, and consider
the next causes thereof, as to have fought with more valiantness, or with
greater force, or with more advantage either of place, time, or occasion, and
then what was the cause or causes of that, and whereof every thing
proceeded, returning still backevvard, even to those things which in the first
order were first to be considered: you shall observe the second order. But if
you examine every thing by it self as the establishing of peace, and
co^firmacion of leagues, and truces with neighbors, the provision of money,
men, and Munition, the order of Marching, incamping, and fighting, and so all
the reast of the means reducing every thing to his general kind without
observing what was first or last done, (so as you comprehend in your
division nothing, but those means that appertain to the obtaining of the
victory,) then you shall observe the third order. The first order properly
belongs to him that labors to come to some end and is meet for the first
reading of any History, since all things are wont to be told in such order
as they were done. The second order is very necessary to judge of every
thing, what is well or evil done and to consider better afterward of those
things, which were not easy to be well considered of at the first. Also
when a thing was not to be obtained by one mean, vvhither it might be
obtained by an other mean or not, and where want is, what mean were most
mete to supply each others place. But if so much knowledge were not to be
gathered out of that tale, or History, then to consider by what means the
like end had been obtained else where. VVherby you shall see, that one has
brought a thing to pass by one mean which an other could not do the like
by an other mean.

In using this consideration in many like causes and declaratio^s: you shall be
able quicklye to discern which means be good and which be not, to bring
any thing to pass. The third order is good for him that has observed the
two first orders, to reduce all things in to a brief sum, that he may the
more easily commit them to memory, or when he has, to put any thing in
execution as to make diverse prouisio^s, or to distribute to diverse persons
diverse charges and offices. But who so ever does consider and examine every
thing, that is of any moment or importance by all these three orders
aforesaid: cannot choose but reap of his labor great benefit. And because
we find many times, that like means have been used to the obtaining of like
ends, (as we suppose) and yet not with like success, we ought therefore
diligently to consider the diverse natures of things, and the differences of
times, and occasions, and such like accidents, to see if we can possibly find
out the cause why men's purposes have taken effect at one time, and not at an
other. And by noting all that has been said, touching the nature and
property of any thing* we shall learn which accidents are wont to
accompany together and which not. Thus much touching the first and second
part of human wisdom.

Now to the third part, vvherby we are taught not only to note the taking and
leaving of all occasions and opportunities, whereby any good has been
procured: but also all the dangers of evils, that either in time have been
vvyselye foreseen, and fled: or into which for lack of foresight, men have
headlong fallen, having therein regard to every man's state, condition,
faculty, profession, and other such like circumstaunces, to the intent that
we our selves may learn thereby to do nothing unadvisedly. And as the
examples of prosperous successes, which God has given as just rewards to
those, that work according to virtue: the great good will and love that all
men have toward them: their fame, glory, and praise, sounding in all men's
mouths, and finally their immortality in being chronycled for their noble
acts, do chiefly serve, to stir us, to verteous, honest, and commendable
doings: Even so, nothing is more meet to dravve us from vice, and dishonest
dealing, than the examples of evil successes, which God has given to the
wicked, as punishments for their evil deserts: their shame and infamy: the
hatred and enmity, that they procure to themselves, not only vvhilest they
live, but also after their death: the Infamy which they leave to their
familye, posterity, and country, whose secret wicked deeds, are laid open
to the world by written History, in such sort, as men will not for shame
once name those persons, which in their life time, would be honored as Gods.
Moreover, to this third part do appertain, all the great labors, expenses,
and perils, that noble minded men have sustained, either in following that
which is good and commendable, or in fleeing that which is evil, and
detestable. And to the intent that in our reading we omit nothing vvorthie
to be noted: we may not make over much haste, but rather read ley surely and
with Judgment, that remembering every thing meet to be observed: we may
fitly apply the same to some good purpose, and make it to serve our turn,
when need is. And though we seek by reading Hystories, to make our selves
more wise, asvvell to direct our own actions, as also to counsel others, to
stir them to virtue, and to withdraw them from vice, and to beautyfie our
own speech with grave examples, when we discourse of any matters, that
thereby it may have the more authority, weight, and credit: yet there is some
difference of consideracion to be had, when by examples we mind to profit
our selves, and when we mind to profit others. For many times a thing of
small importance, may either quicken, or confirm in our selves a part of
wisdom of great importance, but in counselling others (if we would have
our words to be of force and efficacy) we must use those examples that be
of weight and importance. And therefore when we find any such in our reading,
we must not only consider of them, but also note them apart by themselves in
such order, as we may easily find them, when soever we shall have need to use
them. And the order of such examples, would not be altogether according to the
names of the persons, from whence they are taken, which order some writers do
commonly use in the tables of their books, but rather according to the
matters and purposes vvhereto they serve. Neither is it sufficient in this
behalf, to have only common places of virtues and vices, or of things
commendable, and not commendable, but other places also besides them, meet to
be applied to every one of those parts of obseruacion, which we seek,
which places are to be found, ordered, and disposed, not before we begin to
read, but whylest we continue in reading, and in observing all kind of
matters every day with better judgment than other. And by considering under
what title every example is to be placed (for the ready finding thereof) we
shall greatly help our memory. But now to conclude, as he that makes
these obseruacio^s in reading Hystories, shall reap, in my opinion that fruit
which is proper, to that kind of study, and be able thereby greatly to
profit both himself, and his common wealth: So I can not tell vvhyther I may
deryde, or rather pity the great folly of those which having consumed all
their life time in hystories, do know nothing in the end, but the discents,
genealoges, and petygrees, of noble men, and when such a King or Emperor
reigned, and such like stuff, which knowledge though it be necessary and
meet to be observed, yet it is not to be compared to the knowledge, that is,
gotten by such obseruacions as we require, and be of greater importance: to
the obtaining whereof, I vvish all readers of Hystories, to employe their
chiefest study, care, and diligence.

FINIS.

