Amorous Fiammetta.

Wherein is set down a catologue of all and singular passions of Love and
iealosie, incident to an enamored young Gentlewoman, with a notable caveat for
all women to eschew deceitful and wick^d Love, by an apparent example of a
Neapolitan Lady, her approved and long miseries, and with many sound
dehortations from the same.

First written in Italian by Master John Boccace, the learned Florentine, and
Poet Laureat.

And now done into English by B. Giouano del M. Temp.

With notes in the Margin, and with a Table in the end of the cheifest
matters contained in it.

Bell fine fa, chi ben amando muore. Petrar: Lib. 10. Sonnetto. 110. At London,
Printed by I.C. for T(...) and (...)

To the Right worshipful and virtuous Gentleman, Sir William Hatton Knight.
THe paltring Poet Cherillus, dedicated his dancing poemes to that mighty
Monarche Alexander, saying, that he knew assuredly, if that he would not
accept the^ in that they were not pithy, yet he would not utterly reject the^ in
that they had a show of Poetry. Aemilius thinking to gratify that worthy
conqueror Caesar, with some curious piece of workmanship, waded so far in the
depth of his art, as strayning courtesy with cunning, he skypt beyond his
skill, not being able to make it perfect. Who being blamed of his friend,
for stryuing further the^ his sleeue would stretch, answered: that although
art and skyll were wanting to beautify the work, yet heart and will did
polish that part, which lack of cunning had left imperfect. Whose answer, as
one guilty of a greater crime, I claim for a sufficient excuse of my folly,
that durst enterprise to strive beyond my strength, knowing my self unable,
both by nature and art to bring this or any part thereof by mine own skill to
a wise end. For if the Fouler is to be condemned of folly that takes in hand
to talk of hunting, then may I well be dubbed a dolte, which being unskillful,
dare take in hand to desipher the substance of Love, that am but a fool.

But as there is no greater cooling card to a^rash wit, then want, so there is
not a more speedy spur to a willing mind, then the force of duty, which
drove me in a double doubt, either to be counted as bold as blind Bayard, in
presuming too far, or to incur the prejudice of ingratitude, in being to
slow: But as wishes are of no value, so his will as vain that couettes to
pay his debtes with counterfeit coin, there in I find the fault, and commit
the offense. For being greatly indebted to my honorable good Lord by duty,
for the first payment I offer although not mine own labors, to you his
honors worthy Nephue, this small pamphlet of M. John Boccace a famous Poet,
and translated by M. Bartholmewe Young of the middle temple, a piece of work
worthy the wearing, in that it shows the manner how to esehew deceitful and
wicked love: which considered although wisdo^e willed me to go (non Vltra
crepida^) I thought good to present this pamphlet under your worships
protection: hoping you will deigne to accept the matter although it be but
prose, though something unsavory for want of skill, yet accept the Authors well
meaning for his and my boldness, in that his skill and my good will is not in
the wane, whatsoever this work does want. The Emperor Traian never wanted
suitors because so courteously he would hear every man's complainte. All that
courted Atalan^a were hunters, where Moecenas, lodges scholars will flock.
And your worship being a worthy fosterer of the learned, has forced my
author by your virtue and me by duty, to offer these his fruits at the
shrine of your worships courtesy. Beseeching the almighty to send you health,
wealth and prosperity.

Your worships to command in all duty Thomas Newman.

To the noble and gallant Dames of the City of Castale in Mon: Ferrato
Gabriel Giolito.
AMongst the finest and vulgar prose of that most excellent and learned
Clarke, Master John Boccace, written for your profit and consolation, there is
none (most noble Ladies) which you ought to hold more dear, and esteem more
precious, then this present work, entitled (Amorous Fiammetta.) Because
containing in it the sighs, the tears, and prolonged miseries of an enamoured
young Gentlewoman forsaken of her Lover, who does not conceive this very same to
be set forth as a sovereign example, and sole instruction for you all. Not,
that by the condemned ingratitude of one young man, you should learn, generally
to despise all men, but rather because knowing by another, how dangerous a
thing it is, lightly and quickly to give credence to every one his promise,
Love being a natural fire to burn the brauest and most gentle minds, and
enclyning your selves to love, you may select and chose out such a subject,
that afterward the like repentance, and a worse condition perhaps then
Fiammetta had, may not befall unto you.

Whereupon my self, who was borne to do you all the service I can, having
with all diligence corrected this Book, and committed it to the press, I
thought it most beseeming my deuoyre to bring it to light, authorized under
your worthy names, and shadowed (I hope) under the favorable wings of your
assured ampare and defense. Read it therefore, and dyscoursing amongst your
selves the dolorous complaints of that miserable and hapless Lady Fiammetta:
by her desastrous and adverse Fortune, learn you (fair Ladies) to be wyser
and better advised. And having the name and title of the fairest and noblest
Ladies in Italy, assume also the praise and commendation upon you of the
wysest and most pitiful Gentlewomen in the same. Because a woman's ornament
is not in her cruelty enclosed, or in her peevish austernes, and none amongst
them was ever commended for an unworthy enemy to men's affections. In the mean
while I will not omit (gracious Ladies) hereafter to offer up to your high
and sacred thoughts, more noble matters, and of greater consequence.

The Author his Prologue. Fiammetta speaks.
MIserable men, when they perceive that others have compassion of their
miseries, and see them selves to be pitied of some, are wont to take a certain
kind of delight and pleasure in their sorrows and greefes. Because the
occasion therefore, of my voluntary sorrow, by tract of long time and custom,
is rather augmented then deminished in me, I think it not amiss, in telling
and dicoursing my bitter chances to you (most noble Ladies) in whose tender
hearts love perhaps does dwell more happily then in mine, to attempt to
fill (if possibly I may) the same with pity and compassion. And I recke not
whether my speeches come to men's ears or no, but will rather, hide them as
much as I may, from them all: because the cruel dealinges of one false man,
are here so inuectiuely discovered of me, that others imagining the like, I
might sooner expect with their scorns and tauntes to be flowted, then to be
pitied with their sorrowful tears.

I beseech you (gentle Ladies) to read it, whom I know by my own self
naturally inclined to commiseration of my misfortunes. You shall not in reading
of it, find any Grecian fables depainted and set forth with plausible lies,
nor Trojan wars foul and loathsome by deadly goare, but Amorous battles
procured and maintained by innumerable pricking desires, in the which shall be
presented before your eyes, the miserable tears, the ouerwhelming and burning
sighs, the doleful complaints, and the boisterous and tempestuous thoughts,
which continual stinges pearcing my troubled soul have taken from me my
woonted appetite, deprived me of my sweet sleep, exiled my joyful times, and
(O death to my remembrance) despoyled me of my peerless and dearest beauty.
All which things, if you will every one by her self, or else altogether, with
that pitiful heart behold, which for the most part all women have, then
assuredly I perswad my self, that you will bath your delicate cheeks with
streams of gushing tears, which are to me a material cause, and chief
occasion (dispairing of all hope and comfort to come) of perpetual anguish and
grief of mind. I pray you therefore (tender hearted Ladies and gentlewomen)
not to withhold them, but let them issue from their forced fountains, thinking
with your selves, that if your fortunes, which are not very steadfast and sure,
should chance (which the Gods forbid) to be semblable to mine, how dear and
grateful a thing should it be to you, if in lue of your lamentations, and for
your hard happes I should power forth some tears again. But because the time,
(spent more in words, then wailinges,) may not slide away, I will force my
self breefely to come to the performaunce of my promise, beginning first with
my happy and steadfast love, because deducing in argument from that former
felicity, to this present state and condition of life, you may both know and
call me the most unfortunate woman that lives. And from thence I will (as well
as I can) with a ruthful and deploring style, prosecute these unlucky
accidents, which not causeless make me so grievously moan aad lament. But
first (if miserable souls are heard) wretched woman as I am, bathed in my own
tears, I do implore some heavenly deity, (if any there be,) whose holy mind
(moved with pity of my distressed fare) to help my doleful memory, and to
direct my trembling hand in this present work, and being oppressed, to add
such force and vigor to them again, that, what anguishe and bitter greefes I
have sustained, and do yet feel in my tormented mind, even such the one
recording the words and stratage^s, and the other (more willing then able to
such an office) may fully and wholly write them down.

The first Book of Boccace his Fiammetta.
IN the time, when the reuested earth does show it self more pleasant and
fayrer, then in any other season of the year: borne of most noble parents, and
received here of bountiful and favorable Fortune, I came into this World.

Accursed be that day, and hated of me more then any other, in the which I
first enjoyed this common light. How happy had I been (alas) if I had never
been borne, or if I had at the time of my unfortunate birth, been carried to
my grave, or had not breathed any longer time, then the teeth sown of Cadmus:
or else, The men borne that were sown of Cadmus teeth, lived but a day
if Lachesis at one and self same hour, had begun and cut in too her vital
thredde: because then, in that small time of life, these infinite woes, which
are now a sorrowful occasion to put my pen to Paper, should with the
same have been concluded. But what does it now avail for these causes to
lament? For here I am nevertheless by the general decrees and pleasures of
the Gods.

Being received then (as I have said) in most high delights, and nourished
only amongst them, and in my young and tender years, brought up under a
reverend and sage Matrone, I easily learned every good quality, which was
most convenient and commendable for any young and noble Woman. And as my
personage did with passed years increase, so were my beauties also multiplied,
which were the only and especial occasions of all my sorrows, and infinite
greefes. Alas (although I was yet but a little one) how great lie did I glory
with my self, in hearing my commendations in every ones mouth, and did
therefore with art and industry daily study to make them more perfect and
curions.

But arrived now from my childhoode, to a more full and ryper age, and
conceauing by the instincts of nature, with what burning desires amorous young
Gentlewomen may entice young and wanton youths, I perceived that my surpassing
beauty, Beauty hurt full to her that has it.
(a miserable gift to her, who loves to lead a virtuous life) did not only
incende most of al those young Gentlemen, who lived at ye time in flourishing
youth like my self, but many other noble men, with a fervent and amorous
fire: who infinite times with diverse dryfts, many means, and sundry slights,
(unknown to me as then) did attempt to kindle me with that fire, wherewith
they themselves did burn, and that it should not then only scorche me, but
in process of time, in long and lingering flames utterly consume me. And of
many with earnest suit, as well to my Parents, as especially to me, I was
requested in marriage. But after that one among all the rest (a most absolute
(in my opinion) and perfect Gentleman) had won that prize, for which they
striued all, the importunous and troublesome route of wooers (being now past
all hope,) did cease to sullicite me any more with their cunning and daily
pursutes. Wherefore remaining in just content with my loving Husband, I lived
a most happy and joyful Woman, until furious Love with a secret kind of
unknown fire, and never felt of me before, entered into my tender and young
breast. Alas there was not any thing, that might sa^is-fye either my desire,
or any Woman's else, which presently I had not for my pleasure and co^tentation.
I was the only joy, and singular felicity of my young Husband, and as he
was truly beloved of me, so did he equally and greatly love me again.

O how happy might I have thought my self above all other Women, if this new
love had for ever continued inuiolated in my heart? Living therefore in great
happiness, and spending my youthful years in daily sports, and joyful
feasts, false Fortune, the sudden chaunger of worldly things, and most
envious of the self same goods that she had erst bestowed on me, purposing
now to withdraw her hand, and not knowing by what means to spett forth her
venom, with subtle and Sophistical arguments, made an adverse way (leading
to the Dungion of sorrow) open to mine eyes. And truly by no other means,
but by those by which fond Love entered into my heart she could entrap me, or
use her force at all, but the Gods favorable to me, and careful of my
affairs, perceiving her covert and malicious guyles, did intend to arm my
yielding heart and feeble breast with weapons, if I had been so wise to have
taken and used them for my defense, because I might come forewarned and not
unarmed to the battle in the which I should miserablye have fallen. Wherefore
with a manifest vision in my dreams, the very night before ye day (that
dismal day I say) did come, which was the sorrowful beginning of my endless
pains, and loss of liberty, they did clearly admonish me of future
accidents in this sort.

Me thought lying in a fair broad bed, with every part of my body
resolved into deep sleep, Dreams sometimes foretell things to come.
I saw the fairest and brightest day that might be, and my self (I know not
how) more iocant and merry, then ever I had been before. And ioying all alone
in this kind of mirth, I did imagine that I sat in a sweet Medowe, upon the
green grass, and amongst many golden and pleasant flowers, defended from the
heat of the Sun, and from his parching beams, with many cool shadows of
diverse Trees, newly apparelled with thick and green leaves. And having
gathered many flowers in the same, wherewith all that place was most bravely
depainted, with my lyllie white hands I did separate one from another, as they
lay confused and mingled in my lap, and with the finest that I could pick
out, I made a fair and little Garlande, wherewith I did adorn my stately
head. Beautified thus, and rising up (as Proserpina did, when Pluto did
rauishe her from her mother) I went singing up and down in this pleasant and
trym Medowe, rejoicing at the entrance of merry Springtide. And afterward,
feeling my self somewhat weary, I laid me down amongst the thickest and
freshest grass to rest my self a little. But like as that little hydden
Viper did prick Euridices tender foot, even so a lurking and creeping Serpent
did likewise appear to my sight, as I lay along upon the soft and thick
grass, the which (me thought) did with her cruel tongue sting me under the
left pappe, which venomous biting, at the first entrance of her sharp teeth,
did seem to burn me like a scalding and fiery flame. And then being
almost assured, and past fear of ye worst, me thought I put the cold Serpent
into my burning bosom, imagyning that with the benefit of her cold skin,
she should a little ease me, and be more favorable unto me for this gentle
deed. But emboldened rather by the same, and now become more fierce then
before, to the foresaid sting, she reioyned her cruel mouth, and having after
a good while sucked a great quantity of my vital blood, me thought, that
merely going out from my wounded bosom, (though I did strive to ye contrary)
she went also away with my fainting soul. At the departing of which, the
golden day obscured, and (like a shadow driven by the Sun coming behind me)
did cover me all over, after which followed a foggy and mistye darkness,
accompanied with multitudes of black and thick clouds, which hanging upon it,
did seem to be drawn after, and like a confused and difformed Chaos to
follow. And not long after, (as a little white stone cast into a deep and
clear water, does by little and little vanish away from the sight of them
that do behold it) even so was the brightness of this Sun shine day taken
away from my dimmed sight. Then might I perceive the Heavens to be overcome
with darkness, and the gladsome Sun retired back, and obscure night approaching,
made me call to mind, that this sudden alteration was not unlike unto that,
which happened to the Grecians, when the Sun did hide his face, Atreus his
fault was, that he made the Father, which was his brother, to eat his own
Son, whereupon the Sun retired back again, because it would not see so wicked
a mess and table.
because he would not for shame behold the enormitie of Atreus his foul
fault. The fearful lightnings peecemeale glaunced up and down in the air,
and cracking thunders made the earth, but me most of all afraid. And the
wound which until this time, had but only stunge me (me thought) by reason
of the late biting, remaining now full of viperous venom, ouerranne, and
occupied all my body with most filthy and loathsome swellings, no secrets of
physic being able to cure ye same. Whereupon feeling my self at the first
without any spirit, and afterward the force of the poison by more subtle
entraunces serching every vain of my heart, I tumbled and tossed my self up
and down the green grass, expecting always when death would assail me.
And now the final hour (to my thinking) being come, terrified also with the
horror of the time, and with the extreme grief of my infected heart, attending
the mortal stroke of death, made me to shryke and start on a sudden in such
sort, that it caused my deadly sleeping body to shake again, and so brake me
out of that horrible and gastlie dream.

After the which (as it was very sudden) and not a little afraid also of
those things, which (me thought) I had seen, with my right hand I made great
speed to my bytten left side, seeking that presently there, which was
afterward prepared for me in time to come. But yet when I found no wound, nor
any sign thereof, passing merry again, and careless, I began to deride,
and laughe at the foolishness of dreams, and so accounted the labor of the
Gods herein but vain. But, wretch that I am, how justly (though then I
scorned them) have I afterward to my great grief of mind believed, and
found them most true, and planted them without any fruit, being no less
grieved at the Gods, who declare their secrets to incapable minds with so
great obscurity, the which no sooner showed, but incontinently they happen.
Being therefore thorowlie awaked, I lifted up my head, and by a little
creuisse in the door, did see Titan forsake Auroras Chamber, and enter into
mine. Wherefore casting all such fond conceits aside, I rose up.

That was a high and festival day almost to all ye world, in the which every
one, to honor the solemnity of it, attyred themselves with their best and
brauest robes: wherefore, apparrelling my self most curiously with garments
woouen with shyning Gold, and with cunning and skillful hand, setting every
thing in every part about me in the finest order, and adorned like to ye
fairest of those three Goddesses, which Paris saw in the Valies of Ida, I
prepared my self to go to this solemn and high feast. And while I was
beholding my self on every side, not otherwise then the Pecock does her gay
Feathers, and imagining as well to please others, as my self, one of my
flowers (broken from my crown by the Curtain of the bed, or else perhaps
plucked from my head by some celestial and invisible hand) fell from my head
to the ground. But I, taking no regard of the secret operations of the
Gods, and esteeming it as nothing, took it up, and put it in his former
place again, and so passed it slightlie over.

Alas what more manifest sign could the Gods give me of that, which
afterward did happen then this. Truly none at all. This had been sufficient
enough to declare unto me, that my soul, that day so free, and mistress of it
self, laying down her sweet signorie, should be made servile and bond, as
it happened indeed. Oh if my mind had been sound, how had I not then
foreknowne yt day, (that blackest day) that afterward happened unto me, and
had safely ouerpassed it without going once out of my doors. But the Gods
although they lend them (with whom they are angry) certain signs and tokens
of their welfare, yet do they nevertheless deprive them of the due knowledge of
ye same. And so in one hour seem to do their willing deuoyre, and to fulfill
their wrathful minds. My hard destinies therefore did (as it were) drive me on
forwards like a vain and careless Woman, and being accompanied with many
Gentlewomen, that served on my train, with a soft and stately pace, I went to
the holy Temple, in which the sollemne and divine office, due for that day, was
celebrated. The antiquity of my generous predecessors, and my nobility also
had reserved a high place for me, amongst other most excellent and worthy
Ladies there, in the which, after that I was set, observing my old custom,
which was, in suddenly casting mine eyes round about, I saw the Church
equally full of of Men and Women, in diverse companies, diversely to employ
themselves. But no sooner was I espied in ye Temple, though in the midst of
sacred service time, but (as it was a common thing many times before so then
did it also fall out) that not Men only, but every woman did turn their eyes
toward me, to behold me: and wondering at me, as if Venus or Minerua
(never seen of them before) had been verelie come down from Heaven amongst
them.

O how many times did I smyle with my self, feeling such content to tickle
me, and glorying in my self no less then a Goddess, being not a little
proud of all these most happy favors. All the company therefore of young
Gentlemen, A fine description of a trim woman,
leaving of (at sight of me) to gaze upon other Gentlewomen, (of which there
was no small number of rare and passing beauty) and placing themselves about
me, did in manner of a Crown compass me round about. And every one after
his own fancy, speaking and diversely discoursing of my beauty, but all
concurring and concluding in one sentence, did highly extol and commend it.
But I, who with mine eyes turned another way, made a semblaunce to busy my
mind in devotions, but giui^ (...) talk, did conceive and feel (...) desired
pleasure and co^ (...) ^ing my self greatly beh^ (...) eye and pleasant
regard (...) gain. Whereupon I mig^ (...) ^nie of them fondly conceiui^ (...)
hope thereof, did greatly g^ (...) their companions for the same (...)

Whilst I remained thus (...) and beheld greatly of many, a^ (...) should
captiuate others, it chanced that an others most unfortunately entrapped me.
And being now near to that dolorous passage, which of most certain death,
or else of such a kind of life, that should be full of anguish and sorrow,
might have been a sorrowful and sinister occasion, I knew not with what
spirit moved, but with a seemly grace lifting up mine eyes, with an earnest
and sharp view I spredde their beams amids the multitude of young Gentlemen,
that did enuiron me round about. Fiammetta is enamoured in the Temple.
And beyond them all I espied a propper young Gentleman, leaning upon a Marble
pillar, as directly object to my sight as might be. And instigated by my
pursuing destinies, I began to mark his personage, and his behavior, which
of any other before, I had never to do so much. I say therefore, that
(according to my slender judgment, which was not yet very ripe about love
matters) in his countenance he was passing fair and amiable, in his actions
sweet and pleasant, and in his attire decent and comely. And the little golden
and crisped wool which began to appear on his lovely cheeks, did give a
manifest sign of his young and flourishing age. Who being no less pitiful
(as it seemed) then wise, omitted not between Man and Manne, to requite me
with loving looks again. And though I had sometimes the power to withdraw
mine eyes a little while from beholding him, yet no accident whatsoever, no,
not my self (though stryuing to the contrary) could make me le^^e of to
trauerse many strange and uncouth (...) so lively was his very counter^ (...)
my heart, that with what (...) ^e same, I am not able to (...) ^s did affirm
with my (...) ^eare in him, to be most (...) ^ented in mind, and wysh^ (...)
I cast sometimes a glance (...) me.

(...) ^ymes that I beheld him (vn^ (...) ^he secret snares of love) fyr^
(...) ^newhat longer upon his, then I was wont to do, and the percing beams
of his fair eyes encountering with mine, me thought, that with a pitiful and
sweet countenance be seemed to speak these words. O Lady, thou art mine
only joy and singular felicity. Truly if I should say, that these words did
not work an extraordinary delight in me, I should flatly lie: the
supposition of which did so highly please me, that from the center of my heart
they drew forth a sweet and profound sigh, which came accompanied with these
words. And thou art mine. But that remembering my self, I took them from my
mouth. But what did it avail? That which was not expressed and uttered forth,
my heart did conceive and imagine with it self, retaining yt in it, which if it
had gone forth, perhaps I should have yet been free. Then from that time
forward, making my foolish eyes the whole arbyters of that, the good whereof
they were so greedy to enjoy, I did (me thought) in so doing greatly content
and please them. And certes if the Gods, who deduct all things to some known
and certain end, had not taken away my understanding, and bereaved me of my
due knowledge, I might have still been mine own woman. But all such
considerations laid aside, I followed my sensual appetite, and quickly
persuaded my self to yield to love: Because no otherwise then the elementarie
coruscations shooting themselves from one part of the air to another, a
shyning light issuing from out his clear eyes, and running by a most subtle
and fine beam, did meet and hytte directly against mine, which contending to
pass further, by what secret ways (I know not) suddenly went penetrating to
my very heart, which fearing their violent entrance, and calling to it all her
exterior forces, left me altogether pale and cold: But their aboade was not so
long there, but the greatest fear was past, and then were they welcomed with a
hot and burning passion: whereupon the foresaid forces returning to their
places again, brought with them a certain heat, which driving all palenes
quite away, painted my face like the vermillion Rose, and made me burn as hot
as fire: And yet beholding from whence all this did proceed, I could not but
breathe out a sorrowful sigh. And from that hour forward, my thoughts were
occupied in nothing else, but meditating of his brave personage, and apparent
virtues, and especially in imagining how to please him.

In all these intercourses, without changing of place or countenance, he did
most privily steal now and then a look at me again. And peradventure as one
who had been a tried Soldier in other amorous battles, and knowing with
what Engines his wyshed pray might best be taken, with arguments of greater
humility, continually he showed himself more pitiful, and full of amorous
desires. Alas how much deceit was hydden under the veil of that piety, which
(according as the present effects do testify) being now mortified in his
heart, where it never revived again,) bare only but an outward show and vysard
of love? And because I may prosecute every thing and action in particular,
whereof there was not any, which was not fraught with rare fraud and cunning
guile, whither it was he, that voluntarily did work it, or my unlucky stars,
that would have it so, thus it fell out, that (wanting the due skyl exactly to
show you how) I found my self entangled with sudden and unlooked for love,
as at this present I am not free from the same.

This therefore was he (most pitiful Ladies) whom my conquered heart with a
foolish conceit, amongst so many noble, beautiful, and valiant young
Gentlemen, yt were not only there present, but also in all my Parthenope, did
choose to be the first, Naples.
the only, and last Lord and master of my life. This was he, whom I loved,
and do love still more then any one in all the world besides. This was he
who was the beginning and principal occasion of all my woes, and shall be (as I
hope) the final cause of my tragical death at last. This was that day, in
the which, first of a most free and happy Lady, I became a most miserable and
unhappy captive. This was that day, in the which I did first apprehende the
miserable effects of foolish love, never known of me before. This was that
day, wherein venereous venoms contaminated first my pure and chaste breaste.
Alas poor wretch, how many sorrows, and what misery came this day into the
world to thee, by thine own default? How far (alas) should annoy and grief
have been from me, if this day had been turned into darkness? and how great
an enemy was this day to my unstained honor?

But evil things (alas) which are committed and past, All things which are
done, may be sooner controlled then remedied.
may be easier reprehended then amended. I was therefore taken (as I have
said) and whither it was some infernal fury, or envious fortune, which did
so emulate my chaste felicity, laying snares to entrappe me, may this day with
hope of infallible victory triumph and rejoice in my miserable fall. Being
therefore possessed, nay rather oppressed with new kinds of passions, as one
astonished, and like a senseless Woman I satte amongst the other Ladies and
Gentlewomen. And troubled thus in mind, I did neglect the sacred and divine
service, which as I did scarcely hear, so did I not understand it at all: and
thought the sundry speeches and discourses of Gentlewomen, that satte round
about me, but a kind of buzzing and murmuring in my troubled ears. And so this
new and unexpected love did take sudden possession of my tender heart, so
that either with mine eyes, or with my thoughts I was ever contemplating on my
beloved young Gentleman. And yet my simplicity was such, that I did not almost
then know, what end I might wysh or desire of such a strange and fervent
passion. How many times (alas) coveting to have seen him approach near unto
me, did I blame his staying behind all the rest of the Gentlemen, thinking with
my self that that was but a cold kind of affection in him, which he did
perhaps craftily use, and for a policy, to make me more desirous to look
on him, and in looking to love him more.

And moreover, the company of lusty youths, that stood before him, did
greatly hinder my sight, of whom, whilst that I busied mine eyes in looking
sometimes amongst the^, there were not a few, that, (thinking, that for their
sakes I looked so much toward them) did vainly perhaps believe, that I did
it for love of them. But while my thoughts and senses were occupied in these
fancyes, the sollemne service was finished: and the Ladies and the rest of my
companions were risen up to depart, when I, recalling my wits together, which
went wandering about the sweet imagination and figure of their only object, at
the last I beheld my lovely young Gentleman again. And now my self risen up
with the other Gentlewomen ready to be gone, and turning mine eyes toward
him, I perceived that by his pitiful lokes (which I had thought to have
prevented by mine) that his departure, and mine did greatly grieve him. But
notwithstanding, after certain secret sighs, and yet ignorant of what
parentage, estate and condition he was, I went away.

Alas (gentle Ladies) who would believe it possible, that ones heart in a moment
and point of time should alter and change so much? Who would say that a man
never seen before might be so extremely loved at the first sight? And who
would think, that the desire of seeing should be so fervently kindled in
ones breast, as the very sight it self, and being deprived of that, to feel
the greatest pain in ye world, for desire to see the same thing again? Who
would imagine that all those things, that have been so joyful and delightful
to us before, in respect of a new thing come in place, should not yield any
more pleasure at all. Not any one truly, unless he had proved and felt them,
as I do now. Alas that love is not only content to use such a strange, and
too severe kind of cruelty toward me, How love is engendered in diverse
parts and souls of the body successively,
but in subduing me to his might, to prescribe new Laws, cleene variant from
others. I have oftentimes heard, that love in others at his first entrance is
but light, but by nourished thoughts augmenting his force, is made greater.
But so it fared not with me: for he entered into my heart with that same force,
wherewith he continued ever afterward, as one, who at the very first
assault had most entyre and free possession of me. And like as the green wood,
which is hardly at the first set on fire, and does lie a long time, before it
receives flames, but after it is once kindled, with greater heat does
conserve the fire longer, even so it happened unto me, who with this kind of
pleasing passion, never overcome of any before (though attempted of many) and
at the last conquered of one, have burned and kept, (as yet I do more
sensibly) these new flames, that have taken more hold of me, then ever they
did of any other, who before have assayed the like. But leaving aside many
thoughts, which with diverse accidents that morning turmoyled my troubled mind,
and besides these, which now I have told, I say, that being incended with a
new fury, with my captiuated and bond soul I returned again thither, from
whence (not long since) I had brought it free.

Where afterward, that I was now come into my Chamber all alone, kindled
with variety of burning desires surcharged with new thoughts, and pricked with
a thousand stinging cares, terminating every end of them in the imagined
apprehension of my young Gentleman, I thought, that if I could not weane my
self from this new love, at the least in my secret and sorrowful breast,
wisely to have nourished and governed the same, and warily to have brought it
to some good effect. Which things, how difficult they are to perform, none
can tell unless they prove them, undoubtedly believing, that they do no
less harm, then love it self. Wherefore, confirmed as it were in this
opinion, I said thus to my self. Alas thou art in love poor soul, and yet
thou do not know with whom.

What kinds of cruel thoughts, and how many careful cogitations were
engendered of this love, it should be too tedious for you dainty Ladies to
hear, and to grievous for me to tell. But yet (though forcing my self
thereunto) to obtain the more pity at your hands, and some comfort thereby,
I mean to unfold some of them unto you. I say therefore, that careless of
all other things, to spend ye time in thinking of my beloved and amiable young
Gentlemanne, was only most dear and pleasant unto me. And imagining with my
self, that perseuering in this, that which I did intend to conceal, might
perhaps have easily been presumed, I oftentimes found fault with my self for
it. But what did it help? My own reprehensions gave place to my desires, and
like words of light worth passed away with the air. I chiefly desired many
days together, to know what my beloved youth was, to the understanding of
which thing, new thoughts made me an open way, by means of which most warily
and privily I knew it, and whereof I remained not a little contented. My
goodly ornaments likewise, which (as one that little need them) were not
before this time so much in request with me, began now to be greatly liked of
me, thinking that being adorned with the^, I might please the more: Wherefore
I esteemed now more of gorgious apparel, gold, pearls, and other precious
stones, and gemmes, then ever I did before. And I, who until this time had
frequented the holy Temples, Feasts, Sea banks, and pleasant Gardens, without
any further intent or desire, the^ to keep other Gentlewomen and Ladies
company, began, (altered now in mind) for new purposes to resort more often to
the foresaid places, thinking, that there I might with pleasure not only
behold, but with delight and desire be seen again. But the great affiaunce
(truly) which I was wont to have in my beauty, forsook me now quite,
wherefore I never went out of my Chamber, without the infallible counsel of my
trusty Glass: And my cunning hands, (I know not by what curious instructor
newly taught) finding every day more brave and rare ornaments, conioyning
artificial with natural beauty, did make me like Venus star) shine
amongst other Ladies. The great honors moreover, courtesies, and obeisance,
which other Ladies and Gentlewomen of their mere good wyls, and duties did
unto me, although indeed they were incident to my nobilitye, I now began to
accept and expect as services duly and worthily belonging to my high estate,
thinking that I should please my lover most of all, when by these means he
did perceive, that I was of noble birth and lynage. And that common
covetousness, which is naturally borne and ingraffed in all Women, did work in
me (eschewing the same) no other effects, then to esteem of all my riches,
land and treasure, as if they had not been mine own: whereby I became not
only liberal, but feeling also a certain seemly boldness to increase in
me, made me deuoide of all womanly and suspicious fear, accounting but one
thing only deerer to me now then before. And besides all this, my eyes which
until this time had been but simple, and inexpert in amorous regards changed
their former fashions, and grew marvelous skillful in performing their parts.
And I discovered moreover in me diverse other mutations, all which by one and
one, I care not to set down, because first, it would be too long a labor,
and secondly, because I believe yt you (fair Ladies) enamored perhaps like my
self, are not ignorant how great and many those are, which accompany lovers
in like causes.

The young Gentleman was most wary and wise, as many times by experience I was
sufficiently thereof acertayned. He came but seldom times, and that in most
honest and seemly sort where I was, and having (as it seemed) purposed the
self same thing, that I had done, which was to conceal altogether these
amorous flames, did yet with many privy and stealing looks, not a few times
pitifully behold me. He did therefore make those kindled flames in me, more
fervent and lively, and revived those again, (if any they were) that were
spent and quite consumed in me. But the beginning of all this love was not so
joyful and happy, but the sequel and end of it was more sorrowful and
unfortunate, at what time I remained deprived of his sight, because these eyes
being denied their wished joy, did minister a grievous occasion to my poor
heart of grief, whereupon my sighs both in quantity and quallitie were
greatly augmented: And hot desire, occupying almost every least sense of mine,
did make me live as one besides my self, Diverse accidents of love especially
in a weak mind
and as if I had not been there where I was, made many that saw me, to wonder
often times at me, attributing afterward infinite and feyned occasions
(taught me only of love) to such strange and uncouth accidents. And besides
all this, taking from me many times my sweet rest in the night time, and
appetite in the day, did drive me sometimes to certain sudden and furious
kinds of actions, and transported my tongue into strange and fond speeches.
Behold how my unaccustomed gorgious apparel, my prodigal attire, my scalding
and new sighs, my unwonted gesture, frantic fits, the loss of my rest,
quietness, and health, and many other things, which this new love brought with
it, amongst many other Servant and familiars in my house, made a Nurce of
mine especially to marvel much, who, as she was burdened with many years,
so in ripe wisdom and good experience she was not young at all. And who
having sometimes known and tried the heat of Cupids flames, and making
semblance to the contrary, did oftentimes reprehende me, and my suspected
follies. But finding me on a day laid upon my bed, and oppressed with deep
melancholy and sadness, and perceiving by my face, that I was ouercharged with
burdens of heavy thoughts, The Nurce her speech to Fiammetta.
and seeing no company with me but her self, began thus to say unto me.

Oh Daughter, deerer to me then mine own heart strings, what cares do molest
thee thus of late? Now thou spendest not one hour (whom sometimes I was wont
to see merry and free from all pensiuenes) without infinite cares, and burning
sighs.

Then after a great sigh, and often changing of my color, turning me now this
way, now that way, my tongue being scarce able to form and fashion one word
aright, I answered her again.

O dear Nurce, no new thing does annoy me, neither do I feel any more
grief, then I was wont to do, these natural courses only excepted, and
influences, which, never keeping us in one stay and estate of life, make me at
this present (more then they were wont) both painful and pensive. Thou
verily do deceive me Daughter, (answered the old Nurce again,) nor do
conceive how great a matter it is, to make temperate and advised persons
believe one thing in words, and to show the contrary by demonstration. Thou
need not to keep that hidden from me, which many days since I did know
to be in thee.

Alas when I heard her say so, surprised with great marvel and grief,
knowing my self to be touched to ye quick, with an angry countenance I said
to her.

Then if thou do know, why do thou ask? wherefore I request no more at
thy hands, but to conceal and keep that close which thou know. I will not
believe me, (said she again) disclose that, which is neither lawful nor
reasonable to acquaint others withal, earnestly beseeching the Gods, that
before I manifest (during the well nigh finished course of my poor life) any
thing, which (much or little) may turn to thy shame, or that may in any one
iotte preiudicate thy honor, honesty, and virtuous name, the earth may open
and swallow me alive. It is a good while since my Daughter, that I learned to
keep secrecy in matters (perhaps) of as great importance as this: And
therefore live secure of this, admonishing thee to take dilligent heed, and to
be very careful, least others know that by thy indirect dealings, and
unadvised practices, which without report either of thy self, or of any other
but by thy outward countenance only, and mere behavior I have perceived. But
if this kind of mad folly, into which (I know thou art rashly fallen) were
beseeming a Woman of thy estate, if thou were as wise now, as of late thou
were, I would leave it to thine own consideration, being certain, that my
counsel herein should take no place, as a thing needelesse. But because this
cruel Tyrant, (to whom like a young and ignorant Woman, not taking any heed
of him, and of his poisoned bayts, thou haste simply subjected thy self (has
together with thy sweet liberty, bereaved, thee also of thy sound
understanding, I think it not amiss, to put thee freendly in remembrance,
and humbly to entreat thee, that from thy impotent and chaste breast, thou
would banish all wicked things, and naughty thoughts, and by oblivion
consume these dishonest flames, and not to suffer thy self become a handmaide
and bondslaue to most filthy hope. And now it is time to resist with force
and courage, He that resists love in the beginning, does overcome it in the
end.
because whosoever does stoutly resist, and oppose himself in the beginning,
he may easily drive out this villainous and envious love, and like a worthy and
wise Conqueror may safely triumph over him. But whosoever with continued
thoughts and flattering imaginations does continue and maintain it, may
hardly, and too late cast of his yoke, into the which voluntarily he did put
his neck.

Alas (said I then) how easy is it to talk of those things, and how
difficult a matter to remedy them. Although (said she again) that they are
very hard to be done, yet are they possible enough to be reformed, and
ought to be performed. Thou see, or (at the least if thou will) may see,
that in following thine own fancies, thou have (as it were) a certain kind of
desire to ruinate the highness of thy birth, to obscure the great and shyning
fame of thy manifold virtues, to loose the flower of thy beauty, to blemish
thy honor in this present world, and to discredit all those other good parts
in thee besides, which ought of all Women to be kept holy and unstained, and
especially of such as thou art, whose virtues (as in nobility thou art above
the rest) should also shine above the rest. And besides all this, to hazard
the loss of the gracious favor of thy noble Husband, whom thou have so long
(and yet do) loved so well, and who entirely loves thee again. Thou
should not truly have so much as a thought of idle love, neither do I
think (if like a wise Woman thou do but take sound counsel of thy self)
that thou will, nor can busy thy wits about it. But these old breasts of
mine with many years worn out (of the which thou did first suck out thy
nourishing milk and living sustenaunce) even by these, most humbly I pray
thee, that thou would in these timorous occurrents succor thy self, and be
careful both for thy health and honor, and in these thy perplexities not to
reject my weak and willing comforts. And think moreover that an earnest will
and desire to be made whole again, is not the smallest part, and no little
help to recover thy former health. Then I began thus to reply. A will to be
healed, is part of health in any one that is sick
O dear Nurce, well do I know, that these things which thou tellest me are
most true, but frantic fury compels me to follow that which is my bane,
and my guilty mind, and ouerrash in her desires, attempts in vain to put thy
counsel in practice, because that which reason wills me to do, is overcome
by unruly will, which most mightily does dominate in me. Love with his
deity does possess my heart, and there, with his mighty signory ouerruleth
my subject mind And how hard a matter is it for a feeble woman to resist his
forces. (Ah Nurce) thou know well enough.

And having so said, overcome by the force of my grievous passion, and fainting
I fell between her arms. But she, troubled in mind more then before, with an
austere countenance, and sharper speeches began to discipline me thus. You
wilful company of amorous and wanton young Gentlewomen, kindled with burning
desires, and fiery lust, which spurring you forwards to impious idolatry,
have fondlye found out Love to be a God, who more justly deserves the title
and name of frantic fury. And call him the Son of Venus, saying that he
deriueth his omnipotent power from the third Heaven, as though you would
excuse your follyes with a needless kind of necessity. O deceived souls, and
utterly deuoide of all reason, and most ignorant of that which you say. Sent
from the infernal furies, Wanton love reproved.
with a sudden and swift flight he visits all the world, bringing to him ye
does entertain him, not deity but despair, not freendly felicity, but
fendlie folly, allighting on those, who^ he does know to a bound in
superfluity of worldly goods, and to enjoy them with a vain and prodigal
mind, and on him whom he thinks fittest and most forward to make him place.
And this is here most manifest by thee. Why, do we not see holy Venus to
dwell oftentimes in little cottages, both profitable and necessary for our
procreation? yes truly. But this: who by frenzy is called Love, coveting ever
dissolute things, lodges in no other place, but where happy Fortune does
smyle, and where her gyfts abound.

This dainty one, disdayning no less sufficient food to satis-fie nature,
then necessary clothing, does frame all his persuasions to delicate fare, and
sumptuous attire, and so entermingling his secret and sweet poison with them,
does deceive and destroy unwary and ignorant souls. This more willingly and
often seen in high and princly Palaces, is seldom or never seen in poor and
Country cottages. Because it is a certain precise pestilence, which does
choose out only brave and stately lodginges, as most agreeable in the end to
his wicked practices. We see in poor and simple people, effects of good and
quiet consequence, but in the rich, wallowing in pleasure, and shyning in their
abundance of gold, (insatiable as well in this as in all things else) that he
is (more then is requisite) for the most part found: and that which he cannot
do (who can do most) he does desire, and especially endeavor to bring to
pass. Among whom I perceive thee (most unhappy and unfortunate Mistress) to
be one, who by too much wealth, ease and idle pleasure, have entered into these
new and unbeseeming cares. Whom, after I had a good while heard, I answered
thus again. Hold thy peace thou old and foolish dotarde, and prate not thus
against my God. Thou speak voluntarily against him, thy self being no less
impotent for these effects, then justly cast of all men, blaspheming him
now, whom in time of thy younger years thou did religiously adore. If other
Ladies more noble, wiser, and more famous the^ my self have heretofore thus
entitled him, and cease not yet to call him by the name of a mighty God, how
can I then alone give him any new or devised name. To be plain with thee, I
am become his Subject, but from whence the occasion of this allegance does
spring, I neither know nor can tell thee. And what can I do more? My feminine
forces conjoined oftentimes with his celestial power are overcome, and
constrained to retire back again. Wherefore there rests no more for the end
of my new and mortal pains, but my near death, or else the enjoying of my
wished love, which woes I pray thee to mitigate (if you art so wise as I
esteem thee) by thy sage counsel and speedy help, which will perhaps lessen
them at ye least, or else by thy bitter reprehensions surcease to exasperate and
make them greater, blaming that in me, which my soul, (not able to do
otherwise) with all the power and force it has, is wholly disposed to follow.
She departed therefore out of my Chamber somewhat offended (as she had indeed
good cause) at this my peremtorie answer, not giving me one word again, but
murmuring (I know not what) with her self, leaving me all alone.

Now was my loving Nurce I say gone, In this place one may see how contrary
sensuality is to reason.
without speaking any more to me, whose counselles though unadvisedly rejected
of me, yet, I remaining all alone, pondered all her words in my careful
breast. And (although my understanding was obscured with mistie clouds of
senceles love,) I found in them nevertheless a sweet and relyshed taste,
which making my heart, touched as it were with repentance, with a wavering and
unconstant mind I did consider better of that, which (even now I told her) I
had resolved to follow. Wherefore beginning now to think and to persuade my
self to let this doubtful and dangerous matter pass away, I thought it good
to call her back again for my needeful comfort: but this good motion was
quickly countermaunded by a new and sudden accident. Venus does appear unto
her.
Because lying all alone in my secret Chamber, a most fair Lady (not knowing
from whence she came) appeared before mine eyes, glittering with such shyning
light, that compassed her round about, yt my dazeled eyes might scarce behold
her, who standing thus before me, without either moving or speaking, as much
as by ye golden light I might illuminate and sharpen my eyes, so far forth did
I cast their beams, until at last her beautiful form, and formal feyture
of her body was fully arrived to my perfect knowledge. Whom when I did clearly
see, to be all naked, A fine description of a fair woman.
saving only a thine veil of fine purple silk, which (although it covered some
part of her snow white body) did nevertheless abridge my sight in looking on her
no more, then if I had beheld some goodly figure or Image enclosed in cristal
or clear glass. Her maiestical head, the hair whereof did so much exceed
gold in brightness, as the golden color of ours passes the yellowest and
softest in fairenes, was crowned with a fine Garland of green Myrtils, under
the shadow of which, I saw two eyes of incomparable beauty, and passing lovely
to behold, did cast forth a marvelous and splendant brightness, and all the
rest of her fair face, was in like proportion adorned with such divine
beauty, yt her like on earth might not (I think) be found. She spoke not a
word, glorying perhaps in her self, to see me gaze on her so much, or else to
please and delight me, perceiving me so greatly content and desirous to behold
her, yet at length, by little and little in ye transparant and shyning light,
more clearly discovering to me the fairest parts of her dainty body, because
she knew ye with my unable tongue I could not rehearse her exceeding
beauties, nor (without evident sight of them) imagine any such to live amongst
mortal men. Which admirable beauties, when she perceived, that I had severally
and earnestly marked, and to marvel no less at the rare perfection of them,
as to wonder at her coming thither, with a pleasant and mild countenance, and
with an angelical voice, she began to speak thus unto me.

Venus her speech to Fiammetta.
Young Lady, and of all others most noble, what do thou intend to do,
disturbed by the new counsels of thy old Nurce? know thou not, that these are
more intricate and harder to follow, then love it self, from which so fondly
thou desire to flee? Do thou not conceive what great and intolerable sorrow
they keep in store for thee? most foolish woman, once and even now ours, and
by the ye babble of the old woman do now fear to be ours again, like her
who is yet ignorant of the quantity of our great delights, and quality of our
sweet joys. Unadvised as thou art, uphold and maintain him by our speeches,
whom the heavens and earth can scarce contain with his might. What do
thou know how much our winged Son without resistance does reign, and
command, as much as Phoebus, rising with his golden beams out of the rich
Ganges, and plunging in the Hisperian waves with his wearied Chariot, to give
some rest to his fainting steedes, and to ease his own labors, sees in a
clear day: And how he dilateth his signorie over all that, which is shut up
between cold Arture and the burning Pole, who is not only a God in heaven
amongst other Gods, but is so much more mighty then all the rest, that there
is not any one there, who has not been sometimes wounded with his inevitable
weapons. With golden and colored feathers, flying swiftly through out his
kingdoms, The great force of Love.
in a moment of time he does visit them all, and governing his strong bow
upon his stretched string, cunningly directs his arrows, wrought by us and
tempered in our holy waters: and when he finds out some one, more worthy and
fit for his service then another, he shootes them speedily wheresoever it
pleases him. He does stir up and augment in young men cruel and fiery flames,
and in tired and old men, does renew their spent and wasted heat, inflaming
the chaste breasts of virgins with an unknown and hidden fire, and kindling
lively and lovely coals, as well in wives as in widows. He commanded when he
list, the Gods (scorched with his firebrands) to leave ye Heavens above, and
with counterfeit shapes, and false habites, to soiourne on ye earth. Was not
Phoebus, who conquered swelling Python, and first tuned the melodious Cyterns
of Pernassus, many times his vassale, sometimes for foolish Daphne, sometimes
for Climene, and sometimes for Leucothoe, and for many more? yes truly. And at
the last, hyding his great light under the shape of a poor enamored Shepherd
kept Admetus his flocks? Jupiter himself, who does govern the heavens, and
controleth all the Gods, by his compulsion, took upon him forms far
unbeseeming his omnipotent deity. Sometimes spreading his wings under the
shape of a lilly white byrd, sounded forth more sweet and pitiful notes, All
these Fables are touched of Ovid in his trans-formations.
then the dying Swannes of Meander. And sometimes transformed into a young and
goodly white Bullock, wc rude horns on his mighty Godhead, bellowed out amids
the meadows fields, and plains, his amorous plaints, and deyned not to
stoop and prostrate his back to the knees and seat of a sillye maid, and so
with his enjoyed and sweet pray, with cloven hoofes, instedde of cutting
owers, his broad and strong breast parting the waves, and making way through ye
deepest and raging billows, he passed his brothers kingdoms, who for Semele
in his own form, and who for the love of Calysto, turned himself into the
likeness of Diana. And to tell of that which in times past he did,
metamorphized into a shower of gold, for the love of fair Danaee, and
trans-formed into other shapes for many more, it would be too long. And ye
fierce God of war, whose angry and stern countenance, and whose boysterly
behavior does make ye very Giants afraid, has tempered his terrible and
mortal effects under his power, and was content to become a Lover. And Jupiter
his black Smith, who never stirs from his fiery forge, continually beating
and framing thunderbolts, has been also kindeled with his fire, and smitten
with his golden bolts, which are more mighty, and wound more deep then his,
though made of hard iron and sturdie steel. And my self likewise, (although I
am his mother) could not defend my self from his might, whose streams of
mourning tears powered forth for sweet Adonis his untimely and cruel death,
can sufficiently testify But wherefore do we trouble our selves with recital
of so many examples. There is no deity in Heaven, which has escaped him, but
only Diana. And she delighting her self in woods and hunting, has fled (nay
as some think) rather hid her self from him. But if perhaps (as incredulous)
thou do not allow of this true and tried examples of ye Gods, whose mansion
places are in ye heavens above, and art desirous to know who has in earth
beneath felt ye like, so many there are, that I scarcely know where to begin,
promising and giving thee to understand, that they were no base, poor, or
simple men, but the stoutest and most valiant wights that ever lived. And first
of al let us behold the most strong and invincible son of Alcmena, who laying
aside his dyrie arrows, and casting of his huge and rough Lions skin,
delighted very often to pass his loving times away in framing and fytting
Emeralds for his martial fingers, and afterward to prescribe Laws for his
rugged and bushy locks, and by one and one to set them in effeminate and fine
order.

And that mighty hand, with the which he had but erst carried his strong
and knottie clubbe, killed great Antheus and beat down, and drawn from Pluto
his Palace gate the hellishe triple headed Dog, did now draw forth small
threedes, which he spun on Iole her distaffe: And those shoulders, on which
high heaven was imposed ( Atlas chaunginge shoulders with him) were first
tenderly pressed, and beclipped of Iole: And afterward (to please her the
more,) covered with embrodered garments of fine purple and gold. What amorous
Paris did for his sake, what fair Hellene, what Clytemnestra, and what Egistus
did, all the world does know to well. And therefore as (as needelesse also) I
omit to speak of Achilles, of Scylla, Ariadne, Leander, Dido, and many more.

Believe me (Lady) this is a holy fire, and of great force. Now have thou
(therefore) heard how mighty Gods in heavens, Love does work his force even
in brute beasts.
and no mean men in earth have been under the swet yoke of my princely
Son. But what will thou say of his force extended in irrational and brute
beasts, as well in the air, as in the earth. For him the mornefull Turtle
Dove does follow her mate: and our prittie Pigeons with a merueilous kind of
affection, do kiss and bill their loouing ones also. And there is not any
beast living in the wide earth, that can, or does at any time escape his gins.
The fearful Hearts in the Woods waxing fierce, and cruel amongst themselves,
when he does wound them with his darts, fightinge and braying after their
desired and loving Hinds, show blody signs of this burning heat. The enraged
and wild Bores foming at the mouth with whot and fiery froth, provoked by the
instincte, and laws of natural love, prepare and whet their tearing tuskes,
to fight. And the whot Lions of Libia smitten with love, make all the wooddie
hills, and hollow valleys to resound with their roaring outcries. But
leaving the woods and champaignes, I say moreover, that the Gods of the Seas
and running Rivers, even in their coldest waters, feel the burning and
unquenchable heat of my Son. Nor do I think that it is vnkowen to thee, what
approved testimony Neptunus, G'laucus, Alfeus, and others have given thereof,
who were not able to extinguish, no, not so much as to mitigate these flames
with their cold and frozen floodes: which although it has been of every one
long since known in earth, and in the deepest waters, yet penetrating further
into the bowelles of the earth, it does violently make open way to the
dreadful King of the dark Stigian Lakes. Heaven and earth therefore, the Sea
and Hell have assaied the virtue and force of his arrows. And because thou
may in few words comprehend every thing concerning his mighty strength, I
say, that all things are subject to natures lore, and no power is free from it,
and that this it self, also is under his laws. For if he does once
command, old hatreds and grudges are forgotten, and new angers and ancient
rancours give place to his forcible fires.

And last of all, his power stretches forth so far, that it does make
mothers in law become gracious and grateful to their step children, which
is no little wonder. What do thou therefore seek? What do thou doubt of?
What do thou foolishly fly? If so many divine Gods, so many and so
mighty men, and so many fierce and cruel beasts have been conquered of him,
will thou then think it a shame to be ouercomed? Alas thou know not what
thou have to do? But it may be, in submitting thy self to him, thou do
expect some bitter reprehension, and do (perhaps) fear some shame to ensue
thereof, which can by no means fall unto thee, since a thousand more
excellent women then thy self, having committed ten thousand greater faults
then this shall sufficiently excuse thee, and, as great presidentes of this thy
reasonable lappes (if so it be) exempte thee from reproach: who, as thou art not
so mighty as they, have not erred so much as they have done. But if those
motives do not alter thy mind, and yet perhaps will obstinately still
resist. Think that thou can not join with Jupiter in virtue, with Juno in
riches, with Apollo in wisdom, and with me in beauty. And if all we have
been overcome, do thou only think to triumph in thy sole conquest? Thou
art deceived, if thou art of this opinion, and shall suffer a base foil in
thine own proud conceit. Let that suffice thee, which heretofore has been
enough, and to much for heaven and earth, and make not thy self so timorous in
saying. I have a husband, and holy laws and promised faith forbids me these
things, because they are but vain conceits and frivolous objections against
his virtue. For like a strong and mighty Prince he does plant his eternal
laws, when, not caringe for other of meaner substance, he does account them
but base and servile rules. Pasiphae likewise had a husband, and Phedra, and I
my self, when I looued. Nay husbands them selves for the most part love other
women, when they have wives of their own, as Jason for example, Hercules and
wise Ulysses. No injury therefore is offered unto them, if that they are
counterchecked with those laws, which they themselves use toward other. No
prerogative is granted more to them, then to women. Wherefore abandon these
foolish and unconstant thoughts, and love securely as thou have beegunne.
Behold if thou will not submit thy self to mighty love, of necessity thou
must fly away, and whether will thou take thy flight but yt he will pursue, and
overtake thee? his power is a like in every place, and wheresoever thou go
thou art still in his kindomes, in ye which none can hide themselves no longer
then it pleases him to suffer them. Let this suffice thee (young Lady) that
thou art not molested with such abominable and wicked lust, as Mirra,
Semiramis, Biblis, Canace, and Cleopatra were. My Son shall work in thee no
straung and new things. He does rule by laws as well as other Gods, in
following which, thou must perswad thy self, that thou art not the first, and
shall not be the last. And if peradventure thou do believe, that thou do
at this present love alone, thy belief is but vain, and false. For to let the
other world pass in silence, which is full of them, let us only look into
thy noble City, in the which thou have many brave and infinite companions. And
note this withal, that what has been, and is done of so many wise and
judicious persons, may not justly be thought vain and accounted frivolous.
Follow us therefore, and with thankful words and grateful deeds requite our
deity for thy peerless beauty, and intermit not to remember her, who has
out of the number of simple and ignorant souls chosen and took thee, to make
thee know and participate ye pleasure of our gifts. Alas good Ladies, what
should or could I answer, to such perswasiue or forcible reasons alleged by so
mighty a Goddess, but only this. Dispose with me as it pleases thee best. I say
therefore, yt now she held her peace, when I having gathered all her words into
the depth of my capacity, and felt them full of infinite excuses, and knowing
her also better now (the^ at the first,) resolved with my self to embrace and
follow her sweet and pleasing councelles: Wherefore rising quickly out of my
bed, and with an humble mind casting my knees on the ground, being full of
fear, I began softely to say thus unto her. Oh eternal and singular beauty.
Oh heavenly deity, Oh only Lady and mistress of my resolute mind, The force
of love is felt more sensibly and stronger in them that seek to expel it.
whose force the more it is resisted, the more it is felt, pardon my simple
and foolish encounter, which I have made against the pearcing weapons of thy
unknown and puissant Son: And work with me at thy own pleasure. And
stooping to thy will, guerdon my faith as thou have promised at fit time and
convenient place, because that others praising thy effects in me, and wishing
themselves the like, the number of thy subjects may without end increase.

I had scarcely spoken these words, when moving from the place where she
stood, she came to me, and with a fervent kind of affection and merry
countenance embracing me, she first kissed my forehead, and afterward, as
false Ascanius breathing secreet and burning fire into Dido her mouth so she
respiring the like into mine, made my first desires more whot, and my passions
more fervent, as after to the ruin of my tormented heart I felt them. And
opening a little her purple veil, she showed me between her delicate paps, ye
lively image of my belooued gentleman, enfolded in a fine garment, whose sweet
face seemed to be full of many cares, not much unlike to mine, and said thus.
Behold young Lady thy loouinge and loyal gentleman. And we have not given
thee Lista, Geca, nor Birria for thy loouer, nor one like to any of these. But
being most worthy for many brave parts, and a beautiful personage to be
belooued of any Goddess, does love thee (as we have ordained) more then
himself, and will continue the same for ever. Wherefore driving all foolish
fear away, addicte thy self joyfully again to his pure and deserved love.
Thy meritorious prayers have with pity penetrated into our ears, and
therefore assure thy self that thou shall without fail according to thy will
and works reap no small benefit of them. And thus without speaking any more
she vanished suddenly out of my sight.

Alas poor wretch that I am, could I other wise think trying the sequelles of
her sugered suggestions, and of my ensuing miseries, but that this counterfaite
Goddess, was rather cruel Ctesiphone, then gentle Venus, yt thus appeared
unto me, who laying aside for a while her ugly and hideous heaire, no
otherwise then Juno the shining glory of her deity, and taking upon her a
divine form, as she did an old and crooked shape, represented her before my
eyes, as she came to Semele, giving me, as she did also her, sweet counsel
mixte with reueng and poysonne of my final overthrow and helpless fall:
receiving which into my miserable breast, was the greatest occasion, and only
cause, O godly faith, reverend shame, and most holy chastity, to drive and
banishe you from the same, from that then chaste (I mean) but now unworthy and
spotted breast of mine. But pardon sweet virtues, pardon me, if due penance of
a sinner, and sustained punishment of this guilte, may impetrate any remission
or favor at all. But now after the Goddess was gonne from my sight I remained
as one resolute to follow her pleasures: And although this furious passion
which I passed troubled my wits, and dulled al my senses, one only spark of
all that good, and wisdom, which was lost and gonne, kindled (I know not for
what deserte of mine) a prudent counsel, and knowledge of this true rule in my
smothered and consumed heart, To disclosed love a happy end, is sildome or
never granted.
which was, that love once discovered does never or very seldom come to a
happy and good end. And therefore amongst other profound thoughts (although
it was hard for me to do) I intended not to prefer will before reason, in
bringing such desires to their wished end. And though I was truly by diverse
intermediate chances greatly constrained, yet so much favor was granted me,
that without ouercharging the mark, and stoutly enduring the grief, I passed
it well away. And yet in truth the forces which I yet have, are of sufficient
power to uphold and conserve such counsel. Because (although I write most
true things) I have in such order set them down, that except he, who does
know them as well I, being the occasion of them all, no other, were he of
never so sharp a wit and ready conceit, could, understand and know that
it was I. And even him I pray (if this little book chance ever to come to his
hands,) that, for that love which sometimes he bare me, he would conceal
that, which in manifesting it, would not turn to his honor or profitte. And if
he have taken that love from me without any demerite of my own part, that at
the least, he would not dispossess me of that honor, which, (admit that
iniustlie I have it) he cannot (though he would) render unto me again.
Adhering therefore to this determination, and brideling my eger desires, and
too to foreward in their own discovery, with a strained and impatient rain of
sufferaunce, I endeavored with all diligence (and at my fittest opportunity) by
aluring means, and did practice fine and subtle demonstrances to kindle the
young gentleman with those coals, with the which my self was inflamed, and to
warn him to be as wary, and cunning in his proper affairs, as I was wise and
circumspect in my actions.

In bringing which to speedy effect, dangerous delays were not deferred, and
thought not my trauile in the same, either to long or to great, The condition
of the heart is often times comprehended in these which are a like.
because if the true testimony of the qualities of the heart is comprised in
those, which are not different in passions, I quickly perceived, that wished
effects did follow my desires: whereupon I saw him not only full of amorous
heat, but very wise also and expert in pursusing his amorous enterprises,
which things did yield me no small joy and great contentation. With as earnest
care therefore and due consideration, tendering my unsuspected honor, as also to
satisfy his deep desires, when time and place did grant him fit opportunity,
he did seriously solilicite me, and (as I believe) not without great pain,
trying the utmost of his skill) to gain the familiarity of every one, that was
nearest allied, and did daily converse with me, but especially and last of al,
to insinuate into the acquaintance of my husband and firmly to purchase his
freendship. The which he did not only obtain, but did with such show of great
goodwill and favor enjoy it, that there was nothing that might content or
please either of them, if mutually and loouinglie the same was not made known
to each other. I believe (fair Ladies) that without writing it, you may easily
know, or at least may imagine, how greatly this pleased me. For what woman is
there so foolish, who would not especially conceive as much?

This singular and wished privilege, I enjoyed by this happy familiarity,
that publicly, and in all companies I might talk with him, and he discourse
with me again. Who thinking it now hie time to proceed to matters of greater
effects, sometimes with some other (perceiving that I might both here and
understand him) discoursed of such things, by the which I knew, (most
willing to learn the principles of this new law) not by his talk only, Not
with words only, but with actions and gesture love may be manifested,
which he had with others, that he could cunningly and subtillie declare his
affection, and finely have an answer thereof again, but with diverse motions
also of his hands, and gesture in his countenance, and body, he could
passing well perform the same. And thus with pretty lessons pleasing my
willing mind so much, I learned also to be so diligent and wary a scholar,
that I would not tell him any thing, or he to me again, but by these
unsuspected means, whereby equally and justly we conceived our hidden
conceits. Nor being yet content with these honest helps, by figurative
speeches and invented names he taught me how to speak in open company, to
make me thereby more assured of his fervent love, calling me by the name of
Fiammetta, and himself Pamphilus: Alas how many times in the presence of my
self, and of my dearest friends being prittely heated with feasting, and
looues eats, did he devise (fayning Fiammetta and Pamphilus to be Grecians)
how I with him, and he with me, were first combyned in loouing bonds: And
afterward what accidents did ensue of this Grecian love, collouring his
forged novel with fit and feigned names. It made me truly many times to
laughe, not so much at the gravity and conterfaite modesty in his discourse,
as at the simplicity and good meaning of those, who gave ear and belief to
his tale.

And yet I was sometimes afraid, least that both his disordinate heates might
have unadvisedly (perhaps) transported his tongue thither, whether, it would
afterward have repented, that it runned. But as he was a more prudent and
perfect scholar, then I took him to be, so did he craftily take heed of
speaking of false Latin. O gentle and pitiful Ladies, what does not love
teach his subjects: and whom does not he enable to learn wise discourses,
and acquainte him with brave and commendable fashione?

My self being but a young and simple woman in such pastimes, Love a cunning
master.
and scarce able amongst other gentlewomen my companions, in plain and common
things to untie my imperfect tongue, by giving a willing and an affectioned
ear to his speeches, did reap thereby so much fruit, that in a short time,
in fayning and talking I thought I did excel every famous Poet. For there were
few or none of his presupposed positions, but with a fictions and painted tale
I would have effectually argued, and fitly answered to the same, (a very hard
thing in my opinion for a young gentlewoman to learn so soon, and more
difficult to tell, or put in practice.) But all these shifts would seem but
shadows, and of no consequence, if I did write and set down (if present
matter should require) with what subtle slights I did experiment the faith of
one of my most familiar and trusty women, to whom we both purposed to commit
the secrecy of our hidden love (not as yet by speeches manifested to any one)
considering with my self, that enclosed in my burning breast it could not be
kept there long without great trouble and grief, and perhaps without some
violent and sudden issue, unless there were some means and remedies applied
to the contrary. It would be besides this a tedious labor to recount, what
counsel, and how many devises were excogitated between her and me (perhaps
in vain and foolish matters) and never put in ure, no, not so much as imagined
of any before: All which, although I have seen them put in trial to my
great prejudice and hinderaunce, I am not sorry nevertheless, that I have
known them.

If I do not err (Gentlewomen) in my opinion, With what difficulty lovers are
contained in the bonds of reason.
the great firmenes of our young years was very strange to behold, if that
with a due and perfect consideration it is well weighed, how hard a thing it
is for the enamored minds of two young and raw lovers to continue any long
time united together, but that on the one or other side, spurred on with
superfluous and ouerruling desires, they should alter and wander out of reasons
course. But the bonds of our loves were so fast knit, and of such rare tenor,
that the grauest, wisest, and strongest personages in like passages should have
got them high and worthy praises. But now my stained pen, with an unbridled
and wanton desire, does prepare it self to write of those final terms of
love, beyond yt which none can pass further with deed or desire whatsoever.

But before I come to this point, as humbly as I may, I implore (gentle Ladies)
your piety, and therewithal that amorous force, which, possessing your tender
breasts, does also draw your burning desires to such an end. And pray you
moreover, if my speeches seem offensive unto you, (I speak not of the deed,
because I know that if you have not as yet attained to such felicity, you have
in your minds a thousand times wished to have felt the same) that then most
prompt you would arise in my excuse and defense. And thou seemly and honest
shamefastnes to late (alas) entered into my wilful mind, pardon me, most
earnestly entreating thee to give place a little while to timorous young
Gentlewome^, because secure and free from thy restraint and menaces, they may
read that of me, which in their fervent loves (I know) and hot desires, they
also wish might handsomelie befall unto them. With hungry hope (therefore) and
full of fearful cares, our longing desires, The slack dealing in conducting
amorous desires to their end, is very bitter.
yet lingering delays drew one each day after other, which both of us with
painful thoughts did hourelie endure, albeit that one did manifest ye same
in daily meeting, and secret talk together, and the other did show her self
in granting of it very coye, and in show repugnant (though against her will)
as you your selves in seeking that (which perhaps most of all does please your
wanton appetites) do know well enough that enamoured young gentlewomen are
wont to do. He therefore giving but little credit to my words in these denials,
attending fit time and place, more audacious then advised in that which he
did, and more fortunate then wise, obtained that of me, which I as well as he
(though with a fained face, and a little rigorous resisting to the contrary)
did most greedily desire. But if I should for all this affirm, that this was
the occasion that made me love him more, I must confess that every time, that
the remembrance thereof touched my guilty mind, it brought with it an
incomparable grief. Wherefore let the Gods above, (the secret serchers of our
hearts) be witnesses with me herein, that this inevitable accident was then,
and yet is, the least cause of that great love which I bear him. Albeit not
denying, but that this was the^, and evermore since, a most sweet, wyshed, and
welcomed delight unto me.

And what simple and slender witted woman is she, who would not wish that
thing, which she dearly loved to be rather near unto her, then far of from
her, and by how much she loved and desired it, by so much more, to feel ye
same nearest of al unto her. I say therefore, that after such a quickly passed
chance, not fallen in the compass of my belly before, though not seldom times
tossed in my thoughts, with exceeding joy and favorable fortune, not once, but
many times by means of our proper wits, and new inventions, we recreated our
selves with this manner of dainty disport, although ye pleasures of the same is
now (alas) lighter then ye winds flowne from me unhappy woman. But yet while
these pleasant times passed on, as love it self can make true report, and give
sole testimony thereof, sometimes his unlawful coming unto me, was not without
great fear, when by some secret means or other, and at unseasonable times he
would he with me: yet how dear was my Chamber unto him, and with what joy,
and how willingly did it evermore receive him, whom I did also know to use more
reverence in the same, then in any holy Temple. Alas how many pleasant
kisses, what infinite number of loving embracements, and how many sweet nights
more gracious and dear to us then the lightsome and cleerest days, did we
pass together without sleep in pleasant devises and dainty discourses. How
many other delights most dear to every Lover, Maydenly shamfastnes a most hard
bridle to wanton and forward minds
have we felt in yt blessed Chamber in ye merry prime of our happy days. O
most holy shamefastnes (a pinching and hard bridle to wanton and youthful
minds) wherefore once again at my request do thou not depart? why do thou
witholde my pen ready to unfold our passed joys, and pleasures. Alas, in
thinking perhaps to gratify me, thou do grieve me, and to help me, thou do
hinder me. To those women therefore to who^ nature has granted so large and
ample a privilege, that by those things which are spoken, they may comprehend
and imagine the rest which are co^cealed to others, not so wise as these, let
them be manifest and said open. Nor let not any call me fool, as ignorant of so
much, in knowing well enough, that it should have been more honesty for me to
have co^cealed, then to manifest yt which is already written. But who can
countermaunde Love, when with working all his might and force, he does oppose
himself? At this point many times I let my pen fall out of my hands, and as
often again (molested by him) I took it up, and put it to his former task.

And finally like a subject and bond woman I must needs serve him, whom, (when
I was free in the beginning) I knew not how to resist. He showed me, that
hidden delights and privy pleasures, Delights which are hidden are as much
worth as buried treasure.
were as much worth again as hoorded Jewels and secret treasures. But
wherefore do I feed and please my humor about these words. I say, that then
I thanked infinite times the holly Goddess, the promiser, and performer of
these sweet joys: Oh how many times crowned with her green leaves, did I
visit her sacred Temples, offering up sweet incense to her divine Aulters, and
how often did I condemn the old Nurce, and her simple counsel: and did
besides this (rejoicing and glorying my self above all other enamoured young
Gentlewomen and Ladies, that I knew and kept company with) scorn and laughe
at their ridiculous and appassionated loves, blaming that in my speeches, which
was dearest to my soul, saying many times to my self. There is no woman
beloved so as I am, nor any Lady, be she never so noble and fair, that does
love so brave, so wise, and so worthy a young Gentlemanne as I do, nor that
does with so great delight and pleasure reap such amorous fruit in a
paradise of all joy, nor in so great abundance, as I most happily and hourly
do taste.

And to be short, in respect of this, I esteemed the whole world as a trifle
of no accounte, and thought that I reached the highest heavens with my thrice
happy head, and wanting (as I thought) nothing else to attain to the highest
top of felicity, and to ye full accomplishment of all my pleasures and sweet
contents, but only to have had the occasion of all my blis-full joy, and
blessed fortune manifested, and made openly known to the world, thinking with
my self, that that which delighted me so much, should (as my self) have
pleased every one alike: But thou Oh bashfulnesse on the one side, and thou
fear on the other, you have (I say) with held me, the one threatening me
eternal infamy, and the other, the loss of that, of which indeed envious
fortune did afterward miserably despoyle me.

Thus therefore I passed this golden and gladsome time many days and months
(as it pleased Love) without emulating any loving Lady or enamoured
Gentlewoman, loving most happily, and living most joyfully in a world of
sweet content, and swymming with full sails in Seas of heavenly felicities,
and of all manner of delights, not entertayning so much as a thought of
discontent and sorrow, and never imagining, that these pleasures, which then
my merry heart was so amply and thoroughly possessed of, should be the root and
plant (in time to come) of my miserable woes, and woeful miseries, which at
this present, without any hope or remedy at all to my hapless pain and
endless grief, too well I know, and most sencibly feel.

FINIS.
The second book of Master John Boccace his Fiammetta.
WHilst that O dearest Ladies, I spent my merry days in so pleasant and
iocund a life, as is above written, never thinking of future chances, cruel
fortune did secretly prepare her malicious poison for me, and with
continual courage (my self not suspecting any thing) did at an inche pursue
my joyful life. And thinking that (in making me become a vassal to love, and
in my chiefest time of joy and liberty,) she was not well appaide, but
perceiving how this my sweet servitude did yield me great delight, she
endeavored with a more stinging nettle to torment and prick my poor and seely
soul. And her appointed time being now come, she tempered (as after you
shall perceive) her bitter galls and woormewood for my unwilling and feeble
stomach: which (maugre my teeth) compelling me to drink, turned my present
mirth into sudden sadness, and my wonted laughter into woeful lamentations:
which things not only enduring, but yet thinking it my duty in writing
them, to show them to some others, I took such compassion of my self, that
taking almost all my force from me, and bringing infinite tears to mine eyes,
it did hardly permit me any thing effectually to execute my purpose herein:
which, albeit I may very ill do, yet will I forcibly go about to perform the
same.

After that he and I (the weather falling out very cold and rainie) were in
my Chamber together, reposing and sollacing our selves upon a sumptuous and
sweet bed, and Lady Citherea wearied, nay almost overcome, the dark and
silent night with her long tariance favorably granted to our pleasant and
desired sports, fit opportunity of time and place: And a great light hanging
in the midst of the Chamber glutted his eyes and mine, (viewing each others
beauty) with exceeding joy: of which, while I recreated my mind in gazing and
discoursing of his, mine eyes did drink a superfluous kind of sweetness, which
(making their lights inebriated (as it were) with the same, with deceitful
sleep (I know not how) a little while oppressed, and my words interrupted
also in the mids) remained locked up close in their lyddes.

Which pleasant and sweet slumber, passing so mildly away from me, as it
came, my ears by chance heard certain doolefull mutterings and sorrowful
bewaylings uttered forth by my best beloved. Wherefore suddenly troubled in
mind, and my thoughts at war within themselves for his welfare, made me
almost interrupt him with these words. Sweet heart what do thou ayle? But
countermanded" by new counsel, I kept them in, and with a sharp eye and
subtle ears, secretly beholding him turned now on the otherside of the
bed, I lystened a good while to his sorrowful and silent words, but mine
ears did not apprehend any of the^, albeit I might perceive him molested with
great store of lamentable sobbes and sighs, that he cast forth, and by seeing
also his breast bedewed all with tears.

What words (alas) can sufficiently express, with how many cares my poor
soul all this while (being ignorant of the cause) was afflicted? A thousand
thoughts in one moment did violently run up and down in my doubtful
mind, meeting all at the last, and concludinge in one thing, which was* that
he loving some other Woman, remained with me here, and in this sort against
his will.

My words were very often at the brinck of my mouth, to examine the cause of
his grief, but doubting least he lamenting in this sort, and being
suddenly espied and interrupted of me, he might not be greatly abashed
thereat, they retired back, and went down again: and oftentimes likewise, I
turned away mine eyes from beholding him, because least the hot tears
distilling from them, and falling upon him, might have given him occasion and
matter to know, that I perceived his woeful plight. Oh how many impatient
means did I imagine to practice, because that he (awaking me) might
conjecture, that I had neither heard his sighs, nor seen his tears: and
yet agreed to none at all.

But overcome at the last with eager desire to know the occasion of his
complaint, because he should turn him toward me, as those, who in their
deepest sleep, terryfied by dreaming of some great fall, wild beast, or of
some ghastly thing, give a sudden start, and in most fearful wise rouse
up themselves, affrighted out of their sleep and wits at once, even so
with a suddayne and timorous voice I skriked, and lifting up my self, I
violently cast one of my arms over his shoulders. And truly my deceit
deceived me not, because (closely wyping away his tears) with infinite (though
counterfeit) joy, he quickly turned toward me again, and with a pitiful
voice said.

My fairest and sweetest soul, of what were thou afraid? Who^ without delay I
answered thus. My Love I thought I had lost thee. My words (alas) I know not
by what spyrite uttered forth, were most true presagers and foretellers of my
future loss, as now to true I find it.

But he replied. O dearest dear, not hateful death, nor any adverse chance
of unstable Fortune whatsoever, can work such operations in my firm breast,
that thou (my only joy) shall leese me for ever. And incontinently a great
and profound sighe followed these pitiful words, the cause of which not so
soon demanded of me (who was also most desirous to know the offspring of
his first lamentations) but suddenly two streams of tears from both his eyes
(as from two fountains) began to gushe out amain, and in great abundance
to drench his sorrowful breast, not yet thorowlie dried up by his former
weeping. And holding me poor soul (plunged in a gulf of greefes, and
overcome with flooddes of brinish tears) a long time in a doleful and
doubtful suspense, before (even so did the violence of his, sobbes and sighs
stop the passage of his words) he could answer any thing to my demaundes
again.

But after that he felt the tempest of his outrageous passion somewhat calmed,
with a sorrowful voice, yet still interrupted with many heavy sighs, he said
thus again. O dearest Lady and sole Mistress of my afflicted heart, and only
belooued of me above all other women in the world, as these extraordinary
effects are true records of the same: If my plaintes deserve any credit at
all, thou may then believe, that my eyes not without a grievous occasion shed
erst such plenty of bitter tears, when so ever that is objected to my memory,
which, (remaininge now with thee in great joy) does cruelly torment my heart
to think of, that is when I remember with my self, that thou may not (alas
feign would I that thou could) make two Panphilowes of me, because remaining
here, and being also there, whether urgent and necessary affairs do perforce
compel me (most unwillingly) to retire, I might at one time fulfill the laws
of love, and my pitiful, natural, and duetifull deuoyre, O my aged and
loouing father. Being therefore not able to suffer any more, my pensive heart
with remembrance of it, is continually with great affliction galled more and
more, as one, whom pity drawing on the one side, is taken out of thy arms,
and on the other side with great force of love is still retained in them. All
these reasons are condemned of lovers, which perturbe their joys.


These words perced my miserable heart with such extreme bitterness, as I
never felt before. And although my dusked wits did not well understand them,
notwithstanding (as much as my ears and senses attentive to their harms did
receive and conceive of them) by so much more, the very same converted into
tears, issued out of my eyes, leaving behind them their cruel and malicious
effects in my heart. This was therefore (good Ladies) the first hour, in ye
which I felt such grudgi^g greefs envious of my plesures: this was yt hour
which made me power forth unmeasurable tears, ye like never spent of me before,
whose course and maine streams not any of his comforts, and consolatory words
could stop and stench one whit. But after I had a long time together remained
in woeful walinges, enfolding him loouingly beetweene my arms, I prayed him,
(as much as I could to tell me more clearly what pity, and what due pyetie
that was, that did draw him out of my arms, and threaten me his absence,
whereupon not ceasing to lament, he said thus unto me.

Inevitable death the final end of all things, of many other sons has
left me sole to survive with my aged and reverent father, who burdened with
many years, and living without the sweet company of his deceased wife, and
loving brothers, who might in his old years carefully comfort him, and
remaining now without any hope of more issue, being determined not to marry,
does recall me home to see him, as the cheifest part of his consolation, whom
he has not seen these many years past. For shifting of which journey
(because I would not sweet Fiammetta leave thee) there are not a few months
past, when first by diverse means I began to frame some just and reasonable
excuse. But he in fine, not accepting of any, did not cease to conjure me, by
the essence, which I had by him, and by my impotent childhoode tenderly brought
up, and nourtered in his lap, by that love, which continually he had borne
me, and by the duty and that love, which I should bear him again, and by
that requisite obedience which every child should bear unto his father, and by
all other things, that he thought most effectual and perswasiue, did like a
familiar freende (whose part is rather to command) pray me, that, to
commiserate his aged and declyning years, and to tender his welfare I would
with speed return to visit him. And besides this, with solemnes oaths, and
serious obtestations, he caused all his friends, and agents in these parts,
and with most earnest entreaties provoked them incessantly to prick me on in
this behalf, saying, that if he did not see me shortly with him, The laws of
nature are most strong,
his miserable soul would utterly forsake his old and comfortless body. But
(alas) how strong and forcyble are the laws of nature? I could not presently
assent, nor yet can scarce resolve with my self, that, by reason of the great
love I bear thee, these pittious exorations should take place in me. Whereupon
having with thy good leave determined to go see him, and for his great comfort
to remain some short space of time with him, and not knowing also, how I could
live without thee, all these (I say) occurring and accumulated in my sorrowful
memory, do make me every hour (sweet Lady) most justly and sorrowfully
complain. And thus he held his peace.

If there was ever any of you (fair Ladies) that in her most fervent and
zealous love had ever had so hard and bitter a Pille as this, even she I
think does know, with what incomparable grief, my mind, (nourished long
since with food of his love, and set one fire with unspeakable flames of my
own) was then afflicted: But others, free from such amorous passions could not
conceive, because as allegations of extrauagant examples, so all my speeches
besides would not be sufficient to induce them to believe the same. The force
of an amorous passion,
In brief therefore I say, that hearing these words, my soul did seek to
leap out of my body, and it had (I think) flowen away, if between his arms
whom most of all it looued, it had not been straightly embraced, and
forciblye retained. But all the parts of my body remaining nevertheless full
of shaking fear, and my heart puffed with swelling grief, and weltring in the
passions of these agonies, they bereaved me a pretty while of my speech. But
afterward by quantity of time made more pliable to sustain these never felt
sorrows, and unwonted pains, a certain feeble and fearful force was
restored to my daunted spirits. And my eyes, whose conduites stopped by the
violence of this unexpected accident, did now burst out into great plenty of
tears, and the stringes of my tongue contracted together with sharp sorrow,
were now dissolved to utter and breath out the confused anguish, and conceived
sorrows in my mind. Wherefore turning me to the Gardien and Lord of my life,
embracing him, I said thus.

O final hope, and sovereign comfort of my afflicted soul: let these my
pitiful words take place with force in thy fleeting mind, divert thee from
thy new purpose, because if thou do so dearly love me, as thou show,
thy life and mine, before their natural and prefixed period comes, may not
jointly be deprived of this joyful and sweet light. Haled on by duetifull
pity, and drawn back again by zealous love, thou put all thy future
fortunes in doubtful hazard. But certes if all thy words are true, with which
thou have not once, but many times heretofore affirmed, that thou did love
me, no other pity therefore then this should be more mighty, and of greater
force to resist, nor (while I live) to withdraw thee to any other place. And
harken why. It is not unknown to thee, if thou followest that course, which
thou seem to do, in what a doubtful and miserable estate thou leauest my
poor life, which heretofore has hardly passed one day not without great
sorrow, when I could not see thee. Then may thou by this be more
acertained, yt when thou do omit to visit me so long together, all my
joys will utterly forsake me, and this (alas) would be to much. But who does
not doubt, that all kinds of woes, sorrow, and anxieties will assail me,
and succeed in their place, which (without any resistance, that I can possibly
make) will perhaps dissolve my vital powers into nothing. Thou should
have already known, how weak and impotent young women are, to rebacke such
cruel and adverse occurrauntes, and what feeble force they have, with a
strong and resolute mind to endure them. If peradventure thou will object
and say, that in the first beginning of my looues, I have both wisely and
stoutly suffered greater adversities then these, I will truly agree with thee
herein, but the occasions of them, and of these are diverse. My hope placed in
my own valor, made that seem light unto me, which now being put in an
other his will) will be to heavy for me to supporte. Who did ever deny me, when
burning desire had beyond all measure kindled my breast, and surcharged it with
furious passions, that being enamored of thee, as thou were also of me, I might
not enjoy thee? Truly no body. Which comfort (when thou art so far
sequestered from me) will not so easelie fall to my lotte. Besides this, I
enjoyed no more then, but the sight of thy sweet face, and goodly personage,
and knew thee no more but by the outward figure, lineaments, and proportion of
thy body, although in my heart I made great account and prise of thee, but now
have by good proof perceived and felt in deed, that, as thou art now to be
esteemed a great deal deerer of me, then the reach of my imagination could
then extend unto, even so art thou now become mine own with that assured
surenes, and those indissoluble bo^ds, with which true loouers may possibly be
held and united to those, that love them again. It is a greater grief to
leese a certainty for an uncertainty.
And who does not doubt moreover, that it is a greater grief to loose that,
which one has in hold, then that, which he hops to have, although his hope
therein be not afterward frustrate. Wherefore considering this matter well,
I plainly see my death will soon approach. Shall therefore the love of thy
old father be preferred before that great affection, which thou ought to
have of me, be the ominous occasion of my vntime lie death.

And if thou do so, thou art certes no loouer but an open enemy. Ah will thou make more account of those few years reserved for the miseries of thy
old father, then of these many, which by great reason and likelihood I have,
(living joyfully with thee) to spend. Alas what indiscreete folly were this?
Do thou believe that any one conjoined to thee in parentage, nearest in
blood, or most firm in mutual freendship, does love thee so much as I do?
If this be thy belief (believe me Pa^philus) it is erroneous. For truly none
can love thee better, and hold thee (sweet Pa^philus) deerer then I do. If
therefore I love thee more then others, He that does love most deserves more
pity.
I deserve then to be requited with greater love and pity then others.
Prefer me therefore worthily before the rest, and being pitiful toward me,
forget all other pity, that might offend and preiudicate this, and let thy
old father, as he has lived a long time without thee, enjoy (a Gods name)
his wonted rest with out thy company. And let him from hence forth (if so
he please) live amongst the rest of his other friends and alies: And if not,
let him dye. If it be true (as I have heard) he has a good while since
escaped the deadly stroke of death, and has lived longer here then was
convenient for his necessary health, and if he live in pain and with much
troble (as commonly old men do) thou shall in thy absence show thy self more
pitiful toward him, to let him die, the^, wc thy presence to prolo^g his
trobled and tired life. But thou ought rather to succor me poor soul
whose life has not been a good while since, but by thy sweet company
preserved, nor cannot tell how without the same, to enjoy this mundane light,
and who being yet in the prime of my tender age, does hope to live and lead
with thee many joyful months, and years together. If thy journey were to
such purpose, and could work such supernatural effects in thy old father
his body, Medea her medicamentes restored to old Aeson his youth again.
as the charms of Medea, and her medicinal spelles did upon old Aeson, then
would I say, that by just piety thou were instiged, and would highly commend
this requisite pity, and although it would seem repugnaunt to my will, yet
would I wish and allow of this devotion in thee, and exhort thee to the
performaunce of it.

But such a miracle, passing the laws and bounds of nature, can never come to
pass, according to thy natural reason, as thou know well enough. Behold
then if perhaps thou show thy self more cruel and rigorous to me (then
I believe, or imagine thou will) or do so little care for me, whom on thy
own mere choice, and not by compulsion thou have looued, and yet do, that
above my love, thou will for all this advance the lost and helpless charity
of the old man, take some pity at the least of thy own estate, and caring
little for him, and bemoning me less, rue thy own condition, whom (if first
thy countenance, and afterward thy words have not deceived me, I have seen
to be more dead then alive, as even now thou werte (without perceiving me,
that did mark thee) by some uncouth accident, is a most extreme and
sorrowful passion, and deprived once of my sight, By long grief and sorrow
men dre.
and debarred of my company do thou believe to live so long time, as this
pitiless pity does require. Alas for the love thou bear to the Gods,
look better to thy self, and see what likely hoode of death (if by long and
lingering grief men dye, as I see it daily by others) this journey (ah this
inopinate and unlucky journey) will yield thee: which, how hard moreover and
unpleasant it is to thee, thy sorrowful sobbes and tears, and the unwonted
moving of thy heart, which panting and beating up and down in thy breast I
feel, do plainly show: And if not apparraunt death (which is most like) a
worser and more cruel condition of life, then any death, (be assured) will
accompany thee. Alas that my enamored heart, urged with great pity, that it
has of my own distress, and constrained by that tender compassion, which I
feel for thee, must now play the humble suppliaunt, to pray and entreat thee,
and to advise thee also, that thou would not be so fond (what kind of pity
soever moving thee thereunto) as with evident and iminent danger, to hazard
thy safe person.

Who looueth not himself possesses nothing in this world.
Why, think that those, who do not love them selves possess nothing in ye
wide world. Thy father of whom (forsooth) thou art so pitiful, did not give
thee to the world because thou should be thy own minister and occasion of
taking thy self away out of it again. And who does not believe, but, that if
our estate were as manifest, or could be lawfully told unto him, that he
(being wise and of mature judgment and experience) would rather say. Stay
there still. And if discretion and reason would not, pity at the least would
induce him to it, and this (I am assured) thou know well enough. It is
therefore great reason, that what judgment in his own tried cause he has given,
he should, (and is most likely) that he would in our cause (if he knew it) give
also the very same. Wherefore omit this troublesome journey, unprofitable to
thee, unpleasant to me, and prejudicial to us both. As these (my dearest
Lord) are reasons forcible enough (if followed) to keep thee from going hence,
so are there many more not a little effectual (if put in practice) to dehort,
thee from going hence, as first for example, considering the place whether thou
go. For put case thou do bend thy journey thither, where thou were
borne, thy native soil and natural country, and a place belooued more of
thee then any other, (as I have heard thee say) in certain things annoyous,
and for certain causes hated of thee. Because thy City (as thou thy self have
told) is full of haughty and boasting words, but more replenished with
pusillanimous and unperformed deeds. And that they are not only slaves to a
thousand confused laws but to as many different oppinions as there are men.
All which (as well forriners, as Citizens) naturally contencious, and full of
garboyles, do daily rage in civil broils, and intestiue wars. And (as it
is full of proud, covetous, and malicious people, so is it not unfurnished of
innumerable and intricate cares, the least of which is (I know) most contrary
to the good disposition of thy quiet mind.

Naples,
But this noble City which thou do intend to forsake (I am sure) thou art
not ignorant, with what joyful peace it does continually florishe, how
famous it is for plenty of all commodities, how opulent, shining in glory and
magnificensie, and how heroycally administered, under the sole regiment of a
mighty and invincible king. All which things, I know (if ever thy appetite I
have known) are most pleasant to thy dainty taste. It is some times lawful to
praise ones self.
And besides all these rehearsed pleasures, here am I (here am I Panphilus) whom
thou shall neither find there nor may live within any other place. Leave of
therefore thy sorrowful determination, and changing the unadvised counsel into
better consideration, have regard (I pray thee by tarying here still) to the
comfort and weal of both our lives. My words increased his tears in great
abundance, of the which, with intermingled and sweet kisses, I drunk up some.
But after many a heavy sigh, that he fetched, he answered me thus again. O
cheifest and singular felicity of my soul, I (doubtless) know thy words to
be most true, as by every manifest danger included in them, thou have plainly
set down before my eyes.

But because (since present and urgent necessity does require, which I would it
did not) I may breefely answer thee, I tell thee, that to pay and acquit with
a short grief, a long and great debt, I think (my Fiammetta) thou will
easilye grant that I may and must justly do. Thou must therefore think, and
rest assured, that (although I am sufficiently by the pity of my sick and
aged Father duly obliged) yet am I no less (nay rather more straightly)
bound by the same, which I ought to have of us both, which, if it were
lawful to discover, it would of it self seem excusable enough,
presupposing, that what thou have said should be judged of my Father, or of
any other else for him, I would then leave, and let my old Father die, without
seeing him at all. But since it behooves, that this pity must be covert
and kept close, and accomplished also, without manifesting the cause of it, I
see not how, without great infamy and reprehensio^, I might any way desist to
perform the same.

To avoid which due slander in not discharge of my duty, frowning Fortune
shall but three or four months at the most interrupt and suspend our woonted
delights, which no sooner expired, but without all fail thou shall see me
joyfully return to thee again, and make both our hearts as glad at our merry
meeting, as they are now dolefully daunted with their sorrowful parting. And
if the place, to which I go, is so unpleasant as thou make it, (and as it is
indeed compared with this thy sweet self also being here) then this must
greatly content thee, thinking, that if there were no other occasion, that
should provoke me to depart from thence, the qualities of the place, most
contrary to the disposition of my mind, would be forcible motives to make me
return and come hither again. Grant me therefore (sweet Mistress) this
favor, that I may go thither, and as thou have been heretofore most
careful of my estate and honor, so now likewise tender the same, and arm thy
mind with patience in this cross of spightfull Fortune, because knowing this
accident to be most grievous unto thee. I may here after make my self more
assured, that in any chance of Fortune whatsoever, my honor is as dear to
thee, as my self.

He had now said, and held his peace when I be ganne thus to reioyne as
follows. Now do I clearly see that, which framed in thy inflexible mind
thou do bear inexorable. And I scarcely think, that in the same thou do
admit any thought at all of those great and infinite cares, with which thou
leauest my distressed soul so heavily burdened, dividing thy self from me,
Things that are wont to hurt a lovers mind
which not one day, night, nor hour, can possibly live here without a
thousand fears. And I shall remain in continual doubt of thy life, which (I
pray the Gods) may be prolonged above my days, to thine own will and desire.
Alas what need I with superfluous speech prolong the time in discoursing and
reciting of them by one and one? Dangers that hang daily over mortal me^.
thy self knowing well enough, that the Sea has not so many sands, nor
heaven so many stars, as there be doubtful and dangerous perilles that are
imminent, and commonly incident to mortal men. All the which (if you go from
hence) as doubtless they will not a little fear me, so will they greatly
offend and hurt thee. Woe is me for my sorrowful life, I am ashamed to tell
thee that, which now comes to my mind: but because by yt which I have heard
it seems a thing possible and likely, constrained therefore I will tell it
thee. Now if in thy country, in the which (as the common fame is, and as my
self perticulerly have heard) there is an infinite number of fair and
dainty Ladies, who spending their young years in cunning love, and solemn
sports and feasts, (the first a passion especially incident to them, and the
second a common thing used there) with wanton and aluring means are most
expert to entise and procure love again, thy wandering eye should epsy some one
of these, which might perhaps, please thy absent heart, and so for her love,
should neglect and forget mine, ah what a miserable life should I then
lead? Wherefore, if thou do bear me such fervent affection (as thou say
and seem to do) imagine how thou would take it, if for exchange of an
other, (which thing shall never come to pass) I should deny thee (Panphilus)
my love: But before my true heart should harbor one treacherous thought
thereof, these hands of mine should rent it from my breast, and be the
executioners of my just death.

But let us leave these imaginations, and that which we desire may never
happen, let us not with ominous auguries diuinate, and tempt the Gods in vain.
But if thy mind be resolutly bent to depart, and forasmuch as there is
nothing that can please me, which may any ways displease and discontent
thee, I must of necessity dispose my self to be agreeable to thy will
herein. Notwithstanding, with earnest prayers I request thee, that it would
please thee in one thing to follow my mind, in delaying (I mean) yet a little
longer (if possiblye it may be) thy sudden and sorrowful journey, during
which time, imagining in the mean time thy departure, and with continual
thinking thereof, presupposing thy absence, I may with less grief of mind,
learn and frame my self to live without thee: which is no strange thing for
me to request, nor hard for thee to grant, since that the weather, which for
this time of the year is most unreasonable, does greatly incline to the help
and favor of this my desire, and is most contrary to the drifte of thy
determination.

Why, do not thou see, Virgill immitated in the 4. book of Aeneas.
how the skies full of dark and black clouds, with tempests, storms, and
flooddes of pouring rain, and Hills of thick snowes choking up the ways,
with raging and boisterous winds, and horrible thunders, do daily threaten
the earth and earthly creatures with manifest dangers.

And (as thou can not otherwise know) how every little River and Brook is
now by these continual showers of rain swelled into dangerous and mighty
flooddes. What senceles man the^ is he (pardon me good Panphilus) who (having
so small regard of his life) would in this blustering stormy, and ill weather
take any voyage or journey in hand? Do therefore my pleasure in this reasonable
advise which if thou will not do, then tender thy own safety, and do the
duty which thou owe to thy own self herein. Let these lowering and
doubtful times pass on, and stay for calmer wind and weather to travel at
thine ease, and with less danger. And my self in the mean while,
(accustomed by little and little, and enured to pensive and sorrowful thoughts)
will with more patience attend thy joyful return. To these words he deferred
not his answer but said. The tormenting pains, and variety of painful
cares, in the which (Oh dearest Mistress) against my will, content an
pleasure, I leave thee, and those which unfeignedly I carry with me in mine
own breast, let the comfortable hope of my speedy return assuage and
mittigate. Nor is it (pardon me sweet Lady) a point of wisdom, to busy thy
thoughts about that (death I mean) which may as well prevent me here, as
surprise in another place, when my destynies must needs yield to their time,
and to her stroke. Nor to conjecture and prognosticate of those accide^ts
possible perhaps to annoy me as more likely to be prosperous unto me. Where and
when soever the wrath of the Gods or their favor does light upon one, even
there and then, without vain resistance, must he be content to suffer good or
ill. Refer therefore al these things to their disposition with never thinking
or once looking after them, who knowing our necessities, can provide better for
us then we our selves: desiring thee to apply thy mind rather, and employ thy
whole cogitations in humble supplications and requests to them (the gracious
Gods I mean) that they may have a prosperous and happy event. But that I
ever become Lover to any woman, then to thee (Fiammetta) to whose loyal and
everlasting service I religiouslye dedicate my heart and with oath bind my
self. Great love himself (yea though I would my self) with all his might
can never bring to pass, for with so strong and sure a chain, Love has
lincked my heart to thine, sweet affection has made my soul subject to thy
signorie, and deep desire has bound me for ever to thy dispositions. And
assure thy self of this besides. That the earth shall first bring forth
glittering Stars, and the heaven (plowed with Oxen) shall bring forth ripe
corn, before Panphilus shall, or will in any thing transgress the laws of
thy peerless love, or entertain any other woman into the closett of his
constant heart. The delay of my departure into my Country, which thou do
request of me, if I knew it could any ways avail thee or be profitable unto
me, I would more willingly perform then thou do require. But since the
daily differing of it, is an howrely augmentation of our sorrows, and in
departing now, I should return again, before the time of my long tariance
here should be (according perhaps to thy mind) fully finished, I think it
therefore a great deal better to hasten my journey. Which space of time thou
do also crave to learn (as thou say) supposed sorrows, wherein thou do
simply deceive thy self, considering that in this mean time thou should
have (my self not being here) that self same grief so forcible and
extreme, which at my departure indeed, and in my unfeigned absence thou
would conceive. And as for the foulenes of the weather, I will use (as other
times I have been accustomed to do) a good and wholesome remedy, which I
would (the Gods granted) that I had now occasion to practice returning from
thence again, as in departing from hence I know to work well enough. And
therefore with a cheerful and strong mind (my loving Fiammetta) dispose thy
self to this, which, (when thou must do) thou may better pass away in
doing it on a sudden, then with successiue fear and lingering sorrow expect
every hour when to begin it.

My tears (at the end of his persuasion somewhat relented) attending some
other answer, and hearing this sorrowful discourse, did redouble their
falling drops. The manner of those that love.
Wherefore laying my heavy head upon his breast I stayed a good while without
speaking any more unto him, and reuoluing many things in my mind, I could not
assent to his consolatorie persuasions nor dissent from his alleged
assertions. For (alas) who would have answered otherwise to his words, but
thus. Do that which pleases thee best, and come quickly again. Truly I
believe none. But not without great grief and effusion of many tears, after a
long while I gave him that answer, telling him moreover, that undoubtedly it
should be a great wonder to find me alive at his return. After I had spoken
these words, one comforting up the other, we wyped and dried up each others
tears, and for that night did defer them till some other time.

And he (keeping his old custom) came to see me many times, which were but
a few days (alas) before his departure, much changed in habit, and more (as
it seemed) altered in mind, from that, since first he saw me. But that woeful
night, (ah that black and thrice cruel night) being come, which was the
beginning of all my annoyes, and the last conclusion of all my joys, with
diverse and sundry discourses, but not without great anguish of mind, grievous
wailings, and Seas of tears, and of sorrowful sobs and sighs on both sides
we passed soon away. Which (although for that time of the year was very long)
yet to me it seemed the shortest night in all my life time. The description of
the day.
And now the open day (the menacing enemy, and deuider of Lovers) began to
overcome the light of the stars, the sign of which (coming on very fast
after it) appeared to my eyes, embracing him most straightly I said thus.

O the sweetest Lord of my life, what cruel one is he, that does take thee
from me. What angry God is yt, which with so great force does wreack his ire on
me, that while I live, it may be said. Panphilus is not there where his
Fiammetta is. Woe is me therefore poor soul, that knowing not whether thou
go now, shall live desolate, and destitute of thy company. When will that
happy time come, when once again I shall between my stretched arms enfolde
this lovely and sweet body. Alas I fear me never.

And as I know not, so am I not able to express that, which my miserable heart
divining, went up and down, saying and lamenting in this sorrowful sort.
But often times recomforted of him again, I kissed him infinite times. And
after many loving embracements, both of us very loath to rise, yet at the last,
the encroching light of the new day compelling us, unwillingly we did
forsake the receptacle and secret testimony of our delights. And he
preparing now to give me his last kysses, and farewels, with plentious tears
I first began to utter these words. Behold my only love thou go, and in
short time do promise thy return.

Wherefore assure me thy faith hereof (if so it please thee) so that
expecting the same (not accounting for all that thy bare words as vain) I may
have of thy future firmness some lively hope and pledged comfort. Then he
entermingling his tears with mine, and hanging about my neck wearied I think
with heavy grief of mind, with a feeble voice said thus again. By
illuminate Apollo (sweet Lady I swear unto thee, who with most swift pace
coming into our hemisphere (contrary to our desires) does minister a
sorrowful occasion of our sudden departure, and whose golden beams I do
attend for my gladsome guides: And by that indissoluble love, which I bear
thee, and by that due and forced piety, which does divide me from thee, that
four months shall not fully pass, but (if the Gods be gracious to me
herein) thou shall see me here returned to thee again. And then taking my
right hand in his, he turned himself to that side, where he saw the Images of
our Gods hanging, and said.

Oh most holy Gods, coequall and just governors of Heaven and earth, be
present witnesses of this my faithful promise, and of my inviolable given
faith. And be thou also present (O mighty Love) the secret knower of all
these things.

And thou most stately Chamber, more pleasant to me then the heavens and
divine habitacles to the Gods, as thou have been a secret wytnes of our
desires, so likewise keep these words enclosed in thy Walls, in the least
of which (if by my own fault) I do fail, let the just indignation of the
angry Gods be such toward me, as Ceres her ire was (in times past) toward
Erisichthone, or as Dianas scorn was wrecked upon gazing Acteon, or such as
ielious Iunos envy appeared toward simple believing Semele.

And when he had so said, with a zealous affection and earnest desire he
embraced me, and with a feeble and interrupted voice he gave me his last A dio.

After he had thus taken his leave, overcome poor wretch with extreme anguish
of mind, and woeful waylinges, I could scarce answer him any thing again,
but yet at the last by plain and maine force, I did fetch these trembling
words out of my sad and heavy mind. Thy assured faith solemnly promised to
me, and sincerely given by thy right hand to mine, let Jupiter confirm in
heaven with ye effect, as Isis did the prayers of Teleteuse, and make it so
perfect and entire in earth, as I do effectually desire, and as you do with
sacred oath require. And accompanying him to my Palace gate, The effect of an
enamoured woman.
and opening my lips to bid him farewell, suddenly my words were taken from
my tongue, and the light of heaven from mine eyes. And like a ruddy vermilion
Rose cut down with sithe in open fields, feeling the parching and contracting
heat of the Sun beams, does fall down amongst the green leaves, and
leesing by little and little his former color, does die: so half alive and
dead I fell between my Maidens arms, and not a little while after by her
diligent care and help, who was most faithful unto me, with cold liquors
(recalled back again to this sorrowful world) I did begin to feel the
recovery of my former strength and forces. And hoping that he was yet at the
gate, like a fierce Bull, having received a mortal wound, furiouslye rouseth
himself, running and leaping here and there, so I amazed and lifting up my
dimmed eyes, which had scarcely yet received their perfect sight, ran
eagerly upon my Maid with open arms to embrace her, thinking to have
clasped my Panphilus between them, and with a faint and hoarce voice, broken
as it were in a thousand pieces, with incessant weeping and wayling I said. Oh
my soul farewell. The maid held her peace seeing my error. But afterward
having the full feeling of my senses, and perceiving indeed that I was
deceived, I hardly kept my self from falling ye second time into the like
trance. It was now clear day in every place, when seeing my self in my
chamber without my Panphilus, and loking round about me, and being ignorant
(almost) and astonished for a great while how this might come to pass, I asked
my waiting maid, what was become of him, and she poor soul with lamenting,
answered. It is a good-while since Madame, that he bringing you hither in his
arms, the bright day stealing on, The curiosity of loouers.
has by force (and not without infinite tears separated and taken him from
you. To whom I said again. And is therefore gone? Alas good Madame, yea said
she. And yet consequently I asked her again. With what kind of countenance
did he depart. With the most sober, saddest and most sorrowful look (said
she) and like one, who had the picture of grief, care, and anguish lively
depaynted in his demisse visage. Afterward I followed and asked her what
kind of gesture he did use, and what words he did speak, when he went away.
And she answered. You being good Lady half dead between my arms, and your
soul wandering (I know not) where, he got you quickly and softely into his
arms, as soon as he saw you in so strange a plight, and seaching up and
down with his hand in every place, if your fainting soul was yet contained in
your appaled body, and finding your heart panting, and beating strongly against
your tender sides, bewayling and complaning, a thousand times and more, with
the secreet virtue (I think) of his last kisses he called you back again.
But when he saw you still immovable, and as cold yet as the marble stone, he
brought you heather, and doubting of some worse mishappe, weeping often times,
he kissed your pale visage, saying. Oh ye high Gods if there be any harm
committed and caused by my departure, let your just doom light upon me and not
upon the faultles Lady: reduce her vagrant soul into her proper place again,
so that of this last joy, that does remain, (that is to see me at my last
departure, and to give her last ambrosial kisses, with her angelical voice
once again saying farewell,) we may receive a little comfort. But after that
he perceived no feeling in you, as one deuoyde of counsel in this cause, and
ignorant what to do, laying you softely on the bed, and like the surginge
waves of the Sea (tossed up and down with stormy winds) wallowe and rushe
violently sometimes forward, and immediately with as much force totter back
again, even so he suddenly flynging from you to the chamber door, espied
through the windows the threatening lightsome air (enemy to his abode) with
hasty speed to come on. And coming running from thence to you suddenly
again, and still calling and crying on you, reioyning as many sweet kisses,
as raining bitter teres upon your fair and fainting face. But when he had
done so many times together, and seeing that his stay with you could be no
longer, embracing you, he said. Oh sweetest Lady and only hope of my heavy
heart, whom now (of force departing from thee) I leave in doubtful state of
life, the pitiful Gods restore to thee again thy lost comfort, and preserve
thee so long in life, that we may see our selves once again joyful and merry
together, as now (deprived of all consolation) this bitter departing does
divide us a sunder. And all the while he spoke these words, he did so
extremely lament, that the vehement sobbes and sighs, that seemed to clean
the heavens, and his loud plaintes, did oftentimes strike a great fear into
me, least that they had been not heard of those only in our house, but of
our next neighbors also.

And not permitted now to tarry any longer, by reason of the clear
brightness of the day that more and more came creeping on, with greater
abundance of tears then before, he said. Ah my sweet heart farewell, And
drawn away as it were by force, hytting his foot a great blow against the
thresholde of the door, An ominous and ill presage.
he went out of our house.

From whence being gonne, (S.T.) he said looking back, meaning that he
could scarce go forewardes, and still looking back at every step,
thinking that when you came to your self again, I should call him back
again to you, She now held her peace.

And I (good Ladies) as you may imagine, sorrowinge and lamenting for the
departure of my dear loouer, remained the most comfortless and distressed
woman, bewailing with continual tears his sudden and unfortunate absence.

FINIS.
The third book of Master John Boccace bys Fiammetta.
AS you have heard (gentle Ladies) before even in such sort (my Panphilus
being gonne did I remain, and with many tears not a few days after I
woefully beewailed his sorrowful departure. And there was not anything else in
my mouth (although I spoke it softly to my self) the^, O my Panphilius, how
may it be that thou have forsaken me? This name truly, when I remembered the
sweet accents of it, Fond thoughts of loouers,
amongst my many bitter tears, did yield me no small comfort. There was no
part of my chamber, which I did not with a most desirous eye behold, saying
to my self. Here did my Panphilus sit, here did he lie, here did I kiss him:
And in brief, every place in the same by representinge such sweet objects to
my memory, was most dear unto me. Sometimes I feigned with my self, thinking,
that (returned back again) he came to seem, and, as if he had been
indeed, I looked toward the chamber door, and perceiving my self deluded
with my vain fancy, I was angry with my self, knowing that I was deceived
indeed. And because I would drive away vain cogitations, I remember that
often times I began to busy my self about many things, but overcome of
new imaginations, and leaving the same undone, my miserable heart with an
unaccustomed beating did begin to molest me. I called to my mind many things,
which I would at his departure have said unto him, and repeating also many
times with my self those words, which we had to each other spoken. And in
this manner not settling my mind firmly on any thing, I lived many days
together a most sorrowful and pensive life. But after that this great grief,
(conceived by his departure) by length of time was somewhat alleuiated, more
forcible and violent thoughts began to enter into my mind, and being lodged
there, did with probable and apparent reasons keep and defend themselves
there. And not many days after, remaining all alone in my chamber, it came to
pass, that I began to say to my self.

Behold my loouer is gonne, and is goinge on his weary way, and thou poor
soul could not at his departure once say, farewell, nor pray the Gods to
be his guides, nor kiss his troubled countenance no, not so much as see him:
which things if he keep in mind, and if any infortunious accident (which
the Gods forbid) happen unto him, coniecturing some ominous sign by thy
silence, Lovers often times blame and excuse themselves again.
may greatly (perchance) blame thee for it. This thought troubled my mind
very much at the first, but a new counsel and conceit of other matters
removed it again from me, because among my sundry thoughts, I said with my
self. I ought not to incur any blame herein, because he being endued with
great wisdom, will sooner expound my sudden ecstasy for a luckie presage,
saying. She said not farewell, which is commonly wont to be said to them, who
mean to absent themselves for a great while, when they depart, or else utterly
to take their leave, but holding my peace, he will rather think with him
self. that it was a sign, whereby to note that short time assigned for his
stay there.

And recomforting my self again with this flattering imagination, I let it
pass, and entered into other new and diverse thoughts. And being thus beset with
sorrow one every side, I remained all alone, my heart being wholly pensive for
him, walking sometimes up and down in my solitary chamber sitting down now
in this place, and now standing in a muse in that, and other sometimes leaning
my heavy head upon my hand against my bed side, I said to my self.

Oh that my Panphilus were come hither now again? And then from these fancyes,
I passed into other new conceytes. As sometimes (for example) with great
grief I called to mind, how with smyting his foot against the thresholde of
the door, he went out of my chamber, as my trusty waiting woman had told me:
And remembering also that Laodameia did gather no greater token of Protesilaus
his long absence, and unperformed return, by no other sign, then by this, it
made me many times fall into great and ruth full considerations thereof, fearing
least the self same thing (which the Gods grant not) might as
unfortunately befall to me. But not conceiving yet in the depth of my mind,
what should happen unto me indeed, I let these, as vain and frivolous
imaginations pass away, which did never the sooner at my will and pleasure
depart, but when others coming a fresh in their places, then did these
forsake my melancolike mind.

And recounting those now in my mind, that were come, which were so many and
so great, that to think of their number only, (if of nothing else) it was no
small pain to my poor heart, Troubles and cares are wont to extinguish love
in young men,
for I did not once remember (amongst my other thoughts) that I had read in
Ouide his verses, that troubles, cares, and painful affairs did drive love
out of young and tender minds, but rather, so often, when I remembered that
he was on his way. And thinking, that these were no small annoyaunces unto
every one, and especially to him, whom I knew had been ever accustomed to
rest, and acquainted with ease, and now most of all, when he was constrained
to them against his will.

Wherefore I did first greatly doubt with my self, least ye smallest of these
greefes might not have been means forcible enough to have taken him from me,
and feared again, least his unwonted travails, and the hurtefull and
unseasonable weather might have been an occasion of sickness, or of some
worse mischaunce, that might have hindered his deseignes, and so hurt my
desires. And in this doleful imagination (I remember my mind was longer
busied, then in any other, although that I did often times argue, by the
induction of his unfeigned tears, which I did see trickle down his cheeks,
and of my painful troubles, which never changed my firmness, that it could
not be a true conclusion, that for so little grief, so great love should be
extinct, hoping also, that his young age (mastred with singular discretion and
wisdom) would defend and keep him from any other hurtful accident.

Thus therefore, in opposing, answering and dissoluing my own objections, I
spent so many days, that I did not only think, that he was now arrived in
his country, but I was also certified thereof by his letters, which for many
causes were most welcome and acceptable unto me: in the which he certified me,
that with greater flames of affection, he burned more in my love, then ever he
did, and with stronger promises did revive my hope of his return. Wherefore my
first thoughts being gonne, from this hour foreward, new fancies did quickly
arise in their places.

For sometimes I said: Now my Panphilus the only belooued son of his old
father, who many years before had not seen him) received of him with great
joy, They that love are always in suspicion.
feasted of all his kinsfolks, and dearly entertained of all his friends,
does not only forget me, but does (I think) accurse the months, days,
and hours, in the which with diverse occasions heretofore my love has stayed
him here. And honorably welcomed of all his compeers, and with joyful
congratulation of all Ladies and Gentlewomen, does blame me (perhaps) who
knew not how to feed his dainty fancies in any thing else, then in simple
unfolding my secreete love, and the straung effects of my new affections unto
him, when he was here. And minds full of mirth and iollitie, are apt to be
drawn from one place, and to be bound to another, according to the mutabilitie
of their pleased and displeased fancies. But (alas) may it now be, that I
should leese him in this sort.

Truly I cannot hardly think it. The Gods forbid that this should come to
pass: and grant that as amongst my parents, and kinsfolks, and in my own
and native City they have made, and kept me only his. So amongst his kindred,
and in his natural country, let them vouchsafe to preserve him one lie mine.

Alas, with how many salt tears were these words mingled, and with how many
more should they have been, if I had believed that, that, which they
themselves did truly prognosticate, should afterward have proved true:
albeit that those, which then came not forth, I have afterward in trebble
fold spent all in vain. Besides such speeches (my mind divining often times
of her woes to come) surprised (I know not with what fear) did greatly tremble
and quake, which fear was most commonly resolved into these stinging
thoughts, and words.

Panphilus abidinge now joyfully in his Cittye, full of most famous and
excellent temples, and by reason of most solemn and high feasts, with
exceeding pomp and glory celebrated there, does with great pleasure visit
them: where he cannot choose, but find many fair and noble women, which, as in
surpassing beauty, gallant behavior, and good graces, they excel all others,
so most of them being skillful practicioners in their entising art, with
subtle snares, and amorous allectiues are passing cunning to entrappe young
and gentle minds, thereby to draw them to their liking, and so to lure them
to their love. Alas who can then be so strong a gardien of himself, where so
many motives do concur, but must (mauger his bearde) at sometime or other by
plain force be overtaken: as I my self, not many months sithence by like
powers also assailed, may be an approved and hapless president of such
straung and strong virtues, which in my simple breast prevailed. And besides
this, new things are wont to delight more then old. It is therefore but an
easy matter, that he (being newly arrived, and a stranger) may please them,
and they him again.

Alas how grievous was this imagination to me, the which that it should not
come to pass, I could scarce drive out of my mind, saying thus. How may
Panphilus, who loves thee more then himself, receive into that heart, enclosed
in thine, any other new love? Why, do not thou know, that there is here
perhaps some brave Lady well worthy of his love, who with greater force, then
with that of her eyes, has often assaide and endeavored to enter into his heart,
but could not find any way whereby, he being yet scarce thine, as now he is,
so many more Goddesses also of beauty passing up and down in this City,
and yet not any one of them able to move his mind? How can thou then
think that he may be so soon enamoured as thou say? And besides this
do thou believe, that he would violate that troth, which so religiously he
auowed unto thee for any other faith. It may never be, and therefore thou must
trust to his fidelity, and rely upon his good discretion. With great reason
thou ought to think, that he is not so meanly wise, but yt he knows well
enough, that it is but mere folly to leave yt, which already he has, to
get that, which he has not, yea if that which he would forsake, were but a
small thing, and of great deal less account, in respect of that which he
seeks to attain, being of greater estimation and value. And of this also
thou must have an infallible hope, that this cannot so easily come to pass:
because if the great fame and general report of thy beauty be true, which thy
self have often heard, thou may (placed amongst the number of the brauest
Ladies in his Country, and to the fairest of them all paragoned) be prised
above the best, which has not in it any one richer, brauer, or more nobly
borne then thy self. And besides this, whom can he find amongst all the
Gentlewome^ in his City, that would, nay that could love him so dearly, as
thou do.

Again, he is not ignorant (as one expert in amorous affairs) how hard a
labor, and intricate a matter it is, so to dispose and work with any woman,
to make her like at the first, or at the first assaults to make her yield to
love. And although he did not love thee at all, yet being troubled about many
affairs of his Father, and occupied with his proper business, he could not now
be at vacant leisure to acquaint himself with other new women. Wherefore let
not this only fall into thy thought, but hold it for an infallible Maxim,
that as much as thou love, so much thou art beloved again. Alas how falsely
and sophistically were these arguments coined against the truth. But with all
my disputing, I could never refel and put out of my mind the obscure and
miserable ielosie entered into it for advantage, and accomplishment of my other
greefes. But yet somewhat lightened (as if I had argued truly) and eased a
little thereby, I did to my feeble power remove such injurious thoughts from my
mind. O dearest Ladies, because I will not spend the time in recounting every
one of my uncouth thoughts, what were my most careful deeds, you shall now
hear. At the strangnes of which marvel not, since I must needs follow, not
those which I would, but such as it pleased Love to give me, ah those was I
constrained to perform. Very few mornings escaped me, when risen out of my
weary bed, I went not up to the highest turrets of my Palace, and from
thence no otherwise then the Marryners clymbing up to the topp (of their maine
Mast, do pry on every side, to see if they can espy any dangerous Rocks, or
ken any land yt is nere, which may hinder their continued course.) I first
looked about me on every side. And afterward fastening mine eyes steadfastly
toward the East, I did mark how much ye Sun, elevated above the Horison, had
spent of the new day, and the more I saw it higher, ye more I said (to my
self) that ye term of Panphilus his return drew on, and many times I did with
great delight as it were, see it rise and come forth, and discerning sometimes
my own shadow, by the ascended quantity of it in the Meridiall line, made less
and less, and sometimes loking to the space of his body, made bigger by the
earth in his setting, I said with my self, yt he went more slowly, then ever
he did before, and did lengthen the days more in Capricorn, then he was wont
to do in Cancer, and so likewise mounted up to the middle circle, I said yt
there he stayed too long to delight himself in ouerloking the wide earth. And
although he glided down swiftly toward the west, yet me thought he was too
long in his course again, whose light after yt our Hemisphere had lost, and
that ye twinkling stars had full scope to show forth theirs, thus partly
contented, Lovers mark their days with stones
I went numbering and calling to mind many times with my self the days yt were
past, and with little stones did mark those with other days also that were to
come, no otherwise the^ in times (past dividing their merry and happy days from
their sorrwful and dismal times with little black and white stones) were wont to
do. O how many times do I now remember, yt before their due time I did put a
stone there, thinking yt so much of ye prescribed term should be diminished,
how much ye sooner I adjoined it to yt, which was already past, sometimes
counting ye little stones assigned for ye days past, and sometimes telling
those, which stood for those days, which were yet to come, although I kept ye
number of every one of them very well in my mind (thinking every time to have
found some of the^ increased, and that ye other should have been diminished. So
did my eager hot desire transport me to ye wished end of ye prefixed term.
Using therefore these vain cares, I returned many times to my desolate chamber,
more desirous to be there all alone, then willingly in any company. And when I
was alone, to drive away sorrowful cogitations, I opened a certain casket of
mine, out of the which I took many things (sometimes his favors bestowed on
me) by one and one, and ye delight and great desire, which once I had in
beholding him, I did now take in gazing upon them, which when I had seen,
scarce able to contain my swelling tears, yet fetching great sighs, I kissed
the^, and as if they had been rational creatures, and things of understanding,
I did ask them saying. When will your M. be here? and laying the^ up again, I
drew forth many of his leters which he had sometimes sent me, and reading almost
every one of them over, and imagining yt I did talk with him, I felt no little
comfort. I called oftentimes my faithful and secret maid unto me, with who^ I
had much and diverse communication touching him, sometimes asking her what her
hope was of his return, and sometimes what she thought of him, or if at any
time she had heard any thing of him.

To all which demaundes, either to please me, or else according to her opinion,
aunswering the truth, it was a great comfort to my desolate mind. And thus
many times I passed away the greater part of the day with less grief and
sadness. I took no less pleasure and content (then in ye forsaide things) to
visit the holy Temples, Variety of talk does diminish sorrow and sadness.
and to sit at my Palace Gate with other Gentlewomen of my acquaintance,
where often times with sundry discourses, my infinite cares were somewhat
removed from me. To which places sometimes resorting, it fell out often, that
I saw diverse of those young Gentlemen, whom I did know to keep Panphilus
company: and whenever I espied them, I did never forgette to look amongst
them, if happily I might see Panphilus with them, as sometimes I did. O how
often times was I vainly deluded with this foolish imagination. And although I
was thus deceived, yet it did me much good to see them, whom (as by their
pitiful countenaunces they bewrayed as much) I saw full of like compassion,
that I had, in seeing themselves alone (as it were) and deprived of their
sweet companion, and who (me thought) seemed not half so merry, as they were
wont to be.

Ah what a great desire had I many times to ask them, what was become of their
gentle friend and associate, if reason and modesty had not counterchecked my
eagre will herein. But Fortune truly was sometimes favorable to me herein,
because in talking of him in such like places, and thinking that I did not
hear and understand them, they said, that his return was almost at hand: and
how sweet these words were to mine ears, it were a bootelesse labor to
express. In this sort therefore, and with such sundry thoughts and
superstitious deeds, and with many other, like these, I did study to pass
the tedious days away, which were so yrkesome to me in their length, desiring
therefore still for night, not because of both I thought it more profitable or
comfortable for me, but because when it was come, there was the more time
spent, and the less to pass away. After that the combersome day therefore
(whose long hours being finished) gave place to silent night, fresh fancies
and new cares came also in company with the same. And I, who from my cradle
being naturally given to be afraid in the solitarye darkness of night,
accompanied now with mighty love, Love does assure Lovers in darkness,
was free from all manners of fear. And perceiving every one in my house to
take their quiet rest, sometimes I went up alone to that place, where I had
not long since seen the Sun rising in the morning, and as Aronces did
speculate the celestial bodies, and their orbiculer motions, between the
white Marbles in the hills of Luca, so did I (the night creeping on with
ouerlong minutes, and feeling the great cares, and careful thoughts to be
enemies unto my wished sleep) beheld the Heavens from that place, and the
swift reuolutions of the^, imagining with my self, that they were wonderful
slow in their course: and sometimes turning mine eyes steadfastly toward the
horned Moon, (having recourse to her wayne, and to her roundnes, I perceived
by the increase and decrease of it, some nights to be longer and shorter then
other. And so much the more my desire was made more fervent, by how much sooner
I wyshed, that the four months by her sweet course had been brought to an
end. Oh how many times (although it lent a dimmed and obscure light) did I
behold it a great while together with great delight, imagining that my
Panphilus his eyes were then fixed on it as well as mine. Whom for all that I
do not now doubt that (I being now quite out of his memory) he did not
once care to look on the Moon, but not having so much as a thought thereof,
he did rather at that time of the night, take his rest in his bed. Lovers who
expect the return of their beloved, think every hour to be longer then other,


And I remember, that agreeued at the slownesse of her course, with diverse
soundes (following the old and ancient errors of those many years ago) I
helped her forward in her slow course, to grow to her full roundnes, to the
which after that it was come, contented with her perfect and full light, she
cared not (as it seemed) to diminish ye same again, and to return to her new
horns, but to remain still in her round form, albeit with my self I held
her excused for the same, esteeming her aboade more favorable and gracious
with her joyful Mother, then desirous to return to the dark kingdoms of her
infernal Husband. But I remember well, that the devout petitions and earnest
prayers, which many times I offered up unto her, to accelerate her easy and
slow pace, I turned now into threatening speeches saying.

O Phaebe an evil rewarder of thy devout service done unto thee, with
pitiful prayers I labor to lessen thy travel and weary journey, but thou
not esteeming the^, with long and slow tariaunce (injurious to thy self and
to me) do not care to increase mine. And therefore if to the necessitye of
my help, thou dooest not return more by corned, thou shall then perceive me
as slow in thy honors and sacrifices, which I mean to offer up unto thee, as
now I find thee care less and slack in thy duetye to the world. Why, do
not thou know, that the sooner thou shall four times horned, and as many
times round, have showed thy lights to mortal creatures, by so much the
sooner my Panphilus shall return to me again: who being once come back,
then as slow or as swift as thou will thou may run out thy compass and
circles.

Truly that self same madness, which did induce me to make such prayers, that
very same did so bereave me of my self, that it made me sometimes think, that
she (afraid of my threatenings) made greater haste in her course only for my
pleasure: and other times seeming not to care for me, to be more slow then she
was before. This often beholding on her, made me so skillful in her nature and
course, that, when she was in her wayne, or in any part of heaven, or conjoined
with any star, I might have fully judged and known how much of the night
had passed away, and how much was to come.

Both the Bears likewise (if she had not appeared) did by long experience
make me very skillful and certain thereof. Alas who would have believed ye love
could have taught me such Astrology, a science more fit for finest wits,
and profounde judgments, and not for a troubled mind occupied with his fury.

When the heavens full of darkest clouds and ouerrun with boisterous and
tempestious winds, and choked with mistie fogges, did from this place take my
sight away, sometimes (if I had no other matters to busy my self withal)
calling my waiting Maids and Gentlewomen together in my Chamber, I did my
self tell (and to please my strange humor) wylled them also to recount
diverse tales, ye which the more they were elonged from the truth (as for ye
most part such kind of people are wont to tell) so much the more (me thought)
they had greater force to drive away sighs, and to make me merry, who gave
diligent ear unto them, so that sometimes, notwithstanding my melancholic
fittes, I laughed a pace at them. And if perhaps such feigned jests and
invented tales, To have company in miserye does make the grief the lighter.
could not (as true matters) be justly set down in diverse fabulous Books, yet
in serching out of others mysteries by them, and applying these with mine, and
perceiving my self to have company in my sorrows, I passed the time away with
less grief. Neither do I know which of these was most gracious unto me, to
see the nights passed away and spent, or else (my mind busied about other
things) to see the days run on and spent.

But after that the foresaid operations, and many other devises had occupied
my senses for a good while, I went enforcing my self (as it were) to sleep,
although I knew it was but in vain, and therefore went rather to lie down to
sleep. And being all alone in my bed, and troubled with no rumors and
noise, all those thoughts almost: which in the day time had sursaulted me,
came now a fresh to my mind, and in despite of my self made me with many
more arguments pro and con, to repeat them against my self.

And I would many times have entered into others, with thing (alas) was not so
easilye granted unto me, but yet sometimes by very force leaving them, and
lying on that side, where sometimes my Panphilus was wont to lie, which place
reserving yet (as it were) a sweet savor and sent of his body, me thought my
drowzie senses therewith reuyued, and my mind greatly contented, I did call him
softly with my self, and (as though he had heard me indeed,) I did sweetly
pray him, that he would return quickly again. I did after imagine, Diverse
thoughts of lovers.
that he was come again, and fayning many frivolous things with my self, by
one and one me thought I did tell them unto him, and he demanding many of
me again, I did answer again in his place: and sometimes it happened, that
carried away with such foolish thoughts, I fell at last a sleep, which was
sometimes more pleasant and more welcome to me then any watching and waking,
because when I was awake, I did falsely suppose these imaginations with my
self.

But this, if it had endured but any small time, did make them appear no
otherwise to my fancies, then if they had been true indeed. Sometimes me
thought he was returned, Dreams represent many times those things which are
beloved,
and that in most fair Gardens (free from all suspicion and fear) decked with
green leaves, sweet flowers, and diverse kinds of pleasant fruits, I sported
and played with him as other times we did accustom to do. And there I holding
him by the hand, and he me, unfolding his fortunes good and badde, and
telling all his accidents unto me, me thought that many times before he had
perfectly told out his tale, with often kissing I did interrupt him in his
delightful discourses. And as if the same had been true indeed) which but
with fained eyes I did contemplate) I said. And is it true (sweet Panphilus)
that thou art returned again? Certes it is. For here I have thee. And then I
kissed him again. Me thought that other times with great sollace I was
walking with him up and down the sea banks. And sometimes my imagination was
so strong herein, that I did affirm it with my self saying. Well now I do
not dream, that I have him between mine arms. O how it grieved me, when it
came to pass, that my pleasant dreams, and sweet sleep were both ended,
which (going away) did continually carry that away, with them, which without
any trouble or grief to him, I must needs confess did oppress me. And
although that I remained in great melancoly by remembering of the^, living
nevertheless all the next day in good hope, I was somewhat content and eased,
desiring still that night would quickly draw on, because I might in my sleep
enjoy that, which waking I could not attain to. And although my sleep did
sometimes yield me such needy favors, notwithstanding it did not permit
me to receive such dreams of pleasure, mingled without much bitter and
poisoned galle of sorrow, because many times (me thought) I saw him
apparelled with ragged and forlorn garments, besmeared all over (I know not)
with what foul and black spots and very pale and fearful, as though he
had been pursued of some cruel enemy, with shrikes and outcryes calling to
me. Help me, Oh my Fiammetta, help me. Other times (me thought) I heard
diverse talk, and mutter of his death.

And sometimes these fantasies of horror perced so far into my mind, that
(me thought) I saw him lie dead before me: and in many other uncouth and
pitiful forms, so that it never came to pass, that my sleep was of more
force, or greater then my grief. Wherefore suddenly awaked, and knowing the
vanity of my dream, as one contented yet but to have dreamed these terrors
and terrible dangers, I thanked the Gods, Things seen in dreams are some
times true or else figures of true things.
remaining yet some what troubled in mind and fearing that the things, which
I had seen, if not in all, in part at least they had been true, or else
figures of true things to come. Neither I was content at any time or persuaded
by the contrariety of these (although I said with my self, and heard of
others that dreams were but vain) until I did hear some news of him, of
the which I began now carefully and warely to enquier after. And in such
sort (as you have heard fair Ladies) I passed away the tedious days and
irksome nights, attending one still after other in their long course. But ye
truth is that the time of his promised return approaching, I deemed it the
best, and safest counsel to live merely in the mean time: by which means, my
beauty (a little altered and decayed by reason of this long unacquainted
grief) might return again into her proper place, because at his arrival, I
might not seem ill favored and not gracious in his sight, and so might not
(perhaps) please his deinty and curious eyes.

Which was not hard for me to do, because being since his departure,
accustomed and well acquainted with sorrows, it made me endure and pass them
away with very little trouble or no pain at all. And besides this, the near
hope of his promised return made me every day feel a little more joy, and
content of mind. Wherefore I began to frequent to feasts again, not a
little while before intermitted of me, ascribing the occasion thereof to my
obscured and clowdie days, perceauing now the clear and new times to be at
hand.

Nor no sooner did my mind (contracted erst with most bitter and pynching
greefes) begin to dilate and enlarge it self in such a pleasant and joyful
life, but I became fayrer then ever I was before. And I trimmed up my
gorgeous and rich vestures, and made my precious ornaments fayrer, no otherwise
then a valiant Knight at arms does clear and make bright his Complete
Harness, challenged to some worthy and famous combatte, because I might seem
more stately and bravely attyred with them at his return, the which (as
after it fell out) in vain I did attend. As then therefore these actions were
changed into an other tennour, so did my thoughts also chaung their coppie.

Vain thoughts of loouers.
It came never now into my mind, that I could not see him, when he departed,
nor the remembrance of the sorrowful sign of his smytten foot against the
door, nor any thought of stynging and envious jealousy, nor his sustained
troubles, nor my suffered toils, nor his dangers, nor my dollours did now
molest my peace, but rather days next before the end of his promised return
I said to my self. Now it does grieve my Panphilus to be long from me, and
perceiving his time near according to his promise, does make short
preparation and have for his speedy return. And now perhaps having left his
old father, he is on his way.

Oh how pleasant were these words unto me, and how often did I most sweetly
deskant upon this note, thinkinge many times with my self, with what kind of
most loouing entertainment, gracious gesture, and sweet and friendly shows,
I might at the first represent my self unto his person, and welcome him.
Alas how many times said I to my self.

At his return he shall be more then a thousand times embraced of me, and my
zealous kisses shall be multiplied in such store, that they shall not suffer one
right and perfect word to come out of his mouth, and I will make restitution of
them a hundred times redubled, which at his departure (without receiving on his
part any again,) he gave to my pale and half dead visage. And in these
kind of thoughts, I doubted many times with my self, that I could not bridle
that burning and fervent desire, that I should then have at the first sight of
him to embrace him, if I did (perhaps) see him in open an public company.

But the ungentle Gods (as you shall hereafter perceive) found out a
sorrowful means, which persuaded no fear, doubt or mistrust of the due
performaunce of any such circumstaunces, and ceremonies, denying me the
cheifest thing in deed. Remaining therefore continually in my chamber, and as
often as any body came into the same, so often did I believe that they were
come to bring me tydinges, that he was coming, or else to tell me that he
was already arrived. I never heard any talk in any publyque and pryuate
place, but with open and attentive ears I noted it well, thinking that either
they did or else should speak of his return.

And sitting in my chamber I rose (I think) a thousand times out of my place
to run to the window, as though I had been busied about something else, and
looking from thence a far of, and beneath also at the door (driven on by the
suggestion of a foolish conceit, and fond belief of his being near) I
said.

Is it possible Fiammetta that Panphilus being now returned does come to see
thee? And afterward finding my mind illuded, confounded with my self, I went
to my place again. And saying, that at his return he should bring certain
things to my hushande, I did often times ask, and caused many to enquier, if
he was arrived, or when his friends in these parts did look for him. But
receiving no joyful answer of my diligent and careful enquiries, but only
such an one, as of him that should never come any more (as afterward indeed
he did not) caused me to live in a most sorrowful and solitary plight.
Wherefore wrapped (most pitiful Ladies) in these cares, as you have heard, I
came not only to the greatly desired and (with infinite pain) expected term,
but I passed it also many, days after in great and grievous woes. And
uncertain with my self whether I should blame him or not, my hope began by
little and little to relent.

Wherefore I partly left of my former and pleasant imaginations, into the which
(giving perhaps my mind to great a scope) I had entered to far. And new
thoughts now (the old being gonne) began to toss and turmoyle my soul a
fresh, and holding my mind (in diverse doubts and perplexities) to know what
was the occasion of his tariaunce longer then he promised, I began to
excogitate many things carefully with my self. They feel incredible passions,
who after the and of their promised time, se not the return of their be^ooued.
And before many other doubts that were objected to my mind, I found many
things so ready in his excuse, and many more then he him self (if he had been
here) could have perhaps alleged. Sometimes I said. Oh Fiammetta what
reason does make thee think, that thy Panphilus does stay without returning
to thee, but because he cannot: diverse sudden chances and unexpected
affairs do many times hinder forward men in their determinations, and do
quite dissolve their disseignmentes. Nor is it possible to prescribe so precise
a time to future things, as many unwisely believe. And who does doubt also,
that present, near, ancient and dutiful piety does not bind more, then
that which is absent, straung, new, and but mere volentrarie? I know it very
certain, that he looueth me most of al, and does now think of my sorrowful
life, and has no small compassion of my pains.

And pricked on by force of love, is many times in hand and most willing to set
forwards, and to come unto me. But the old doterd (his injurious father) with
his tears (perhaps) and prayers, has somewhat more prolonged his appointed
time, and opposing his commandments, to his forward will, has retained him
still there. Wherefore as soon as fit opportunity is aunswerable to his
desirous mind) he will come to me again. But after these speeches and
freendly excuses, my thronging thoughts did drive me on farther to imagine more
straung, unlucky, and more grievous occurrauntes. Sometimes I said.

Who can tell, if he more wilful (then his due love required) to see me
again, and too precise to come just at the end of his appointed month,
laying a side the great pity of his aged father, and neglecting all other
business, has embarked him self in some slender vessel, not attending ye
calmes of the tempestuous waves (and crediting to much deceitful and lying
Mariners, who for their gain are too aduenturous and desperate of their own
lives, and too prodigal of those of their passengers, and having committed him
self to the rage of the merciless winds, and surging waves of the dangerous
Seas) is perhaps drowned and perished in them. Unfortunate Leander by no
other occasion, and lamentable means then these, was taken from his happelesse
Hero. Again who knows, if constrained by his froward fates, and fortune, he
is thrown upon some uninhabitable and desert rock, and escaping danger and
death by water, in exchaung of that, has gotten a worse by famine or ravening
fowls, or else left upon any rock by forgetfulness (as Achimenedes was)
does in vain attend that some should come, or by chance touch by, to fetch
him from thence. For who is ignorant how full of deceytes the lawless seas
are?

For it may be also that he is taken by enemies, or with gives by wicked
Pyrattes bound fast and kept in prison. All which perrilles as they are common,
so do we daily see them come to pass. But on the other, side afterward it
came to my mind, that his journey was more safe by land, yet I did imagine
likewise of a thousand sinistrous chaunches that might hinder and stay him
as well that way. Wherefore judging that he might (when such inopinate and
unlucky hazardes of fortune came suddenly, and soonest objected to my mind
(find the more just and better excuse, as he did allege the greater and
worser dangers) some times I said.

The effect of the Sun in the spring time
Behold the Sun whotter then it was wont to be, does dissolve the huge
hills of Snow congealed in the middle region of the Air, whereupon with
furious and flowinge stream they came pouring down into the plains, of the
which he has not a few to pass over. Wherefore if now with more audatious
rashness the^ advised reason, he has adventured to pass over them, and with
his horse is fallen into any of them, and stifled there amongst them, has
miserably lost his life, why, how can he then come. Floodes have not learned
of late, neither is it a strange thing to them, with these injuries to molest
trauaylers, and cruelly to swallowe up unawares, those that pass over them.
But if he has happily escaped these unhappy dangers, he may be perchance
fallen into the hands of some pitiless thieves, and (despoyled of all that
he has,) is perforce kept, and without hope of redemption stayed of them.

Or else paraduenture may be overtaken by some malady in the way, where now he
abides for ye recovery of his health, and after he is well again, will
without fail come iyofully to us. While these careful imaginatyons occupied
thus my perplexed mind, a little cold sweat did ouerrunne all my body, and
I was so greatly afraid of the event of these uncertain dangers, and so
strongly persuaded of their truth, that I turned my break brain thoughts,
into pitiful prayers to the divine powers, that they would take the same from
me, apprehending them so forciblie in my mind, and no more nor less, then if
before mine eyes, I had seen his imminent danger, and instaunt death. And
sometimes I remember that with fyrme belief I bewailed his woeful end, as if
I had seen any of these intellectual aduersyties indeed.

But afterward I said to my self. Alas what strange causes are these which
my miserable thoughts cast before my eyes. The Gods forbydde that any such
may befall. Let him stay still, and as long as pleases him, and let him rather
(then to content me, or to offer him self to any dangerous ieopardie, which
may chance indeed, though now they do but delude my troubled wits) not
return, nor see me at all.

All which perilles (though they are indeed possible) yet are they impossible
to be kept close, being most like that the untimely and violente death of so
noble and famous a young Gentleman as he is, cannot long be hydden, and
concealed especially from me, of whose estate and welfare I do carefully
cause, and with secret and subtyle inuestigations do continually procure
dillygent inquiry to be made.

And who does doubt moreover if that any of these supposed perrilles were
true, but that flying Fame, Fame a swifte reporter of ill things,
the swift reporter of ill news would have long since brought the manner of his
death hither?

By means of which fortune (but my least freende in this) would have given me
an open way, to have made me the most sad and most sorrowful woman, that
might be.

Wherefore I rather believe, that he remains in as great grief, as I am in,
if that his most willinge return is forbidden only by the heavy
commandments of his father, and therefore he will come quickly or else
excusing his staying so long, will for my great comfort write to me the
occasion thereof.

Truly (the foresaid thoughts) although they did fiercely assault me, yet
were they easily enough overcome, and the hope, which by the term determined
was enforced to fly from me, with all my power I did retain, laying down
before it the long and fervent love, which he bare unto me, and I to him, his
pawned faith, the adjured and sacred Gods, and his infinite tears, in which
things I did affirm, and think it impossible, that any deceit or guile
might be hidden. But yet I could not so rule my sorrowful mind, but that this
hope, thus forcibly kept, must needs give place to many vagrant and vain
thoughts, that were yet left beehinde, which driving hereby little and little
out of my woeful breast, did work amayne to return to their former places,
reducing eftsoons to my mind diverse prodigious signs and tokens, and many
other unfortunate accidents. And I did scarcely perceive, ye peaceable hope
being almost quite expelled out of my heart, but I did immediately feel their
mighty and new forces planted in her place. But amongst all other murdering
thoughts, that did most of all massacre my grievous soul (hearing nothing at
all in process of many days, of my Panphilus his return) was sharp and
stinging jealousy. Ah this spitefully galled and wounded my breast more, then
I was able to endure. This did dissanull all excuses, which I had made for him)
as knowing and consenting to the occasion of his absent deeds. This did often
times induce me to those speeches condemned of me before, saying.

Alas how art thou so foolish to believe, that either the love of his father,
urgent affairs, or delightful pleasures, may now keep Panphilus from
coming hither, if he did love thee so as once he said he did.

Do not thou know that Love does overcome all things, Love does overcome all
things
for he has (fervently (perhaps) enamoured of some other Gentlewoman) quite
forgotten thee, whose pleasures being as forcible as new, do hide and hold
him there, as sometimes thine did keep him here.

Those foresaid Ladies passing gracious in every thing they do, and (as you
saydst) in every point most apt to love, and with brave allurements
endeavoring to be beloved again (he himself being likewise by the delicate
pureness of his clear complexion, naturally inclined to such passions, and
for many rare and commendable qualities in him most worthy to be beloved)
applying their whole studyes to his service, their pains to his pleasures, and
he his desires to their devotions, have made him become a new Innamorato. Art
thou so assotted with the fame and glory of thine own beauty, that thou do
not believe that other Women have shyning eyes in their heads, fayrnes in their
faces, and that they are not as full of courtly behavior and good graces, and
all things else, that may command young men's minds, as well as thou art? And
do thou think that they are not so skillful (who are (alas) a great deal
more then ever thou werte) in these amorous attempts as thou art? Why thou art
deceived. And if this be thy belief it is false. And dooste not likewise
believe that he on the otherside can please more then one Woman? But yet I
think, that if he could but see thee, it would be a hard thing for him to
love any other. But since he cannot see thee, nor has not seen thee these
many months, how can you deem otherwise then so? Thou must needs know,
that no worldly accident is permanent and eternal, for as he was enamored of
thee, and as thou did please him, so is it possible that another may like
him, and he (abandoning thy love) may affectionate some other. New things
always please
For new things are ever wont to please a great deal more the^ those which
are daily seen. And every one does with greater affection desire, that which
he has not, then that which he has already in his own possession.

Again, there is nothing, be it never so delightful, which by long time
enjoying and using the same, does not ware yrkesome at last, and of less (if
of none) account at all. Who will not moreover sooner, and more willingly love
a fair and new Lady at his own house, then one whom he has long since
served in a foreign Country, and unknown place: He did not also love thee
(perhaps) with so fervent and zealous affection, as he made thee believe. And
neither his tears, nor any of his passions were to be held so dear, and so
sure a pledge of such great love, as he did still affirm, and as thou did
think that he did bear thee. Many men also departing from their beloved, are
tormented with anguish, and grief of mind, with bitter waylings, taking their
woeful congies, swearing deeply, and promising many things profoundly, which
with a good and firm intent (perhaps they mean to perform, but some sudden
and new chance controling the same, is an occasion to make them forget al
their former oaths and protestations.

The tears, oaths and promises of young Men, are not now, and of late become
arres and pledges of ensuing deceits for simple and credulous Women. They are
generally more skillful and more apt to know all these things, then in knowing
how to love, such is their vagabond wills, leading the^ to these
inconveniences. And there is not any of the^ who would not sooner change ten
Women every month, then to adhere and keep himself ten months only to
one. These continually believe to find out some new customs, forms and
devises, and do greatly glory to have had the love (ah the spoil) of many
Women. What do thou therefore hope for? Wherefore do thou suffer thy
self to be abused with vain and false belief? And yet (Fiammetta) though
thou know not the means, and art not able to withdraw him from this, yet
continue thou still in loving him: and show, that with that art, that he
has betrayed thee, thou have not deceived him.

And many other words followed these, which did kindle me with fierce and
burning anger, and which did with a most timorous heat so inflame my mind,
that it brought me almost to unbeseeming furious and frantic actions. Nor
the confected rage did first pass away, before the infinite tears (bursting
it a sunder) did most abou^da^tly issue out of my watery eyes, which were
accompanied also (the same nevertheless remaining sometimes with me a good
while) with great and grievous sighs, that came smoking out of my smothered
heart, (which to comfort and cheer up my self again) condemning that, which
my presaging mind did foretell me of, by maine force as it were, the well
nighe lost and fugitive hope, with most vain reasons did return again. And
in this sort recovering almost again all the joy, that whilome had left me, I
lived many days between hope and despair, being always careful, and
beyond all measure desirous to know exactlie what was become of him that came
not.

^ The fourth book of Master John Boccace his Fiammetta.
MY tears (pitiful Ladies) have been but light hitherto, and my sighs
pleasant in respect of those, which my sorrowful tongue (not so pressed to write
the^, as my heart so prone to feel them) does now prepare to set down before
you. And truly if ye pains which I have passed hitherto, are well considered,
they may be rather termed dalliaunces of a young and wanton gentlewoman, then
woes of a tormented Lover. Arm your minds therefore with firmenes, and
patience, and let not my promises so make you afraid, that (the things which
are paste, seeming grievous unto you) you would not be desirous to hear the
sequelles, which are full of more sorrow, and greater grief. And I care not
(gentle Ladies) to comfort you any whitt in these sad reports, because you
might take the more pity of me, and the more, by how much knowing his
malice the greater, by whose impyetie all these sorrows did fall upon me, you
might be more warye, and less wylfull in committing your fond dispositions to
young Men's fleeting discretions, and in putting your trusty hope into their
trothles hands. And so in talking with you, I shall (perhaps) oblige my self
unto you, and in counselling you make my self unbound, or else admonishing you
by these perplexed accidents (allotted and befallen to me) I shall help, if
not heal your amorous maladies. I say therefore (good Ladies) that with such
diverse imaginations (which you have a little before comprised by my dyscourse)
I was continually molested, when after more then a month past of his promised
return, I heard certain news on a day of my beloved young Gentleman: and thus
it was. That going with a devout mind on a day to visit the sacred and
religious places, and to offer up to the Godds some orysons for the release of
my hard mishappes, that, restoring Panphilus to me again, or else driving him
utterly out of my mind. I might recover my banished comfort. It came to
pass, that being in company with many wise and discrete Ladies, (some
nearly allied to me by blood and affinity, and others conjoined to me by
ancient familiarity) set upon pleasant discourses, and in merry veins,
there arrived by chance a Merchant, who, no otherwise then Ulysses and
Diomedes did to Deidamia, began to show forth his gems and precious Jewels,
and such especially as he thought most fine, and fitting best the dainty
minds of such young and curious Gentlewomen.

Who also (as I gathered by his speech, and he being also demanded of one of
the company,) says that he was an inhabiter of that City, where my
Panphilus was borne, and dwelled. But after having shown many of his knacks,
and some of them bought of the Gentlewomen, others prised and given him again,
they entered into pleasant and merry talk amongst themselves, and whilst he
did look for his money, one of them, who was of a young and flourishing age, of
a most beautiful countenance, and of noble blood, commended of many for her
rare qualities, and of most for her courtly and nice behavior, and the very
self same Gentlewoman, who had asked him before, what he was, and from whence
he came, demanded of him again, if he had ever known one Signor Panphilo
his countriman. Oh how much with these and many other demands, did she please
my humors, and fulfill my like desires. I was insooth greatly glad that they
fell into such talk, and did most willingly lift up my ears to hear the
arguing of them both, but especially to know the effect of his aunswers, who
without delay said.

And who is he that does know him better then I do? To whom she said again,
striving (as it were) and importunatly forcing her self, to know what was
become of him. And where he is now? Oh (said the Merchaunt) it is a while
since his Father (having no more Children but him) called him home unto him:
whom the young Gentlewoman yet asking again. How long is it since thou knew
any certain news of him? Truly (said he) never since I came from thence,
which is not yet (I think) full fifteen days. She continued still enquiring
and said. And how does he now? Very well said he (it seems) for the very
same day that I came from thence, I saw a most fair young Gentlewoman with
great solemnity, feast, and joy, enter into his house, which (as I partly
understood) was newly married unto him.

Whilst the Merchant was speaking these nipping words, although I gave a
doleful ear unto them, yet I stared the inquisitiue young Gentlewoman
steadfastly in the face, maruayling with my self, and imagining greatly in my
mind, what the occasion might be, that should move her to examine such
straight perticulers and interrogatories of his estate. Whom I would before
this time have believed, that no other woman but my self, had scarce known.
For I perceived, as soon as the sorrowful words (that Panphilus was married)
came to her ears, that casting her eyes down, there appeared in her cheeks a
red, and hot color, and that her prompt and ready words dyed presently in
her mouth, and by as much as I could perceive, with the greatest pain in the
world she stayed her tears, (ascended already up into her eyes) from
trickling down her cheeks. But I (especially desiring the same) oppressed
with sursaults of unspeakable grief, and suddenly after assailed with an
other as forcible and as great (ielosie I mean) I scarcely staid my self with
most vile and scolding terms, from reprehending her altered countenance,
and disturbed senses, as one grieved at the very heart, that she should show
toward Panphilus such manifest tokens of Love, greatly fearing thereby, that
she shad (perhaps) (as well as I) some just occasion to be discontented with
the report of these bitter news. But yet I moderated my self, and with great
pain and fretting anguish of mind (the like I think was never heard of,) I
bridled and kept still my troubled and irefull heart, under a modest and
unchanged countenance, though more desirous to complain and bewail, then to
harken any further after such heavy news, or to see such apparent and
wounding signs of corriuallitie.

But the young Gentlewoman, perhaps with that same forced courage and strength,
forcibly retayning her grief within her like my self, and passed it away, as
though it had not been she, who was before so much troubled in mind and in
face, and showing a semblaunce that she believed his words, the more she asked,
the more she found his answers contrary to her desires, and alas most
repugnaunt to mine. Whereupon, leaving the Merchant, of whom so instantlye she
had demanded news, and disguising her sadness with a vysard of feigned mirth,
we stayed longer together, (then I would) talking diversely of this and that.
But after our talk began to grow to an end, every one went away, and I my
self with a soul fraught full of anger and anguish, fretting within my self,
no otherwise then ye enraged Lion of Libia after he has discovered the Hunter
and his toils, my face burning sometimes by the way as red as fire, and
sometimes wexing suddenly pale again, sometimes with a slow pace, and
sometimes again with a hasty gate, and broad steps, more then womanly
modesty did require, sorrowfully returned to my sorrowful lodging. Where,
after that it was lawful for me being all alone, to do what I would, and
entered now into my Chamber, Passions of ielosie.
I began most bitterly to lament. And when a good while together my infinite
tears had washed away a good part of my grief, my speech being come to me
more franckly then before, with a faint and feeble voice I began to lament,
saying.

Now do thou know the occasion, so greatly desired of thee, of his unjust
stay? Now do thou know (miserable Fiammetta) why thy Panphilus does not
return to thee again? Now have thou found out that, which so seriouslye
thou did search out? What do thou then desire to seek more, miserable
wretch as thou art? what do thou demand more? Let this suffice thee.
Panphilus is no more thine. Cast away now thy flattering hope for ever seeing
him again, and thy desires to have him ever any more. Abandon thy bootlesse
tears, lay down thy fervent love, and leave of all foolish and vain
thoughts. Believe from henceforth divine presages, and credit hereafter thine
own divining mind. And now begin to know (though too late) the periuries
and deceits of young men.

Thou art come just to that miserable point, whereto other silly women
(trusting too much like thy self) have already arrived. And with these words
I rekindled my incensed rage, and reinforced my grievous lamentations. And
afterward with most fierce words I began to speak thus.

Blasphemes of those that be iel^ous.
Oh ye Gods, where are you now? where do your just eyes now behold? where is
now your due anger? wherefore does it not fall upon the contemner and scorner
of your might? O mighty Jupiter whose divine Godheadde can brook no wicked
periuries, and yet is by an execrable impeforsworne, what do thy thunderbolts,
and where dooest thou now bestow them? who has most justly now deserved
them? Wherefore are they not cast upon that most irreligious and perfidus man,
to terrify others by his perpetual fall, not to forswear thy holy name. Oh
illuminate Phoebus, where are now thy Darts, with mortal steeles, of which
fierce Python (in respect of him, who so falslye called thee to witness of his
detested treachery and deep deceits) did so ill deserve to be pricked. Deprive
him of the comfortable light of thy shyning beams, and become his pursuing
enemy, no otherwise then thou shewedst thy self to miserable Oedipus, O ye
other Gods and Goddesses whatsoever: and thou mighty love, whose celestial
power this false lover has mocked, why do you not show your force, and power
the condign wrath upon his guilty head? Why do ye not turn heaven and
earth, and all the cruel fates and the infernal sisters against this new
bridegroom, that in the world for a notable example of a detestable deceiuer,
and for a wicked violatour of your righteous laws, and despiser of your might,
he may not survive any longer to laughe and flowte you to scorn?

Many less faults then this have procured your heavy indignation not to so
just a revenge as this: Wherefore then do you delay it? you are not scarce able
to be so cruel toward him, that he might for his heinous offense be duly
punished Alas poor wretch, wherefore is it not possible, that your selves
injured also, should not feel the effects of his fraudulent dealinges, as
well as I, so that the irefull heat of his deserved punition, should be as
well kindled in your revenging breasts, as in my injured heart. Oh Gods throw
all those dangers down, or else turn some of those least plagues upon his
hateful head, of the which I did of late doubt. Kill him with any cruel kind
of death, that pleases you best, because I might in one hour feel my total
and final grief, that I should ever after have sustained for him, and so
revenge your selves and me at once.

Do not partially consent, that I alone should bewail the grief of his vile
offenses, and that he, having mocked both you and me, should merely rejoice and
desport him self with his new spouse. But incensed afterward with less
anger, and yet provoked with more fierce and sharp complaints, coming to
Panphilus, I remember that I began thus to say.

O Panphilus now I know the cause of thy stayinge there. Now are thy deceites
most manifest unto me. Now do I see what kind of love does hold thee
back, and what pity does keep thee there. Thou do now celebrate the
unhallowed Himens, and espousall rightes (nay wrongs,) and I poor soul,
enchaunted with the pitiful charms of thy fair tongue, and with thy
Crocadile tears deceived) do now consume and wast my self away with mourning
and lamenting, making with my floddes of tears, an open way to my speedy
death, which with ignominious titles of thy cruelty and homicide shall quickly
ensue.

And these pleasant years, which I desired so much to prolong shall be now
cut of by thy unjust occasion. Oh wicked man and worker of my woes, tell me
now with what heart thou have entertained thy new spouse, with intent to be
guyle her, as thou have done to me? With what eyes did thou behold her?
With those eyes that thou did entrappe me (most miserable and credulous
woman?) What faith did thou promise her, that which thou did so
solemnly swear to me to keep uncorrupted: The thing that is once bound for
ever can be bound no more.
why, how could thou do it. Do thou not remember that the thing, which
is once bound, cannot be bound any more then once: what Gods did thou
adjure? Ah, what perjured Gods? Alas miserable woman, I know not what Sirene
slights, and Cercian pleasures have so bewitched thee, that (in knowing
thyselfe to be mine) thou should tranforme thy self into so wicked a mind,
and sincke into the deceitful gulf of thy pleasing fantasies. For what fault
(alas) did I deserve to be so smallie regarded of thee? Whether is the great
love between us so suddenly flowen away.

Alas what wicked fortune does so miserably corrcte and oppress doleful
creatures? Thou have now committed thy promised fidelity to the winds, and
thy faith also of thy right hand given me to the same, ye perjured Gods, by
whose sacred Godheades, with great desire or show thereof, thou did swear
to return, and thy flattering words, wherewith thou were very well stored,
and thy fained and forced tears, with which thou did not only has thy
cheeks, but also mine, all these (I say) lightly and rudely heaped one upon an
other, thou have rashly committed to the careless winds. And now scornefully
deriding me, thou lyuest merrily with thy now mistress.

Alas who would have ever beeleeued, that such vile and bitter gall, had been
hidden in thy hunnied and flattering speeches, and such accursed disloyalty in
thy unsuspected dealinges? or would have ever imagined, that thy tears had
been with such deceiteful art sent forth, Certes not I. How needful it is
to be merry trusting lovers words.
But rather as thou did seem faithfully to speak them, and no less
sincerely to lament, so I did with assured integrity give credit to thy
words and tears.

And if peradventure thou will affirm the contrary, and say, that thy tears
were true, thy oaths simply protested, and thy faith given with a pure and
upright heart, let it be granted: But what seemly excuse will thou allege,
for not performing them so entirely, as thou did promise. Will thou say that
the entising beauty of thy new Lady is the occasion thereof. Why, this will be
but a weak reason, and a manifest note of thy inconstant mind. And shall this
be besides a sufficient satisfaction for my loss? Alas no. The sin is not
pardoned unless the thing, which is taken away, be restored, again. O most
wicked man was not the fervent love, which I bare thee sufficiently known
unto thee, and yet (woe is me therefore) do still bear thee against my will?
Alas yes. Thou did not therefore need so great skill, and such subtle wit
to deceive me.

But because thou would show thy self cunning in the highest degree, thou
did therefore use all possible art, and malice in thy filed speeches. But
boast not (Panphilus) of thy brave victory, and goodly conquest, that thou
have got, in deceiving a simple and young woman, and her especially who did put
so great trust in thee. My simplicity did merit greater sincerenesse, then
thine was. But what? I believed the reverend Gods no less inuoked by thee
then thy own self.

The which with bended knees, and bowed heart, I pray that they would make this
thy greatest part of thy eternal fame, to have deceived a young Gentlewoman,
who looued thee more then her self.

It is a great shame to deceive a young woman that looueth ^^uely.
Ah Panphilus, tell me now did I ever work any thing against thy mind, or was
I at any time so oppugna^t to the feeding of thy humors, whereby I deserved so
stily to be affro^ted, and so injuriously to be betrayed? I never committed in
sooth any other fault, against thee (if this be a fault) but when I did so
foolishlye enamour my self of thee, and did bear thee (more then was due) so
great faith and exteame love. But this offense did not deserve such accursed
pennaunce in thy cruel conceit. In one thing only (I know) I have too much
failed for doing of which, I have justly deserved ye anger of the Gods: and
this was, to receive thee (wicked man and vile monster) into my chaste and then
undefiled bed, and in suffering thy naked side to lie so near to mine. Admit
that I was not (as they themselves did well perceive and say) but thou
especially were culpable of this crime, who with thy bold subtlety and
cunning practyses, surprising me alone, and fast a sleep in the dark and
silent night (as one, who at other times was accustomed to deceive me) first
taking me softly in thy arms, my dear honor and unstained honesty being
almost violated, before I was thorowlie awaked, what could I do then (alas)
when I perceived this. Should I have cried out, and with my bootlesse clamours,
have blotted my undoubted virtue with perpetual infamy, and for thee Panphilus
whom I ever looued more then my self, procured a certain and sudden death.

I striued apace (the Gods know) and with my feminine forces (as much as I
could) resisted thy eger will, which (not able to control) being overcome,
and my self wearied, thou did enjoy thy greedy pray.

O that, that black day, which did in course bring on this damned and wicked
night, had been my last to have ended in the same my virtuous and unspotted
life, with an honest and patient death. How dearly honesty ought to be
esteemed.
Oh how many bitter greefs and what griping corsiues will assail me from
hence forth: and thou with thy Wedded wife, wilt (for thy own pastime and to
delyght her) by one and one unrip thy old looues, and make me (miserable
woman) culpable in many matters, abasing my beautyes to commend and flatter
hers, and discommending my quallities, to set hers forth the more. Both
which, and all things else in me, were with high praise wont to be
extolled of thee, above all other women's in the world.

And all those unspeakable favors, which compelled by mere pity and
extreme love, I did so gently bestow on thee) thou will, perhaps,
injuriously affirm, that they sprung of whot and burning lust. But amongst
many other things, which thou will untruly declare, remember (disloyal
Panphilus) to speak of thy own deceites, by means of which, thou may
truly swear, and say, that thou have left me in a lamentable and miserable
estate. And with these forgette not also to tell of thy received honors, and
infinite courtesies done thee, because thou may make thy ingratitude
sufficiently known to thy hearer. Ingratiude.
Nor let it pass thy mind, nor escape thy mouth, to reckon up how many
worthy, valiant, and noble young Gentlemen, have attempted many times to get
my love, and the diverse means which continually they practiced for the least
hope of it, as their glorious and daily musteringes before my windows in
goodly troops, in the day time, their ielous contentions by night, and their
divine prowess showed in feats of arms, and yet could never unwind me from
the laborinth of thy enchaunted love.

And forget not to tell that (notwithstanding all this) for a woman scarcely
known, thou have of me made a sudden and dishonorable exchange. Who (if
she be not perhaps so simple as my self) will with great suspect receive thy
dissembling kisses, and will warely defend her self from thy deceitful
dealinges, from which alas I had never the power to keep my self, and whom I
wish may by such an one to thee, as Atreus his Philomena was to him, or as the
daughters of Danaus to their new husbands, or as Clitemnestra to Agamemnon,
or (at the least) as my self (thy iniquity being the occasion thereof) have
lived with my dear husband, most unworthy of all these injuries.

And that she may bring thee to such extreme misery (which now for very
pity of my self I do woefully bewail) that it may force me against my
will, to power out aboundaunt tears for thee. All which things I pray the
Gods, if that with any pity they behold miserable creatures) may quickly
fall and light upon thee.

Although that I was greatly troubled with this intolerable grief, and not
that day only, but many more after, notwithstanding the alteration, that I
perceived in the foresaid Gentlewoman, did stinge me cruelly on the other
side, the which drew on my mind sometimes to so ruthful and ielious
thoughts, as I was not other times accustomed to imagine. And therefore said
with my self. Alas wherefore do I sorrow (Panphilus) for thy long absence,
and that thou art combined to a new wife, knowinge that if thou werte here
present, thou should be mine never the more, but an others. O most wicked
man into how many parts was thy love discected, and how fit does the
etimologie of thy name and calling agree with thy nature and condition, since
being (Panphilus) thou art a freende to all. To her with whom thou live
there, to this, who lives without thee here, to me, who lives and dies for
thee, so that to her, to this, to me, and yet perhaps to none at all. And so
false wretch by these means thou were in league with many, when I thought
though thou did defy all women besides me. And so it came to pass, that
thinking to use my own goods, I was to bold in usurping that, which belonged
to others. And who can tell (this being now known) if any of these, more
worthy of favor at the Gods hands then my self) obtesting them for the
injury received by me, and craving revenge for the harms, that I have done
them, have impetrated so much grace, to make me feel these unacquainted woes,
and undeserved greefes of mind. But whosoever she be (if any there be) let
her forgive me, because I have ignorauntly offended.

And my simple ignorance does deserve some favorable pardon. But with what
fine art did thou feign these things with what a vile conscience did thou
practice the^, by what kind of love, or of what tenderness of mind were
thou drawn to this: I have heard it more then once said, that none can love
no more but one, at one and self same time. None can love at one and self
same time more then one at once
But this rule took exception in thee.

For thou did love many or else did carry a show thereof to much by
one: Ah careless wretch, did thou give to all, or to this one, (which
could not so well, nor so craftylie conceal that, which thou did so
maliciouslye hide from me) that faith, those tears, those signs, and
promises, which thou did so prodigally bestow on me. If thou did this
thou may then securely live, and at thy liberty love all, and yet not
bound to any woman: Because that which is distinctlie given to many cannot
be properly said, given to one.

Alas how may it then otherwise, be but that he, who robs so many simple
women of their yielding hearts, must needs be despoyled of his by some woman
again. Why Narcissus was enamored of himself.
Narcissus belooued of many, and being most rigorous to all was, at the last
overtaken with the shadow of his own beauty. Atalanta most swifte, and
pitiless in her race, left her miserable loouers behind combatting between
love, life, and death, until Hippomenes with a brave and maistered deceit
over ran and over came her, she consenting also willingly to the same.

But why do I allege old examples? My self, who could never be taken of any
one, was at last (ah me therefore) unfortunately surprised by thee. Have not
thou therefore amongst so many of thy spoil, found out some brave one, who
has entangled thee? I do not think, but do assuredly believe, that thou
were once subdued by him, who may tame thee, and subject to her, who had but
little cause to be proud of her captive.

But if thou were (whatsoever she was, that with so great force did conquer
thy subtle heart) why do thou not aply thy love only to her lykinges. But
if neither to her, nor to me thou have desire to return, at least come back
again to this, who could not cover thy secret and false love, nor conceal
her own fond passions. And if thou will needs have my fates and fortune so
contrary to me (which perhaps according to thy erroneous oppinion I have
deserved) let not my offenses preiudicate the right of other women. Return
again to them at the least, and keep thy faith first perhaps promised to
them, and then to me, and to hurt me only, offend not so many, as I believe
thou have left here, and else where in vain and fond hope. And let not one
prevail more there, then many here.

She is already thine, nor cannot (although she would) but be still thine.
Leaving her therefore in safety, and with infallible assurance of thy love,
come, because those which are not able to be made thine, but with thy presence,
thou may with the same keep them also thine: After many of these vain
speeches, because they did neither smite into the ears of the Gods, nor sound
in those of that obdurate and ungrateful young man, it came to pass
sometimes, that suddenly I changed my councelles into these speeches, saying.
O miserable young woman, wherefore do thou desire, that Panphilus should come
hither again? Do thou think, with greater patience to suffer that
consuming corsiue near thee, which being so far of, is most grievous to thy
thoughts. Thou desire sond woman thy own harm. And if now thou remainest
in (peradventure) that he loves thee. So if he did return thou may be
assured, that he were come not for thy sake, but for the love of some other
woman. Let him therefore remain still there, and from hence forth being far
from thee, let him rather hold thy love in doubtful suspense, then living
here, by contrary examples and by to apparaunt demonstrations show, that he
does not love thee at all. And content thy self at the least, that thou
do not remain alone in these consuming pains, and forsake not that
comfort, that miserable and distressed women, when they have companions in
their miseries, are wont to take.

It were too hard a task for me (good Ladies) to show with what incensed
ire, with what quantity of tears, with what burning sighs, and choking sobs,
with what gryping greefes of my poor heart, and with what vehement and doleful
passions, I was almost every day wont to meditate on these thoughts, and to
think of these matters. But because every hard thing in time is mollified and
changed, Every hard thing wexeth soft in time.
it happened that having many days together led this kind of life, and not
able to sincke any further into ye Gulf of grief, then I was already fallen,
by little and little it began somewhat to relent. And the more it departed from
my affected soul, the more was my fervent love, and lukewarm hope kindled
there again, both which remaining in the place of my surceasing sorrows, made
me change my present will, and alter my first desires of having my Panphilus
again, and to deskant somewhat of his return to me again. And as even now
the despair of never enjoying him again, was most contrary to me in this, so
much the more did my repugnant desire of the contrary increase. And as kindled
flames tossed abroad, and blown about with boisterous wyndes, do grow into
greater flakes, so Love by contrary thoughts in me, was not only nourished,
but made of greater force. Wherefore I was moved with repentance of these
foresaid frantic passions, and superfluous speeches. And now considering well
of that in my mind, which unbridled anger had provoked me to say, I was as
much ashamed, as if they themselves had heard me. And therefore I gently
blamed that senseless rage, which in the first assaults of it, with so great
force and fury does take hold of our blind minds, that it does not permit
any truth (be it never so much apparaunt) to be manifest unto them. But
notwithstanding, the more it is kindled, the more in space of time it waxes
cold again, and does make that afterward clearly known, which rashly before
it condemned in words and deeds. Wherefore having recovered my right mind
again, and after my senses were better settled, I began thus to say. O most
foolish young Womanne, wherefore dooest thou thus molest thy sefe? Lovers some
times blame and sometimes excuse their beloved again.
Wherefore without any certain occasion or knowledge dooest thou consume thy
self in the heat and rage of thine own anger. Say that this is true, that
the Merchant told (which perhaps is not) and admit that he has married a
wife, is this so great a matter? An inopinate thing indeed (I must confess,)
which thou did not think would so soon fall out. And yet it is most
requisite, that young men in these causes must please and obey their Fathers
wills. For if his Father would have it so, with what face or color could he
deny it? And thou must also believe, that most of them that take wives, may
love them well, and yet esteem of others more. And, that the copious plenty,
which busibodied wives yield to their quiet Husbands, is an occasion of
sudden cloying, although they did never so much please and delight them in the
beginning. And what do thou know, how much, or whither she does content him
or not. Perhaps Panphilus took her by mere compulsion, and loving thee more
then ever he did her, it is (perhaps) no small grief unto him, and does
think the time too long and tedious in being with her. And if she please him,
thou may yet hope, that she will quickly seem unpleasant, and yrkesome
unto him.

And of his promised faith and religious oaths you can not truly, with any
reason accuse him, because coming to thee again, he shall in thy Chamber
fulfill the one and the other, and what else he has auowed to our mutual and
great joy. Have therefore recourse to the Gods with prayers, that Love, which
is able to do more then pledged oaths, or pawned faith, may move and make
him return to thee again. And besides this, why should thou have any
suspicion of his disloyalty, persuaded thereunto by the troubled mind only,
and altered countenance of the young Gentlewoman. Do not thou know, how
many young Gentlemenne love thee in vain, who if they knew thee to be
Panphilus his Mistress, could not choose but be greatly agreeued. So must thou
think it possible, and no strange thing, yt he is beloved again of many women,
who would be as sorrowful and as heavy to hear that of him which grieved thee
so much, although for diverse occasions every one might be especially
discontent. And in this manner, forging sundry fancies with my self, I came (as
it were) again to my first hope. And whereas I had before thundered forth many
blasphemous curses against his dealings, now with humble and mild petitions I
entreated him, and persuaded my self to the contrary. Thus hope recovered once
again, my tormented heart had not, for all that any force to be merry, but
there appeared rather in my countenance signs of sorrow, and I felt in my
mind a continual molestation, so that I knew not what to do, or how to
think of these perplexities. My first cares were fled away, and in the first
fury of my sudden anger, The conditions of angry lovers, and of those that
are overcome with their passions
I had in rage cast away all the stones, which were memorial testimonies of
the ouerpassed days, and had burned all the Letters I received from him,
broken all his favors, and rent in pieces all his other trash.

I took no pleasure now to gaze upon ye heaven, as she, who was uncertain and
doubtful of his return, being thoroughly persuaded of it before. The desire
that once I had to hear amorous hystories and tales, and to pass the night
away in such exercises, was quite dead, and the present time, which had
abbreuiated now the Summer nights, did not grant these things, of which
oftentimes either all or some great part I passed away without sleep,
continually spending them in pitiful plaints, and in sad cogitations. And if I
enjoyed sometimes the benefit of sweet sleep, my fancies were nevertheless
troubled and tossed about sundry dreams some of them seeming very joyful unto
me, and some full of sorrow and care. The resorting to public places, temples
and feasts, was yrkesome now unto me, and I did never, (or else very seldom,
when I could do none other) visit or desire to go to them. My face being on
ye sudden become lean and pale, caused so many maruailes, doubts, and sadness
in my house, that every one talked diversely of the same.

And looking and living in this pitiful case, and making semblaunce that I
knew of nothing, I remained the most pensive and the most sorrowful woman
that might be. My doubtful thoughts did draw on and waste most part of the
day, uncertain whither I might resolve my self to mirth or moan? But seeing
the nights fitting best my unpleasant humors, and finding my self alone in my
Chamber, after having first lamented my woes, and talked many things with my
self, stirred up and inspired as it were with better counsel, I turned my
devout prayers to Venus saying.

Fiammettas prayer to Venus
O singular beauty of the Heavens. O most pitiful Goddess, and most holy
Venus, who in likeness of thy self in the beginning of my anxieties, did
appear unto me in this Chamber. Aforde me now some comfort for my great
greefes, and by that reverend and internal love, that thou did bear fair
Adonis, mittigate my extreme pains. Behold what tribulations I suffer for
thee. Behold how many times the terrible Image of death has been presented
before mine eyes. The Image of death terrible,
Behold if my pure faith has deserved so much pain as I wrongfully sustain.
Being but young, and not knowing thy darts, I suffered my self at thy first
pleasures, and without denial to become thy subject. Thou know how much
good thou did promise me: and I cannot truly deny, but that I have enjoyed
some part thereof, but if thou will comprehend these sorrows, which thou
did give me, as part also of that good, then let Heaven and earth perrish
in one hour, and let all laws like unto these be adnihilated, and made new
again with the world. But if they seem unequal in thy sight (as I hope they
do) then let (O gracious Goddess) thy promise be fulfilled, because thy holy
mouth may not be thought, or said to have learned to dissemble (as mortal
men's do.) Send forth thy Son with his golden arrows, and with thy
firebrandes to my Panphilus, where he does now remain so far distant from
me, and inflame his heart in such sort (if peradventure for not seeing me so
long time, it is waxen too cold in my love, or too hot with the present
beauty of an other) that burning as I do, none occasion whatsoever may
withold him from coming back again. Because taking again some comfort and
ease under the heavy burden of these calamities, I may not so quickly die.

O most fair Goddess, let my words sound into thy ears, and if thou will
not set him on fire, pull out of my poor heart thy wounding Darts, because I
may (as well as he) spend my days without such great grief. With this form
of prayers (although I saw their effects but vain, yet thinking that they
were heard) I did with small hope somewhat lighten my torments, and beginning
new thoughts I said.

Oh Panphilus where art thou now. Ielious thoughts
Alas what dooest thou? has now the silent night surprised thee without sleep
and with so many tears as it has taken hold of me? Or does thy young spouse
perhaps (not heard of me at all) hold thee in her arms, or yet without any
remembrance of me, do thou sweetly sleep? Alas how may it be, that Love
can govern two Lovers with so unequal Laws, both loving so firmly, as I am
too assured yt I do, and as perhaps thou do. I know not? But if it be so,
that these thoughts do occupy thy mind, as they do overcome mine, what wicked
prysons, or merciless chains do hold thee, that in breaking of them thou
do not return to me? I know not (certes) what might stay me from going to
thee, unless my beautye, (which would without all doubt be an occasion of my
utter shame, and a great impediment to me in all places) did not only keep me
back. What business soever, and what other occasions of stay thou did there
find, should be by this ended, and now thy Father should have glutted
himself with thy daily company, who is I know, (and for whose death the Gods
know, I do continually pray) the only occasion of thy stay there. And if not
of this, at the least of robbing thee from me, he was undoubtedly the only
cause and means. But I fear me poor soul, that going about to pray for his
death thou do prolong his life, so contrary are the Gods to thy requests,
and so inexorable in every thing I crave of them. Ah let thy love (if it be
such, as it was once wont to be) conquer their opposite force, and come
again. Do not thou think, that I lie sadly all alone a great part of the
tedious nights, in the which thou did once bear me faithful company,
though accompanied (I must needs confess) with millions of martyring
thoughts. Alas how many long Winter nights lying a cold without thee in a
great and sollitarie bed, have I passed heavily away. Ah call to thy
forgetful mind, the sundry kinds of these pleasures, which in many things
we were wont to take togeger, remembering which, I am then certain, that there
is no other Woman able to divide thee from me. And this belief does make me
(as it were more surer then any other thing, that the news of the new spouse
are but false, which if they were true, yet she cannot (I think) take thee
from me, but for a time. Return therefore, and if sweet delights have no
force to draw thee back again, let the desire which thou have to deliver her
(whom above all other Women thou love, from sudden and shameful death)
persuaded thee to be reclaimed. Alas, if thou were now returned, I hardly
believe that thou could know me again, for so has exceeding sorrow and
anguish of mind extenuated, and altered my former and fair countenance. But
that, which infinite tears has taken from me, a short gladness (in seeing
thy sweet face) shall quickly restore to me again, and I shall be once again
that Fiammetta, which I was before. Ah come Panphilus come, because my heart
does still call upon thee, suffer not the flower of my young days to perrish in
dole, altogether pressed for thy delights, and vowed to thy pleasures. I know
not alas, with what modesty I could bridle my sudden and exceeding joy, if
thou werte here again, but that vnmoderatly it should be manifest to every
public person. Because I doubt (and justly) that our love, with great
wisdom and patience a long time concealed, might not be perhaps discovered
to every one. But yet were thou come to see, and to try, whither ingenious lies
could as well take place in prosperous eue^ts, as in adverse and crooked
accidents. Alas I would thou were for all this come, and if it could not be
better, then let every one that would know it, because I would think quickly
to find out a plaster for every wound.

This being said, The vain belief of Lovers
I suddenly rose up and ran to the window, as if he had understood my
words, but I perceived my self (alas) deceived in my foolish imagination, in
thinking that I heard that, which I did not, and yt he knocked at the door, as
he was sometimes wont to do. O how many times, if any of my other careful
Lovers had known this, might I have been dishonourably dealt withal, if any
malicious and crafty person had fained himself to be Panphilus in such a case.
But after that I had opened the wyndowe, and looked toward the Gate, mine
eyes made me more assured of this manifest illusion, and so was my vain joy
tossed with a true and sudden turbation of mind, not unlike to the
tempestious waves (after that ye strong Maste, (broken in pieces by blasts of
mighty winds, with crumpled sails by maine force of them is thrown into the
Sea) without resistance do cover and hide the endaungered ship. And returning
after my old wont to my accustomed tears, I did miserably begin to lament
and bewail. And forcing my self afterward to give some rest to my tormented
mind, drawing up the vapors of sweet sleep into my closed eyes, in this
manner with my self I did call upon them again. Oh quiet sleep, Sleep the
rest of all things, and the peace of all men's minds
the most pleasant rest of all mortal things, and vain peace of men's minds,
which do shun all care like an enemy, come to me, and with thy
operations drive out of my burning breast, these smothered thoughts these heavy
cares, and these ruthful and restles fancies O thou, that do restore
wearied bodies, and hardened in cruel and breathless pains to ease again,
and dooest make them fit and fresh to endure new labors, why dooest thou
not come? thou give repose to others, give also some little rest to me, whose
need is more then any others else. Forsake the eyes of merry and pleasant young
Gentlewomenne, who holding now their Lovers in their arms, and passing the
time joyfully in the exercise of the Goddess of Cypris games, do utterly
refuse and hate thee. And enter into mine, who lies here alone, forsaken, and
choked with Seas of sorrowful tears, and consumed with scalding sighs. O
thou the tamer of fierce and wicked creatures, and ye better part of man his
life, let me take some comfort by thee, and reserve thy absence, until that
time, when Panphilus with his pleasant discourses shall delight my weaned ears,
which shall be never wearied in hearing him, and my desirous eyes, with his
brave beauty in looking on him. O feeble brother of dark death, which do
equally intermeddle false things with true, enter into my sorrowful eyes. Thou
did once ouerspread Argus his hundred eyes, commanded by ielious Juno to
watch, and unwilling to sleep. Alas, come now into mine, The propertye of
sleep,
which are but two, and which do with great desire attend thy grateful
entrance. O Haven of life, rest of light and companion of night, which do
come all alike, as gracious to high Kings, as to base and poor slaves, enter
in to my sorrowful breast, and making a pleasant soiourne there, recreate a
little my daunted spyrits. Oh most sweet sleep, which do compel human
generation (fearful of death) with more patience to learn her long and
lyngering coming, possess me with the effects of thy force, and drive from
me these infectious hurtes, in the which my unquiet mind troubles it self
without any profit at all. Morpheus more pitiful unto me then any other God,
to whom I offered up my prayers, (admit that he made delay in granting me that
favor, which I besought him by my importunate orysons) after a long space
(constrained more by the force of my pitiful prayers, and vnpittied disquiet
then of his proper accord) came slowly and silently stealing into my eyes, and
so (my self not perceiving him at all) crept in by ye windows, Dreams of
haples Lovers
as yet half open, into my giddye head, which did greatly need his
presence and help: and being most wyllingly entertained there, did wholly
turn himself up and down, possessing every place of it. But sweet and
desired peace, although that sleep was come, did not yet enter into my
unsettled mind, but in lue of thoughts and tears, a thousand fearful
visions, (full of infinite terrors) did make me greatly afraid, believing
verily, that no hellishe fury remained in Pluto his Cities, but that every
one in most horrible forms and ugly shapes (me thought) did appear many
times unto me, threatening me of diverse insuinge stratagemes, and often times
with their ghastly looks breaking me out of my momentarie sleep, which
afterward (as though I had not seen them at all) I was content and glad
with in my self, that they were but fantastical and foolish shadows.

And in brief, there were but a few of these nights after the unfortunate
tidinges of this new bridegroom and his bride, in the which I took any
pleasure, or ease in my forced sleep, and never representing to my wandering
fantasies my Panphilus with such joy, as they were wont to do, many times
before. Which thing did no less beyond all measure, grieve me, then the
contrary without mean to molest me. Of all these cares at last, of al my
streaming, tears, ceaselesse sobs and sighs, and of al my multiplied greefs
but not of the occasion of them, my dear husband had no small inckling, and
knowledge, especially when he perceived, that the lively color of my face
was changed into a dead palenesse, and that my pleasant and shining eyes
(depainted round about with two blewe and purple circles) were deeply suncke
into my forhead. Seeing which things (I say) caused him many times to marvel,
how all these alterations should happen.

But perceauing at length, that I had lost my appetite to meat, and that my
woonted sleep had forsaken me, he some times asked me, what was the cause
thereof. Whom I answered, that the weakness of my stomach was in fault,
which had so extenuated and appalled my face, with that deformed leanness, my
self not knowing no other cause, why it was thus gonne from me but only that.
Alas how simply did he believe (giving entier faith to my deceitful words)
this feyned excuse and false tale, and caused infinite medicines to be made
and ministered to me, all which (to content him) I did willingly take, not
that I did think to get any profitte or ease at all by them. No help of the
body can lighten the passions of the soul.
For what lightning of the body can ease or assuage the infesting passions of
the infected soul? None I believe. But my mind being purged of them, they
might (perhaps) alleuiate and help my body much. The medicine available
for my malady was but one, which was very precious, dear, and to far of, to
make me receive my pristinate health. But after my deceived husband perceived,
that all these drugges did help me but a little, or nothing at all, he being
more tender and careful of me (then I deserved) by sundry ways and new
means endeavored to purge me of this melancholic humor, and to restore to
me my lost and former mirth, but yet he labored all in vain.

Sometimes with comfortable words he did assaie to cheer me up, saying.
There are sweet Lady, and my dearly belooued wife, (as thou know well
enough) a little beyond the pleasant hill of Falernus, in the midst of old
Cuma, Delectable places.
delectable Islands upon the Sea coasts: The situation of which, is so sweet,
pleasant, and delightsome, that the like (I think) is not under the coape of
wide heaven. They are environed with most fair hills, full of all sorts of
fruit, and covered all over with green vines, laden with goodly bunches of
white, read and purple Grapes, in the valleys of which, there are no kind of
wild beasts, that may with pleasure be hunted, but are to be found there.

Nor far distaunt from thence, there is a great plain full of game, and
fytte for all manner of flyghtes of praying and sollacing Hawks. There is the
Island Pitycufa, and Nisida, abounding in Connies, and the Sepulcher of great
Mesenus, leadinge away to the dark kingdoms of Pluto.

There are Sibilla of Cuma her Oracles, there is the Lake Auernus, and the
great Theator (a common and ancient place for many brave pastymes, and rare
spectacles. There are sweet and clear Fishpondes, the Hill Barbarus, and the
vain and prodigal labors of the wicked Emperor Nero.

All which delights both old and modern, cannot but greatly recreate men's
minds, that never saw them before. Who for their pleasure and sollace, go
many times to visit them.

And besides all this, there are most healthful and wholesome Bathes for men
and women of all degrees, and most sweet and goodly ones for Ladies of
honor, and renown. And the air being very temperate and pleasant there,
does continually aforde fit times, and good occasions and means to visit
them. There is no going thither without a merry mind, nor abiding there,
without great feasts, iollitie and pastime in such brave companies of noble
men, Ladies, Gentlewomen, and fine and stately dames of this City.

Wherefore I am determined that thy self, (not well, as thou say in thy
stomach,) and troubled worse (I fear in mind, and, as far as I can guess,
grieved with deep and melancholy passions) for recovery of each sanitie
again, shall go thither with me: Which journey shall not be without great
pleasure, assured profitte, and speedy help unto thy distempered body, and
sorrowful mind. But when I heard his words doubting least in the very midst
of our sports and abroad there, my dear Panphilus might return, and so might
not (perhaps) see him, inflicted with inward grief, I stayed a good while
pawsing, before I could answer him again.

But after seeing his resolute pleasure imagining also, that if he came, he
would seek me out wheresoever I was, I answered him I was ready at his
pleasure, to go whether, and when he would. And to be short not many days
afafter we went thither.

Oh what contrary medicines did my loouing husband excogitate, and practyse
for my helpelesse greefes? Admit that corporal langours were cured there,
yet very sildome or never did any go thither with a whole and sound mind,
that did return with the same again whether it was the mere Situation of the
place washed with the waves of the Sea (the natural place of Venus nativity,)
or the time in which it is more used (in spring tide I mean) as more fit for
those things, that made it. Neither is that (truly) to be maruailed at, which
often times appeared to me there. That the most honest Gentlewomen, and of best
account, deposing for a while their womenly modesty, and shamefastness, did
use in all their merry meetinges, and sportes, an unwonted kind of
unbridled liberty and irrequisite familiarity, and did more lasciuiously
assemble together in those places (privileged perhaps for such wanton
pastimes) then any where else.

And I was not only of this oppinion, that with less stayne to their honors,
in those places, in that company, and at those times, they might do it, but
all those almost which were accustomed to resort to those Islands the^ as full of
mirth glee and feasts, as Cypres or Cytherea were, at what time their Ladies
holidaies and divine honors were celebrated there. The greatest part of the
time there was spent in ease, and passed away sometime more in delightful
exercises, and not a few times in amorous discourses of Gentlewomen amongst
themselves, or else in company of young gentlemen and Gentlewomen altogether.

There were no viands but most delicious, and which were most deintie to be
got, Wine stirs up to Venery,
and most noble, precious, old and the purest wines, of force not only to
awake drousie Venus, but to raise up to life that vigor, which is already
mortified in any man or woman, do follow there. And how much also the virtue
of the bathes does confer to the same, they do better know, who have
sometimes proved them. There the cool, Sea banks, and most pleasant
gradens, and every other place besides, with diverse feasts, with new devised
sportes, with most fine and curious dauncinges, with all kinds of musical
instruments, and celestial melody, and with amorous songs and Madrigalles,
made, played, and sung by those lusty youths, and sweet Nymphs did resound
forth merueilous and pleasant Echoes. Who is he therefore, that can amongst
so many entising pleasures there, keep him self free from Cupide his darts,
who does without any pain or labor (if I am not deceived) rule there, as in
the most principal place of all his kindomes, and helped by so many friendly
allectiues, does with great ease against such willing and capable subjects,
use his strength and divine forces.

Into such places (most pitiful Ladies) my husband was wont to carry me) to
rid me of my amorous burning fever. Into which after that we were arrived,
love used no other means toward me, then he did toward other, but my
soul rather, (which could not be wrapped in more straight bonds of love then
it was) somewhat (though little enough) cooler, and by the long staying, that
Panphilus being from me had made, and by many tears, and sustained greefes)
was kindled into so great flames, yt I thought, I had never felt the like
before. And this did not only arise of ye foresaid occasions, but remembering
with my self that I was often times there in Panphilus his company, both
love and grefe (seeing my self without him) did not a little increase in my
wounded heart. I saw not any Hill, or Valley, that I (accompained sometimes of
many, and of him, sometimes pitching their toiles for wild and savage beasts,
sometimes leading hounds, and learning water Spaniels, and laying ginnes to
entrappe and snare the silly Fowls of the Air, sometimes bayting hooks with
Angle cord, to choke the pretty and foolish Fishes in clear rivers and
brooks, and sometimes getting some, and other sometimes missing of their
purpose) knew not and perceived, that these were evident testimonies of our
mutual pastaunce and glee. Moreover, I did not see any rock shore or Island
there, but I said.

Here was I with my Panphilus, The like Petrarck unfolded most finely in a
certain Sonnet.
this did he speak unto me here, and this did we here. Likewise there could be
nothing else seen there, which was not first an especial occasion to me, with
great efficacy to remember him, and with more fervent desire afterward to see
him either here, or else returned in any other place again. As it pleased
therefore my dear hushand, so there we began to take our delights. Sometimes
rising up betimes, and so soon as clear day appeared, and mounted upon our
swifte coursers, and gentle Palfreies, sometimes with hounds, sometimes with
hawks, and with both sometimes, rominge up and down into the nearest
places, and most abundant for vollerie and venerie, now through the shadowed
Woods, and now in the open feeldes, we went earnestly persuing our game. And
seeing many goodly chases, and brave courses there, rejoicing every ones
heart to see them, did but a little or nothing dimnishing my sorrowful
thoughts, for when I saw any fair flight, or course, therewith all I
presently said.

O that thou werte here Panphilus, to see this sport, as sometimes thou were.
But (alas) having now until that point, somewhat sustained, and with less
grief, endured the beholding, and with some small relaxation of my pains,
followed these pastimes, by recording them now, and thus in my mind (overcome
as it were with secreet grief) I left them abruptly of, and let them all do
as they lysted for me.

O how many times do I remember, that in these imaginations, my bended bow,
and arrows did fall out of my hands, in handling of which, in pitching of
nets, and letting hounds go, or following them, there was not any Nimphe
that waited one Diana her train, that did (I think) ever excel me. And it
fell out very often, that many times in my cheifest sport of hawking like a
careless woman, and thinking of other greater matters, I did let those hawks
that I carried on my fist (my self flowen as it were out of my wyts) with
sudden flight to soar away, of which pastime being in times past most
studious, Diverse pastimes bring to unhappy loouers no pleasure at all,
and as much desirous, and not half so careless to commit such faults, I
did not only now take no regard, but found no pleasure in them at all.

But after that every valley, hill and all the wide plains were thoroughly
trauersed up and down, and our company laden with store of pray, we
returned home to our pleasant Pauilions, which often times we found full of
glee, and mirth by reason of sundry and diverse feasts made in them.

Sometimes afterward sitting under the hollow dens, and entryes of high
Rocks, that did with their crooked bodies ouerhange the Sea, and with fresh
air shadowing the Sands, where tables being set and furnished with sundry
sorts of meats, in company of many Ladies and brave Gentlewomen we made
great cheer together.

From which again we were not so soon risen, but diverse sweet instruments
sounding melodious music, the young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen in most brave
order began to lead diverse stately and pleasant daunces, in which I must
needs (though against my will) make one. But because my melancholy mind was
not delyghted with them, and that the weakness of my body did also deny the
same, I daunced but a measure or two, and satte me down again. And with
drawing my self behynd all ye rest amongst the clothes of Tapistrie and
Arras that were spread abroad, and hung up I secretly said to my self.
Where art thou now my Panphilus, and so sat me down again amongst other
Gentlewomen.

And in these places at the very same time giving a willing ear to the
skillful music, and the silver soundes of of those instruments, which with
passing sweet notes entered deeply into my mind, and thinking of my Panphilus
I did at one time cover and hyde, discord, feasts and grief because listening
to the pleasant noise made, every demi dead spyrite of love did regaine
their former vigor, and force in me again: and the remembrance of those
merry times did return again to my mind, in which the heavenly harmony of
these instruments, touched with rare skill was wont in presence of my Panphilus
to work diverse commendable and sweet effects. But seeing not my Panphilus
there, with most sorrowful tears and sighs I would willinglye have
complained on them, if it had been lawful for me in that place. And besides
this the sundry Sonnets sung of many young Gentlewomen there (exceeding the
Nightingales in sweet notes) were wont in my joyful times to delight my
happy mind, of the which, if there was any (peradventure) that did please my
melancolicke humanes, I gave most attentive ear unto the same, and desiring
greatly to have it, because rehearsing and singing it afterward to my self,
I might openly and with less susspect after a modest kind of sort, learn
covertly to mourn, and secreetly to sorrow with my self, with those greefes
especially, that were contained in it.

But after that the reiterated daunces and roundes had wearied the young
Gentlewomen, every one began to place themselves amongst us, and (as it was
no rare thing there to see the amorous young Gentlemen thronging about us, did
encompasse us in manner of a crown, which thing never happened there, or any
where else, that I perceived, but it made me call to mind that fatal day,
when Panphilus, standing behind a fair knote of young Gentlemen, entrapped
me with the virtues of his divine graces: Wherefore I lifted up mine eyes many
times in vain, prying and looking between them, being fondly persuaded by my
foolish conceit, that I should in like manner have seen my Panphilus amongst
them here.

Wherefore casting mine eyes sometimes amongst them I marked how some of them
with eger looks, and pyttifull glaunces did behold the amiable obiectes of
their cheifest desires.

And my self waxed by this time very cunninge in those amorous daliaunces,
with a perplexed eye did view every one, and note every thing, they did, and
perceived well, who looued in deed, and who iested in demonstration, sometimes
commending one for the grace, that he observed in his discourse, and sometimes
an other for the pretty invention he used, and for his amorous arguments so
well couched together in his loouing stintes: saying to my self, After a
known error one wexeth wise at length
that my miserable estate and cursed condition had been much better, if I had
then played the counter fette, as now they did, reserving thereby a free soul
to my self, as with dallying and sporting they did keep to themselves.
Afterward refelling such an opinion, I said. Nay I am rather content (if in
possessing an evil there is any content at all) to have loved faithfully.

Returning therefore with mine eyes and thoughts to the wanton behavior, and
amorous actions of these young Lovers, I reaped some small comfort by their
sundry fancies. And when I did perceive that any of them did love more
fervently then the rest, I did more commend with my self such well meaning
Lovers. And having thus a long time with an earnest mind beheld them, I began
softly to say with my self. O thrice happy and fortunate are you, who are not
deprived of the sight, and sense of your understanding as I am? Alas how was I
wont heretofore (as you do now) to sollace my self with these indifferent
recreations. Long may you enjoy your felicity, since I alone must remain an
example of scorn, and a pattern of myserie to all the world. If Love at the
least (making me discontent with the thing beloved of me) shall be an
occasion to shorten my days, then shall it follow, that with a tragical
death (as Eliza did) I will eternish my everlasting fame and memory.

And having thus said, I held my peace, and went again to note those
countenaunces, gestures and actions, with which these loving Nouices, professed
Lovers, No feast de lights where the thing beloved is not seen.
and retired Soldiers did diversely study to please their dainty Ladies and
Gentlewomen. Oh how many have I eftsoons seen in like places, who (after a
great while having looked in every place about for their desired joys, and not
seeing nor finding them, deeming and reporting the feast not half so pleasant
by reason of their absence, nor so delightsome) with half angry and very sad
countenaunces have gone from thence again. Whereupon some little laughter
(although it was but feeble and weak) in the mids of all my melancholye
dumps was permitted to take place, and a little comfort also granted to them,
perceiving that I had company in my sorrows, measuring in this sort by mine
own miseryes other men's mishaps. Then thus disposed (most dear Ladies) as my
words do show, the delicate bathes, the weary hunting, and the Sea bancks
had glutted my queasie mind with all kind of pastimes, and cloyed it with
superfluities of feasts. Wherefore dismasking my old and former countenance, and
discovering the smoke of my choked sighs, and ye loss likewise of my
appetite to my meat and sleep, to my deceived Husband, and not caring to
manifest to the appointed physicians of my health, these incurable infirmities,
both he and they disparyring (as it were) with themselves of my life, we
returned again to the City. In the which, the condition of the time
preparing many and diverse feasts, it framed also with the^ diverse occasions of
my manifold greefes: wherefore it came many times to pass, yt to the
sole^nising of new espousalles I was especially also invited, as being by
parentage near of kin to them, or else by ancient familiarity, freendship,
or neighborhood, acquainted otherwise with them. To the which also my Husband
oftentimes constrained me to go, thinking by these means to prevent the
ordinary course of my melancholy fits, or else somewhat to ease my mind, so
greatly infested by them. Whereupon I was at such times urged to take again my
forsaken ornaments, and to put my neglected hair (judged of all men before to
shine like gold, but not unlike now to ashes) in the finest order I could,
wherein I was not to learn, how to do it. And remembering my self with a more
deep consideration, Appassionated young Gentlewomen care not how to adorn
themselves.
whom these fine thredds of gold, besides all other beauties were wont to
delight, with a new froward passion I did disturb again my fantastical mind,
which made me sometimes so much forgett my self, yt I remember, that (no
otherwise then called back again from a deep sleep, or raised out of an
ecstasy) taking up again the comb, that was fallen out of my hands, I
returned to my careless and unwilling office. And taking some assured counsel in
my Glass, of the setting forth of these ornaments, with which I had adorned
my self. And seeing my face to look very pale, and greatly dis-figured, and
deeply therewithal apprehending in my mind my lost and altered beauty, I
was almost in a doubt, whither it was my face or no, which I saw in the
Glass, but imagining rather that some infernal and hidious fury stood by
me, turning my self about, I did verily think and fear, that it was behind
me. But yet, after yt I was tricked up very brave, cleen contrary to the
quallitie of my mind, I went with other gentlewomen to those solemn and
sumptuous feasts, in which reigned nothing but mirth, joy, and all manner of
merry and pleasant recreations. Merry I term them in respect of others,
because as he knows, from whom nothing is hid, there was never any since
the departure of my Panphilus, which was not an occasion to me of most heavy
cheer and matter of continual sorrow. Being therefore come to the places
appointed for the honors of such marriages, although that in diverse places, and
at diverse times celebrated, yet they never saw me otherwise disposed, then to
remain still at one stay, which was, bearing a counterfette countenance of
content, and a feigned face, (as well as I could) of merrynesse, with my inward
mind altogether occupied with subjects of sorrow, deriuing the occasion of
this sadness and grief, as well from joyful and pleasant things which I saw,
as from sorrowful and unpleasant passions which I felt. But after that amongst
other Ladies and Gentlewomen I was with great honor received, my mind not
intentive upon new fashions, nor mine eyes desirous to gaze upon brave and
rich attire, wherewith al ye place did shine, but with a vain imagination
deceiving themselves, thinking (perhaps) to have seen Panphilus there (as
oftentimes in like places they had done before) they went rolling up and down,
and casting their beams in every place round about: and not seeing him, as one
now most assured of that, of which I was at ye first probably persuaded, and
like a woman confounded in mine own foolish conceit, I sat me down with ye
rest of ye Ladies, refusing the proffered courtesies, and offered honors, for
whose sake (he being now absent) they were wont to be most dear unto me.

And after that the new Bryde was come home, and the magnificent pomp used at
the Tables was ended, and every one with his passing dainty cates and heavenly
Nectar bad cheered up their frollicke minds, as diverse brave daunces,
sometimes directed by the tuned voice of some cunning and singular Musition,
and othersome led and footed by the sound of diverse sweet instruments, were
begun every place of the espousall house resounding with a general applause of
mirth and joy, my self because I would not be accounted coy and disdainful,
but civil rather in such an honorable assembly, and well manered, having gone
sometimes about with them, I began to sit me down incontinently again,
entering still into new and fantastical imaginations.

Every thing refreshes the memory of the Lover of his sorpassed and happy life
It came then to my mind, how solemn and glorious that feast was, which like
unto this was once made in honor of my nuptial joy, in the which being then
but a simple soul in frantic love matters, and free from melancholye
passions, as abounding in all joy, I saw in my self with worthy
congratulations of every one honorably saluted, and nobly entreated. And
co^paring those times with these, and seeing them beyond all proportion
altered, I was with great desire (if opportunity of time and place had
granted) provoked to weep. This swyft and sudden thought, did run also
in my mind, when I saw the young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen to rejoice equally
together, and to be merry alike, courting and devising one with another,
sometimes with many pleasant and sweet discourses, and sometimes with many
singular and pretty devises, fit for such purposes, how that once I beheld
my Panphilus in like places, and how in his company he and I all alone had
passed the time there together, and could not now do the like. And it grieved
me no less to see my self depryued of the occasion of making such kind of
joy, and enjoying such content, then I was sorrowful for the pleasure which I
lost by the not performance of the same. But from thence applying my ears to
amorous delights, songs and sundry tunes, and remembering those with my self
that were passed, I sighed, and marvelous desirous to see the end of such
tedious feasts, being malecontent in the mean time, and sorrowful with my
self, I passed them away. Notwithstanding, beholding every thing exactly, the
companies of young Gentlemen being flocked about the Gentlewomen and Ladies,
that now were set down to rest them, and retired into diverse places to gaze
on them, I did perceive well that many of them, or almost all, did sometimes
aim their beams at me, and did talk secretly amongst themselves of diverse
things touching my beauty, bravery and behavior, but not so softly, but that
by manifest hearing of my own part, or by imagination or hearesay of some
others, no small part of their speeches came to mine ears.

Some of them said one to another. Diverse opinions and speeches of men
Alas behold that young Gentlewoman, who had not her paragon for beauty in our
City, and see now what an one she is become? Dooest not thou see how
strangely she is altered, and how appalled her once fair face is grown, my
self being as ignorant of the cause, as amazed to see the effects. And having
thus said, looking on me with a most pitiful and mild eye, as they who were
greatly condolent of my greefes, going away left me full of compassion, and
more pittious toward my self, then I was wont to be. Others did enquire of
one another, amongst themselves, saying. Alas, has this Gentlewoman been
sick? And afterward did answer themselves again, saying: It seems so,
because she is wexed so lean and pale. Wherefore it is great pity,
especially thinking of her former beauty yt is now vaded quite away. But
there were some of a deeper reach then the rest, whose true surmises grieved
me very much, after many gesses and speeches amongst themselves, saying. The
palenes of this young Lady is a manifest token of an enamored heart. For what
kind of infirmity does bring a Lover to a lower estate of body, then the
unruly passions of fervent and hot affection? She is undoubtedly in love. And
if it be so: he is too cruel and inhumaine, that is the cause of such
unworthy consequences, (grief and cares I mean, that make her look with so
pale and thin cheeks.

When I had heard these nipping words that rubbed up my festered wound, I
could not with-holde my sighs, perceiving that others were more ready to
pity my miseries, then he to prevent these mishaps, who by greatest reason,
and most of all should have had compassion in his thanklesse heart. And
after I had fetched many deep sighs, with an humble and low voice I
earnestlye besoughte the Gods, that in lue of their kindness toward me, they
might have better success in their Loves. And I remember again, that the value
of my honor and honesty was not small amongst some of them, who in talking
together, did favorably seem to excuse the foresaid true surmises, saying.
The Gods forbid yt we should hatch such a thought in our minds, to say, that
fond Love should molest this wise and modest young Lady, or that blind
affection could trouble her mind at all. For she as she is endued with as
great honestye as any other, so was she (as it ever seemed) never addicted to
such vanities as many of her coequalles, and has not showed at any time so
much as a semblance of wanton boldness, but continually arguments of wise and
modest behavior. Nor amongst the diverse communications and companies of
curious and inquisite Lovers, there could be never heard any speech of her
Love, Love is a passion not supported any long time.
not once immagined amongst them, which is so furious and forcible a passion,
that it will not be any long time concealed, but will like restrained flames
violently burst out unawares.

Alas (said I then to my self) how far do they roame from the truth, not
deeming me to be in love, because, (as it is the manner of fools) I make not
my love public to the view of every one, and preach it not openly abroad to
be secretly tossed from mouth to mouth, as others (vainly glorying in theirs)
are commonly wont to do. There came also sometimes oppositely before me, many
young and noble Gentlemen, proper men of personage, of sweet and amiable
countenaunces, in every thing gracious, courageous, and courteous, and the
chiefest flowers of our City, who often times before, by many cunning means
and drifts, had to their utmost of their power attempted, and labored to
have drawn but the devotions of my eyes to the desires of their hearts. Who,
after that a certain while they had seen me, so much deformed and altered
from that I was wont to be, (not well pleased perhaps) that I did not at ye
first frame my affections to their fancies, disdayned now to look at me, and
forsook me, saying. The brave beauty of this Lady is gone and turned to a
bleacke hew, and the glory of her enflaming desires is now extincte. Wherefore
shall I hyde that from you (fair Ladies) which does not only grieve me to
rehearse, but generally all Women to hear. I say therefore, that although it
was the greatest grief in ye world to think, that my Panphilus was not
present, for whose sake my then excellent beauty was most dear unto me, yet in
such vpbraiding sort to hear that I had lost it, it was no less then present
death to my soul. And besides all these things, I remember that being
sometimes invited to such feasts, I have been drawn perforce into the
company of many pleasant Ladies, diversely discoursing amongst themselves of
amorous conceits, where with willing ear, harkning what issue infinite Lovers
have had in their hot passages, I easily perceived, that there was never any
of the^ tormented with so fervent passions, as I am: nor their love besette
with so many miseryes, nor contrived with such secrecy, as mine was. Although
that of more happy and fortunate Lovers, and of less honorable loves also the
number is greater. In this sort therefore, sometimes eying, and sometimes
gyuing ear to that which was done and spoken in these places, like a pensive
and sad Woman I passed away the weary time. After that the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, had rested themselves a pretty while, it happened that many brave
young Gentlemen rising up, and amongst other Gentlewomen invited me
oftentimes to dance, but as often in vain went from me again. Who remaining
nevertheless in their disports (with minds free from heavy thoughts, and
high intentions) some moved with desire to show perhaps their greatest
cunning, and others pricked on thereunto by spurs of hot and burning love, but
all very curious in the same, my self sitting by my self alone, with a
scornful mind and coy looks, did mark the new fashioned tricks, the
gesture, and behavior of many Gentlewomen there. And certes I blamed some in
my mind, although I greatly desired (if it might have been) to do as they
did, if my Panphilus had been present there. Who, as oftentimes as his dear
remembrance came to my doleful mind, so often was it sufficient matter, and
the only occasion of my new melancholy and fresh sorrows: and who does not
(as the Gods know) deserve the great love, which continually I have borne, and
yet do still bear him. But after that with no small grief I had a great
while beheld these daunces, which with the sudden sursaults of other grievous
thoughts seeming unpleasant and tedious unto me, urged as it were with some
other business, I rose up most willingly from my place, and to burst a sunder
my heaped and swelling sorrows (whose open and sudden discovery I greatly
feared) I got my self smoothly away into a sollitary and secret place,
Grief is reclaymed by lamentation.
and there giving full scope and leave to my flowing tears, I acquitted my
foolish eyes, for all the vanities that they had seen, with an austere and due
guerdo^, which were not distrayned from the^ without many bitter words,
kindled with burning anger, but knowing also my miserable fortune to be so
cruel toward me, I remember that sometimes I began thus to inueye against her,
saying.

The properties of Fortune.
O fearful Fortune, mortal ennemie to every happy creature, and only hope
of miserable men. Thou the sudden chaunger of kingdoms, and of mundane
things, do as a helper with one hand lift up, and as a destroyer with the
self same throw down again, as thy indiscreete judgment does direct thy
inconstant will, not content to be wholly any ones, exalting him aloft in one
thing, or else in an other, casting him utterly down, or, after that thou have
made him happy by any lent felicity, do heap upon his mind new and uncouth
cares, because that worldly men living in continual want and need, may
(according to their vain opinion, and their endless pride) implore thy help,
and adore thy deity. Yet art thou still blind and deaf, disdayning to behold
the manifest miseries, and refusing to lysten to the complaints of miserable
creatures, triumphing only with those, whom thou have unworthily (perhaps)
exalted. Who embracing thy freendly favors, and honoring thee with all their
devotions, whilst with a smiling look and flattering promise thou art
entertaining them, even on a sudden with some unexpected accident or other,
find themselves utterly thrown down by thee, and then (though to late) do
miserably perceive, how thou have changed thy serene smiles into froward
frowns.

Amongst the number of which, my self (wretched woman) may be put, who not
knowing of my own part any malice wrought against thee, and ignorant of any
heinous offense and indignity whatsoever perpetrated, by me against thee, that
might reduce thee to so severe a revenge, am most unworthily and pitifully
punished. Alas whosoever reposeth trust in great and mighty things, and like
a puissant Prince rules in high and stately palaces, applying always his
quiet and credulous mind to joyful and pleasant obiectes? Let him cast his
eyes upon me, and behold how from a high and renowned Lady of felicity, I am
now become a most low and wretched handmaide of fortune, and (which is worse
then this) how cruelly I am rejected and disdained of the only lord and
master of my subjected heart.

Ah Fortune, thou did never give any more effectual example of thy
unconstant mutabilitie, then my self, if that with a perfect and sound mind
my first and latter condition of life be well considered. I was received of thee
fickle fortune of thee (false Fortune) was I received into this world, in
abundant quantity of goods (if nobility, riches, honors, and dignity be any
part of them) which were moreover by thy bountiful and large hands (which
thou did never yet withdraw from them) daily and copiously augmented. So
that (in sooth) like a mighty Lady I did continually possess them, as
mutable things use them, and beyond the common course of women's covetous
nature, did liberally imparte them to others.

But being ignorant Fortune, that thou were also the same, which with unequal
passions and careful thoughts dyddest surcharge the mind, and not knowing,
that thou had also a great portion in love his Signories, I fell in love
as thou would, and with that young Gentleman whom thou only, and none
else, did then present before my wretched eyes, when I thought my self
farthest from any such danger. Whom after that with strong and intricate
knottes thou dyddest perceive that he was bound in the Circle of my heart, thou
have (unstable and changing often times) sought to work my harm, and wreake
thy undeserved injuries upon me, sometimes disturbing our linked minds with
vain and deceytfull imaginations, yea, and sometimes our eyes with pitiful
and public glaunces, because our love made manifest, might be hurtful unto
us.

And I am certain, that many times thou have been (even as thou would thy
self) the only cause, that many displeasaunt and discrepaunt words of my
belooued young Gentleman have come to my ears, and have with mine of like
consequence filled his again, able enough (being credited) to have engendered
hatred and discord, and to have hazarded a sudden mislike, but their issue,
and thy driftes were never aunswerable to thy determinations. Because admit,
thou do as a Goddess govern all exterior things, as it pleases these,
the virtues of thy mind are never the more subject to thy might.

That which fortune cannot bring to pass by right, she does by worng.
Our wisdom has continually gonne beyond thy wiliness in this point. But
what does it avail for all this to oppose it against thee, since thou have a
thousand slights to endomage thy enemies. And that which thou can not bring
to pass by right, thou do contend to work by wrong. Not able to sow the
seeds of malice and envy in our hearts, thou have endeavored to inculcate
into the^ things of like efecte and predicament, and besides this to repleate
the^ with the greatest grief and anguish of mind. Thy industries adnihilated
heretofore and made frustate by our provident wisdom, were strengthened again
by thy other fraudulent forces and peeuishe ways, and as a perverse enemy, as
well to him as to me, thou have practiced the means with thy ominous
accidents, by long distaunce of place to divide us both a sunder.

Alas when I would have thought that in so strange a place, so far distaunt
from this, and divided from me by such great Seas, so many high hills, wide
feeldes, valleys and playnes, and by so many great rivers, the only source
and cause of all woes should (by thy means) be sprung up, and grow still?
Truly never. But yet it is so, and for all that though he be far from me,
and I from him, I doubt not, but that in despite of thee Fortune he looueth
me, as I love him, whom above all things else in the world I do most
dearly esteem.

But to what end and effect does this love serve more, then if we were
either mere strangers, or mortal enemies. Alas nothing at all to no purpose
else. Our wits and policy therefore prevailed naught against thy
contradictions. Thou have carried away with him all my delight, all my good, and
all my joy: and with these my merry times, feasts, and pastimes, my gorgious
attire, my peerless beauty, and my pleasant life. In lue whereof thou have
left me dollours, grief and sorrow. But yet thou could never make me
relinquishe his love, no nor is thy might so great, (as great it is) to make
me by intermediate fyttes only fancy him. Alas if I, being yet but young,
had committed any thing against thy Godheade, the simplicity of my vnrypened
years, should have excused my raw defectes. But if thou would
nevertheless take some revenge upon me. Wherefore did thou not wreake it
up on thy own things.

To put ones Sickle in an others Corn.
Thou have iniustly (Fortune) put thy Sickle in an others Corn. For what have
thou to do orto entermedle thy laws with love his matters? I have most high
and strong towers, most fair and ample feeldes, many heardes of Cattle, and
great store of treasure, which with thine own hands thou have bountifully
bestowed on me, wherefore with consuming flames, devouring waters, cruel
rapine, and saccage and wherefore with unlucky death did not thou extend
thy wrath upon them? Thou have left me those things, which may no more avail
for my consolation, then Mydas his golden favor, which he received of Bacchus
for his pinchinge hunger: and have transported only him away, whom I
accounted deerer then Gold, then gemmes, then rich palaces, yea more then
infinite worlds, of wealth. Accursed therefore be those amorous arrows, which
presumed to be revenged of Phoebus, and which now sustain such base injuries
by thee.

Alas if these had never pricked thee, as now they pearce me, with better
advise (perhaps) and with more mature deliberation thou would molest thy
loouinge associates. But behold thou have wronged me, and brought me to this
extreme point, that of the richest, noblest, and highest Lady, I am become
the most miserable and unfortunate woman in all my country, and this cruel
fortune thou see to well approved in me. Every one does rejoice and spend
their times in merry feasts and glee, and only I do still lament, and waste
my youth in endless moan, which kind of life is not now begun, but has so
long endured, that me thinks thy merciless anger should have been ere this
time somewhat mittigated.

But I forgive thee all, if of pity or of curtesy thou will let me
favorably enjoy the sweet company of my Panphilus again, as thou have not
without great grief divided him from me. And if perhaps thy anger does yet
endure, let it be satiated upon the glory of my goods and possessions. Alas
cruel as thou art, let my unhappy and poor condition of life grieve thee, and
move thee to commiseration of my calamities. Thou see that I am become such
an one, that as a fable to the common people, I am carried from mouth to mouth,
whereas my several beauties with solemn fame and with sweet praises were
wont to be blazoned every where. Begin therefore gentle Fortune at the last
to be pitiful toward me, because I may with grateful and reverend titles
(my self enabled justly to praise to thee) incessantly honor thy mighty
majesty.

To whose prayers if thou do open a gracious ear, and wilt not rigorously
deny the easy effects of so reasonable a demand, then for ever do I vow
(and herewithall let the immortal Gods bear record) to erecte to thee the
lively Image of my self, preciously adorned, and gloriously set forth in
every place and Temple (dedicated and most dear to thee) in token of thy
perpetual honor, and everlasting fame. Which with never dying memorial of
thy miraculous pity subscribed with these words. (This is Fiammetta lifted
up of Fortune from the deep pit of extreme misery, to the highest top
of happy joy) as shall be published to the open sight and view of all the world.
Oh how many other things also did I often times declaime with my self, to
recount which, would be but a long and tedious labor, but all were breefelie
ended and resolved into bitter tears, by means of which, sometimes it fell
out, that being perceived of other gentlewomen, and with many comfortable
words cheered up by them, I was much against my will carried to these festival
daunces.

But who would think it possible (amorous Ladies) that such anguish and grief
should so usurp a young Gentlewomans heart, that there was nothing, There is
nothing that makes a miserable loouer glad but the same is an occasion of
greater grief again one way or an other,
which could not only not make it merry, but that the same was an occasion
of greater sorrow, which cannot but seem incredible to all, though not to me
miserable woman, that has proved it, does feel it, and does know it to be
to true.

It came to pass many times that the weather (according to the season of the
year) being very whot many other Gentlewomen and my self, because we might
the better pass it away, upon most swifte Boats, winged on every side with
flashing Oars, we plowed the gentle waves of the calm Sea, singing
sometimes, and with playing sometimes on diverse Instruments, went rowinge up
and down to seek out sollytarie and opacall Rocks, divided from the maine
shore, entering sometimes into hollow caves, at the footes of steep hills,
made by nature it self, under which, (being most fresh for wind, and cool
shadows) we did many times sit and pass away the heat of the day.

The fire of the mind does not receive any refreshing or case by exterior
things.
These were alas, especial and chief remedies offered to me, to refrigerate
the corporal heat of my body only, but they lent me not any new ease of
those never ceasing sorows, and no extinguishment at all of those flames, which
burned my soul inwardly, but did rather bereave me of such needful helps,
because the outward heat being now past (which to delicate and tender bodies
is doubtless no small annoy) by and by a more ample and fit place was made
for amorous and tedious thoughts, which are not only the preserving matter of
Venus flames, but a forcible substance augmenting the same.

Being therefore come to these places which we had sought out, and
shrowding our selves under them for our refreshing and delight, we went
(whether our minds did lead us) up and down, viewing here and there this
company and that of young gentlemen and gentlewomen, with goodly troops of
which, every little Rock, Bank and sandy shore, (which were by the shadow
of any hill defended from the scorching heat of the Sun beams) not
otherwise then a green Meddowe with fair and plenteous flowers) were almost
al covered. O what intensiue pleasure and how great a delight is this to the^,
that have their hearts free from the molesting passions of love. There might
be seen in many places fair tables set, and white and fine Diaper clothes
spread upon them, and all things so exquisitly done, and with such, ornament,
magnificence, glory and cost, that the very sight only of them had sufficient
force to provoke any, ones mind, and appetite, were it never so melancolicke
demisse or drwsie, but only mine, which was to much soked in sorrow. There
might in other places (as convenient time did require, diverse others have been
seen, how merely they went to their morning repastes, of whom our company
(as we did them again) with cheerful countenances, and courteous entreaties
was invited to their feasts and sportes.

But after that we had (as the rest also) with great feasts banquetted our
selves, and after that (the tables being taken away we had daunced certain
Neapolitane rounds, and then (after our accustomed manner) had embarked our
selves again, we went by and by rowing up and down in this creek, and
that Cliffe, wherein certain secret and by places of the Sea shore, to the
gazing eyes of every curious and wanton young Gentleman were showed delightful
and desired sightes, which was: many fair and young Gentlewomen stripped into
their Wastcoates of white Satin without sleeves, and without hose or shoes,
swimming, and sollacing themselves in the cool water. And gathering Shel-fishe
amongst these cliffes and hard rocks, in stooping down to take them up,
did often times discover their round and snow white balls of their delicate
and fruitful bodies. And in some places again there were others, who with
more subtle and with greater industry, with trammelles, dragges, flewes, and
with all manner of nets and diverse others yt with angles (to the great delight
of the beholders) and with many new devises more and pretty arts, deceived
the silly and simple fish. But what need I trouble my self to declare every
particular pastime and pleasure which was practiced and taken there? Let them
(though they go not thither at all) imagine the like, that have exercised
themselves, or have any understanding in such things, how many, and of what
force they are to recreate the mind. And if they go thither, when they shall
see nothing else, but mirth, and sollace, and all kind of youthful disportes.

There the open minds of every one are free from sorrowful passions, the
occasions of the contrary being so many and so great that there is scarce a
denial of any demand among them.

In these places I confess (because I would not seem to be deuoyde of
courtesy, and would not be troublesome to the whole company) I took a visarde
of feigned mirth upon me, though I was still sailing with contrary blastes of
tempestuous love and envious Fortune in those Seas of greefes and cares, in
which since my Panphilus his departure I have continually hulled up and down.
The grief of the mind is hardly covered with a merry countenance
Which thing how hard it is to perform, they that have tried it, may give
sufficient testimony thereof. For how could I be merry in mind, calling to
mind that I had sometimes seen Panphilus with me, and my self also without
him in like pastimes, whom I did now by distaunce of many miles know to be
divided from me, and besides this with out hope to see him any more. If I were
not troubled with any other grief, then only care and vexation of mind,
which continually held me in suspense of many things, was not this sufficient
enough to have confounded my soul alone? And can it otherwise be thought,
because for as much as the fervent desire that I had to see him, had so
bereaved me of my true knowledge and understanding, that knowing assuredly that
he was not in those places, yet (as though he was there indeed) I did argue
in my mind, and, as if this had been true, without any contradiction I
proceeded farther to see, whether I could epsy him out or no. There was not
any Boat, Galley, Ship, or Bregandine (of all which the Sea coasts there
was so full, sailing forth, some coming in, some casting and some waying
Anchor, as the azure sky in a clear and frosty night laden with Golden stars)
which I did not first with mine eyes survey, and after by my servants search
out and know whether they went, and from whence they came.

I never hard sound of any instrument although I knew him to be skillful in
only one, to the notes and tune of which I did first give an attentive ear,
and did after ask, who he was that played on it, imagining still, that he
might possibly be the same, whom I did so carefully seek after. There was not
any pleasant Rock, Cool shore, or shaddowed Cave, which I had seen, nor
any company left unvisited of me, to see if happily I might have found him.

Certes I confess, that sometimes this unfeigned and vain hope did abolish a
great part of my sighs, which sighs, (after that it was gone from me)
amassed together in the concauitie of my brain, Fiammetta her sighs turned
into tears issued out of her eyes
whose natural issue was to have been breathed forth, converted now into
bitter and brinish tears, were by the conduits of my sorrowful eyes powered
forth, and so the counterfett joys, were turned into confected and true
anguish of mind.

Our pleasant City, surpassing all other Cities in Italy, that are held
famous for noble feasts and royal shows, Naples
does not only exhillirate her Citizens with generous and solemn Nuptials,
refresh them with diverse sweet walks, Crystaline Ryuers, delightsome sea
sands, pleasant shoares, and green bancks, but copious also in many goodly
sports, as sometimes with one public and sumptuous spectacle, and now with
another princely and solemn show, does rejoice her peoples hearts, and stir
them up to exceeding and general gladness. But amongst all other pastymes, in
the which it does appear to the world most famous, in Tylt and journey (which
is almost daily exercised there) and generally in all feats of arms, it is
chiefly renowned. This therefore was wont to be an ancient custom amongst us
(after that the tempestious and stormy blasts of shaking Winter are past, A
description of Springtide
and the merry Springtide with her new flowers and green grass, has brought
again to the world her trepassed beauties, the vigor also and courage of
young lustye Lords and Gentlemenne, being by the quallitie and season of the
time rekindled, and their amorous hearts more prompt then before, to discover
their fervent desires) that at the greatest and most stately houses of noble
men, ye brauest most honorable Ladies, shyning in glittering gold, and
adorned with their most precious and rare Jewels, did with these, franckly
assent to meet joyfully together. I do not think, that to behold King Priam
his Daughters in Law, with many other of the Phrygian Ladies, when attired and
beautified in the brauest sort, they presented themselves, and came before
their Father in Law, and sovereign, to dance, to feast, and to make merry,
was either a more rich, or goodly sight, then for to see in many places of our
City, the maiesticall meetinges and brave assemblies of celestial
demigoddesses in ye same, which, after that in fair troops they came to the
puplike Theaters (every one to the utmost of her power, showing her self most
brave, and making her self most beautiful) I doubt not, but if any Gentleman
stranger, but indifferently conceited and judicious, had arrived there (having
considered their haughty cou^tenaunces, their noble behavior, and viewed their
costly apparel and rich ornaments, rather princelike then convenient for
many (nay most) Gentlewomen there, would not have judged them women of this
latter age, but would have thought, that some of those ancient and magnificent
Ladies had been returned again to the world: Saying with himself.

She for her statelines does resemble Semiramis. This other (gaying on her
sumptuous apparel and Iewelles) would rather be deemed Cleopatra. An other
(considering her courtly and lovely graces) he would have compared to fair
Hellen. And another (viewing well her gesture and sweet actions in his mind)
he would affirm not to be unlike to Queen Dido. Wherefore proceed I thus in
comparison of them all. Every one by her self would rather seem a divine
majesty, then any human matter. And how often times have I (miserable
Womanne) before I had lost my Panphilus, heard many young Gentlemen deskant
upon my self, contending to whither of these two I might have been best
compared: To the Virgin Polixena, or to Venus of Cipres.

Some of them saying, that it was too much to compare me to a Goddess, and
others alleging the contrary, said, that it was too little to resemble me to
an earthly and mortal woman. There was not amongst so great and noble company
any of them remaining long in their places, nor grave silence was kept there.

But the old and ancient Gentlemenne rising up to behold the lusty young
Gentlemenne, how lovingly some of them (taking the coy Gentlewomen by their
delicate hands to dance) did amorously discourse with them according to the
desires of their fancies, and how othersome with tuned voice, and melodious
instrument desciphered the effects of his amorous passions. And in this sort
was the hotest part of the day spent in all manner of noble sportes, and glee
that might be devised.

And after that the Sun has once begun to send forth his beams cooler then
before, A description of Autumn. Italy.
then do the honorable Princes of our Ausonian kingdom meet together in
that habit, as their high estate does require. Who (after that they have
beheld the divine graces of every Lady, and fed their greedy eyes with
every Gentlewomans beauty, and marked well their dancing, commending some
more, some less, but all generally, going away with almost all the Knights
and Gentlewomenne (as well married, as unmarried men) after a little while in
great and most brave companies, with rich and new fashioned apparel, and
clean contrary to the rest, with Masks, and other goodly shows they
return back again.

What tongue is there, be it never so famous for golden eloquence, and choice
words, or wit, never so much commended for excellent sentences and exquisite
invention, that could perfectlye or perticulerlye set down the Noble and
gorgeous Habittes, and the sundry brave suits of apparel, (as pleasant for
varietye, as wonderful for magnificence) which was seen there?

Not Homer certes, so worthy amongst the Grecians, nor Virgill so highly
praised of the Latins, which with stately verse did write ye infinite
adventures, and accidents, which both those noble men, and which the
Grecians, Troyans and Italians, had of yore in their open wars, private
peace, and stratagemes. I will therefore endeavor to make a brief relation of
them to those Women, who did openly never see the^ performed, which
description shall not so vainly be inserted in this my pitiful discourse, and
not to so small purpose, but that the wiser sort of Women, may comprehend my
sorrow beyond any woman's past or present, to be without pause or relaxation
still continuated: since that with the admirable dignity of so many princely
shows and rare sights, it could not by any merrye mean (were it never so
little time) be broaken from that cleaving and cloying grief. I say therefore
(to come to the matter) that our noble Princes and valiant Lords, were mounted
upon Coursers of Naples, and Spanish Gennets, so passing swift in running,
that any other beast whatsoever, yea the very winds themselves (although they
made never so much speed) they would in course (invisible almost) leave
behind.

Whose youth and lusty years, comely favor, and approved magnanimity and
courage, made them passing gracious, and renowned in every Gentlewomans eye and
mouth. They came prauncing forward on their barded horses, with caparisons of
purple and crymosin Satin, curiously embrodered with fine threddes of shyning
Gold, and with clothe of the same artificially wouen by Indian hands, with
strange works of diverse colors, intermingled, filled and bordered with Gold,
pearl, and precious stones. Whose silken soft, and lovely locks, hanging
down upon their stately shoulders, were tied round about with a fine
billement of Gold, besette with Diamonds, Rubyes, and Emeraulds, and with many
other gemmes, or else with a little Garlande of green Laurel, A description of
Tylt and giuoco di can much used of the Spaniards.
having on his left hand a light shield, and bearing a strong Lance in his
right hand, at sound of Tuscane trumpets making furious and courageous
encounters either one against another, or many against many, after the Morysco
guise, but generally in the most brave and admirable sort, before the noble
Ladies and Gentlewomen begin their heroycall sports. Commending him most,
Italians and Mores.
who with ye point of his Lance carried nearest to the ground, and closely
couched under his shield, without any disordered motion of his body in the
saddle, did show himself in running on his fiery steed.

To such kind of feasts and pleasant shows, as I was ever wont (poor and
miserable Fiammetta) I was also invited, and certes not without great grief
unto me, because beholding these pastimes, it came to my mind, that I had
whilome seen my Panphilus sitting amongst our more ancient and reverend old
Gentlemenne, to behold such like spectacles: whose sufficiency (according to
the admirable gravity of his youth) deserved so high a place. And sometimes
standing (as young Pretextatus amongst the noble and grave Senators of Rome)
with the foresaid robed Knights, to judge of these pastimes, amongst whom,
one for his authority was like unto Sceuola, another for his gravity to either
of the Catos, and some of so pleasant and delectable cou^tenaunces, that they
seemed Pompey the great, or Marcus Marcellus, and others of so stern and
martial looks, that they seemed lively to represent the worthy Affricane
Scipio or Quintus Cyncinnatus: all the which equally, and eagerly beholding the
running of every one, and calling to mind their young and lusty passed years,
pricked to the quick with glory of honor and courage, and muttering and
fretting to themselves, sometimes commended one, and sometimes another,
Panphilus affirming all their sayings, and allowing their censures. Of whom
sometimes I heard, how he compared (talking of this and that, now with one,
and now with another) and how he resembled all those valiant Champions that
did run, to the young and old renowned Heroes of the other worlds.

O how dear a thing was this to my ears, as well for him that spoke it, as
for them that attentively gave ear unto it, and also for my Citizens sake, of
whom it was spoken. So much truly, that the remembrance thereof, is yet very
grateful unto me. Of our young Princes, whose heroycall countenaunces bewraid
their hardy and courageous minds, he was wont to say, that one was like to
Arcadius of Parthenope, of whom it is reported, and firmly believed, that none
came better appointed, and more resolute to the destruction of Thebes, at what
time his mother sent him thither, being but a young youth. The next after he
confessed to be like sweet Ascanius, of whom Virgill (a singular record of so
brave a youth) wrote so many golden verses. Comparing the third to Deiphobus,
and the fourth for beautye to Ganimedes.

Then coming to those of ryper age, that followed these, he gave them no less
perfect and pleasant semblaunces. For there might you see one coming along,
with a ruddy color and a red beard, and with soft, bushy, and crysped locks
falling down upon his strong and slightly shoulders, and (no otherwise then
Hercules was wont to have) bound up with a fine little garland of green
leaves, apparrailed with costly garments of silk, occupying no more room,
then the just quantity of his body, garnished with sundry brave works
wrought with skillful hand, with a Mantle upon his right shoulder, fastened
together with a button of Gold, and with a fair and rich shield covering his
left side, and carrying in his right hand a light spear, as was most fit
for that sport, whom he said, that he was in gesture, and countenance, like to
great Hector. After whom an other coming along, adorned in like Habits, and
with as stout a countenance as the other, having cast up the golden fringed
border of his Mantle upon his shoulder, with his left hand cunningly
managing his unruly horse, he judged an other Achilles. Another following him,
shaking his threatninge Lance, and carrying his targe behind his back, having
his soft hair tied together with a fine veil (given him perhaps of his Lady)
he called Protesilaus. After whom another following with a fine Hatte on his
head, of a brown color in his face, and with a long bearde, and of a fierce
countenance, he called Pyrrhus.

And another after him with a more mild look, and with a sweet and smooth
face, and more gorgiously adorned then the rest, he thought to resemble Parris
of Troy, or king Menelaus.

What need I prolong my narration about this royal rank any further. In
brief, as they passed in that long and goodly company, he showed who was like
to Agamemnon, who to Ajax, who to Ulysses, who to Diomedes, or to any other
Grecian, Troyan, or Latin, worthy of eternal praise and memory. Neither did
he give them these names merely of his own pleasure, but conferring and
confirming his arguments with acceptable reasons about the manner of these
paragoned Lords, did show that they were duly and woorthely compared unto
them. Wherefore the hearing of these reasons was no less pleasant, then to see
the very same persons by whom and for whom he spoke and framed them.

The gallant troop therefore of Horsemen, after ryding three or four times
with easy pace up and down, to show themselves to the lookers on,
courageously began their fierce courses, and standing almost right up in
their styrrops, bravely couched under their Targets, with the points of their
Lances carried so even as they seemed to shave the ground, The order of those
that run a Tylt
swifter then the swiftest wind their horses carried them away. And the air
resounding with the shootes of the people that stood by, and the iangling of
the silver and golden belles, that every horse was almost trapped withal, the
noise also of Trumpets, and of other martial instruments, the flapping and
smyting of ye caparisons against the horses sides, and of their bases in the
air, and the flyttering of their Mantles also against the wind, did prick on
their fiery steedes, to a more hot, brauer, swifter, and more courageous
course.

And thus every one with great delight and joy, continually beholding them,
and marking the order of their courses, they made themselves to be woorthely
admyred, and not unworthily praised in the secret hearts, and open mouths of
all the spectators.

How many Ladies and Gentlewomen (some one seeing her Husband amongst these
here, another her Lover, and some their near Kinsmen) did I see many time
clappe their hands, and most highly rejoice at the dexterity and courage of
their friends? Not a few truly. And not only these, but strangers also:
my self only excepted: who (although I saw my Husband there, and other of
my kindred with him) with sorrowful cheer did behold him, not seeing my
Panphilus there. And when I remembered how far off he was from me.

Alas good Ladies, is not this a marvelous thing, that that which I see,
should be the material cause and substance of my sorrow? And that nothing may
make me merry. Alas what soul is there in hell, never so much tormented with
endless pain, that seeing these things, could not but feel some respective
joy? Why, not one at all (I think.) For they ravished with the sweetness of
Orpheus his harp, forgotte for a time their cruel pains and torments. But I,
set in the mids of a thousand torments, and placed amongst a thousand joys,
and continually exercised in many and sundry kinds of sports, cannot (I say)
bury my grief in momentary oblivion, nor assuage and lighten it, be it never
so little a while. And put case that sometimes at those feasts, and such like,
I have with an unfeigned and true countenance hid it, and have given respect
to my tedious sighs, in the night afterward, when I did find my self all
alone, I did prolong, not pardon any part of my tears, but did power out
rather so many of them, as the day before I had spared, and kept in scalding
sighs. And these things inducing me to more pensive and percing thoughts,
and especially in considering their vanities, more apt and possible to hurt,
then to help, as by proof of them I do manifestly know, the feast being
finished, and my self going from it, and not without cause complaining and
waxing angrye against these vain shadows, and all other worldly shows, I
began thus to say.

Oh how happy is that innocent man, who dwells in the sollitarie village,
enjoying only the open air? The praise of a solitary life,
Who employing his sole care and labor to invent subtle ginnes for simple
beasts, and to make nets for unwary birds, with grief of mind can never
be wounded. And if perhaps he suffer any great wearines in his body in
casting him self down upon the green grass, incontinently he refreshes him
self again, changing his place sometimes in the fresh river banks, and
sometimes under the cool shadow of some great wood, where the chirping
birds with their pretty songs, and the soft trembling of the green leaves,
(shaken by some pleasant, and little wind, as staying themselves to harken to
their silver notes) lull him swetlie a sleep.

Ah Fortune had thou granted me such a life, (to whom thy desired gifts
are but a cloging care, and detriment,) it had been better for me. Alas how my
high Palaces, sumptuous beds, treasure, and great family any thing
profitable, and how little pleasant unto me, when my mind surcharged with over
much anxyetie, and wandering in unknown countries after Panphilus, cannot have
any small rest, nor when any comfortable respiration may be granted to my
wearied and breathless soul? Oh how delightful and gracious a thing is it,
to press the green and sweet banks of the swift running rivers, with a quiet
and free mind, and upon the naked turfes to fetch a sound and unbroken sleep,
which the glyding river with murmuringe bubles and pleasant noise, without
fear does nourishe and maintain. These eases are without any grudge,
granted to the poor inhabitaunt of the country village freely to enjoy, and
are a great deal more to be desired then those toys, which with many
flattering words I have often times fawned on, and have with such dilligent and
daily care embraced, (as the fine dames of the Cities use commonly to do,)
and which at last with the careless coil of the tumultuous family or
negligentlie broken. His hunger (if at any time perhaps it prick him (with
geathering of Apples in the faithful and secure woods, he does drive away,
and many young and tender herbs, which the wide Champaignes, or little hills
of their own free will bring forth, are also a most sauorie and sweet
sustenaunce unto him. Oh in how many running brooks, Christalyne fountains,
and sweet waters, lying down all along may he quench his thyrste, and with
the hollow of his hand in clear and streming rivers? Ah wicked and pinching
care of worldlings, for whose sustentation nature does require but little, and
does prepare light things. We think with the infinite number and sundry
sorts of delicate vyandes to fill the gourmandise of our bodies, and to please
our queasie appetites, not perceiving at all, that in them there lie hidden the
very causes, by means of which the ordinate humors and good blood are ever
more corrupted, then nourished.

And how many times in cups of gold and silver, richly garnished with gemmes
and precious stones, in steed of sweet and delicious wines, do we daily
hear that cold and swelling poysonnes are tasted, and do howerly see, that
in hot wines and compound drinckes, licentious, unbridled and wicked lust is
drunk and thrown headlong down. Whereupon, commonly they fall by means of
these into a superfluous security: which by wicked words, or damned deeds,
does bring to them a miserable life, or does pay them home with a most
contemptible death, seeing moreover by daily proof, that these kinds of
unkind beuerages make the drinkers bodies in a great deal worser, Poetical
conceits,
and more miserable case then stark mad. The Satires Faunes, Driades,
Naiades, and the Nymphs keep him faithful and simple company.

He does not know what Venus does mean, nor cannot skyll of her byformed
Son: And if he does perhaps know her, he perceives her beauty to be
but base, and little amyable. Now (alas) would it had pleased the Gods, that
I had likewise never known it, and that keeping simple and plain company,) I
had lived a rusticall and rude life to my self all alone.

Then should these incurable greefs have been far from me which I now
sustain, and my soul, The pomp of the world like to the wind,
together with my most holy name, should not have cared, nor desired to see
these worldly pompes and feasts, like to the flying winds and vanishing smoke
in the air, nor (if it had seen them) should have been so full of anguishe
and sorrow as now it is. The desire of high and princely towers, of rich and
sumptuous houses, of great families, and costly traynes, of fair and delicate
beds, of shining clothes of gold and silver, of pampered, proud, and
swifte horses, and of a thousand other superfluities of nature, does never
disturb his temperate mind, nor clogges his heart with buderning and burning
care to keep them. Not accompanied, nor sought after of wicked men, he does
without fear live in quiet and sequestered places, and without seeking
doubtful rest in high and stately lodginges, does demand only the open
air and light for his repose.

And of the manner of his life the wide firmament is a manifest and continual
witness. Oh how much is this life now a days unknown, and like an enemy
escheued and contemned of every one, whereas it should be rather as the dearest
and sweetest content followed and embraced of all. Truly I suppose that the
first age of the world lived in this sort, which peese-meale brought forth
Gods and men.

There is no life (alas) more free, nor more deuoyde of vice, or better then
this: the which our first fathers enjoyed, and with which also he is this day
of all others best contented, who abandoning the opulent and vicious Cities,
inhabyteth the private and peaceable woods. O what a world had it been, if
Jupiter had never driven Saturn a way, and if the Golden age had continued
still under a chaste law, because we might all live like to our primitive
parents of the first world.

Alas, whosoever he be, that does this day observe the first and ancient
riches, even he (I say) is not inflamed with the blind rage of hapless and
helpless Venus as I am, nor he, who has resolved with him self to dwell in
Woods, hills, or dales, was ever subject to any careful kingdom, not to the
wavering wind of the unconstant populare, not to the suffrages, oppinions, and
censures of the trothlesse common people, not the infectious plagues and
envious pestilences, nor to the frail favor also of blind and inconsiderate
Fortune, in all which my self (having put to much trust, love, and study, in
the midst of the waters like Tantalus) do dye with endless thirste. To
little things great rest is aforded, although it be a hard matter without
the greater to be able to sustain ye life. But he, whose thoughts are
turmoyled about great things, or does desire to ouerrule great matters: the
same man (I say) does evermore follow the vain honors of vading riches.
What they are that follow riches.
And high styles, and magnificent titles, please for the most part false and
deceytfull men. But he is free from fear, and doubt, and can not decerne of
the malicious man, swelling in rancour and cancred envy, nor of the backbiter
by his venomous tongue and viperous teeth, who dwells in the simple and
solitary woods and feelds. And is also ignorant of the sundry hatreds, and
incurable wounds of love, and the abominable sins of the people committed
one against an other in the Cities, and lives without fear of breach of
laws, and clear of suspicion to be guilty of ryottes, and mutinies, and
beats not his branes to forge feigned tales and to use deceitful words,
which are notes to entrappe men of pure faith and plain dealing. But the
other, while he is alofte, is never without fear, or perrill, suspecting
continually the very same sword, that he wears by his side. Oh how good a
thing is it to resist naked, and lying upon the ground, securely to take his
sustenaunce? Never or seldom at all, did capital or great sins enter into
little cotages. At the first there was no care taken for gold, nor the holy
stone, nor God Terminus, was set a bound or Arbyter to deuyde feeldes from
feeldes, and seueralles from commons. With tall and stout ships they plowed
not the unknown waves of the Sea, but every one did know his proper coasts
and banks, Nor with strong piles of timber, with deep ditches, high walls,
strong bulwarks, and rampires did they fortify and compass about the sides
of their Cities, nor cruel weapons and rustie armor were scoured up and made
ready to fight, or borne of warriers in those days, neither had they any
Enginnes, or deuellishe devises which (with great pity) might ruinate stony
walls, and break Iron gates in pieces.

And if there was perhaps amongst them any little war, with naked breast,
and unarmed arm they fought it out, in which the broken bows of trees, and
stones served them for their weapons and pellets. Nor the fine and light spear
of horn was armed with Iron, nor the stabbing dagger, trenching sword, and
murdering rapyer were gyrt to any of their backs, or side: Nor the bushy
crest, and proud plume of colloured wauing feathers did adorn the glittering
helmettes, and that which in their happy days was the happyest thing of all,
was, that Cupid was not yet borne, whereby the chaste mynds (violated afterward
with his poisoned darts, when he first began to fly with swifte wings
through the world) might live securely and free from all tormenting thoughts.
Ah I would the Gods had given me to such a world, the people whereof content
with a little, and fearing nothing, followed only their wild and and sauadge
appetites.

And that of so many great goods, and felicities, that they enjoyed, I had not
possessed any other, then not be molested with so grievous love, nor to feel
so many smootheringe sighs, as now I am, and do now feel, then should I have
lived a more happy life then now I do in this present age, full of so many
poisoned pleasures, unprofitable orna^ents and shadowed pomp. Alas that the
wicked fury of gain, and avarice, Mutations of ages.
that headlong and enraged wrath, and that those minds, which of themselves
kindled loathsome lust, and voilated these first bonds, so holy and easy to
be kept (given of nature her self to her people,) And that the thyrst after
rule (a bloody Sun) came now in place, and that the weaker became a pray to
the greater and more mighty? Sardanapalus came now in, and first of all made
Venus (though of Semiramis it was made more dissolute) more deintie and
delicate, and then to Bacchus and Ceres prescribed new orders, and customs
never known of them before.

Then came in also warlike Mars, who found out new sleights, and a thousand
mortal ways to death. And then all the world began to be contaminated with
black goare, and the Sea to be tainted with read rivers of blood running
into it, Then most wicked crimes entered into every one his house, and in
brief there was no great or detestable sin perpetrated without some former and
foul example before. Brother killed brother, the father the son, and the
son the father. The husband lay slain for the fault, and many times by the
proper fact of his wife. And wicked mothers destroyed daily their own fruit.
The infinite cruelty, and endless envy of stepdames, which continually,
secreetelie or openly they bear to their husbands children, I need not to
allege, because their effects, are manyfestlie seen at all times and
places.

Riches therefore brought Pride, Avarice, Lechery, Wrath, Gluttony, Envy
and Slothe, and every other vice with them. Love the worker of all mischefe,
And with these aforesaid Fiendes the Captain and worker of all mischief and
the only artificer of all sins entered also (dissolute and unbridled Love I
mean,) by whose continual sieges laid to miserable minds, infinite Cities
ruinated and burnte, do yet smoke, and for whom all nations have made
mortal vprores, and do yet broyle in the lamentable and endless wars.

And the overwhelmed and drowned kingdoms by his cruel tyranny, do yet
oppress many people. And concealing all his other execrable effects, let
those only, which he uses toward me, suffice for a manifest example of
his merciless mischief and cruelty, which do so sharply enuironne me on
every side, that I cannot turn my mind to no other thing, but only to the
grievous obiectes of his immanitie.

Discoursing thus with my self, sometimes I thought that, that which I did,
was wicked in the sight of the just Gods, and yt my pains were annoyous to me
without compare.

But many greater offenses committed in times past, and daily practiced by
others, made me (in respect of them) seem but innocent, and the consideration
of those pains, which others endured, (although I believed that none passed
the like grief as I did, seeing my self not to be the first, nor one alone)
did so work in my understanding, that I became the stronger to suffer my own:
The which I pray the Gods determine with hasty death, or else drive them away
with Panphilus his speedy return. Thus therefore pitiless Fortune, for this
kind of life, or rather for a worse then this, has left me but small
comfort as you) pitiful Ladies) have heard.

Which consolation understand it not such, that it was able to make me forget
my sorrow (as others commonly are wont to do,) for this did but only stop
my tears (ready to fall out of mine eyes) and did sometimes indeed dissolve
my sighs into nothing, without afording me nevertheless any other benefit.
Prosecuting therefore the pitiful history of my painful life, I say, that
heretofore with many other young gentlewomen, adorned with singular beauty, I
was never wont to omit any great feast in our City, or which was celebrated
in our divine temples: the which solemnities, feasts and triumphs without my
presence, the company did account but little worth, and thought them less
beautified. Which times appointed for the^ my waiting women duly knowing to be
at hand, were very diligent to solicit and put me in mind of them: and others
of my maids also, observing their old order in laying forth, and making ready
my noble garments, sometimes said to me: with what gown may it please you (good
Madam) to adorn your self. For the solemnity of such a feast is to be
celebrated this day in the temple, which does attend your coming for the
only beutifying and accomplishment of it. To whom (alas) I remember yt
sometimes with an angry voice and austere countenance (turning furiously to
the^ again, A troubled mind cares not to go brave,
no otherwise then a tusky Bear does to a company of barking Curres) I
answered saying. Pack hence the vylest part of my house, and carry away these
ornaments from my sight. A simple and poor garment is most fit to cover
this miserable body, nor let not me here you any more talk of temples,
feasts, and sollemnities, if you esteem of my favor at all. Oh how many
times did I yet perceive well enough, that those temples were visited of many
noble personages, who came thither, rather to se me, the^ for any great
devotion, and not espying me there, grieved as it were in mind, went from
thence again, generally affirming that the feast was dishonored, and not to
be called a feast without my presence there. But although that I refrayned thus
from them, yet sometimes entreated, and constrained I must needs in company
of other noble Ladies my acquaintance and companions go to them: with whom
(but simply apparelled in my ordinary holiday attire) unwillingly (the Gods
know) I went thither.

And there did not look for any sollemne and high place (as I was wont to do)
but refusing the honors offered unto me, I humbly betook my self to the
lowest places amongst other gentlewomen of meaner calling and degree. And there
harkening to many speeches sometimes of one, and sometimes of an other, which
secret grief (as well as I could) I passed away the time that I stayed there.
How many times (alas) did I here them, that sat nearest unto me talk of me,
saying.

Oh what a great marvel is it to see this young Gentlewoman (the singular
ornament of our City) become now of late of so demisse an abject a mind?
What divine spirit has inspired her? Where are her noble robles? Where are her
high and stately countenaunces? And whether are her rare and surpassing
beauties fled? To which words (if lawfully I might) I would have answered.
All these things with many other more, (deerer to me then these,) Panphilus (ah
my injurious Panphilus) has carried away with him. And compassed about there
with many Gentlewomen, and importunatlie urged with many questions, with a
feigned cheer and countenance, of necessity I must satisfy them all. But one of
the Gentlewomen amongst the rest, with these stinging words began to move
me, saying. Thou make me (Lady Fiammetta) and many other Gentlewomenne
more, never cease to marvel at thee, not knowing what sudden occasion has
moved thee to forsake thy rich attire, thy Jewels, gemmes, and ornaments, and
many other things, so commendable and beseeming thy young years and which
(we know) were once most precious unto thee. Being yet but in the flourishing
prime of thy age, thou should not put on this grave apparel, and these
uncouth Habits.

Do thou think, that letting thy youthful time pass, thou can call it
back again? Use thy years therefore according to their properties and
nature. Years ought to be used according to their quality,
This homly and honest clothing which thou have put on, may perhaps hereafter
serve thy turn better. And as thou see here every one of us (elder and
grauer then thy self) with curious and skillful hand adorned, and with
honorable and costly garments attyred, with such ought thou (Fiammetta) to
be set forth and beautified. To her, and to many other also, expectinge what I
would say, with an humble and low voice I made this answer.

Gentlewoman, and you the rest of my friends, we come to these holy places,
either to please ye Gods, or else to please men. If to please the Gods, the
mind adorned with virtue is sufficient, and it does not import, whether the
body be clothed with silk or sackcloth. If to please men, for as much as most
of them are blinded with false opinions, and by the exterior parts and
lineaments of the body conjecture the inward disposition of the mind, I
confess yt the apparel used sometimes of me, and now of you is very
requisite. But this is now my least care, my chiefest desire consisting rather
in a sorrowful repentance of my passed vanities, which being most willing to
amend in the sight of Gods and men, by this apparel, and in other things
else, I make my self (as much as I can) contemptible to the world, and
displeasaunt to your nice eyes.

At which words the tears of inward truth violentlye expressed forth,
bathed my sorrowful visage, and therefore thus I began to say softly to my
self. O ye pitiful Gods, the serchers of all our hearts, let not these
untrue words (uttered by my lying tongue) be imputed to me for a sin, which,
(not of a malicious will, and flat hypocrisy to deceive the^, but of mere
necessity to dissemble my grief, and cover the cause of it from them) I was
constrained to use as a holy and godly excuse. But let them rather be
meritorious unto me, since that in concealing from thy people an evil and
scandalous example, in lue thereof by these feigned words, I gave them a good
president and pattern of better life. It is a great grief (you know) for me
to tell a lie, and with what an impatient and troubled mind I tell this forced
and forged tale, you know to well, and I can do no more.

Oh how many times (fair Ladies) for this iniquity, have I received
pitiful praises of the Gentlewomen sytting about me, saying: that of a most
vain woman, I was become a most devout conuertite. How hard a thing is it to
judge of another holiness
Truly I understood many times, that there were some of them of this opinion,
that I was so highly in the Gods favor, that there was nothing that I could
crave at their hands, but I might easily obtain the same of them. And therefore
I was many times visited of holy women, for a zealous and devout one also,
they being (poor souls) as much deceived in that, which with my sorrowful
and subtle countenance I did hide in my mind, as ignorant how discrepant my
fervent desires and my feigned devotions were. O deceitful world, how much can
counterfeit looks prevail in thee more, then just and well meaning minds, if
that their works be hidden an secret.

My self a greater sinner then any other, and sorrowful for my dishonest
loves, yet couching them under the Veil of honest words, am reputed holy:
But the just Gods know, that (if I could without danger of my honor and
good name) with true reports I would make satisfaction to every one, whom in
fictions, speeches and gesture I have deluded, and would not hide the
headspringe from whence such streams of tears did flow, nor the course from
whence the effects of my sorrowful life are derived: But (alas) it may not be.

When I had answered her, who first demanded of me the cause of my
melancholy, an other sitting next unto me, seeing my tears almost dried up
said. Gracious Fiammetta, whether is the shyning beauty of thy fair face
gone, and how is the lively color of thy rosy cheeks extinct? what is the
cause of thy pale and wanne visage? Thy twinkling eyes like to morning
stars, are dimmed now with blew and purple circles that compass them about,
and are so deeply suncke into thy brows, that scarcely they may be discerned
in thy forhead. Thy golden tresses, once so bravely adorned with curious hand
heretofore, why now tied up diffusedlie, and scarcely are they seen? Tell
me Fiammetta. Beauty is but a frail thing
For thou make me too marvel without end. And her I answered in few
words thus. It is a manifest thing, that human beauty is but a vading
flower, and that every day and hour it waxes less and less, which (if it
has any trust in it self, at length does perceive it self to be but
nothing, and to lie miserably prostrate. He that gave it me, (submitming me the
occasion of expelling it again) with a dull pace has taken it from me, The
uppermost attire of Italian and Spanish Ladies, and Gentlewomenne is a fine
black mantle of silk or Say upon their other garments which covers the^
from the hand to the feet.
possibly (perhaps) to restore to me again, whenever it shall please him.
And this being said, not able to withold my tears, shrouded under my mantle
I shed them aboundauntly. And with these words I lamented with my self saying.

O beautye the uncertain Jewel of mortal men, and the gift of a little
time, which does both come and go sooner away, then the pleasant Meddowes
depainted with many flowers in the sweetest seasonnes of gladsome Springtide,
and the verdure of high Trees apparrelled with sundry leaves, which are no
sooner for a little time adorned with the virtue of Aries, but immediately with
the hot exhalations and vapors of parching Summer, are consumed and taken
away again. And if perhaps the burning season does leave any of them
untouched, Autumn does not spare to leave them naked and bare. Even so thou
beauty, most often in the midst of thy prime and best years, injured by
many accidents, do perrish, which if perhaps they be pardoned thee in youth,
the riper age (though with all thy force and means thou dooest oppose to
preserve the same) does take it quite away. Oh beauty, thou art but a flying
and inconstant thing, and not unlike to the waters, which never return more to
their first fountains: and no hope in changing and brittle goods, and
therefore less affiance should be put.

Alas, how did I once love thee, and how dear werte thou to me (miserable
woman) and with what care werte thou nourished and kept of me? But now (and
deservedly) I curse thee beauty. For thou art the first occasion of my lost
liberty, the first entrapper of my dear Panphilus his soul, enjoying him,
haste not sufficient force to keep him still. And he being now gone, haste
not the power or virtue to call him back again. If thou had not been, I
had not seemed pleasant to Panphilus his lovely eyes, and not having pleased
them, he should have never sought to allure mine, and not entysing and
pleasing them, as he did, I should not now sustain these pains of mind.
Thou art therefore the only occasion and beginning of all my hurt. Oh thrice
happy are those Women, who without thee, suffer the rebukefull checks of rude
and rusticall behavior, and are contemned for their foul and ill favored
hew, because they (observing Dianas chaste and holy laws, and seldom
troubled with pricking motions, as well deuoide of peevish passions of their
own parts, as not fearing the forcible assaults of fond suitors) may live
with their souls free from the cruel signorie and tyranny of love. But thou,
the only occasion of receiving continual molestation by them, who never leave
to gaze on us, dooest (by their importunacie) of force entice us to break
that, which we should most dearly observe O happy Spurina, and worthy of
eternal memory, (who knowing thy effects and unlawful affections) in the
flower of her youth, with cruel hand did kill thee in her breaste, rather
choosing to be of the wyser beloved for her virtuous act, then of wanton
youths for her concupiscible beauty. Alas if I had done so, all these
griefs, all these thoughts, and these tears should have never thus molested
my tender heart, and my now corrupted life should have yet remained within the
compass of her first laudable bonds.

Heereat the Gentlewomen pulled me again, and blamed my superfluous tears,
saying. Oh Fiammetta, None must despair in Gods mercy,
what myserie is this? do thou despair of the mercy of ye Gods? Do not
thou believe that they do pitifully forgive ye greatest offenses without
shedding of so many tears? This course which thou do take in hand, is
rather the way to seek thy own death, then pardon for thy faults. Rise up
therefore and wipe thy face, and behold the sacrifice which the sacred
Ministers of Jupiter are carrying to offer up to his mighty Godhead.

At these words (stopping my tears) I lifted up my head, which now I did
not cast round about (as I was wont to do) assuredly knowing, that my
Panphilus was not there, nor to see if any other, or of whom I was beheld, or
if the standers by gazed on my apparraile, and ornaments, as they were wont to
do, but rather wholly intent, and relying upon the favor of the supernal
Gods, to power forth some pitiful prayers for my Panphilus, and for his happy
return, calling upon them with these words, I said. O most gracious
governors of high Heaven, The end of one sorrow is the beginning of another.
and general Judges of all the world, set now some stint and measure to my
grievous pains, and prescribe an end to all my sorrows. You see I have not
one merry hour, nor quiet day, since that in continued course the end of one
sorrow is the beginning of another. But that sometimes I accounted my self
happy, not knowing my miseries to ensue. First with vain labor to beautify
my young and vnripened years, more then was requisite (sufficiently adorned of
nature it self) having vnweetingly offended you, for pennaunce and
satis-faction of such faults, ye have of indissoluble and cruel love, which
does at this very instant torment me, made me a miserable thrall and captive.
And you have afterward filled my mind (not accustomed to troubles and
sorrows) by means of yt, with new avoiding cares. And lastly have divided
him from me, whom I love more then my self: whereupon infinite perrilles are
grown one after another in prejudice of my poor life. But if the prayers of
miserable creatures, sometimes penetrate your divine ears, then pitifully
incline them to my petitions, and not regarding the multitude of the faults,
which I have committed against you, let that little good (if ever I did any) be
bountifully considered of you, and in guerdon of it, favorably give ear to my
zealous orysons, and grant my earnest requests, which, (as they are but easy
for you to perform, so may you (by not denying me ye same) give me most great
content, and make me happy again. Alas how well do I know, that this prayer
in the sight of you, (most just Judges) is very unjust: but it must (needs)
proceed from your justice, that of two evils, to wish the less and to prevent
the greater, it is the safest and best counsel. To you therefore, from whom
nothing is hid, it is manifest, that my beloved Panphilus, by no means can
slide out of my mind, nor those passed accidents out of my memory, the
remembrance of whom, and of which, does many times with gryping greefes bring
me to such a point, that (to be rid of them) I have eftsoons desired a
thousand manners, and sought as many means of death, all which, that little
hope, which remains for me in you, has forciblye taken out of my hands. If
it be therefore a lesser evil to keep my Lover still, as I have done, then to
destroy my wicked soul, with my massacred body (as I believe it is) let him
return, and be restored to me again. Let living sinners be deerer to you, and
possible to return to you again, then the dead dying in their sin, and
without hope of redemption. And vouchsafe rather to leese a part of your
creature, then the whole, which you have created. And if this be too great, and
too much to be granted, let that which is the last end of all miseries, before
that with deliberate and voluntarye counsel (constrained with greater greefes)
I take it of my self) be granted to me. Let my words come before your sight,
whom, Miserable creatures require death
if they can not move to pity, then you other Gods dwelling in the celestial
regions, if there be any of you there, who sometimes living here beneath,
have had trial of that amorous fire which I feel, receive them, and offer
them up to those higher powers, who will not take them uttered by my unworthy
mouth, so that obtaining grace for me, I may first live here joyfully, and
after the end of my days enjoy part of your glorious fruition, and before
time, to show sinners, that it is a good and convenient thing for one sinner to
pardon and help another.

These words being spoken, I did put sweet odours and incense upon their
Aulters, with many other rich offerings, to make them more willing and ready to
bend down their ears to my prayers, and for Panphilus his help. Which
ceremonies, after they were ended, departing from thence, with the rest of the
Gentlewomenne. I returned to my sorrowful lodging again.

Finis.
The fifth Book of Master John Boccace his Fiammetta.
AS by those things which I have spoken of before, you may presume, even so
(pitiful Ladies) has my loathed life been assaulted in the cruel battles
of Love, and yet is tossed every day upon more sharp and mortal pykes of
iealosie. The which certes (considering my future estate) might justly be
thought a pleasant peace and pastime. My self also being stricken with fear
(when it came to my remembrance) with fear (I say) of that, to the which
point it did last of all transport me, and which does yet almost possess
me, to make the more delay to come to it, because I was ashamed of my own
fury, and because in writing of it, me thought I reentred into it again,
deducting therefore my discourse in length, with a slow hand I have written
and published those things unto you, which were less grievous unto me: but
being not able now to avoid these, nor to fly to them any more, the order
of my narration drawing me on, I will (though fearfully) come unto it. But
thou most holy pity dwelling in the tender breasts of delicate young
Gentlewomen, govern thy raynes in the^ with a stronger hand, then thou haste
done hitherto, because in discurring this my doleful narration, and giving
thee a great deal more scope then is precisely convenient, I might not
(perhaps) turn thee into the contrary of that, which I do seek and hope for,
and so might take as it were from the laps of these Ladies and Gentlewomen that
read thee, their flowing and falling tears. The Sun was now turned another
time into that part of the Heavens, where the presumptuous Son was set on
fire, when so rashly he guided his fathers Chariott, after that Panphilus
departed from me. And I miserable woman had now by long use learned to suffer
accustomed greefes, and I lamented more temperately with my self, then I was
wont to do, and believed, that there were no more woes left for me to
sustain, then those, which I had all ready endured, when envious Fortune, not
content with my passed myseries, did suddenly show me, that she had yet more
bitter poison to infect my afflicted soul withal.

It came therefore to pass that one of my dearest servants returned from
Panphilus his country hither, When Fortune does begin to show her self
contrary, then she goes encresing ever her spite.
who was of all that knew him, but especially of me, most joyfully
welcomed. And telling of his own adventures and trauayles, and of those
things, which he had seen interminglyng better with worse, bechaunce he
remembered him self at last to speak of Panphilus, of whose praises dilating
very much, (remembering the courtesies that he had sometimes done him) made me
most contented, and plied my willing ears to his tale. And shamefast reason
and womanly modesty did scarce bridle my eger will from running to embrace
him, and to enquire of my Panphilus with an extraordinary kind of
appassionate affection, as at that very present I felt. But yet staying my
self, and he being also demanded of many concerning his estate, and having
answered every one well, I only asked him with a merry countenance, how he
employed him self and spent his time there, and if his mind was happily bent
to return again? To which demaundes he answered thus. To what purpose (my
good Lady) should Panphilus come again? There is not a fayrer Gentlewoman in
all his country, (which above all other Cities does bring forth Goddesses
for beauty,) then she, who most entirely loves him, and by as much as I could
understood of others, and (as I verily believe,) is dearly belooued of him
again, otherwise I would account him but a fool, whereas heretofore I ever
judged him to be wise.

My heart was so turned at these words, as Oenones was sitting on the high hills
of Ida, and seeing her lover come sailing homewards with the new Grecian Lady in
the Troyan Ship: which thing I cold scarce hyde in my countenance, although
very hardly I did the same: but yet with a dissembled and fainte laughter I
said unto him. Certes thou say even true: For we could not imagine in this
country any one gentlewoman so different from his deintie lyking, whom we
might deem worthy of his love, so high was his inestimable virtue, so rare
were his laudable quallities, and so many his good graces. But if he has found
out any one there, he does both well and wisely in staying with her there.
But tell me, with what mind does he brook his new wife? he then answered, he
has no wife? for she that came to his house (as I told not long since) true
it is, that she came, not to him, but to his father. Whilst he spoke these
bitter words, Jealousy is of all others the worst.
which so earnestly I lystened unto, passing out of one anguishe into an other
anxyetie a great deal worse, pricked moreover with sudden anger and grief of
mind, my sorrowful heart began so to pante and beat, as the swifte wings
of Progne, when she begins to take her strongest flight, do beat against
the white Sea banks and shoares.

And my fearful spyrits began no otherwise to tremble through out every part
of my body, then the superficial and uppermost part of ye Sea, with the gentle
breathing of some calm wind descended upon it, is commonly wont to do, or the
bendynge reeds scarcely shaken of some pleasant and soft air, and I began
to feel my strength by little and little decaie, wherefore getting my self
(as conveniently as I could) from thence, I went into my Chamber, because none
might perceive the violent issue of my sudden grief. And being now gonne
out of the presence of every one, I came no sooner into it, but I began to
power out of mine eyes such plenty of tears, as a swelling vain or fountain
of water, bursting and gushinge out, when it ouerfloweth the valleys, and I
could scarce hold my troubled tongue from loud exclamations, and my hoarce
voice from pittious lamentations, but casting my self (nay rather falling)
flat upon my miserable bed (the wicked witness of our looues) I would
have cried out aloude, and said.

O Panphilus why have thou betrayed me? But my words" were broken in the very
midst, so suddenly were the vygour and forces taken from my tongue, and
from the other parts of my body. And there I lay a good while, as one dead
(nay verelie thought to be dead indeed) carefully watched, and giving no
small wonder to every one there, by this sudden trance, (no skill of
Physic, or secrecy of any art being able to make my erringe life return
to her former place again.)

But after that my sorrowful soul, which in lamenting had many times
embraced the miserable spyrittes of my body to depart, did yet stay it self
in the same, and recalling her forces again together, which were almost
dissolved and fled away, my eyes received again their light, which for a
good space they had lost.

And lifting up my head, I saw many Gentlewomen and others about me, who
with their loouing and pitiful services bewayling my sudden swoune, had with
most precious and sweet waters all bedewed me, and with many other
instruments in their hands, and which, I did see lying before me, laboring
to regaine my lost life. Whereupon, I maruailed no less at those waters,
preserues, and glasses that were about me, then at the great lamentations of
all the gentlewomen there.

And after that I had recovered my speech again, I demanded what was the
the cause of their assembly about me, and of all those things there. And one
of them answered, and said.

These things (good Lady) were brought hither (and for no other purpose we
also came) to reduce thy fugitive soul into thy cold body again. Then after
a great sighe, and faynte spirit, I said alas good Gentlewoman, with what
freendly office of pity, (working rather a most cruel function, and
repugnant to my will) do you think to have don me a thankful piece of
service, whereas you have procured my great pain, and done me the worst
turn, as ever I had, in forcible retayning my soul in me still, which was so
well disposed, and so willing to have left the most miserable body that
lives. Alas it is enough, that there was never any thing, which with like
affection was desired of me, or of any body else, which you have denied me. My
soul al ready dissolved from these pains and tribulations, had been
nearly arrived to the wished haven of my desires, but you have hindered it her
passage.

After these words, the Gentlewoman recomforted me with diverse good speeches,
but they spent both words and wind in vain. I feigned notwithstanding to be
of better cheer, Miserable men desire to be alone to burst out their inward
grief in lamentation.
and alleged new occasions of this miserable accident, because, when they
were gone, I might have full scope to burst out my great and swelling grief.
And after that some of them were departed, and the rest had taken their leave,
my self bginning to show a merry countenance, and to dissemble my sorrow, I
remained accompanied only there with my old Nurce, and with my faithful
maid, who had all this time been privy to my long playntes, and a procurer of
my momentarie pleasure, both which dutifully ministered comfortable salues to my
unfeigned sores, possible enough to have healed them, had they not been mortal.
But I, thinking only of those unlucky tydinges which I had heard, to one of
you, Gentlewomen (to which I know not) I suddenly became an open enemy, and I
began to reuolue great and grievous matters in my perplexed mind. And that
amassed lump of grief, which could not altogether contain it self in my
breast, with a furious and despitefull voice I did in this sort partly drive
out of me, saying.

O wicked and false young man. O enemy to pity, and pitiless wretch? O
Panphilus the worst of all those, who with out deserte does breath this common
air? Disloyal Panphilus, who having blotted me (most miserable woman) out of
thy ungrateful memory do now dwell and delight thy self with thy new
deceitful dame. Accursed be that hapless day, when first I saw thee, and
that fatal hour, and very instant, in which thou did please my simple
eyes. Accursed be that Goddess, which appearing to me, with her allured
promyses flattered my waueringe mind, and disturbed the same (though resisting
with all her forces to the contrary) from the bounds of my right judgment,
to like of thee (wicked wretch,) and (ungrateful monster,) to love thee.

Certes I think, that she was not Venus, but rather some infernal fury in
her shape, striking me with madness and filling me with frantic fury, as
once she did miserable Atamas. O most cruel youth, whom amongst many other
most noble, beautiful, and valiant young Gentlemen, I did fondly choose out for
the best, where are now thy serious prayers, which for safety of thy life
with tears thou did often times offer unto me, affirming that both that,
and thy death wear in my hands. Where are now thy pitiful looks, and
those two never dried eyes, with the which (malicious man) thou dyddest never
cease at thy pleasure to shed forth tears in my presence? Where is now the
great love, that so bravely thou did feign to show me? Where are thy
sweet words, and thy sower greefes, thy infinite sorrows, thy pains and
travels proffered and employed in my service. Are all these slyd out of thy
memory, or have thou framed them a new to entrap thy deceived and new loouer?

Accursed be that pity of mine, which took that life out of death his mouth,
that (thereby making her self the^ a joyful woman) should have rather sent it
to the darkesome den of death Now those eyes which whilome in my presence,
lamented, laugh before their new Mistress, and that mutable heart has turned
all his sweet words and fair offers to her only, and now have thou
hereticallie dedicated all thy services to her devotions.

Alas Panphilus, where are now those profaned and perjured Godheades? Where is
thy promised faith? Where are thy infinite tears, of the which (miserable
woman) I drunk no small quantity? believing them to be tempered then with as
great pity and love, as now they are turned but to drops of treacherous
deceit. All those placed in the bosom of thy new Mistress thou have with
thy self taken from me. Alas how great a corsiue was it to my poor heart, when
once before I heard, that by Iunos law thou werte combined to an other woman.
But perceiving that the couenauntes, in which thou did bind thy self to
me, were not to be preferred before them, (although I did painefullie bear
it,) yet overcome with just grefe, I did with less anguish of mind endure it.
It is a great grief, that that which does justly belong to one should
unjustly be an others,
But now understanding that by the self same laws, by ye which thou were bound
to me, thou have (in casting me of) given thy self to an other, it is an
intolerable pain for me to sustain. But now I know the cause of thy stay,
and openly perceive my own simplicity, with the which I ever believed that thou
would, (if possibly,) have once returned again. Alas Panphilus did
thou stand in need of so many guilefull arts, and cunninge fetches to delude
me? Why did thou so often, so solemnlie, and so highly swear unto me,
with continual asseueration of thy most entyre and sincere faith, if thou
did think thus to deceive me? Wherefore did not thou go away without
taking thy leave, or without making any promise of thy return? I did (as thou
know) most fervently love thee, and thou were not then so much entangled
in my love, and werte not so straightly my prisoner, but at thy will (as to my
no small pain, I now perceive thou have done,) and without wasting such
infinite and vain tears, thou might have departed from me. If thou had
done thus, then I should without doubt have suddenly dispaired of thy return,
manifestly knowing thy deceit, and then with death ere this time, or ese with
just oblivion my torments should have been concluded. But because they might
be the more prolonged in giving me a little vain hope, thou have continuated
and nourished them still. But I poor soul, never deserved this at thy wicked
hands. Alas how sweet were thy salt tears to me? but now (knowing their
vile effects,) I feel the^ to be most bitter to my dying mind. Alas if love
did so strongly rule in thee, as he does feercelie use his might and signorie
in me, tell me then, if it was not sufficient for thee to be once captiuated,
but that ye second time thou must fall into his forces again? But what do I
talk of love? For thou did never love, but have rather delighted to jest
with young gentlewomen, and have made it but a sport to deceive wc thy subtilty
their simplicity. If thou had loved (as I did believe thou did) thou
should yet have been mine own. And whose could thou have been, yt had
looued thee more then I? Alas what dame so ever thou be that have taken him
from me, though thou art my mortal and only enemy, yet feeling ye great
grief, which his falsehood has engendered in my breast, I must needs take
pity on thee: He that deceives once deceives ever.
Wherefore I warn thee to take heed of his deceites, because he that has once
deceived, has for ever after lost his honesty and shame, and does make it no
matter of conscience to deceive every one from thence forth.

Alas wicked youth, how many orisons and sacrifices, have I offered up to the
Gods for thy safety, and now thou must fly from me, to go to an other. O
Gods my prayers (I perceive) are heard, but to the profitte of an other
woman.

I have the sorrow, and an other suckes the sweet, I reap but dole and pain
for my long devotions, and an other delight and pleasure of him who in right
and equity should be mine.

Ah wicked man, was not my beauty correspondent to thy bravery, my dooinges to
thy desires, and my nobility to thy Gentilitie? Alas a great deal more? Were
my riches ever denied thee, or did I take any of thine? Ah never. Did I ever in
deed or demonstration love any man besides thy self? And (unless thy new
love make thee degresse to far from the truth (thou wylt confess and say
no. What fault of mine therefore, what just occasion of thy part, what
greater beauty, or more fervent love have taken thee from me, and given thee
to an other? Truly none. And all the Gods be my records herein, that I never
wrought any thing against thee, but that (beyond all terms of reason) I looued
thee. And if this has deserved such treachery as thou haste done, and workest
against me, let thy own self (disloyal as thou art) be judge. O ye Gods
the just reuengers of our unjust defectes, I call upon you for cruel and due
vengeance. I neither wish, nor go about to practice his death, who by his
vile escape from me would have wrought mine. Nor do pray yt any other
punishment may befall to his deserved guilt, but, if he love his new choice, as
I love him, that (in casting him of, and giving her self to an other, as he
has taken him self from me) she would leave him in that kind of life, that
(cruel as he is) he causes me to lead. And so with unseemly motions of my
body, turning me now this way, now that way, like a frantic woman I tumbled
and tossed up and down in my bed.

All that day was not spent in other speeches, then in such of like tennour,
and in most bitter waylings. But the night worser then the day, and more apt
for all kind of sorrow (ye melancholy darkness being more conformable too
meditating miseries, then the light) being now stolen on, it came to pass,
that being in deed with my dear husband, and lying a great while silent to
my self, and broad waking, yet warring within my self with hosts of
dollorous thoughts, amongst which, calling to memory all my passed times,
as well my pleasant occurrences as sorrowful passages, and especially that I
had lost my Panphilus by means of a new love, my grief grew in such
abundance, that unable to keep it any longer within, with great lamentations
and doleful complaints, I burst it out, albeit concealing the amorous occasion
of it. And my sighs were so forcible, and my sobbes so profounde, that my
Husband (being now a goodwhile drowned in deep sleep) by the great noise
and molestation of them was awaked: and turning himself to me, who was spunged
in mine own tears, and taking me lovingly in his arms, with mild and
pitiful words, he said thus unto me.

O my sweet soul, The love of a good husband.
what sinister cause of so doleful a plaint in the quiet night, when thou
should take thy rest, does trouble thee thus? What thing is it, that this
long time has made thee so melancholicke and sad? Nothing must be concealed
from me, that may any way displease, or discontent thee. Is there any thing,
that thy heart does desire, and that my wit and substance may compass for
thee, or that in demanding of it, thou might possibly have? Art not thou my
only comfort, my joy, and my good? And do not thou know that I love thee
above all worldly things, yea more then my self. Whereof not by show, nor
one proof, but by daily experience thou may live assured. Wherefore dooest
thou therefore lament in such sort? Wherefore do thou afflict thy self in
such extreme grief? Do I seem unpleasant, ill favored, or nothing gracious
in thine eyes, or am I unworthy of thy beauty, or is not my birth, parentage,
and estate agreeable to thy nobility? or do thou think me culpable in any
thing that I may amend. Speak, and tell me franckly, and discover to me ye
vale of thy desires. There shall be nothing left undone, or unattempted for thy
sake if it may possible be. Thou do (altered in visage and apparel, and
extremely sorrowful in all thy actions) minister a doleful occasion and matter
to me of an unquiet life. And though I have before seen thee continually sad
and pensive, yet this day more then at any time. I thought of late, that some
bodily infirmity was the cause of thy palenes, but now I do manifestly
know, yt it is grief of mind, yt has brought thee to this pitiful case,
wherein I see thee, wherefore I pray thee close to me the root, from whence all
thy sorrows do grow? Whom with a feminine and sudden wit, taking counsel of
fained tales and lies, which before had served me for a shyft, I answered
thus.

O sweet Husband, deerer to me then all the world besides, I lack not any
thing, wherein thy forward help may avail me, and acknowledge thee (without
all doubt) more worthy then my self, but the death of my dear Brother, of
which thou art not ignorant, has long before, and now since brought me to this
extreme sorrow. Which, as often as I think of it, with bitter wailings does
rent my heart in pieces. Sometimes the manner of ones death is more lamented
then the death it self
And certes I bewail not so much his cruel death, a thing naturally incident
to us all, but the strange and pitiful manner of the same: which thou did
know to be violent, unfortunate, and bloody. And besides this, the strange
things, and ugly sights, that appeared to me after his death, do kill my
fearful soul to think of. I can never so little shut up mine eyeliddes, or
give any slender sleep to my sorrowful eyes, but immediately all pale,
trembling, naked, and full of goare, showing me his cruel wounds, he
appears quaking before me. And even then, when thou did perceive me to
weep and lament, he came into the Chamber, standing and staring before me, as
I was a sleep, in likeness of a horrible and fainting ghost, fearfully
quaking with a breathles and panting breast, in such sort, that he could scarce
utter one word, but at the last with extreme pain, said. O my dear Sister
wipe that blotte of ignominy from me, which with an appalled and troubled
face, looking ever for very grief and shame thereof on the ground, does make
my sorrowful ghost wander, with great disgrace and scorn, amongst other
haples sprites. And although it was some comfort for me to see him, yet
overcome with terror, which I had of his dreadful habit, and moved with just
compassion of his words, with starting on a sudden, I awaked out of my feeble
sleep, and thus my tears (the which thou dooest now go about to comfort)
fulfilling the duty of my conceived pity, did at hand follow. And so (as
the Gods know) if weapons were fit for Women, I would ere this have revenged
his miserable death, and with a fierce countenance and courageous heart, sent
the greedy gutton of his innocent blood amongst other damned souls. But alas
I can do no more then I am able. Therefore (dear Husband) not without great
occasion I am thus miserably tormented in mind. O with how many pitiful
words did he then comfort me, applying a salve to the wound which was healed
long enough before, and how did he endeavor to mollify and diminishe my
plaints with those true reasons, which for feigned tales he so carefully made.

But after he thought, that he had comforted me up a little, he fell a sleep
again, and then I, (thinking of the pitiful and tender love he bare me) with
more cruel grief secretly bewayling my unjust requital of the same, Prayers
of a desperate Lover.
began again my interrupted and peece-meale lamentations, saying. O most
cruel Dens inhabited of savage and wild beasts. O hell, the eternal
prison ordained for wicked company. O any other exile whatsoever deeper then
these, open and swallowe me up, and with just pains torment my sinful and
deserved soul, and plague me of all others the vilest Woman. O mighty
Jupiter, most justly angry with me, tumble down thy thunder, and with swift
hand throw down thy crushing bolts upon my hateful head. O holy Juno, whose
most holy laws (thrice wicked Woman) I have infringed, take vengeance of me
now. O ye fierce Caspian Serpents, tear in pieces this polluted body of mine.
O ye hellish Ravens, infernal Harpyes and cruel beasts, devour and entombe
me in your greedy mawes. And you most fierce and unruly Iades, the cruel
quarterers of Hippolitus his innocent members, rende me impious and trothlesse
Womanne in a thousand pieces. And thou most pitiful Husband, sheathe thy
revenging sword with due anger in my culpable breast, and with plentious
effusion of my blood, send forth my wicked soul, that has so unworthily
deceived thee. Use no remorse of pity, love, nor moderate mercy toward me,
since that I have preferred the love of a stranger, and of a perfidus Impe,
before the bound faith and due reverence which I owe to thy holy and unspotted
bed. O the worste of all womankinde, most worthy of great punishment for
this, and for many other things, what fury appeared before thy chaste eyes
that day, when Panphilus first pleased thee? Where did thou abandon that
love, and pyety, which was due to the holy Laws of matrimony? Whether did
thou banish thy reverend chastity (the chiefest honor and ornament of women)
when for the blind lyking of disloyal Panphilus, thou didste forsake the love
of thy loving Husband? Where is now the pity that thy beloved youth does
show thee? And where are the comforts that he should now give thee in thy
perplexed miseries? Lulled in the lap of another Woman, he merrily passes
away the weary time, and and does not care for thee, and yet in truth he
has reason therefore. Wherefore it must worthily fall so to thee, as to all
others, which embrace licentious lust, neglecting lawful love. Thy injured
Husband, who with rygour should punish thee, with great pity goes about to
comfort thee, and he that should perform this just function, cares not (alas)
wrongfully to torment thee. What, is not he as fair as Panphilus? And are not
his virtues, courage, nobility, and especially his love and constancy, and
all other good parts in him, are they not far above all and every thing yt
Panphilus has in him worthy of praise and commendation? Ah there is no doubt
thereof. Wherefore then did thou forsake him for an other? What blindness,
rashness, sin, and what iniquity has brought thee to this? Alas poor soul
I know not.

Things freely possessed are esteemed of slightly
Only that those things which are franckly and freely possessed, are wont to
be accounted of no price and value, although they be (indeed) very dear and
precious. And that those, which hardly, and with hazard are gotten, (be they
never so vile) are esteemed and embraced as most singular and sweet things.

The daily fruition and glutting company of my Husband, which should by great
reason have been most dear unto me, surfeited my queisie mind, and so
(satiating my chaungable appetite) deceived me: and I (mighty enough (perhaps)
to have resisted) do now miserably lament and bewail that which I have left
undone: nay rather I was without (perhaps) strong enough, if I would my self,
if I had called to mind those signs, and thought of that, which the Gods in
sleeping and waking, had showen me the night and day before my haples fall.
But now not able to retire (though I would) but constrained by my appointed
stars, to combat still in these amorous conflicts, I knew too well what the
Serpent was, which stunge me under my left side, and swelling with my sucked
blood went away. And likewise I see the events, that the prognosticating
flower of my crown, falling from my adorned head, does manifestly declare.
But alas this vain wisdom and aftersight comes all too late.

The Gods (perhaps) to purge themselves of some conceived wrath against me, and
repenting that they had showed me any signs, took the knowledge of their
future effects from me, not being able to restore them to me again, as Apollo
from his beloved Cassandra, to whom, after he had granted abooue of a
Prophetical spyrite, did take the virtue and effect of it, in that she was not
believed of any, whenever she diuined. Whereupon placed in the mydst of all
miseries, not without great reason and just cause, I bewail and consume my
life in woe.

And sorrowing thus with my self, and turning and tumbling my self in my
weary bed almost all the night, I passed it away, without giving mine eyes
leave once to shut up their liddes. But if any sleep entered into my
sorrowful breast, it did so faintly remain there, that the least stir or
noise was able enough to have broken it. And yet although it was but weak, it
did not tarry with me, without representing many fierce battayles in his kind
of accustomary demonstrations to my affrighted mind. And this did not happen
to me that night only, of which I spoke of alone, but many times before, and I
was almost continually molested after with the same accidents. Wherefore my
soul both waking and sleeping, has and does feel equal and like
tempestious storms. The complaints which I powered forth in the night time,
took not away their turn and place in the day, but, as excused now for
sorrowing again by reason of those lies, which I told my Husband, from that
night forward I did many times lament, and did begin to be extremely sad,
and sorrowful in open and public company. But the day being come on, my
trusty Nurce (from whom the least part of my greefes was not hid, because she
was the first that knew the amorous signs in my face, and had also imagined
diverse future accidents in the same) coming to visit me, when it was told
her that Panphilus had chosen another Woman, Oh how many times simple husbands
are deceived
and doubting of me, and most careful for my neglected weal, my Husband no
sooner went out of the Chamber, but she immediately entered in. And seeing me
(through the great anguish, and grief of the last night) to lie as one half
dead, with diverse comfortable words she went about to assuage my furious
evils, and fervent passions, and taking me in her arms, with trembling hands
she wyped my face all blubbered with tears, with speaking these words.

Young Lady, and my dearest Mistress, thy sorrows make me beyond all measure
sorrowful, and would afflicte me more, had not I warned thee of the^ before.
But thou (more wylfull then wise) forsaking my willing counsels and precepts,
have headlong followed thy flattering conceits and pleasures, wherefore with
sorrowful cheer, I see thee unhappily overcome with these greefes, which must
needs be due chastisements for thy rash and unreasonable follyes. But because
every one may always as long as life does last, (so that he have a willing
mind to perform it) decline from his wicked ways, and turn again into the
right, I shall think it the dearest thing to me, that may happen, if from
henceforth thou would shake of the dark cloud from the eyes of thy
understanding, obscured by this wicked tyrant, and restore to them again the
clear light of truth. What he is, the momentary delights, and the prolonged
greefes, which thou have passed, and do endure for him may make thee
apparauntlie know. Thou have like a young and simple Woman, Youth follows will
more then reason
following more thy unbridled will, then rayned reason, fondly loved, and in
loving, to that end which is not only expected, but commonly also desired in
such passions, have attained, and yet (as it is said) haste known it to be
but a more short then sweet delight. And what thing else can there be desired
or looked for hereafter, then that which thou haste already had. And yet if
happily it might come to pass, that Panphilus should return again into thine
arms, thou should feel no other pleasure then thou were wont to do.
Fervent and hot desires are wont to be in new things, in the which many times
putting a certain kind of hope of a false imaginatiue pleasure, and thinking
that, that good is hydden in them, (which perhaps is not) with great grief
do make appassionate Lovers endure their force and heat. Whereas those
things, which are already known, are wont to be more temperatly, and but
meanly liked of, and not half so much in request. But ouerruled too much with
the greedines of thy disordinate appetite, and disposing of thy self
altogether to new and fantastical opinions, thou dooest perform the
contrary. Wise and discrete folks, perceiving themselves to be in troublesome
places, and full of doubtful dangers, are wont to retire bake again, rather
content and wylling to leese their labor and travail, which they have endured
until that place, to the which they have arrived, and deeming it better to
return safely again, then going on forward, to endanger themselves, and to
get no other end of their rash attempt then sudden death. Follow thou
therefore the like example, while thou may, and place now with more modesty,
advised reason before lawless will, and wisely hale and help thy self again
out of this pytte of perrill and sorrow, into the which thou have suffered thy
self foolishly to fall. Fortune perhaps yet favorable unto thee, (if with
advise thou wylt take heed) has not forestalled thy passage in returning
back again, nor has so covered and choked up the same, but that
(discerning thy footsteppes well) thou may by the self same come back again,
from whence thou did first move thy headlong feet, and be once again
that Fiammetta, which whilom you werte wont to be.

That which does principally help one from the bondage of love.
Thy good name, thine honor, and thy known virtues are yet unstained and whole,
and whatsoever thou haste yet done, is not in the minds of many secret, nor
in the knowledge of any public person commaculated, which being once
corrupted, has been heretofore the only means, and yet is (as we daily
see) an occasion to make one fall into the uttermost and deepest place of all
mischief. Proceed therefore no further, least thou contemn and waste that,
which Fortune has reserved for thee. Comfort thy self, with this imagination,
that thou did never see Panphilus, or else that thy husband was ye same man.
Thy indifferent fantasy is apt to any conceit, and imaginations are easily
suffered to be wrought like Wax. By this way only thou may make thy self
merry again, which thing thou ought specially to desire, if anguish and
sorrow afflict thee so much, as thy words do promise, and thy countenance does
protest. These words and such like, not once, but many times, with a sorrowful
mind did I hear, without making any answer to them again. And though I was
beyond al measure troubled in mind, notwithstanding I knew them to be most
true, but yet the matter very ill disposed, did receive them without any profit
at all. But turning me now on one side, and now on another, sometimes it
happened, that moved with rauing anger, and not respecting the presence of my
austere Nurce, with a voice enraged with womanly grief, and with a sorrowful
kind of complaint, and greater then any of the rest, I said thus.

O Megera, O Tesiphon, O Alecto, tormenters of wicked and woeful souls, let
your horrible and ugly hair stand up, and incense the cruel and firce
Hydias with venomous anger, and kindle them to new kinds of quaking fears,
and with flinging your crawling Snakes in her face, enter speedely into the
wicked chamber of that damned adultresse. Inflame your miserable brands for her
vile conjunctions, that she enjoys now with her robbed loouer, and beset
their delicate bed about with them in sign of a dirie presage to wicked
loouers. O any else people of the black habitations of infernal Dis. O ye
Gods of the immortal kingdoms of Styx, be present there, and with your
luckles lamentations smite fear and horror into these faithless friends. O
miserable Scritch Owl, sit and sing over their hapless house.

And O you ominous Harpyes, give them some terrible sign of future woes. O
eternal Chaos, and darkness enemy to all light, possess the adulterers
houses so, that their wicked eyes may not behold, nor enjoy any comfortable
light at al. And let your malice (O ye reuengers of wicked things) enter into
those minds, which are so ready to change, and raise up cruel contention and
tragical murders between them. After this casting out a hot burning sighe, I
added these words following. O most wicked woman, whosoever thou art (unknown
to me) thou do now possess my loouer, so long, and so often wished for of
me, and I (miserable woman being far from him, do in the mean time languish
in continual pain. Thou do enjoy the guerdon of my trauelles and deserts,
and I (deceived of the fruit) do remain still in sowing and pouring forth
prayers and consume my self in watring them with continual drops of tears.

I have offered orisons and incense to the Gods for his prosperity (whom thou
have secretly imbeseld from me) and they were heard only for thy profitte.
And now behold with what art (I know not) nor how, thou have rooted him out
of my loouing heart, and engrafted him (false woman) in thine. And yet I know
that it is so. But with such content, and so may thou love, and live (I
wish) as thou have made me to do. And if (perhaps) it be to hard for him to
fall in love the third time, then let the Gods divide your looues, no
otherwise then they did dissolve the Grecian Ladies and the Judges of Ida, or
as they did disseuer that of the young man of Abydas, and of his vigilant and
sorrowful Hero, or as they did break of those, of the miserable Sons of
Eolus, bending their sharp judgment only against thee, he himself
remaining safe. O naughty woman, thou must needs have thought (viewing well his
come lie face) that he was not without some Lady, and loouinge Mistress.

If thou dyddest therefore suppose this (which I know thou did imagine,)
with what mind did thou practice to take that away, which appertained to
an other? with an envious and fraudulent mind I am sure. Wherefore I will, as
my mortal enemy, and wrongful occupier of my goods, pursue thee evermore,
and as long as I live, will nourishe and preserve my life with hope of thy
shameful and cruel death. Maledictions of anen amoured woman.
The which I wish may not be so common and natural as to others it is, but
that turned into a lump of massy lead, or Ixions heavy stoane tied about
thy neck, thou may be cast into some deep, and dark cave, amongst the
midst of thy enemies murdering hands, and that neither fire, or funeral be
granted to burn and bury thy torn and massacred members, but being pulled
in pieces and scattered abroad, they may serve to glutte the hungry mawes of
howling dogs, and ravenous woolues. Which I pray, (after they have devoured
thy soft and tender flesh,) may for thy naked bones fiercely jar and
cruelly fight one with an other, so that greedelye gnawing, and breaking them
in pieces with their whetted teeth, they may lively represent thy wicked pray,
and thee delighted with thy gluttonous rapine, which in thy detested life time
thou did fowlie commit.

There shall not escape one day, not one night, no not one hour, but my ready
mouth shall be full of endless curses. Sooner shall the Celestial Bear plumpe
down into the Ocean, and the raging waves of Sicilian Caribdis shall be quiet,
and the barking Dogs of Scylla shall hold their peace, and ripe Corn shall
grow in the waves of the Ionian sea, and the darkest night in her cheifest
obscurity shall shine like Titan his beams, and water with fire, death with
life, and the Sea with winds shall sooner with breachlesse faith be at turce
and make concord together, before I will reconcile, and establishe a piece
with thee (vile monster of woman kind.) But rather whilst golden Ganges
shall be hot and Istrus cold, and while high hills shall bear sturdie Oaks,
and the soft and watered meadows green grass, so long (foul brothell) will I
be at continual war and defiaunce with thee? which neither mortal hatred,
nor death shall determine, but pursuing thee amongst the dead gostes and
fiendes of Hell, with all those torments that are used there, I will
continually plague, and eternally punish thy damned soul for thy condemned
and hateful deed.

But if perchance thou do survive me, whatsoever the manner of my death
shall be, and wheresoever my miserable Ghost shall wander) from thence, perforce
I will labor to take it, and entering into thy loathsome body, will make thee
as mad, as the Virgins, after they had received Apollo. Or else coming in
thy sight, broad wakinge thou shall see me in a most horrible shape, and in
thy fearful sleep oftentimes will I awake, The virgins that is the deuiners.
and afright thee in the uncomfortable silence of the dark night.

And breefely in whatsoever thou go about, or do, I will continually be a
horrible obiecte to thy wicked eyes, and a griping corsiue to thy hellishe
heart: and then (remembering this cruel injury) I will not suffer thee to be
quiet in any place. And so long as thou lyuest, with such a hideous fury (my
self the only worker of it) thou shall be continually haunted.

And when thou art dead, I will minister occasions of more dirie stratagems
unto thy miserably ghost. Alas poor wretched that I am, to what end are my
botlesse words prolonged? I bark and threate^, and thou do bite and hurt
me, and enfolding my beloved Panphilus between thy unworthy arms, do care
as much for my menacing and offensive words, as high and mighty kings for
their inferior and impotent vassailes: and no more then conquering Captains
for their confounded captives. Alas would I had now Dedalus his art, or Medeas
Cotche, because making wings by the one for my shoulders, and being carried in
the air by the other, I might suddenly alight there, where thou do basely
hide and nestle thy self, with thy stolen loone. O how many thundering words,
and what threatening inuectiues with bended brows would I cast out against that
false youth, and against thee, unjust robber of an others felicity? O with
what villainous terms would I reprehend your detestable follies?

And after that I had amazed, appaled and attainted your wicked faces with a
shameful blush, with recital of these vnshamefull faults, I would then
without delay proceed to sharp revenge, and taking thy hair (false
enchauntresse) in my hands, with pulling and renting them, and drawing thee
here and there by thy tresses before thy perfidus loouer, I would glutte my
swelling anger, and tearing thy garments from thy disgraced body, with
reproachful tauntes I would triumph over thee, mall apart and wicked
traytresse. Nor this should not suffice me to fulfill my due anger, nor be
half enough for thee, to expiate thy odious crime, but with sharp nails I
would disfigure, that painted visarde, which so much pleased his false eyes,
leaving an eternal memorial of their caracters, and revenge in it. And thy
miserable body with my greedy teeth peece-meale I should shyuer, leaving the
which afterward unto him (that does now flatter thee) to heal again, my
self (joyful for part of so small vengeance) would hie me home again to my
sorrowful habitacles. Whylest I spoke these words with fyrie sparkeling eyes,
with closed teeth, and with bended fist, as though I had been at the very
action it self, I remained a pretty while silent: and me thought I had
indeed played one Pagent of my greedy revenge.

But the old Nurce with mournful voice lamenting, said thus unto me. O
daughter since thou do now know the furious tyranny of this passion, which
thou call thy God, who does this molest thee, temperate thy self, and
bridle thy pittious complaints.

And if the due pity which thou should take of thy" own self does not
move thee heereunto, The care of her honor must warn every wise woman from
vain thoughts and deeds.
let the regard of thy honor persuade thee to it, which for an old error
passed, may lightly be stained with a new shame: Or at least with-holde these
complaints, and outcries, least that thy loouing husband perceive not the
indirect causes of thy doleful plaintes. And so for two causes he might
worthelie be sorry, and agreeued at thy senseless folly. Then being put in
mind of my husband, and thinking of the wrong, and shame, I had done him,
moved with new pity, I lamented more sensibly then I did before, and
discussing in my mind my corrupted faith, and the holy laws of wedlock
violated, I said.

O most faithful companion in my troubles, my husband may be sorry for little
or nothing. For he, which was the occasion of my offense, has been a severe
purger of the same. I have long since received a guerdon, and am yet paid with
to severe a reward for my demerites. My husband could not imagine to give me
any greater punishment, then that, which my late loouer has afflicted me with
all. Only death (if death be painful, as it is commonly said) my husband
may annex to my other torments. Let him then therefore come, and give it me
quickly. It shall be no pain for me to die, but a wished pleasure, because I
greatly desire the same.

And it shall be more acceptable and welcome to me, performed by his own hands,
whom so greatly I have offended, then perpretrated by any others, or by my
own. If he do not give me it, or if it does not voluntarily come unto me,
my troubled wits shall find out some speedy passage to it, because by
means of that, Diverse punishments of damned souls compared to the pains of a
loouer.
I hope to conculde all my sorrow at once.

Huge hell, the last and extremest punishment of damned miserable souls, in
the most tormenting place of all, has not any tortrue so forcible or equal
with mine. Ancient authors allege and bring in Titius for an example of
great punishment, saying that his increasing liver is continually becked, and
devoured of a greedy vulture. And certes though I accounte his pain not
little, yet it is not like to mine. For if the hungry Vulture feed upon his
liver, a hundred thousand thousand gryping, and stinging greefes continually
gnawe my heart more then sharp bills of any praying Birds. They likewise
affirm, that Tantalus placed beetweene clear water, and goodly fruit, does
evermore dye for hunger and thirst.

My self (alas) put in the midst, and swimming in all mundane delights,
with affectionate desire wishing my loouer, and not enjoying him, do sustain
as much, nay rather greter pain then he. Because with never ceasing hope, he
thinks sometimes to taste of these fresh waters, and ruddie Apples, that hang
on every side about him. But I (dispayring now altogether of that, which I
once hoped would have been my comfort,) do neither see, nor can excogitate
any ease for my grief, and loouing him more then ever I did, by the alluring
forces of an other woman, and of his proper accord also, is so kept back,
that he has not only cast me quite out of his remembrance, but that by
means thereof, I am debarred to entertain the smallest hope that may be of my
welfare for ever after. And miserable lx ion also, turmoiling eternally at his
unruly wheel, does not feel such cruel pain, that it may be likened to
mine. Because my self shaken with continual motions of furious madness, by
my adverse fates do suffer much more grief, then ever he can do. And if ye
daughters of Danaus with lost labor do continually power water into tubbes
full of holes, thinking to fill them, I strain forth greater plenty of tears
by the ouerflowing conduites of my eyes, drawn from the hollow cave, and
center of my heart. Wherefore do I trouble my self to recite these infernal
tortures by one and one since that there is heaped in me a greater Chaos of
miseries, then any there, divided, or conjoined. And if I had no other kind of
anguish to cruciate my miserable soul, that I must of necessity keep my
dollours secret, or at the least conceal and hide their offspring, whereas
they, with loud voices, careless speeches public actions (conformable to
their sorrows) might discover and manifest theirs, by so much the more should
my pains be adjudged greater and more grievous then theirs. For (alas) how
strong ye restreined fire and how more violently does it burn, then that,
which has full scope, and no obstacle to exhalate and throw his flames abroad.
And how grievous a thing it is, not to be permitted to speak one word of
extreme sorrow, that does sensibly torment one, and yt it is not lawful to
tell the annoious occasion of it, but under the show of a merry countenance it
is convenient to hide it in the secret closet of an impatient and painful
heart. Wherefore not extreme sorrow only, Death a lightning of sorrow,
but external death shall be a lightning of my grief. Let therefore my dear
husband come, and in one hour let him revenge himself, and rid me out of
these pains. Let his unsheathed sword open my miserable, and naked breast, and
let him in one instant with plenty of my blood pull forth my sorrowing soul,
and dissolve my infinite and heaped woes, and (as my vile wickedness does
deserve) let him tear this heart the retainer of these vile injuries, ye
principal deceiuer of his true affections, and ye cheifest receiver of his
feined friend and secret enemy. After that the Nurce did see me hold my peace
and begin to weep bitterly, with a mild and low voice she began to
reply. Oh dear daughter, what means this, which so frantickly thou
speak? Thy words, are as vain, as thy conceits more foolish. I have seen
(being now an old woman) many things which have passed in this world and have
daily known the order, and course of many ladies and gentlewomens loves. And
(although I am not to be accounted my self amongst the^) yet nevertheless
have I once felt the secret poiso^ of these amorous darts which are more
grievous sometimes and much more troublesome) to the^ of lower degree, and of
poor condition, then to the nobler and higher personages, when as all the
means and passages to the attaining of their desires and pleasures, are
stopped and cut of from them, that are needy and poor: Whereas they at
their will, and with their wealth may break an open way to heaven. And ye,
which thou say to be almost impossible, and so grievous unto thee, I never
conceived, nor felt to be half so painful and nothing so hard as thou
do make it? Which grief, although it be indeed very great, ought not for
all that to work such effects in thee, as to consume and waste thy self in
such woes, and thereby to seek thy own death, which more rashly and
furiously, then by any good motion of wisdom or argument of reason thou
do wish for. I know well, that burning anger procured by fury is blinded,
and cares not to cover it self, nor does brook any bridle, and does admit
no reason, and is not afraid of death, but rather driven on headlong and urged
of it self, it resists the mortal pricks of sharp swords. But if thou
would let this anger of it self wax somewhat colder, I doubt not but thy
kindled folly should be made manifest to that temperate and cooled part. And
therefore good daughter with patience sustain his great force, and give place
to his fury.

Wherefore note my words a little, and settle thy mind upon the examples, Weak
com^^rtes.
which I will propunde unto thee. Thou art with incessaunt anguishe of mind
most sorrowful (if I have well perceived thy speeches) for the long absence of
thy belooued youth gone from thee, and for his faithless fidelity, and for the
second love of his new choice. And being agreeued at these (perhaps)
uncertain and unjust injuries recknest no pain like unto thine. But (certes)
if thou would be so wise, as I do wish thee, thou shall for ease of all
these painful accidents (pondering well my words) receive an easy and an
effectual remedy. The young man whom thou loouest ought without all doubt
(according to the laws and ordinances of love) to love thee again, as thou
do him, and if he does not, he does very ill, and yet there is no force to
compel him thereunto, since every one may use the benefitte of his own
liberty as it pleases him best. If thou do love him greatly, and so much,
that thereby thou do endure great pain, he is not therefore to be
blamed, nor thou can not justly be agreeued with him therefore, considering
that thou thy self art the chiefest cause of this. For mighty Love (al, though
he be a great Lord, and his forces are inevitable) could not for all that
against thy will, place thy Lover in thy heart.

Thy vagrant wit, and idle thoughts, were the first originalles of thy love,
which if thou had effectually opposed with thy might, these sorrowful
events had not happened unto thee, as now they have done, but, as one free
from such uncouth passions, thou might have moved him, and all others, as
he (disporting himself with his new love (as thou say) does now make but a
jest of thee.) It is therefore necessary, since that thou have submitted thy
liberty to his Law, to govern thy passions according to his pleasures, and
since he thinks it best to be far from thee, that thou content thy self, and
not repine thereat. If with tears he did vow entire faith unto thee, and
promised thee to return, he did not use any new thing herein, but an old
and common trick, practiced out of memory, and performed every day of most
Lovers. And these are the prancks, and many more such fashions of like
consequence, which are daily taught and learned in thy God his Court. But if
he has not kept with thee that faith and promise, there was never any Judge,
that in decyding of this matter, could say any more of it, but that he did not
well, and would so acquit him, thinking also with thy self, that he should
do ye like, (if any other strange love, or fortune had given thee over to such
a breach of former faith) as now thou should, and I do wish thee to do.
He is not also the first that has done so, nor thou the first, to whom like
accidents have befallen. Diverse examples of those that forsook their lovers
Jason departed from Lemnos from Hipsiphile, and returned into Thessaly to
Medea, and from her afterward to Creusa. Amorous Parris went from the woods of
Ida from Oenon, and returned to Troy with fair Hellen. Theseus went from
Creete from Ariadne and came to Athens to Phedra. And yet for all this neither
Hipsiphile, Oenone, or Ariadne killed themselves, but rejecting all vain
thoughts, buried their false Lovers in dark obliuio^. Love (as I said above)
does thee no wrong at all, or has done thee any more, then thou thy self
would take. He uses his bow and arrows without any respect of persons, as
we may daily see by proof. And there are so many and manifest examples,
making so clear on his side, and for his manner of inordinate dealinges, that
none can worthily be agreeued at any badde success, which he gives, and that
can with reason (almost) bewail the ordinary grief, pains, and care, which
by his means and molestations his followers have, but rather complain and
lament their voluntary submission, and be sorrowful for their franck consent
which they yielded to him. For he being but a wanton, naked and blind boy,
does fly and alight he knows not where himself. Wherefore to be sorrowful
for his accustomed and indirect vsages, to bewail his unkind and froward
abuses, to receive no comfort by him, or by no means to think to remove him,
is rather a loss of words and wind.

The new Woman, who has taken thy beloved in her netts, or else whom he has
with his cunning guiles overcome, and whom with so many revenging words thou
do menace, with her own fault (perhaps) has not made him hers, but he with
his important suits (it may be) and with his flattering and pitiful words,
great gifts, and seruicable deeds, has won her to be his. And as thou were
wont (not able to resist his enchaunting prayers, and to behold his woeful
tears) so she perhaps as flexible by prayers, promises and protestations, as
thy self, could not endure them without some great pity of his distressed
and sorrowful cause. If he could so well by amorous complaints express his
hot desires, and could so cunningly (as thou have told) like a Crocadile
whenever it pleased him, bewail and lament, then must thou clearly know
that tears joined with beauty are of great force to obtain their request. And
besides this. Say that the Gentlewoman with her sugared speeches, and gracious
behavior has overcome him, why, is it not a thing commonly used now adays in
the world, that every one does seek his own advantage, not having any regard
or care to an other his prejudice, Every one seeks his own advantage.
but where and when he finds, even there and then he takes as he best may.
The good Woman as expert as thy self in these affairs, knowing (perhaps) him
to be a cunning Knight in Venus Courtly battles, allured him therefore the
more unto her. And who withholds thee, or what impediment have thou to
hinder thee, that thou may not do the like to some other? which thing,
albeit I neither counsel nor command. But if there can be no more done then
may be, and that of necessity thou art constrained to follow Love, whenever
thou will pull thy neck out of his servile yoke, thou may quickly find a
great number of young and lusty Gentlemen in this City, more valiant, noble,
proper, more worthy and more loving, and a great deal more constant then he
is. Who (as I certainly believe) to obtain but the smallest favor at thy
hands that he has had, would gladly kiss the very ground that thou treadest
on. Whose sundry kinds of delightful services, and sweet pleasures, shall so
by little and little drive him out of thy remembrance, as he has for love of
his new Gentlewoman banished thee (perhaps) out of his memory.

Jupiter laugheth at these promised faithes, and solemn oaths, when they are
broken. And whosoever does use one, but according as he is used himself, what
can the world speak or think of any more, then the deserts of such an one
did require. To keep faith with one that has broken his, is reputed now
adays but mere mockerye, and to requite deceits with deceits, is esteemed no
small point of wisdom.

Medea forsaken of Jason, entertained Egeus. And Ariadne forsaken of Theseus,
got Bacchus for her Husband, and so were their mournings turned into mirth.
Temperate therefore thy greefes, and suffer thy pains patiently, because thou
have not any occasion to be sorrowful more for another, then to be pitiful
toward thy self. And whenever thou will, thou shall find opportunity
enough to make the^ cease, considering that the same, and greater greefes then
thine, were sometimes sustained and passed away by others, greater and more
noble personages then thy self. For Deianira was forgotten of Hercules for
Iole, and Phillis of Demophoon, and Penelope of Ulysses for Circe. And all
their torments and passions were greater then thine, by how much ye heat of
their love was greater and more fervent then thine. And so much the more if
their divine essence, immortal powers, and the hautie condition of those
notable men and Women are well considered, and yet they suffered them. In these
disgraces therefore thou art not alone, nor the first. And those adversities in
the which patients have company, Greese is less hurtful when one has company
in it.
are not so grievous and painful to them, as thou thy self dooest say.
Wherefore be merry again, and expel these vain cares, admonishing thee to
have before thine eyes a continual doubt, and fear of thy dear Husband, and
of his just anger, and yet vnconceiued iealosie, to whose ears, if perhaps
these follies (as needs they must at last) should come, admit, (as thou
say) that he could give thee no other, nor no less punishment then death,
the very same (for as much as one can die but once) ought every one (when his
hour is come, and when he can) to take it in the best sort, and order he may.
And think, that if that kind of death, which in thy rage and angrye mood thou
dooest so quickly and so wickedly desire, should follow and happen unto thee,
with what great infamy, and everlasting shame should thy living memory, thy
dear honor, thy good name, and thine honestye, survive and remain for ever
after blotted, and ignomiously obscured.

Worldly things should be used, not as troublesome substaunces, but as
transitory shadows. Wherefore from henceforce, let neither thy self, nor any
other, put any affiaunce in them, whether they have a prosperous or
preposterous issue, nor yet thrown down in adversity, let not any of the
otherside despair of the best. Clotho mingleth these and those things
together, and forbids that Fortune be stable and constant, and changes
every fate. None had ever the Gods so favorable to their wills, that they
might presentlye bind them unto them, or could at any time have them tied to
their affections. For they, provoked by the guilt of our sins, turn our
affairs topsye turuy, and Fortune again helps those, that be valiant
courageous, and stout minded, rejecting those that are pusillanimous,
fearful and doubtful in their enterprises. And now it is time to prove if
virtue have any place in thee. Admit that at al times it may never be
removed, though oppressed with dark clouds of adversities, and darkened with
black tempests of misfortune, it is oftentimes choked and lies secret and
hydden. Hope also has this property annexed to it, that it is not a guide to
afflictions, nor shows any way to grief or sorrow. Wherefore, he that may
hope in any thing, let him despair of nothing. We are tossed with the
fluctuant waves of our destinies, and those things (believe me) that they
prepare for us, cannot with so light care, with so small regard, or with so
soon labor be changed. The greater part almost of that, which we (mortal
generation) either do, or suffer, comes from the heavens above.

Lachisis does keep a decreed Law to her Distaffe, and does draw forth every
thing by a limited way. The first day she gives thee is the last: neither is
it lawful to wrest determined things, and wrought above with the influences of
the Planets, to an other course. It has hurt many to be afraid of an
inmoouable order, and many also in not fearing the same. Because while these
are a fearing their own destinies, the very same are already befallen to the^
unawares. Leave therefore thy greefes and sorrows, which voluntarily thou
have procured and live joyfully, putting thy hope in the Gods, and endeavor to
do well: because it has often times come to pass, that when one does think
himself furdest from felicity, then with an inopinate step he is suddenly
entered into it. Many Ships securely sailing through the deep and wide Seas,
have been offentimes cast away in the mouth of the wyshed Haven. And some
again, dispayring altogether of succor, have in the self same day, and
danger, yea suddenly arrived to the desired end of their long voyage. And I
have seen many trees smitte^ with Jupiters scorching lightnings, and in few
days after again covered over with green leaves, and laden with goodly
fruit. And some again cherished with great care, by some secret and sudden
accident, withered quite away. Fickle Fortune does yield sundry effects: for
as she has been the instrument of thy long grief, so (if by hope thou do
nourish thy life) she will likewise minister to thee many occasions and
wholesome means of double joy again. And now she held her peace.

But as many times as she perceived me distracted into these unwonted and
extremest passions, so did the sage Nurce use these speeches toward me,
thinking with her self to drive these irremoouable greefes, and obstinate
anguish out of my mind, reserved only for the full consumation of my death.
But none or few of her grave counselles, did touch my troubled mind with
effect, and ye greatest part of them spent in vain, vanished away in the air.
And my sorrowful soul did every day more sensibly feel more green and
grievous wounds. Wherefore lying many times upright upon my rich bed, with my
face covered between mine arms, I imagined diverse great matters, and strange
things in my troubled mind. And now I will begin (pitiful Ladies) to tell of
most cruel things, and not credible almost to be hatched in the breast of a
simple Woman, They that love unfortunately do often times think to kill them
selves.
if the sequel of these, or greater then these were not seen afterward to
come to pass. My heart being therefore cleaued almost a sunder with
unspeakable grief, and perceiving my Lover to be far from me, like a
desperate and frantic Womanne I began thus to say to my self. Behold the
very self and same occasion, which Sidonian Eliza had to abandon this hateful
world, cruel Panphilus has given me. And (alas) a great deal worse. It
pleases him that forsaking these, I seek out other regions. And since I am
become his subject, I will fulfill his hard beheste and pittyles pleasure: and
in one hour I will requite my hapless love, my committed wickedness, and my
iniuried and dear husband with a tragical and unnatural death. And if
oppressed souls, delivered out of this corporal prysonne, have any liberty in
the new world, I will without delay conioyne mine with his. And where my body
cannot be, my soul shall supplye the place of it. Behold therefore I will
die, and so rydde me of all these pains, I think it most convenient, that
with these hands I execute this last stratageme upon my self. Because there
can be no other hand so cruel, that can perfectly perform that, which justly
I have deserved. I will therefore without delay willingly take my death, the
remembrance of which, although it be terrible to my weak sex, and to my
womanly thoughts, yet shall it be as welcome unto me, as this painful life is
yrkesome unto my soul.

And after that I had resolved upon this last pretense, I began to devise with
my self, which was, of a thousand ways the best, to take my life from me.
And first of all cold and sharp yrons came to my mind, the mortal means of
many one his untimely death, considering that the said Eliza by their cruelty
did forsake this common air: and then after these the deaths of Biblis and
Amata were presented before mine eyes, the manner of which was offered to me
to end my weary life. But more careful of my honor and good name, then chary
of my self, and fearing more the manner of dying, then death it self, the one
seeming unto me very infamous, and ye other too extreme cruel in ye mouths
and minds of every one, were occasions to make me refuse the one, and not to
like of the other. Afterward I imagined to do as the Sagontines, and as those
of Abydas did, the first fearing Hanniball, of Carthage, and ye other Phillip
of Macedon, committing themselves and all their goods to ye fury of consuming
flames. But knowing that this could be no small detriment to my dear
Husband, vnculpable and guiltless of my evils, I refused also this kind of
death, as I did the rest before. After these I called to mind ye venomous
iuyces, which heretofore assigned to Socrates, to Sophonisba, to Hanniball,
and to many other Princes more, their last days. And many of these indeed as
they pleased my changable fancy, so did I think them fit for the purpose.
But perceiving that in going about to seek them, no little time was requisite,
and doubting least by inquiry of them my drifts should be called in
question, and sifted out, and that my determined purpose also in the mean
while, might perhaps have been altered, I imagined to seek out some other
kinds of death. Wherefore I bethought me (as many times I had done before) to
yield up my feeble spirits between my knees, but doubting least it should
be known, and suspecting some other impediment incident to it, I passed to
other headlong thoughts. And the very same occasion (and least I should be also
seen) made me forsake the burning, and swalowed coals of Portia. But the
death of Ino and of Melicer ta, and likewise the hunger starued end of
Erisichthone, occurring to my memory, the long time, that I should have in
executing the one, and in staying for the other, made me also to reject them,
thinking that the pain of the last did a great while nourishe the
languishing body. But besides all these ways, the precipitate death of Perdix
falling from the highest Tower of Creete, came also to my mind, which speedy
kind of death only pleased me infalliblie to follow, as one deuoide of all
ensuing infamy, saying to my self. Casting my self down from the highest
Turrets of my Palace, I shall crush my boanes in a hundred pieces, and dashe
out my brains, and by all those several pieces will yield up my hapless
soul contaminated with prepared goare, and ready broken up to be offered up
as a Sacrifice to the Gods. And few or none there are that will imagine and
say, that by mine own cruelty, fury, or proper will, this death besell unto
me, but imputing it rather to some unlucky chance, with pouring out pitiful
tears for me, will bewail my untimely death, and curse my froward Fortune.

This deliberation therefore took place in my mind, and it liked me
especially to put the same in practice, thinking to have used great pity
toward me, if I had perhaps become pitiless and cruel against mine own
self. This determination therefore had now taken sure root in my heart, and I
did not attend for any thing else, but fit time, Wicked thoughts ever war
with good
when a chillie cold suddenly entering into all my boanes, made me tremble for
very fear, which brought these words with it, saying. O miserable Woman, what
dooest thou intend to do? Wylt thou (overcome with mad anger) in a senceles
rage and fury cast thy self away? If thou were now constrained to die of some
grievous infirmity, would not thou (alas) endeavor and seek to live,
because at the length thou might see thy Panphilus once more before thy
death? Do not thou think that when thou art dead, thou shall never see him
again, and that no kind of pity, that he may use in thy behalf, may help
thee any thing at all. For what did ye slack return of Demophoon profitte
impatient and strangled Phillis? She flourishing without any delighte felt his
coming, which if she could have stayed for, he might have found her still a
Woman as he left her, and not a Tree. Live therefore Fiammetta, for he will yet
for all this (returning as a freende or as an enemy at length) come to thee
again. And with what disposed mind soever he return, thou can not choose
but love him still. And perhaps thou shall see him, talk with him, and move
his unconstant and hard heart to compassion of thy woeful plightes. He is
not made of sturdye Oak, nor of Flinty stone, nor borne, bredde, nor nourished
in a hollow Cave amongst wild Beasts, and did never suck the milk of
Tygres, nor drink any other savage and cruel beasts blood, neither is his
heart made of Diamonde, or of steel, and is not of so brutishe and rusticall
inclination, but that he will lend his ears, and bend his heart to my
pitiful plaints, passions, and persuasions, and take some remorse of coequall
commiseration of my sustained sorrows. But if he will not be overcome with
pity, then wearyed of thy loathsome life, it shall be more lawful for thee
(driven on on by manifest despair) to kill thy self. Thou have passed away
more then one whole year (without him) a pensive and painful life, and well
may thou yet (though with redoubted grief) rub out an other. Death does
not fail at any time, Any may have death whenever they will
whenever one does either desire, or procure it, which will be then as
pressed, and more ready to come, then now he is. And thou may then depart
with hope, be he never so malicious and cruel, that being at thy present and
hapless death, he will shed some tears. Recall therefore again thy over
rash and cruel advise. Because whosoever hasteneth too much to wicked
counsel, Who hasteneth to wicked counsel, studieth to repent at leisure
studyeth afterward to repent himself by leisure. And this last part of thy
tragical life, which thou do mean to play, is not a thing that may
afterward be amended with vain repentance: which if it did follow, could not
with all the force it had, recall it back again. My mind being thus
mollified with these arguments, with a sudden altered purpose, and inopinate
advise, I kept a long time in an equal poyse of moderate reason. But dreadful
Megera launcing it with sharp and mortal wounds of grief, disturbed by
settled senses, and dystourned my willing mind from following this good motion,
and egged me on to prosecute, and to practice my first unnatural and cruel
resolution, which now I thought privily and earnestly to bring to effect.
Wherefore (to cloak it) I always showed mine old Nurce a merry countenance,
and did finely counterfette my sad cheer, with some pleasant kind of
comfortable speeches, to whom, because I would have had her gone out of the
Chamber, I said. Behold (good Mother) how I have planted thy most true reasons
and grave counsels with great profit in my breast, but because this blind fury
may depart out of my foolish mind, withdraw thy self from hence a while, and
leave me to my rest, that am now very desirous to sleep. But she being as
full of subtlety as my self, and as one that did divine of my secret intent,
commended much the mind I had to sleep, and as she was commanded, went a
little way from me, into a dark corner hard by, but would by no means go out
of the Chamber.

But because I would not give her any occasion to suspect that, which I went
about, cleene contrary to my mind and desire, I seemed to like well of her
staying still, thinking that after she had seen me sleep, she would have
gone away. With quiet rest therefore I feigned this imagined deceit, in the
which although nothing appeared outwardly, yet thinking of that hour, which
should have been my last in this pleasing world, full of bitter anguish, and
environed round about with legions of stinging greefes, I muttered forth these
words to my self, saying.

O miserable Fiammetta, and of all Women that live in this world the most
miserable, behold thy Glass is now run, thy latest day, hour, and last
periode is come: And after that from the highest place of thy Palace thou
shalt have thrown thy self headlong down, and that thy soul shall have
forsaken thy bruised body, then let thy tears be dried up, let thy sighs
then surcease, and thy sorrows, and desires be determined, and then in one
hour, with the dear price of thy spilled blood and with ye ransom of thy
pale death thou shall redeem thy self from the bonds and captivity of love,
And then shall thou cancel the verbal Obligation of Panphilus his promised
and unperformed faith. This day thou shall have the deserved embracings of him.
This day the Millitary Ensigns of love shall cover thy body, with a dishonest
and unseemly torture. This day thy wearyed spirits shall see him. This day
thou shall know, for whom thou have forsaken thy self. This day of force thou
shall make him pitiful. This day thou shall begin the vengeance of the young
and wicked Sorceresse, and thy malicious copartner.

But Oh ye Gods, if any pity does harbor in your divine breasts, be
favorable to me in these my last prayers. Suffer not my death, and the memory
of my life to pass amongst the rude populare, with blotte of dishonor and
stayne of infamy. And if in taking the same there be any fault committed,
behold there is a present satis-faction, since that I die with fear to publish
the occasion thereof.

The revealing of which, should be certes no small comfort unto me, if I
believed that in talking of it, it might escape without ignominious blame. Make
my dear Husband also (ye sacred Gods) suffer it with patience, whose true
love, if I had duly observed, and had rightly performed Iunos holy laws, I
might have yet lived a happy and merry Woman, without troubling your divine
Godheads with these earnest prayers. But like an ignorant Woman of my thrice
happy estate, and (as others of my condition are wont to do) following ever
the worst, women take ever the worst in hand.
and forsaking ye best, am now woorthely appaide with this unfortunate and due
recompense. O fatal Atropos, by thy infallible blow to all the world, I
humbly pray thee, that thou would with thy power guide my falling body, and
dissolve my soul not with too great pain from the thredde of thy Sister
Lachesis. And thee O Minos receiver of it, by that love that sometimes burned
thee, and by this blood, which now I offer unto thee, even by the same, and by
what else may move thee (infernal Judge) I obtest thee, favorably to conduct
it to the places appointed by thy just judgment for it, and that so cruel and
sharp torments be not prepared for it, as to deem and repute the infinite
pains, that it has already passed, but light in respect of them to come.

After I had spoken these words to my self, incensed Tesiphon appeared before
mine eyes, and with a senseless murmr, and contracted and menacing forehead,
made me afraid of a worser life to ensue, then that which was already past,
but afterward, with a kind of confused speech, saying. (That nothing which
was never tried could be hurtful) inflamed my troubled mind with a more eager
desire of my own ruin. Wherefore perceiving that my old Nurce was not yet
gone, and doubting least her long tarying might not mar my matters, being
now resolved to die, or that some other accident might not take it quite away,
with displayed arms upon my bed, and embracing it, I said. O bed farewell,
praying the Gods, that thou may be more fortunate and gracious to thy next
Mistress whom thou shall receive, then thou have been to me. After which
words, my eyes rolling about ye chamber, the which I never thought to have
seen any more, surprised now with sudden grief, I was deprived of the
light of the Heavens, and groueling up and down, surseysed (I know not) with
what a shiuering and trembling fear through out all my body, I would have risen
up, but every part of the same overcome with quaking fear, did not suffer
me, but I fell suddenly down again, not once, but thrice upon my face: in
which occurrant I felt a fierce war between my angry soul, and my timorous
and vital spirits, which by maine force did keep it still, that feign would
have flowen away. But my soul at last ouercomming them, and driving away cold
fear from me, suddenly kindled me with a hot and burning dollour, and so I
recovered my wandered forces again. And yet my face morphewed with the pale
color of death, I violently rose up, and as the sturdy Bull, having received
some mortal prick fiercely runs up and down, beating and tormenting him
self, even so hellish Tesiphon, gadding madly up and down before mine eyes,
made me (like a frantic and mad Woman, and not knowing mine own fancies) cast
my self from the bed upon the ground, and led by this infernal feende, I
did run toward the stayres that went up to the highest part of the house.
And having in a trice leaped out of the Chamber, with most extreme
lamentations and careless looks, viewing every part of the house, at last
with a hollow and feeble voice I said. O most unlucky lodging unto me, remain
thou here for ever, and make my fall manifest to my Lover, if ever he return
again. And thou Oh dear Husband, comfort thy self, and from hence forward
seek out a new wife, but a more wise, loving, and more loyal mate the^
Fiammetta has been unto thee. O my dear Sisters, Parents, and all the rest
of my other companions and friends, with all ye (my faithful Servant, live
ye here still with all the favor that the Gods may afford you.

The goodness of God oftentimes does not suffer wicked determinations to come to
effect,
Thus like a mad Woman, with sorrowful words I did hasten to my wicked end.
But the old Nurce, as one by some sudden fear awaked out of a slumber,
careleslye leaving of her work at the wheel, greatly amazed at the sight of
this spectacle, lifted up her aged body, and, crying as loud as ever she
could, made post haste to follow me, who with a horce voice, and scarcely
understood of me said. O daughter whether do thou run, what mad fury
does drive thee forward? Is this the fruit that my words (as thou saydst)
by the received comfort of them, did put in thy breast? Whether go thou?
Tarry for me (alas) Afterward with a louder voice she yet exclaimed. O ye
young men, and servant of the house come, come quickly and take away this
fond Woman, and keep her back from her furious actions and desperate intent.
Her vociferations were of no force, and their have less speedy. And me
thought I had Mercury his wings fastened to my shoulders, and that swifter
then Atlanta, nay then any wind I did fly to my violent death: But of
unexpected chances (appending as well to good as to wicked purposes) one
(alas) was an occasion to make me still enjoy this loathsome life: Because my
long garments, wauing and blown abroad with the force of my hasty flight, and
freendly enemies to my furious pretense, my self also not able to refrain my
course, were fastened I (know not how) to a shyuered post by the wall, as I
was running, and interrupted my swift passage, which for all the striving and
pulling that I could do) did not suffer me to leave any piece of them behind
me. Wherefore whilst I was laboring to undo them, the sorrowful Nurce
breathless, and panting came upon me, to whom (I remember) with taynted
cheeks, full of burning anger, and with outrageous outcryes, I said. O
miserable old woman pack from hence in an evil hour if thy life be dear
unto thee. Thinking to help me thou do hinder me, in not permitting me to
execute this last and mortal duty, resolved thereunto, and spurred on with an
eager desire to cut in sunder the web of all my woes. Because whosoever does
let one from dying, that is disposed, desirous, and resolved to die, Who does
hinder one that is disposed to die he himself does kill him.
does no less then kill him himself. Wherefore thou art now become my
homicide, thinking to deliver me from death, and (like the greatest enemy to my
quiet rest) do endeavor with thy thanklesse office to prolong my sorrows.

My tongue exclaimed, and my heart burned with ire, and yet thinking to have
loosed my garments in have, I did entangle and fasten them more and more,
(which as soon as I had found out the way to undo) I was immediately held
and stayed by the noise of the clamorous Nurce, so that by her feeble forces
and hanging upon me, I was greatly disturbed of my purpose. But vnwynding my
self at last out of her hands, her strength had profited her nothing at all,
if the young Servants and Women at her continual exclamations had not come
running from every part of the house and force perforce had not stayed me. Out
of whose hands with much struggling, and diverse frisks, and with greater forces
also (the desire of death adding strength to my mighty will) I thought to have
vngrappled my self, but breathles at the last, and overcome by them, I was
carried back again to my Chamber, which once I thought never to have seen
again. How many times (alas) with lamentable and bitter speeches did I chyde
them saying.

O vile and base Servants, what boldness is this, that makes you so mallepart,
and what precipitate presumption is this, that mooues you so rudely and so
roughly to handle her whom you should reverence, and contrary to your duty
thus violently to lay hands and grype your Mistress, to whom you should be
most obsequious, and of whose welfare you should be most careful, and at whose
will and pleasure you should be most dilligent and ready. What kind of fury
(mad wretches) has enspyred you to this rash dealings. And thou wicked
Nurce, the cruel example and mean of all my miserable greefes yet to come,
why have thou repugned my last desseignes?

Why, dooest not thou know that in procuringe and helping forward my death,
thou had done me a greater pleasure and a better turn, then in
withholding me from it. Wherefore let this miserable part be played, and let
the end of my tragical life be duly accomplished by me, and (if thou love
me, as I think thou dooest) leave me to mine own will, leave me (I say) to
mine own self to represent the last pagiaunt of my doleful life. And (if
thou art so pitiful and careful over me as thou show) employe thy piety
and study, in saving my doubtful fame, and honor, which after my death shall
still survive. Because in this piece of simple service, with which thou do
now hinder me, thy practice, pain, and needelesse labor shall prove at
length but vain. For do thou think to take from me those sharp tools, and
cruel poynados with which I will at last broche this miserable heart of mine,
and in whose points and edges consists the only hope of my desires. Or else
strangling cords, loathsome and swelling poisons, mortiferous herbs, choking
ryuers, burning coals, and consuming flames? What does this vigilant care
avail thee any more, but to prolong a little this yrkesome life, and to
reserve it to that kind of death (which even now, without touch or stain of
infamy, might have set peace to my afflicted soul) which by thy pitiless
interruptions deferred, thou shall doubtless at one time or other, make most
infamous unto al ye world, and most shameful unto me. Because death is in
every place, and consists in every thing. Let me therefore now die, least
growing to a more grievous condition of life, with a more inhumaine mind and
cruel hand, I prepare for my self the most miserable and cruel death that
may be.

Whylst wretched Womanne I spoke these words, I could not keep my hands
still, but sometimes fallinge on one Servant, and sometimes on an other,
catching some by their locks, I pulled the heayre from their head, and
fastening my nails in the faces of other some, I made the blood to spynne out
of their cheeks, tearing from othersome their poor garments from their backs.

But (alas) neither the old Nurce, nor the mangled servants answered me one
word again, but lamenting my senseless actions, executed their pittious
functions toward me, whom then with gentle words and entreties I endeavored
to gain to my will, which served my turn nothing at all.

Wherefore like a frantic Hecuba, making a great noise, and with outrageous
speeches I began to exclaim saying. O wicked hands, and prone to al
mischief, you, the adorners of my hurtful beauties, were a great occasion to
make me become such an one, as to seem so fair and pleasing in his eyes, that
I was desired of him, whom I love most of all. Since therefore these euilles
have spronge by your help, in guerdon of this, use now your wicked cruelty
upon my accursed body. Rent it in pieces and open it, and diued in my hot
blood, pull out from my accursed body my miserable heart, and inexpugnable
soul. Tear out (I say) this false heart wounded with blind love. And since
that all means of mortal and murdering instruments are taken from thee, with
these revenging fingers, (the adorners of my banefull beauties) and with these
sharp nails peece-meale dismember, and without remorce of pity rent it out.
Alas that my bootelesse speeches did menace and promise me desired euilles, and
commended them to the execution of willing hands, but the vigilant care of the
prying servants being always ready to the hinderaunce of them, withhelde
them against my will. And the mournful and importunate Nurce with doleful
speeches after all this, began thus to say. Affectionate comforts.


O dearest daughter, by these miserable breasts which were the scources of thy
alimentes, I humbly pray thee, that with a quiet and appeased mind thou
would give ear to my words. By them I will labor to mittigate thy
passions, that thou shall not sorrow any more, or to drive quite away
(perhapes) from thee, the blind anger, that does incend thee to this kind of
fury, or else with a more remiss and calm mind to make thee suffer the
same: or else speedely to forsake it. Wishing thee to reduce that to thy erred
memory, that shall revive thee, and be no small health, and great honor unto
thee. It is therefore expedient for thee (good Lady) most famous for so rare
virtues, as thou art endued with all ye gifts of nature and fortune, not to be
subject to pinching sorrow, nor (as a woman overcome) to turn thy back from
daring dollours, from threatening mishappes, and from persuinge woes.

It is not a point of virtue to require death, and to call upon it nor a part
of magnanimity to be afraid of life, It is not virtue to desire death and to
be afraid of life.
as thou art, but rather to countermaund pressing euilles, and to fly away
before them, is not the part of courageous and resolute minds. Whosoever does
abate his destinies, and does contemn, divide, and cast from him the
profittes, pleasures, contents, and goods of his life, as thou have don) I
know not what need he has to seek death, and cannot tell why he fears
life, since that the one and the other is a will of a timorous person. Now if
into the dark dungeon of extreme misery thou do desire wil-fully to cast
thy self, seek not death, because this is the last expeller and extinguisher
of it. Let this foolish fury fly out of thy mind, by the which (me thinks)
thou do seek both to have, and to lose thy loouer. Why, do thou believe)
by being dissolved into nothing) to get him again? To whom I answered not a
word: But there was such a rumor spread through out the wide house, and through
out the City, and country round about. that all my servants (no otherwise
then at the howling of some hungry woolfe, all the nearest inhabitauntes are
wont to meet together) came running to me from every place, and all of them
afrighted with sudden sorrow, demanded what the matter was. But I had already
forbidden them, that knew it, to tell any thing at all. Wherefore covering the
horrible accident with a cunning lie, they rested all satisfied. My dear
husband made have thither, and my loving sisters, my careful parents, and
friends with panting and fainting breasts came running to me. And every one of
them equally deluded with a false tale, did (instead of a most wicked woman)
repute and praise me for a holy Saint. And every one after much weeping, first
reproved my life punished with so much sorrow, laboring afterward to
comfort me up again. But from thence forth it fell out that some believed,
that I was haunted and stinged with some fury, and therefore like a mad woman
continually watched me. But some more pitiful then the rest, marking my
mildnes, and judging it (as it was indeed) but a certain grief of mind,
with taking great compassion of me, laughed at that which the rest both did,
and said. And visited thus of many, I remained every day more amazed then
other: And under the discrete guard of the sage Nource I was closely kept. And
as there is no anger so burning or so extreme, All anger with time is brought
to nothing.
but by course of time is made cold again: So remaining certain days in
this case (as I have set down) I came to my self at last again, and did
manifestly know the Nurces words to be true. And with bitter tears therefore
I bewailed my passed follies. But yet although that the heat of my rage in
time was spent, and became nothing, my love nevertheless did not one whitte
decrease, but tarried with me still, by reason of the melancholy (used in other
accidents before) which now continually I had, taking it grievously at the
heart, to be forsaken for the unjust love of an other woman. Wherefore I
conferred with my Nurce often times about this matter, and took counsel of
her, desirous to find out some good means how to reclaim my old loouer. And
therefore some times I determined (by her advise) with pitiful letters to
certify him of my sorrowful life, and grievous misfortunes, and other
sometimes we thought it more convenient by some wise messenger, to let him
understand of my daily woes, procured by his wilful, absence. And truly
although ye Nurce was old, and the way very long and dangerous, yet she would
for my sake have gonne thither her self. But waying every thing well, we judged
yt letters were they never so pitiful were not of any effecacy to move him
from these present and new looues, so yt we accounted those but lost labor.
Admit yt (for all this) I did sometimes write certain, which had the very same
issue that we coniectured of before.

To send the Nurce thither, I thought it as far from the purpose, because I
did apparauntly perceive, that she could never come to him alive, and to put
my affiaunce and trust in an other, I thought it to prejudicial to my honor
and honesty. So that these first consultations were but frivolous. And there
was not left any way in my mind to have him again, but in my own person to
go to him: To perform which enterprise, there occured diverse things in my
mind: all which by good reason were at last adnihilated of my Nource.

I thought sometimes to take the habit of a Pilgrim, and with some faithful
companion and secret freende, to seek him out in the very midst of his
countries. And although this did seem possible unto me, notwithstanding I did
clearly see my honor to be in great hazard thereby, having heard how fair
and wandering Pilgrimmes are oftentimes vilie abused of wicked ruffians and
thieves, by the ways and in their trauelles. And besides this, knowinge my
self obliged to my good husband, without whom, or his leave, I could not
conceive how to frame, or how to take in hand this long journey, which thing to
obtain, in vain I might have hoped. Wherefore I gave no place to this
bootlesse invention. And therefore I was suddenly transported into an other
devise, as inconvenient, as the other was indecent for my estate before, and I
imagined indeed that it should come to pass, and should verily have done it,
if some repugnaunt chance in the mean time had not happened, but hereafter
(if I do but live) there shall not effectual practices be wanting to fulfill
the drifte of my pretenses. I feined in these my foresaid adversities, if the
Gods, had delivered me from them, to have made a vow, desiring to have
performed the which, with just reason I might have travailed up and down in
my loouer his countries: passing through the which, I had opportunity at will to
see, and to recall him back again: which I discovered to my dear husband, who
willingly and lovingly offered to furnished me with necessaries in the same
voyage, yet wishing me to attend a more convenient time. But the delays
hereof being very grievous, and no less dangerous unto me, and fearinge
least it might be suspected, and so detected a vicious and wicked journey, and
Pilgrimage, this (I say) caused me to enter into new imaginations, and into
other counselles: all which seemed worser to me, then the rest aleadged before,
except only the meruellous and supernatural effects of Hecate with the which,
By Hecate which Proserpina deuoteth is understood art Magique.
because I might most safely commit my self to the fearful spirits, I had
much talk and conversation, and with those especially, whom I had heard were
most skillful, and who themselves did boast to excel in art Magique,
promising to perform and bring to pass what I would.

And some of them swearing to carry me suddenly thither. Others to weane his
mind from all other looues, and to ingrafte it in mine again. Others telling
that they would restore me to my former liberty, and my self desiring that
the least of these might come to pass, I found them as full of tatling words,
and vain promises, as their unperformed and simple deeds did manifest.
Whereupon my flatteringe hope remained many times confused, and in suspense by
them, and therefore thinking it best of all to shake of these wicked driftes, I
attended convenient time, in the which my husband promised me to fulfill my
feyned vow.

Finis.
The sixth Book of Master John Boccace his Fiammetta.
MY Sorrows (notwithstanding the hope of my future voyage) were continuated,
and the sky with continual motion caring the Sun with it, did draw on one day
after an other without any intermediate space of time: And vain hope held me
in wavering doubts, longer then I would, my great greefes, and grievous love
not any whit deminished. The description of the Spring tide.
And now that Bull, which sometimes transported Europa, held Phoebus with his
golden light, and ye days borowing light of the nights, of the shortest,
became the longest. And flowery Zephirus (arrived with his calm and peaceable
blasts) had set the boisterous wars of Boreas in peace. And the stormy and
dark tempests banished away with the cold air, and the white snow
discovering the tops of high hills, and the plashie meddowes (washed with
the abundaunce of falling rain) had made every flower fayer, al grass to wax
green, and generally had renewed al herbage: And that hoary witness, which
all the cold winter season has covered every tree, was now changed into a
lively and fresh verdure. And in every place that season of the year did
rain, when joyful Ver abundantly enricheth the earth with his wished and
welcomed treasures. And the ground (starred as it were and wrought with
violets, marigoldes, and sweet roses) did seem to counteruaile ye eight heaven
in beauty, By the mother of Bacchus is understood the vine,
and Narcissus did now begin to grow on every meadow and the mother of Bacchus
also to show forth sprowting and fructiferous signs of her fertile womb,
and did with her green burgeons (more then she was wont to do) over charge
her supporter and fellow Elm, him self also become now more heavy by his new
garments. Driope, and the delastrous sisters of Phaeton did also now show
merry and cheerful countenaunces, having shaken of the miserable habitte of
hoarie winter. The pretty birds perching on every twigge and bow, were
heard to warble forth sweet and silver notes. And Proserpina her mother, ye
devout goddess of countrymen) joyfully waued up and down the feelds with her
goodly garments. And besides all these things my cruel Lord made every lusty,
young, and loouing mind to feel the heat of his fiery darts hotter then
before: Where upon every one, young Gentlewomen as well as gallant youths,
adorning themselves (according to their degree) in the brauest manner and
richest fashion of attire, endeavored to please their best belooued. The merry
feasts cheered up our Citizens, and filled all our City full of mirth, which
were more magnificent and copious, then any that had been made in floorishing
Rome of yore. And the Theators resounding with sweet songs, and melodious
soundes, did enuite every loouer to them. The Heroical young gentlemen
sometimes mounted upon stately coursers, and proud Gennets did run at Tylte
and Just in rich and complete Harnis, and sometimes their pampred and
headstrong Horses trapped all over with a caparison of little silver and golden
bells did hotly fight at Tourney. And sometimes prowdly prancing up and down on
them, with skillful hand did show how these foming fiery steedes with
frothie bytte should be managed and ridden. The young and wanton Ladies with
decked troops of beautiful Gentlewomen following them (desiring also to see
these sportes) wearing fine garlandes of new flowers about their heads, did
lend sweet and gracious aspectes to their gazing loouers, sometimes out of
high windows, and sometimes from beneath their doors. Of which some with
new gifts, others with a merry countenance, and some with sweet words, but
generally all with some favor or other did freendly honor their loouers, and
kindle greater flames in them. But I like a stranger and forlorn woman,
sitting by my self in a sollitarie place all alone, and comfortless for the
decayed hope of my joyful times, did not a little sorrow with my self but
lament greatly and mourn.

Nothing pleases my melancolyque fancyes, no feast could make my heart merry,
nor afforde any comfort to my grievous thoughts or ease my playntes. My hands
touched no green leaves, carried no sweet flowers in them, and cared as little
to handle any joyful thing, as my sorrowful eyes to behold them. And I
became so peeuishe an emulatresse, that I envied at others mirth, and with
great desire did injuriously wish that every woman might be so entreated with
love, and served with such sauce of Fortune, as I was. For with what a willing
ear, and with what great consolation do I remember, that many times I have
heard the recounted miseries, and miserable mishappes, that in times past, and
lately have befallen to unfortunate loouers. But while the angry Gods held
me in this cursed condition of life, Fortune to afflicted the more often times
shows a merry countenance.
deceitful fortune, with greater woes to afflict miserable men, changing as
it were in the midst of their adversities, shows them sometimes a pleasant
look, because, abandoning themselves, and trusting more to her fawnyng smiles,
they may fall into greater myseries, when their momentary mirth begins once,
and on a sudden to cease.

And so these ignorant fools, relying wholly upon her, at last perceive
themselves thrown headlong down, as miserable Icarus in the midst of his
flight, trusting to much to his waxed wings, and mounted up to the highest
skies, fell from thence into the sea called yet after his own name. This
frowning fortune I say, perceiving me amongst such seely souls, not to be
content with these passed euilles, that she had given me, preparing worser for
me, with a false and dissembled joy began to smile upon me, and to mollify
somewhat her pawsed anger: Because recoyling a good way back, she might (no
other wise then the hot rams of Africa in rutting time to give a greater
dubbe) assail and hurt me the more.

And in this sort with a certain vain gladness, I made truce for a season
with my sharp and still sorrows. But my faythlesse loouer having now tarried a
great many months more, then those four promised past, and unperformed:
Loouers are sometimes comforted with one joy.
It fell out that sitting on a certain day all alone in my sorrowful chamber,
though wearied with the ouercloying company of doleful thoughts, and
accustomed lamentacions, the old and feeble Nurce with a more hasty pace,
then her aged limbs could well endure, came rushing in, her furowed face all
bewette with trickling sweat, and setting her self down by me, her breast
panting up and down, and her eyes expressing a certain kind of ioyfulnes
in them, she began many times to speak, but the precedent faintness of her
wearyed pulmon, did ever break of her words in the midst: To whom (with a
mind full of suspicious wonder, and fearful doubt) I said. O dear Nurce
what means this great labor and pains, that thou have taken, thus tired thy
self with? What thing do thou so earnestly desire to tell, and with such
have, that first thou wylt not suffer thy breathless spirittes to rest them.
What, are they joyful, or unlucky tidinges? Shall I prepare my self to fly,
to dye, or what shall I do? Thy countenance (I know not how, nor wherefore)
does some what renew my drooping hope, but my affairs hanging a long time in
contrary suspense, persuade me to suspecte more cruel mishappes, which are
of common course and custom incident to miserable creatures. Tell me therefore
quickly, and hold me no longer in doubt, resolve me, what the ocasion of this
thy have may importe? Tell me, whether any happy God, or haggishe fury has
driven thee hither?

Then the old woman having yet scarce recovered her wind, interrupting my
words, and more joyful then before, said. O sweet daughter rejoice, there is
no cause of fear in my tidinges. Shake of all grief, and inuest thy mourning
mind again with thy shining robe of mirth, thy belooued and loouing loouer is
returned. And Panphilus (Fiammetta) is at hand.

These angelical words entered so deep into my amazed mind, and filled it
with such sudden joy, as my eyes did presently show an evident testimony of
the same, but my persuing grief, and haunting miseries did incontinently
bereave me of it, and made me give no credit to them. Wherefore lamenting, I
said. O my dear Nource by those thy many years, and by the aged body, which
long since has desired eternal repose, I pray thee, not to mock me (a most
miserable and distressed soul,) of whose cares and greefes thou ought also
to be partaker. Impossible things.
For first will the clear rivers (I think) return to their first fountains,
and Hesperus will bring clear day: First will Phebae with her brothers beams,
give light to the dark night, before my ungrateful loouer will return. Who
does not know (alas) that, disporting him self with his new mistress, he is
lulled a sleep in the secure cradle of all delights, enjoying his merry times,
and loouing her more then ever he did me. And think more over (Fiammeta) that
wheresoever he were now, he would return to her again, and therefore not
likely to come from her, whom he looueth so etreamely, to me whom he infinitely
hates. But presently she added. O Fiammetta, as ye gods shall receive the
parting soul of this withered, and old body thy careful Nurce does not lie
in one word she has told thee. Nor does it become one of my age, with such or
like tales to mock distressed women, and thee especially, to who^ I owe all
the duty, and love I may. Then I replied and said. How came these blessed
news to thy ears, and how do thou know them to be true, ah tell me
quickly, because if they seem probable in my iealious and doubtful mind, I
may rejoice my self with the happy vtteraunce and sweet accentes of them. And
rising from the place where I was, a little gladder then before, and somewhat
cheered in mind, I sat nearer to the Nource, and then she said. Rising this
morning very early about my proper business, which lay near to the Sea shore,
and earnestly musing on them, I went with a soft and slow pace, with my back
turned toward the Sea, when a certain young Gentleman leaping a shore out
of a late arrived ship, unadvised carried by the force of his skip, did
boysterously and (as after I perceived) against his will fall against me.
Wherefore I coniuring the Gods and with great choler turning toward him, to
blame him for this received injury, with humble words he meekely craved
pardon at my hands.

But earnestly looking on him, and marking well his habitte, I judged that he
came from the coasts and country of thy belooued Panphilus, and therefore
said to him. Gentleman (as the Gods may be favorable unto you) of courtesy
tell me, if you come from any foreign country? Yes good woman, that I do,
said he again. Then said I. Tell me from whence good Sir if it please you.
And he said, from the coasts of Hetruria, and from the most noble City in
the same I lately came, and of which I am. As soon as I heard this, I then
knew him to be Panphilus his countriman: Wherefore I asked him, if he knew
Panphilus, and what was become of him.

And he answered that he did know him very well, and reported many good
things to me in praise and commendation of him, and besides this said, that
he had now come with him, if a little business had not stayed him there,
but that (without al doubt) in a few days after he would come thither.

In the mean while, yt we were thus talking, all his companions, that came
belike with him leaping on shore, and ready to depart, he went away with them. I
leaving aparte al other business, with the greatest have I could (thinking that
I should not have lived so long, until I had told thee of it) came heather
breathless and panting as thou see. Wherefore live now merrily once again,
and exile these sad thoughts. Which things, when she had spoken, with a
most glad and joyful countenance I kissed her old forheade, and yet with a
doubtful mind, I many times afterwads coniured her, and did ask her again,
if these news were true, wishing ever in mind, that she should not tell the
contrary, and doubting least she had deceived me. The manner of those that
doubt,
But after that many times with holy oaths she did swear, that she had told
me nothing more then truth, although that I and No went wavering up and down
my suspicious head, like a gladesome woman with these speeches I rendered
immortal thanks to the Gods, saying.

O supreme Jupiter most royal rectour and maiesticall sovereign of the high
heavens. O luminate and radiant Apollo, from whom nothing is hid. O gracious
Venus and most pitiful of thy subjects. O sacred Boy carrying the golden and
sweet darts be ye all praised together and with equal honor magnified.
Whosoever perseuereth in your hope, cannot perrish in his long and doubtful
travels. Behold by your favorable mercies, and not by my merits my desired
Panphilus does return, whom I shall not so soon see, but that your alters
(heretofore visited of me with most lamentable and pitiful prayers, and
washed with bitter tears) shall now with my obsequious hands be perfumed with
most sweet odours, and precious incense. And to thee Fortune full of pity,
turning now thy wrathful face away from my manifold euilles, will I presently
give, and erect the promised image, with testimony of thy needful and
imparted benefits.

But most humbly obtesting you all, with that humility and devotion, which may
make you most exorable, that you would deygne to take away all unlucky
occurrentes possible to hinder my Panphilus in his determined journey, and to
conducte him hither as safe and sound, as ever he was heretofore. My prayers
finished (no otherwise then an vnhoodded Faulcon) rousing my self up
together, and clapping my hands, I began thus to say. O amorous breasts
weakened with long consuming sorrows, cast away from hence forth all pinching
cares, since that my dear loouer (remembering me again) does now return
according to his promise.

Drive away sorrow, harbor no fear, and shake of the great shame, that does
abound in afflicted and despised things, nor (as Fortune has heretofore
guided you) presume not to entertayne any more grievous thoughts, but dissolve
now into nothing the dark clouds of cruel destinies, and let every
semblaunce and thought of my miserable times depart now from me, let my merry
and pleasant countenance return again, and be made capable to rejoice at
this present felicity, and let old Fiammetta with her ruinated soul be
altogether blotted out of my memory. Whilst joyfully I spoke these words
with my self, my heart began yet to doubt (I know not) what, and a sudden
searching cold (being ignorant of the cause thereof) did over run all my
body, so that it countrechecked my will, ready to rejoice my mind.

Wherefore I remained a good while as one astonyed in the very midst of my
speech. Miserable men never believe gladsome things.
Alas that this inconvenience and fault does haunt miserable and afflicted
souls. That they cannot dispose and frame them selves to give credence to
joyful things, apparaunt almost, and told them for their good, and comfort.
And admit that their happy fortune return again, it is irksome
nevertheless unto them to be merry at all, but believing it as a dream, they
slenderly pass it away, as though it were not indeed. Wherefore like one
half amazed with my self, I began to say. Who called me back again, or
what forbadde me from my new commenced joy? What does not Panphilus return?
Truly yes.

Who does therefore command me to mourn again. There is no way now left,
nor do I see any occasion to new make me fall into my old sadness. Who does
therefore for bide me to deck my self with new flowers, and to adorn my
fine body with rich robes? Alas I know not, and yet I am forbidden (I know)
by some secret suggestion of sorrow, and relic of hidden grief, of which
my soul is not yet clearly purged.

And standing on these doubtful points, and in this sort against my will, as
though I had not been in my self, in the midst of all my doubtful errors,
great store of tears fell from my eyes, and in the cheifest of my new merry
mood my accustomed lamentations abruptly disturbed it. And thus my long
afflicted heart did by the ever running conduites of my eyes send forth her
woonted and wastfull tears.

Signs of a mind deuining of things to come,
And my unconstant mind (diuyning as it were of ensuing misery and of worse
mishappes) did with great grief and lamentations (like the Sicilian hill)
euaporate many scalding sighs and sobbes, most manifest signs, by the which
I do now certainly know, that then there is some great and stormy tempest
near at hand, when without any blast of turbulent winds, the wary Seamen
perceives the calm and quiet seas begin to swell. But yet desirous to
overcome that which my mind would not, I said. O miserable woman, what ill
news, and what misfortunes to come needless do thou feign in thy suspicious
mind. Say yt this which thou foretellest of, may happen to thy doubting mind of
consequent mishappes, thou fear (alas) to late, and without any profitte at
all.

From these words) therefore) ever after I applied my mind wholly to a new
kind of mirth, and I did (as well as I could) extinguishe all melancolique
thoughts. And warning my faithful Nurce to be dilligent about Panphilus his
return, I changed my mourning weeds into gorgeous and gallant vestmentes,
and began to wax very curious, and careful of my self, because least by my
long affected countenance, and disordered attire, I might not at his return
seem vnloouely in his eyes.

My pale and lean cheeks began to recover their lost and lively color,
and recovering their forsaken plumpnes, began to wax round again. And my
tears now dried up, took away with them also those read and purple
rainebowes, which encompassed my eyes round about: The which, being returned
into their due places, received again their whole and perfect lyghtes.

And my withered cheeks, being somewhat broken and worn by continual
streams of tears, that washed them, grew again to their old and former
softness. And my neglected hair, although not suddenly they became not
golden, they wanted not now their accustomed frizelings, and deintie deckinges,
to make the^ look so passing fair as once they did. And my dear and costly
apparel, having a long time line vnworne in sweet Indian presses, did now
bravely set forth my seemly body. What more? In brief, The effects of them
that return to be joyful again.
I turned my pains to pleasures, my greefes to gladness, my sighing to
singing, my mourning to mirth, and made a renouation of my self, and of all
things else that belonged to me. And I made my self almost as beautiful as
once I was, first, and brought my self well nie to my former estate and
happiness of life, insomuch that the Gentlewomen my near neighbors, my dear
kinsfolks, and my loouing husband merueiled not a little at this sudden
chaung, saying to themselves.

What inspiration has drawn her from so long sorrow, and mittigated thus her
continual melancholy, which neither by sweet and effectual comfortes, nor
by freendly and loouing requests, could heretofore be driven out of her
obstinate mind. This is surely no less then a miracle. And as they wondered
much at it, so were they also very glad of this sudden alteration. All my
family being very heavy a long time for my continual tribulation, began
with me to rejoice now again, and as my errors were altered, even so it
seemed that all things with the same were changed from sorrow into sollace.
The days which erste I thought longer then they were wont to be, did (by
reason of the hope, which I had of Panphilus his return, seeming now longest
of all unto me) pass away (me^ thought) with the slowest course, that might
be. Nor the first were so well counted of me, but with greater care and
diligence I marked these. In space of which time, sometimes sitting with my
self all alone, and thinking of my passed cares, and careful thoughts, I did
now cheefely condemn them, saying.

O how hardly of late have I thought of my dear lover, how rashly have I
condemned his long staying, and how foolishly have I believed, that he was
wholly given over to the liking and love of an other woman, induced thereunto
but by the slender report of one of my lying servants. Accursed therefore be
their buzzing tales. O Gods how can men with such open and impudent
countenaunces tell abroad false and shameless lies. But every thing
(Fiammetta) should with more sound advise of thy own part have been considered,
then so soon and so easily to have given belief unto them. I should (alas)
have counterpoysed the faith of my loouer so many times sworn, and promised to
me, and as many times again with affectionate tears auowed, and should have
weighed the love, that he bare me, and yet does with their fabulous words,
false rumors, and base credittes, in the equal ballaunce of my right
judgment, who (without any sacrament of urged oath, and my self not caring to
enquire further, and not desirous to know any more, then that they spoke) told
only the bare reports of others and with asseueration only of their first
opinions and superficical knowledge, which do now manifestly appear to be
erroneous and false.

One alleging, that he did se a young gentlewomen go into Panphilus his
fathers house, because he knew not any other young gentleman perhaps there
but him, and not thinking of the unseemly and common wantones of old dotardes,
or else (ignorant (perhaps) of her alliance with them) believed by and by
that she was his wife, and so without any more a do told it her who therefore
did believe it, because she took but little heed and care of him, that told
it. An other, because he perceived him sometimes to eye some fair Gentlewomen,
or else to dally with her, which (might be) was his Kinswoman, or some one, with
whom he was familiarly and honestly acquainted, did judge her to be his also,
and affirming it again with simple words to me, I did like a simple Woman
believe the same. O that I had most duly pondered these things in my mind,
how many tears what infinite sighs, and what extreme grief had I never
felt. But what thing can an enamored and silly Woman advisedly ponderate in
her mind, and directly do? As sundry forces assail us, so do they toss
and turn our minds to every change. And simple Lovers easily believe all
things. Because love is a passion full of care and fear. Love is a thing full
of care and fear.
For by continual use they addict themselves always to hurtful accidents,
and desiring many things, believe most possibilities, contrary to their
troubled fancies, so fixing their irremooueable minds upon the first, that to
the second reports, and things, they give small belief or none at all. But I
am to be held excused: and therefore I always prayed the Gods that they
would make me a liar in my fond imaginations and belief.

But behold my prayers are heard, and he shall never understand of these words
which I have spoken against him, which if he did know, he could say nothing
else, but that they proceeded from the fervent love I bare him. For how dear a
thing should it be to him, to hear of my torments, and grief of mind, and to
know of my passed and prevented perilles for his sake, because these are most
true arguments of my undoubted love and faith, and I can scarce think
otherwise, but that he has tarried so long, and to none other end, but only
to prove, if with a constant mind I could (without forgetting him) attend
his coming again. Behold therefore, and with what force of mind I have
expected him? Wherefore from henceforth when he shall perceive, with what
pain and tears, and with how many millions of martyring thoughts I have
looked for him, love shall be borne anewe again in him, and no other God. Ah
when shall it come to pass, that he (being once arrived) shall see me, and I
him again?

God sees all things
O ye Gods, which from your high thrones contemplate all things here
beneath, may I temper and moderate my eager desire, from embracing his body
before all men, as soon as I shall see him? Truly I believe I shall hardly
do it. O bounteous Gods when shall it be, that enfolding him straightly
between mine arms, I shall render him treble again those kisses, which at
his departure he gave to my dying lyppes, without any exchange for them
again? Certes the presage which I noted, that I was not able to bid him
farewell, is now true, and by yt the Gods have very well declared to me his
return. O ye gracious Gods, when will that time come, when I may joyfully
recount unto him the Seas of salt tears, and the worlds of woes, which I have
passed, and worn out, and when shall I know the occasion of his long and
sorrowful absence? shall I live so long? Alas I scarcely think it. Ah let that
day come quickly, because death (not long since, so often called, and procured
of me) does now terrify me, which, (if possiblye my prayers can enter into
his ears) I humbly beseech, that flying far from me, he would let me spend
the remainder of my young years in joy and pleasure with my beloved Panphilus.
I was therefore very careful, that no day should pass me, wherein I did not
employe my whole study and diligence, to be very inquisitiue of Panphilus his
return, and to hear also of some true news of him. And my dear Nurce was
not negligent in seeking out the young Gentleman, and bringer of these glad
tidings, because she might with more surenes be acertained of that, which she
had told me, which thing she did not only once, but as often times as
conveniently she could (and as many times as she had done before) she did
always bring me word, that his return was nigh at hand. Wherefore I did not
only expect the promised time, but proceeding a little further, I did imagine
it possible, that he was now come. And therefore a hundred times in the day, I
did run sometimes beneath to the door, and sometimes to the window, looking
round about me a great way if I might perceive him come. And I saw not any
manne coming a far of that way, that he should come, but I did verily
imagine, that it was he, and with great desire did look on him so long,
until coming nearer unto me, I might easily perceive that it was not he.
Whereat being somewhat grieved in mind, I looked out to see if any other
came, and sometimes one, and now another passing by, and seeing that none of
them was he, I remained (my greedy desire and hope deceived) full of confusion,
and very angry with my self.

And if I was perhaps called into the house, or else by some other urgent
occasion went from the window, a hundred thousand thoughts (as if a multitude
of dogs grinding their teeth at me, had bitte^ my soul) did sting and molest
me saying to my self. Alas even now (perhaps) he goes by, or else is already
passed, whilst thou art here busied about not so contented an office: and
immediately I went again to see if I could see him come, Read Ariosto of her
that attended the return of her Lover.
making it but a short time between going down to the door, and running
quickly up to the window again. Ah poor soul, and wretched Woman, how much
sorrow and how many troubles did thou sustain for him, whom howrely
looking for thou could never perceive to come. But after that the day was
come, in which my Nurce told me, that he should arrive, and of the which, she
had so often foretold me, I adorned my self no otherwise then Alcmena did,
when she heard that her Amphitrio was at hand, and with my mastering hand left
not any thing in me vnbeautified, but set forth in the best and brauest
order, and in the finest fashion.

And I could scarce keep my self in, from going to the Sea side, because I
might the sooner see him, because (also) I heard certain news of the arriual
of those Galleys, in the which my Nurce understood and certified me that he
should come. But thinking with my self, that the first Saint, that he would
visit on shore was my self, I (therefore) bridled my earnest and hot
desire. But in fine (as I rightly guess) he came not at all: whereupon I
began beyond all measure to marvel, and in the mids of my late joy,
arised in my mind diverse kinds of doubts, which were not so easily
overthrown by superficicall suppositions of his coming, or by any other
shadows of glad some thoughts. After a little while therefore, I sent the old
Woman to know what was become of him, and whether he was come or not? who went
as it seemed, with such an unwilling mind, and with as flow a pace, which did
divine of some consequent and sorrowful tydinges. Wherefore I accursed many
times with my self, and with great anger blamed her crooked steps and aged
paces. Who staying but a little time abroad, came to me again with a
sorrowful cheer, and dull gate.

Signs of one that brings ill news
Alas when I saw her come in this sort, I could hardly contain my soul in my
body, and therefore suddenly imagined that my Lover was dead by the way, or
else that he was arrived very sick. The color of my face changed a
thousand times in one instant, and going to meet the dreaming Nurce, I said
unto her. Tell me quickly what news do thou bring? Does my Lover live. She
changed not her gate, nor answered me one word. And being now entered into my
Chamber, and setting her self down, looked me very pitifully in the face.
Wherefore every part of my body being shaken like the tender Aspen leaves,
by some soft wind, I did begin now to tremble, and hardly restraining my
tears, I crossed mine arms, and did put my hands into my sorrowful bosom,
saying.

If thou do not tell me quickly, what this thy sorrowful countenance does
mean, and what these sad signs which thou do bring with thee do
signify, there shall not any part of my garments remain whole to my body, nor
hair untorn from my head. What secret occasion therefore may it be, that
moves thee from telling it, but only that, which I fear will prove
ominous unto me. Conceal it no longer, but declare it, whilst I am attending
for worse What (tell me at a word) lives my Panphilus? She pricked on by my
angry words, and threatenings, with a low voice, and looking down to the
ground said. He lives. Then said I again, wherefore do thou not tell me
quickly. What envious accidents stay him from coming hither? Why do thou
hold me in suspense, and wavering amidst a thousand fearful surmises? Is he
sick with any malladie? Or what froward occasion does with-holde him, that
being come out of the Gally, he does not come to see me. Then she said. I
know not whether want of health, or any other mischaunce does detain him.
Then said I again, have thou not seen him? or is he not yet come? I have
seen him said she, and he is come, but not the same whom we did expect. How
art thou sure said I that he is not my Panphilus? Have thou seen him at any
other time, and did thou now behold and mark him well? Truly said she, I
did never see him, that I wot of, but being even now brought unto him by
that young Gentleman, who told me the first news of his return, and telling
him, that I had oftentimes enquired for him, he asked me what I would with him?
His health and welfare said I. And I demanding of him, how his old Father did,
and in what estate the rest of his things stood, and what was the cause of his
long staying since his departure, he answered, that he never knew his Father,
and that he was a posthumus borne, Posthumus is he that is borne after his
Fathers death
and that all his things were in good plight, and that he had never been
here before, and did mean to stay here but a small time. These things made
me to wonder, and doubting least I was deceived, I asked him his name, which
courteously and plainly he told me, and I no sooner heard it, but immediately I
perceived, by ye identity and likeness of it, with the name of thy beloved
Panphilus, both thee and my self to be greatly deceived. When I heard these
things (most pitiful Ladies) mine eyes forsook their lights, and every
sensitive spirit, for fear of death, Effects of a sudden passion
went their ways, and falling down in the place where I satte, there remained
no more force in my body, then was scarce able to breathe forth one poor
(alas.) Which (when the miserable old Woman perceived) lamenting greatly, and
calling the rest of my Women about me, carried me like a dead woman to my
bed, and there laboring to reduce my wandering spirits with cold water,
believing a great while together to recover life, and yet misdoubting al so the
same, they watched me with diligent care. But after that my forsaken forces
came to me again, and after I had powered forth many tears and sighs, I
asked the sorrowful Nurce an other time, if it were so, as she had said. And
besides this, remembering with my self, how warye and discrete Panphilus was
wont to be, and suspecting that he had wisely and of purpose made himself
unknown to the Nurce, with whom he had never talked in his life before, I
wylled, that she should describe unto me the countenance, the feyture, the
gesture, the personage, and the fashions of that Panphilus with whom she had
talked. But she affyrming first with an oath, that it was no less, and no
otherwise then she had told me, declared to me afterward in order, his
stature, the lineaments of his body and face, and last of all, the manner of
his apparel. All which (alas) made me give too great faith to that, which
the old woman told me.

Wherefore thruste of from all hope, I reentred into my former woes, and rising
up like a frantic Woman, I pulled of my sumptuous garments of joy, and laid
aside my once dear, but now unpleasant ornaments, and my friseled shyning
hair, with an envious Hecuba hand, I tore out of order, and did carelessly
ruffle them together, and despysing all comfort, I began most bitterly to
complain of my incessant, and miserable mishaps, and with cruel words to
condemn my failed hope, and to blame the good thoughts, and like concealed
opinions of my untrue and wicked Lover.

And in brief, I returned wholly to my old life of myseries, and had a more
earnest and fervent desire of death then before, which I had not escaped, Hope
does still keep one in life
(as yet I have) but that the hope of my intended voyage, with no little force
with-helde me from performaunce of it.

The end of the sixth book.
The seventh Book of Master John Boccace his Fiammetta.
IN this kind of life therefore (most pitiful Ladies) I have remained, as by
the recounted and passed accidents you may geather. And by how much my
ungrateful Lord, does see my hope fly from me, by so much ye more does he
work stranger effects in me, then he was wont to do, and blowing with more
hot desires the glowing coals of love in my smothered breast, does make them
greater then before, which, as on the one side they do mightily increase, so
are my pains and sorrows on the other by like proportion augmented. Which
never being with due ointment assuaged of me, are by my own will and follies,
made more grievous and insupportable: And being more sharp do more afflicte
my sorrowful and woeful mind. And I doubt not (but following their headlong
course) they will at length with some honest mean open me the way of death,
which heretofore I have so long, and unfeignedly desired. But yet having my
assured hope as I have already said in my pretended voyage to find, and see
him (ah that ungrateful Panphilus I mean) who is the original of all this, I
did not seek to mittigate them, but was rather now resolved (as well as I
could) constantly to endure them. For performaunce of which, I found out one
only possible way amongst many others, To resemble ones pain with an others
greefes is a lightning of sorrow.
which was, to compare and measure my pains, with theirs, who had likewise
passed such bruntes as my self, fighting under the amorous ensigns, and in
the dollorous battayles of love. Whereof I think to reap a double commodity.

First in knowing my self not the first, nor to be alone afflicted with
misery, as not long since my Nurce, in her alleged comfortes told me.
Secondly, that every grief, pain, and pange of their love, being (in my
judgment) sufficiently recompensed, I determined and resolved with my self to
pass away ever after with my former, every other grief whatsoever: which I
reckon no little glory to me, when I may say, that I am only she, that living
has sustained more grief and misery then any other woman: And with this kind
of glory (forsaken yet of every one as extreme misery indeed, and of my
self (alas) if I could otherwise do) in this sort as you shall hear, I
passed away my melancholy times. I say therefore, that martired with these
continual anguishes and considering well of others who have not been exempted
from the like, the painful looues of Inacus his daughter (who being first a
tender and delicate damsel, and passing loouely and beautiful, did seem
lively to represent me) came to my mind, and afterward, her great good hap
and happy felicity, in that she was not meanly belooued of mighty Jove.
Which thing doubtless cold not be of her only but of every woman also
accounted a great glory and praise. Afterward considering how she was
metamorphised into a Cow, and how by the severe command of iealious Juno,
she was kept of vigilant Argus, I did judge her to be beyond all measure
tormented with great anxieties and grief of mind. And certes I am of opinion,
that her greefs did greatly exceed mine, if that for her company and comfort
she had not had sometimes the assistance of her loouing God. And who does
doubt, if I had the sweet company of my loouer, who might any time have helped
me in these ruthful passions, or that he had but sometimes taken any little
pity of me, that any woes whatsoever could have annoyed me so, as they have
continually done? Bedes this, her end made her passed and approved sorrows,
very light. Because Argus being killed by her loouers messenger, and she
transported lightly with her heavy body into Egypt, and returned there to her
own shape again, and married to Ostiris, she saw her self at last installed
in the Imperial diadem and like a happy Queen to sway the regal scepter of
Egypt. If I could but think, or hope though in my old age to see my Panphilus
once again, I would say that my greefes were not to be compared with the
sorrows of this Lady, But the Gods only know, if this good fortune shall
ever happen to me or no, howsoever with false hope in the mean time I delude
and flatter my self. The greater part of these fables are in Ouide.
Next to her the unfortunate love of Biblis is represented unto my thoughts,
whom (me think) I see forsake, all her wealth, joy and pleasure to follow
unflexible Caunus. And with these, I bethink my self also of wicked Mirrha,
who, after the detested fruition of her odious looues, flying from her angry
Father, who pursued her with menaces of just death, plunged also into that
misery

I behold also dolorus Canace, who, after the miserable birth of her incestious
conceptio^, looked for nothing less but death. And thinking well with my self
of their several sorrows, I did doubtless esteem them to be extreme,
although their looues were but filthy and abominable lusts. But if I am not
deceived, I see them all ended, or else in short space to be terminated.
Because Mirrha flying away, having the Gods pitiful of her pains, and
aunswerable to her desires, was with delay transformed into a tree of her own
name.

And she never after (although it does continually destill Amber tears, as
she did at the very instant, when her form was changed) felt any of her
former pains and playntes. And as the occasion of her sorrows did arise, so
the cause of their pryuation, was not also wanting. Biblis likewise (as some
say) without any longer delay ended her doleful days with a cruel halter,
admit, that others hold, that by great favor of the Nymphs, (who did
commisserate her hard destinies) she was turned into a fountain of her own
name, till this day yet keeping the same.

And this befell to her when she knew that Caumus denied her, her desires, and
scornefully rejected her company, and with frowning brows reproved her
wicked suits. What shall I say in showing my own pains, greater (alas) then
those, that molested Biblis, and more grievous, then those, that Mirrha had,
but that the breuiety of them has had no small advantage over the length of
mine. Those therefore well considered, the pitiful looues of hapless Pyramus
and Thisbe were next objected to my remembrance, of whom (I cannot but take
great compassion, imagining them both to be young and with great trouble, and
many sorrows to have burned in each others love, and laboring with mutual
presence to have reaped the fruit of their fervent desires, which with
untimely death and in short time were equally dissolved.

O what a pitiful thing is it to think, what grief pierced poor Pyramus
his heart, when, in the silent time of night finding his dear Thisbes robes,
bloody and torn of the wild beast at the foot of the Mulbery tree, near unto
the fountain and appointed meeting place, by these dismal and unexpected
tokens, he surely thought that she was devoured. The sheathing certes of his
own sword in his inpatie^t breast did show it manifestly enough. Afterward
discoursing in my mind the wounding thoughts of miserable Thisbe, beholding
her loouer wallowing in his own goare, and pa^ting yet with declining life, I
think them to be so grievous, and imagine her tears also to be such burning
drops, that I can hardly believe that there were ever any (mine own
excepted) that did torment, and scalde more, then hyrs. Wherefore these two (as
it is now said) in the very beginning of their greefes, and looues did end the
very same. O thrice happy souls, if that in the other world, as in this their
perfect and firm love does, still remain inuiolate. And so, the pains,
cares and infinite woes, of all their former love could not be equivalent with
the delights, and content of their eternal company.

After these the grief of forsaken Dido entered with greater force and deeper
consideration into my mind, because her condition did of all others most
resemble mine. I imagined how she was building of Carthage, and studying with
great Majesty to dictate laws in Iunos temple, to her new people: And how she
gave bountiful entertainment to Aeneas a stranger unto her, by envious
tempests of ye Sea weatherbeaten, and cast upon her Libian shores, and how she
was enamoured of his brave personage, and passing virtues and at last how she
committed both her self, and all hirs to the disposition and pleasure of that
Troyan Duke. Who having used her royal Palaces at his pleasure, and soaked
himself in all manner of delices in her country, she being every day more and
more enflamed with his love, abandoning her at last, departed from thence. O
how much without compare did she seem miserable in my conceit, beholding her
looking from her highest turrettes toward the sea, covered with disankred
ships of her flying and vnpittifull loouer.

But I judge her more impatient, then dollorous, when I think of her cruel
death. And certes at the first departure of my Panphilus I felt (in my
oppinion) the very self same grief, as she did on the sudden endure, at the
sailing away of false Aeneas. O that it had so pleased the Gods that I, as
unable to endure my grief, as she was hers, had with some sudden death ended
my loathed life, so that by these means I might have delivered my self from
these pains, and sorrows, as she did her self, which afterward (by
defaulte thereof) did continually cleave in sunder my afflicted heart. After
these miserable thoughts, and the ruthful chances of unhappy Hero of Sesto
came to my mind, whom (me thought I saw coming down from her highest
Tower to the Sea banks and rocks, where she was wont sometimes to meet and
receive her welbelooued and wearied Leander into her arms.

And even there again (me thinks) I se her with what a pitiful and pale
countenance she beheld her loouer lying dead before her, Sorrow cease when
hope is past to regaine the thing which is lost,
driven first on shore by a freendly Dolphin, al naked, and souced in brinish
waters, and laid along upon the Sea sands, and wiping with her garments the
salt water from his pale visage, and drowning him the second time with the
flowing streams of her swelling tears. Ah what great pity does her cruel
passages find in my sorrowful mind. More truly then any of those of the
foresaid ladies, and sometimes so much, that forgetting my own woes, I did
weep and lament for hirs.

And lastly cold I conceive no means for her comfort but one of these two,
either to die, or else to forget him, as other dead men have been: In taking
either of which her sorrows (I think) might have easily been finished.
Considering that no lost thing, in recovering of which again, there is no hope
left, can grieve us any long time. But yet the Gods forbid, that this
kind of comfort should happen to me, which if it did come to pass, no counsel
in such a case should avail but that, which persuaded me once to a resolute
and hasty death. For during the time that my Panphilus lives, whose life his
happy stars, and predominante planettes preserve as long, as he himself
does desire, that cannot (I hope) nor shall not befall unto me. But seeing the
enter course of mundane things in continual motion, this belief is added to
my hope, that in the end, or else (perhaps) before, he shall return, and be
mine again, as once he was: which lingering hope not coming to effect, does
howerly make my life grievous and irksome unto me. And by thus much therefore,
I esteem my self oppressed with greater sorrow then she was. I remember yt
in French meeters, to which if any credit may be lent, I have sometimes read
that Sir Tristram, and Lady Isotta have more then any other loouers, French
Rimes,
mutually and fervently looued each other, and with their changing delights,
have had great misfortunes and adversities enter mingled, even in the
floorishing and brauest time of their youth, who, because, loouing greatly
together, they have tasted both of one end, it seems most credible, that not
without extreme sorrow and bitter grief on bothsides, they forsook their
worldly delights.

Which may be easily granted, if in abandoning this world they thought that
in the other, the same could not be found or had. But if they had this
opinion, that they were as ample and common in the other (as they had in deed)
then it is to be thought, that death had rather aforeded them some great
content and joy, then any sorrow and fear at all. For what certainty of
grief may one give with testimony of a thing, which he never proved. None at
all truly. In Sir Tristram his arms was his own death, and the death of his
Lady also.

For if, in embracing her body so straightly and loouingly it had grieved her
at all, in opening his arms again, the pain (no doubt) had ceased. And yet
for all this, let us admit and say, that it is by great reason most fearful,
and grievous to taste of: what grief can we say to be absolutely in a thing,
that does come to pass but only once, and which does occupy but a little
space of time? Certes none. Sir Tristram therefore and Isotta in one hour ended
their delights, and dollours. The continued time of my stretching grief, and
lasting sorrow, has without comparison greatly exceeded the brevity of my
enjoyed mirth and joys. But amongst the number of these foresaid loouers, my
mind did think of miserable Phedra, who with her voluntary and advised fury,
was ye occasion of his most cruel death, whom she loved more then her self:
and I know not truly, what damage and great inconvenience did follow her of
such a great fault, but I am certain, if ye like had ever happened to me,
there had been nothing but violent death, yt might expiate ye guilt thereof: but
if she lived, she buried him afterward in darck obliuio^ as commonly all
things (as even now I said) are wont to be forgotten by death. And besides
these sorrows which Laodamia, Deiphyle Argia, Euadne, and Deianira, and many
others felt, followed hers in my scanning thoughts: all which either by
violent death, or by necessary oblivion received some comfort at last.

Fire the longer it remains in any thing the more it burns.
And who doubts that burning fire, red hot iron, and melted lead, does not
grievously burn and scalde his finger, who does but suddenly dippe it in,
and does quickly pull it out again: Why, none I think: And yet this is
nothing to that extreme pain, whose whole body is in either of these
tormented and plunged for a good space together: wherefore how many soever I
have described above in woes, sorrows and pains, the same may be said to be
but a momentarie while in their superficial and counterfeite greefes, whereas
I have really felt them, continually been in them, and am not yet free from
them. Wherefore all these foresaid woes, in respect of mine, have been but
amorous annoyaunces. But besides these miserable women, the no less sorrowful
teres powered forth of those, who with the unexpected brunts of cruel fortune
have been confounded, came before mine eyes.

And these are those of Iocasta, Hecuba, Sophonisba, Cornelia and Cleopatra. O
how much myserie (considering well the miserable success of Iocastas looues)
do we see befallen unto her in all her life time, possible enough to have
daunted and troubled the most stout and strongest mind. For she being very
young, was married to Layus King of Thebes, who commanded, that her first
child should be thrown out to be deuowred of wild Beasts, the miserable
Father thinking by this, to have prevented that which the heavens and his
inevitable destinies, with infallible course had prepared for him. O what a
grief must (I needs think,) that this was to her soul, considering the
degree of her that sent it, and that with her own hands she was constrained
to deliver, and to send it to a cruel kind of death: and afterward
certified by them, that carried her unfortunate infant, of his mangled and
devoured corpse, with what intolerable grief she believed, that he was dead
indeed. And to see her hapless Husband most miserably slain of him, whom he
had engendered in her own bowels, and that she her self afterward espoused to
her unknown Son, had by him four children. And so how almost in one hour she
saw her self mother, and wife to this wicked Parricide: whom after she had
perfectly known, when she saw him deprived first of his eyes, and last of his
kingdom, and how his execrable fact and detested life was published to ye whole
world. In what miserable plight her soul was then, oppressed now with many
years, which were rather desirous of repose, then meet to be diminished with
restles anguish, she may well think, and judge, who has been tossed with
the greatest, or with like greefes of mind. But yet her dispiteous and cruel
Fortune heaped upon her extreme misery, greater and more bitter woes. For
seeing the yearly intercourse and successiue reign of her two Sons, with
mutual compositition divided between them. And afterward the faithless
brother pynned up in the City, and seeing the greatest part of Greece under
the regiment of seven Kings, lastly, after many blooddie battles, consuming
fires, miserable spoil of Virgins, wives, and goods. When she beheld one of
her prodigious Sons unnaturally to embrew his sword in his own brothers
blood, and when her Husbands Son driven out, and exiled into an other
Kingdom, she saw the ancient and old walls of her noble City builded
first by the sweet harmony of Amphitrion his Cythern, pitifully ruinated
and beaten down. And how her late flourishing kingdom was miserably divided
and utterly dissolved: and having hanged her self, left perhaps her Daughter
in a most ignominous and shameful life. What could the angry Gods, the
world, froward Fortune, and the malicious Hagges of hell have conspired more
against her. Nothing certes in my opinion.

For let that ghastly place be surueyed, and every torture therein duly
considered, and yet I hardly believe yt there could not in the same such
extreme torments and pains be found. Wherefore I approve and say, that
every and least particle of her anguish, and of her fault to be most grievous,
and no less impious. And as there is no woman that would judge, that my grief
were not to be compared to the greatness of this, so (truly) would I also say,
had not mine been amorous.

For who doubts but that she knew, (seeing the abominable crimes of her
wicked house, and of unnatural Husband (worthy of the condign anger of the
Gods) that duly scanned these adverse accidents) these horrible accidents to
be meritorious punishments for such heinous guilt, and barbarous impiety. None
truly, that would judge her to be in her right wits. And if she were but a
fool she felt her greefes the less, because (not fully knowing the weight of
them) they could not so greatly grieve her. And whosoever knows her self
worthy of such calamities and troubles that she endures, with little grief
or none at all, she resolves with her self more patiently to pass them
away. But I never committed any thing, wherewith the Gods might justly be
offended with me, having with continual offerings honored them, and with holy
victimie besought their divine graces, never despysing their Godheads, as in
times past the Thebanes most wickedly did. But perhaps some one may well
object and say. How can thou affirm, that thou have not deserved
punishment, or that thou have not committed any fault? Why, have thou not
violated the holy laws, and with an adulterous youth defiled thy marriage
bed? yes truly.

But if this matter be well propounded, as I have not my self only done
this crime, so does it not deserve (I think) so great punishment, and such
grievous pains. Because she must think, that I being a tender young
Gentlewoman, was not able to gainesaye and resist that, which the strongest
men in the world, nay the Gods themselves could not do.

And as I am not the first, that has committed such a freendly fault, so am I
not alone, and shall not be the last, but having almost all Women in the
world my companions in this excusable error, I am not so greatly to be
condemned for the same. And those laws which I have infringed, are of common
course wont favorably to pardon a multitude.

My fault moreover, as it was most secret, so it should not therefore be so
severely and thorowlie punished. A secret fault is half pardoned.
And besides all this, Say that the Gods were justly stirred up to wrath
against me, and did seek to give me sharp corrections for my great
offenses, were it not a greater part of justice, and more reason to punish
him, who was the occasion of my fall? Now whither burning and lawles love, He
that is the occasion of sin ought worthily to be punished.
or Panphilus his rare beauty, brave personage, and quallities induced me to
corrupt the sacred laws of wedlock, I know not, but knowing too too well, that
both the one and the other were of most great force to torment me most
stranglie. So that this now did not happen by the sin committed, but is
rather a new grief and sequestered from ye rest more cruelly cruciating the
patient and sustayner of it, then any other.

The which moreover, if the Gods for my committed offense had given me, they
should do contrary to their right judgment and accustomed manner, in that
they should not with the sin recompense the punishment, which being compared
to the due pains of Iocasta, and to her deserved defaults, and considering
mine own errors, and the severe punishment, which I do suffer for the same,
she must needs be said to be but slightly punished, and my self with too
rigorous chastisement, and unmeasurable pain, to be corrected. Nor let not any
take hold of this, that she was bereaved of her Kingdom, depryued of her
Sons, despoyled of her Husband, and last of all, of her own life, and I but
only of my Lover. All which truly I confess.

But spyghtful Fortune carried away with this Lover, all my felicity, though
that, (which perhaps in other men's sight and judgment was accounted happiness)
has still remained with me, and which is cleene contrary to my desires.
Because my Husband, my parents, my riches, and all things else besides are a
most grievous burden unto me, and nothing congruant with my wished content.
Which things if she had taken from me, as she did my Lover, there had the^
remained a most open way for me to have fulfilled my desires, which undoubtedly
I would have followed. By which if I could not have brought to pass my will,
then were there a thousand kinds of deaths ready for me, to have rydde me
from all my woes and miseries. Wherefore I justly think that my pains are
much more greater, then any of the foresaid.

Hecuba
Me thinks that next after these, I see Hecuba coming to my mind, passing
sorrowful in her countenance, who escaped from that general ruin, and
suruiuing only to behold the doleful and destroyed Relics of so goodly a
kingdom, the subversion of such an admirable City, the cruel death of so
Princly a Husband, of so many renowned sons, and most fair daughters, to see
the destruction of so many magnanimious Nephews, valiant Cosins and Allies,
the rapine of so great riches, the havoc of infinite treasure, the spoil of
so many Virgins, the rauishment of wives, and of all sorts of Women, the
extinction of such excellency, ye loss of so many Kings hewed and slain
right down, such blodie massacres, and pitiful stratagemes, of the dismayed
and betrayed Troyans, the impiety perpetrated in ye Temples polluted, battered
and made plain with the ground, and the indignity and irreuerence done to
their dishonored and chased Gods. And seeing her self to be old, and
sorrowfully recalling to her wounded mind, what mighty Hector was, what
valiant Troylus, what doughtie Deiphobus, and what her youngest darling
Polydore, and the shyning virtues of many noble men more, and how
vnfortunatlie she saw them all die, remembering also how the generous blood
of her late mighty and maiesticall Husband was cruelly shed in her own lap
before the holy Aulters, and how she saw fatal Troy, whilome reared up to
the skies with stately, Towers, famous for magnificent buildings, full of
princely Palaces, and very populous with noble and worthy Citizens, consumed
with devouring flames, and wholly rased from the earth.

And besides all this, the pitiful sacrifice of her fair Daughter Polyxena,
offered up by vnpittifull Pyrrhus, to the shadow of Achilles. Oh with what
excessive grief and anguish of mind (must we needs think) that she beheld
all these things. But short was the sorrow, which her old and feeble mind,
not able to endure the same, wandering out of her right course, made her mad,
as her barking complaints amiddes the fields and woods did plainly show. But
I with a more firm and perfect memory, then is needful for such woes, to my
great grief do continually remain in my sorrowful and sound wits, and do
discern more and more, the preposterous occasions of my present woes, and of
my future sorrows. Because my manyfolde harms enduring longer then hers, I
think them (be they never so light) to be more grievous (as I have many times
said) then the greatest and most sensible pains which is ended in a short time.

Sophonisba (equally participating the adversities in her Widdowhoode,
Sophonisba
and the joy of her marriage in one and self same moment almost of time,
iocande and sad, an honorable and glad spouse, and a poor prisoner, invested
and despoyled of a Kingdom, and finally in these short alterations of
tottering Fortune, drinking her fatal poison, (full of anguishe and deadly
grief) appears next unto my thoughts. Behold her sometimes a most high and
famous Queen of the Numidians, afterward the martial affairs of her Parents
and friends having but an adverse and lucklesse issue, her Husband Siphax
taken from her, and become prisoner to Massinissa King of Marsilia, (warring
under the Roman Ensigns) and her self in one hour deprived of her
Kingdom, and prisoner also in the mids of her enemies Camp, Massinissa
afterward making her his wife, and she restored to the same again.

O with what despite, grief, and bitter anguishe of mind, do I believe that
she saw these things succeed abruptly one after another. Nor yet secure of
her voluble and flattering Fortune, with how heavy a heart did she celebrate
her new espousalles, which greefes and extreme myseries, with a tragical
end at last, and with a stout enterprise, she did fully finish. Because not
one natural day, after the nuptial rytes being yet spent, and scarcely
thinking with her self, that she remained in the regiment, and that she did
bear the former sway of Scepter, and warring thus within her self, and
thinking of the new love of Massinissa, not framed well to her mind, the old
love of Siphax being not yet extinct, with no trembling heart, but with a bold
hand, received the mortiferous poysonne, which her new Husband sent her by
her own Servant, (the fearful messenger of her untimely death, and with
certain dispitifull, and premised speeches, without any sign and token of
fear in her resolute face, druncke of the same, immediately after yielding up
her ghost.

O how bitter may one imagine that her life was, if she had had any longer time
to meditate, and think of her death, that did follow. Who therefore is not to
be placed, but amongst those Women, To think of grief makes it greater.
who have been but meanly and not much afflicted with sorrow, considering that
her speedy death did prevent her beginning woes, where as mine have continued
with me a long time together, and yet do accompanye me against my will, and
are sworn to remain still with me, to make themselves more mighty thereby,
and with their united forces to infest more their usurped habitation. After
her, doleful Cornelia oppressed with infinite sorrow was objected to my musing
thoughts, Cornelia
who^ smiling Fortune had exalted so high, to make her ye first wife of
Crassus, and afterward great Pompey his spouse, whose worthy valor had almost
gotten him ye chiefest principality in Rome, and attained to ye sole government
of all the Empire annexed unto it. Who notwithstanding-after that frowning
Fortune changed her copy, in manner of a fugitive fled miserably out of Rome,
and afterward out of all Italy, her self also with her husband being
fiercely pursued of conquering Caesar. And leaving her in Lesboe, after many
turmoyles of inconstant fortune, ouercomming his puissaunt competitour in
Thessaly, by whose discomfiture and overthrow, he recovered his force and
might again, which not long since by his valiant enemy was greatly abated.
And besides all this, with hope to reintegrate, and to renew his power in the
conquered East, floting upon the surging Seas, and arrived in the kingdoms of
Egypt, offering himself voluntarily to the defense and trusty tuition of young
King Ptolomie, being there cruelly done to death, she saw his embrued and
headless troncke tossed and beaten up and down the raging waves. Which
things if every one by it self, or altogether be duly considered, we must
needs say, that without al compare they afflicted most grievously her dying
soul.

But the sound and comfortable counsel of the sage Vtique Cato, and the lost
hope in these instabillities of Fortune to regaine her Pompey again, in a
little time mittigated, nay rather adnihilated her former sorrows, whereas I,
still nourished with vain hope, not able by any counsel or comfort to drive
away the same, but by the simple advise of my old Nurce, (equally knowing of
my sorrows from the beginning, in whose heart I knew good will more ryfe, then
wisdom ripe in her head, because believing oftentimes to remedy my grief,
she has redoubled them) do evermore remain and live co^suming my self in
bitter plaints and confounded in a thousand doubts and anxieties of mind.
There are also many, Cleopatra
who (I think) do believe yt Cleopatra Queen of Egypt did suffer intolerable
grief, and that her pains did greatly exceed mine. Because first, seeing
her self conjoined with her brother in the Kingdom, and living in all manner
of pleasure and delights, and afterward cast by him into prysonne, was thought
beyond all measure to be charged with insupportable dolor.

But the present hope of that, which after happened, made her to pass it over
more lightly. For she being delivered out of prison, became Caesar his loving
and belooued Lady. But afterward forsaken of him, there are who think, that
for grief of these crossing cares, her tender hartstringes did well nie break
a sunder, not regarding that there was a certain touch of inconstancy, and
breach of love, as well in her, as in him, which at both their pleasures they
did forsake, and take from one another, and bestow it else where, as often
times she plainly showed, how fitly she could do the same. But the Gods
forbid, that such consolation befall to my comfortless and afflicted soul. For
he was never yet, or ever shall be, besides him, to whom by many deserts I
have auowed the whole term and travail of my life, that could affirm, or
yet can say, that I was ever his, but in heart affianced only to Panphilus, and
whose I will for ever remain.

Nor let him hope, whosoever he be, that any other love shall never be of such
force as to drive his out of my faithful breast. Besides this, if she had been
at Caesar his departure left altogether comfortless by him, there would be
some again, who ignorant of the truth, would believe that this was very
grievous unto her: but yet it was not so. Because if she were on the one side
agreeued at his departure, the joy on the other, and the comfort that she
received of her little Son Caesarionem which she had by him, and of her
Kingdom restored to her again, counteruayling her grief, nay, exceeding all
her former sorrows whatsoever, did yield her treble consolation. This joy
has force and strength enough to overcome greater anguishe, and more extreme
cares of mind, then those of them, who love but a little, and that but coldly
to (as even now I said) that she did. But that, which for the accomplishment
of her greatest grief, was annexed to the rest, was, that she was the wife of
Mark Antonie, whom she had with her libydinous entisements styrred up to
civil, nay uncivil wars against her own brother, aspyring thereby and
hoping (by the victory of them) to have been crowned Empress of ye Roman
monarchy. But dubble lose arising to her by this in one hour, which was ye
death of her slain husband and of her frustrat hope, of al other women made
(her as it is commonly thought) the most vnfortu^at and most sorrowful Lady,
and beyond al conceit to be confounded with the greatest cares and greefes,
that might be. And considering truly so high a mind, and so proud a
conceit, which to be first in imagination and afterward in indeed sole and
sovereign Lady and Queen of the whole circuit of the earth, by one
unfortunate battle to be dashed, and cast down (our sex also being naturally
given to aspyre and domination) besides the foil of the conquered, and the
triumph of the victor, and besides this the loss also of so dear and brave a
husband, it cannot be otherwise apprehended, but that it was a wonderful
corsiue to her noble heart and an extreme torment of her dismayed soul.

But sodanely she found out a wholesome medicine, which did speedely help and
heal this mortal mallady, and that was a straung kind of death. Which
(although for the time it was very cruel and sharp) was not for all that, in
execution any long time a doing: Because in one little hour, two venomous
vipers may at the pappes of a young and tender woman suck out both blood and
life, as they did out of miserable Cleopatras breast.

O how many times would I have done the like, although for a lesser occasion
according to the opinion of many, if I had been peremtorilie forsaken, or if
for fear also of ensuing infamy thereof, I had not withdrawn my self.

With this and the aforesaid Ladies the execellencie of Cyrus killed of Tomaris
and drowned in a boll of his own blood, the fire and water of Craesus, Cyrus,
Craesus. Persians, Pyrrhus, Darius, Iugurtha, Dionisius, Agamemnon,
the rich Kindomes of the Persians, the magnificency of Pyrrhus ye power of
Darius, the cruelty of Iugurtha, the tirannie of Dionisius, the highness of
Agamemnon, and the sudden chaunges of many other more occured to my thoughts.
All which were stinged with these greefes, and spurned at the feet of
scornful fortune, as the foresaid women, or else altogether comfortless,
left of to worse mishappes. Who also with sudden arguments of their better
fare were aided, nor remaining any long time in them, did not feel the
greatness and grief of them so entirely as I do. Company as it is above said
does lessen the grief, Theistes, Tereus,
Whilst I went recounting the ancient sorrows in this sort, as you have
heard, and seeking in my mind to find out some tears, and sorrows in most
respects like unto mine own, because having company I might not so greatly
lament, and might suffer my grief with more patience. Those of Theistes and of
Tereus, both which were the miserable Sepultures of their own Sons, were
objected to my memory. And I marvel what unnatural and forced patience
(fearing their inward bitinges) and what pitiless restrainte did moderate
those savage Sires from launching their sides, and with slicing knives to make
way for their Sons struggling in their paternall bowels, and striving to come
forth, abominating that wretched place into which they were so rauenously
gulfed. But these also burst out, and (with that they could) choked at once
their hatred and grief together, and so took in a manner a certain comfort
in their harms, perceiving that without fault they were accounted miserable
men but of their people, that which happened not to me.

For I have compassion borne me of that, which did never grieve me, and dare
not discover that which does most of all afflicte me, which thing if I durst
do, I doubt not, but as others in my miserable case have found out some
remedy for their pains, Lycurgus,
so might I (perhaps) find out some ease and help as well as they. The
pitiful tears of Licurgus, and of his house, (justly powered forth for dead
Archemorous killed of the Serpent,) come also sometimes to my mind, and
accompanied with the continual sighs of sorrowful Atalanta mother of
Parthenopaeus killed in the Thebane Camps, Atalanta.
which came so properly and so nearly to me with their effects, that I could
scarce conceive any greater then them in my mind, If had not proved them my
self, I say, that they were full of such great sorrow, that they could not be
more.

But every one of them are with so high glory eternished, that they might be
esteemed in a manner merry accidents, then mornefull stratagems, The sorrowful
tears (of Licurgus I mean) with the mortal exequies, honored of the seven
kings, and infinite sportes and spectacles made by them in solemnization of
that glorious funeral, and those of Atalanta made notable and beutified also
with the laudable life, and victorious death of her young Son.

But I have not any thing, nor any such cause, to make my tears scarce well
employed, much less excellent, and my self content, because if it were so
whereas I now esteem my self more doleful and unfortunate then any other,
perhaps I should be persuaded to auerre the contrary. Vilisses.
The long trauelles of Ulysses, his mortal and imminent perrilles, his
wandering and weary perigrinations, and all his deeds whatsoever are next of
all showed unto me, who never tasted them, but seasoned with most bitter and
extreme anguishe of mind, and redoubled many times in my imaginations, they
make me think mine to be far greater and much more grievous, and harken why.
Because first and principally, he was a manner, and therefore of nature more
strong, and better able to endure them, then I, being a tender and young woman,
and he being moreover continually armed with a stout, courageous, and feirce
mind, and beaten to daily dangers as one rypened amongst them, when he
travailed, and turmoyled, did seem to have but his ordinary, repose, nay his
greatest ease and pleasure in them.

But I being continually in my Chamber, and tenderly served with dainty and
delicate things, passing my times away in pleasures, and daily accustomod to
dalliances of wanton love, every little pain, and fear thereof is most
grievous unto me.

He driven, and pricked on by Neptune, and transported into diverse parts ye of
world, and of Aeolus likewise received his troubles.

But with careful love I am infected, and with such a lord infested, that
troubled and conquered them, that molested and tossed Ulysses. And if
dangerous casualties, and daily fears did seem to threaten him, of his
proper accord he wandered continually in seeking of them out. And who can
with just cause complain or be agreeued for finding of that, which he does so
earnestly seek for. None can be sorrowful for finding that they seek.
But I (seely wretch) would feign live in quiet if I could, and would
willingly fly from woes, and greefes, if that so rigorously they did not rushe
upon me, and if I were not my self so forcibly driven upon them.

Besides this, he was not afraid of death, and therefore without fear did
commit him self to her force and might. But I live in continual dread of it,
though compelled by extreme sorrow I have sometime (not without fear of
greater grief) run willingly unto it. He also by his long trauelles and
ieopardies of Fortune did hope to get eternal glory, and never dying fame: But
I am afraid of my escandilized name, and infamous memory hereafter, if it
should come to pass that these secret looues should at any time come to
light.

So that now his pains are not greater and more then mine, but are rather in
number and quallitie far less then mine, and by so much the more, as they
are fabulated to be greater then ever they were indeed. But mine (alas) are to
true, so many, and more greater, then I am able my self to recounte. But after
all these, I see (me thinks) the sorrows, sobbes and heavy sighs, the
infinite woes, and pittious plaints, that Hipsiphile, Medea, and Oenone had,
and the pitiful tears of Ariadne which were more copious then all the rest:
all which I judge most like unto mine. Because every one of these (like my
self) deceived of their loouers, watered the ground with tears, cleeued the
heavens with continual sighs, and sustained without any fruit, or hope of
future content, most bitter torments of mind. And admit (as it is granted)
that these dolours were cast upon the^ by their ungrateful loouers, and by
their injurious and undeserved ingratitude, yet with just revenge of their
wrongs done unto them, they saw the end of their tears: which comfortes
(although I wish it not) my sorrows also have not. Hipsiphile, Hipsiphile,
admit that she had greatly honored Jason, and had by due deserts obliged
him unto her, perceiving him to be taken away of Medea, had with as great
reason as my self just occasion, of complaint and sorrow.

But such was the providence of the Gods, that, with righteous eyes beholding
every thing (but only my harms) they restored to her a great portion of her
desired joy, because she saw Medea, who had taked away Jason from her, (
Jason forsaking Medea for the love of Creusa) quit dispossessed of her once
enjoyed pray. Certes I do not say, that my grief should finishe, if I should
see the same befall to her who has deceived me of my Panphilus, unless I were
that she, that should alure him from her again, but will frankly confess,
that a great part of my sorrow would for a time cease.

Medea did also rejoice for revenge, Medea,
that she had (although she was no less cruel toward her self, then
malicious against her ungrateful loouer) in killing their common children in
his own presence, and consuming the royal palaces of king Creon and the new
Lady with merciles flames. Oenone also sorrowing along time, in fine knew,
Oenon,
that her disloyal loouer suffered due punishment for breaking, and corrupting
the sacred laws of love, and saw his country for the wicked rape and
exchaung of her self for his new adultersse, miserably wasted, and his own
City sometimes the seat of demie Gods, and semy Goddesses, but now an
uncouth habitacle and a poor village of Sheppard swains, overthrown and
razed clean from the ground. But truly I love my greefs a great deal more,
the^ I would either with tongue or heart wish so sharp a revenge of my
wrongful Panphilus. Ariadne also being Bacchus his wife, Ariadne.
saw from heaven furious Phedra, (who was the cause, that Theseus (abandoning
her, and leaving her desolate in the Island (being newly enamoured of Phedra)
miserably bewitched with the incestuous love of Hippolitus her husband his
son: So that every thing duly scanned, I find my self amongst the number
of miserable and desastrous women to be tormented with more woes, greefes and
with greater sorrow, then any of the rest, and to have the sole principallitie
and only name of all other distressed women whatsoever.

And I can do no more. But if perhaps (good Ladies) you account my framed
arguments, but friuolus assertions and repute all these former examples but
weak proofs, as forged in the simple conceit of an appassionated woman, and
if you imagine them (because proceeding from a blind mind) to be but blind
also, and of no conclusion, esteeming the teres sighs, and sorrows of others,
more extreme then mine, and thinking them to be more unfortunate then my
self, let this only and last proposition therefore, supply the defecte (if
any there be) of all the rest before. If he that bears envy, is more
miserable, and more wretched, then he to who^ he does bear it, then of all
the forenamed persons, I am the most miserable and unhappy woman. Because I
do greatly emulate, and not a little envy their ordinary accidents,
accounting them not so grievous, nor so full of such great misery as mine are.

Behold therefore (gentle Ladies) how by the old deceites of injurious
fortune, I breath a most wretched woman. And besides this, she has done by
me, no otherwise then a candle burned to the snuff, do cast up flashes of
greater light, since that (in appearance only) making truce with my greefs and
giving some pawse to my daily woes, and a little case to my tormented mind,
but by her cruel despit again returning afterward to my former tears, and
to my sorrowful task, of all the wretched women that live, she has made me
the most miserable, and the only receptacle of all dyspayre and dole. And
because all other comparisons laid aside, with only one I may endeavor to make
you more assured of my new euilles, I affirm (gentle Ladies) and tell you
with that gravity, that other miserable women my compeeres may affirm
greater, that my pains are at this present so much the more greater, then they
were before their vain and frustrat joy, by how much the second fevers
assailing the sick patientes with equal cold and heat are wont to annoy
them (recovered once and now fallen down again) more then the first. The
second fevers hurt more then the first.
And because I may rather heap pity in your minds with the imagination of
the rest of my pains, then fill your deintie ears full of new words tendering
your wearied spirits, with pity that I have of your patience, minding now
not to be more tedious unto you, and not to draw forth your tears any
further in length, if there be any of you at the least, that in reading of it,
have (perhaps) shed, or yet do power forth any: And not to spend the time
any longer in words, which calls me back to tears, I am determined to
hold my peace, making it manifest unto you, that there is no more comparison
of my shadowed discourse, to those substantial dollours, which I feel
indeed, then there is of painted fire, to that which does burn indeed: The
which I pray all the Gods, that either by your meritorious prayers, or else
by my earnest and effectual orisons, they would with some licour of comfort
extinguish, or with speedy death quite abolish: Or else with the joyful
return of my Panphilus assuage and moderate the same.

The end of the seventh book.
Fiammetta speaks to her Book.
ANd thou my little Book, drawn out (as it were) from the sepulture of thy
Lady, art now (as it has pleased me) come to an end, with a most careful,
troublesome, and tired foot, even such as thou art now, written by mine own
hands, and with my falling tears in most places defaced, before the inamoured
Ladies, and wanton Gentlewomen, present and offer thy self. And if (pity
being thy guide, as I do most assuredly hope it will be) they shall willingly
look on thee: and if Love has not changed his Laws since I became a
miserable Lover, let it be no shame for thee in so vile a habit (as I send
thee) to go to every Lady, and Gentlewoman, of what honor and degree soever
she be, so that they deigne to give thee friendly entertainment. Thou need
not any other habit, since I thought this most fitting thy effects: Considering
that thou must be content to figurate my life, my self, and my times, (which
being most unfortunate) make thee apparrailed with misery, as me appalled with
mishap. Wherefore take thou no care for that, which other books (whose subjects
are contrary to thine) are wont to have, which are, sumptuous couerings,
garnished with curious and costlye works, depainted and beautified with sundry
fair colors, pollished with fine shauings, laid on with embrodered knots of
Gold and silver, or else bearing high styles and glorious titles. These (I say)
are not beseeming the sad and heavy plaints, which thou do carry in thy
forehead. Leave these aside (my woeful Book) and the great margines also, and
ruled spaces, the brave kinds of colored ynkes, and the great carracters,
placed in the beginning of happy Books, which only sing of mirth, glory, joy,
and bliss. It does become thee best, with torn and ruffled leaves, and
tached full of blots and blurres, to go thither, and to those, to whom, I send
thee, and, (with ringing my distressed mishappes into the ears of them that
shall read thee) to awake and stir up their hearts to holy pity, and due
compassion of them. Of which piety, if (by thy suggestions) they express and
show forth any outward signs in their fair and beautiful visages, then be
not thou slack to render them (as well as thou can) immediate and immortal
thanks for their pitiful duties toward thee. Why, thou and I are not
reduced to such a miserable condition, nor are not so heavily disgraced of
cruel Fortune, that these requitals should seem so great, but that we may,
and can well aforde them. Nor can she take this privilege from any wretched
Woman, that is, to set her self forth as a president of mishap, and to give
approved examples of misery to those, It avails much to take heed by others
examples
which live in happiness, because they may in their golden felicities, and in
their prosperities use a moderate mean, and so temperate their pleasures, that
they fall not into that confused laborinth of love, and into that miserable
estate of life, as I have done. Which kind of life, both led, and lothed of
me, so plainly (as (I know) thou can well do) and so perticulerly lay open
before them, that (if in their wilye loves they are but any thing wary, and
but meanly wise) by fear of our sustained harms, they may be well advised,
and forewarned in obuiating the secret and subtle deceites of young Men. Go
therefore. But whether a hasty, or slow pace is fittest for thee, I know not,
nor what piece of thee shall be first sought out, nor how, nor of whom thou
shall be received. But as Fortune does guide thee, so go thou on. Thy course
cannot be much inordinate. Thy clowdy times do hide thy shyning star, (which
if it did yet appear) furious Fortune has so eclipsed, that she has left no
hope of thy better hap, nor argument of thy health. And therefore thrown
abroad here and there (as a Ship without helm and sails tossed up and
down the surging waves) carelessly abandon thy self, and as the places
require, use likewise diverse and congruent counsels. And if perhaps thou do
come to the hands of some one woman, which does with so great content and
happiness enjoy her loves, as we are most unfortunately molested with ours,
that will laugh and floute at mine, and reprehende them (perhaps) and condemn
them for foolish and yield toys, with an humble and patient mind, bear thou
nevertheless their scorns, and digest their taunts which are but the least part
of our great greefes, and which seem nothing at all, to those that we have
already passed. And put her in mind, that Fortune is evermore unconstant and
wavering, by which Caveat she may know, that by the ordinary course of her
mutabilitie, she may make us glad again, and may bring her to that kind of
painful life, as she has now driven us unto, and that then, with like mocks
and flowtes, we will requite and pay hers home again. But if thou shall find
any one, that in reading of thee, cannot keep the tears from her eyes, but
that (condolent and pitiful of our cares and pains) does with the same
multiply thy blots, receive and gather them, as most precious and holy drops in
thy bosom, and mingle them with mine, and the^ showing thy self more
pitiful and afflicted, request her humbly, that she would pray for me to him,
who does with golden feathers in a moment visit all the world, so that
entreated by a more religious mouth, and by more meritorious prayers then mine,
(and therefore more pliable to the peticions of others then to my plaints, he
may lighten my heavy sorrows, and take away my oppressing anguish of mind. And
whosoever she be, even with yt form of words, which to miserable wretches is
granted most exaudible, I pray, and do with those prayers most heartily
obtest, which are in the ears of the hearers of them most effectual, that
she may never taste of such bitter miseries, and that the placable Gods may be
ever favorable unto her, and that she may happily and perpetually enjoy her
love, according to her own desires. But if among the amorous company of wanton
young Gentlewomen, posting thee from one hand to another, thou do (by
chance) come to the fingering of mine enemy, and to the wrongful vsurpresse
of my felicity, fly incontinently from thence, as from an infectious and
naughty place: and discover not one of thy leaves, lines, or letters to her
robbing and bewitching eyes, least that understanding the second time of our
woes and pains, she might have more occasion to boast and brag again, that
she has wounded and confounded me. But yet if it chance, that by force she
keep thee, and (manger thy teeth) will see and read thee, then offer thy self
in such sort to her, that she may not laugh, but lament in reading of my hard
mishaps, and pricked with the sting of her guilty conscience, she may be in
mind persuaded to restore to me again my unjustly detayned Lover. O what
happy pity, and holy piety should this be, and then how would the sower
fruit of this harshe pains seem sweet to my distempered taste. Shun the
eyes of men, of whom, if thou can not choose but be seen, speak unto them,
saying. O ungrateful generation, decidours and deceiuours of simple women, it
is not meet for you (considering your demerites) to look into holy things,
and fraught full of such pity as this is, and, (knowing your remorce of pity
to be so small, as your impiety and cruelty is great) unfit to meddle with
distressed and pitiful things. But if to him, who is the orgaine of all our
harms, thou do chance to come, with this exclamation a far of, greet
him from me, saying.

O thou which art more rigorous, and harder then any Oak, fly from hence,
and do not violate me with thy unworthy and polluted hands. Thy corrupted
faith is an occasion of all this, which I bring with me. But yet if with a
courteous, gentle, and indifferent mind thou will read me, recognizing thy
former faults, and present injuries unjustly done against her, whose messenger
of sorrow I am, and that returning to her again, thou desire to be pardoned
of her, then boldly see, touch, and spare not to read me. But if thou wylt not
perform this last requisite duty, it is not then so decent, and honest a
thing for thee, to see ye pitiful tears which thou have vnpittifully caused:
and then would it be again but small for thy credit to increase them more
and more, if (in reading me) thou do (as I think thou can not) persist
in thy first and froward will. And if perhaps any curious and dainty
Gentlewomanne does dislike of thy words, so rudely composed, and so disorderly
couched together, tell her, that, that which is unpolished, and unpleasant for
her fine conceit, she may (if she please) ouerslyppe and let pass, because
brave and filed speeches require clear minds and free from all hurtful
passions, and are best beseeming merry and calm times. And therefore thou
shall say unto her, that she may a great deal sooner fall in admiration, how
my troubled wit, my tired pen, and pains did last out, but for that
little, which thou do tell out of order, considering that fervent love on
the one side, and burning iealosie on the other, with diverse conflicts held my
sorrowful soul in continual battayles, thy obscure and clowdy times feeding
the one, and contrary Fortune favoring the other. Thou may go safely away
(as I believe) and securely escape from all awaytes, laid to entrappe thee, and
need not care for the cauils of captious heads, because thou may be
assured that Envy with her venomous teeth, or infectious tongue shall neither
byte, nor styng thee. But if perchance thou shall find any (which I think
thou never can) that being more miserable then thy self, might emulate thee
(as one more happy, and not so wretched as her self) then patiently suffer thy
self to be bitten. But I do not well know what part of thee shall receive
any new offense, since that with the cruel blows of angry Fortune I see thee
torn and broken in every place. Thou can not be iniuried now any more by
her, then already thou art, nor from any high and happy seat is she able to
make thee fall down, to a more vile and base place, for so low as none may be
lower, is that where now thou do remain. And admit that she has not
thought it meet to conioyne us with the superficial part of the earth, and
does still seek and suppeditate stranger occasions to interre us under it,
we are so beaten and so enured to adversities, that with those shoulders, with
which we have sustained, and do yet bear the greatest and most heavy
burdens of woes, and sorrow, we shall with less pain and not with so great
grief bear lighter, and endure lesser then those. And therefore let her
assail us when, and where she will. Live therefore. For nothing may deprive
thee of this. And remain an eternal example, and perpetual president of
bitter anguish, and grief of thy woeful Mistress to those, who live in happy
mirth and heavy misery.

Bueno fin haze, el qual bien amando muera.
A Table of the contents of the seven books of Fiammetta.
Of the first Book.
FIammetta her dream in the which all her future infelicitie is showed and set
down. fol. 2 A presage signifying the adverse success of her love. fol. 3
The description of the young Gentleman, whom Fiammetta did choose for her
loouer, fol, 4 The speeches of Fiammetta her Nurce tending to her reprehension.
fol. 8 Fiammetta her answer unto them. fol. idem. Venus appearing to Fiammetta
does with many words persuade her to love. fol. 11. The means that
Panphilus observed to manifest his love to Fiammetta. fol. 16 The end of
Fiammetta her amorous desires. fol. 17
The second Book.
Panphilus unfolds to Fiammetta the occasion constraining him to depart from
her. fol. 21 Fiammetta her answer again, wherewith she labors to withdraw
him from his resoulte journey. fol. 22 Panphilus does swear never to be any
other woman's then Fiammettaes. fol. 25 Sundry speeches used of them both the
day and night before his journey. fol. 26. 27 In what plight Fiammetta remained
after his departure. fol, 28. 29
The third book.
Diverse perplexed thoughts of Fiammetta. fol. 30 Fiammetta by a letter that
Panphilus sent her, augmenteth her hope of his return. fol. 31 The great
jealousy and amorous suspicions of Fammetta. fol. 32 Fiammetta counting the
days and noting the season and course of the year does afflict her self.
fol. 34 A certain custom and manner of them that love. fol. idem Fiammetta
does spend the nights in vigilles, gazing on the moon: and diverse other
things continually fixing Panphilus in her thoughts. fol. 35 Fiammetta does
blame the moon accusing her of too great slownesse in her course. fol. idem. A
short discourse of Fiammetta pertaining to Astrology. fol. idem. Fiammetta
has diverse means to pass away the long days and nights with less annoy.
fol. 36 Fiammetta her imagination, thinking that she is with her Panphilus.
fol. idem. The force of a dream. fol. idem. What Fiammettaes thoughts were
after the promised term of Panphilus his return was past. fol. 39. 40
The fourth Book.
Fiammetta does understand by a certain Merchant that Panphilus is married
in his own country. fol. 43 Fiammetta believing the news to be true does
lament and bewail with her self. fol. 44 Her hope of seeing Panphilus again
being extinct, and love and desire increasing more and more, does blame her
self for using certain words in her anger against him. fol. 49 Fiammetta her
prayers to Venus. fol. 50 The hard condition of Fiammetta. fol. idem The praise
and properties of sleep inuoked of Fiammetta. fol. 52 Fiammetta her husband
perceiving her continual sorrow, and demanding the occasion of it cannot
truly know it. fol. 53 Fiammetta invited of her husband to visit the
healthful and sweet bathes of Baia goes thither with him, but chang of air
not applying any remedy to her amorous fire, does augment it more. fol. 53.
54 Diverse sollaces showed Fiammetta by her husband does kindle a desire in her
to see Panphilus again. fol. 55 Fiammetta constrained to go to feasts,
beholding her altered hew and pale face in a glass has a certain fear of
her self. fol. 57 The glee and mirth of other gentlewomen putting Fiammetta in
mind of her passed joys, redoubleth her tears. fol. 58 And extraordinary
palenes in her face is a sign of an inamoured heart. fol. 39 No love so
fervent, nor beset with so many woes as Fiammettaes was. fol. idem The
exterior heates ceasing the flames of love are nevertheless augmented. fol.
63 Care of the mind is a great annoyaunce. fol. 64 Certain kinds and
excersings of fishing. fol. idem Fiammetta her vain hope to see Panphilus
again. fol. ide^ An ancient custom used in Fiammetta her City to inuit
Ladies and Gentlewomen to Lords houses, at times of their most sollemne
feasts. fol. 67 The praise of diverse young Gentlemen before whom Fiammetta
prefers her Panphilus. fol. idem The manner of Iusting. fol. 68 The praise
of a sollitarie life, and of theirs who do inhabitte villages. fol. 69 The
praise of the Golden world, and disprayse of the present age. fol. 70. 71
Fiammetta not caring to wear any more her wonted Ornaments, is of certain
Gentlewomen her companions reproved for it. fol. 72. Beauty is but a
doubtful and frail gift of mortal men. fol. 74 Fiammetta her prayers to the
Gods. fol. idem.
The fifth Book.
One of Fiammetta her servants returned from Panphilus his country, does
tell her, that he is not married but in love with an other Gentlewoman there.
fol. 77 Fiammetta her lamentation. fol. 77. 78 Fiammetta never looued any but
Panphilus. fol. 79 Fiammettaes husband perceiving her to lament and weep in
her bed, and dreams, does ask her the cause thereof, and with many loouing
words does comfort her again. fol. 81 Fiammetta with cruel maledictions
does reprehend and condemn her self. fol. 85 The Nurce with many reasons
does study to cheer up Fiammetta. fol. 87 A cruel and desperate invocation
of Fiammetta against her self, and against Panphilus his new belooued
mistress. fol. 86 Fiammetta does desire death. fol. 88 Fiammetta does show
that the pains of hell are less then hers. fol. 91 Fiammetta her Nurce
blaming her again does endeavor to comfort her. fol. 90 Tears conjoined with
beauty are of great force. fol. 89 Fiammetta does meditate on diverse kinds of
death to kill her self. fol. 92 The reasons the Fia. forged for to kill her
self. fol. idem Fiammetta determined the second time to kill her self, is
intercepted of the Nurce, and of her other women. fol 95 Diverse Gentlewomen
promise diverse remedies to Fiammetta. fol. 99
The sixth Book.
A description of Springtide. fol. idem The misery of Fiammetta. fol. 100 The
Nurce does bring news to Fiammetta that Panphilus is nigh at hand. fol. 101
Fiammetta her prayers to Venus. fol. 102 Fiammetta recomforted, believing that
Panphilus is on his way does take again her forsaken ornaments, and waxes
fair again. fol. 103. 104 The Nurce does tell Fiammetta to whom she
thought was the right Panphilus, was an other of the same name, wherefore she
does return to her former woes. fol. 107
The contents of the seventh Book.
Two occasions moving Fiammetta to sustain her amorous pains with less
grief. fol. 109 Fiammetta compares her pains with the greefes of many other
unfortunate loouers, and finds none equal with hers. fol. 110 Io belooued of
Jupiter transformed into a fair Heyforde after many sustained and passed
trauelles, became at the last Queen of Egypt. fol. 109 Biblis. Mirrha, and
Canace came to diverse sharp and cruel ends. fol. 110. This be, Dido, Hero.
fol, 110. 111 Sir Tristram, Isotta, Phedro, Laodamia, Argia, and others. fol.
111 Iocasta, Hecuba, Sophonisba, and others. fol. 112 Cornelia first Crassus
his wife, and afterward Pompey his Spouse. fol. 115 Cleopatra Queen of Egypt.
fol. 116 Cyrus, Craesus, and others. fol. 117 Theistes, Tereus, and Lycurgus.
fol. 117. 118 Atalanta mother of Parthenopaeus. fol. idem. Ulysses. fol. 117
Hipsiphile, Medea, Oenone, and Ariadne. fol. 118 Fiammetta her speech to her
book. fol. 121
The end of the table.
Il faite bon fin qui meurt pour bien aymer.
Il decimo l' Anno terzo d' Aprile. 1587.

