THE Newfound Politic. DISCLOSING THE SECRET NATVRES and dispositions as
well of private persons as of Statesmen and Courtiers; wherein the Governments,
Greatness, and Power of the most notable Kingdoms and Commonwealths of the
world are discovered and censured. Together with Many excellent Caueats and
Rules fit to be observed by those Princes and States of Christendom, both
Protestants and Papists, which have reason to distrust the designs of the King
of Spain, as by the Speech of the Duke of Hernia, uttered in the Counsel of
SPAIN, and hereto annexed, may appear. Written in Italian By Traiano
Boccalini Gentleman of Rome, and privileged by sundry Princes of Italy, and
also out of Italy by the most Christian King. And now translated into English
for the benefit of this Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Williams, near the Royal Exchange. 1626.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
Dread Sovereign,
THe kind welcome which these Raggualioes of Boccalini lately found among the
French and in other Princes Courts, who suspect the incroaching power of the
House of Austria, has moved me to collect and consecrate them in English weeds
unto your Majesty. The First was translated by M. Florio, sometime Servant to
your Royal Mother of blessed memory. The Second by one, unto whom the
commonwealth cannot as yet be beholding for his name; And the Third part by
me, although far inferior unto either of them for any knowledge which I dare
arrogate to my self in the Italian Tongue, having discontinued the use thereof
since my return out of Italy, being above 24. years past, until this
present time. Yet nevertheless, when I had fully perused the novelty of the
Authors strain, the pleasant conceits of the work, enterlaced with some
matters of consequence, which might serve for caueats and annotations to such
as stand interessed in State-affaires, I was encouraged to renew that which I
had so long neglected, and by compiling some of the choicest Observations, to
present them to your judicious view. And because my chiefest cares for many
years have been fixed upon that most hopeful Plantation in the Island commonly
called The Newfound Land, I entitled this Work The Newfound Politic, as
well in regard of my affection devoted to that place, as for the newness of
the style and matter, wherein the Author poetically discouers some Mysteries of
Policy, which may rowze up the Spirits of the State of Venice, and other
Neighboring Provinces, to watch with Argus Eyes, lest the deceitful show of
Indian Gold, a fitter bait for Turks and Moors, might produce any sudden
Innovation prejudicial to the liberty of Christendom, which ought to
flourish in mutual love and charity, and not to live in continual iealousies
to be surprised by any Prince that acknowledges Christ for their universal
Head. The King is wise as is the Angel of God, and conceiues more than it
becomes a man of my rank to insinuate to so high a Majesty concerning the
Affairs of longhanded Princes, whom Experience, and not the admonition of a
contemplative Scholar, has taught to remember that Verse of the Poet: Tunc tua
res agitur paries cum proximus ardet:
When the next wall unto your house does burn,
Look to your self betimes; next is your turn.
The King of Kings long preserve your Majesty in all Earthly happiness, to
his glory, our comfort, and the defense of the true Christian Faith. So prays
from the bottom of his heart

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, WILLIAM VAVGHAN.

The Contents of the first Part.
Chap. 1. THE Company or Corporation of Politicians, sets up a Warehouse or
public Shop in Parnassus, in which are to be sold diverse kinds of wares
useful for the Virtuous life of the Learned. Chap. 2. The most sovereign
virtue Fidelity, being secretly fled from Parnassus, Apollo having discovered
where she had hidden herself, dispatcheth the two most excellent Muses,
Melpomene and Thalia, to persuade her to return. Chap. 3. Apollo perceiving
the great disorders, that the flight of the sacred virtue Fidelity bred in all
Mankind, by the mediation of the Sovereign Muses, and of the sublime Heroike
Virtues, obtains her return into Parnassus. Chap. 4. Iustus Lipsius, to make
amends for the fault he had committed in accusing of Tacitus, does so
passionately observe him, that before Apollo he is charged to idolatrize him:
whereupon after a feigned, and but verbal punishment, he is in the end by his
Majesty, not only absolved, but highly commended and admired. Chap. 5. The
chiefest learned men of Parnassus are suitors unto Apollo, to inioyne Tacitus,
to recompile those books of his Annals and Histories, which are lost. Chap. 6.
Cornelius Tacitus, for some complaints urged against him by diverse great
Princes, by reason of certain political spectacles, which he has devised,
most prejudicial unto their government, having been imprisoned, is by Apollo
set at liberty. Chap. 7. The Duke of Laconia, for having advanced a most
faithful Secretary of his, to the highest dignities of his estate, is accused
before Apollo to idolatrize and dote upon a Mignon: but he does most
egregiously defend himself. Chap. 8. Apollo, bewailing the woeful wracks,
which in the Courts of great Princes, his virtuous followers suffer, and fall
into; for to assure their Navigations, commands some of the chiefest learned
men in his Dominion, to endeavor to frame a Sailing-Card, to sail safely by
land. Chap. 9. The Lord John de la Casa, having presented his quaint Galateo,
or book of Manners unto Apollo, meets with great difficulties in diverse
Nations, about their promises to observe the same. Chap. 10. Apollo having
highly commended the Statute, made by the most mighty Kings of Spain, that no
Advocates, Lawyers, or Proctors, shall pass into the Indies, the Doctors of
the Law finding themselves aggrieued, complain unto his Majesty. Chap. 11. An
Apothecarie, at the very instant, that he is taken prisoner by Sargeants,
without being examined at all, is forthwith condemned and sent to the Galleys.
Chap. 12. The virtuous people of Apolloes State, having consigned unto his
Majesty's General Treasurer, the accustomed Donatiue of a thousand conceits,
according to their custom they beg a boon or grace at his hands. Chap. 13. By
letters intercepted, and taken from a Currier, dispatched by some Princes to
the Lake of Averno, the common people come to know, that the rancors and
hatreds now reigning among diverse Nations, are occasioned and stirred up by the
artifices of their Princes. Chap. 14. Antonio Perez of Aragon, having presented
the Book of his Relations unto Apollo, his Majesty does not only refuse to
accept it, but commands the same to be presently burnt. Chap. 15. The
Monarchy of Spain is much aggrieued, that her falsehoods and treacheries are
discovered. Chap. 16. The Spanish Monarchy arriueth in Parnassus; She
entreats Apollo to be cured of a Cauterie: She is dismissed by the politic
Physicians. Chap. 17. The Spanish Monarchy goes to the Oracle of Delphos, to
know whether she shall ever obtain the Monarchy of the world; she has a
cross answer. Chap. 18. Philip the second of that name, King of Spain, after
long strife about his Title, makes his solemn entry into Parnassus. Chap. 19.
The Dogs of the Indies are become Wolves. Chap. 20. The French are humble
suitors unto Apollo, to know the secret, how to perfume gloves after the Spanish
fashion. Chap. 21. Why the Monarchy of Spain is lately retired into her
Palace. Chap. 22. How the ministers and officers of Spain are continually
interessed in their private profit. Chap. 23. Apollo having used all possible
means, and exquisite diligence, to have some one of the Court-Mignons, or
Princes-Idols taken and apprehended, does severely proceed against one lately
fallen into the hands of the Judges. Chap. 24. The whole Race or Genus of Sheep
send their public Ambassadors to Apollo, by whom they earnestly entreat him to
grant them sharp teeth and long horns: whose suit is by his Majesty scorned
and rejected. Chap. 25. In a public Congresse or Assembly, contrary to the
accustomed manner of the Phoebean Court, Force having pretended to precede
Reputation; that illustrious Lady with an excellent resolution, maintains
her reputation and credit which was in some danger. Chap. 26. The Province of
Focides by her Ambassadors complains unto Apollo, that his Majesty's officers
do not permit her to enjoy her privileges: whose request is not only
rejected, but they have a most sharp and unpleasant answer. Chap. 27. Socrates
having this morning been found dead in his bed, Apollo uses all possible
diligence, to discover the true occasion of his so sudden death. Chap. 28.
Natalis Comes the Historian, for having spoke something in a public congresse
of learned men, that grievously offended Apollo, is by his Majesty severely
punished.
The Contents of the second Part.
Chap. 1. MAximilian the Emperor is advertised of the trouble begun among his
sons. Chap. 2. Most of the Princes, Commonweals, and States of Europe, are
weighed in a pair of Scales, by Lorenzo Medici. Chap. 4. Almansor, sometime
King of the Moors, encountering with the Kingdom of Naples, they relate one to
another the miseries they sustain by the oppression of the Spaniards. Chap. 5.
Sigismund Battor learneth the Latin Tongue. Chap. 6. The Cardinal of Toledoes
Summa is not admitted into the Library of Parnassus. Chap. 7. The Monarchy of
Spain throws her Physician out of the window. Chap. 8. Most of the States of
the world are censured in Parnassus for their errors. Chap. 9. The Monarchy of
Spain inuiteth the Cardinal of Toledo, to be her Theologian, which he
refuses, and why. Chap. 10. The Spaniards attempt the acquisition of Savoy,
but do not prevail. Chap. 11. The Duke d'Alva being arrived at Parnassus, in
complementing with Prospero Colonna, they fall foul about defrauding the
Colonesis of their Titles. The Post of Parnassus to the Reader.
The contents of the third Part.
Chap. 1. AFter an exquisite Examination and trial made of those Wits, which
ought to have the charge of Provincial Governments, a rank of Governors are
published in Parnassus, and wholesome auisoes for all Governors, Judges, and
Under-officers of State. Chap. 2. The most Illustrious Monarchies resident at
Parnassus, demand by what means the Venetian Lady got such exact obedience,
and exquisite secrecy of her Nobility, whereof she gives them convenient
satisfaction. Chap. 3. The Roman Monarchy demanding of Cornelius Tacitus the
resolution of a Political Question, receives full satisfaction of the Shepherd
Meliboeus, who casually was there present. Chap. 4. Many people having wasted
their means by gluttonous feasts, prodigal fare, and pompous apparel, for
the moderating of such lavish expenses, do desire a Statute of their Princes,
but they miss of their purpose. Chap. 5. Terence the Comedian being imprisoned
by Jason the Pretour of Vrbine, for keeping a Concubine, is delivered by Apollo
with very great dishonor to the Pretour. Chap. 6. Domitius Corbulo for
certain words spoken by him during the time of his government, which sauoured
of Tyranny, is called in question by the Criminal Magistrates, but in the
end, to his greater glory, dismissed. Chap. 7. By the promotion of Diogenes the
Cynick, unto a higher place, the honorable chair of the Tranquillity of a
private life being vacant, Apollo prefers the famous Philosopher Crates to that
charge, who refuses it. Chap. 8. A Controversy happening betwixt the Governors
of Pindus and Libethrum about matters of Jurisdiction; Apollo punishes them
both. Chap. 9. The Virtuous of Parnassus do visit the Temple of the Divine
Providence, whom they humbly thank for the great Charity which his supreme
Majesty from time to time has vouchsafed to show unto Mankind. Chap. 10. A
Contention happening between many Learned men, which might be the most notable
Politic Law, or most excellent Custom worthy of commendation in the
flourishing State of Venice, the same is finally decided and determined by the
Venetian State herself, to whose arbitrament the Question is referred by their
general consent. Chap. 11. The Doctors of the Chair having admitted into
their University some famous Poetical Ladies, Apollo commands them to be
dismissed home to their Families. Chap. 12. The Lady Victoria Colonna entreats
of Apollo, that the infamy which women incurred for cuckolding their Husbands,
might likewise extend to adulterous Husbands. Apolloes answer. Chap. 13. A
Poetaster for playing at Cards and devising the Game called Triumph or Trump,
is brought before Apollo, who after he had deeply entered into the mystical
meaning of the said Game, not only dismisseth him, but grants him an yearly
pension to instruct his Courtiers in that new Art. Chap. 14. It being noted,
that Petus Thraseas in the company of his son in law Eluidius Priscus did use
commonly to frequent the house of the Lady Victoria Colonna, he is grievously
rebuked by Apollo. Chap. 15. A learned Gentleman of Rome begs a remedy of
Apollo, to make him to forget certain grievous wrongs, which he had received
in the Court of a great Prince: for which cause his Majesty causes him to
drink a cup-full of the water of Lethe, but with unfortunate success. Chap.
16. Apuleius his golden Ass, and Plantus his Ass do complain unto Apollo of
the great severity which their Masters used in beating them. But they are sent
away with no pleasing answer. Chap. 17. A general Reformation of the world by
the seven wise men of Greece, and by other Learned men, is published by
express Order from Apollo. Chap. 18. The Duke of Hernia his speech in the
Council of Spain to a proposition, Whether it were expedient for his
Catholic Majesty, to conclude a peace with his brother in law the Duke of
Savoy.
THE NEW-FOVND POLITIC.
THE FIRST PART.
The Company or Corporation of Politicians, sets up a Warehouse or public
Shop in Parnassus, in which are to be sold diverse kinds of wares useful for
the virtuous life of the learned.
The first Raguaglio of the first part.
THe great business, which the Corporation of Politicians has for so many
months negotiated with these Exchequer-officers, that they might set up a
public Warehouse, common to their Nation, in Parnassus, with large
privileges for Politians, was the last week fully concluded and established.
And even yesterday, in the great Marketplace, they made a most sumptuous show
of all such wares, as men commonly do most stand in need of.

And even as Menante will not think his labor ill employed to give you notice
of the chiefest of them; so is he persuaded, that some honest man will not
disdain to read them. First then, there is to be sold in that admirable
Warehouse great store of stuffing, or (as some call it) quilting, which though
it be of no esteem among the base and vulgar sort of men, yet is it valued and
bought up at a very high rate of many wise and understanding men, namely, of
Courtiers, who have discovered, that it is the shearings or nap of those rich
clothes of Prudence, which wise men weaue with the fine wool of Patience, and
serves to boulster or fill up the pads of servitude, or pack-sadles of bondage,
to the end they may fit the more easy upon the backs of wretched Courtiers,
and hide those loathsome bloody gallings and festered sores, which seem most
ugly in such men, who albeit they be known for capital enemies unto all
pains and labor, are not notwithstanding induced to serve and follow the
Courts, with an assured hope, there to live an idle merry life, and proudly to
command others. It has by diverse been observed, (as a thing regardfull) that
many young men, who though they may live well in their own Fathers houses, have
nevertheless bought up good store of that precious stuffing, and have therewith
quilted certain petty boulsters, unto which they enure themselves in the service
of private houses, only that they may not come into Courts, as unbroken colts,
and in receiving the first time the boistrous heavy pack-saddle of Court
servitude, assure themselves not to commit those fond actions, and fantastic
prankes, which enforce house-stewards, and hall-vshers (who are the rough
house-breakers of young Courtiers) to give them some lashes of bitter
distastes, thereby to bring them unto the patient toleration of that irksome
and toilesome thraldom. There is also sold in the said Warehouse great store
of most excellent Pencils for those Princes, who in their urgent occasions, are
often enforced to paint white for black unto their people. And although this
be a merchandise only fit for Princes, yet do those false-hearted men make
great provision of them, that relying on the traffic of apparances, apply
themselves to nothing more, than to the infamous profession to leere and laugh
in ones face, and underhand craftily to deceive him, and to wind about the
silly credulons people with fawning fair words, and foul tainted deeds. They
have likewise an infinite quantity of spectacles of admirable and sundry
virtues: Some of which serve to give light unto those salacious and beastly
luxurious men, whose sight does so fail them in the fury of their unbridled
and libidinous lust, that they cannot discern Honor from Infamy, nor know a
friend from a foe, a stranger from a kinsman, nor any other thing worthy of
respect.

So great is the riddance, that those Politic merchants do hourly make of
such spectacles, as all may evidently perceive, that few or none are those men,
that in carnal things have a good or clear sight.

They have besides a kind of spectacles, which serve to dim all light, and
shorten all sight: and the Politicians themselves affirm, that albeit these
spectacles are more behoouefull unto all sorts of men, than those that extend
the sight far off, yet are they most needful unto Courtiers, by reason, that
there do often present themselves most loathsome and nastie things unto the
sight of honest men.

And for so much as to turn ones back toward them may breed displeasure, yea
and anger in mighty men or great Lords: and to look upon them is a torment
and vexation unto an honest mind: And therefore for a man upon any such
occasion to put so strange spectacles upon his nose, he is free from the
troublous molestation to see the loathsome and abominable things of this fill the
corrupted world, and the vulgar silly multitude is induced to think, that a
man viewes them with more heedie curiosity.

There are also other spectacles very good to preserve the sight of those
unkind and unthankful men, which the very first day of any new dignity
received, waxes so dim and misty, as it reaches even to the bounds of
Ingratitude.

The Politicians that keep the shop and fell them, say that they are made with
the precious stuff of the fast-holding memory of benefits received, and of the
remembrance of fore-passed friendship.

But most wondrous are those spectacles framed with such skillful art, that
they cause to those that have them on, Pleas to seem: Elephants, and Pigmeys
Giants. These are greedily bought up by certain great men, who putting them
upon the noses of their unfortunate attendants, do so alter and distract their
sight, as if their Lord do but once lay his hand upon their shoulder, or look
upon them with a smile, though artificial, and perhaps forced, they deem it
as a reward of five hundred crowns a year.

But the spectacles lately invented in the Low Countries are likewise bought up
at a very dear rate by great Lords, and distributed among their Courtiers,
which being used by them, they cause those offices and rewards, to which their
sight shall never attain, not perhaps their age reach, to seem near at hand.

Moreover, there are to be sold in the said Warehouse (but at a most excessive
rate) humane eyes, which are of admirable virtue, since it is impossible to
think, how infinitely a man bettereth his own things, when he viewes them
with others eyes: yea the very Politicians themselves protest upon their
consciences, that with no other, or better instrument, may a man sooner attain
unto the happiness, to purchase that thrice excellent virtue, so ambitiously
aimed at, and sought after by great men, of NOSCE TE IPSVM.

There are also sold in that shop, certain Compasses, not made of silver, of
brass, or of steel, but of the pure interesse of the most fine reputation,
that may be found in all the Mine of Honor: And they are most admirable to
measure a man's own proper actions, since experience has manifestly caused all
men to know, that Compasses framed of the base stuff of fantastic conceit,
of self-will, or of mere interresse, do seldom prove just and true to those,
who in their own affairs desire to draw their lives parallel. Moreover, such
Compasses prove most excellent to those, that do exactly possess the skill
and art to use them, to take the just measure of the latitude of those ditches,
which for their credit and reputation they are compelled to leap clean over,
and not run in danger to fall or stumble in the middle of them, and ^^mefully
bury themselves alive in the puddle of folly and vnheedinesse: Nor can those
lavish waste-goods, and spend-thrifts, whose purses being but shallow and
poor, will waste and spend like Princes, with any other instrument, better
learn the most necessary virtue to make the step answerable to the leg, than
with these Compasses.

The said Politicians do likewise sell a numberless quantity of boxes or
leather-cases full of Mathematical Instruments, such as Surueyors or
Land-Meters do use, which are more than necessary, exactly to measure, and in
all dimensions to square out those with whom a man is to treat about grave
affairs, and important negotiations, or to confer and impart weighty secrets.

The said warehouse has also great utterance of certain Iron-tooles, which
resemble those, that Chirurgions or tooth-drawers use, and call Barbicans. They
serve to open and dilate the chaps of those unhappy Courtiers, which being to
make a virtue of necessity, are often compelled to swallow huge great pumpions
in stead of small mastick pills.

They have likewise great store of Beesoms, made of circumspection, whereof
wary Courtiens make good provision aforehand, that they may every morning and
evening diligently sweep from off the stairs, which they daily go up and
down, perilous hard Peasen scattered upon them by certain envious and
maleuolent spirits, who taking greater pleasure in spoiling other men's affairs
than in accommodating their own, do only exercise the shameless trade, and
treacherous work, of breaking the neck of honest and virtuous men's reputation.

Moreover, there is in th^^ ^^shop to be sold (but for the weight in gold) a
kind of most perfect and superexcellent Ink of the maker, far more precious
than Bise of the most far-fetched Azure, which by the quills of learned Writers
(being virtuously and skilfully displaid on books) serves to embalme the dead
bodies of virtuous men, and to yield them most aromatically odoriferous unto
after-ages; whereas those of the ignorant yield a most loathsome stench, and
are soon turned into vselesse ashes. And with this ink^ only is the name of
the learned eternized in the memory of all Nations, which in the illiterate
and ignorant does suddenly die and vanish. A balsame (truly) of more than
humane virtue, since those, that therewith anoint themselves, live, although
they die, and departing out of the world, but with their bodies, abide
perpetually therein with the memory of their learned works.

An infinite sum of money do likewise those Politicians receive daily for a
kind of Oil, which they sell, for so much as it has often been experienced
to be most exquisitely available, to comfort and corroborate the queasie
stomachs of Courtiers, to the end that without enfeebling their constitution of
Patients, the poor unfortunate wretches, may the more easily and speedily
digest the bitter distastes, which so often and daily they are enforced to
swallow and pocket up in Courts.

They sell moreover in certain little viols of glass, (of which Menante, who
writes these present news, has been so fortunate as to get one at a
reasonable rate) odoriferous humane sweat, most admirable to perfume those, who
with the fragrancie of Musk and Ciuets of honorable labors will endeavor
with pen in hand to appear and rank themselves among learned men.

The said warehouse has also great dispatch of a kind of Penids, made of most
fine paste-royall, very excellent to whet and stir up the appetite of certain
wilful sour Stoics, to the end, that with an insatiate greediness, they may
know how to eat and feed on those loathsome dishes of this world, which albeit
they recoyle and provoke vomit in some, and are wholly repugnant unto the taste
and stomach of good men, nevertheless there be some, who because they will
not purchase the displeasure of great men, and so overthrow their own affairs
by pulling an old house on their heads, are forced to make show and pretense,
that they greedily desire them, and with hungry rauenousnesse devour them.

There are besides to be seen in that shop certain great boxes full of
Musk-comfets, very excellent to make the breath of those Secretaries, Privy
Counselors, or Senators in Commonwealths (who are bound to let secrets
putrify in their bodies) to yield a sweet savor.

Then in a back-roome and several Magazin, they sell certain horse-pasterns
or fetters, made of the iron of considerate maturitie, which, though by some
foolish kind of men, they be scorned and rejected as implements for beasts,
the wiser and more wary have lately brought them into so great credit, as they
are daily bought up at an excessive price by those precipitate and foole-hardie
wits, that fearing, or scorning the judicious maturitie of the ordinary
Carier, take pleasure rashly, and hand-ouer-head to address and compass all
their affairs by Posts and Curriers.

But no other merchandise of that rich warehouse has lately had greater
utterance, than certain Fann's, made, not of the feathers of Ostriges, of
Peacocks, or of any other gay-coloured bird, but of herbs and flowers. And
because Mr. Andrea Mathioli, the Delphick Herbalist, has among those flowers
and herbs found and known the drearie and infernal weed, Wolues-bane, the
wary and foreseeing virtuous Inhabitants of Parnassus, have evidently
discovered, that those mysterious Fann's, serve not to make wind in the h^at of
summer, but to rid and drive away from men's noses those importunate flies,
which certain ill-aduised and vnheedie spirits, having gone about to remove,
by hitting them with their daggers, have shamefully slit and cut their own
noses.

The most sovereign virtue Fidelity, being secretly fled from Parnassus,
Apollo having discovered where she had hidden her self, dispatcheth the two
most excellent Muses, Melpomene and Thalia, to persuade her to return.
Rag. 11. 1 Part.
THE Royal Palace of the sovereign virtue Fidelity, which whilome was so
frequented by the chiefest and most eminent Officers of Princes, and by an
infinite number of Senators of the most renowned Commonwealths, is of late so
little haunted, that it seems to be the house of desolation. Whereupon, on
the 18. day of this present month, the honorable mansion of so excelse a
virtue was seen to be clean shut up. Apollo was no sooner advertised of so
important a case, but he commanded, that the gate of her famous Palace, should
with violence be laid open; and that from the Lady Fidelity herself, they
should understand the true occasion of so strange a novelty. His Majesty's
beheast was forthwith put in execution, and they, who most exactly searched
each corner of the Royal Palace, found no creature therein, which the virtuous
Inhabitants of Parnassus understanding, they presently put themselves into
mourning weeds, sprinkled themselves with ashes, and showed diverse other signs
of sad sorrow: yea and Apollo himself in particular did so grievously condole,
that all the Court might evidently perceive in him those very same effects of
inward sorrow, which he publicly made demonstration of, at what time the
wailefull and deplorable disaster befell his unfortunate Son Phaeton. His
Majesty well knowing, that the government of Mankind would go to wrack, if
the solid foundation, which vpholdeth all this worlds machine, should fail,
caused presently certain Edicts to be proclaimed, wherein (both to the
ignorant, and to all others incapable of the most noble prerogative, to live
with honorable fame and good report in the memory of men) he freely granted a
hundred years of immortality, to be delivered him so soon as he should find
out, where that famous virtue had hidden herself.

And to assure the payment promised, the Royal Exchequer-Chamber delivered
bills of exchange, and letters of assignation, signed by Homer, by Virgil, by
Liuie, and by most wealthy Tacitus; all of them principal and most eminent
Merchants in the Factorie of Paruassus, amongst those virtuous men, who with
their praiseworthy studies, wholly apply themselves to the right noble and
honest traffic, to e^ernize others names in the memory of all Nations. The
greatness of the promised reward invited diverse to go seek her out. And
after much pursuit and exact diligence, the Royal Majesty Fidelity was found
in a stable, lying among the Hounds and Spaniels belonging to the famous hunter
Acteon, and of most lovely Adonis.

Apollo being in all possible haste advertised of so strange a novelty, did
immediately send thither the two Sovereign Muses, Melpomene and Thalia, to the
end that removing so excellent a Virtue from so vile and loathsome a place,
they should reconduct her to her wonted habitation. But all endeavors proved
vain: for that glorious Princess, bitterly bewailing her disastrous
condition, cried out, Oh you Sacred Di^ties, relate unto my Sovereign good
Lord Apollo from me, that my eternal and most capital enemy Fraud, has at
last obtained a complete victory, touching the controversy, that she has
ever had with me: And how that infamous Interesse, who in these dismal days,
tyrannizeth over the minds of all the best Nations, has rigorously banished me
from out the hearts of men, which in former times were wholly mine.

Let his Majesty likewise understand, that the whole Universe is so deeply
plunged in the filthy mud of all abominable and brutish pollutions, that the
constant Fidelity, honorably and faithfully to serve her Lord or Prince, even
to the effusion of the last drop of her heart-bloud, and to the emmission of
the last gasps of life, which erst was so admired, and ambitiously sought
after, is now adays reputed no better, than a foolish and hare-brain'd
obstinacy. And tell him moreover, that if a man (so he may accommodate and fit
himself to all times to all places, and to all persons) have a fraudulent
heart, full-fraught with perfidious treachery, and readily disposed, to exercise
whatsoever execrable Infidelity, or damnable perjury; the same is now adays
commended and extolled, to be wisdom, sagacitie, and wariness of an all
comprehending and reaching wit. And tell him, that I, a poor abject creature,
glutted, and even tired to see so filthy and opprobrious things, am enforced
to embrace the resolution (as you see) to live among these dogs, in whom I now
find that true Fidelity, which with so much toylesome carke, I have ever
labored, and wearied my self to insert and plant in the perfidious and
interessed heart^^ of all men.

Apollo perceiving the great disorders, that the flight of the sacred virtue
Fidelity, bred in all Mankind, by the mediation of the Sovereign Muses, and
of the sublime Heroike Virtues, obtains her return into Parnassus.
Rag. 30. 1 Part.
NO tongue can fully express what anxietie and anguish Apollo fell into by the
secret and sudden departure, which (as by our former Letters has already been
signified) the excellent virtue Fidelity (some weeks since) made from this
state of Parnassus. For his Majesty could not possibly be at peace, or take
any rest, to see the world deprived of so noble a Princess. And his
afflictions were daily increased by the foul disorders, which continually were
heard to multiply in all Principalities, between the common people, and
thrice-sacred Amicitia (the only exquisite delight of Mankind) who seeing her
self forsaken by that pre^ious virtue Fidelity; and fearing to receive some
notable affront by Fraud, absolutely denide to inhabit any longer in the hearts
of men, who freed from the oath of Fidelity or Allegiance, which indissolubly
they owe unto their Princes; and likewise loose from the bond of that sincere
love, with which they are fast tied unto their private friends, became so fell
in perfidiousnesse, so brutish in seditions, as making every most detestable
wickedness to seem lawful; they with treachery chased unspotted
Faithfulness from all humane society, and with foul seditions, sacred Peace;
defiling the whole world with blood, and filled the same with most villainous
Larcenies, and with all manner of perfidious and execrable confusion. Besides,
the just grieuances and complaints of Princes did continually molest Apollo's
mind; which Princes did openly protest, that by the damnable infidelity of
their subjects, they were enforced to abandon the governance of Mankind:
whereupon Apollo, to find out some convenient remedy against so notorious a
mischief, thought it expedient to intimate the high Court of Parliament of all
the general Estates, against the twentieth of the last month, unto which he
summoned the Poet-princes, and the Deputies of all virtuous Nations. All which
being in great diligence appeared on the prefixed day, there were discovered in
many people great hatreds against their Princes, all which protested openly,
that not by the vice of Infidelity, but urged and even compelled by
desperation, they had for ever banished from out their hearts that Fidelity,
which, as most hurtful and prejudicial to them, they were resolutely
determined never to acknowledge and re-admit: for so much as she was most
foulely abused by many Princes. And whereas in former times, the Fidelity of
Subjects, having ever served as an instrument to induce Princes, to
counterchange the awe and service of their people with gentle and courteous
vsages, they now clearly perceived, that the virtue of a base and prostrate
obedience, was reputed but the baseness of an abject mind, and the merit of a
voluntary and untainted faithfulness, a necessity to serve; by reason of
which manner of proceeding, public mischiefs and disorders were vncontroledly
gone so far, that many people had been compelled to undertake the
resolution, which the world now saw; only to the end, that humorous and
capricious Princes should come to the perfect knowledge, that the authority to
sway and command may easily be lost, when the outrages, ingratitudes, and
misusages, daily used toward subjects, having surmounted all humane patience,
brought all nations (naturally inclined to dutiful obedience) even unto
desperation; and never any more to live in subjection of Masters; with an
obstinate resolution, rather to wrach on a free government, than to be
continually contemned, abused, flaied, hurried and molested under
Principalities. Although the rage and disdain of Princes toward their
subjects were great, and the distaste of the people greater, the sovereign
Muses nevertheless, with the assistance of the thrice-excellent heroic
Virtues, who effectually labored to bring a business of so great consequence
to some good end, with the dexterity of their wit, in the end they somewhat
calmed and assuaged the minds of the angry Princes, and instigated the proud
hearts of the enraged people: And the Court of Parliament was dissolved, with
the capitulation of this atonement, that the people should solemnly vow and
promise forthwith to readmit into their breasts the excellent virtue Fidelity,
which they should swear to make absolute Mistress of their hearts. And that
Princes should be strictly bound, to banish and expel from out their hearts,
Avarice and Cruelty; and in lieu of them, yield the free possession of their
minds unto the Sovereign Virtues, Liberality, Bounty, and Clemency, who
were they, that perpetually held Fidelity and Obedience fast ^ettered in the
hearts of subjects: Since that by an autenticall testimony, subscribed by
Caius Pliuius, and other natural H^storians, it most evidently appeared, that
the silly sheep, who are seen so gently and willingly to obey their
shepherds, do notwithstanding shun and abhor all Butchers. And that it was
impossible to induce Dogs (although naturally most trusty, loving, and kind to
their masters) to wag their tail, or to leap, and faune on those, that gave
them more stripes than morsels of bread.

Iustus Lipsius, to make amends for the fault he had committed in accusing of
Tacitus, does so passionately observe him, that before Apollo he is charged to
idolatrize him: whereupon after a feigned, and but verbal punishment, he it
in the end by his Majesty, not only absolved, but highly commended and admired.
Rag. 86. 1 Part.
THE most curious learned of this State, have often observed, that whenever
any virtuous man, does through humane frailty commit any oversight, for the
dread which he afterward seeleth of wicked actions, does in such sort (with
falling into the other extreme) correct the same, that some there be who
affirm, that Democritus did not so much for the benefit of contemplation, pull
out his own eyes, as for to make amends for the error he had committed,
laciuiously gazing upon a most beauteous Damsel, than beseemed a Philosopher
of his rank and profession. And the report yet goes among the virtuous, that
Harpocrates, to correct the defect of overmuch babbling, for which he was
greatly blamed at a great banquet, fell into the other extreme, never to
speak more: Nor ought the sentence of the Poet be accounted true,

Dam vitant stulti vitia, incontraria currunt. Since that, in a Dog that has
once bin scalded with boiling water, it is held a point of sagacitie, to keep
himself in his kennell when it raineth. As likewise it is the part of awary
man to avoid Eeles, if he have once been deadly bitten by Snakes.

This we say, for so much as so great was the grief, and so notorious the
agony, that Iustus L^psius felt for the accusation, which he so unhappily
framed and published against Tacitus, that to repair the fault, which of all
the virtuous of this State was exceedingly blamed, not long after fell into
that error, and went in person to visit Tacitus, and for the injury which he
acknowledged to have done him, he most humbly begged pardon at his hands.

Tacitus knowing what reputation the readiness of a free and genuine pardon
yields a man, with a magnanimity worthy a Roman Senator, not only frankly
and generously forgave Lipsius the injury received, but (which by the unanimous
report of all the virtuous of this State has deserved highest commendations)
he most affectionately thanked him for the occasion he ministered unto him, to
make purchase of that glory, which sincerely to forget all injurious affronts
received, does procure and confer upon a man, unto the ancient and most
affectionate devotion, which Lipsius (who had ever bin most partially affected
unto Tacitus) had ever borne unto so sublime an Historian; the wonder of so
great indulgence being adjoined, and the facility of a p^rdon so earnestly
desired, did so increase the love in his mind, and so augment his awful
veneration toward him, that he more frequented Tacitus his house than his
own.

He now loved to discourse with no other learned man: no conversation did more
agrade him: he commended no other Historian: and all with soth partiality of
inward affection, namely, for the elegancie of his speech, adorned more with
choice conceits, than with words; for the succinctnesse of his close, neruous,
and grave sententious Oratorie, clear only to those of best understanding,
with the (...) and hatred of other virtuous men of this dominion, dependents of
Cic^ro, and of the mighty Caesarean faction, who approve it not. And did with
such diligence labor to imitate him, that not only with hateful antonomasia,
he dared to call him his Auctor, but utterly scorning all other men's
detections, he affected no other ambition, than to appear unto the world a new
Tacitus.

This so unwonted kindness among friends, never seen from inferiors toward
their superiors, and which exceeded the most hearty love or affection that any
can bear and express to the nearest of his blood, engendered such a jealousy
in the minds of Mercerus, of Beatus, Rhenanus, of Fuluius Orsinus, of Marcus
Antonius Muretus; and of diverse others, followers and lovers of Tacitus, that,
induced thereunto by mere envy, hatched in their hearts (but according to the
custom of worldly dissemblers, which is, to paliate the passion of private
hatred with the robe of charity toward their neighbor) under color to revenge
the injury, which not long since Lipsius had done unto their friend Tacitus,
they framed an enditement against Lipsius, and presented the same unto Apollo,
charging him with the same delict or crime of impiety, whereof he had accused
Tacitus, giving his Majesty to understand, that he loved not Tacitus as a
friend, that he honored not him as a Master, and regardfull Patron, but adored
him as his Apollo and Deity. This accusation, which as in crimes of capital
treason, by reason of it is heinous outragiousnesse, needs no other proof
than the bare testimony of any one man, did enter so deeply into Apollo's
mind, as he deemed himself offended by Lipsius in the highest degree, caused
him forthwith to be brought before his Majesty, by the Pretorian band of the
Lyrick Poets, fast bound in chains and gyues; and staring on him with a fierce
wrathful countenance, and with death-threatning gestures, demanded of him,
What his genuine opinion or conceit was of a certain fellow, called Cornelius
Tacitus, borne of an oyle-monger of Terni.

Lipsius vndismaiedly answered Apollo, That he deemed Tacitus to be the chief
Standard bearer of all famous Historians, the Father of humane wisdom, the
Oracle of perfect reason of State, the absolute Master of Politicians. the
stout Coripheus of those writers that have attained the glory in all their
compositions, to use more conceits than words; the perfect and absolute form
to learn to write the actions of great Princes, with the learned and apparent
light of the essential source and occasion of them: a most exqusite artifice,
and which was only understood by the sublimest master of the Historian Art, as
that which greatly yielded him glorious, that knew how to manage it, and him
truly learned that had the judgment duly to consider the same; the perfect Idea
of Historical verity; the true Doctor of Princes; the Pedagogue of Courtiers;
the superfine paragon, on which the world might try the alloy of the Genius of
Princes; the just Scale, with which any man might exactly weigh the true worth of
private men; the Volume which those Princes should ever have in their hands,
that desire to learn the skill and knowledge absolutely to command: as
likewise those subjects, who wished to possess the science dutifully and
rightly to obey.

By this so affected Encomium, and by so earnestly exagerated commendations,
Apollo easily perceived, and came to know, that Lipsius did manifestly
idolatrize Tacitus, whereupon in mind enraged thus he bespake him.

In what esteem will thou then (Oh Lipsius) have me, that am the father of
all good letters, sovereign Lord of the Sciences, absolute Prince of the
liberal Arts, Monarke of all virtues, if with such impiety and shameless
impudency, thou do idolatrize a Writer, so hateful unto all good men? and
an author so detestable unto the professors of the Latinetongue, both for the
nouelty of his phrase, for the obstruse obscurity of his speech, for the
vicious breuity of his discourses, and for the cruel and tyrannous political
doctrine which he teaches? by, and with which, he rather frames cruel
Tyrants, than just Princes; rather wicked and depraved Subjects, than endowed
with that untainted probity, which so greatly avails, and facilitates in
Princes the way how to govern their states mildly and uprightly. It being most
apparent, that with his impious documents, and abominable precepts, he
peruerteth lawful Princes into cruel Tyrants, he transformeth natural
Subjects (which should be as mild and harmless Sheep) into most pernicious
Foxes: and from creatures, whom our common mother Nature, with admirable
wisdom has created toothlesse and hornelesse, he conuerteth them into
ravenous Wolves, and untamed Bulls.

Who shows himself a ^lye cunning Doctor of false simulations, the only
subtle artificer of treacherous tyrannies, a new Xenophon of a most cruel and
execrable Tiberipedia, the wily forger of the ever to be detested mystery, how
leeringly to smile and therewith deceive, how with facility to utter and
affirm that which a man never means or intends, effectually to persuade that
which one believes not, instantly to crave that which one desires not, and to
seem to hate that which one loves; who is a sublime Pedagogue to instruct
others in that most villainous doctrine to smother and suppress the conceits
and meanings of a true-meaning heart, and yet to speak with a false-lying
tongue: the ingenious Architect of fallacies and deceits, and so singular and
excellent an author of rash and fond-hardy judgments, that he has often most
shamefully attributed holy interpretations to most impious and to be abhorred
actions: And on the other side, has cannonized sacred ones as Diabolical.

And will thou (Oh Lipsius) among so many my liege and trusty virtuous men,
even before my face, adore and worship as thy God, a man that in all his
compositions has manifestly declared, that he has not known God?

Who being composed of naught but impiety, has sowed and scattered through the
wide world, that cruel, prodigious, and desperate policy, which so infinitely
defameth those Princes that make use of it, and so deeply afflicts the
people that feel it; who as well to Princes as to private men, has taught the
cursed way, and mischievous fashion, how to converse and proceed with false
doubleness; and the treacherous Art, to do that which a man says not, and to
say that which one means not.

A way which by some is practiced only to become skillful in that abominable
doctrine, how with the pensill of false pretenses, to pourtray black for
white; to circumwinde the simpler sort of people with the fallacies of fair
sugared words, and of lewd and wicked deeds; to deceive all men with using
laughter in anger, and weeping in joy; and only by and with the pernicious
compass of private interesse, to measure love, hate, trust, faith, honesty,
and each humane or moral virtue, read and perused by good men, only to come
to the knowledge of the new and hidden tricks and artifices, with which, in
these days, wretched mankind with so evident calamity, is most miserably
circumgired, and tossed to and fro: and to discover the most execrable
hypocrisy, that diverse followers of so wicked an Art have used and practiced,
to be by the simpler sort of people reputed for men of upright conversation,
and honest life; albeit, for to observe and obey the rules of Tacitus, they
act, and daily perpetrate deeds, that by the vgliest Devils of hell, are deemed
most abominable.

Perceiuest thou not (Oh Lipsius) since the Volumes of this thy Tacitus have
past the hands of all people, diverse Princes have straied and e^^onged
themselves from the ancient course, to govern their subjects with humanity,
mildness, and clemency: and what an infinite number are now clean parted and
divorced from the genuine plainness and singleness of atruly-vertuous life?

Know Lipsius, that so great a part of Tacitus his works (as some simple and
shallow-brain'd men do affirm) were not lost in the violent deluges of the
barbarous Nations, which with so rapid inundations passed into Italy, to
ouerrunne and subdue it, for they miscarried, and were lost before so great
ruins; not through the ignorance of the people, who in those turbulent and
embroiled times, were continually busied in the exercise of arms, but because
those yet untainted ancient Nations, in which reigned equally the wellmeaning
simplicity of mind and heart, and the purity of the then new budding Christian
Religion, abhorred that Author whom some ill advised do now so much love and
cherish, that (as I perceive thy self have done) many and diverse evidently
idolatrizing him, have ereared him for their golden Calfe. Tacitus is in every
part of his most unworthy to be read of good or honest men, for so much as the
villainies, and the impieties contained in his works, do far exceed in number
his leaves, his lines, his words, his sillables, and his letters. But by the
life of Tiberius, which he has compiled, a Prince suitable and worthy the
genius of such an Historian, all must acknowledge the same to be most
intolerable and damnable; the which for a singular benefit of all mankind,
having for many ages lain secretly hidden in the most secret and concealed
parts of Germany, through the pesti^erous and diabolical curiosity of a
Germane, more dreary and fatal to all the world than his Compatriate, that was
the first invented the deadly and dismal Bombard, whence it was drawn forth,
at what time that most noble Province began to be infected by the modern
heresy; only to the end, that with so horrid a prodigy, at the same time that
execrable Luther began to molest and subvert the sacred rites, wicked Tacitus
should embroile the profane. Compositions in the highest degree most wicked
and pernicions, which for many years were lost, because they pleased not
antiquity; and are now, to the great shame and reproach of this age, admired of
those Politicians, who being followers of such impieties, have most completely
learned from the Master of fallacies and tromparies, the doctrine to know, how
to the utmost of a man's age, to entertainemen with fair words, to feed them
with smoke, to fill them with wind, and with vaine-vaine hopes fairly to lead
them to extreme beggary.

A doctrine most assuredly infernal, which by Tacitus the the inuentor and
husband thereof, having been sown and dispersed abroad, only for the benefit
of Princes, is now a days seen to be embraced and cherished with such
insatiate greediness, by private and mean subjects, that Tacitus, who was
herefore an Auth^^ held only worthy of Princes, does now so publicly pass
from hand to hand among all men, that even Shopkeepers, fachius and base
porters show not themselves more cunning in any profession than of State
policy, to the great contempt and derision of an Art held in highest regard and
reputation of great men, the whole universe is seen to swarm, and to be full
of sharking and spoiltrade Politicians.

At these irefull and exorbitant speeches of Apollo, Lipsius stood amazed, as
one half dead and distracted, yet notwithstanding, even in the utmost
abashment and consternation of mind, pulling up a good heart, and taking
breath, most submissiuely begged pardon of his Majesty for any fault he might
have committed; then boldly told him, that such and so infinite were his awful
obligations toward his beloved Tacitus, and so great was the honor, which
among his Countrymen the Flemings, the English, the Germans, the French, the
Italians, and the Spaniards, his bosome-minion, and most dearly beloved Author
Tacitus had purchased him; whom though he acknowledged to love most entirely,
and to honor as his terrestrial God; yet, to attain unto a superlatiue
degree of due satisfaction of his bounden duty, and with exactness to
accomplish the duty of true gratitude, he thought all he could do to be
nothing, in respect of his invaluable merits.

His reason was, that having published and left unto the world, diverse ordinary
labors and compositions, his only works upon Tacitus were they, that had
made him to merit an abode and mansion in Pernassus, and an honorable and
immortal renown among many Nations: and that if he, who with other men's money
exercised the traffic of trading and rich merchandising, was easily pardoned
his error, if he did even worship and adore him, that at his pleasure might
make him break and turn beggar: How much more then did he deserve of his
Majesty to be, if not commended, yet at least excused, if in loving and
honoring his dear dearest Tacitus, he exceeded all bounds of duty, of
decorum, or of dignity, sithence in and upon him only was grounded the whole
fabric of all the credit and estimation that he had purchased among the
virtuous. And that he, ever since his first ingresse into Pernassus, had of
all the learned bin so beloved, cherished, courted, and reverenced, that his
house was no otherwise frequented, then that of the most famous writers.

But that after he fell into the error to make Tacitus his enemy, statim
relictum illius limen, nemo adire, nemo solari: and therefore rather than he
would any whit diminish his veneration, and awful respect toward that prime
Author of his, he was well pleased to hate himself, and to lose his life,
deeming the loss of the same far less, than the greatness of the fame,
unto which by means of Tacitus he had attained.

So highly did these words of Lipsius offend Apollo's mind, that more and more
enraged with fierce wrath, he vehemently complained, that even before his
awful presence with so impudent asseueration, he had rather manifestly made
demonstration of a wilful stubbornness to persevere in his stiff opinion of
so heinous an excess, than humility to yield unto penitence, and for his
fault to crave p^rdon. And above any other demerit of so obstinate a man, his
Majesty could by no means endure, that he had entitled the impiety of
Idolatry, with the style of honorable gratitude; and wilful obstinacy, with
the title of a constant and uncorrupted truth.

Whereupon he suddenly commanded the foresaid Cohort of the Lyricke Poets,
presently to drag him out of his presence, as one most unworthy to look his
Majesty in the face, whom he had so capitally offended to the quick.

And that having stripped him of such good letters as he possessed, they should
publicly proclaim him to be a most shameless ignorant Ass; and after burn
him alive, as a most wicked and detestable idolater.

Forthwith was poor Lipsius brought, and haled unto the place of so great
infamy, where his friends most earnestly persuaded him to advise himself, and
at once, humbly ^uing for mercy at his Majesty's hands, endeavor to save both
his life and reputation.

In the very moment of desperation of so horrible and lamentable a plunge, it
was manifestly perceived, that at the apprehension thereof, there appeared in
Lipsius such an undaunted constancy, and an vndismaid boldness of a courageous
mind against the terrors of death, that he thus answered Apollo.

And let his will be done: for, he cannot die ignorant, that can perfectly
demonstrate to possess Gratitude, which is the Sovereign Queen of all humane
virtues.

And therefore, the flames that were prepared to consume him, would yield a
far brighter splendour of Glory, than of Fire: and that even in the last
instant of his dying-life, he solemnly protested, that he would in no wise
acknowledge the crime wherewith he was charged, to have overmuch loved or
superstitiously honored his beloved Tacitus to be true. And that by reason of
the infinite bonds, wherewith he stood tied unto him, and for the respectfull
love he bare him; the grief and molestation that he felt in remembering, that
he died ungrateful unto him, did more excruciate and torment him, than the
rigor or pains or death: and that the agony, in which they all saw him,
proceeded not from the fright or terror he felt, that he must die, but from
the inward pangs, and hearts grief, which vexed him, in as much, that he had
heard his Majesty, name and pronounce Tacitus, to be a wicked Atheist. An
injury, which had it been uttered of so excellent and wise an Author by any
other man whatsoever, then by his sacred Majesty (even in that last gasp of
life) he would never have left it unrevenged, at least with the weapons of his
tongue. And that with the same liberty, which is so proper unto such as care
not to live, he made it known unto all men, that the real truth was, that
Tacitus had so much knowledge of God, that he alone, among all the Heathen
Writers, with his profound and exact knowledge, having attained perfectly to
know of what worth and efficacy (touching matters of Religion) faith is of
those things, which are not seen, or cannot by humane reason be proved, had
boldly said, Sanctiusque ac reuerentius visum de actis Deorum credere, quam
scire: Words most sacred, and well worthy to be considered by those Divines,
who in their writings had lost themselves in their Sophistical subtilities,
and Logical nicities.

Apollo having heard these things, as one possessed with wonderment, and full
of admiration, presently caused Lipsius to be loosed, and most affectionatly
embracing him, he thus bespake him; Oh my dearly beloved and virtuous Lipsius,
with what comfort to me, and auailefull gain to thee, have I tempted thy
patience, and made trial of thy most virtuous constancy? And by the bitter
detractions, which I have uttered against Tacitus, which are but those with
which they accuse him, that either never read him, or understand him not, I
have thoroughly made proof of thy zealous devotion toward that most excellent
Historian, whom I deem worthy my regardfull admiration.

And by that, which I have now heard from thee, I do evidently perceive, that
thou have read him with delight, studied him with profit, and learnt him to thy
great advantage; for I know that the stout defense, which to thy immortal
glory, thou have made in his behalf, is not thine own, but drawn from thine
and mine Tacitus.

This said and done, Apollo turned himself toward the virtuous, who for
curiosity, and to hear the success of that great accident, were in great
troops flocked into the Hall, he thus said unto them:

Oh you my entirely beloved virtuous learned men, admire and perpetually
imitate the renowned constancy of this my glorious virtuous Lipsius, and let
the infinite dilection and sempiternall veneration of that Prince, be eternally
imprinted in your hearts, who strongly supporteth your reputation: And never
forget that the credit and power of him, who loses the good grace and favor
of his Prince, does more easily ruin, and precipitate, than do the houses,
whose foundations fail and decay. And therefore, you that follow Princes
Courts, learn to know, that Nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile, ac fluxum
est* quam fama potentiae non sua vi nixa. A most assured document, which
teaches all men, both in loving, in honoring, and in perpetually serving
their Princes with a most constant trust, and steadfast faith to imitate my
Lipsius. For, even as in sacred mysteries and holy rites, it is an unpardonable
and gross impiety, to have or acknowledge any other God, than him, who has
created Man, the Heavens, and the Earth: So should you never admit into your
hearts any other devotion of Princes, nor at no time expect commodity, or wish
for preferment, except from that Lord, who by the trust and confidence, which
he reposeth in your trust and fidelity, by the extraordinary affection which
he bears unto you, makes you to be known to all the world, not as his
servants, but as his dear friends. And by the supreme and uncontrolled
authority, which he suffers you to exercise in his dominions, causes you to
appear and seem unto his other subjects (even as himself is) so many Princes.

And for so much as the great wittiness and sagacity of Princes, by reason of
the great iealousies and diffidences, that accompany those, who sway and
reign, is commonly accompanied by suspicion, and favorites or Minions in
Courts, being ever aggrauated by envy, ever pried into, and observed by emulous
competitors, and ever persecuted by the malicious or envious; to the end you
may the more successefully overcome so many difficulties, and may ever
prosperously maintain your selves in the states and honors which you have
acquired; love your Princes with all your hearts, observe them with all your
best affections, and evermore serve them with all possible faithfulness and
sincerity.

And rather, then so much as to think, much less to do any thing, that may
bring with it the least-least danger to diminish one jot of their good favor
(as my Lipsius has done) choose to yield unto death.

And believe confidently, that then begins your downfall, when by some
fatal mischief of yours, you suffer your selves to be persuaded or entangled,
that you may better or advantage the condition of your service, with, and by
using with your Princes (who know so much, see so much, understand so much, and
observe sa much, as more cannot possibly be known, seen, understood, or
observed) simulation to seem that, which one is not; the falsehood at once to
smile and deceive: all double dealing, and to chew with both chaps: all cloging
dissimulation in stradling over ditches, the better to be able (if ever his
Prince should fall into some disaster) to take part with the Conqueror.

For, Princes, who, suppose they know not so much, yet have they ever so many
whisperers about them, as one or other will bring them in tune. And when they
sleep, they are never destitute of wicked Spirits to keep them awake.

So that, they, who think it safe, and dangerlesse, to live and hold out long
with falsehood and dissimulation, may rightly be compared unto those fools,
that undertake to cant Gipzies, to cheat cozeners, or that hope to sell false
balls unto Mountibankes.

The chiefest learned men of Parnassus are suitors unto Apollo; to enjoin
Tacitus, to recompile those books of his Annals and Histories, which are lost.
Rag. 84. 1. Part.
YEster-day the chiefest learned men of this State of Parnassus met together in
the common Colledge-hall, where after diverse long discourses past between them,
they with one accord presented themselves before Apollo's Majesty, unto whom
Petrus Victorius, a great learned man of Florence, in the name of all the rest,
said, That those virtuous men, whom his Majesty beheld, did most humbly beg a
favor at his hands, the most gracious, that ever he could confer upon his
learned followers, who with continual brackish tears bewailed the disastrous
loss of the Annals and Histories of Cornelius Tacitus; the father of humane
wisdom, and true inuentor of modern Policy, did most humbly conjure him, to
command that excellent man to repair the damages, which the injury of times
had caused, both to his reputation, and to the general commodity of his
virtuous followers, by framing all that anew, which at this day is wanting in
his most excellent works. At this request, which seemed both virtuous and
reasonable, contrary to the opinion of all men, his Majesty was much offended,
and with manifest alteration of mind, he framed this answer: Oh you my
ignorantly-learned friends, does it not then seem unto you, that the Princes
of this world are already ouer-cunning Statists, but that you wish them to be
more perfect Doctors in that Science, in which for your last misery, they
offend in being ouer-skilfull in the same? Since some of them with the practice
of one truly Diabolical and infernal Reason of State; it evidently appears,
that they have brought both Sacred and profane things into a manifest
confusion: Have not as yet the common miseries of so many scandals, which by
the harsh and wrested government of some Princes, are seen to arise in the
world, opened your eyes so wide, as you may perceive and know, that all modern
Policy is but the trash of your so beloved Tacitus, and as a contagious
disease has infected all the world?

Are you not yet come to the knowledge, that the now present Reason of State,
with which a number of people are rather flead than shorn; rather sucked dry,
than milked; and rather oppressed, than governed. A thing in it self so
exorbitant, it is mere ignorance to desire the same to be more violent? And
does it not seem unto you, that from the cruel government of Tiberius, and
from the prodigious life of Nero, so exactly written by your Tacitus, some
modern Princes have drawn most exquisite precepts, how to gnaw to the bone,
and how to shave to the brain? But that you would also have them to have the
conueniencie, to see whether in the lives of Caligula and Domitianus, which to
the end that the loathsome obscenities, and the barbarous cruelties, which those
two ugly monsters of Nature committed, should for ever lie hidden: the Majesty
of the eternal God, for your incomparable benefit, has exterminated from out
the world, they might draw some secret precept, to make the fifth Act of the
woeful and dismal Tragedy more funeral and wailefull. A happy and
beneficial gain (oh you virtuous) for the whole world, has the loss been
of the greatest part of Tacitus his labors.

Oh how fortunate might men be reputed, if likewise those fatal relics,
which for the last calamity of mankind are left unto us, were also lost for
ever. And that the world were governed with the modesty and simplicity of the
ancient Monarkes, who esteemed men as reasonable creatures, and not with the
bitterness of diverse modern Princes, who manifestly seem to believe, that
they are but two-footed beasts, so created of God only for their benefit: even
as his Divine Majesty, to no other end caused the earth to produce Mice, but to
fatten Cats. But you Sir Peter Victorius, since I see, that you also are of the
number of those good men, that wish Tacitus were entire; be pleased that I
speak a few words with you in private, since you have spoken in behalf of the
public.

Do you not think, that your Princes with the only first leaf of the Annals
of Tacitus, which they so diligently study, and know so well to put in actual
practice, are become so skillful Medices to cure the canker of the sedicious
Florentine people? Thrice happy were all the world, if Tacitus had ever held
his peace.

Therefore get you gone in the name of God, together with the rabble of your
learned Copes-mates; for my very heart is ready to burst, to see that men
likewise are borne with the unhappy calamity of Thrushes.

Cornelius Tacitus, for some complaints urged against him by diverse great
Princes, by reason of certain political spectacles, which he has devised,
most prejudicial unto their government, having been emprisoned, is by Apollo
set at liberty.
Rag. 7. 2. Part.
THe apprehending of the person of Cornelius Tacitus, which happened the last
night by the express commandment of the Lords Censors, has caused great
amazement throughout all the University of the learned men; being a man so
remarkable in Parnassus, so dear unto Apollo, prime Counselor of State,
chief Chronicler, and his Majesty's Master of Sentences. It was presently
diuulged, that this has happened by reason of some complaints exhibited
against him by certain most potent Princes, who have grievously complained and
aggrauated, that Tacitus with the seditious argument of his Annals, and of his
Histories, has framed a kind of spectacles, that work most pernicious effects
for Princes; for so much as being put upon the noses of silly and simple
people, they so refine and sharpen their sight, as they make them see and pry
into the most hidden and secret thoughts of others, yea even into the center of
their hearts: and they protest, that they nor can, nor will ever by any means
endure they should make apparent demonstration unto all men of the pure essence
and quality of the minds and purposes of Princes, what they are inwardly, and
not what with their tricks and artifices (necessary for to rule and reign)
they endeavor to appear outwardly. Yesterday morning the Attorney General of
the greatest Monarks, now resident in Parnassus* appeared before the right
honorable Lords Censors, among whom, in regard of the reputation of Tacitus
his person, who was to be arraigned and adjudged, Apollo himself came and sat
among them.

This Advocate or Attorney General with exaggerated words gave them to
understand, that it was full well known to all the best understanders of
State-matters, that for the peace and tranquillity of kingdoms, Princes are
often compelled to commit actions not greatly to be commended, which (to
maintain themselves in the peoples opinion, to be honest and upright Princes,
in which conceit, he that reigns must necessarily labor, and endeavor to
keep himself) they were wont to shadow and blanch over with the specious and
precious pretexts of an holy and undefiled intention, and of an honest, hearty,
and affectionate zeal toward the common good. All which tricks, devices, and
artifices, they can no longer put in practice or make use of, if the true sense
or meaning of their designs shall at any time come to the knowledge of the
vulgar.

And that if it were possible, that the people (without being subject to others
Empirie) might be governed of themselves, then would Princes most willingly
renounce the Royal titles, and authority of commanding; for so much as they are
now fully resolved, that Kingdoms and Principalities are but insupportable
burdens, subjects full-fraught with crabbed difficulties, and of so infinite
dangers, as at their own richly-sumptuous tables (so much envied them by
Gluttons and greedy Gourmands) they should never taste morsel, that would not
relish of Arsenike. But if experience had made the world to know, that the sway
and government of Humane-kinde, without the presence of a wise and Politic
Prince, to rule and direct the same, would ere long be filled and ouer-run with
wailfull and tragical confusions.

It is likewise convenient, that all these just and lawful means be granted
them as are requisite and behouefull uprightly to govern their subjects: For,
if to manure and till the fields, the Husbandman is not denide to have his
oxen, his plough, and his mattock: If the Tailor (to cut out and sew his
garment) have allowed him, both needle, thimble, and sheares; and the Smith,
his hammer and his tongs; why shall Monarchs be deprived of means, and barred
of power, hereafter to cast dust in their subjects eyes, which is the readiest
benefit, the most excellent, and necessariest instrument, that ever any
Politician could invent, or find in all the volume of State-reason (though
most excellent) rightly to govern Empires? All which things, Princes (by
reason of the seditious invention of Tacitus) could no longer effect, or bring
to pass: it being most evident, that the Diabolical spectacles, framed by
that euer-factious and seditious man, besides the first quality (as has been
said, to subtilize and sharpen the sight of the vulgar people) they produce
also a second most pernicious effect, that is, to be so well and fitly fastened
to the noses of all men, as it is no longer possible for Princes, (as
heretofore they have done, with no less facility, than profit to themselves)
to cast dust into their subjects eyes, though it were of the most artificial,
and superfinest, that possibly could be, without plainly discovering, that they
are cheated, cozened and deceived.

The complaints and grieuances of the Monarchies seemed most true both to
Apollo, and to the venerable College of the Censors. And therefore they deemed
them worthy to be maturely considered.

Now by the long discourses and debatements, that passed among them, conc^rning
a business of so great consequence, it seemed, that their opinion was likely
to prevail, who consured, that Tacitus together with his scandalous Annals,
and his seditious Histories, should for ever be expulsed the society and
conversation of all men.

But his Majesty, unwilling so much to vilify or embase the Prince of all
Political Historians, or to distaste honest Students, by depriving them of
their bosome-delights, was contented, that Tacitus should be given to
understand from his Majesty, how his pleasure was, that of those spectacles
(in very deed prejudicial unto Princes) he should frame as few as possibly
could be. And that above all things, he should vigilantly take great heed, not
to disperse any abroad, except unto choice and excellent men, unto Secretaries,
and unto Privy Counselors of State to Princes, to the end they might serve to
facilitate unto them the good and upright government of their people. And that
above all, (even as he tendered or loved his Majesty's good favor) he should
take especial care, never to impart or communicate any unto those turbulent or
factious spirits, which in seditious and duskie seasons, might serve in stead
of bright lamps, or farseene beacons to that simple race of men, which is
easily governed, as wanting the glorious light of letters, may be said to be
blind and without a guide.

The Duke of Laconia, for having advanced a most faithful Secretary of his,
to the highest dignities of his estate, is accused before Apollo to idolatrize
and dote upon a Mignon: but he does most egregiously defend himself.
Rag. 38. 1 Part.
THE now regnant Duke of Laconia has of late advanced one of his subjects (by
him highly esteemed, and extraordinarily beloved) from a base and low fortune
to the highest dignities, and supremest honors of all his Dominion. For he
has not only placed him in the sublime Senate of the Laconians (a degree by
reason of its eminency ambitiously aimed at, and sought after by diverse great
Princes) but having infinitely enriched him with great revenues, has also made
him to be as much honored and regarded as any whatsoever most renowned subject
of all his State.

This so worthy Duke, by those who envy the greatness of that his servant,
was before Apollo's Majesty denounced to be an Idolater of a Mignon, and a
doter upon a favorite or darling.

Apollo being highly moved against that Prince, for the heinousness of so
horrible a delict (as his manner is in any outrageous excess) without taking
diligent information of the truth of the accusation, presently caused Lewis
Puloi, Prouost-Marshall of this State, to be called before him, whom he
threatened to be rigorously tortured, if within the space of half an hour,
with all manner of scorn and derision, he did not bring before him, fast bound
in fetters, as prisoner, the Duke of Laconia. Pulci, with all exact diligence
accomplished Apollo's beheasts: for immediately, all laden with heavy chains,
he haled and dragged the poor Prince before his Majesty, who by an express
messenger was presently advertised of his attachment, and forthwith commanded
the Martelli, most virtuous Florentines, and public Bell-ringers of Parnassus,
that by the ^olling of the greatest bell, the Criminal Magistrate should be
called together, which was immediately done.

Thus the Duke standing fort^ before him, Apollo himself, after he had
tauntingly vpbraided him with the foul crime, whereof he stood endited; all
inflamed with wrath, he told him, that he allowed him but the space of half an
hour to defend his reputation.

And in the mean time (as if that poor Princes case had been utterly
desperate) he straightly commanded, that whosoever had committed the indignity
to have adored a servant of his, should be condemned to perpetual infamy, as
unworthy to live among the virtuous Princes of the Phoebean Court.

Then the Duke thus began his defense. Sir, and father of the virtuous; I have
so armed my conscience with the fine, and proofe-cuirace of Innocence, and so
am I assured to have lived virtuously, and uprightly in all my actions, as I am
more than certain to have demerited nothing of your Majesty. Nor does your
indignation, nor this precipitous doom, to see, that the dreadful sentence of
my infamy does fore-goe the cognition of the cause, any jot dismay or confound
me.

Only I marvel to see, what as yet I never believed, that the foulness of
accusations, yea among the most just and uncorrupted Tribunals, as this is, is
of power to call in question, and bring into so dangerous hazards, the
reputation of men of my rank and quality.

But I quiet my self in the will of God, who has ever willed, that the gold
of others innocence, should be refined in the fire of false calumnies, and in
the test of persecutions. I freely confess unto your Majesty, to have exalted
my friend more than my maleuolent enemies have reported unto you. And in this
my action, which to your Majesty has been pourtraid so heinous, this only
grieueth me, that (in mine opinion) I have not thoroughly performed all that
virtue of complete gratitude, which so dear a friend has worthily deserved at
my hands. And if those who accuse me, or other Princes my equals, of
prodigality, of dotage, or of an abject mind, borne in the foul sink of
sottishness, to serve servants, when they see a Courtier well-beloued or
rewarded by his Lord or Prince, would not suffer themselves to be blinded by
malice, by passion, or by envy, but with a mind void of phlegm or spleen,
would impartially consider the true merits of Court-fauourits, they would then
name that a virtuous life, which they entitle vicious prodigality; duty of
gratitude those gifts, which they call inconsiderate; and a virtuous affection,
the infamy, wherewith they charge them to dote upon, or idolatrize Mignons:
But it is not a profession fitting vulgar or ordinary men, to diue or pierce
into Abditos Principis sensus, and si quid occultius parant: whence it happens,
that the ignorant, with the infamy of great men, fall into so gross errors,
as they style the virtuous proceeding of a grateful man, to be a vice of an
abject mind.

The Principality of the Laconians (as your Majesty well knows) is
Elective, in which the confining Princes, have ever been of greater power,
than he that ruled and commanded the same: not only for the end and scope,
common to all elective Princes, after their death, to procure unto their blood
and kinsfolks, potent friends, but for the adherences, which foraigne Princes,
for important respects, have with the Senators or Peers, that enjoy the
prerogative to elect a new Prince: the dependence and train of whom they
endeavor to acquire, and procure with those arts and tricks, as are already too
well known to all men. Moreover, your Majesty knows, that the Prince of
Macedonia, with his plots and practices had gotten so great authority in my
State, and was so ouer-growne in forces above all the Grecian Princes, as he
was not only the absolute arbitrator of all Greece, but openly aspired unto an
universal Monarchy.

Besides, it is not unknown to your Majesty, that the said Prince of
Macedonia, under color of amity, and the protection of the Dukes of Laconia,
with undermining practices sought ever their ruin and overthrow. And for so much
as the power of the Prince of Epirus hindered him from being able to compass so
high ends, he, to remove, or at least, to frustrate, or to weaken so strong an
obstacle, more with machinations of gold, and with secret conspiracies, than
with open force of Arms, he caused those insurrections of the people, and
those rebellions in Epirus, that have so much impaired the State thereof.

And (as a thing too too well known to the world) I will not now call to your
memories, how that my most prudent Predecessor, fore-knowing that the
depression of Epirus, was a manifest preparation for the ruin of the Laconian
Empire; to assure the same from the ambition of so mighty an enemy, he
resolved, openly with might and maine to aid and support the afflicted State
of Epirus.

And how that good Prince died in the pursuit of his wise resolution, not
without vehement suspicion of poison ministered unto him by express order from
the Prince of Macedonia; as he, who neither could, nor would endure, that the
division of Epirus (by him accounted so secure) should be hindered by him.

In this unhappy state of things, I was advanced to the Dignity: And to avoid
the disastrous end of my Predecessor, in the first months of my Principality,
I showed my self to be of a remiss genius, and altogether incapable of great
affairs of State.

I did wholly apply my self to reform the Magistrates of my Dominion, and
correct the abuses and vices of my subjects, openly professing to be a capital
enemy to the Prince of Epirus; but in my heart, full well knowing whereunto the
secret machinations, and plots of the Macedonian Prince aimed: and knowing
also, that each loss of the Prince of Epirus, would prove my overthrow; I, to
establish my State, reduced unto so apparent dangers, resolved with my self,
to afford him all the aid I could.

But, to assure mine own life for those disastrous mischiefs, in which my
Predecessor perished, it behooved me, in so strait and difficult a deliberation,
to proceed with wonderful caution and secrecy.

And observing (as no doubt your Majesty, and all these Right Honorable
Judges know full well) that amongst the numberless imperfections incident unto
Elective States, the greatest is, that, less than any whatsoever
Principalities, they find or enjoy that most important, and invaluable benefit
of secrecy in their Ministers: for so much as the customs of men are so
depraved, as their Senators and Counselors prove often greedy Merchants, or
Brokers of their Dignities and Offices; out of which they labor and practice
to extract and reap the greatest commodity, that possibly they can: Now
therefore, even in the beginning of my Principality, seeing my self engaged,
yea and engulfed in so many anguishes and perplexities: And knowing, that I
must needs wrack, and utterly perish upon the rock of Infidelity, if in a
business of so maine consequence, I made use of those ordinary Secretaries,
whom I knew to have long before fore-stalled and bribed by foraigne Princes:
The great God (from whose only benignity, and not from any else, I acknowledge
this great benefit) enlightened my understanding. And he it was, that first
proposed unto me, this mine, I will not say servant; for by the matchless
virtue, which I have found and experienced in him, he deserves not to be
styled with so mean, or with so base a surname, but most deare-deare friend.
And to him, who in the quality of a bosom servant, had most faithfully served
me the space of full eight years, I freely unfolded that secret of my heart,
which had it but fallen into my imagination, I would have deemed it most
dangerous for me. And then it was, that I perceived, how that the excellency
and high worth of a Secretary consists not (as many think) in the speaking
with elegancie, but in being secretly silent with fidelity. This I say,
because with so happy success of the important business, which I had in hand,
I used and employed this my trusty servant, as I most successefully came to
beguile and countermine the wilie-wise Prince of Macedonia; which no subtle or
crafty wit was yet ever able to do.

And by the means of this my so faithful Secretary, my affairs have bin so
carried, as no man could ever diue into, or so much as guess at my designs.
And I have underhand aided and supported that Prince my friend, whom I openly
professed to hate and persecute: and have prosperously practiced the trade, at
once to laugh and to deceive, with those who make public ostentation to be
the canonical Doctors of that Art. And with so virtuous a deceit have I
reduced the affairs of Epirus (whilome so imbroiled, as they were generally
held desperate) unto the state the world sees. Since that from the most
deplorable misery that could be, I have raised the same to be the sole
Arbitrator of all Greece. And the Macedonians, who had chimera'd and ideated
unto themselves universal Monarchies; and that in less than a month they
should be able to swallow down all other men's states: from their highest
hopes are so tumbled down into a precipice of lamentable desperations, as
having utterly renounced their ambitious cepricios, to usurp other men's
Estates, as with much ado they keep and maintain their own.

Apollo, having attentively listened unto those things, all joyful ran to
embrace the Duke of Laconia, and with tenderness of heart said thus unto him.

Oh Duke of that thrice noble Nation, which in few words expresses many
things, right virtuously and honestly have thou dealt with a man of so
incomparable worth and virtue. And I tell thee plainly, that in thy most
honorable Laconian Senate, there are but few other Senators to be found
equal in merit to this thy friend, to whom had thou given all thine Estate,
yet should thou dye vngracefull to him, and in his debt; since in these
unhappy times, wherein even in the open market of the perfidiousnesse of many,
the secrets of Princes are at port-sale, sold to him that offers most. That
Secretary, who in important affairs proves faithful, and continues trusty
unto his Prince, cannot so highly be honored, nor so bountifully be rewarded
by him, but that he has deserved much much more.

Apollo, bewailing the woeful wrackes, which in the Courts of great Princes,
his virtuous followers suffer, and fall into; for to assure their Navigations,
commands some of the chiefest learned men in his Dominion, to endeavor to
frame a Sailing-card, to sail safely by land.
Rag. 23. 2 Part.
THE deplorable wracks, which diverse learned men so often suffer in the Courts
of great Princes, grieuing Apollo daily more and more to the very heart, who
with continual labor and toilesome sweats, of the most famous Sciences
(hoping by them to merit the good favor and grace of Princes) having fraighted
the Ship of their minds with them, are afterward seen unfortunately to lose
themselves on the quicksands of a beggarly hired Chamber, or to sink in the
whirle-poole of some base Hospital, and sometimes to split on some craggie
rock of beggary.

No riches of infinite virtues being of force to free them from so deplorable
calamities: He, I say, would needs at last endeavor to find out some remedy
for so great mischiefs, whereby he might rest assured, that in all Courts
(but especially in that of Rome, placed in so tempestuous a Climate) the
navigations of his beloved virtuous attendants might be reduced unto all possibe
security; and all for the benefit of good letters, which do much empaire their
reputation, when others see that they so little advance or benefit those that
spend most of their best age in learning them.

Now Apollo seriously discoursing with himself, that if the English, the
Portagues, the Bretton, the Biscan, the Hollander and the Zelander Pilots,
only with a little observing of the Stars, the Moon and the Sun, with a
little stone in their hand, could and were able to curb and command the vast
and dreadful Ocean, which they so freely, and every way, and at all seasons
furrowed and waded through, as they had thereon plotted out highways and
watlin-streets, toward and from all Coasts.

How it could be that his virtuous, with the powerful help of Astronomy, of
Cosmographie, of the Mathematiks, of the Meteors, but chiefly with their quaint
wits, sharpened on the whetstone of continual reading of Books, could not
invent as easy and secure a navigations by land, as the Pilots of the forenamed
Nations had found out by sea. Therefore to assure (as far as the virtue and
strength of good letters can extend unto) the navigations by land.

Apollo did not many months since institute a Congregation of men, selected
out from all the Sciences necessary for so maine a business, appointing as
chief and president thereof, Ptolomie, the Prince of Cosmographers, unto whom
he allotted great Aristotle, as companion in the Meteors, Euclide for the
Mathematics, Guido Bonatti for Astronomy: And to these he added as Coadiutor,
Count Baltazar Castilion, a man well skilled and practiced in the bottomless
seas of the Courts.

And for the better security of all that which he intended to establish for the
happy success of a business of so important a consequence, his Majesty
commanded, that famous Annon of Carthage, Palinurus, Columbus, Cortese,
Ferrante Magellanes, Amerigo Vespucci, Vasco di Gama should be admitted in the
Congregation, as they, who have been the prime and chiefest Pilots that ever
the navigations by Sea had.

First then (as it was convenient) there was by that right excellent man
Ptolomie, framed a most exquisite Card to sail by Land, which with singular
cunning was every way lineated.

And to come to the perfect knowledge of the true elevation of the merits of
Courtiers, and longitude of the rewards, with which their services should be
acknowledged, there were not only invented diverse and most learned Astrolabs,
but a new and most artificial Quadrant.

True it is that that excellent man Guido Bonatti, with all his profound
Astronomy, labored exceeding hard to find out the true altitude of the pole
of the Court of Rome; nor was it ever possible, either for him or for any other
of the most sufficient of the whole Congregation, with any Astrolabe
whatsoever, to even or level and adiust the course of the Sun of the
phantasticke brain, and giddy humor of a selfe-conceited Prince.

For the genius of Princes being the true and safe North-Starre, which
nauigating Courtiers ought heedily to observe in the nauigations by land.

Those worthy men were much amazed, and wondered how a Star so certain and
infallible in Sea nauigations, should in Land navigations be found not only
unstable and wavering, but was perpetually turned and gired about, by the two
contrary motions of private interesse, and selfe-passion: from which two
difficulties, many most dangerous turbulencies arising, they were often the
causes of foul and horrible wracks.

But greater difficulties and incumberances were discovered in the most
uncertain motions of the wandering Stars, of the Ministers and Officers of
Princes, since (as it should have bin) they were not so much rapt by the first
impetuous Mouer of the good service due to their Prince, unto which they were
often manifestly seen to be retrograde.

And that which exceeded all wonder, was the amazement whereinto the
Congregation fell, when by a certain observation it perceived, that the
inferior heavens of the Ministers, with the course of their private passions
toward their own interesse or selfe-respects, did often draw and rap the said
primum mobile.

So that by these strange accidents, the business was so intricate and full of
confusion, as those Lords could never possibly come to the perfect knowledge of
the regular and true motion of so many spears, as was necessary to those that
were to publish infallible rules of them. The rubs and impediments increased
when they came to the act to note and set down the winds in the guide-ship
compass, which they found to be neither certain, nor limited in number, as we
see they are in all Sea-cards, but were little less than infinite; for,
besides the four master winds of the Princes will, of his childrens desires,
of his Brethrens prerogative, of other Princes of the blood's pre-eminence, and
the several opinions of privy Counselors, there were discovered an infinite
number of quarter-winds, or side winds, of the ministers and Officers of the
Court, of Mignons and Fauourits to the Prince, of vnder-Secretaries, of
Buffons, of Flatterers, of Parasites, of Fiddlers, yea, and of Panders, all so
irregular, so voluble, so unconstant, and in some occasions, so stormy, so
boistrous, so high and furious, as in the compass which they were a framing,
they bred so inextricable difficulties, as made those famous Pilots to condole
the miserable condition of nauigating Courtiers, who in their land-sailing must
be enforced to fit and adapt the sails of their wits to such a multitude of
several winds as appeared unto them.

All which difficulties notwithstanding (though insuperable) those notable
Pilots never fainted or gave over. Nay rather, though they discovered the
immense and vast Ocean of the Courts to be all over full of flats, shelues,
shallows, quicksands, crags, rocks, gulfs, whirl-pools, sirts, Scilla's and
Carybdis of envious, emulous, malicious, seditious, malevolent, spightfull,
rancorous, clamorous, turbulent, froward, skittish, and diabolical,
malcontents, detractors, back-bi^ers, slanderers, railers, grudgers,
persecutors, finde-faults, fantastick-humors, and heteroclit-wits, by so much
the more did their courage increase to surmount so hard a task, and so
intricate a business, and to bring it to some good pass.

Their Astrolabs being framed, and the Quadrant finished, and the Ship-guide
compass reduced unto the best perfection they could, the Congregation
determined to come unto the act of experience, whereupon having made choice of
eight quaint, smug, and spruce Courtiers, all completely stored with patience
(the most necessary biscuit, commodious provision, and needful sustenance for
those that have the heart to lanch into, and furrow the tempestuous Ocean of
the Courts) who, whilst they diligently prepared themselves for their voyage,
having hoised their sails, and only expecting a favorable wind, a chance
befell impossible to be believed; which was, that a most propitious North-gale
blowing, to which all the eight Courtiers, suddenly hoised and spread the
sails of all their hopes, only those of one were seen to appear full
swollen, and prosperously to follow his voyage, whilst the other seven never
budged from their stations.

Which the Lords of the Congregation perceiving, they were much distracted,
especially when they observed, that in a Land-nauigation the favorable winds
of the Princes good grace and opinion did not blow equally in all the sails of
his Courtiers, though all of equal merit and worth.

And greater was their wonder, when the said favorable wind, blowing a new
fair stiff gale, some Courtiers, who were prepared for a bon-voyage, speedily
hoised, and spread all their sheeting, they might perceive one who had neither
mast, nor sail, nor tackling, of any merit, but lay there idly hulling in the
haven, to learn some practice of the Court, before he would adventure himself
into the dangers of so troublous and hazardous a navigations, by the force of
that propitious wind, was driven out of the port of his restfull ease, and
blown roomeward into the deep of managements beyond his skill or sufficiency;
and with a most succesfull navigations, end the voyage, with the purchase of
great reuennues, of rich offices, of eminent honors, and of sublime titles: A
nouelty that seemed so rare and strange to all the Pilots, that Mag^lanes, as
one confounded with wonder, said thus;

My honorable good Lords, I would never have believed there should be so
great a difference between the Sea-nauigation, and the Land-sailing.

And these extrauagant novelties which now I see, seem so strange to me, as
they make me greatly to doubt of any happy issue of this our enterprise. But,
for as much as all arduous difficulties may at last be overcome with a
constant patience in the pursuit of them, let us boldly proceed.

By this time another right virtuous Courtier, displaied the sails of his
faithful service, at a fair westerly gale of the good favor of his Prince,
and by the quality of the sails full puffed, with the gracious demonstrations of
words, which he received from his Lord, imagining that he had gone a far
journey, after a long-long voyage, having calculated the course of his
navigations, he found himself riding at Anchor in the very same place, whence
he hoised sail in the long voyage of his assiduous service: The silly and
unhappy wretch, having continually bin fed with diverse hopes of fallacious
expectations, without substance of any good.

But a stranger accident presented it self unto those Lords, when they saw at
one same instant a stiff gust to blow both South and North so ragingly, from
the adle brain of a fantastic Prince, that the unfortunate Courtiers, tossed
to and fro by two so contrary winds, could not resolve to which they were best
to address their sails, so that diverse virtuous good men perished in that
tempestuous storm. At which strange case Celumbus exclaimed and said; Now I
plainly perceive (my Lords) that the navigations by Sea, wherein these
extrauagances are never seen, is a business so safe, as it may be compared
unto such iournies as men go by land in Horse-litters Columbus had no sooner
vttred these words, but the Lords of the Congregation perceived, that certain
right virtuous Courtiers, who rode in the haven, were in great danger to be
cast away; the Sea of the Court wrought so, and was beyond it is custom so
risen, and the surges mounted so high, as they threatened a general naufrage.
The biggest Cables of the most exquisite Court-patience, although right strong
and tough, did rend in sunder; so that all was wrackfull ruin. All which
notwithstanding the sky of the Princes countenance was calm, and his aspect
clear, nor did any other wind blow, but the gentle Zephirus, or West of the
Princes quietness. The mischief was apparent; the breath of the Princes
indignation was not felt, and yet the miserable nauigating Courtiers perished
in the harbor

All this raging storm notwithstanding, an hardy and courageous Courtier, who
dared to heave Anchor, and come out of the haven; and (as every man thought)
was not only nor drowned nor overwhelmed; for, that blustering tempest which
would have endangered or wrack't any whatsoever best practiced and skillful
Seaman, served him in steed of so prosperous a gale, as in a short time it
brought him unto an haven of high and honorable dignities.

An accident (in truth) worthy of infinite admiration, and which caused great
wonderment and amazement in all the Lords of the Congregation. It seeming very
strange unto them, that in the Land navigations, those stormy tempests served
some in lieu of fauonrable winds, which in most safe and quiet havens were the
dismal destruction of many.

But another thing seemed more wondrous unto them, when in a calm sky, clear
welkin, and fair season; no clouds, no lightning, no thunder, nor any sign of
foul weather appearing, there were suddenly seen certain thunderbolts to
fall, which utterly consumed and burnt two most unfortunate Courtiers. At which
unwonted accident, the Lords of the Congregation were much affrighted, wondering
how the thunder-darts, hurled by an irefull Prince, were not accompanied with
those foregoing Lightning-flashes and thunderclaps, as those be, which by the
All-powerfull hand of the great God are hurled at Mankind, and which forewarne
all Courtiers to avoid them.

A little while after, they saw a Courtier assailed by an outrageous storm of
persecutions; who after he had long strugled, and stoutly defended himself
against the muddie fury of the swollen Sea of his Princes wrathful indignation,
and from the furious blasts of cruel and malicious detractions, lest he should
sink and be swallowed up, he was forced to fling all his goods and
merchandise ouer-board. And the miserable wretch had already lost the maine
mast of his hopes, and his merits had a great leake, and drew in abundance of
water of desperation, when lo his vessel rushed and split against the marble
rock of the ingratitude of a most unthankful Prince.

Then followed a most strange thing, which was, that after so disastrous an
encounter, the vessel of that Courtiers service being split, wrackt and sunk,
the storm of Court-persecutions ceased, the Sea of the Princes indignation was
calmed, and the rock (which had caused that miserable wrack) was converted
into a most safe haven: the Courtiers vessel but ere-while overwhelmed, of it
self start up out of the waves, more fair, more strong, and in better plight,
than ever it had been before. And the merchandise of his merits of it self
was laded again, which not long after, he uttered and vented at a very dear
rate; trucking and changing the same for great dignities, eminent titles, and
rich revenues.

This accident seemed very strange unto the Lords Pilots, and unto all the
Congregation, nor could they sufficiently wonder how it could be possible, that
in the land-nauigation the most unhappy wrackes of some, might serve as great
felicities to others.

Now the Congregation continuing in trying of new experiments, enjoined a
sly-witty Courtier to hoise and display the sails of his talent toward a wind
that blew from South, and happily sailing, and keeping toward the North, after
many days sailing the Pilot-courtier desirous to see where he was, he with his
Astrolabe measured the altitude of the Pole of his merit; and to his great
wonderment found, that having continually kept the prow of his faithful
service toward the North of his Princes interresse, he had made his voyage
Southward. Of so strange a disorder, the Courtier at first accused himself,
that (as he should have done) he had not steered the helm of his faithful
mind toward the North of his Princes good service. But when both with his
sailing-card, and with his ship-guide compass in his hand, he assured
himself, that he had evermore guided the ship of his actions in an even and
honest line, he plainly perceived, that the error or mistaking of his unlucky
voyage proceeded so, because the North of his Princes affection had suffered it
self to to be turned toward the South, by certain wicked and maleuolent
whisperers, which he has always about him.

Then Vespucci, Gama, and other Pilots, besought the Lords of the Congregation,
to give over the business, as a desperate cure: and said, that nothing yielded
the navigations by sea more sure or safe, than the immutabilitie of the
North-starre.

And that by the last most unfortunate experience, it having evidently
appeared, that the minds of Princes (which are the infallible North-starre of
land-nauigation) suffering themselves so often and so easily to be turned,
removed, and circumgired by lewd and wicked people of the Court: to adventure
to sail the tempestuous Ocean of the Courts, was a resolution not fitting wise
men, but desperate persons.

In this interim the Lords of the Congregation might see a most elegant spruce
Courtier, who for the space of more than threescore years had so happily
sailed, both in the Court of Rome, and in others, that he had not only
surmounted outrageous storms of ruthlesse blasts and boistrous winds of
persecutions, but had even shiuered and broken the very same huge rocks, on
which he had split and wrackt his vessel; but that afterward, when with a most
pleasant gale, and prosperous wind, on the height of his felicity, he pursued
his course, only for that he unfortunately hit upon a rush of an impertinencie
of a base Catch-pole, he was utterly cast away. An accident which caused such
distraction in the Congregation, that the Lords jointly resolved, to have but
one trial more made (and then be quiet) by a Courtier, that was ready to set
sail; and him they commanded to hoise and spread all his sails: But so it
happened, that whilst he held on his course in a coast, deemed of all men,
most safe and dangerlesse, his ship vnheedily, or by chance, hit upon a rock,
and was wholly split and wrackt, which the Lords of the Congregation seeing,
they all bitterly bewailed the ignorance and vnheedinesse of the Courtier; for
so much as he could not avoid that rock. But he made manifest demonstration
to them all, that it was not marked in the sailing-card. Whereupon all the
Pilots casting their eyes upon great Ptolomey, as if they silently accused him
of ignorance, having omitted that rock, which so well deserved to be marked in
his Card, and had been the cause of so disastrous a mischief. But Ptolomey
having first well viewed the place, and considered the country thereabout, did
evidently demonstrate unto the Lords, that no man living had ever before that
time seen any shelfe or rock in that place, and therefore he had not marked
it in his Card; but that it suddenly grew and started up in the very instant,
that the vpfortunate Courtier hit and ran upon it.

Now the Lords of the Congregation perceiving, that in the navigations by land,
huge rocks did every hand-while spring up and grow in a moment, even in the
midst of fields and other places supposed most safe to be nauigated in the
darkest night, they concluded their business to be desperate, and their
attempt impossible. And therefore dismissing the Congregation, they straightly
commanded, that in the perilous Land-nauigation, no man should dare to go a
journey, except at high noone, and withal, every man should carry a great
Lantern of wisdom, with a burning Taper therein in the prow of his
proceeding; morning and evening with his bare knees on the ground, and hands
heaued up to heaven, humbly beseeching the Majesty of the everliving God, to
send them good success, since that for one to bring the Ship of his hopes into
a Court, as into a safe heaven, does rather depend from the immediate aid and
assistance of God, than from any humane wisdom whatsoever.

The Lord John de la Casa, having presented his quaint Galateo, or book of
Manners unto Apollo, meets with great difficulties in diverse Nations, about
their promises to observe the same.
Rag. 28. 1 Part.
THE Right Reverend Lord, John de la Casa, who (as we wrote unto you by our
last) was with great solemnity admitted into Parnassus, where after he had
visited these illustrious Poets, and complemented with all the learned Princes
of this Court, he presented his right quaint and profitable Book of Galateo
unto Apollo, which his Majesty did so highly commend, that immediately, he
strictly commanded, it should inuiolably be observed by all Nations: And at the
same instant enjoined the said Lord to compose a Galatea, since it was
manifestly known, that the Ladies of these modern times, have as much need to
be corrected in their evil and depraved manners, as men. Which Edict caused
great alteration in the people subject unto Apollo's dominion: For, it was
never possible, neither by entreaties, nor by menaces, to induce the Marquesans
to be pleased to receive it; and they boldly protested, that they were rather
resolved to renounce their Country, and forsake their children, than to leave
their most laudable custom, to honor their Lords and Masters with all
sincerity of heart: to love their friends with purity of affection* rather than
with lou^ing coursies, and with such other Court-ceremonies learned by rote.

There were also found greater difficulties among Princes, because the most
mighty Monarchy of France would never subject it self to the nice
observations of the strict rules of Galateo, Nisi si, and in quantum, her own
taste and liking did accord unto, which (she said boldly) she would rather
attend, than on affected fair creances, which she should never observe but
with a certain outward appearance.

The Sovereign Monarchy of Spain swore solemnly, that she would submit her
self unto Galateo's rules, on condition the Lord De la Casa would remove but
one Chapter out of it, which was, that being at a Table with other Princes,
she would not have it counted ill manners in her, if seeing a good morsel in
her companions dish, she did presently lay hold on it, and convey the same upon
her own trenchar. Moreover she would not be noted to be ouer-gluttonous, if
by chance she should eat and devour all her neighbors part. The Venetian
Magnificoes affirmed, that they would willingly allow of Galateo, provided
always that the Lord De la Casa would declare therein, that with all diligence
to pry into, and seek to know other men's matters, businesses, and secrets, was
no point of ill manners, but a necessary point of State Policy.

Then all the Princes of Italy applauded and embraced Galateo, only they said,
that without being accounted unmannerly, they would be allowed to chew on both
sides. But the Dutch mutined, and were like to cause some hurly-burly: for they
did not only utterly refuse to bind themselves to the Italian sobricty in
drinking, but did obstinately require, that it should be enacted and recorded
in Galateo, that the Dutchmens excessive quaffing, and continual being
drunken, and Cup-shotten, was one of the chiefest virtues could be found in men
of their Nation, and one of the first requisits that Princes and
Commonwealths, for the safety and welfare of their States, could wish for, or
desire in their Subjects, which request of theirs was by all the learned of
Parnassus rejected and impugned, as impertinent and abominable.

And therefore touching that particular of sobriety in drinking, the Dutch were
earnestly entreated and exhorted to submit themselves unto the rules of
Galateo, since that by reason of their custom of immoderate bibbing, and so
often being fox't, they were by the best Nations of Europe pointed at as
gazing-stocks.

To these objections the Dutchmen answered stoutly, that those sober men
deserved rightly to be styled foul drunkards, who living under the bondage and
servitude of Princes, by the phantasticke humor, or toyish conceit of one man,
strangely passionate and giddy headed, they were daily insulted upon,
oppressed, hurried, and extortioned in lives, lands, and goods: And that those
drunken Germans should be reputed perfectly sober, who had the wit to
vindicate themselves; and had likewise the heart and grace to maintain
themselves in liberty: adding moreover, that they accounted them bedlam fools,
who did not believe, that the drunkenness of the Germane people was the true
foundation and establishment of so many famous Republiks as were now seen
among them. For the safety of a State, and the universal peace of the people,
depending only on the fidelity of the ministers of Princes and Republiks, and
on the well-meaning plainness and sincerity of every man's mind: what other
more precious jewel could be desired in the world, then continually to see in
Germany by virtue of excessive quaffing of Wine, to vomit forth the inwardest
secrets and most hidden cogitations of the minds of men.

The Germans added moreover, that by long experience they had plainly
discovered, that they did most exquisitely well advise and counsel their
country, who by means of the good store of wine that they had drunk, having
therein drowned all private interesses, and smothered all foul dissimulation,
which sobriety is wont to beget in others minds; the open-hearted Dutch spoke
always with a single free heart, and not as the Italians, and other Nations,
yea, the sobrest are commonly wont, only with their mouth, ordinarily full of
guile and leasings.

They said likewise, that so ambitiously affecting the glorious name of brave
men at arms, as was well known to all the world, they could not with patience
listen unto the counsels and deliberations of sober men, who are commonly full
of timidity, and of a vicious circumspection, veiled with the man^le of
prudence; but because they would have them to be generous and courageous, they
would not allow, that any man should undertake to counsel his Country being
fasting, but after he had first swilled down good store of grape-liquor, and
enflamed his heart with generosity, it being the proper quality of good wine
rather to expel timidity from the heart, than remove judgment from the
understanding.

And therefore the Germans with great reason, De reconciliandis inuicem
inimicis, and iungendis affinitatibus, and adsciscendis Principibus, de pace
denique ac bello, plerumque in conuiuijs consuitant, tanquam nullo magis
tempore ad simplices cogitationes pateat animus, aut ad magnas incalescat.

Furthermore they said, That if the Italian vicious sobriety were introduced
among the Germans, that most faithful and sincere Nation, would therewithal
begin to abound with those double hearts, false minds, secret thoughts, unseen
sleights, handy-dandy, or turne-coat spirits, fraught with treasons,
treacheries, conspiracies, and machinations, full of untrue and forged
affections, masked with secret hatred, with feigned and dissembled friendship,
and with all manner of foisting, whereof those Nations that glory to be sober
are most abundant Cicilies and fruitful Egypts, a thing so true, that the
French, who for the vnspottednesse and purity of their free and single hearted
minds, in the excellent virtue to be ever most faithful and loyal to their
Kings, have at all times bin most glorious and renowned in the world, since
diverse of them have left the most commendable custom to quaffe merrily, and to
be drunken after the good Dutch fashion, have suffered themselves to be
drawn into those most felonious actions that the world knows full well. And
if that little window in a man's breast, was by the wisest of former ages deemed
a thing so necessary, and esteemed as an invaluable benefit unto mankind,
because through it a man might visibly see and view the hearts of certain sly
cunny catching companions, who, within being most ugly devils, employ the
utmost of their endeauours to be reputed fair Angels; With what ground of
good reason can any man blame the right laudable and precious custom to quaffe
merrily, and to be drunk? it being most palpable and evident, that drinking of
much wine has the virtue to make bodies diaphaned or transparent. For which
solid reasons, which by Apollo were both allowed and commended for militant, it
was resolved, that concerning the particular point of drinking moderately and
soberly, the excellent and far renowned Dutch Nation should not be subject
unto the strict precepts of Galateo.

The use of drunkenness being among the Germans rather an artifice of the
Public, than a vice of private men; It being manifestly known, that both in
times of peace and of war, those nations are best advised that do as the
Germans; Deliberant, dum fingere nesciunt: constituunt, dum errare non possunt.

Apollo having highly commended the Statute, made by the most mighty Kings of
Spain, that no Advocates, Lawyers, or Proctors shall pass into the Indies,
the Doctors of the Law finding themselves aggrieued, complain unto his
Majesty.
Rag. 83. 1 Part.
THe renowned Court and habitation of Parnassus may rightly be esteemed most
happy, not so much for the right excellent government of Apollo's Majesty, nor
because it is inhabited by the most quaint, flourishing, choice, and sublime
wits of the whole universe, as because the exquisiteness of a virtuous life,
the perfection of all right honorable customs, and the exactness of all the
best laws dispersed through the whole world, are therein with all precise
diligence introduced, propagated, cherished and observed. The reason is,
because those that inhabit or reside there, are bound to bring the most
commendable fashions of their Countries.

A custom, that has brought so great commodity unto the Private, and so
honorable reputation unto the Public, as all men may evidently perceive, that
to be a right blessed and happy country, which lives and subsisteth, not so
much by her own proper laws, as by and with those iudiciously selected from
out all other most civil and best established Nations.

Apollo having lately bin informed, how the most potent Kings of Spain, having
under great penalties prohibited, that no Advocates, no Lawyers, nor Proctors
shall pass into the Indies, was pleased to approve and ratify the said Decree
as most wholesome, as most holy. And did highly extol and commend the piety of
those Monarks, who showed so great charity toward the new world, in seeking
to preserve it from that mischievous infection, that has filled and infected
the old-one with so many deplorable calamities and wailfull controversies.
Whereupon his Majesty commanded, that the said holy and excellent Edict should
forthwith be engraven, and enregistred in a fair table of metal, which to the
perpetual memory thereof should be affixed near unto the twelve Tables of
the most famous Roman Laws in Forum maximum. We must not omit to let you
understand, that the Doctors of the Laws were greatly moved and vexed at this
iniunction, who earnestly recommended the indemnitie of their reputation unto
his Majesty, alleging, that if they should not obtain the favor to have the
publication of that ordinance stayed, occasion would be given unto many to
imitate those of Ancona, of Norcia, of Recanati, and of other people, who to
the great dishonor of good letters, had chased and expelled from out all their
counsels and consultations those Pettie-foggers and Law-pleaders, which of all
other people were held in so great admiration; for they verily believed, that
without the PLACET of a man skillful in the Law, it was impossible for any man
to say or do any thing well or honestly. And that by so much the more, they
besought his Majesty to take their cause into his consideration, as there was
question made of the indemnitie of the thrice-sacred Liberal Arts, which all
Students of the Laws, to their intolerable costs and charges, and with
unspeakable toil, labor and sweat, did waste and consume themselves to learn.

At whose strange instances, Apollo (against the opinion of all the
bystanders) fell into a chafing passion, and with great indignation, answered
those malapert Doctors, that he much wondered, how before his Majesty's sacred
presence, they had dared to affirm, that they spent, and labored, and sweat
so much to learn the sacred Liberal Arts, as if the Delphick Edict were not
known to all the world, in which the study of the Laws is especially
declared to be no Liberal Science, but a base trade, and a mechanical
occupation, brought into the world for the affliction of mankind, studied and
plodded upon without any delectation to the mind, without any speculation of
the intellect, and without the so materially-needfull help of the sovereign
Muses in all perfect and commendable Sciences; and only exercised for mere
covetousness of lucre, to fatten with pelf and crowns a piece of man with
two gloting eyes in his skonce, or a slouenly fellow, who although he be
altogether void of that viuacitie of wit, which good and noble letters affect
so much, nevertheless, to become an eminent Advocate, it suffices him to have
a blockish brain, a porter-like gross complexion, a rusticall behavior, and
a clownish demeanor, fit rather to draw in a cart, than to converse with
civil or learned men.

An Apothecarie, at the very instant, that he is taken prisoner by Sergeants,
without being examined at all, is forthwith condemned and sent to the Galleys.
Rag. 65. 2 Part.
THe Apothecarie that dwelt at the sign of the two Crowns in the high
Mercerie-street, was four days since apprehended by the Officers of the
Criminal Court: and for so much as the poor wretch was suddenly hood-winkt, and
muffled, and on men's shoulders carried to the haven, and put into a Gallie, all
Parnassus rested much amazed, to see the execution of that unfortunate man's
condemnation, foregoe the framing of his enditement.

It is reported, that this has happened at the instant request of all the chief
Monarks of the universe, now resident in this State, who think themselves
offended to the quick by that Apothecarie, for so much as he did openly sell
Fine smoke: a merchandise, which Princes challenge and pretend to belong only
to them; and that no private person whatsoever should dare to sell but they.

Some suppose, that by the example of that unfortunate wretch they have gone
about to terrify all others from troubling them in matters concerning their
jurisdiction and prerogative. And although the shallow-headed and simple sort
of people give out, that the Apothecaries fault deserved not so rigorous a
resentment, yet those that will pry and thoroughly diue into the secrets and
interesses of great Princes, affirm, that he has very gently, and with much
indulgence been dealt withal. For So Much as Fine smoke, serving Princes (in
many and daily occasions) in lieu of fine coined gold, every treasure of theirs
(though never so rich and great) would soon be exhausted, whenever that so
current money of Fine smoke, losing its credit and esteem among the vulgar
sort of people; Princes should ere long be enforced (according to the Plebeian
fashion) to pay their debts with ready money.

The virtuous people of Apollo's State having consigned unto his Majesty's
General Treasurer the accustomed Donatiue of a thousand conceits, according to
their custom they beg a boon or grace at his hands.
Rag. 81. 2 Part.
THose that have exact knowledge of the passages of this State, know full well
that the virtuous of Parnassus pay duly unto the Exchequer-Chamber, not only
the tenth part of the fruits of their wits, but the quitrent taxed according to
each man's talent: whence it is, that fertile Ovid does yearly pay unto the
public Receivers eight Elegies; Virgil fourscore printed Heroicke verses;
Horace five Odes; Martial eleven Epigrams; and so others according to their
sessment or taxation.

Besides that, the virtuous every three years under the name of a Donatiue or
free gift (yet such a Donatiue, as if it be not paid with a genuine good will,
without losing its modest name, it may be exacted, distrained, and levied by
Bailiffs and Sargeants, who may distraine goods, take pawnes, and sell them at
Port-sale) pay into the Delphick treasury a million of conceits, which by the
sovereign Muses are afterward liberally distributed among those silly
Literates and poor Scholars, who being deprived of all munition, only for
the love and good will they show toward good letters, yield themselves worthy
to be relieved.

And the custom is, that upon the occasion of so large a Donatiue, his
Majesty is ever wont to counter-change the bounteous liberality of his
Virtuous with some suits or favors, which the learned may lawfully demand and
challenge.

So that the last week, after the collection of the Donatiue, in a general
Congregation, the virtuous concluded to beg six graces at Apollo's hands, all
which were set down in a note or memorial, that should be presented to him,
when as the quaint Classis or witty form of the Politike-vertuous advertised
the Congregation, that in the occasions of begging suits, boones, or graces
from Princes for any merit a man may pretend, it was necessary to avoid the
error of demanding over many things at once, not only because the multitude of
graces which Suitors crau^, do distaste and molest Princes, who commonly are
easily distasted upon occasions to pay bonds or duties; but because he that
beggeth plurality of requests, is commonly answered and satisfied with the
slightest and worst of them: And therefore it would prove a wise resolution, in
such a case, to be very earnest and circumspect for the obtaining of one only
good suit. Always provided it be of good worth and consequence, and which
without a note of much ingratitude may not be refused or denied by the Prince.

This advertisement of the Politicians, was by the generality of the Virtuous,
applauded, commended and followed. Whereupon the very next day, there were sent
unto his Majesty the Right Excellent Bernardino Viperio, and Tiberio
Serpentino, both Advocates for the University of the Virtuous, who having
tendered and presented the Donatiue unto Apollo, they most humbly besought him,
that in providing of Judges for his Tribunals, and of other officers for
public Magistrates, he would be pleased to make choice of men of mild and
gentle natures, of a courteous and affable genius, of a plausible disposition,
of a meek and lowly dexterity, of easy access, of a quick understanding,
of a nimble apprehension, of a temperate patience, of a tractable conversation,
and of a cheerful aspect. And that it might stand with his good pleasure to
send certain eteroclit, irregular, arrogant, fantastic, wayward, peevish,
insolent, passionate, self-conceited, humorous, proud, giddie-headed, and foully
tainted Animals, who with their untuned, vnde^linable, unsettled, and
distempered Calfe-braines put wretched suitors, and miserable Clients into
greater troubles, and more harmfull agonies, than the processes, or please
themselves, and appoint them to be Botesons, Masters-mates, and Auditors in the
Galleys, there to employ, and exercise their turbulent, seditious, litigious,
mutinous, harsh, and quarrelous talent upon the Ging, Swabbers, and
Rowing-slaues, which is, and proves so insupportable to free men.

By letters intercepted, and taken from a Currier, dispatched by some Princes
to the Lake of Auerno, the common people come to know, that the rancors and
hatreds now reigning among diverse Nations, are occasioned and stirred up by the
artifices of their Princes.
Rag. 58. 2 Part.
Between the confines of Pindo and Libetrum, on Monday night last, was an
extraordinary Post robbed, whom certain mighty Princes had in great diligence
dispatched toward the Lake Auerno. And for so much as the Currier had no hurt
done him in his body; it is suspected, that the robbery has been committed
to none other end, than to seize on his letters, as indeed it followed: for
they only took a packet from him, which he had about him, directed to the
Infernal Furies, Alecto, Thesifon and Megera, by which letters (and truly with
great scandal) it has been disconered, that certain Princes do wage and
stipend the said Furies, to the end, that not only among diverse Nations, but
often among the subjects of one same Prince, they may sow and nourish
perpetual strifes, and neuer-ending discords. And to fill up the measure of
distastes, there was a letter found in the said packet, of ten thousand
ducats, to be paid them for the arrerages of six months past. The subjects
of those Princes, that have written the letters, by their Deputies have caused
them to be presented unto Apollo, to whom they have grievously exclaimed, and
bitterly complained, that their Princes, who ought vigilantly to heed nothing
so much, as the perpetual peace and unanimous concord, not only of their own
particular subjects, but of all other Nations besides, should with ready money
purchase ^editions to others, and mischiefs to themselves. And that until
now, they never came to the knowledge, how by the mere artifices, tricks,
plots, and machinations of Princes, those divisions, factions, grudges,
unkindness, distasts, discords, and unnatural hatreds, were seen so to
abound among diverse Nations; and to be the source and root of those calamitous
and infinite mischiefs, that so much oppress and afflict mankind.

All outrages, excesses, abuses, and pollutions of that nature, as if they were
once clean rooted out of the world, men might securely enjoy the comfort, to
see the French love the English, the Spaniard affect the French, and the Dutch
embrace the Italian, and see a perfect peace and good concord to follow
between all men.

Whilst these Deputies were thus discoursing, it was observed that from
Apollo's eyes, through the great compunction of what he heard, there gushed
forth abundance of sad tears. Whereupon the by standers supposed verily, that
his Majesty would in raging passion burst forth into some bitter terms
against those Princes, that were charged and accused of so heinous crimes, when
thus he said: Oh you my faithful friends, your complaints are as grievous, as
they be true; but know, that the enormities whereof you complain, proceed not
so much from the bad or waiward nature of Princes, as they are occasioned by
the turbulent humors and seditious devises of the peevish people, who with
their sicklenesse and instabilitie do so work, as it is impossible to
purchase and obtain the universal peace of mankind with any other instrument,
than with sowing those discords, divisions, seditions, and factions among
Nations, whereof you so much, and so grievously complain: for long experience
has made Princes to know, that the huge and unwieldy machine of reigning
securely, is all built and reared upon the firm foundation of
equally-contributing and iustly-distributing. And it is a thing most manifest,
that the people without Princes to sway and govern them, would of themselves
precipitate into more cruel seditions and bloody quarrels, than those, which
for the public peace, and general good of all, others sow and breed among
them. All mischiefs (oh you my most beloved) very necessary. Although it
grievously grieueth me to see, that the infirmity of those universal
iarrings, and discords, which now reign in mankind cannot be cured with any
more sovereign remedy, and ready antidote, than with the bitter medicine,
which you say is now so nastie unto you.

Antonio Perez of Aragon, having presented the Book of his Relations unto
Apollo, his Majesty does not only refuse to accept it, but commands the same
to be presently burnt.
Rag. 60. 2. Part.
ANtonio Perez, whilom principal Secretary to the most mighty King of Spain,
Philip the second, knowing the bad opinion that that Secretary purchases unto
himself among all Nations, who with distaste parts from his Prince; within a
while after he had recovered himself in France, for his own discharge,
published unto the world those his unhappy Relations, which have so heavily
laden him with infamy and blame. For, whilst he with all manner of art and
skill should have procured to conceal them, upon Thursday morning last, dared
to present them to Apollo; who, as soon as he saw the Book, and was informed
of the contents thereof, fell into such indignation against him, that even then
he caused the same to be burnt in the public and chief Marketplace, and
said unto Perez, That he had given unto his Relations that place in Parnassus
which he and they deserved. And that to the end other Secretaries, his equals,
might take example, and learn to prefer secrecy, and faithfulness of
silence before the charity to ones proper life itself; yea, and before the
love of a man's own self: for, even as he deserves the name of a treacherous
and proditorious villain, that upon any casual distaste, or conceived
unkindness, reuealeth the secrets committed to his trust in times of former
friendship; so a thousand times most shameful, infamous, and ever to be
detested is that Secretary, who for whatsoever hard usage he may have received
from his Prince, publishes those secrets which by his Lord and Master have
been imparted unto him in forepassed confidence, not only voluntarily, much
less by any kind of cruel rack or sharp torture, ought never to be
published or disclosed to any creature whatsoever.

The Monarchy of Spain is much agrieued, that her falsehoods and treacheries
are discovered.
Rag. 2. 3 Part.
IT is not yet well known, whether it were by chance, or by the malice of some
Frenchmen, or (as many have vehemently suspected) by the machination of that
Nation, which is so implacable an enemy unto the French, some few years since,
a fire took hold of the Royal Palace of the Monarchy of France; and so great
was the flame, and so dreadful the blaze, that the neighboring Monarchies
entered into fearful suspicion, that so huge a fire could hardly be quenched,
but with the ruin of their states: so that every man, for the safety of his
own, ran speedily to quench the fire in an others house. The English, albeit
natural enemies unto the French, with all diligence brought thither the waters
of their Thames. The Germans, those of Mose and Rhine. The Venetians did in a
manner empty all their Fennes and Marshes. The prudent Dukes of Tuscanie, in
great haste ran with all sorts of weapons, to help to extinguish that
consuming flame, which wise men greatly feared, was likely to end in an
universal desolation.

And truly it was wondrous strange to see that the Monarchy of Spain, known
to be so deadly an enemy unto the French, she also among the chief friends of
France labored with might and maine to extinquish that fire, at which most men
supposed, that she would rather run merrily to warm her self, whereat all men
stood amazed, especially when they saw, that she with all solicitude, and
external charity brought unto it, not only the waters of her golden Tagus and
Iberus, but also of the vast Ocean, of which when the English and the
Hollanders please, she is absolute Mistress.

Since those Politicians sinisterly interpreting the Spaniards charity,
declared publicly, that it was a most pernicious thing in the necessities of
the French, to admit the aides of those Spaniards, who being known to be
eternal foes, and capital enemies unto France, ought rather to be esteemed
the Architects of the utter ruin of the French, than zealous of the greatness
and prosperity of their kingdom: as they who measuring all the Actions and
proceedings of those which reign among Princes, by the only compass of
private interesse, do seldom admit any manner of piety toward God, much
less of charity toward men.

And so much the more were such Politicians become abominable to most Nations,
as it manifestly appears, that the Spaniards in their forwardness, diligence,
and charity, to bring water unto that fire, did not equal only, but exceed
whatsoever best friend unto the French. And that which increased the wonder,
and that among the simpler sort, caused great reputation unto the Monarchy of
Spain, was, that Flanders and Austria her ancient Patrimonies, burning in a
most cruel combustion of war, she had preferred the welfare and safety of
the French, before the charity of her own preservation.

But for so much as no humane endeavor, nor store of water was sufficient to
quench the least sparkle of so frightfull a fire: And that notwithstanding all
the diligence and remedies that were used, the devouring flames of those most
fierce and bloody civil wars, increasing daily more and more, the
wel-meaning and best affected simpler sort of men began to listen unto the
Politicians aduertisements, and to suspect, that the charity of the Spanish
Monarchy was altogether private interesse, and peculiar Spanish charity; which
made them resolve, no longer to give credit unto outward apparences, but
inwardly to view what matter the Spaniards brought in their Caske, and found,
that in lieu of water to quench fire, they had filled them with pitch, tar,
rosen, oil, and turpentine, and also with diabolical dissentions to foment
and increase the same. Which treachery was likewise found to be favored by
certain French Barons, who more than others professing to be charitable, made
use both of the barrels, and of the matter lent them by the Spaniards.
Whereupon they were by the just disdain of the French Monarchy presently put
to death, and burnt in the very same flames, which with so great sedition, and
treacherous infidelity, they nourished in the heart of their own Country.

And the Spaniards were not only chased from that work, but by sound of
Trumpet publicly proclaimed to be a company of false hearted hypocrites. And
by an especial Edict of the French Monarchy, all men were given to understand,
that if ever there were any man found that would believe, that any spark of
charity toward the French could lodge in the breast of a Spaniard, he should
be held, esteemed, and reputed an egregious Gull.

And that if after the first warning he should persist in his error, he should
be tossed in a blanket, as a factious and seditious fellow.

It was a thing worthy of admiration to see, that so soon as the Spaniards and
the foresaid unnatural French gave over their work, that fire which before
was so great, that the most judicious do affirm, it was in all humane reason
inextinguible, on a sudden ceased of it self: Whereupon the eternal and far
renowned Flower de Luces, whilom so hurried and trampled under foot, sprung up
again, more gloriously flourishing and resplendent than ever they were.

And France, which through the immoderate ambition of some turbulent spirits,
had most barbarously bin tormented and molested more than full forty years, to
the great wonderment of all, in the twinkling of an eye became quiet and in
peace.

Whereby all the world came to know, that the Spaniards had been the first
Authors of that ever deplorable French combustion, which they under most
specious shows and pretenses of Religion, and christian Charity, had labored
to make the world believe that they sought to quench. Some report that the
Spanish Monarchy upon this retired her self into her royal Palace, and that
for many days, she would not admit any body to see her, having given her
self over unto so great melancholy, that with floods of tears trilling down
her blubred cheeks, she loudly exclaimed, that she would much rather have
lost two of her best kingdoms, than to see those her holy and hypocritical
pretexts so scoft at, so derided, and so laid open to all the world, wherewith
she remembered to have diverse times (to her infinite profit) sold unto the world
most stinking Assa-fetid^, in stead of Musk, Ziuet, and Ambergris: It
seeming unto her to be deprived of her richest treasure, and to have lost her
inexhaust mines of gold and silver in Peru, yea, and of the new world besides,
seeing her self so unluckily deprived of the hope and benefit, to be at any
time more able to depaint unto the silly credulous people, white for black, or
chalk for cheese; deeming it a very hard case to see herself brought unto the
wretched and dreadful condition, in which she has ever seen the French, to
be enforced to purchase kingdoms and dominions with the only force of the
point and dint of the Sword; and not as heretofore she has done with the only
semblances of her false-holy pretexts, which have sometimes stood her in stead
of flourishing and strong Armies. She knows that she has put the world into
combustion, and has ever loved to fish in troubled waters.

And it grieueth her beyond measure, that she has so lost the good opinion of
most Nations, that she is in some danger that none will hereafter believe her
though she chance to speak the truth; whereas heretofore the stimulation of
false pretexts, and of most apparent hypocrisy were held in credit, and in
lieu of thrice sacred verity, most absolute zeal and perfect devotion.

The Spanish Monarchy arriueth in Parnassus, She entreats Apollo to be cured
of a Cauterie: She is dismissed by the politic Physicians.
Rag. 4. 3 Part.
IT is now four months since the renowned Majesty of Spain arrived at this
Court, unto whom Apollo forthwith assigned a day for her puklike and solemn
entrance, which by the consent of the whole Consistory of the learned, was
appointed to be in the royal Audience Chamber, in the presence, and with the
assistance of the Sovereign Muses: which solemnity (for some urgent occasions)
was not performed but two days since.

The reason is, because she has spent the full time of four months in
consultation with the Poet Princes, about the Titles which she should mutually
give and receive from others; as also in agreeing about the manner how to
receive them, and how they would receive her in their reciprocal visitations.

The consideration whereof has made all the virtuous of this College, to
stand amazed, and bitterly to bewail the hard condition of these modern
times, infected with the contagion of so many complemental vanities. And the
grieuances of the virtuous were so much the more increased, for so much as
diverse learned Princes openly refused to be visited by that great Queen,
saying, that they feared to receive some insult or affront from her, for they
had lately received letters from Italy, wherein they were by their loving
friends forewarned to be circumspect, and vigilantly stand upon their guard, it
being peculiar unto the Spaniards to go visit others, with intention rather to
iniu^y than to honor them. And that they thought it an egregious folly, in
lieu of avoiding of affronts abroad, to expect them with bended knees and cap
in hand at home in their own houses.

And although that so potent a Monarchy (to the great admiration of all) has
showed her self much more nigardly, in giving others satisfaction of Titles,
than in distributing of her Ducats, she has notwithstanding received from
these Poet Princes, and from all virtuous Potentates (who concerning this
titular circumstance, stand rather upon real substance than on the vanity of
things) the greatest gust and contentment she could desire. True it is, that
one thing has much empaired the reputation of so great a Queen in this Court,
which is, that albeit she stand in extreme need of trusty friends, she
nevertheless shows herself so procliue and foreward to alienate those from
her, who expect for nothing at her hands but satisfaction in words.

Yea, some have noted (as a remarkable thing) that the Master of the Ceremonies
has forewarned her Majesty, that those precise punctilio^ she so nicely
stands upon, are most odious, and only proper to barbarous Kings, and right
worthy her royal Majesty. And that a great Queen in Europe, her equal, has
in great passion and anger plainly told him to his teeth, that she much
marvelled both at him and all his ceremonials, since he seemed not to know,
how a Prince without gravity and State, may rightly be compared to a peacocke
without a train. It is impossible to set down with what longing curiosity and
earnest desire, so renowned a Princess has bin expected by all the learned of
this Court: for, from the utmost bounds of all Apollo's Dominions, an infinite
number of all sorts and sexes, have flocked hither to view the countenance of
that mighty Queen, who with a prodigious stream of happiness, has in short
time united and brought under her diverse potent Kingdoms, and with them framed
an Empire so formidable, that there is no Prince in the known universe, but for
fear and suspicion of her, has at some time or other bin driven to put on a
lacket of maile, or a Cuirace of steel.

This Queen not many months since, attended on by a numberless Fleet, with
prosperous navigations, arrived safely in the Isle of Lesbos: and the most
honorable Lady the Republike of Genoa, has gratis lent her her most famous
Port, although by reason of a certain ancient prerogative, the family of the
Dorias draw a very great revenue out of it.

The Spanish Monarchy, in comparison of that of France, of England, and of
other ancient Monarchies of Europe, is but young in years, but in body and
bulk far bigger than any other whatsoever: and to the proportion of her
years, she is of an unmeasurable greatness, whereby it is argued, that if she
continue to grow unto that age in which humane bodies are wont to receive
increase and growth, she will prove an huge Giantesse, and attain to that
boundless height of universal Monarchies, unto which the Roman Monarchy
came.

But he accidents of matters, and secrets of State, affirm most assuredly,
that she cannot grow much greater. And that in her tendrest years she is
sprung up unto that height of body, unto which she may in any long time
attain: which is evidently perceived by this infallible argument, that in
these days, she grows but half an inch with greater difficulty than in
former times she did two handful.

This potent Lady is of so swarthy an hue, that she draws near unto the
Moore or Affrican.

And therefore are her comporiments rather disdainful and proud, than serious
and grave and in all her actions she shows her self more cruel than severe.
And for as much as she could yet never learn the Art so necessary unto
Princes, to pardon, it is the undoubted opinion of many, that it will prove
some hindrance to her greatness: for glorying in nothing more, than to be
called the Doctoresse of all Nations, in the Science to be implacably-resolute,
in knowing how to cut off the tops of those haughty and luxurian Poppies,
which in the gardens of her States do proudly ouertop others, she greatly
rejoices that it be said, how in this Art, she has excelled that great
Tarquinius, that was the first inuentor of so mysterious a secret.

She being then so hardy and resolute in committing of seuerities, she is much
perplexed in conferring of favors, which are seldom seen to proceed from
her. And those few that she bestows come from her with such an imperious
haughtiness, that they are not very acceptable. And yet in exterior semblance
she is all affability, and wholly spends herself in complements. But he that
with the spectacles of State-policie can pry into the inmost of her heart,
shall easily perceive, that she is all Pride, all Avarice, all Cruelty. So
that all they that have any long time treated or negotiated with her, report,
that none receive from any other Princes more milde-honied words, and more
bitter deeds. Whence it is, that as a friend she does greatly allure men, and
as a mistress much insult upon, and terrify them.

Her hands are beyond all due proportion long, which she extends far and
near, as occasions serve, without distinguishing of friends from foes, or
stranger from kinsman. Her nails are like an Harpies, and most griping. Her
fingers are of so hard and fast-hold, that what once comes into her clutches,
she never lets go again. Her eyes are black, and a most sharp piercing
sight. Her look is squint, with which wishly beholding one, she fixedly
looks upon another.

A thing of great danger unto Princes; for of late days, having bent her face
toward Algiers, no man suspecting it, she had earnestly fixed her look
toward Marseilles.

In her eyes is plainly discovered a most greedy and insatiate desire, since
that there is nothing that she fixes them upon, but she most greedily
wishes and coueteth the same with all her heart, and that is the reason, that
our observing Speculants say, that this Queen does immoderately thirst after
others goods, and that as yet she never had friend, but with her tricks, and
wilie-beguilies, she has in the end made her slave.

All which things discover plainly unto the world, that she is rather fit to
govern slaves than free men. For there is no other Princess whatsoever, that
more ambitiously labors to ingrosse and forestall all service into her
hands, not only from her own subjects, but from her best friends.

She observes so punctual a form of State, that she does not so much as
vouchsafe to go meet good occasions, which infinite times have sought her in
her own house.

She far excels all other Queens, both present and past in knowing, how
under her rich robe of cloth of gold to paliate her private interesse, be it
never so diabolical.

And although she be daily seen to commit most damnable actions, she makes no
greater ostentation of any thing than of her conscience; whereby the French,
who under color of her holy and religious pretexts, have so often been
ouer-reached, have at last (to their no small cost) learned to arm themselves,
and to get on horseback, when with a Crown in her hand, they see her propose,
or treat affairs full of religious pretexts, and sacred charity, toward her
best beloved neighbors.

She is so cunning in the exercise of riding, that she has not only
successefully tamed and broken the generous Coursers of Naples, but also the
rough and skittish Mules of Spain, which by a natural instinct are wont to
kick, to whinze, and bite at all men.

She is of all other Queens of so mistrustfull a Genius, that, except her own
Nation, she has declared all others (though subject unto her) to be of no
confidence, albeit she have diverse times, and in all occasions found them right
trusty and faithful; which point is so prejudicial unto her, that the most
skillful in the worlds affairs, do probably conclude, that by reason of this
one most important defect, it is impossible she should grow bigger. The reason
is, because there is no other Queen, that cares less to be beloved of her
people, than she, and that endeavors more to be feared.

And therefore do our Politicians note this in her as a kind of notorious
folly, that she confidently believes, that with misusing and hurring all
men, she shall induce them to adore her, and with such hateful deportments,
allure all Nations to serve her: For the great store of her treasures, is the
forcible Adamant, which violently attracts unto it the minds of some, who
utterly abhorring her, are bound to seek, and by all means procure her
declination.

She is most curious and accurate in matters of small moment, whereas in
weighty and important affairs, no other Queen has more easily suffered
herself to be supplanted and ouer-reached.

In her discourses, and in resolving of most important businesses, she shows
admirable wisdom, and circumspection; but whether it be through her natural
tarditie, or artifice of her officers, who are all most greedy merchants of
great negotiations; or because she is of opinion, that no resolution is done
with decorum, that is not long a doing, and with tedious delays expected of
all men.

She executes her determined resolutions with such slownesse, that the face
of affairs changing with the times, her resolutions determined with great
wisdom, do often prove unhappy.

And therefore do all conclude, that she is more courageous in the skill of
plotting machinations, than in the exercise how to manage Arms, in which she
shows to have an undaunted heart, a resolute constancy, and an unspeakable
sufferance of all crosses and inconveniences; but so weak in resolutions, that
her extraordinary circumspection has many times the semblance of timiditie.
Whence it follows, that she seems more apt to maintain States, than to
acquire them. Diverse notable men laugh at her, to see her address and govern
all her actions by the compass of certain solid and mature Counsels, without
ever referring them into the hands of that Fate or Chance, which has so
greatly favored the French, and yielded them so glorious, when in their
actions and managements, they have governed themselves with much valor and
little brain.

There be some that think this happens, only because she is as sparing of her
own blood, as she is thirsty and insatiate of other men's. And therefore do
the expertest Captains of war mock and gibe at her, to see her aspire at
the Empirie of the whole Universe without ever fighting.

The reason whereof is, because this most potent Queen, being of long time
accustomed to purchase great Estates by Alliances and Marriages, she abhors
the dreadful custom of the French, to conquer kingdoms with the price and
hazard of their own dearest blood.

She being then more wittily-warie than boldly courageous, it follows, that
she is more mischievous unto her enemies in times of peace, than war: whence
it is, that the French, who hitherto have lived with her in a supine or stupid
carelessness, after so many calamities endured, have at last learnt to double
the bars of their doors, when they have concluded peace with the Spaniards.

She is most careless and lavish of her own riches, but so greedy of other
men's, that she cares not to desolate her Patrimoniall Estates, so she may
make conquest of others.

She is of so secret and hidden thoughts, and of a mind so abstruse and
unsearchable, that there is no wit, artifice, or skill of man able to look
into her drifts. Nay, Linx himself with his through-piercing sight, cannot
penetrate into them, no not so much as the outside of them: whereas men of a
glimmering or short sight, may plainly see into the very bowels of the French
and other Nations.

For he that shall with with judgment go about to describe the Genius and
customs of so great a Princess, must confidently believe, that in all the
managements she has in hand, and in all the affairs that others negotiate
with her, she is inwardly clean contrary to that she appears without.

And although that among the foresaid virtues, she be full fraught with so
enormous vices, notwithstanding by reason of her prodigious fortune, all of
them are interpreted and admired in her as virtues, whence it follows, that
diverse great Princes take it as an honor to imitate her in her vices.

She is of a most sturdie and robust complexion, whereby all judge her to be
long-liued.

She only languisheth of the indisposition, to have her limbs much distracted,
which does much debilitate the forces of so huge a bulk.

And although that with the help of the liberty of Genoa, and of the alliance
she has with the Duke of Sauoy, she uses diverse means and artifices to
contract them; nevertheless by reason of the diversity of the interesses of
these Potentates, she makes no great use of them.

This mighty Princess receives no greater damage from any, than from her
chief Spanish Officers, whom alone she imployeth in great charges, all which
are by them exercised with such, and intolerable surquedrie, as they will not
only be honored as men, but adored as Gods. An impertinencie so great, as it
has stirred up a loathing, and nastinesse of the Spanish Dominion, not only
in the Italians, and in the Flemmings, but in the Spaniards themselves.

One thing has caused great wonderment in all that behold so potent a Queen,
which is, that her whole body is full of horse leeches (for the most part of
Genoa) some of which are so big and fat, as they appear to be of those great
Ecles that come out of Holland, or those big Lampreis that breed in Seuerne It
is not known whether it be through impotencie, or negligence, or through a
destiny fatal unto great Princes, whose vital blood these noisome creatures
seek evermore to suck, that she endeavors not to shake them off, and be
freed from them.

This most mighty Queen then, being entered into the Royal Palace before
Apollos Imperial Majesty, stretched forth her left arm, causing her servants
to vnswathe the same, and so naked, showing it unto Apollo, and to the whole
sacred College of the learned, she thus bespake.

Imperial Sir, and gracious father of all good letters: This which your
Majesty sees; yea even this is that stinking cauterie, and loathsome issue of
Flanders, which the French, the Germans, and some Italian Princes, that now
friendly faune upon me, together with the help of that formidable Virago, and
transmarine Renegada made in this mine arm, for the distrust or suspicion they
had of me. I acknowledge that the Princes forenamed had just cause to be
jealous of my power, when after the death of Henry the second, they saw France
fallen into the wretched calamity of Infant-Kings, and that I, in their
minority, sought to sow discords in that goodly kingdom.

Now that these suspicions are vanished, and that (ay me, why do I not blush
to speak it?) the contention, which I have had with the French, and
particularly with that undaunted limb of the Devil, the Prince of Bearne, is
now ended, and that I have at last been condemned my self in all costs and
charges: My humble request unto your Majesty is, that this grievous and
fasheux cau^erie be healed, and closed up. For most men are of opinion, that
for the infinite number of humors, that have run unto it, it is now become so
festred and enraged a cankre, as I fear (which God a^ert) it will prove the
loss of my arm.

I did not pass into Italy through mine own ambition, or unquenchable
thirst, wholly to sway the same, as mine enemies report. It is well known to
all the world, that I was untimely called thereunto, and even haled unto it by
the Princes of Italy themselves, to free them from the great fear they were
in of the French. And there is no man living in Europe, but knows how that in
the States that I possess in Italy, I employ so large a share of my stock and
freehold, as they rather serve to further my weakness, and keep me still
oppressed. And thrice-happy were my Spanish home, which I might ere now have
covered with tiles of pure silver, and states of massy gold, had I never had
intelligence, or dealings with the Italian nation, so double-hearted, so full
of fallacies, so anxious of private interesses, and only good to embarke her
neighbors into dangerous affairs without biscuit; and then upon the least
occasion, shake them off, and leave them in the lurch, or in the midst of their
greatest danger; as she, that openly professes the trick and skill to pluck
creuises out of their holes with others hands, and not with her own.

And I have often wondered, how Italy, which (as all the world knows) has
suffered herself to be broken, sadled, and backed, and ridden by all strange
Nations, will now stand upon such nice punctillios of chastity with me, who if
she but see me stir (be it never so little) she presently enters into
suspicion, that I go about to ravish her of her honor and liberty.

And howbeit, the greatness wherein the kingdom of France does now find it
self, may assure Italy, and all the forenamed Princes from the fear they
have conceived of my power; I am nevertheless (if it be your Majesty's
pleasure) ready to give all men good caution and surety De non offendendo: on
condition, that this to me so loathsome and irksome issue be healed and closed
up.

By the express appointment of his Majesty, the cauterie was with all
diligence viewed and considered by the Politic Physicians, who after long and
mature consultation of the whole College of them, they unanimously concluded,
that it most evidently appearing, that the Spanish Monarchy is continually
troubled with an incessant thirst, to sway and dominere, she stands in need of
that running issue, by which those gross and peccant humors, which from Peru
distill into her stomach, may be purged and euacuated; for they are the cause
of her unquenchable and hydropicall thirst.

Those excellent Physicians did likewise consider, that if the said Monarchy
had not that Cauterie, there were most evident danger, that the pernicious
humors of Peru, might ascend into the head of Italy, to the manifest ruin of
those principal members, which yet are left sound in her; and that the said
Monarchy of Spain might easily fall into an incurable Dropsy of an
universal Monarchy; against which dangerous inconveniences they affirmed,
there is good provision made with the Cauterie of the Low Countries, which
ought to be kept open, so long as Peru (so stirring a member) does subminister
those pernicious humors unto the Spanish Monarchy. This resolution did
mightily displease her, wherefore in great passion and perturbation of mind,
thus she brake forth: Sir, if through the spite and malignitie of others, I
must so foully languish and consume my self in continual providing and
applying unguent for this corroding cankre, which mine enemies call a Diuertiue
Font^ell, some, who happily think least of it, shall lay clouts and plasters
unto it.

Her quip was presently understood by the English, by the French, and by the
Italians, who replied, that they nor feared, nor doubted of any thing; since
they sent nothing into the Low Countries, but the garbage, the offals, the
filths and sweepings of their States; whereas the Spaniards did there waste
pure gold and consume vital blood. And therefore, both the English, the
French, and the Germans, to arm and secure themselves from the formidable
power, boundless ambition, and secret machinations of the Spaniards, who have
no Horizon, were forced, in conformity of the Aphorism or the Politic
Hippocrates, Tacitus, Consilijs, and estures externas moliri arma procul habere.

The Spanish Monarchy goes to the Oracle of Delphos, to know whether she
shall ever obtain the Monarchy of the world; she has a cross answer.
Rag. 10. 1 Part.
YEster day morning, two hours before day, the renowned Monarchy of Spain,
in great secrecy departed from Parnassus, in a Caroch with six horses, having
taken but a few followers and confederates of her Court to art end her. Her
departure has ministered no small jealousy in all this Dominion, but more
especially in the Monarchy of France, who was much moved thereat.

And to find out what way she had taken, presently took post, and following
her tracts, ouertooke her even as she arrived in Delphos before the Oracle of
Apollo; unto whom the Spanish Monarchy presenting herself (as they report
that were present) she proposed this question.

Oh eternal and bright lamp of the world, the right eye of heaven, who art
the bringer not only of the day, but of all goodness unto mankind.

Thou know that long since, all my thoughts have bin addressed unto that
universal Monarchy, unto which none ever attained but the Roman people. Thou
know the effusion of blood, and the prosusion of treasures that I have
caused and spent, to reach unto the goal of my intention.

Thou only know the teilsome vigils, the bloody sweats, the industrious
practices that I have spent, suffered, and plotted, to come unto so important a
design.

Thou likewise know, that by the indefatigable dexterity of my wit, by the
mighty virtue of my coin, and by the marchlesse valor of my Nation, I did not
many years since sow so infinite seditions, and raised so turbalent wars in
the very heart of France, on which I had laid the foundation of all my hopes, I
had well nigh obtained the wished end of mine intention: And how for a final
conquest of all lets and rubs I wanted but the means to unite Naples unto
Milane: which difficulty if I can once surmount, I may boldly vaunt to have
won the game. But since either by my fatal misfortune, or by the
impossibility of the business, or by the power of so many cruel enemies that
are risen up against me, the scandals of the reuolutions, which with so many
machinations, for the space of so long time, I had dispersed among the French,
whom I could yet never vanquish, are in one only day converted into that peace
and tranquillity, that my heart is aggrieued to see, and my mind abhors to
remember; as loath to make an utter havoc of so many of my people I intended
to employ in this enterprise, I have almost brought them unto a final
desolation. And because I would no longer be a laughing stock unto the world,
I here prostrate my self before thy sacred Majesty, most submissiuely
beseeching thee to give me a direct answer, whether that universal Monarchy
which I have so deeply riuetted in my heart, and which is the only aim of all
my actions, is by the will of heavens destinated unto me; which I desire to
know, to the end if there be no impossibility in the pursuit thereof, I may
rouse up my spirits, and by the possibility of it, keep my Spaniards in heart.
For, to tell thee the very truth, who pryest into the secretest thoughts of all
men both by Sea and Land; by the infiniteness of conspiracies, of
counter-mines, and of complots, that by mine implacable enemies have bin
plotted and contrived against me, and now more than ever are practiced to my
detriment, I begin to faint and despair of any good success.

At this exorbitant question the Temple did shake, and the earth trembled round
about a great distance off, when from the mouthof the Minister of Apollo
proceeded these words.

The universal Monarchy shall again return to the far renowned Italian
Nation, at what time it shall have banished those intestine iarres, and civil
discords which have brought her in bondage to foreign and strange nations.

After so doleful an answer, the Spanish Monarchy, full of spite and anguish
came forth of the Temple, but confounded with amazement when she saw the
Monarchy of France present her self before her, whom (having first entertained
with some ordinary complements) she took by the hand, drew her apart, and
friendly imparted unto her the answer that the Oracle had given her.

And how the universal Monarchy was by divine providence like to return unto
the Italian nation; which thing succeeding, France should find and feel new
Julius Caesar's, as Spain second Scipioes.

And that to secure and settle their affairs, she thought there was no better
way than to share and divide Italy equally between them.

Moreover she offered to teach her the secret that she most successefully had
experimented in the Indies, by virtue of which, they might both assure
themselves of the Italian Nation, in such sort as there should no memory be
left in the world of so wicked a race of men but the bare name. Unto whom the
French Monarchy framed this answer;

Oh Spain, first suffer me to forget that most unfortunate division of the
Kingdom of Naples, which my King Lewis the twelfth made with thee, and then we
will confer of this matter. For, know Spain, it is not so easy a thing to
consen and injury the French the second time, as I see you persuade your self.

Then as touching the secret you propose unto me, how we may assure our
selves of the Italians, I pray you do you attempt it and put the same in
execution, since to desert and desolate the world of people (as you have done
and practiced in the Indies) and to dominere over a bare land void of
inhabitants, is a certain politic precept that is not found in the Register
of the French reason of State. For, I have (and that to mine own cost) learnt
to be contented with a little so it be good.

And therefore do I found my greatness more on the multitude of good
subjects, than on the wide extent of a Kingdom.

And so that my French Nation may live at ease and commodiously in this world,
I am well pleased to admit of other Nations therein.

The negotiation of the concord of Italy is long and tedious; and you know by
good experience, that purges given to assure a man from a disease he fears,
do many times hasten the same.

I will not omit with the Genuine liberty, that is proper to my nature,
confidently to tell you, how that the enterprise to subdue all Italy, is not so
easy a task as I perceive you apprehend to your self. For, when I had such
toys in my head, which to me proved most pernicious, and I verily believe will
prove no better to you, I thought as you think now: and I have manifestly
discovered, that the Italians are a kind of creatures that are ever more
warily vigilant how to escape our hands, and who can never be tamed, or
brought under the yoke of strangers bondage. And although as most subtle Apes,
and crafty Monkies, they easily transform themselves into the customs and
fashions of those Nations that sway them, yet do they ever keep fixed in
their hearts their ancient malice and hatred.

They are great Merchants of their servitude, which they traffic and trucke
so cunningly, that if they but once put on a pair of Breeches after the cut of
Madrill, they will induce you to believe that they are become true and perfect
Spaniards; and if they wear but a great Folio ruff of Cambricke, we presently
think them to be turned into right Frenchmen.

But come once to the close or vpshot of any business with them, they will
then show you more teeth than can be found in fifty bundles of handsawes, or a
thousand combs.

And Italy does justly resemble those greedy and covetous Dames, who with the
strong and sharp lie of their blandishments scald their vnheedy lovers, but
never let them come to the iouissance and fruition of that which they most
desire.

And therefore believe me (who have to my no small cost made trial of it)
concerning the conquest of Italy, you shall in the end reap nothing but loss
and shame.

Philip the second of that name, King of Spain, after long strife about his
Title, makes his solemn entry into Parnassus.
Rag. 12. 3 Part.
THE most Mighty King of Spain, Philip the second, who (two months since)
arrived in this Court, could not before yesterday be admitted to make his
public and solemn entrance. The reason has bin, because that in certain
triumphant Pageants which the Spanish Nation has with royal magnificence
erected unto him, there were fairly written, these words;

Philippo secundo Hispaniarum; vtriusque Siciliae, and Indiarum Regi Catholico,
Italiae pacis Auctorifoelicissimo.

Which words, for so much as they were somewhat distasteful unto most of the
Italian Princes, they instantly required that they might be cancelled and
blotted out, saying, that (upon no terms) they would never acknowledge that
peace of Italy from the Spaniards, which themselves so dearly, and with such
vast sums of ready money purchased of the Hollanders and Zelanders.

This Aromaticall contestation was long debated and canuast to and fro. And
although the Italian Princes did concludingly prove in judgment, that the
present peace of Italy did not directly proceed from any well-meaning sincerity
of the Spaniards, who if they might have had their wills, would have enthralled
the same, had not that great diuersion bin made to them, but ought wholly to be
acknowledged from the wars in the Low Countries.

Now in the greatest heat of this controversy, the Queen of Italy, with her
wonted wisdom, interposing her self, appeased the same, who having conuoked
all her Princes, she exhorted them to leave all vain ostentations and spungy
vauntings unto the Spaniards, and meditating on real and substantial
subjects, continue to feed them with vapourous smoke.

The Horse-troope, both for the quality and number of the Princes that
concurred to favor, to court, to attend, and to serve so great a King, was the
most numerous and the most honorable that ever was seen in Parnassus. So was
this mighty King ranked among those Monarchs, which in the world have bin more
famous for their wisdom and sagacity, than for their courage or valor in
war. Moreover, the Impresa which he carried in his royal Standard made all
the learned of this Court to wonder, which was a fair painted Writing-pen, by
virtue of which it did evidently appear by the testimony of some Historians,
that both in the most potent Kingdom of France and elsewhere, where any fit
occasion had been offered unto him to make use of it, he had caused and
stirred up more and greater ruins, spoils, rapines, wracks, and hauocks, than
ever his Father Charles the fifth could cause or effect with the greatest part
of the Cannons of Europe.

The Impresa was highly commended by the sacred College of the virtuous: All
Writers taking it for a great honor unto themselves; that a Pen in the hand of
one that had known how to use it, had archieued and effected so memorable and
remarkable actions.

This great King has still bin most royally entertained in Parnassus; for,
even the chief and most eminent Monarkes in Europe have held it as an
honorable reputation, to be able to attend and serve him.

So that even the next day after his ingresse into this Dominion, being
disposed to be trimmed, and to commit himself into the hands of a Barber, the
great Queen of England disdained not all the while to hold the Basin under his
Chinne.

And the most renowned martial King of France, Henry the fourth, surnamed the
Great, took it for a matchless glory to himself to be admitted to wash his
head, which he performed with so exquisite skill and artificial dexterity, as
he seemed to be borne in that exercise, and brought up Prentise in that trade.

Although some envious detractors have given out, that he did it without any
Soap or Washing-ball, but with strong scalding Lie alone.

This mighty Monarke has bin presented by all the virtuous of Parnassus, with
diverse gifts of Poetry, and other quaint and much elabourated Poems, all which
he has counterchanged with great liberality, and bounty.

And to a certain learned man who presented him with an excellent discourse,
wherein was demonstrated the way and means, how, and in what manner most noble
Partenope, and all the most flourishing Kingdom of Naples, which by the
insufferable outrages of the Soldiers, by the robberies of the Judges, by the
tyrannous extortions of the Barons, and by the general rapins and ransakings,
which the griping and greedy Vice-royes that from Spain are sent thither, only
to cram and fatten themselves, is now brought unto extreme misery and
desolation, might be restored unto the ancient greatness of its splendour, he
gave a reward of twenty Ducats of gold, and consigned the said discourse unto
his Confessor, commanding him to keep it safe, for that it was written very
honestly and religiously; whereas unto a most cunning and sufficient
Politician, who delivered him a very long Treatise, but altogether contrary to
the first, as that which treats of politic precepts, and shows what
course is to be held to depresse and afflict the said kingdom of Naples,
lower and more than now it is. And how it may with facility be reduced unto
such misery and calamity, as that generous Courcer which the Seggio of State,
without any headstall or saddle, has hitherto (with no happy success) borne
for an Impresse or recognisance, may be compelled patiently to bear a
Pack-saddle or Panier, to carry any heavy pack or burden; yea, and to draw in a
Cart.

For so much as he was informed that it was iudiciously compiled, and
according to the right terms of modern Policy, he assigned a gift of twelve
thousand Crowns rent a year, and moreover made him a Grand of Spain.

The Dogs of the Indies are become Wolves.
Rag. 22. 3. Part.
ON the night of the twelfth of this present, about eight of the clock,
arrived in post-haste a Curtier dispatched from Lisbone unto Apollo, who told
his Majesty, that he had brought him most important news from the
West Indies. The next morning very early, all the learned ran to the Court, to
hear some news. And the Spaniards were the first, who with great anxietie
inquired, whether there had lately been discovered some other mount of
Petofis, or a new Rio del Plata in the Indies, which if it were, they would
speedily haste thither, to plant the holy word of God.

The French were very importunate to know, whether some new world had been
found our, which with making the Spaniards more powerful, might help them
utterly to subvert the old-one.

Apollo had no sooner read the letters, but he fell into a ^^ance of sorrow;
and having inuolued himself into a ^oggie mist, a shower of abundant brackish
tears was seen to trickle down his cheeks; which was taken for a most
disastrous presage: by which sudden alteration, all men judged, that the Post
had brought very bad news.

Now whilst all the Court was full of all sorts of learned and virtuous men,
who in great anxietie longed to understand the cause of his Majesty's public
sadness; after sundry clattrings of thunder, and infinite flashings of
lightnings, which they heard and saw, there was heard an horrible and dreadful
voice, which said:

Oh you, that inhabit the Earth; fast, macerate, and cloth your selves with
haire-cloth; sprinkle your selves with ashes; eat your bread with tears;
endeavor with humble prayers to assuage the wrath of God; and with contrite
hearts, and penitent souls, suppliantly beseech him, that of his infinite
mercy, he will vouchsafe, to deliver all humane-kinde, inhabiting the old
world, from those portentous and monstrous novelties, which we certainly
understand to have lately happened in the new. At so unexpected, and prodigious
aduertisements, infinite of the Virtuous, by the wounding affliction that they
felt in their hearts, fell down in a swoune, thinking verily that the West
Indies had been utterly consumed by fire, or overwhelmed by the fury of
merciless waters.

In this terror and dismal plight, all the people in Par^assus, with showers
of tears, with throbbing sobs, with groaning howlings, with loud-shrill voices,
as the like were never heard, cride for Mercy, Mercy: and with most submissiue
intreatings and groans besought Apollo, that he would daigne to impart unto
his devout subjects, what those mischiefs were, from which they should entreat
the immortal God to be delivered.

Then from the aforesaid Court of his Majesty was heard a second voice, which
gave all men to understand, that the dogs which the Spaniards had transported
into the Indies for the safeguard of their flocks of sheep, were all become
such ravenous wolves, that in worrying and devouring of flecced cattle, they
exceeded the voracitie and cruelty of the greedy Tigres.

After so drearie and unhappy tidings, all the learned in Parnassus burst forth
into wailfull cries, and lamentable skreeks, dolefully complaining, that if the
dogs, which were placed for the guard and safety of the sheep, became wolves,
so ravenous, as they devoured whole flocks; unto what Gardians night Shepherds
hereafter recommend the keeping and safe custody of their sheep?

And their flocks being now destitute of the protection of dogs, who have
always been so faithful unto their Masters and Shepherds, how could it be
possible, but that the whole Genus and kind of sheep must needs decay and
perish through all the world, and become the most unhappy creatures of all
others, since they must be a prey both to the Wolves their enemies, and to the
Dogs their friends?

Whilst all the Nations of Parnassus (surprised by so great terror) were all
dismayed, fainting, swouning, and groueling on the ground, only the Flemmings
and the people of the Low Countries, were seen all dreadlesse and vndismaid,
to run leaping up and down Parnassus, encouraging all men to pull up a good
heart, to be of good cheer, and never droope or faint: for there was no
calamity nor misery could or be threatened or inflicted on mankind, which by
an undaunted resolution, and resolute mind, might not be or diuerted or
avoided.

And with land acclamation they gave all men to understand, that even in their
own Countries, those dogs and currs, which the Spanish shepherds had sent for
the guard of the Flemmish and Belgic flocks, were transformed into such
ravenous wolves, as with their fierce immanitie, and fell brutishness, they
devoured all their sheep; and that ere this they would have woorried the whole
race and flocks of the Low Countries, if by the resentment of that bold and
courageous determination (now famous through all the world) they had not
provided a sound remedy for it. And therefore, if those mischiefs should
befall the old world, which (as the report was) were happened to the new, they
wished all men to know, that the true and only remedy, to chastise those
Currs, tainted with that foul fault, to woorrie, to rapine and devour
harmless sheep, was, to give them some Holland-Nux-vomica, and (as they
deserved) make them to vomit out their very heart, and burst and burst.

The French are humble suitors unto Apollo, to know the secret, how to perfume
gloves after the Spanish fashion.
Rag. 9. 3 Part.
THE emulation that reigns between the two most warlike, martial, and
mighty nations, the French, and the Spanish, is as great as eternal.

For there appears no virtue in the French, that is not most ambitiously
sought after by the Spaniard. And the French is never quiet until he have
attained unto all the rarities wherewith he sees Spain endowed.

Now for so much as the skill or sleight of the perfuming and tempring of Amber,
with which they make their gloves so sweetly odoriferous, is the peculiar
invention and mere endowment of the Spaniards; The French have omitted no
manner of pursuit, to find out, and attain the perfection, how to make the
like. For they have with anxious labor, and to their cost provided themselves
of Musk, of Ambergreese, of Ziuet, and of all the most aromaticall drugs, that
the Orient affords; but all proved vain and effectlesse.

For neither their cost, nor all their diligence have been sufficient, to make
them obtain the end of their wished intention: yet rather than they would give
over their pursuit as desperate, the thrice noble French nation had recourse
unto Apollos Majesty, as the only producer of all Aromatikes and sweet gums,
whom she has most instantly besought to vouchsafe to reach her the true way,
how to perfume gloves with Amber-greese, wherein the Spaniard is so cunning.

It is most certain, that Apollo was never seen to laugh so heartily, no not
when he saw the downfall of unhappy Dedalus, as he did at the impertinent
request of those French suitors, whose hands he commanded his Priests, that were
about him, to smell unto. And that they should make a true report what they
smelt of, the Priests presently obeyed; and told his Majesty, that they had no
ill savor, but smelt very sweet. Which Apollo hearing, he told the French,
that Nature did evermore counterchange others defects with some rare virtue or
other. And therefore had he conferred the gift, to make sweet smelling gloves
only unto that Nation, whose hands were so rank, that they did ever stink
worse than any carrion.

Why the Monarchy of Spain is lately retired into her Palace.
Rag. 14. 3 Part.
For So Much as many days were past since the Monarchy of Spain had showed her
self in public, and has not only ever since, lived as a recluse in her own
house, but has continually kept all the doors thereof fast shut.

The Italian Princes, and above all the Venetians, not only most diligent
searchers into men's thoughts, but careful and studious obseruers of that great
Queens actions, seeing so strange an alteration, entered into anxious and great
iealousies. And because it has never been possible for them or any other to
know, what her so sudden retiredness might signify, all men did argue, that
it could not be without some secret mystery.

The Venetians for jealousy of their own Estates, impatient of delays, by
ladders set up against the walls of her palace, entered in at the windows
thereof, and saw that she was very busy with one of her chief officers,
called the Marquis Spinola, laboring hard with diverse rare and artificial
engines, to stop all the holes, gaps, chinks, and creuisses in and about her
house. And wondering not a little, to what end she should do it; they presently
advertised their friends speedily to arm and prepare themselves; for so soon
as the Spaniards should have stopped all the gaps and holes of any supply,
help, or succor, they would assuredly give chase to all the mice and rats,
and make an universal slaughter of them.

How the ministers and officers of Spain are continually interessed in their
private profit.
Rag. 20. 3 Part.
THree days are now past, when about nine of the clock at night, there were
seen to enter forty cart loads of hay into the Royal Palace of the Monarchy
of Spain. And for so much as the strange and unseasonable hour, made the
French, the Venetians, and other Potentates, who live in continual jealousy
of the greatness of so formidable a Princess, to suspect some mischief,
there was speedy search and diligent inquiry made, to know the mystery of so
strange provision; and whether under that hay, the carts might be laden with
any unlawful and forbidden goods.

Whereupon many Spies were set a work about it, who found out, and reported,
that under the hay there were hidden and stowed certain chests full of
mattocks, spades, pick-axes, and shouels. And because these are instruments and
tools belonging to Pioners, Sappers, Diggers, and labouring-men, the French
presently resolved to arm themselves. And the Venetians were about to lanch
their Galleys from out their Arsenall into the Sea; when by some Politicians it
was advised, before they should discover their intention, to find out, whether
the Spaniards had at any time before made provision of such tools or
implements, and whether they expected to receive any more else-whence. But they
were undoubtedly assured, that before that time they had never received any,
nor did hereafter look for any more.

The said did besides certify unto them, that so soon as the said chests were
unladen, they were not carried into the royal Armorie or common Magazin, but
that all the Grandes of Spain, and the chief Officers of so potent a
Monarchy, did presently divide those spades, mattocks, scoopes, shouels,
pick-axes among themselves; with which the very next day very early they began
to dig ditches, to draw rills, to convey riuelets, to direct gullets, to rear
banks, to frame scluses, and to fill the country with aqueducts, and
water-pipes, with such labor, pain, and diligence (every man drawing all the
water he could procure to his own mill) as they had brought all public
matters, and the whole State to such misery, and calamity, that the mills of
the community of Spain, for want of water, could nor go, nor work, nor
grind.

Apollo having used all possible means, and exquisite diligence, to have some
one of the Court-Mignons, or Princes-Idols taken and apprehended, does severely
proceed against one lately fallen into the hands of the Judges.
Rag. 5. 2 Part.
APollo (to his infinite grief) being come to a perfect knowledge of the most
enormous disorder, which the shameful blindness of those Princes causes, no
less in great Empires, than in petty Principalities, who commit that
unpardonable excess, to subject and enuassal themselves unto a base and new
vp-start servant of theirs, since neither his Majesty's continual
exhortations, nor the frightfull calamities, which for the said foul excesses
an infinite number of Princes has suffered and smarted for, has been of force
to remove them from that hard destiny, by which they seem violently to be
drawn, to precipitate into the bottomless whirlpoole of so outrageous
inconveniences; for so much as he would not abandon the protection (a quality
proper to his Majesty) of the governors of mankind.

Some few months are now past, since he resolved with all rigor to persecute
those servants, that with their prodigious ambition, and artificial tricks
(altogether diabolical) undertake to rule and govern their Lord and Master.
And therefore did his Majesty not many years since publish most grievous
mulcts, and rich rewards, to be inflicted upon the offenders, and given to
those that should reveal any such unto his Judges.

Two weeks are now past since one of these varlets, having bin accused unto
the Magistrate, was presently apprehended and laid up, who by many evidences
being found foul and guilty, was laid upon the rack, where he confessed all
the horrible tricks, shifts, wiles, circumuentions, masks, and detestable
iuglings, that he had used and practiced, not only to induce his Master to
become his slave, but even to adore and worship him.

Apollo having read and considered the process and enditement against that
monstrous villain, fell into a strange amazement, how those Princes (who are
so greedy of domination that they often fall into moody iealousies, and
unnatural suspicions, not only of strangers, but of their own children) may
or can (either through their own gullishnesse, or monstrous fraud of others)
fall into that reproachful infamy, to become vassals, and even slaves unto a
base rascally servant of theirs.

And he thought it a most portentous case, that there should be found both
Sons and Nephews unto Princes, who to obtain the goal, to dominere over
their fathers, and to Lord it over their Uncles, had showed spirits full of
ambition, and minds extremely thirsty, to sway and command, and by cunning
policies, and politic mysteries, had attained the garland of their desires,
the very same men shortly after, could themselves fall or decline into that
abominable metamorphosis, to forgo their domination purchased with so great
care, anguish, wiles, and sweat, and make one their superior, that is so far
their inferior.

A wonder so rare and extrauagant, as humane wit can no more give a reason for,
than of the hidden virtue of the Adamant stone.

Apollo, to the end that by the exemplary punishment of that darling-Courtier,
Princes might learn some so profitable document, as might in some sort
terrify them from committing so hateful indignities; three days since he
summo^ed all the Princes now resident in this Court, to appear before him in
the great Audience-Chamber. In presence of whom, their greater confusion, with
a loud and intelligible voice, ^^caused the abominable enditement, framed
against that villainous varlet, to be read by Bossius, his Majesty's Clarke of
the Crown, who being demanded what tricks, course, or art he had used to reach
unto the end, so absolutely to ouersway and govern his Lord and Master,
answered, that the very first day he came to the Court, he wholly applied his
mind and wits, exactly, and with all diligence punctually to observe the
Genius of the Prince, which having ^ound to be naturally inclined unto lust and
luxury, he with gentle, plausible, and cunning artificial manners, did
presently ^o apply himself to commend a vice so unworthy a man that has the
charge and government of a State committed unto him (as if lasciviousness had
bin an egregious and laudable virtue.)

And how he used all possible industry to become his instru^ent or minister in
them: which having easily obtained, he employed all possible industry to
provide him with most obscene instruments to fulfill his filthy lust: and that
afterward, under diverse pretexts and sundry colors, he had industriously
labored, that all those virtuous, honest, and honorable servants about the
Prince, whom he knew or suspected might reclaim him unto a debonaire and
virtuous life, should be removed or discharged from the Court as vicious and
professed enemies to the Prince and State; yea, some he had put to open shame
and disgrace, and others he had blinded with false and surmised offices,
places, titles, and honors.

And had in their places advanced and substituted some of his own creatures,
dependants and confidents, who were all deeply plunged into all manner of
carnal sensuality and brutish lasciviousness, by whose means and
furtherance (he affirmed) to have employed all his study and care that his Lord
and Master should be utterly deprived, and shake off some commendable and
genuine endowment, which by nature, and from his former education he had
attained unto* and had after that so wrought, that under color of being false
and disloyal, all the old Officers of the State, were or discharged or
expelled the Court, whose just condoleances and grieuances he had pourtraid and
represented unto him as sedi^ious railings and petulant detractions: and had so
prevailed with him that their important charges and offices were all conferred
upon men without judgment, without wisdom, without honesty, or without
charity toward their Princes welfare, or private interesse; having in
recompense required nothing at their hands but confidence, secrecy, and a
strict adherence to his own affairs; by whose means he had so beset,
besotted, and circumgired his Lord and Master, that it was never possible
afterward for truth (which as the shadow to the body should perpetually and
inseparably be united unto a Prince) to come to his notice or ears, by the
relation of any well meaning or faithful friend to him or, the State.

And that afterward to the end he alone might absolutely rule, and
vncontrouledly sway the State, he had so fairly allured him to sloth and
idleness, that he brought him to be plunged even up to the eyes in pleasures
of Gardens, in recreations of country houses, and in sports of hunting and
hauking: nay, he had so far prevailed with him, that he abhorred as things most
hateful to hear of State-matters, or of his proper interesses.

And had besides induced him to believe that his treacherous plots and
practices to make him fall out with his own Son, and other Princes of his
blood, was an unfeigned zeal of inward love and hearty affection toward him:
a spotless charity toward the public benefit of his people: and that by his
quaint artifices and iugling tricks, he had brought him to be so stolide, so
stupid, and so gullish, that the manifest and insolent tyranny of his base
servant (known and abhorred by the simplest of his state) was by the
unfortunate Prince, named to be a vigilant regard to his service, an easing of
him from pains, a disburthening of him from cares, and a charity toward the
Commonweal; and that sloth, idleness, lithernesse, and careless negligence
was an honorable rest and quiet repose.

And moreover, to the end his Prince might never awaken or rouse himself from
out his drowzie and shameful laethe-sleepe, and by opening his eyes, come to
the knowledge of his own stolidity, idiotisme, and gullishnesse, and so
discover others treacherous ambition, he had filled his Court with Flatterers,
Parasites, and Sicophants, who with plausible blandishments, and infamous
persuasions, extolled and commended his silly unaptness to be a matchless
valor: the general hatred of his people, to be a loving and unfeigned
affection: all public railings and detractions to be exaggerated praises;
confusion and disorder to be a perfect government, the tyranny of a lewd
villain to be honorable and careful service, extor^ions to be sacred justice,
lavish prodigality to be virtuous liberality, his abject lithernesse, and
crauen timidity in having so basely neglected and abandoned the helm and
government of his State, he commended to be right honorable labors, diligent
endeavors, and politic government. All these perfidious treacheries being
confessed by that false wretch, so amazed and terrified those Princes that
heard them, that with a loud voice they all cride out, that, to become most
rigorously cruel against so impious and wicked a villain, with Gallows,
Gibbets, Rackes, Wheels, Halters, Axen, Tortures, Flames, and bloody weapons,
were true and charitable piety and pity. And therefore they should all jointly
become Suitors unto Perillus, to devise some new kind of torment, as might
dilaniate and tear in pieces that monster of nature, and yet not deprive him
of life; to the end there might never more be found a man that durst dare to
commit so heinous and outrageous villainies. And all the Princes were so moved
with the foulness of that enditement, as unanimously they all besought his
Majesty to show some extraordinary rigors against those, who by the fraudulent
wiles and exorbitant tricks of their servants, suffer themselves to so
vi^uperous and shameful a state.

Now for so much as by this virtuous instance intimated by those Princes unto
Apollo, his Majesty's mind was so moved to compunction, that tears were seen
to trickle down his cheeks, some Idiots that stood by, deemed this to proceed
from the excessive contentation which Apollo felt, to hear the great horror,
whereby Princes had embraced and fostered that vice, which his Majesty so much
desired they should shun and detest. But the wisest and best of the Virtuous
that were present at that act, knew very well, that Apollo wept and bewailed
the unhappy blindness of those inebriated and infatuated Princes, who
abhorring their own excesses in others, did most instantly require, that those
vices into which the greatest number of them were imperceptibly, and at
unawares plunged over head and ears, might with some extraordinary and
rigorous severity be punished. So mischievous and pernicious is that
reproachful and detestable vice in Princes to idolatrize Mignons, which they
exactly perceiving, and extremely blaming in others, they never see, but rather
favor and commend in themselves. And whom do we see fall into this foul
fault, and shameful error, but such as make most ostentation to be the
Aristarco's and reformers of the world?

The whole race or Genus of Sheep send their public Ambassadors to Apollo, by
whom they earnestly entreat him to grant them sharp teeth and long horns:
whose suit is by his Majesty scorned and rejected.
Rag. 88. 1 Part.
THE whole Race or Corporation of Sheep have sent four Ambassadors to this
Court, which this present morning have bin admitted by his Majesty to have a
royal audience. Whereupon a great and goodly Magistrall Ram of Lincolne-shire,
in an articulate bleating voice uttered these words;

That the Sheep knew very well, that that God, who had created all things, had
used so great charity and impartial justice toward all sorts of living
creatures, as he had recompensed the defects and imperfections of some with
other equivalent endowments of use and virtue. So that in so infinite a
multitude of bruit Animals, there was not one that might justly complain to
have in its creation received any wrong at his divine Majesty's hands.

But yet it seemed unto them that (as a step-sire) he had showed great
partiality only with the Sheep, for so much as having created them with diverse
imperfections, it did not appear that he had endowed them with any equivalent
virtue by or with which they might (if not assure their state) yet at least be
able to live in this world with that safety and quietness that other creatures
did.

For although his divine Majesty had created the Hare with wondrous timidity,
with sharp teeth, and without a heart to bite, he had necerthelesse endowed
her with so swift a foot as did assure her from the tushes or fangs of the
fiercest beast.

And that the Fox could not justly find her self agrieued to have been
created slow of foot, his Majesty having endowed her with such sagacity of wit,
as she could with facility avoid the wiles, the snares or ambushes of any wild
beast. And that he had so recompensed the slownesse of the Wolves running with
so hardy an heart, with so keen a tooth, with so circumspect a genius, as
being a terror to all beasts, he makes himself to be awed and respected of
men.

Moreover it evidently appeared, that his Majesty had used the same charity
unto the Foul and birds of the air, since that unto those to whom he had
denied the speedy use of their feet, he had in recompense given them larger
wings, and a swifter flight, namely to Pheasants, to Partridges, and to
Quails, who in requital of their short wings and train feathers had the
nimblenesse of their feet. And that the silly Sheep only, having bin created
with so blockish a stupidity of wit, heartlesse, slow-footed, and without those
keen biting teeth, with which other beasts make themselves to be awed and
respected.

They thought themselves forsaken and rejected by that divine Majesty and
charity that had manifested so great dilection and louingnesse, even unto wild,
fierce, and hurtful Beasts.

The said goodly tall Ram added moreover, that to fill up the measure of the
incomparable calamity of the harmless and disarmed sheep, his Majesty had
allotted the Lions, the Tigres, the Bears, the Wolves, (being the most cruel
and blood-thirsty Beasts that wander upon earth) to be their fatal and
implacable enemies.

So that it seemed that the poor Sheep were created only to feed and to be a
prey to those enraged and furious beasts, that know not what satiety means.
He said moreover, that unto the unsupportable injuries which the Sheep
received daily from their enemies, were likewise added the outrages and
misusages which their own Shepherds continually heaped upon them; all which
proceeded because they were so disarmed and weaponles: For, if they might be so
happy, as but once in ten years, if not for revenge, at least for correction,
upon certain occasions, to have teeth allowed them to bite certain cruel and
indiscreet Shepherds, who milk them without charity, and sheare them without
discretion, peradventure they should be more kindly and better dealt withal.
And their Shearers, or rather Shauers, would more gently handle their Sheares,
and not hurt or tear their skin.

And therefore the whole kind or race of Sheep, that they may no longer be
the lodestone or subject of most wailefull oppressions, do most instantly
beseech his sacred Majesty, to have long teeth and sharp horns granted them
to bite and gore their enemies, that so they may become more respected and
better esteemed.

To this rammish request Apollo answered with a blithe and cheerful
countenance, that the Sheep had made a request suitable and worthy their silly
simplicity, since they know not how among all the foure-footed Creatures that
live upon the earth, no one can be found more favored and privileged than
they; for, whereas others are with numberless cares and infinite dangers
enforced to shift and sharke for food, diverse of which are constrained to
employ the night (ordained for sleep and rest) to feed and sustain themselves,
as not daring to beseene by day; only for the Sheep, even by men (who are Lords
over all wild beasts, and possessors of the earth) Pastures and Fields are
provided, reserved, and with carfulness and labor hired, purchased, and
manured at excessive and dear rates.

And that in dark and stormy nights, in foul weather, and at all times, they
alone were carefully provided for, charitably fed, tenderly watched, and
diligently guarded in their folds, yea, and desended from their hurtful foes.
And whereas other creatures were continually hunted, chased, and pursued by
many sorts of other ravenous wild beasts, and entrapped by the wiles and
devises of men; for whose destruction infinite people apply themselves to
nothing more than to weaue nets, to frame toiles, to lay springes, to set
traps, to hide ginnes, to dig pit-falls, and to breed, to teach, and to feed
dogs.

Only the Sheep by an especial grace and prerogative, enjoyed the noble
privilege, to have men labor so industriously for them, and to shield them
from so infinite dangers; and that the Creator of this universe had made
demonstration of especial predilection toward the whole race of Sheep, who
in lieu of ravenous teeth, goring horns, and swift legs, had graciously
granted them the powerful and subduing weapons of rich wool, of nourishing
milk, of dainty cheese, and of diverse other sorts of invaluable riches, with
which they so forestalled and possessed the love of men, that for the endeared
charity that they bear to all Sheep, they incessantly hunt, chase, pursue,
and destroy Wolves, Tigres, Bears, Foxes, Lions, and all other wild and
ravenous beasts, which love not Sheep, with all manner of arms, rapine, or
bloody cruelty.

And how by reason of the singular gifts and incomparable benefits that Sheep
bring to all mankind, being reputed the only deliciousness, delight, and
wealth of man, it came to pass that they were the most numerous race or kind
of creatures that live upon the earth; so that the Sheep being nourished, fed,
cherished, guarded and defended by the vigilance, care, cost, pains, and
charity of their Shepherds, they showed themselves very simple and foolish in
desiring to have devouring sharp teeth, and long goring horns. And at last
Apollo said, That concerning the severity of some Shepherds in milking and
shearing of them, they ought to use no other weapons to revenge themselves,
than those of dutiful obedience and humility, with yielding them store of
wool, plenty of milk, abundance of cheese; and (...), co study fertility and
fruitfulness.

This being the supreme (...) of the brood and race of Sheep, that those
Shepherds who misuse and evil entreat their flocks, are in extremity cruel
unto themselves; it being most certain, that a wound rashly given to a Sheep,
has the propriety to kill the Shepherd. And therefore he straightly commanded
them, to take greater heed to manifest the least inclination or show to bite
their Shepherds, than they would do of Wolves keen teeth, since those Sheep
cannot be accounted so happy, which with all humility and prostrate obedience,
do warrant and guard their Shepherds from all harm and danger, as those most
unhappy, that make a dismal profession, to terrify and make them afraid.

In a public congresse or Assembly, contrary to the accustomed manner of the
Phoebean Court, Force having pretended to preceed Reputation; that illustrious
Lady with an excellent resolution, maintains her reputation and credit which
was in some danger.
Rag. 15. 2 Part.
THat the Lady Reputation in all public places and assemblies has yet ever
had the precedence and right hand of Lady Force, is well known in Parnassus.
But it fortuned the other morning, that whilst Apollo made his solemn
entrance into the sign of Leo, Force (according to her terrible genius, borne
unto insolences) dared to presume to preceed Reputation, who, if in that
occasion (making use of her admirable dexterity) she had not known to reto^t
and put by so dangerous a rub, and unexpected stop, she had undoubtedly
received some notable affront.

She was nevertheless much offended at the foul petulancy offered her by her
capital enemy, whereupon the virtuous, ever much devoted unto so excelse a
Princess, ceased not to encourage her, exhorting her by no means to pocket up
the insolency of her temerity. And moreover, bade her to remember, that she was
the right arm of all Potentates, and the sole instrument wherewith Princes
Lorded and swaied the world. And therefore willed her to pull up a good heart,
and resolve to confront that fondly rash Dame, whom with the only Majesty of
her countenance she would at the first encounter so daunt and abate her pride,
that (as a thousand times it had come to pass) she might with great facility
suppress and bring under.

With wondrous reposednesse of mind, and gentle words, Reputation answered
those virtuous men her loving friends who so comforted her, that she
exceedingly valued and loved the ready good will, which she perceived in them
all; but she could neither commend nor follow the counsel they gave her. And
that they should call to mind, that the whole of the power of her authority
and greatness being founded, not on the forces of strong-armed Armies, nor on
the strength and security of inexpugnable cittadels, but on the bare opinion
of men; a thing most inconstant and variable. So as it behooved her, in this her
adversity, to proceed with great caution, and admirable dexterity. And that
between her, and Force, there was a monstrous great disparitie: for if Force
were once vanquished, she might easily recover her self, and with greater
impetuofitie attempt a second battle, so much the more dangerous for her; for
to her ordinary power she might join the violence of Disdain, and the shame
of her first overthrow. But if it should happen, that at the first shock she
did not quell her enemy, either with the majesty of her presence, or with the
authority of her look, so that as an Elephant, which being once fallen to the
gound can never rise again, she might destroy her, she should wholly be
deprived of that greatness and awful respect, which the public veneration of
the common people bred in her.

Considerations so much the more necessary in her, as she had experienced,
that nothing is more perilous for her, than by force of Arms to seek to
maintain that authority great, and that reputation on foot, which she sees
to be founded but on the bare opinion of the vulgar popular. And that she
hoped to provide for the indemnitie of her authority with her wonted remedies,
and would with her accustomed weapons buckle with Force, not doubting but to
conquer her.

She said moreover, that Force did now use those extraordinary terms of
insolency toward her, not because her power was any whit increased, but by
reason of some disorders of hers, she perceived the ancient decorum, her
wonted majesty, and the peoples veneration toward her to be greatly
diminished.

Reputation having uttered these kind words, went away, and shortly after
retired her self into her lodging; whence for diverse months space she was
never seen to come abroad, but with great severity gave her self to reform
and correct her self, for ever banishing all self-respects and private
interesses; to which, because she had yielded overmuch, and too openly
abandoned her self, she evidently perceived her honor and credit to be much
impaired. And then with the beesom of a rigid reformation in her self, she
wholly imployd her time in cleansing her house and ^^milie from all manner of
filthiness, pollution, and baseness; from which she also chased and expelled
griping Avarice, daring Ambition, and all other private, dishonest, unlawful
or scandalous passions.

This Princess having thus reformed her private disorders, being one morning
to be present at some solemn and public Act, she extraordinarily embellished
and adorned her self all over with honesty of mind, with uprightness of
spirit, with singleness of heart, with vngrudging liberality, and with all
her other most esteemed virtues. And having put on the rich robe of
righteousness, and affectionate love toward all well-deseruing creatures, and
of public charity, she came forth with so awful a majesty, and comely a
gravity, where she was expected by all the other most excellent Virtues, in
whom she stirred up so great respect, and regardfull veneration, that even the
Lady Force her self (so great was the devotion that possessed her mind) was
seen to tremble and stand amazed: and in that occasion, not only with her
accustomed reverence, to grant her her due precedence on the right hand, but
with a kind of servile submission, to beg, as a singular favor at her hands,
the prerogative, in that solemnity, to carry up her train.

The Province of Focides by her Ambassadors complains unto Apollo, that his
Majesty's officers do not permit her to enjoy her privileges: whose request
is not only rejected, but they have a most sharp and unpleasant answer.
Rag. 1. 2 Part.
THe most populous Province of Focides, which some years since rebelled from
the Ignorant, and voluntarily did subject it self unto Apollo's Dominion, of
whom she obtained so ample privileges and large immunities, as it might truly
be said, that the Focenses lived in a kind of free liberty, has now sent her
Ambassadors to this Court, to complain against his Majesty's officers, that
they will not permit them to enjoy those privileges, which by his sacred
Majesty were granted them. And therefore do instantly require him, to command
the due observation of them.

This business, which somewhat distasted Apollo, was by him referred unto his
Royal Council of State; from whom the Ambassadors two days since had for a
final answer, that the Lords of the Council did greatly wonder, and rested
much scandalized, that the people of Focides seemed to be so ignorant of the
affairs of the world, as they knew not, that Privileges, Liberties,
Franchises, Exemptions and Immunities granted unto people newly conquered, were
like unto those cherries, that were given to children when they cryde and
puled, to make them hold their peace, but were afterward taken from them when
they lay still and quiet. To whom the chief of the Ambassadors stoutly
replied, that if in Parnassus they used so foully to abuse silly well-meaning
people, Focides would ere long fall to whining again, to the end it might be
stilled with cherries of new privileges.

To this companion, Francis Guicciardin, Lord President of the Royal Counsel
suddenly answered, that if the F^censes did well consider the present state
wherein they were, they should find, that with the Cittadels, which in times
of peace they had suffered to be built upon their necks, they were reduced unto
such terms of bondage and thraldom, as if they fell to whining again, they
might very well, without any danger or prejudice unto Apollo's state, be
stilled and made to hold their peace with smarting lashes and bloody stripes.

Socrates having this morning been found dead in his bed, Apollo uses all
possible diligence, to discover the true occasion of his sudden death.
Rag. 32. 2 Part.
THis present morning, great Socrates, who yesternight went to bed in perfect
good health, has been found stark dead in his bed: and for so much as his
corpse was all swollen and puffed up, most men do vehemently suspect, that there
has been some machination of poison practiced upon him. And the Peripateticks
(cruel enemies to the Socratike Sect) have been much questioned and blamed
for it. And so much the more, because it is well known to all men, that the
most detestable arms of poisoning are very familiar unto Aristotle. Prince of
that great Sect.

All Socrates his household has this morning been imprisoned, from whom no
other light or confession can be wrested, but that some days before, Socrates
was seen and observed to be much anguished, grieved, and perplexed, still
seeming to feel some grief of mind; for he was diverse times heard lamentably
to exclaim, Oh corrupted world! Oh depraved age! Oh most-most unhappy mankind!

Apollo, who has felt an extraordinary sorrow for the loss of so great a
Philosopher, has strictly commanded the body to be opened, to see whether his
bowels and entrails yielded any sign or likelihood of poison, which being
done, all his interiors were open, whereby it was evidently percei^ed, that
Socrates, by reason of the infinite filthy things, enormous abuses, and
scandalous objects, which he was compelled daily to view and behold in this
depraved and corrupted Age; and for having taken a great windiness of
scandals, he was forced to burst. Most rich and sumptuous have the funerals
been, that were celebrated for so great a man.

And Marcus Tullius Cicero (a most affectionate favorer of the Socratike Sect)
with an excellent and elaborated Oration, having highly extolled the verity of
the doctrine, with floods of tears bewailed the calamity and miserable
condition of these present days; in which with rigorous severity, all men are
strictly forbidden to satyrize.

And honest Gentlemen beholding continually things most worthy to be published
by sound of horn and trumpet, are enforced to see, to hold their peace, and to
burst.

Natalis Comes the Historian, for having spoke some thing in a public
congresse of learned men, that grievously offended Apollo, is by his Majesty
severely punished.
Rag. 49. 2 Part.
VVHilest some few days since, Natalis Comes a Latin Historian, together with
diverse other learned men of this Court, under Melpomenes Porch (as the custom
of Historians is) discoursed of the glory of those great Princes, that have
left any eternal memory of their honorable actions in the world, termed by
the name of a glorious conquest the usurpation of a kingdom, made by a mighty
Prince, without any justice, right, or lawful pretense.

Which speech being presently reported unto Apollo by one of those wicked and
makebate spirits, whereof the Ai^e, and the Earth is ever full: His Majesty
fell into so passionate a rage against Natalis, as at that very instant he
caused him to be put in prison, and at once used the rigor, straightly to forbid
him, for the space of three whole years, the ingresse into any Libraries.

And howbeit Apollo have most importunately been solicited by most of the
chief Historians of this State, to proceed with some milder term of mercy
toward so virtuous a follower of his, he nevertheless has and does still
refuse to do it.

And says besides, that there is no greater wickedness in the world, than the
impious and treacherous license, which diverse Princes have usurped unto
themselves, to rob and steal whole States and Kingdoms one from another.

An action that has filled the world with those lamentable mischiefs, and
deplorable confusions and disorders, that so much afflict mankind. And he
thinks it an iniquity extremely outrageous, that in his virtuous Dominion,
there should be found any one learned man so perfidious, as durst dare to style
those treacherous thefts, and unlawful robberies, which are committed with a
million of aggravating and impious circumstances, by the title of glorious
conquests.

THE NEW-FOVND POLITCKE.
THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. 1.
Maximilian the Emperor is advertised of the trouble begun among his Sons.
THere came three Posts very lately unto the Majesty of the Emperor
Maximilian the second; and presently it was known how they brought him
advertisement, that the Archduke Matthias had taken Arms against the Emperor
Rodolphus his brother, seditiously requiring the Kingdoms of Hungary and
Bohemia, and the absolute Dominion of Austria, and other Provinces. These ill
news infinitely troubled the mind of the Emperor; for he well knew, that the
discord risen up among his Sons, would give the enemies of the house of
Austria that content, which they so much desired. Whereupon, yesterday morning
very early, that Prince presented himself before Apollo, and with many tears
demanded of him, when the evils of the House of Austria, so long before
commenced, through the cruel combination of all Germany against it, should
have an end; and for what demerit such fearful scourges were sent unto his
house. Unto this demand Apollo answered in this sort: All the troubles and
persecutions of your Family, great Emperor, shall cease, when it shall wholly
abandon those ambitious thoughts of desiring to command over Hungary, and
Transiluania, which has given unto Germany such iealousies, that to secure her
ancient liberty from the power of your house, she bends all her study to
nothing more, then to the depression of it: for the Germans, searing greater
prejudice from your acquests, then from the victories of the Turks, are fully
resolved rather to lose Vienna, then recover Buda, And then also shall all
Germany unfeignedly love your Archdukes, when deposing their present ambition,
they shall make it appear, that they desire to be equal, and not superior to
other Princes of Germany.

CHAP. 2.
Most of the Princes, Commonweals, and States of Europe, are weighed in a
pair of Scales, by Lorenzo Medici.
SEeing it is apparent, that the Roman Commonweal, after the acquisition it
had made of the Empire of all Italy, could in a short time arrive to that
Universal Monarchy, which is yet so famous to the world, and whereunto many
ambitious Princes have since in vain aspired, it has been a general
received opinion, That that Potentate, who in State and Forces is suffered to
grow unto such greatness, that he finds no other Prince able to counterpoyze
him, no more then the Roman Commonweal did, after it became Commander over
Italy, cannot possibly be impeached from obtaining the Universal Monarchy.
Whereupon those Empires and Kingdoms, which were afterward framed out of the
pieces of the Roman Monarchy, to avoid those calamities and dissolutions, which
fell upon such Potentates as were oppressed by the Roman Forces, out of most
wholesome, and almost divine counsel agreed together, that every fifteenth
year, all the Princes of Europe should assemble into one place; where each
ones Forces should be severally weighed; and thereupon fit counterpoyze, and
due mortification be given unto him, that was found to be grown to any
greatness, which might be odious and dangerous to his Competitor.

Many great Wits were from time to time preferred to that honorable charge of
governing the Scales; but for an hundredth years past or thereabout, they were
managed by the Illustrious House of Medici, and in particular by Lorenzo the
Great. Which prerogative, although to many it seemed prejudicial unto the
Majesty of the Popes, and prudence of the Venetian Senate, who have always
watched; if not more, at leastwise equally with Lorenzo, and the Florentine
Commonweal, to maintain both in Italy and abroad, the Forces of the
Potentates of Europe even balanced, yet with a marvelous consent of all the
Historians the government of the Scales was given into the hands of Signior
Lorenzo. The first day of August, then all the Princes and Potentates of
Europe, assembled in Phocis, not only to meet with so important a business as
the perfect knowledge of their own affairs, but that also of others, which in
matter of State imports much more. Whereupon by an ancient and just
prerogative, the first that came to be weighed, was the Aristocraticall
Monarchy of the Apostolic Sea; whose temporal State was put into the Scale;
and because the weight of the last fifteenth year was but six Millions of
pounds, and now was found to amount unto seven and an half, every one knew,
that the addition of the noble Duchy of Ferrara had caused that increase. The
next that was put into the Scale, was the State of the seven Princes Electors
of the Roman Empire, which by old Records appears to have weighed in times
past seventy Millions of pounds; but since, by the indiscreet government and
courses of many Emperors, that lusty complexion, which made it evermore
redoubted, was so spoiled, that it fell into those dangerous and foul
infirmities, which after a long Quartane, found end in an Hecticke Fever, that
has now so consumed it, as our age beholds it left with nothing but very
skin and bone. Howbeit, though it be so much decreased in State, yet the
great bulk it has of body, makes it in show very goodly to look upon; the
rather, because the intrinsecall imperfections are not discovered: for many
good persons with the ancient Titles of the Empire, and Maiesticall name of
Caesar, have beautified it very excellently without, but when it came to be
weighed, it was found quite empty within; a feather not being so light, as the
name of a Prince without authority is vain: whence it is that the Roman Empire
proved so weak, as it weighed but 480 pounds. Then the famous Peers of France
brought unto the Scale the flourishing and warlike French Monarchy; a square of
five hundredth and fifty miles every way, replenished with an infinite Noblesse,
armed on horseback, which not only maintains peace at home, but makes so
great a King formidable to all the Nations of the earth; besides a world of
learned men which adorn it; Merchandise and Trades which enrich it; Tillage
and Husbandry, which make it plentiful, and abounding with every good thing.
The ancient weight of so famous a Monarchy was twenty Millions of pounds; but
in the last fifteenth years weight, by reason of the horrible calamities,
whereinto (by the disloyalty of some of her Barons) she was thrown, it did not
arrive to twelve Millions; howbeit, now it not only equalled, but went far
beyond the weight of the best ancient times; for it came to five and twenty
Millions; a matter of such marvel to every one, that the Spaniards got on their
Spectacles, and very narrowly observed, whether the Weights were right or no.

To the ancient Kingdom of France, was added the acquisition of Bresse given
up by the Duke of Sauoy, which in regard it was so aduantagious to the City of
Lions, augmented the weight of it above a Million. Next were the many Kingdoms
of Spain put into the Scale by the Spanish Grandes, and to the great wonder of
those ancient men, that could remember, how an hundredth and twenty years
since, they were held in a poor and vile account, the weight amounted to
twenty Millions. The Spaniards remained exceeding well satisfied with this
weight of their Spain: and assured themselves, that with the addition of so
many other States, they had besides to put into the Scale, not only to equal,
but far to exceed the five and twenty Millions of the French Monarchy.
Wherefore instantly they put into the Scale the flourishing Kingdom of Naples,
which every one thinking would increase the weight at least 2 Millions more, it
appears, that then it weighed less by one and an half: at this strange
accident the Spaniards being much amazed, said, That either Lorenzo had used
some fraud in the weighing, or that of necessity the Scales were not even;
because it was a monstrous thing, that the addition of matter should abate of
the weight. Whereunto Lorenzo coldly answered; That his Scales were even, but
that neither the Indiaes void of Inhabitants, nor the Neopolitans, and
Milanese, which were so far distant from the Forces of Spain, and
replenished with a people, which so unwillingly supported the command of
strangers, weighed any thing at all: for it was the love and multitude of
subjects, the fertility and union of States, that give weight, and turn the
Scale.

Hereupon the Spaniards added the Duchy of Milan into the scale, which in like
manner abated a million of the weight; whereat also the Spaniards were so much
astonished, that they would not put Flanders into the Scale, fearing to receive a
greater distaste and affront. Howbeit some said, that if they had put in the
Indiaes, they might have wrought some good effect, but not those miracles which
certain lavish tongues have delivered; who with the same facility talk of
milions of Crowns that the Furnace men make of very brick and tyle. Then came
the English Lords, who put into the Scale their Kingdom, so much redoubted for
the strength of the wonderful situation thereof; for the continued mountains
which compass it about, serving for walls, made by the very powerful hand of
God in form of bulwarks, and the Ocean for most profound Dit^hes, make it a
Kingdom feared, in regard of the commodity it has to assail others; and the
insuperable difficulties which they shall find that offer to attempt it. The
weight of this Kingdom was answerable to that of the last fifteenth year
which amounted to sixteen Millions. But the English, to give more weight to
their Kingdom, would have put the Kingdom of Scotland into the Scale when the
Scottish Nobility with drawn swords in their hands opposed themselves; freely
protesting, that they would never suffer their country to be annexed to the
kingdom of the English; for yet fresh was the lamentable example of the
miseries of Flanders, who when she saw her Earls become Kings of Spain,
foolishly believed that she should command over the Spaniards; whereas soon
after, not Spain was sacked by the Flemmings, but Flanders by the covetous and
cruel Spaniards; and that which made up their misery, Charles the fifth, the
Emperor, and King Philip his Son, by their continual residence in Spain, of
Flemmings became Spaniards. The unfortunate Flemmings by loosing their Prince,
of natural subjects, grew to be esteemed strangers, and men of little faith.
And so Flanders, the natural Country of Charles the fifth, the Patrimony of
King Philip, became (according to the terms of modern policy) a State of five
States, and began to be governed by Strangers; with those iealousies, and with
those oppressions of customs, taxes, contributions, and donatiues, as begat
those bad humors, those ill satisfactions, from whence since has proceeded
that civil war, which after an unspeakable profusion of gold, an infinite
effusion of blood, an incredible loss of honor to the Flemmings, was
converted into a covetous merchandise of the Spaniards. Therefore the Scots by
such lamentable miseries have learned, not to permit their King, upon any
terms whatsoever, to abandon the royal Seat of his ancient kingdom, for to
place it in a greater, newly fallen unto him: in which case the Scots should
under their cruel enemies the English, be sure to suffer all the calamities,
which inferior Nations are wont to endure at the hands of the superior.

Some that were present at this Act, report, how the Spaniards told the King of
England, that those Scots which had spoken so arrogantly in the presence of his
Majesty, were to be severely chastised; to whom the King of England answered,
That the Spaniards ought not to give that counsel unto others, which had
proved so pernicious to themselves: and thereupon having commanded the stay of
weighing their Kingdom, he assured his Scots, that ere long he would give them
all possible satisfaction.

After this, the vast Ottoman Empire was put into the Scale; which the last
fifteenth year arrived to the sum of two and thirty Millions, but now was
found to be less than sixteen; the strangeness whereof made all the Princes
very much to marvel; and particularly the Venetians, who could not believe
such a fall; whereupon they desired, that which more diligence it might be
reweighed, and it appeared, how in that little time running between the first
and this second weighing, it had fallen eight hundred twenty and two pounds:
whereby it was manifest, that the Ottoman Empire, heretofore so terrible to the
world, now consumed with luxury, covetousness, and idleness, runs headlong
to his ruin, which gave great contentment to all those Princes. Nevertheless
it was observed by some of the wisest there present, that the Spaniards were
not so glad of it as the rest; out of a doubt they had, that the depression of
the Turk, would be the exaltation of the Venetian State. Then came the Polach
Senators, and put into the Scale their Kingdom, which in regard of the small
authority the King has there, and the too much command, which the Palatines
arrogate unto themselves, made but a poor reckoning, for it did not amount to
six millions of pounds, whereas in times past it always exceeded twelve. After
them the Signory of the Council of Te^^ put into the Scale the flourishing
Estate of the Venetian Commonwealth, most admirable for the greatness
thereof, and opportunity of situation fitting for all great enterprises, which
went beyond all expectation in the weight, for it came to eight Millions; the
cause whereof was said to be the huge mass of Gold, which those wise Senators
in so long a time of peace had gathered together into their Treasury. Next came
the Switzers, the Grisons, and other free people of Germany, and brought their
Common-weals to the Scale. Howbeit the Princes required, that they might be
weighed each one severally by it self, wherewith the Germans were well
contented, so that it might be done. But Lorenzo having put the Commonwealth
of Basil into the Scale, it appeared, that the greater part of the other
Commonweals of Germany were all so linked together, that it was impossible to
separate them one from another, which put a many of ambitious Princes there in
a sweat. Then the Duke of Sauoy caused his State to be put into the Scale by
his noble Knights of the Annonciata, which equalled the weight of the last
fifteenth year; but Lorenzo having added into the Scale that most noble
prerogative of Title, which the said Duke Charles Emanuell enjoys of the
prime Soldier of Italy, it was seen to aggrauate the weight a Million four
hundredth and twenty pounds. After this, with a pomp and Majesty matchable to
Kings, appeared the Duke of Lorraine; whose State, though little, equalled the
weight of great Kingdoms; and it was considered that it fell out to be so by a
certain good fortune which that Prince had, to have his States so happily
seated, that he could easily put the Low Countries into grievous difficulties,
by impeaching the passage of those succors which the Spaniards conduct thither
out of Italy, whereby he has grown into such reputation, that to the most
offerer he sells for ready gold the merchandise of that his adhering: in such
sort, that after he had dreyned the Spaniards, as much as any the de^outest
French Lord of the holy League whatsoever, siding afterward with the French,
he knew so well how to change his copy, that a King of France, such as was
Henry the fourth, the great Duke of Toscan, and the Duke of Mantoua were glad
of his alliance. And fully to make up the Spaniards jealousy, the famous
Venetian Commonwealth drew into her pay a Prince of that House with such
affection, that if that great Lady had not made a vow of perpetual chastity,
and her nature (according to the custom of some Indians) had not been
stitched up the first day she was born by the Venetian Signory, most jealous of
her honor, it was verily believed by many, that she would have taken him to
husband. It was observed, that the Duke of Sauoy envied much the felicity of
this Prince, because he finding himself also seated between the French and
the Spaniards of Milan, as the Duke of Loraine was between the French and the
Spaniards of Flanders, in stead of so many benefits, and so many commodities as
fell upon the Duke of Loraine, he had received most cruel kicks, not only
from the French, then his enemies, but from the Spaniards his friends, so that
it was evident, the Duke of Sauoy did now plainly see, how that practice of his
with the Spaniard was most pernicious for him. Then came the Otto di Balia, and
put into the scale the flourishing State of the great Dukes of Tos^an, which by
reason of the excellent wits of the Inhabitants, perpetual plenty, continual
peace, and quiet security it enjoys, answered in weight to many Kingdoms.
Lorenzo greatly rejoiced, when he saw how upon the foundations of those
Churches and Hospitals, which he and his Predecessors in the time of the
Florentine liberty had laid in their Country, their Successors, according to
the model left them by Cosimo the Great, had afterward found means to erect
strong Cyttadels; whereupon Lorenzo, to make a glorious show of the worth and
wisdom of the Princes of his house, added into the Scale the admirable
understanding of Ferdinand the Great, with the excessive weight whereof it was
so over charged, that the huge chain whereby it hung brake in two, so that all
went to ground. This accident of the Scales so broken, was an hindrance that
other Italian Princes which remained could not be weighed; whereupon it was
concluded, that coming according to the ancient custom, to lay all the
Princes and Potentates of Italy in balance against the Monarchy of Spain, out
of the universal weight of the Italian Princes, each ones particular would
easily appear. Into the midst of the great Hall then was brought an huge and
even pair of Balance, whereinto on the one part was put all the Kingdoms of
the Monarchy of Spain, and into the other all the Principalities of Italy, and
it was seen that they stood in equal balance; a matter of great trouble to
all the Italian Princes: but whilst they continued in this agony, it was noted
how the mighty French Monarchy, with one only loving look which she gave to
that Balance, wherein the Italian Principalities lay, made it suddenly to
turn on that side. It may not be omitted, how the Spaniards seeing the Dukes
of Sauoy, who the last fifteenth year refused to be weighed with the Italian
Forces, now to be put into the Balance, for to counterpoise theirs, threatened
them by biting their thumbs at them; whereof those Princes being aware, with a
generosity worthy their undaunted spirits, they say thus unto them; Signory of
Spain, ye can no longer feed men with hopes, for now we are thoroughly
possessed of your courses: ye thought to have brought the Dukes of Sauoy, by
the cunning of your hopes, to such a ma^ne, as to forgo that little bread, which
they had in the mouth of their state; to reach at the shadow of those great
inheritances of Spain, which they saw in the bottom in the water. And because
the Spaniards complained for that the Dukes of Parma, Modena, Vrbin, the Lords
of Mirandola, and the famous Roman Barons, Gartani, Colonesi, and Orsini, which
have the Fleece, and are in their pay, were weighed with the Italian Forces;
whereas in regard of that Order, and the Pensions they receive, they were
obliged to adhere to their designs, and to be the ministers of their
greatness. They were answered by those Lords, that they received the honors
of the Fleece, and inioyed the profits of those Pensions, as honorable Ladies
accept of gifts from their Lovers; only in a pure way of courtesy, and not with
an intent any way to forget what appertains to their honor.

CHAP. 4.
Almansor, sometime King of the Moors, encountering with the Kingdom of
Naples, they relate one to another the miseries they sustain by the oppression
of the Spaniards.
THe famous King of Moors, Almansor, he that many years together reigned in
Spain over the noble Realm of Granada, met yesterday with the Kingdom of
Naples, and falling in talk with him, after he had for a good space observed
the chain, which the said Kingdom of Naples wore fastened about his leg, he
told him, that the manufacture thereof being Moresco, he verily thought that he
had many times seen, and handled it somewhere else; and a little while after
with a show of great marvel he affirmed, that he knew it well; and how it was
the very same, wherewithal both he, and the Moorish Kings his Predecessors had
for the space of seven hundredth years held many Kings of Spain in servitude;
and therefore he earnestly entreated him, to let him understand, how, by whom,
and when he was chained in that manner. A very good eye, and an excellent
memory have thou, Almansor, (answered then the Kingdom of Naples) for this
unlucky chain, which thou see about my leg, was brought out of Spain by
Gonsaluo Corduba, called the great Captain, and therefore it is very likely to
be the same thou speak of. And now it is an hundredth years, since first I
found my self in the miserable servitude, wherein thou beholdest me, and from
which I know not whether ever I shall be freed; for in regard of the mighty
power, whereunto I see the forces of the Spaniards arrived, having utterly lost
all hope of assistance, that may be expected from men, I know that my ancient
liberty stands wholly in the powerful hand of God, who had need to renew in
me the miracles of the Red Sea, if my deliverance shall follow. The years
(replied Almansor) confront well; for a little before the time of thy
servitude, the Spaniards undid this my chain from about the leg of the
Kingdom of Granada, wherewithal afterward they bound thee. But let it not
displease thee, O Kingdom of Naples, to declare unto me, how it could come to
pass, that the Spaniards should make themselves Masters of such a Kingdom as
thou art, so potent, and so far distant from their Forces. By fraud Almansor,
(said the Neapolitan Kingdom) did the Spaniards get into Italy, for by open
force they had never been able to make such notable acquests; and as thou
said well, so disproportionable to their Forces, which were so far off. But
hear, and wonder at the large and gross conscience of a King of Spain in
matters of State, although he used much Art to seem unto foolish men a very
Saint; for thou shall come unto the knowledge of a Tragedy, according to the
rules of my Christian Religion, most wicked and cruel; but according to the
terms of modern Policy, the most advised that ever any Nation represented
upon the stage of the world. Alfonso my King, to his utter, and my chiefest
ruin, gave Isabella his Niece (for from this unhappy marriage did my
displantation take beginning) to John Galeazzo, Duke of Milan for wife. The
minority first, and then the unspeakable silly weakness of so unfortunate a
Prince encouraged Lodouico Sforza to usurp the State upon his Nephew; Alfonso,
as it behooved him, sought to hinder that Tyranny; whereof Lodouico being
aware, and knowing, that without the ruin of my Kings, it was not possible for
him to arrive unto the end of his most iniust desire, he fell into that
resolution, which afterward both to himself, to me, and to all the Princes of
Italy, proved so fatal, of drawing the French into Italy, to the conquest of
me. My Kings to defend themselves from such mighty enemies, called to their
aid that holy soul of Ferdinand King of Aragon their Cousin, who showed
himself so kind a kinsman, and such a faithful friend, that in stead of
chasing away the French enemies, he divided me with them; and to show himself
complete, a little after this unhappy division, he entered into wars against
the French, and having overcome them, he forced them to return full of shame,
and loss into their country; whereupon the good King Ferdinand without any
scruple at all of conscience became my absolute Lord; and then it was, that he
fastened this chain about my leg, which thou remembrest to be the
manufacture, and work of thy Nation. And I do not think, that in all the
Chronicles of the Saracen^, Moors, or Turks, which it is likely thou have
read, there was ever a more wicked treachery recorded, done by a King, that
desired to be reputed a man of a good conscience, and of an holy disposition;
and that a little before had received of the Apostolic Sea that glorious title
of the most Catholic King. Truly (replied Aim^nsor) in the Chronicles, which
thou have named of my Nation, many foul actions committed by diverse Princes
out of ambition to reign, may be read, but this which thou have recounted of
Ferdinand goes beyond them all. But if thou, O Almansor, (said the Kingdom of
Naples) did with thy Nation keep the Kingdom of Granada, chained so many
hundredth years, what course took the Spaniards for to free him? That Union of
the Kingdoms of Castile and Aragon (replied Almansor) which followed upon the
marriage between Ferdinand and Isabella, occasioned the liberty of the Kingdom
of Granada: a most unhappy Union, the which, no less than I have done, and
continually still do, the greatest Potentates of Europe have lamented, do
lament, and perpetually with unfeigned tears will lament; as that which is the
true and only root, from whence are sprung all those greatest subuersions of
States, which unto this day have been seen in many parts of Europe, but more
remarkably in Italy. And believe me, Neapolitan Kingdom, that even till now
might I have reigned happily in Spain, if this pestiferous Union had not
overthrown my greatness; for the many iealousies that reigned between the
Castilians and Aragonians, were my inexpugnable Cittadels, which would have
maintained my reign here for ever. Withal assure thy self, O Kingdom of
Naples, that the aids which the Popes gave to Ferdinand, and Queen Isabella,
greatly accelerated my taking in. Peace, peace, Almansor (said then the
Neapolitan Kingdom) for after thou were chased out of Spain by the ambitious
Spanish Nation, the Popes underwent such miseries, that it may be truly said,
how with ready money they bought those extreme calamities, wherewithal
afterward they encountered; for though the Sea Apostolical were well contented
to see the Moors driven out of Spain, yet that satisfaction was much
distasted with my servitude, which followed presently upon it, the Popes having
never had any thing in greater fear, than that I should fall into the hands of
a mighty Prince, who might make them live in those perpetual iealousies,
wherein finding themselves drowned even up to the very eyes, many of them, and
particularly those, that have a greater knowledge of things of the world, do
not always make quiet sleeps. A clear testimony of the truth which I speak,
was the lamentable and wicked sack of Rome, perpetrated by the Spaniards a
little after my servitude; with which ingratitude they paid the Apostolic Sea
for all they were debtors unto it, as well for the remission of the Tribute of
Naples, as for the other succors, which they received in the war of Granada.
A calamity, that having past the terms of most grievous miseries, has in
such manner opened the eyes even of men of the drowsiest understanding, that
every one comes clearly to know, what it is to vnchaine the Lion out of a
zeal of piety; for the Spaniards no sooner saw themselves freed from the
impediment of the Moors of Granada, but that through the ambition, which they
showed in desiring to command over the whole Universe, not only in Italy, but
throughout all Europe, most important iealousies of State, and most grievous
interests of Religion discovered themselves, insomuch, that I have often heard
it discoursed by men of most understanding in affairs of the world, how
peradventure it would have been less prejudicial for many Princes of Europe,
that thou had reigned still in Granada, than that the Spaniards should have
passed into Italy, to acquire such important States, as at this day they
possess there.

Hereunto may be added the preiudices both public and private, which my ruin
has brought, and continually does bring unto the Italian Princes, and more
particularly to the Popes, because the Kings of Spain had no sooner fastened
this chain about my leg, but presently they began to aspire unto the dominion
of all Italy; and the quicklier to arrive thereunto, they knew very excellently
how to interesse themselves in the differences, which at that time depended
between the Princes of Italy and the French, about the possession of the
Duchy of Milan, wherein that top of man, Charles the fifth carried himself in
such sort, that he made himself to be known the worthy Nephew of his
Grandfather by the Mothers side: for having with the forces of the Italian
Princes, chased the French out of Italy, in stead of restoring the Sforzi to
the State, as it was agreed betwixt him, and the confederate Princes, with the
fraud of a thousand Turkish quarrels picked of purpose, which he well knew how
to invent against the Sforzi, he made himself absolute Master of that so
important a Duchy. Stay, Kingdom of Naples; and making a point here, (said
Almansor) satisfy me in this: Seeing the noble State of Milan was fallen into
the hands of the Spaniards; what hindered them from running precipitously to the
acquisition of all Italy? and seeing thy servitude does manifest unto the
world, that the aids and succors of Princes, serve more for the benefit of him
that gives them, than for the profit of him that receives them, why would not
the Italian Princes rather suffer, that Milan should be under the Dominion of
the French, than by receiving aid from the Spaniards, run the danger of
letting that Duchy (being so important a member of Italy) fall into the hands,
as thou said it did, of the Kings of Spain? The power of the Kings of France
(answered the Neapolitan Kingdom) defends that remnant of Liberty which
remains in Italy, from the ambition of Spain: for those glorious Kings out
of the interest of their greatness will not endure, that the Dominion of all
Italy should fall into the power of the ambitious Spanish Nation, which cannot
extinguish the ardent thirst they have of commanding, neither with the Conquest
of all the new World discovered by them, nor with so great a part which they
possess in the old.

Besides, the Italian Princes, who know the great peril (wherein they find
they are) of a dangerous and miserable servitude, have so united themselves
together, that although they be many in number, yet make they but one Body; and
the Spaniards; who have used, and do use all possible devices to disunite
them, evidently perceive, that they wash a Black-Moore.

But touching the State of Milan, thou must know, how it was judged more secure
for the public Liberty of Italy, that that Duchy should fall into the power
of the Spaniards, than that it should remain in the hands of the French; who
for that they were joining to Italy, when therein they should possess any
little part, there would have been manifest danger, that they would have made
themselves absolute Lords of the whole: but in the Spaniards it would fall out
clean contrary; for their Forces, albeit very great, are notwithstanding so
far off, that by so long a tract of Sea, they could with much difficulty
transport out of Spain into Italy Forces, that were able to maintain the
acquests they had made, not that they could be sufficient to subdue the whole.

Thou speak the truth, (said then Almansor) but go on, and declare unto me
the prejudices, which thy falling into the hands of the Spaniards brought unto
the Popes. Know then, (replied the Kingdom of Naples) that whereas before, the
Popes were the terror of my Kings, now it happens to be clean otherwise; for
they live in a very great agony, lest the Union of Milan with Naples should one
day follow; to which mark, they observe, the Spaniards have directed the scope
of all their thought; whereupon the Spaniards, whose proper nature it is to
make good use of the fear, whereinto they see they have put the Princes their
neighbors, have arrogated unto themselves such authority in the Court of Rome,
that they vaunt they are the true arbitrators of all the most important matters
which there are handled. Moreover, when the Kings of Naples were not Kings of
Spain, the Popes with every little menace of denying the inuestiture, obtained
of my Kings, Principalities, Duchies, Earledomes, and other great States in
gift, buying their friendships also with marriages, and many other sorts of
liberality; but now the fear being ceased, if the Popes will make their
kindred great with titles of important States, they must be glad to buy them
with their ready money, and the advised Kings of Spain, besides the precious
Gold of entreaties, which at any hand they will be sure shall precede for a
first payment, sell them unto them thoroughly sawced. Important interests, and
grievous disorders are these (said Almansor) which thou have recounted unto me;
but how comes it that thou, Kingdom of Naples, which art the Magazine of
Silks, the Granary of Italy, should go so ragged, and be so lean? Seeing
the Spaniards, that come naked out of Spain [answered the Kingdom of Naples]
after they have been three or four days in my house, will needs cover
themselves all over with gold, it is no marvel if I be spoiled, to clothe so
many Raggedemuffins: besides, if thou saw the rapacitie of the Vice-royes,
that to recover themselves are sent unto me, or if thou knew the rapines of
Secretaries, of thousand Officers, and other Courtiers, which they bring along
with them, all thirsty of my blood, thou would greatly marvel, how it were
possible, I should sa^iate the raging and greedy swallow of so many
hunger-starued wretches. As for the little flesh thou see on my back, the
Spaniards affirm, that in the book of a certain Florentine, who has given
rules of the cruel modern Policy, they find written, that being a Kindome
conquered, after the manner of those horses which are kept only for races, I
ought to be maintained low in the flesh.

I but (said Almonsor then) the Milanesi how are they entreated? They also
(replied the Kingdoms of Naples) are bathed with the water, wherwithall thou
see me so wet; only this difference is betwixt us, that in Milan are drops,
in my house, floods. The true occasion of the diversity of these intreatings
is the quality of the Lombards dispositions, most unlike to my Neapolitans: for
the Nobility of the State of Milan are naturally fantastical, free,
resolute, and far from that Vice so proper to my Neapolitans, of flattery,
and affectation; but so bold and hardy, that they dare say, how ^f one only
Cremonese spirit had been found amongst my Neapolitan Barons, it would have
hindered that same forced donatiue, that has brought me to eat bread and
onyons; the which, although with great words, it has bin often demanded by the
Spaniards in Milan, they have been as resolutely answered, that they should
take care to live: Besides, the confining of the Grisons, of the Duke of Sauoy,
and Venetians, are the cause, that the Kings of Spain proceed with more
discretion in Milan: for when the Popes managed Arms, I my self also was for
their occasion greatly respected. But soft, Almansor, yonder comes my most
capital enemy Don Pedrode Toledo, wherefore I pray thee withdraw a little; for
at any hand I would not have him take notice, that I lament my disgraces here
with thee; and for this only, were it for nothing else, may I term my
servitude most wretched, in that I am forced to call this miserable State,
wherein thou see me, the happy golden Age.

CHAP. 5.
Sigismund Battor learneth the Latin tongue.
YEsterday about eight of the clock in the Evening, the ordinary post of
Germany arrived at this Court, and brought very joyful news how Sigismund
B^ttor, Prince of Transiluania, was grown so inamored of the graceful Latin
tongue, that to his great glory he spoke, and wrote with the purity and
eloquence of the Cesarean style; whereupon all the Virtuous earnestly besought
Apollo, that for such good news there might be made in Parnassus all those
demonstrations of joy, which (to encourage Great men to the love of Learning)
were wont to be made, when any Prince became learned: But his Majesty, that
sees into the uttermost secret of all things, denied those Virtuous their
request, and told them that then only there should be feasting in Parnassus,
when out of the freeness of a noble mind, and mere election of studies, not
constrained by any necessity, Princes applied themselves to Learning; and that
they were to know, how Prince Battor had gotten the elegant Latin tongue,
neither out of ambition to show himself to be learned, nor out of a virtuous
curiosity to know many things, but only out of necessity for his reputations
sake, to correct the foolish and childish absurdity which he committed, in
Gender, Number, and Case, at such time, as in the war of Hungary, he took
that fatal resolution to arm himself against the Turk, for to adhere unto
the Emperor of Germany, whom in regard of the strong and lively pretensiors,
which he has to the Principality of Transiluania, he was to have in more
horror, then seventy Ottoman Emperors.

CHAP. 6.
The Cardinal of Toledoes Summa is not admitted into the Library of Parnassus.
THE Illustrious and Reverend Francesco Cordova, Cardinal of Toledo, a
personage of exemplarie life, an exqu^site Divine, and excellent Philosopher;
he that in his own person honored the Word of God in the pulpit, more then
any other Preacher whatsoever of his time, some few days since arrived at
Parnassus, having been received upon the confines of the State, by Alessandrod'
Ales, and Cornelio Musso Bishop of Bitonto, and all the way encertained at his
Majesty's charge. This honorable learned man presented his Writings unto the
venerable College of the Virtuous; and those of Philosophy were not only
commended, but admired, as also the Commentaries composed by him upon the
Divine passages of all the sacred Writers, were received with extraordinay
applause, and shortly after they were carried in a precious Vrne under a cloth
of Estate, into the Delphicke Library, and with the name of the Author,
consecrated to Eternity. Only his Summa, although very learned, was not
received by those Virtuous, who freely told him, that there were so many Works
already of that kind in his Majesty's Library, as some of them seemed
superfluous: for an infinite many of great Divines had with such diligence
handled ma^ters appertaining to the consciences of private men, that they had
put the salvation of souls into comprimise, for the only regard of a
shillings gain: And that the world very much desired to see a complete Summa,
composed upon the consciences of great Princes; a matter most necessary for the
quiet of the whole Universe, and altogether omitted by Divines; wherein those
actions of Princes should be exactly discoursed upon, with which so often they
put the world into confusion, filling it with robberies, assassinates, and such
slaughters of men, that many of them blinded with ambition to reign upon
earth, have made rivers to run with humane blood.

The College of the Learned, hearing these particulars, said, That they much
desired to have these questions disputed and resolved: Namely, whether
Christian piety will admit the special hypothesis, which the violence of the
sword has usurped over others States: Whether a Principality, that by Arms
and fraud, is forcibly taken from another Prince, may be held by one that has
the true fear of God: Whether that course of ruling a Kingdom, which is
conquered only to the end to impouerish and waste it, that so it may be
governed without jealousy, may be practiced by one that is borne in the
Christian Faith: Whether the exalting of Reason of State to such an height,
that it should trample under feet, as at this present it does, all Laws divine
and humane, be not a more detestable and execrable Idolatry, then worshipping
Nabuchadnezzars Image, or the golden Calfe. And lastly, the College said, That
then their desires would be fully accomplished, when there could be found a
Divine so much fearing God, that with his Writings durst fright Princes as much
from doing evil, as many others with their great Volumes had terrified private
men; for it seemed a strange thing unto them, that infinite learned Divines ^^d
so labored to reason of the strict account, which Shopkeepers are to render,
even for idle words, unto the Majesty of God, and in the mean time had
omitted to make mention of those exorbitant errors, committed by great
Princes; when with their Armies ouer-running States, they send all things into
perdition, both sacred and profane: And that with more benefit to mankind, and
eternal reward to themselves, Divines might have discoursed upon the actions
of Lewis the twelfth, and Francis the first, both Kings of France; of Ferdinand
King of Aragon, and Charles the fifth the Emperor, whose souls departed out of
this world with the heavy burden of half a million of man-slaughters, all
committed by their ambition to reign, and whereof they were to give a strict
account to Almighty God: all which were matters exceeding necessary, to the
end, that mankind so much afflicted by the ambition of Princes, might one day
receive the consolation, which with such longing it desires, when those that
reign should be terrified from doing amiss, and be made to know, that Hell
was prepared as well for the great as the small.

CHAP. 7.
The Monarchy of Spain throws her Physician out of the window.
THis Morning the Monarchy of Spain having sent for her ordinary Physitia^, a
little after with her own hands she threw him out of the window of her royal
Palace, whereupon the poor wretch, being all battered in pieces, died
incontinently. An accident that seemed the more strange, in regard the
Physician was held by all the Court, to be a man of extraordinary honesty, and
in the practice of his profession most admirable. Sundry were the discourses
that were made upon so remarkable a matter. But, Apollo desiring to know of the
Spanish Monarchy herself, the true cause of so grievous a resentment, that
mighty Queen told him, how above forty years since, upon occasion of some
accidents that befell her, and other signs which she had discovered, she
feared that in process of time, she should catch some dangerous French
disease from the Royal house of Burbon, and therefore to provide for the
inconvenience which she foresaw, she had demanded counsel of her Physician,
who prescribed her a long fastidious and chargeable purgation, compounded of
diverse Oils of holy Leagues, of insurrections of people, of rebellions of
Nobility, of Cauteries, and other very bitter ingredients, whereby she had
spoiled her stomach, weakened her strength, and altogether lost her appetite;
and that the infinite quantity of Syrrupes, and the many medicine^ which she
had taken with such anguish, had wrought no other effect, but the acceleration
of the disease, which without that unlucky and unseasonable purgation
peradventure she should never have had: Moreover, that the many Leaches which
were applied to many parts of her body, had in such manner sucked the best
vital blood of the Gold of that Spain, that through the weakness of her
complexion, she was not able to euacuate those evil humors of Flanders, which
had held her, and do hold her oppressed. By which disorders, all occasioned
through the naughty counsel of that imprudent Physician, she was so
exasperated against him, that she had solemnly sworn to throw him out of the
window, if to free her from future infirmities, he ever after ordained her any
purgation; And that perceiving how the pain which she has at this instant in
the Shoulder of Holland, was an apparent Lues Gallica, she had demanded
counsel of the same Physician for to clear her self of it, who unmindful of
his former errors, had foolishly ordained the second purgation, wholly and
altogether like the former, and that therefore being overcome with pain, she
had thrown him out of the window, so punishing him at once for both the faults
he had committed: for it seemed unto her, that he had well deserved the
misfortune of that resentment, seeing that by the accidents following, with
such infelicity of her Spaniards, he had not learned to know, that purgations
made before their time for diseases that are feared, do not work those good
effects, which either the Physician believes, or the patient desires.

CHAP. 8.
Most of the States of the world are censured in Parnassus for their errors.
APollo careful of nothing more, than to see the Princes of the world, should
in the upright government of their States, give the people such satisfaction as
they ought, introduced into Parnassus (many ages since) this admirable custom:
That every year, the names of the chiefest Potentates of the earth, written
upon little scedules, should be put into an Vrne, and then being drawn forth
one by one, the public censor of political matters should (in the presence of
the sacred College of the learned) record the disorders, which he had observed
in the government of their States; whereupon those Princes were bound either
incontinently with satisfying reasons to defend such things as were objected
against them, or else within a Month to reform them.

An institution no doubt very noble and holy; for it has effected, that in the
progress of so many ages, since first it was used, Princes have corrected an
infinity of errors: besides, knowing that they are to be called to so strict
an account, it makes them endeavor to live so virtuously, that in the
presence of so many Princes they need not to blush. Upon the day appointed
then, most of the Potentates of the World appeared before Apollo: And Count
Baldazar Castiglione the Political Censor, said unto the reverend Lord
Giouanni dalla Casa, Nuntio for the Sea Apostolical in this State, which was
first drawn out of the Vrne; That it seemed unto him a most scandalous matter,
and indeed unworthy the Greatness and Majesty of the Popes, that in Rome
should be seen some potent Families, unto whom it served in stead of a rich
patrimony to be dependant on foreign Princes, not very well affected to the
greatness of the Apostolic Sea, which in every occasion were apt with the
power of their Factions to give the Popes much trouble; and that he might truly
say, how in all his time he had not seen a more foul and execrable thing,
than that which the Emperor Charles the fifth did, when with the noble Charge
of the Kingdom of Naples, he rewarded the cruel seditions, and shameful
treacheries, which the Cardinal Pompeo Colonna, used against the high Bishop
Clement the seventh. Then the Lord Giouanni demanded of the Count, how long it
was since he had conuersed in the Roman Court; who answering, Some seventy
years past: the Nuncio replied, that returning thither now he should find, how
by reason of the abundance of vertjuyce, which the Pompei, Fabritij, Prosperi,
Ascanij of the family of Colonna; the Virginij, and other more principal
Barons of the House of Orsina had eaten; the teeth of their Nephews and
Grandchildren were so set on edge, that they could hardly chaw their broth:
for the Popes which had tied those exorbitances about their fingers, knew so
excellently how to practice the Tarquinian precept, that they have reduced
those Poppies, which heretofore were as high as Cedars, to the humble stature
of ridiculous dwarffes.

This answer satisfied the Count, who turning to the Roman Empire, next
drawn out of the Vrne, he said unto him, That the present disorders which
were seen not only in the great patrimony of the House of Austria, but in all
Germany, proceeded from the negligence of the present Emperor Rodolphus, and
therefore he much desired, that that Majesty would with more care embrace the
government of his so many States; remembering, that Princes, rulers of mankind,
bore upon their shoulders the heauiest weight, and had in their hands the most
laborious work that any the painfullest day-labourer whatsoever could
exercise. The Censor was exceedingly thanked by the Roman Empire for this
advice; whereunto with much gravity he answered, That it was a disgrace common
with all Princes, to be accused of negligence, when scandals arose in their
States, although it notoriously appeared, that in regard they were occasioned
by the practices of more mighty enemies, they could not possibly be avoided by
an understanding Prince.

Wherefore it was to be considered, That the monstrous felicities, which the
most mighty House of Austria have had by inheriting with their Matches, the
States of Flanders, the Kingdoms of Spain, of Naples, Sicilia, Bohemia,
Hungary, and Portugal, have given all the Princes of Germany, of Italy, and of
Europe such diobolicall jealousies, that they have caused both the passed and
present ruins, now beheld in their ancient patrimony: Whereunto the Emperors,
which have reigned since Maximilian the first of famous memory, albeit they
were reputed most valorous and prudent Princes, could never after apply any
salve, that did not infinitely exasperate the sore of the disorders of Germany,
wherein had concurred such abundance of malignant humors, that it might truly
be said, it was immedicable. Further, it was to be remembered, what small
authority the modern Emperors have had in Germany, so that it were not only a
discourtesie, but open injustice to will one, that has his hands fast bound
behind him to perform the acts of Or^ando. Moreover, the quality of the
Empire was to be regarded, which being elective, they that served, had more
authority in it, then they that commanded. Besides the present weakness of the
house of Austria in Germany, from whom (with the seditions of Religion) the
hearts of their subjects are stolen; a theft so important, that they may well
abandon those States as lost, wherein such dangerous seed is sown. Whereupon
the present Emperor seeing himself deprived of the obedience of his subjects,
desires every one to reflect upon the quality of the Cousins, which the House
of Austria has in Spain, and they shall find that the people of Almaine borne
for their liberty, to secure themselves from the monstrous power of such a
Family, take impious and wrongful reuenges even on those, which shall not be
free from the servitude of the Spaniards, if for the sins of men they ever
arrive to that point of commanding over the World; from which (by the mere
goodness and mercy of God) they are put off as far, as by their many devices
they have labored to come near it. That also it was to be thought upon, how
the first that in Italy, and abroad, disinherited with all kind of
irreuerence, and disrespect, the Majesty of the Empire, were those their
Cousins of Spain, as clearly appeared by the usurpation of Finale, and other
Imperial feudes by them possessed. All which things, moving dangerous humors
without dissoluing them afterward, do cause the House of Austria in Germany,
to be cruelly scourged by most powerful enemies, whilst the Spaniards with
their only menaces seek to put the whole world into suspicion and distate. And
for conclusion, he desired all the sacred College to consider, that to the
miserable sterilitie of children, which is seen in the present Emperor, is
adjoined a lamentable fertility of brethren; one of which incited by the most
violent spur of ambition, has not doubted at last to go about to overthrow
his own House, which is ready to fall. All accidents so unhappy, that they
would make even Solomon himself seem to the World a very fool.

These replies, which to all the Assistants seemed very weighty, satisfied the
Censor, who turning him to the warlike French Monarchy, said unto her; How all
the Virtuous of Parnassus much desired of her, that she would rule the
furious, unquiet, capricious, and exceeding impetuous dispositions of her
French, reducing them to those terms of prudence, aduisednesse, and
stayednesse of mind, which are seen in the noble Italian, and Spanish
Nations; and how it much blemished her reputation, that the Kingdom of France,
which holds a first place amongst the most principal Monarchies of the
World, should be inhabited by men so infinitely rash. To this advertisement the
French Monarchy replied, That the Censor not well informed of the interests of
her Kingdom, had censured for defects the chiefest virtues, which she loved in
her French. Folly, lightness, unadvisedness, and a precipitous nature were
they, which had made her so feared, and formidable a Queen, because her French
with unspeakable alacrity and forwardnes, would upon the least nod of hers,
expose themselves to those perils, whereunto other Princes could not with the
rope, the cudgel, and the cruellest kinds of punishment compel their wise,
advised, and circumspect subjects: And that in the many wars, which she had
held with most valorous Nations, she had learned to know, how an Army framed
of soldiers, which had little brain, and much courage, so that they are led
by a valiant, and discreet General, does carry away the victory from those
people, who profess more circumspection, and wisdom. This answer of the
Monarchy of France, was so much the more commended of Castiglione, by how
much, regarding the quality of a mighty Kingdom, he knew that the French
possessed all those endowments and virtues, which were requisite in a Nation,
for to found, amplify, and maintain a great Empire.

Then the Censor turning to the powerful Monarchy of Spain, said unto her,
how it was evident, nothing gave greater satisfaction to all people in
general, but more particularly to those which were subject to strange Nations,
than the humanity, and affable carriage of such as governed them; whereas she
sending to the governments of Naples, Milan, and Sicilia, none but her own
Spaniards, they with their ordinary Castilian stateliness, and insupportable
Spanish pride, without all comparison far exceeding that, which the Kings of
Spain themselves either could, or would have used in those States, did so
exasperate even their good and faithful subjects, that the Spanish Dominion
was grown infinitely odious: And that further, both in weighty, and slight
affairs, he desired more quick expeditions from her, seeing that by her too
much delay, and perplexity in the deliberation of important matters, she had
lost many fair occasions, that had presented themselves unto her, for the
enlarging of her Empire. The Monarchy of Spain very much thanked the Censor
for the aduertisements he had given her, and in her excuse answered, how that
honorable Gentleman, which had a young wife, beyond all expression fair, but
of a disposition inclined to lasciviousness, should show himself very
discreet, if he desired, that a proper hansome servant, whom he kept in his
house, should be rather extremely hated, than any whit affected by his wife:
and that unto the delay in the resolution of her affairs, which she knew to be
vicious and prejudicial, it lay not in her power to give remedy: for almighty
God having not without important occasions created her Spaniards wholly, and
altogether quite different in disposition from the French, whilst they in the
deliberation of businesses, were rather precipitous, than executiue, she in her
being so slow and irresolute, obeyed the will of God, who would have it so.

The next drawn out of the Vrne was the Monarchy of Poland; unto whom Count
Baldasar said, How all the Princes of Europe c^u^d have wished, that the
present King Sigismond had used toward those seditious Nobles, which last
rebelled against him, some severity worthy so grievous a fault, only to the
end, that by their example, other Lords might have been deterred from
committing the like. To this the Polach Monarchy answered, That those
chastisements given to the Nobility, which in an hereditarie State would be
commodious, have always proved in her elective Kingdom prejudicial: And how
that Kingdom, which another receives in gift from a Nobility, in whose power
is the election of the King, cannot without evident peril of falling from his
greatness. be governed with that rigor, which in other hereditary States is
necessary; for that Senate, which out of an election of love gives another a
Kingdom, if it be provoked by the powerful passion of hate, knows also how
to reassume it, in regard well-aduised Senators are wont to reserve unto
themselves those necessary instruments, whereby upon every occasion of evil
satisfaction, they may recall their used liberality: And that the present King
Sigismond being the first of his House, which had reigned in Poland, he was to
direct the aim of all his thoughts to no other scope so much, as by an
extraordinary indulgence to win the hearts of the Nobility of his State, that
so with a grateful memory of his clemency, he might perpetuate the succession
of such a Kingdom in his Blood. An advertisement most necessary for Sigismond
his King, by reason the Polachs, although their King be elective, do never
defraud the Royal Blood of the succession, if he that reigns, can tell how
to get the general love of the Nobility. For the Polonians being a Nation,
that know not how to live in an absolute liberty, do so abhor all manner of
servitude, that that King among them (a matter common to all elective princes)
shall be most oculatiue, and vigilant in the matters of his State, that least
seems either to see or know any thing. Not only the Censor, but the whole
College of the Virtuous, admitted the justification of the Polach Monarchy for
excellent.

Hereupon the Count turning himself to the vast Ottoman Empire, said unto him,
That the cruelty which he used, only upon light suspicions, against his
chiefest ministers, was held by all the world to be a bloody course; it being a
received opinion, that men of extraordinary valor and merit, should not be
laid hands on, but for great and proved offenses: And that when the Ottoman
Princes did even justly take away the lives of their ministers, the custom of
seizing upon their Estates to their own use, and thereof utterly depriving the
children, did scandalize all good justice, because it seemed, that with such
cruel rigor, the Estates, rather than the faults of the delinquents, we
hunted after. To this so open a correction, the Ottoman Empire answered with
admirable gravity, That he was grown to that greatness wherein he was seen,
by the only two most powerful means of reward without measure, and
punishment without end: And that the sole foundation of the quiet of every
State, being placed in the fidelity of the most important ministers, Princes
were not to seek any thing with more care, than with immense rewards to allure
them unto faithfulness, and with infinite punishments to terrify them from
trecheries: That those ministers which have in their power, the Forces,
Command, and Governments of States, not being able to err, but in most
important matters, it were the counsel of a foolish Prince, upon suspicions of
that moment, to arraigne, accuse, and hear the iustifications of the offender;
but in such a case, the Prince which will run no danger, ought to endeavor to
surprise his minister upon the sudden, and to deal so securely, that the
execution of the punishment may precede even the accusation it self: That many
times it had fallen out, that he with a sudden chastisement had prevented the
consummation of most foul treasons: Which resolution, though he acknowledged
to be most severe, yet he knew it had so wrought, that there were never seen
in his State any Counts St. Paul, Princes of Orange, Dukes of Guise, d'Aumale,
du Maine, de Mercure, and other foul monsters of disloyalty, which, with the
shame of those Princes, that with halters, poynards, and axes, knew not how to
prevent such dangerous offenses, have been seen otherwhere: It being a rule
in matters of State as common, as secure, That that minister, which gives to
his Prince the least shadow of suspicion of his faith, incurreth a capital
pain, because those Captains which have the care of Armies in their power,
are bound, like the wives of Honorable personages, to live with such purity
of mind, that they be free not only from blame, but from the least suspicion
of a blameworthy thought. That touching the seizure of his Bashawes estates
after their death, he thought he might truly say, that the entertainments,
gifts, and wealth, wherewithal other Princes rewarded their ministers, in
comparison of those inexhaustible riches which he bestowed on his
well-deseruing Officers, were vile, and poor, as those Royal Treasures, which
Ruften, Mahomet, Ibrahin, and infinite others left behind them after their
decease, have fully testified: That the greatest regard which a Prince ought to
have in rewarding his ministers, consists in providing, that the unmeasurable
riches, wherewith he bought of them infinite fidelity, may not possibly at any
time be converted to the prejudice of him, that used the liberality: That from
the grievous disorders fallen out in the States of other Potentates, he had
found it to be a matter most pernicious unto Princes, that the extraordinary
riches left by a deserving Minister, should pass unto his children, not having
first deserved it (by their virtue, valor, and fathers said fidelity) of the
Prince: That he had not out of covetousness, as many misiudged, confiscated
the great inheritances of his Bashawes, but that by the commodity thereof,
those subjects should not be idle, and consequently vicious, which being
descended of fathers of notable valor, gave the Prince assured hope they would
imitate the virtues of their Progenitors: That the gate of his Treasure stood
perpetually open to the heirs of his Ministers, to restore them their fathers
inheritances twice doubled, when they with their fidelity and valor should
deserve them; and how much the riches of men vicious, and subject to ambition,
were apt to disturb the peace of any Kingdom, how great soever, well appeared
by the fresh examples, which he had seen both in France and Flanders.

Whilst the Ottoman Empire spoke in this manner, he observed that the renouned
French Monarchy, with the shaking of her head, seemed to declare, that she no
way approved those reasons: whereupon somewhat the more moved, he said thus:
Mighty Queen, my custom in seizing upon the estates of my Bashawes, is
profitable for the greatness, and quiet of my State; and in regard of the
friendship that is betwixt us, I would to God, the same course were observed in
your France; for you know full well, to what use Henry the Duke of Guize
converted the exceeding riches, wherewithal the liberal Kings Francis the
first, and Henry the second rewarded the merits of Duke Francis his father.
You, and I, and all those that reign do know, how the sweetest bait that can
allure men, is a Crown, and there being no man, which for to taste never so
little of it, but would hold it a great pleasure for to expose even his life to
manifest danger of losing it, Princes ought to be most vigilant in keeping with
extremest severity the passages thereunto closed up against all men: nay, they
ought to acco^modate their affairs in such sort, that no private man
whatsoever should once hope to taste of so sweet a thing: And I tell you
freely, that if your Duke of Guiz^ had in my State but only thought that,
which with such public scandal he boldly put in execution in your Kingdom of
France; I would the very first day have given him that blow, whereunto your
King Henry the third, although he were incited unto it by the greater part of
the Princes of Italy, could never be drawn, until the very last hour of his
shameful disgraces, and even at that instant, when the sort of the French
vprores was become an incurable ulcer; for where ambition reigns among
Nobles, Princes are constrained to show themselves all severity, continually
keeping scaffolds in readiness, and prepared, to punish the seditious and
rebellious; and their Treasury open, to reward the quiet, and the loyal; that
Prince being unworthy to command, that has not the understanding how to make
himself be obeyed; neither can there be a more scandalous matter seen, not
met withal in a State, then that the Prince should live in jealousy of an
Officer, which ought to tremble before him. But it is the property of you the
Princes of Christendom, making profession of Learning, and directing your
selves by rules of policy, to call me Barbarous, and my secure way of
proceeding, Tyrannical, whilst in the mean time, ye suffer your selves to be
reduced by your Heroycall virtues of clemency, and gentleness, to shameful
terms of enduring unworthy things.

It is not possible to deliver, how much the Ottoman Empire offended all the
Virtuous of the sacred College with his discourse, who standing up, told him
in great disdain, how they could prove with present reasons, that all which he
had said, were most wicked conceits, unworthy to be spoken by any person that
had a soul, or to be heard of men, that made profession of honor. Whereunto
the Ottoman Empire answered, smiling, That others in the government of
Kingdoms might have regard to Virtue, and I know not what, but for his part he
would never be persuaded, but that the quiet and peace of States ought to be
preferred before all other humane interests whatsoever.

Then the Censor, to cut off so odious a dispute, turning to the great Duchy
of Moscouy, said unto him, That the most noble perogatiue of reigning over
people, which were lovers of Learning, and excellently Virtuous, was the second
amongst the greatnesses of a Prince: Whereas he by so endeavoring to bring up
his subjects in a gross ignorance, reaped no small blame, if not much
disreputation; because every one skorned him, for that, expelling the famous
liberal Arts out of his State, he had only permitted his people to learn the
benefit of writing and reading. To this Censure the Duchy of Moscouy answered,
That the dreadful fire, which he had observed Learning had ever kindled in
those States, where it had been admitted, had made him resolve not to suffer in
any sort, that so scandalous a Cockle should be sowed in his Duchy; for men
being the herds of Princes, as sheep the flocks of private persons, it were
extreme folly to arm those gentle sheep their subjects with the malice, which
Learning engraffeth into their dispositions, that attain unto it; whereas
otherwise, in regard of that harmless simplicity, wherewith Almighty God
has created them, they may be commodiously ruled and governed, be they never
so many in number, by one Prince alone: And how he held for infallible truth,
that if the Germans and Hollanders had been maintained by their Princes in the
simplicity of their ancient ignorance, and withal it had been prohibited,
that the pure mind of those Nations might not have been contaminated with the
plague of Greek and Latin learning, without all doubt they had never had the
judgment, with such a ruin of their old Religion, and destruction of many
Princes, that before ruled over those Provinces, to know how to frame those
perfect forms of Commonweales in their countries, whereunto neither the wit of
Solon, the wisdom of Plato, nor all the Philosophy of Aristotle could ever
arrive.

This answer so moved the Censor, and all the sacred College of the Learned,
that with threatening looks they said, how the reasons alleged by the Great
Duchy of Moscouy, were open blasphemies; and it seemed the Learned were ready
to make good their words with deeds, when the greater part of the mightiest
Monarchies were seen to betake themselves to their weapons, for defense of the
Moscouite; who growing more audacious upon the forward assistance of so many
Potentates, boldly said, If any one would deny, that Learning did not infinitely
disturb the quiet, and good government of States; and that a prince might not
with more facility rule a Million of ignorants, then an hundredth learned, that
were made to command, and not to obey, he lied in his throat. The Virtuous upon
this daring defiance grew extremely incensed, and stoutly replied, That the
Moscouite had spoken with an insolence, worthy of an ignorant, and how they
could also prove unto him, that men without learning were Asses and Calves with
two legs.

Now were they almost ready to go together by the ears, when the Censor cried
out, Forbear, and carry due respect to this place, where we are assembled to
amend disorders, and not to commit scandals; whereupon such was the reverence
every one bare to the Majesty of the Censor, that both the Princes, and the
Learned, although they were transported with anger and disdain, became
suddenly pacified.

All being quiet, then the Censor said unto the famous Venetian Liberty, which
next was drawn out of the Vrne, That the hardest matter to be found in an
Aristocracie, as she well knew, was to restrain the young Nobility, who with
their licentiousness distasting the better sort of Citizens, had many times
occasioned the ruin of most famous Commonweals; And that he to his great
grief had heard, how the young Nobility of Venice with their proud demeanor
had offended many honorable Citizens of that State; who exceedingly
complained, that whilst the insolency of the Nobility increased, the
chastisements for it decreased; And that therefore heremembred her, that it was
a dangerous point in an Aristocracie, when those which were to glory for that
they were far from those dangers, whereunto such are subject, as are to obey
the humor of a Prince, be heard to complain, that they are oppressed by many
Tyrants. Hereunto the Venetian Liberty answered, That the disorder recounted
by the Censor was true, and withal dangerous; but that the authority of
commanding, was so annexed to pride and insolency, that they seemed to be
borne both at one birth: And that the licenciousnesse, which the Nobility of
all Aristocracies uses toward the Citizens, was by all the greatest men, that
have discoursed of Commonweals, reputed a desperate cure; for although it was
most necessary, that insolences should be restrained with severe pains, yet
on the other side, an Aristocracie was to abstain as much as possibly might be
from public punishments of Noblemen, albeit seditious; to the end that their
shameful suffering might not be an occasion to disinherit the whole Nobility
it self of that respect which is due to them from the people; for having the
government of the State in their hands, the interest of the public
conservation thereof requires, that they be held in highest reputation: And
although in her Venice, disobedient and insolent Noblemen were not seen to be
so often punished, between the two pillars in the Piazza of Saint Mark, as it
seems many desired, yet by the great Council the Pregadi, the College, and
other supremer Magistrates, that dispense the public Charges, those seditious
Noblemen, which were discovered to carry a tyrannical mind, were cruelly
afflicted with the torment of shameful repulses: And that many subjects of
most Noble Houses are seen in Venice, whose ancient reputation for their
demerits was maimed by Arquebuses charged with bullets of paper; and that being
stricken down with such kind of shot, they could never rise since to honors
and dignities; things wherein consists the life of the Noblemen of an
Aristocracie: And that to excruciate a body, a greater torture could not be
devised, no not by Perillus himself, then that which once a Nobleman of Venice
experienced, when in a concurrence of the Honourablest charges, he saw one
younger then himself pass before him, only because he was known to the
Senate to be more deserving. Castiglione did not only admit the justification
of the Venetian Liberty, but also did infinitely commend the circumspection
and severity which she used in punishing her Nobility, upon occasion of any
demerit or defect.

Then the Censor said unto the Duchy of Sauoy, That his State being seated in
the Confines of France and Italy, he was necessited with all carfulness to
maintain himself neutrall between those Princes, with whom he confined; but
in those last rumors of France, by discovering himself openly to be wholly
Spanish he had put, not only his own, but the States of all the Princes of
Italy in great trouble: And that whilst with the bellows of his forces he
blew the fire of the French vprores, kindled by the Spaniards ambition, he
ought to believe, that that flame was to burn up friends and kindred, before
ever it could get to the other Italian Potentates that were enemies. The Duchy
of Sauoy answered the Censor very readily, That the adherence of his last Duke
to the Spaniards, was true, but the fair occasion he had of three seuens in
his hand, even forced him to set up his rest, hoping to encounter the most
famous Primiera, that ever any other Prince whatsoever had at Cards; to which
venture he was the rather carried, because he was assured he could loose but
that money, which at that game he had won before: That afterward, though by
his ill luck the fourth Card, which was dealt him, proved to be a Coat of
affront, wherewith he had made the worst her, that could be encountered on the
whole pack of Cards, nevertheless he knew, that the brauest minds would
confess, that albeit the resolution was very dangerous, yet not to wrong the
Cards, they would have played no otherwise themselves. The Censor apprehending
the Metaphor, very much commended the Magnanimous resolution of that Duke; who,
for that he might from a small fever have received in gift the Empire of the
greater part of the world, not only without any note of imprudence, but to his
infinite glory, at such time as so resolutely he cast the Dye of all the
greatness of his fortune upon the Table of Chance, he might well speak those
famous words anew, Or Caes^r, or nothing.

Then the Censer turned him to the Noble great Duchy of Toscan, and sharply
reprehending him, for going with his Galleyes as it were provoking of Waspes,
he recorded unto him, the misery and calamities which the Knights of Saint
John suffered at Rhodes, at Tripoli, and the great danger, that lastly they
ran at Malta, only because they would imprudently have tied squibbes to the
Bulls tail; And that euerywise Christian Prince ought rather to favor the
present carelessness of the Turks, then to waken them with injuries of little
profit; nay, such as brought others much damage, and necessite them to apply
their minds anew unto maritime affairs, which in these times they had even
abandoned: Also he remembered him, how infinite people daily complained, for
that, by his hindering Italy of the trade of the commodities of the L^vant, all
drugges that came from beyond the Seas, were grown to an excessive rate. To
this correction the great Duchy of Toscan answered, That the power of a Prince
could not be termed perfect, which with a number of armed Vessels had not some
Dominion on the Sea: And that his Galleyes were not only very necessary for
the Toscan greatness, but also for the security of the Liberty of all Italy,
as serving for a School of Mariners, for a Seminary of Captains and Soldiers
at Sea: That he confessed the damage, which they did to the Trade of
Merchandise, but withal, he desired it might be considered, that the mystery
of War, either by Land or by Sea, could not be learned by Soldiers, nor
exercised by Princes without prejudice to others: And that Toscan breeding much
filthiness of fantastical unquiet brains, and extrauagant humors, he had
therefore great occasion for those Galleys, that might serve, as it were, to
carry forth all the filth of his State, and thereby keep it clean, employing
such only for Gally-slaues in them, as had done evil before, and that in
regard of their unquiet nature, were like to do worse after.

This excuse of the Great Duchy of Toscan was approved both by the Censor,
and all the sacred College. Whereupon the Count said unto the Liberty of
Geneua, who was last drawn out of the Vrne, That the excessive use of
Exchanges, which she permitted unto her Nobility, caused that great disorder
of enriching the private, and withal of impouerishing the public, whose
revenues would have risen to huge sums of Gold, if the real riches of her
Nobility had been employed in a just Trade of Merchandise.

The Genouese Liberty with a readiness, that gave a particular gust to all
the Learned, answered, How it was true, that Exchanges do work that effect,
which the Censer had mentioned, and therefore were most pernicious in any
Monarchy whatsoever; howbeit that notwithstanding they might be permitted in a
well-ordered Commonwealth, without any prejudice of the public interests;
because the richest and securest Treasures of a free State, are the riches of
the Nobility, and Citizens together; a matter which falls not out in a
Monarchy, where between the commings in of the Prince; and the means of
private men, there runs a long wall of eight Stories high built by Mine and
Thine: Further, that in a Monarchy the mutation of the State commonly follows
with little or no prejudice to the people, only changing the name of Matthew,
to that of Martin; but in the subuersions of Commonweals, where liberty is
changed into servitude, there the proper substance of private men, is the
public treasure; for then will they profusely spend all that ever they have,
for to defend their own liberty even to the last gasp.

CHAP. 9.
The Monarchy of Spain inuiteth the Cardinal of Toledo, to be her
Theologian, which he refuses, and why.
THe report goes in this Court, that the Mighty Monarchy of Spain, by her
chief Secretary inuiteth the worthy Cardinal of Toledo, with allowance of a
large pension, to assist as her Theologian in the Royal Council of State, to
the end that nothing should be determined there, which might be against his
conscience: This matter filled the whole Court with marvel, in regard every
one knew how little that Prelate in the rebenediction of the most Christian
King Henry the 4. favored the affairs of his Prince; for which cause no man
could imagine the occasion, wherefore so wise a Queen in a business of such
weight, should use the service of so diffident a subject. Those which make
profession best to understand the manner of proceeding of the advised Spanish
Nation, even in this resolution acknowledged the inueterate prudence of the
Kings of Spain, whose proper custom it is never to be at quiet, until that
with pensions, with honorable charges, with all kind of loving
demonstrations, and humane devices, they have drawn unto their party all such
great subjects, as they see to be alienated from their Interest, and from whom
they know, that one day yet they may receive services. The chiefest Confidents
of so great a Cardinal, deliver, that his Lordship very gladly accepted the
noble Charge propounded unto him; howbeit with this condition, (which by the
Spaniards was presently rejected) that whenever with the authority of the
Sacred Scriptures, with the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, with the ordinances
of the Canons, he should make the Royal Council capable, how the resolutions
made in it, were disagreeing from the Laws of God, and men; he alone then
would have power to hinder the execution of them; and all to the end, the world
might know, That the Royal Theologian in that Council was only to help the
conscience of his King with the will of God, not to serve for a mask to
establish the Dominion of Kingdoms over men; for it seemed too shameful a
matter unto him, that such a one as he should be employed to authorize the
diabolical impiety of the modern reason of State, and to make most stinking
Assa fetida appear unto simple people very excellent Musk.

CHAP. 10.
The Spaniards attempt the acquisition of Sauoy, but do not prevail.
SEeing that for to draw the French nail out of the table of Milan, where it
was fixed, the ill-aduised Italian Princes had made use of the Spanish pickaxe,
which entered in such manner into the very table it self, that it was never
possible since to draw it forth with any kind of pincers whatsoever, all the
Potentates of Europe, and especially the Italian Princes, which perceived, that
the Spaniards after the servitude of the Milanesi, openly aspired to the
absolute Dominion of all Italy, to the end they might secure that remainder of
liberty, which is yet resting in her, agreed amongst themselves, that every
five and twentieth year, the Chain which the Spaniards have forged for the
Italian servitude, should with exact diligence be measured by persons thereunto
deputed. And coming (a few days since) accordingly to measure it, the Italian
Princes to their infinite amazement found, that so odious a Chain was
increased with five most prejudicial links; presently whereupon the Political
Smiths were called, who very carefully made an assay of the iron added to the
Chain, and they found that the first link was forged at Piombino, the other
at Finale, the third at Correggio, the fourth at Porto Lungone, and the last at
M^naco. Greatly did the Princes marvel at the strangeness of this accident,
and many of them were ashamed, that through their careless simplicity the
Spaniards had increased the Chain of the Italian servitude, much more in
peace, than they could have done in war with four Armies. With these strange
exorbitances, the Italian Princes were so incensed against the Spaniards, that
they told them freely, how if they did not contain themselves within the
bounds of honesty, and modesty; if the Italian files would not suffice to
reduce that miserable Chain to his due measure, they would make use of the
French; and if with them neither they could obtain their intent, they would
procure enough from England, and Germany; yea, and in case of desperation they
would not stick to furnish themselves with those excellent damasked ones, that
are made in Turkey. Whilst the Italian Princes were in this contestation,
there arrived a Post, which in all haste had been dispatched out of Italy
unto them with this certain advertisement, That the Spaniards were forging
another link in Sauoy, to be added unto the Chain of their servitude: in
regard of which news, the renowned Venetian Liberty instantly opened her
famous Arsenall, and all the Princes of Italy ran to arm themselves; the
warlike French Monarchy commanded her Nobility to horse, all Germany put
themselves in order to pass the mountains, and the numerous Fleets of the
English, and Hollanders, set sail toward the Straits of Gibraltar; when just
in the nick, even as all the World was in Arms, a new Post arrived, who
pacified the minds of men with this intelligence, That indeed it was true, how
the Spaniards had labored with all possible industry to forge that most
important Link of Sauoy, but that they had sweat in vain, because in the
soldering, it broke.

CHAP. 11.
The Duke d'Alva being arrived at Parnassus, in complementing with Prospero
Colonna, they fall foul about defrauding the Colones^ of their Titles.
DOn Hernando de Toledo Duke d'Alva, a few days since, arrived at Parnassus,
and by express order from Apollo, a diligent examination of his actions being
made by the military men, he was found worthy to be admitted into Parnassus
amongst those famous Captains, which without effusion of blood, knew how to
vanquish an enemy, more by patience, and art, than by open force, or valor;
that durst hazard the fortune of Kingdoms upon the doubtful chance of a
Battle. But because Lodouic^ Guicciardino, an understanding Writer of the
affairs of Flanders, had preferred a Complaint, how that for certain matters
not very pleasing, which he had written of the Duke, he had been ill
entreated by him, therefore he stayed a long time to clear himself of such an
imputation; for there was an Edict of Apollo very rigorously observed in
Parnassus, whereby that Prince, or private man, was declared to be infamous,
which durst offer any wrong to any Historian, or other Writer, for things
written by him not very honorable, but yet true: Howbeit, of such power were
the Dukes friends, that Guicciardino was contented to revoke his complaint,
whereupon with all the greatest solemnity he was admitted into Parnassus, and
had a place in his Majesty's Company of men at Arms, which was commanded by
that famous Quintus Fabius Maximus; who for the excellency of his well-aduised
wariness, was surnamed Cunctator. And it happened, that amongst the other
Princes, and Captains, which the said Duke visited, one was the most excellent
Lord Prospero Colonna, by whom he was received with all kind of honor; and so
much the more, because he understood that the Duke made a public profession
of being the disciple, follower* and imitator of his slow, but sure way of
making war. Howbeit, a strange and troublesome accident fell out in this
visitation; for at the first meeting, the Duke having given the Lord Prospero
the Title of your Honor, he was so incensed with disdain, that taking
himself to be highly wronged by so vile a title, with an angry voice he said;
Duke, I had thought thou were come hither, to honor one that is greater than
thy self, not to undervalue him; but because it is the fashion of the Colonesi
to answer the injuries of words with deeds, go out of this house, and in the
street (with my sword in mine hand) I will prove unto thee, that all those,
which use such base terms to men of my rank, deserve not to be admitted into
the company of honorable persons. The Duke remained much astonished to see
that great Captain take the matter so hainously at his hands; and going to
withstand the Lord Prospero, who offered to thrust him out of the chamber, they
fell to grapple one with another: And because the Spaniards, which were in
company with the Duke, seeing him in such terms with Colonna, entered into the
chamber to assist him, the Italians which belonged unto the Lord Prospero did
the like; whereupon in regard of the number of persons in so strait a place,
there ensued a cruel fray; the noise whereof coming into the street, was the
cause that the news of so dangerous an accident was suddenly carried to
Apollo; who in all haste dispatched thither the Regent of the Vicaria with the
guard of Archers, who freed the Duke out of the Lord Prosperoes hands: and the
uproar being quieted, he commanded the Spaniards, that had been very ill
handled, to return home to their houses; Thereupon the Lord Prospero, to
prevent any sinister information that might have been given against him,
presented himself before Apollo, unto whom (the same goes) with a troubled
countenance he used these words: Sir, it is well known, that men of the
family of Colonna, of the quality I am of, have always inioyed the title of
Excellency, Antequam Abraham fieret, and ere the Spaniards were in rerum
natura; wherefore for that Nation to abuse a man of my rank, as the Duke
d'Alva did me but now, is most insupportable; for if the vileness of him that
offended, does infinitely aggrauate the injury with him that is offended, how
is it possible, that an Italian Baron of my quality, should contain himself
within the bounds of modesty, seeing himself undervalued by that Nation,
whose miseries, not above four days ago to speak of, so moved the whole
World to compassion, that thorowout all Churches they were recommended to the
charity of well-disposed Christians, of whom alms were gathered, to free them
from the miserable servitude, wherein they were so grievously oppressed by the
Moors of Granada. The Spaniards enjoy the dominion of the greater part of
Italy; where, by such as I am, notwithstanding that daily they threaten it with
a cruel, and universal servitude, they are loved, honored, and even served.
With their prodigious avarice they have deprived us of our wealth; and in that
lamentable sack of Rome with their inexpressible lust they violated the honor
of our chastest Matrons. And now, in exchange of so abject a patience, they
would also take from us this little honor of breath we enjoy, and these
miserable Titles, the unhappy remains, and deplorable relics of the Italian
reputation: Which is a matter so hard to be digested, that by every honorable
Italian Baron it ought to be revenged, not with complaining words, as I do,
but with daggers points.

It is reported by them that were then present, how all the while the Lord
Prospero was speaking, Apollo did nothing but smile, and that when upon his
conclusion he burst out into those words, how the Spaniards abuses toward the
Italians were to be revenged with daggers points, he fell to laughing
outright, and said, Prospero, thou art, and ever were too much given over to
choler: and I am enforced to tell thee, how it infinitely mislikes me, that
such a one as thou, who have always made a particular profession of prudence,
should marvel, that slaves, which for twenty years together have been fed
in the Galleys with course and moldy Biske^, when they light upon a batch of
new white Mancher, should fill their bellies till they are ready to crack
again: Whereas that raging appetite of theirs, and every other dishonest act,
which they use, to assuage their hunger, ought to be so far from seeming
odious unto honest men which behold it, that it should rather move them to
pity. Therefore do ye Italians likewise permit, that the Spaniards, men but
new in this World, and lately got out of the servitude of the Moors of
Granada, may glut themselves with meat so delicate to their taste, as are the
honorable Titles, which they have found in Italy* for I assure thee, that when
they shall be cloyed with such vanities they also will become, as the French
are, such courteous Gallanes, that they will willingly give the Title of
Excellency even to their horse-boyes, much more to such as thou art. And I tell
thee, that if thou had that prudence, and that perfect knowledge of the
World, as I wish thou had, thou would very well perceive, that those
exorbitances, and that so odious manner of proceeding, which the Spaniards use
in Italy, whereof thou so complainest, is even as so much sweet sugar for you
Italians, and bitter poison for the Spaniards; who if to their valor to their
aduisednesse, and unspeakable ambition which they have to reign, they had
affable and courteous manners annexed, with the utter destruction of that
remnant of Liberty, which is yet out of the Lions jaws, they would soon
become absolute Masters of the World. All which are in^olencies, that with
daggers points, not by you Italians, but by the Monarchy of Spain herself,
ought to be revenged with all kind of cruelty on her Spanish ministers, who
with their vanity distaste the good servants of so great a Queen, and make
her government nothing acceptable to her subjects: A disorder that bringing
much difficulty to the substance of that universal Monarchy, whereunto it is
not possible she can arrive with the public hatred of all Italy, has high
need of remedy.

With this answer Apollo returned the Lord Prospero exceeding well satisfied to
his house, after whom the Duke d'Alva appeared before his Majesty with all his
family wonderful melancholy, which cast such milk in their faces, that the
Spaniards seemed not so black, as ordinarily those Moors that come out of
Granada use to be. Then Apollo interrupting the complaint which the Duke was
about to make against the Lord Colonna, said; Duke, I am much displeased with
the disorder, which I understand has h^pned, and so much the more, by how much
the cause of such an uproar is not very just, nor withal very honorable on
thy side: And upon this occasion it pleases me to remember unto you Spaniards,
that to be not only niggards, as to all men ye are known, but not to use
prodiga^itie in giving unto others those Titles, which are desired, is a
manifest sign of malignitie, because the ingenuous nobility of a Baron is
known, by showing little covetousness in receiving Titles, and much
liberality in giving them: For even by overmuch, not by due honor, does
greater reputation accrue to him that gives, than to him that receives it.
And you Spaniards that use such austeritie in desiring great Titles only for
your selves, are not a whit increased in reputation, but rather are become so
odious and ridiculous to all men, that the Italians in their Comedies, have
deservedly introduced the personage of the Spaniard to represent unto the world
a perfect Braggado^hia, I wonder ye should not perceive, that in thinking to
arrive unto the Dominion of the earth by abusing m^n, is the wrong way to the
wood; The minds of men (Duke) are taken with the bait of humanity, with the
whistle of gratitude, of courtesy, of gentleness; and that Fowler would show
himself very ignorant, that should go with a drum into a Doue-house for to
take Pigeons, as I see you Spaniards foolishly do. Moreover, I tell you, that
if ever any Nation were to make a bait of dignities, for to allure the Italians
to fall into the nets of your Dominions, and light upon the Limebush of your
servitude, it is you Spaniards, for the ends which ye have upon Italy: Withal
ye are to consider, that the States, which ye possess, of Napl^s, and Milan,
are fastened unto you with wax; for ye shall command over those two members no
longer, then til the Italians resolve to chase you from thence; who if they
could be assured, that after your ruin, they should not fall into the power of
the French, ye should quickly know, that only with a little disturbance, which
they could give you in the Port of Genoua, they would put you into a thousand
intricate difficulties: all matters that should admonish you to give
satisfaction, at least wise in words, to them, whom in regard of your interests
in Italy, ye are obliged to respect. As for the injury, which you say you
have received from the Lord Prospero, I tell you plainly, that whatsoever
affront shall be done you upon any such like Titular occasion, I will not only
be insensible of it, but I will think you have desirously sought it. Then the
Duke would have excused himself with saying, that from his King he had
instruction how to carry himself toward the Italian Barons in the particular
of Titles, when Apollo told him, that the Spanish abuses to the Italians were
not to extend but only to the Neapolitans, and Milanesi; and his Majesty also
added, That if too much passion did not blind the Spaniards, they might easily
see, how their Grandes, whom Spain it self could not contain, and that in
Italy, would play the Giants, compared with the Roman Barons; and those of
mean stature would prove but dwarffs. Hereupon a cloud* as white as snow,
beginning by little and little to cover the person of Apollo, the Priests that
were about him perceived how his Majesty would prophecy; so that every one
falling prostrate on the ground, and with the rest, the Duke and his followers;
out of that hollow cloud proceeded the divine voice of his Majesty, which with
a pleasing sound spoke in this sort: I foretell unto you Spaniards, that with
your rough and odious manner of proceeding, ye will one day compel the
Italian Nobility, which is the Mistress of the cruel Sicilian Vespres, to plot
some bloody Neapolitan Euensong against you; it being the proper custom of the
Italians, with greater rage to revenge the abuses of words, than the offenses
of blows; as they that having short patience, and long hands, are borne not
only with an heart most inclined to great resolutions, but that do not use to
revenge injuries with all kind of cruelty, before they are quite forgotten by
those that did them. And with your own ruin, you will then find them, with
swords in their hands, to be Paladine Orlandoes, when ye shall persuade your
selves they are become most suffering Asses.

The Post of Parnassus to the READER.
THese Papers coming by chance into my hands, I perceived there was something
in them that I could not perceive; wherefore I thought best to communicate them
with better understandings; for my part I could see no hurt in them, but did
imagine by that little good which I saw, there was much more that I could not
see, and therefore judged them fit for all men's eyes. Yet finding the names of
Spain and Austria, or Austria and Spain, (pardon me, politic Reader, for I
am not certain which should have prioritie; and I know in such Catholic
points, a little error is deadly) so often inserted, I durst not be too bold
with sacred things. For I well saw those two names jointly considered, are now
grown of such estimation, as all Nations and Kings bend their knees, and doff
their bonnets at the naming of them, more superstitiously for destroying, tha^
reverently at the Name of Jesus for saving. Therefore I could not resolve,
whether it were treason or sacrilege, or I wot not what greater sin, to touch
sacred things profanely with common and unwashed hands; especially when I saw
all such as had done the like, or less then thus, made miserable examples of
disobedience, as if they had offended Adam himself, or a house miraculously
raised up by God, or rather originally created in nature, to rule over all the
world in Adams stead; and that to be the son of a King, could not protect an
offender in this kind from punishment, yea, from being cast out of his
paradise. O (thought I) when I saw this, how worthy is he, that does thus to be
counted only the Catholic King: for he is a King of Kings indeed, fit to be
the executioner of his Holiness divine Decrees, and to consume all with
Lightning, where the sacred fulminations went before. Tremble all Princes, and
look to your Crowns; especially you petty ones in Germany, that are but
fatted to be swallowed one after another, as his stomach can digest, or your
turn comes to be served up. You see it is safer being his servant, than the
son of any Potentate besides. Therefore strive for place and preferment
there, and help with all the speed ye may, to betray one another to ruin.
Your that are Protestants or Lutherans, it is no matter for Religion; hold some
the stirrup, and let others lift Spain into the saddle, to ride one another
like Poste-horses by turns. You see how honorably he deals with that Prince,
whose peaceable patents made him easy entrance; and how favorably with the
Palatinate, whom he rides in blood, and spur-galls on both sides, whilst you
stand laughing on, and see not that your day is coming.

Thus I thought, and thought withal to be silent, and to keep these papers
from flying abroad, for fear of having my own wings clipped. But when I saw in
defect of greater, God had raised up petty Princes to defend the Faith, and put
that spirit into the Prince of Orange, the Count Mansfelt, and the Duke of
Brunswicke, which he had taken from Saxony and Bavaria, and others, it made me
resume courage, beholding the immediate hand of God in this work, and to
think, surely God will have all the glory to himself, that he imployes such
instruments, whose estates, in comparison, are but drops to the Spanish Ocean:
I will not therefore be guilty of so much cowardice, as to reserve my self,
where these men fight, and seem prodigal of their own lives; or at least,
not of so much dishonestie, as to conceal what God has sent into my hands,
perhaps to publish for the general information and benefit of all
Christendom. Go out therefore, and prosper in Gods name.

THE NEW-FOVND POLITCKE.
THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. 1.
After an exquisite Examination and trial made of those Wits, which ought to
have the charge of Provincial Governments, a rank of Governors are published
in Parnassus, and wholesome auisoes for all Governors, Judges, and
Under-officers of State.
AFter a long time spent in expectation, yesterday, finally to the satisfaction
of all men, the Distribution of this States government was published. It is not
possible to believe the diligence and exquisite circumspections, which were
taken by his Majesty and his Ministers in the choice of those being exact and
worthy of so great a business. For first, they took into their consideration
to make choice of ancient men, experimented in State affairs, only to the
end, that Colts should not be put to be tamed by knauish house breakers; and it
is worth the observation, that in so great a number of concurrents for places,
they had elected persons of a slow Genius, of cold constitutions, and in their
actions perplexed, irresolute, and addicted to drowsinesse, even almost to
disability: and on the contrary, that they had excluded those which for the
quickness and viuacity of their wits, appeared to be far fitter, and more
worthy of employments than others. And it is thought the reason was, because
that wise men, which are promoted to businesses of examinations and trialls of
wits do firmly believe, that those wits which are over lively, nimble, and
fiery, prove very unapt to rule others, having great need themselves of a
curbing-bit, and a head-straine to save them from falling down headlong into
ditches; it being also manifest by long experience, that these by their fool
hardy, and ouer-resolute spirits, do sooner disquiet people than become good
instruments to maintain them in that sweet peace and correspondent
satisfaction, which indeed ought to be the principll care of all those which
should be admitted to manage the affairs of provincial Governments. And it
is apparent to all men, how those Princes Electors hold it for an irrefragable
maxim, that, He makes a happier progress with very good success, who being
of a slower genius, of a soft spirit, knows best to accommdate his passions to
stand as still as a Sign at a Tavern; because the world, which requires good
government, turns quickly seditious and imbroyled with the fantastical
Chymeraes of certain hotspurres, which in all their affairs by seeking to
become ouerwise in their own conceit, they do in stead of quenching and
appeasing troubles and combustions, kindle them the more by unseasonable
remedies. Intempestiuis remediis delicta accendunt.

Fifteen days since, by a most rigorous Trial, which was made for so great a
business, not the ignorant (as many thought) but those capricious Proiectours
were excluded, whose pates being full of or others and new inventions, are
enemies to those ancient customs and ingenuous orders, whereto people have
been enured as another nature, yet these subtle heads would better them with
modern and new laws. It Is true, they greatly labored to find out pliable
subjects of a mild and flexible disposition, which knew to apply their own
nature to another bodies nature conformable, as wives ought to be to their
husbands. Nor did they admit at any hand an Officer, which had not studied for
the space of four years continually, that most important point of Philosophy,
to live as not to live: The very Basis and groundwork, whereon the quietness
of people securely consisted, and the safety also of that good government,
which might be hoped at the hands of an honest wise Governor, in whom they did
not so much regard his insight and knowledge in the Laws and Statutes, as that
he should be well seen in that prudent mystery, in that mild manner of
proceeding, and in that dexterity of understanding, as is not as yet found
registered in Books. A consideration so necessary, that some great Lawyers,
which have had the charge of Provinces, lighted upon most simple success, as
that lantern of the Laws Bartolus can bear testimony, who was forced to
leap out of a window at the Palace of Todi, for all his rare judgment and
skill in the Laws because he would not be taken and torn in pieces by some
that could no longer brook the impertinent curiosities of one that was so wise
of his tongue, and so imprudent in his brain. Likewise this is certain, that
they rejected, even with the bastinado, those great Beasts, which with open
ostentation, to Peacocke-wise used to look big with austere and terrible
countena^^ce, taking delight to threaten his Majesty's Subjects, made by the
Creator of the same mould as themselves, more like tyrants, than civil
Judges, which many of them counterfeit for some other sinister respect, and
above all things they had a care to exclude those tyrannical Butchers, who
Busyris like, being bent to shed humane blood, would make men believe, that
they went about to set the crooked World right again with Pillories, with
Gibbets,, or at least with stupendous ^ines and mulcts worse than a
Thunderbolt, such as were never imposed in more ancient times. Above measure
they loved those Judges which took more care to hinder misdemeanors, than to
punish them, and which never subscribe to the sentence of Death, the Greek
letter TH, without the Ink of Tears.

The next day after, all the Presidents and Judges appeared before Apollo, who
caused Salust Crispus, chief Notary of the Collaterals, to minister the oath
unto them, which was, That they should faithfully leave the world as they found
it, and not alter any of the ancient Privileges.

After the Oath thus ministered, the said Salust took aside the Governor of
Libethrum, a Favorite of his, and gave him these admonitions. First, to begin
his Government with a kind of carelessness, and to continue it with diligence
by degrees, entering in as a Lamb, and playing the Lion toward the end, but
always generously inclined, remembering that Principle of Cornelius Tacitus,
Acribus initiis incurioso fi^e.

Secondly, that in all causes between the Common people he should do most
exact Justice without exception of persons: but in suits arising among the
Nobler sort he should mingle with the rigor of Justice the dexterity of a
wary judgment, remembering always, that the accusations of great persons were
so odious to Princes that they laid upon Officers Gowns an aspersion, like the
tainting spots of corrupted Oil which could never be washed away with the
purest soap of innocence. Therefore among those great spirited men, a Judge had
need with the sword of Justice, to employ like a wise Fencer, the target of a
nimble wit and a cautelous care, that neither of the one side nor of the other,
he be exclaimed upon for any distasteful order. For Princes having cause to use
their help for counsel, force, or purses, they desire to hold them well
satisfied. And therefore in controversies falling out among them, a Judge had
need to learn some easy way to draw out rotten teeth, and with the hand of
dexterity to fill up the place with the finest Cotton wool.

Thirdly, a Judge must enforce himself to know all things, but not to execute
al which he knows. Omnia scire non omnia exequi. For to attempt needless and
brabling matters, were to go about to set straight the leg of a Dog, or to
lose his brain in the Alchymie of Fools. And in this corrupt Age it is good
counsel for an Officer to tolerate in people some stale disorder, then with any
ill satisfaction to the generality to torment himself to seek to bring in
that, which he cannot execute without commotions and heart-burnings.

Fourthly, that with other Judges and officers subject to the same Prince, he
should not contend nor contest for matter of pre-eminence or right, nor look
to be his own Caruer, or to right himself in his Court by using any strict
course with inferior officers for matters of prerogative of Courts, but either
to acquaint the Prince himself, or to wink at the affront, if another Court
seems to justify the subject, or else to take in hand the weapons of a gowned
man, the pen. But if the Judges authority stretch to the Confines of another
Prince, he must not seek differences, nor avoid them. But if they proceed
from Soldiers or Pirates, he must defend his Borders and Jurisdiction with
Arms. Yet so, that toward all princes subjects in league and amity with his
Prince, he behave himself as temperately regardfull, as zealously affected to
his own Princes honor.

Fifthly, that in some occasions he prefer the public peace of his
government before that strictness of Justice, which is mentioned in Books.

Sixthly, that for any impertinent thing, which he sees or hears, which be not
extraordinarily altered in mind or countenance; and that if he cannot do this,
yet that he refrain himself from speaking of it, and in any case to beware
that he deliberate not, nor study for revenge or reformation in heat or anger,
but in cold blood after a long times delay.

Seventhly, that in supreme and weighty matters he take heed of making any
show of undaunted, of a fiery, and resolved mind, but rather that he content
himself to hunt Waspes and Hornets out of their holes, with the hand of the
Prince armed with the gauntlet of a higher authority; for although an Officer
finds that he has ability and power enough to execute a greater enterprise,
yet for fear of emulation in Court, or some casual block in his way, which
the wisest man could not foresee, oftentimes it is not expedient to put in
execution all that which his authority might warrant him.

Eighthly, that he deal in all ordinary matters concerning ordinary men,
entering into strict friendship with no man residing within the precincts of his
command, but to beware of that wresting and wiredrawing occasions, which might
reach unto the hatred and hindrance of another, and to avoid domestical
familiarity, which causes contempt. Only let him use that decent gravity
which may procure respect and an awful love. But in any case, that he shun
the conversation of base and riotous persons, and that he keep company for the
most with men of his own rank, yet so, that he make not any man so endeared
and so bosom a friend unto him, who might afterward by prying into his
dealings, and diuing into his secrets, turn to be his capital enemy. For
sometimes contemptible persons, not suspected for craft, may in the twinkling
of an eye, of low and earth creeping mushromes, become tall Cedars at least in
their own ouerwe^ning conceit.

Ninthly, that he force his noble nature to endure the stinking pride of
Lawyers, although most odious to God and all good men, and to bear with their
impertinent discourses, and wrangling bawling, who take upon them to become
Lambs at home and Lions abroad, only to maintain the glory and reputation of
the Bench, but commonly it is to fill their own purses with the ruins and
spoils of honester men than themselves. Wherein I wish him to remember that
golden saying of Tacitus, that it is a most profitable, as also most pithy in
the choice and free will of Good and Evil things to consider, what thou thy
self would or would not endure under another Governor or Judges power,
Vtilissimus idem, ac^^r^uissimus bonarum malarumque rerum delectus, cogitare,
quid volueris sub alio Principe, aut nolueris.

Tenth, that he take heed with great circumspection he fall not into the other
extremity in seeking to avoid the defect of his predecessor, as a certain
Prince very heedlesly did, who perceiving that wise men found fault with the
late Prince for too much lenity, turned an odious Tyrant. The golden Mean is
ever best.

Eleventh, that with extraordinary severity he take more care to bridle the
disorders of his own house, then the seditions of the common people; for the
immodest and uncivil carriage of a Magistrates domesticke gentlemen, whom some
call Countrey-Courtiers, is a far greater blemish and scandal to their
Master, then the brutish insolence of rude Clownes and ill-bred Swains.

Twelth, that he hate, as the horror of Hell, all kind of fore-stalling and
engrossing of commodities, and that he account as the Capital enemy of his
reputation such detestable gains. But specially, that devilish gain, which is
in these days much practiced, and one of the chief causes of our Creators
anger toward many States, by the sale of Offices. A most perilous Charybdis,
a rock so dangerous in the Sea of worldly business, that Justice being fled
back into Heaven, these petty Chapmen, who never dream of another world but
this earthly one, turn all things topsie turuy to make themselves sauers for
their dear-bought places. Whereas a noble spirit should firmly believe, that
the Merchandise of a Christian is ingenuous simplicity and plain dealing, and
being honestly called to bear office in his country, then his richest lucre
worthy of an honorable Officer is to ingulfe himself in the Trade of honor
and uprightness of Justice, which being by the trumpet of Fame blown into his
Princes ears in a short time, God inspiring the heart of the Prince, he shall
be preferred from Office to Office, until he arrive to a contented fortune
correspondent to his Heroycall worth and magnanimous mind.

Thirteenth, that perpetually he have his eyes fix^ on his vnder-Iudges hands,
and that he look as narrowly to them, as if he held a biting serpent in his
own hand, that injustice being a very dangerous member which hazards his
credit by the Devils temptations to blurre his masters honor by playing the
base Mechanicke in the sacred seat of Justice. And because no Judge receives
bribes but sinisterly by his wise, servant, or without witness, saving the
party himself, his supreme Judge or Prince ought to proclaim rewards to the
discouerers, and upon the least evidence to remove such thieves of the Deity;
seeing that Justice is one of the prime Divine Attributes.

Fourteenth, that he accommodate his Genius and Nature to the nature of his
prouincials, showing himself mild to the peaceable, and severe to the
seditious. And to take special care to weed out idle persons; if they refuse
convenient labor, which he ought to see them put unto; and if any Drones be
found with honey, to examine them from whose hiue they stole the same.

Fifteenth, that to the end his Prince may conceive well of his worth, he
acquaint not his highness with slight occurrences, nor trifling matters, which
fall out in his government. Nor yet must he refrain to certify unto him all
the most important affairs, chiefly, all proiects tending to his honor or
profit.

Sixteenth, that he believe how the penalties and punishments in the power of a
wary Judge, consists more in threats then in inflicting of them, and that he
never forget this lesson: How Officers govern men full of a thousand
imperfections, subject to infinite errors, how they are not Angels of Heaven
which cannot sin; and therefore in his government he affects more the report
of a sweet natured Judge, like his Creator, who bearing with our trespasses,
Si quoties peecant homines, toties sua fulmina mittat, and not the repute of a
tyrannizing Minister.

Seventeenth, that he frequent not Revels, Dances, or any public Feasts,
mournful spectacles, and tragical in the end to wise Officers, as
instruments, which vilify his fame, and bring his personal presence into
contempt among the vulgar, and might bring his gravity into question among his
equals.

Eighteenth, that he know how the shameful acts of the Nobles and principal
Gentlemen do wax more cruel against them, which debase themseues to commit
them, without touching or blemishing the general reputes of their honorable
families.

Ninteenth, that he held it for a thing certain, that it is better to
dissemble and wink at some common infirmities and frailties, then to show
himself earnest to punish them, it not being the resolution of a wary man to
enter into that naughty passage, out of the which he otherwise knows, that the
horse cannot draw forth his feet.

Twentieth, that he vary not in opinion with his equals in office or under
Officers, but upon extremity, knowing that his Prince had rather he should use
dexterity and nimblenesse of wit in such actions, then rigorous Justice.

Twenty one, that with a pleasing sagacity he let the world see, how he had
found all such as inhabit in his jurisdiction rather good people, then by any
rigorous proceedings of his that he made them good, because whosoever glories
and vaunts that he has hanged and punished so many malefactors during the time
of his office, he triumphs in their infamy and shame, which cannot redound to
his honor, nor to that discreet carriage, which is required in a well
foreseen Governor.

CHAP. 2.
The most Illustrious Monarchies resident at Parnassus, demand by what means
the Venetian Lady got such exact obedience and exquisite secrecy of her
Nobility, whereof she gives them couenient satisfaction.
THe Monarchies of Great Britain, Prance, Spain and Polonia, wondering that
the Venetians had gotten the start and fame for their gift of Secrecy, and
that the Spanish Monarchy could by no cunning intelligences, nor rich pensions
corrupt any of their Parliament house, called the Pregadi, never as yet to
disclose any of their privy counsel, they went with one consent to the Palace
of the Venetian Lady, earnestly importuning her to discover unto them by what
means or policy of State she had arrived to that happiness, as to obtain
such Secrecy and rare Obedience in so many mouths and hearts, which they
could scarce meet withal in one or two of their trustiest servants. To this
the Lady answered, that she had allured and won her Nobility to this virtue
of Secrecy, with rewards and hopes of promotion, and for the crime of
disobedience she scared them with punishment.

To which the aboue-named Monarchies replied, that they also wrought and used
the same means, but could never as yet obtain that wonderful effect and rare
end. Then said the Lady that happened, because in comparison of those ^ewards,
which are conferred upon well-deseruing persons in a Commonwealth rightly
ordered, the rewards of Monarchies were poor, and punishments more sparing.
Whereto the Monarchies made answer, that with them it was clean contrary, and
that the rewards of Free-States, to be paraleld with the wastfull liberality,
which great Kings extended toward their Ministers, was but beggary. For they
never heard, the Venetians had been so liberal as to recompense any of their
Senators service and fidelity with preferring them to be owners of Cities,
Towns, Castles, Lieutenantships, or Lands in Fee, as Kings have diverse times
advanced their Subjects unto: And that the greatest reward, which the Venetians
accustomed to bestow at any time upon their Senators, was to prefer them to
some Offices, which they were forced to labor hard for, and to pass many base
and inferior Offices by degrees and steps, even from their youth up, before
they could arrive to any supreme place of command or profit. Besides that, the
most part of their Offices were rather hindrances than gainful: only they
carried a color of some reputation to them that knew no better, nor saw the
glory and pomps of Monarchies.

And for punishments, without any comparisons, those were far more terrible and
cruel, which proceeded from the resolved will of a Prince incensed for some
grievous cause, than the punishments of the Venetian Senate against any of
their Senators, which ordinarily were more slow and wary, than sudden and
quick. And that there was a great difference in proportion between a Prince,
which judged his v^ssall, and a Senator which by his suffrage and voice
punished his equal, his friend, and kinsman: That the Venetians knew not but
banishment, and one kind of cruel punishment, called, Iltremendo Canal Orfano,
to sow up their Traitors in a Sack, and to drown them in their Lake, which
they seldom do but in desperate cases: Whereas in Monarchies, the Judges
sentenced some to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, some to be burnt, some to
be rackt and tortured, a thing common in Spain, practiced under pretext of
heresy toward other Princes sub^ects; and if any of their Nobility were
condemned for high Treason, they escaped not the axe, the kindest favor
England affords to offenders, saving one only example in the Chronicles, of
Queen Anne Bullen, for her greater grace and honor was beheaded with the
sword of Calice.

At these speeches the Venetian Dame smiled, and said, that in stead of those
rewards of Honor and Estates in Fee, which Monarchs bestowed upon their
well-deseruing Creatures, she also requited her best and wisest Nobles with
places of great authority and command, with most absolute power and dominion;
One with the Noble Kingdom of Creet or Candy; others with Corfu, and other
Islands subject to her State: Some she preferred to be her Viceroyes in
Dalmatia and Istria; some she appointed Governors of her neighboring
Territories on the Continent, of Nova Palma, Forum Iulij, Harca Trevisano,
Padua, Vincenza, Verona, Brescia, Bergamo, Crema on the Frontiers of Milan, and
the rest of her Nobility she reserved perhaps to their far greater
contentment in the Senate House at home in Venice, which might be termed the
Maiesticall Miracle of Cities. So that her Nobles might better be called Kings
and great Princes, than private Gentlemen or Subjects, who in all affairs of
moment, having every one a special interest, must needs be faithful to their
own selves; whereas the servants of Princes were faithful unto them not as
sons but as vassals. And the fear, which frights our Nobles of Venice from
selling the Secrets of the State, to foreign Princes arises from this
infinite disparity and disproportion, that is betwixt that which is lost with
treachery, and that which is gained with fidelity; betwixt that remorse of
conscience, which a Subject feels for betraying his Prince, and the fear
which a Senator is possessed with for proving disloyal to a Free State. There
is great difference in the love of a Freeborn Senator, and the love of a
cringing vassal, howsoever he be gilded with the bare title of a Nobleman.
What will it then boot one of our Senators to bewray the secrets of our State
to his own hindrance and perpetual dishonor? Finally, the Venetian Dame told
them, that the rewards which Princes conferred upon their Counselors and
Secretaries, occasioned oftentimes pernicious effects clean contrary to their
Masters meaning which trusted them; because those rewards so given not only
cooled them in their good service, specially at that time, when they had no
more, than they might hope for of him for their cares and pains: but the good
will of the Prince being commonly mutable, and subject to change and nouelty,
the treacherous machinations and emulations of some Courtiers being frequent
and rife, it sometimes falls out that the Ministers to assure themselves of
their places and high commands, which they purchased by their honorable
deserts, or perhaps by the help of their purses, or by other means,
suspecting a remouall from their Offices, or some disasters by their
adversaries, they prove underhand false, and to make up their market, or
perhaps to make themselves sauers; if they bought their places, they fell their
Princes secrets, and may be afterward tempted to do him a worse mischief.
But such is the ardent affection, which kindles in the hearts of all our
Venetian Nobles, that they will hazard to live with poverty, shame, and
disdain at home, than to be hired abroad by strange Princes, or to betray
their native Country by revealing any secrets which might redound to the common
hinderance: so that I may rightly liken a Nobleman of Venice to a Fish, which
being bred in that Lake in the water of liberty, knows not how to live abroad
out of Venice in the element of servitude.

CHAP. 3.
The Roman Monarchy demanding of Cornelius Tacitus the resolution of a
Political Question, receives full satisfaction of the Shepherd Meliboeus, who
casually was there present.
THE ancient Roman Monarchy ever since she was ransackt by the Goths,
Vandalls, and other Northern Barbarians, lived near this Court under color
of going a hunting continually disguised for the same purpose the other day
repaired to Cornelius Tacitus, who for his recreation had retired himself out
of Parnassus into the Country. To whom she said, that she came unto him
purposely to be resolved of one maine doubt, which troubled her mind
continually, the which she had imparted to many Politicians, but could never as
yet be satisfied by any of them, and therefore she repaired to him, as to the
prime and grand Statesman of all others. The matter which thus perplexed her
was to know why the Kingdoms of Greece, Asia, Egypt, France, Britain, Spain,
and the Commonwealth of Carthage, with many other great Provinces, before they
became united to the State of Rome, were of themselves powerfull-enough and
formidable, but being sithence subjected and united together in her proper
person, they missed with all their forces to make her strong and durable. To
this Cornelius Tacitus answered, that this was a difficult Question, and could
not suddenly be resolved, but the next day after some pause and study he would
return thither with his best resolution. The Monarchesse rested very well
satisfied, and as she was ready to license his departure, Meliboeus that
famous Shepherd recorded by the Poets, who that morning had brought to Tacitus
a present of fresh cheese and cream, and a couple of dainty cheeses, and stood
all the while attentively listening to this Question, seeing them now ready to
take their leave, he interrupted them, desiring Tacitus not to depart, for he
would instantly without any study give the Lady sufficient satisfaction. The
Lady and Tacitus laughed very heartily, and bade him not to beat his brain
about such deep matters, but to go home and look to his sheep. Meliboeus
replied very earnestly, that no Race among mortal men could better discourse
of true and solid State-businesse than Shepherds; and that Princes should be
most happy, if in governing their Subjects, they could imitate Shepherds in
charity: And so should the people be, if they could obey their Prince, as
sheep did their shepherd.

The Monarchesse and Tacitus confounded with marvel at the sudden and
extemporary words of the Shepherd, willed him freely to utter his resolution.
Whereupon Meli^oeus began in this manner: Most mighty Princess, I am (as my
Virgil well knows) his Mantuan Shepherd, and it were a great shame to these
silver hairs, which you see on my head and chin, if I were not exactly
experienced in my own occupation; I say then, that in so many years which I
have spent in governing sheep, I have gotten this knowledge, that the
greatness and power of a Shepherd does not consist (as many ambitious and
conetous men believe) in possessing of thousands of sheep, but that he be
owner of so many sheep only, as a good Shepherd can watch with his eye,
govern with his rod, and rule with his whistle. And the reason is clear, for
in too small a number of sheep we see Shepherds poor, because their great
poverty compels them with too much severity to milk their flock, and too often
to sheare them. In a moderate and mean number, where the true perfection lies,
Shepherds become always wealthy and happy; whereas in the excess and
ouer-abounding number of sheep, by reason of the difficult and hard means to
govern them, being thus from the golden rule of proportion so far remote, and
indeed beyond the power of one man, they cannot choose but incur manifest
danger. Whence it comes to pass, that the miserable sheep of his flock being
too many in number, by the covetousness and carelessness of him, that
undertakes to govern them, do pine away at first, and at last they dye of
mere necessity and want. How is it possible, but that confusion should
happen, where multitudes abound out of the Owners view and reaches: For it is
the Masters own eye, which fattens and makes his flock to thrive. Right happy
were many great Potentates and States, if our Creator had bestowed on them the
property of Camells to bow and kneel down to the ground for the receiving of
the burden of Governments, and had the discreet moderation to set meeres and
bounds unto their ambitious minds by rising and standing up (as is the manner
of those beasts) when they feel themselves reasonably well laden; and to
receive no heavier charge on their shoulders, though stronger than Atals, at
such time as they know themselves sufficiently charged with states proportioned
according to their abilities in true wisdom and prudence.

There are past now 1626. years, since I became a Shepherd in Arcadia, and
ever since my coming and being here, I have contented my self with five
hundred sheep in my flock, which have yearly yielded me five hundred
Crowns, which is more than sufficient for my own maintenance, and my
families. And this most fortunate gain is so sure unto me, that I am respected
of all men in Arcadia, and reputed for the best Shepherd in all the Country.
Yea, the wisest in Parnassus do hold me to be a happier man than Alexander the
Great, who was not ashamed to wish for more worlds to conquer. That Shepherd,
whose ambition prouokes him to keep many flocks in hope of gain is much
deceived, for where his own eye cannot ouersee, he must needs commit the
charge of them to others, commonly, to Louts, Knaves, Thieves, and Villains,
who as people borne altogether for their bellies, and other carnal and worldly
pleasures, will not only sheare but slay their Masters flocks. Besides, who
knows not whether he must sometime or other undergo a greater charge than all
his Flocks amount unto in warlike provisions and garrisons to defend them from
Pirates and wild Tartars, or from his malicious neighbors?

For example, I will instance in my neighbor Menalcas, who being my capital
enemy, and bearing great envy and emulation in seeing me prosper with my five
hundred sheep above him and others, and verily believing, that he should
supplant me, if he could enjoy more flocks than I kept, not content with the
like number of sheep as he formerly possessed equal unto me, but thinking to
make himself absolute Monarch of all other Pastors in Arcadia, he took up
money at use, and at the extremest interest, sold the greatest part of his
Patrimony, and having got together a large mass of money, sent into England,
Spain, and to strange Countries, where he understood the fairest wolled sheep
were, and with excessive cost transported them hither, and made three several
flocks of five hundred in each flock. But it fortuned so, that those sheep
being foreign, and not acquainted with the language and whistles of our
Shepherds, nor with our kind of pasture, they stragled here and there into
unknown places. Whereupon Menalcas was forced to substitute Deputy Shepherds
and many Dogs to look unto them and to fetch them in. But such was the
natural hatreed of the sheep toward the Dogs, and the implacable moodinesse
which they conceived to be continually hurried up and down, that they fell
into an inward conceit of languor and despair, and so into flat disobedience to
abhor both their Shepherds and the Dogs, insomuch that when they were to be
milkt and shorn, they hid themselves in woods and deserts. And then it was
known throughout all Arcadia* that Despair and strange usage can turn Conies
into Lions. Yea, it was sound, that at that time the Spanish sheep, which
Menalcas had brought thither, proved so rauing mad, that they attempto bite
their Shepherds. Menalcas thus perplexed for the loss and escape of so many
sheep, hired out of Spain and Swizzerland, the valiantest Dogs he could have
for money, which considering the infinite charge he sustained in conducting
them into Arcadia, and the nature of these Dogs being continually accustomed to
hunt these sheep, they came at last, what for want of their due allowance, and
what of a wanton and greedy disposition, they turned like Wolves, and preyed so
long upon these silly sheep, that the rest which were left alive pined away
with grief, rather to endure such continual hurrying and troubles under
strange Pastors and ravenous Dogs.

Poor Menalcas upon the report of this tragical event became the byword and
subject of laughter to all Arcadia for this his ambitious enterprise; and was
pointed at with the more fingers, even of very boys, when afterward he was
feign to turn a petty merchant of skins, the unlucky relics of a lamentable
charge, and the presaging tokens of his own Funerals; for indeed the man's
heart strings brake of very sorrow and melancholy, leaving his house, that
sometimes flourished among the best of us in Arcadia, now desolate and most
miserable.

CHAP. 4.
Many people having wasted their means by gluttonous feasts, prodigal fare,
and pompous apparel, for the moderating of such lavish expenses do desire a
Statute of their Princes, but they miss of their purpose.
SOme Nations subjects to certain Princes which are resident here at
Parnassus, having tried, that superfluity of belly-cheere, excess of drinking,
and the vanities of apparel and newfangled fashions, are now a days besides
the wrath of their Creator justly incurred for the breach of these vows,
which were undertaken for them at their Baptism, many men were transformed
into Swinish qualities, to their healths impair, the ruin of their estates,
and souls danger. And for their outside, they garnished themselves like
peacocks, so gay and trim, that no patrimony how rich soever, can now supply
the ambition of men, nor the vanities of women; and that they also observing in
these proud times, how this excess proceeds yet further, that all the portion
which is left unto young Gentlewomen, whom civil modesty heretofore was wont
to be their chiefest ornament, how great soever the same might be, did not now
suffice to buy them Carkanets and Jewels, and imbrodered peticotes, so that
Fathers are not able to marry them according to their rank; and to match them
with thrifty persons were almost impossible, for having known them for such
vain creatures, they will not be troubled with their company, and to let them
run headlong according to their unbridled fancies, they must either marry
with unthrifts, like themselves, or live unmarried, to the hazard of their
chastities: so that except some Law be enacted for the curbing of this excess,
they may well be said to hold the Wolf by the ears.

Upon these considerations, fearing their utter overthrow, with one consent
they presented their supplications to their Princes, who seemed very glad to
entertain their motion so much tending to the public good, and like good
Politicians knowing how profitable it is to strike the iron while it is hot,
and at that time to publish a Law, when the subjects themselves become suitors
for it, must needs fall out very luckily, and with good fruit in the effect,
they out of hand, while their subjects were in this humor of thirft, joined
together to cut off all superfluous customs in feasts and drinkings, and all
new fashions of attires, tying themselves to one fashion only, not to be
altered for many years, allowing what is decent and comely to every several
vocation.

But the Evening before this most laudable Statute was to be signed and
published, accidentally it came to the ears of the Princes, Farmers, and
Officers of the Customs and Imposts, who being likewise backed and whetted on
by the Mercers, Vintners, Grocers and other Tradesmen which lived upon the
spoil of the richer sort, they repaired in all haste to their Princes, and
very cunningly entreated to defaulke and abate a great part of those yearly
sums which they were to pay them for such Wines, Spice, Sugars, and such
other foreign commodities, as by way of Customs and Imposts, they were to
receive to their use. The Princes stood confounded in their judgment, hearing
speech of so great losses and defalkments, as they very craftily insinuated and
pretended in Foxes habits to be most true, and although most of the stuffes
were wrought in their own Countries, at least the most durable and best
befitting every Nation, yet they made their Princes believe, that there came
from Naples, from Genoa, from Millan, and from Spain, so many kinds of
stuffes, silks, gold and silver lace, which if the Statute of thrift went
current, they could not but sustain exceeding great losses in the public
Customs; whereupon the Princes sent for the Committies and Deputies of their
People, and told them what their Customers had proved before them on their
honest words, so that they could not hinder their own interest and profit,
lest they should make themselves lean in going about to fatten them. With this
answer sauouring of the Princes gain, the people departed much grieved and
afflicted, and confessed all of them, that to heal any disorders with that
medicine which might offend the public Customs and Imposts were desperate
Cure, and incurable Cankers.

CHAP. 5.
Terence the Comedian being imprisoned by Jason the Pretour of Vrbine, for
keeping a Concubine, is delivered by Apollo with very great dishonor to the
Pretour.
PVblius Terentius lived in a little house, but very well furnished, in the
Comicall quarter, with no more meni all servants about him, then Bacchis his
maid and Davus his ancient attendant. And although Bacchis in the flower of her
age, being then a very beautiful creature, had bin graced with her Masters
bed, yet now being aged, she continued in his house without scandal, and very
modestly disposed, not ministering the least cause of murmuring or dislike to
any of the neighborhood. But it happened about ten days since, that Jason
the great Lawyer being Pretour of Vrbine, to get him some repute in his new
Office, directed a Process under a penalty to Terence, commanding him in his
Majesty's name, all excuses laid aside, immediately to put Bacchis out of his
house, unless he would incur the danger of a Concubine-keeper. But Terence
did not only disobey the contents of the Mandate, but other Writs of Iasons
court. Whereupon the Pretour forbear to send any more warrants of orders and
injunctions; and yesterday without any more ado caused Terence to be
apprehended and imprisoned; but with so great displeasure to Apollo, that in an
extraordinary great chafe he publicly exclaimed, that by his officers, yea and
that in Parnassus, men more malicious then ignorant, that wicked abuse of being
quick-sighted in appearance and show, but blind in matters of substance was
lately introduced and practiced to the dishonor of his Court. Then commanding
Terence to be discharged out of prison, he caused Jason himself, for all his
famous Books of the Law to be there shut up in his stead, and also to his
greater affliction, appointed Philip Decius his Adversary, to be Pretour in his
room. Whereupon yesterday the Rod and the Standard, being the Pretorian
E^signes, were delivered to Decius, who going to Apoll^es presence his Majesty
spoke these words unto him: By the correction inflicted on Jason, learn to
know that Reverend Judges, which in the administration of Justice, do more
attend the true and real service of God, than by formal tricks and gibes to
play upon their Inferiors, they ought first to hunt out of his own house
malice and bribery, and then to chase out of other men's houses young harlots,
as Thai^, before he proceeded to expel an aged Bacchis.

CHAP. 6.
Domitius Corbulo for certain words spoken by him during the time of his
government, which sauoured of Tyranny, is called in question by the Criminal
Magistrates, but in the end to his greater glory dismissed.
BEcause the City of Pirrhus, and all that most populou^ Territory by the
mildness and over much lenity of certain Governors, became more insolent
then in former times, and full of Malefactors and perilous Factions, which
disturbed the peace of the virtuous, Apolloes Majesty, to bridle with some
exemplary punishment, the licentiousness of his seditious subjects, about two
months past sent into that government, the rigorous Domitius Corbulo, who in
few days did so demean himself, that from a seditious State, he reduced the
same to a peaceable course of living. Within a while after, it cha^ced, that
Corbulo discoursing with some of his familiar friends, enquired of them, what
conceit they had of him: they freely answered him, that the rigor and severity
which he had lately used against many of the seditious, had terrified the whole
City and Country, that all did hate him. At which answer, Corbulo rejoiced
beyond measure, and told them again: There Is no matter, Oderint dum metuant;
let them hate, so they stand in fear of me. The which words were afterward
carried by some pick-thanks to Apollo who taking in ill part the accusation,
referred the same to his Court of criminal causes. And because by an ancient
Decree published by his Majesty, it was known and declared, that whatsoever
Prince legitimate, natural, and hereditary, presumed to utter such arrogant
and rash words, he should incur this penalty, to be reputed a Tyrant, and if
any Officer should let slip, though unawares, and by chance, any such dangerous
words out of his mouth, he should be capitally punished. Corbulo was summoned
to appear upon this Information before the Judges, who according, came the
next day to answer with all humility; where the case was thoroughly canuased,
and while all men expected to hear some rigorous order to be taken with
Corbulo, by extraordinary favor the cause was removed by a Certiorari before
Apollo himself, where to all men's admiration he was pronounced clear and
guiltless, and remaunded back into his government with far greater authority
and grace then before. The sentence contained, that in a Prince which had the
Honey of Grace in his power, those words were shameful, and expressly
Tyrannical; most honorable in that Officers mouth, which had nothing in his
hands but the odious sting of Justice: that Prince being miraculous indeed,
which causes himself to be beloved and reverenced of his people, and that
Officer most sufficient which has the Genius and nature, to make himself to
be feared and obeyed.

CHAP. 7.
By the promotion of Diogenes the Cynick, unto a higher place, the honorable
chair of the Tranquillity of a private life being vacant, Apollo preferres
the famous Philosopher Crates to that charge, who refuses it.
DIogenes the Cynicke, who for so many years with much fruit to the universal
good, and his own infinite glory in particular had undergone the charge of
commending in the Chair of the public Schools Poverty, Solitariness, and
that contented quietness of mind, by whose persuasion Attalus himself the
King of Treasure became of that admirable resolution to put away his riches,
the easier to embrace the austere Sect of the Stoikes, which is much edified
now in Parnassus, about two months past he was promoted for his singular great
merits to a more sublime Dignity, even to be the Archcriticke of the sacred
Muses. Whereby the noble Cynicall place left vacant his Majesty bestowed it on
the famous Crates, who yesterday morning went to Apollo, and contrary to all
men's expectation refused to accept of this renowned Charge, freely affirming,
that by the advancement of Diogenes to that late transcendent Dignity, the
Chair of poverty and contentment of mind, being now become vilified and much
hindered, his heart would not give him to exercise that Office with that
candor, feruencie, and ingenuous simplicity of mind, as the affairs of that
place required: because the very first day, when he should settle himself to
his mild Lectures and peaceable Meditatio^s, of necessity he could not but be
swollen with some ambition, and be possessed with the like ardent desire and
glorious hope to be enstalled in the same or such another Dignity, as his
Predecessor had obtained, who had cashired and cast out of his heart, though
extraordinarily composed, that honest simplicity, which makes wise men to
reason, and like a calm wind to breath with their harmless thoughts and not
with the tongue, which oftentimes trips and delivers, like a clattering
clapper, more noises and gall, then honeyed admonitions. To this he added, that
the necessity of ambition and the violence of desire did arise and flow, not
from vice but from that honorable zeal, which also Philosophers, yea, the
most mortified of all others in Parnassus, do hold as the most earnest and
intentive spur of their Reputation. The reason is, because when they should
not receive in progress of time, the same or the like preferments at his
Majesty's hands, as he had conferred upon Diogenes, the world would judge all
that came to pass, not by their professed humility, nor because they with all
their hearts and souls preferred the private life before public Offices,
quietness before business, and poverty before riches: but because his
Majesty had not found in them those abilities, worths and deserts, which he
had known and found in Diogenes. Therefore Crates foreseeing these
inconveniences incident to this Office, his conscience would not permit him
with such a troubled mind, so subject to the violence of ambition, with any
hope of doing good to read Lectures of humility, the contempt of riches, and
the vanity of worldly greatness: it being a thing impossible to find any man
so powerfully eloquent, which shall be able to persuade others to follow that
kind of life, which the hearers know to be abhorred and misliked of the
Preacher himself.

CHAP. 8.
A Controversy happening betwixt the Governors of Pindus and Libethrum about
matters of Jurisdiction: Apollo punishes them both.
IN the Territory of Libethrum, a heinous misdemeanure being committed, the
Governor of the place pursued the Offender, that fled to a Country man's house
adjoining to the Territory of Pindus, and threatened to burn the house, except
he yielded his body. In the mean time the Governor of Pindus understanding
that this place was in his Jurisdiction, hastened also thither. But before his
arrival the Party had submitted himself prisoner to the Governor of
Libethru^: whereupon he of Pindus required the prisoner as his due being taken
in his Liberties: but the other claimed the place, where the prisoner was
apprehended, to be in his Patent or Commission. After much debating the
question and difference, both Governors not being able longer to contend in
words, fell to blows, and their men so sided with their Governors, that there
was much bloodshed on either part. Apollo hearing of these affronts sent for
them both, and after long patience in examination of the difference, his
Majesty finding that the Governor of Libethrum had profferd the first wrong
in rashly disturbing the Government of his Fellow-subiect, the place appearing
now to be clearly in the Government of Pindus, though before somewhat litigious,
he deprived him of his Government, and declared him incapable of bearing any
charge from thenceforward. And for the Governor of Pindus, whom his Majesty
found to have most right to the Place and Prisoner, he condemned him for all
that to the Galleys for ten years, aggravating this execution for example
sake, to teach him and all other Officers, that they which serve the one and
the same Prince or State, ought to defend the reasons of their Jurisdictions
with the Pen, and not with the Pike, reserving arms and force for strangers,
which might invade their Country. A case remarkable, and to be regarded of all
such Officers bearing charge on any Frontier Towns, if not of Judges of
Courts, who though they be subject to one Prince and the same Laws, yet for
matter of Jurisdiction do sometimes contend, punishing the poor Subjects for
their ambition and ouersights.

CHAP. 9.
The Virtuous of Parnassus do visit the Temple of the Divine Providence, whom
they humbly thank for the great Charity which his supreme Majesty from time
to time has vouchsafed to show unto Mankind.
THis Morning according to the ancient style of this Court, the Temple of the
Divine Providence was visited by all the Scholasticall Princes, and learned
Barons of Parnassus. And there Iovianus Pontanus with an excellent prayer
thanked our great Creator for the infinite charity and love he has showed to
Mankind, in creating Frogs without teeth; because it would have been an
unprofitable benefit for Mankind, that this world covered with so many Heavens,
full of so many Stars, had been created the chief and sovereign height of
all the most delicious pleasures, and not also as abundant of things more
necessary, when Gallants which should spend their time in defending themselves
and us from the bitings of such fastidious and importunate creatures, were like
to walk with an insupportable impediment of iron boots: whereas now against
such troublesome vermin, which have no hurt in them saving their croaking
noise, a rampart of a good pair of ears suffices, which will not care for
that ill-pleasing noise, which they know to be without danger.

CHAP. 10.
A Contention happening between many Learned men, which might be the most
notable Politic Law, or most excellent Custom worthy of commendation in the
flourishing State of Venice, the same is finally decided and determined by the
Venetian State herself, to whose arbitrament the Question is referred by their
general consent.
Worthy of Record is that virtuous Contention, which about six days past
arose betwixt certain Learned men of this State; who while they discoursed of
the notable orders, the most excellent Laws, and other mostrare Decrees, which
maintained the famous Commonwealth of Venice in such height of greatness,
they fell into sundry opinions, which of them ought to bear away the victory.
And because every one of them did obstinately defend his own opinion as the
best, to the end so great a difference should be decided without commotion of
mind or passion, they unanimously agreed upon this resolution, to appear all
of them before the State herself, to whom they should first declare their
several reasons, and that she should afterward adiudge which of them had
aimed next unto the mark. This they made known unto the Sovereign Lady, who
graciously undertook to give that satisfaction which they expected.

Petrus Crinitus then was the first, who said, that it being a most assured
rule, that all things whatsoever subsist under the Moon, do spring at first
and then grow, and waxing old at last they fail: it seemed a thing unto him
worthy of admiration, that the Venetian State alone did notwithstanding her
years become more youthful and fresh every day than other, and that those
Laws, Orders, and Decrees, which in other Principalities after long forbearing
of their execution, were at length utterly forgotten, did only in Venice so
flourish with severity, with greater observance, and exacter diligence,
working that efficacy and benefit, that in this Commonwealth no such
reformation, nor innovation ever happened, as heretofore we read have chanced
with infinite tumults and hurliburlies in the ancient Roman State, and now of
late in the Florentine Commonwealth; it being a peculiar virtue unto the
Venetian Senate, perpetually to preserve their flourishing liberty, with a
severe execution of their ancient Laws; whereby none of those defaults ever
happened in this State, which other Potentates and Free States could no way shun
for all their exquisite care and diligence, but that they fell into such
careless negligence, that they lost both their liberty and lives. Therefore
not without good cause he dared to affirm, as a thing most certain, that the
Venetian Commonwealth for their prudent care in the rigorous execution of
their ancient Laws ought to continue and prosper eternally, as long as the
world lasts.

Next spoke Angelus Politianus, that he did truly admire both what Petrus
Crintus had recounted, and a thousand other orders in that most prudent
Commonwealth. But the rarest thing which he observed, was how an Aristocracie,
the true foundation whereof, as the most understanding Writers have delivered,
was the equality of fortunes among the Nobility, could have been able to
maintain it self in such peace and greatness, consisting in that
disproportioned inequality of wealth, wherewith the Venetian Nobility is
endowed, wherein although there were two such dangerous extremes found, as
immoderate riches with some of them, and much poverty with others of the same
rank in Venice, notwithstanding there appeared not that defect, which in
humane probability and according to the common course of the world, the best
Laws could not prohibit, that the richer sort did not trample the pooror
under their feet, who though they greatly envied the condition and state of the
wealthy, yet notwithstanding either by reason of their affectionate charity,
which reigned in the Venetian Nobility toward the public good, or else
because those infinite riches, which some of them so possessed, were not abused
toward their Inferiors; both poor and rich lived modestly, peaceably, and
contented in this most Fortunate Country.

After him followed Julius Caesar Scaliger, and said, that the greatest wonder
in the Venetian State, which amazed the world, was that the Nobility
themselves which bare sway, did not only most patiently pay the usual ancient
subsidies and tallages belonging to the Exchequer, but with incredible
alacrity of mind and speedy performance, they assessed on themselves other
new impositions of money, which with great diligence and rigor were afterward
exacted and called for at the public Receivers hands. Yea and oftentimes in
important affairs concerning the Commonwealth, before they burdened the
common people with any new Customs and Taxations, they have yielded supplies
out of their own purses, and that so liberally and cheerfully, that this one
act of theirs deserved place before all other wonders and remarkable orders in
this State, as such a one, which every man must acknowledge to be an act of
that excellent quality, which renders the Venetian Commonwealth for ever
glorious; for having such a Nobility so dearly inamoured of their Free State,
that they more readily preferred the public interest before their own private
particular.

Then succeeded Bernardo Tasso, and said, that he had for a long time soiourned
in Venice, where he marvelled at nothing more than to see the Nobility, who
glutted their minds with continual pleasures, delights, and idleness,
governing the affairs of the Republike with such admired virtue, that they
seemed unto others to be men of an exemplarie and regular life, and also Rulers
borne to perpetual cares and burdens.

After the opinion of Tasso, Francis Berni, according to his manner, with a
pleasing grace, which gave good content to the most Excellent Venetian Lady,
said, that the most rare and wonderful thing, which great wits ought to admire
in this State, that notwithstanding the marshes and channels did abound with
crabs and creuices in all places about the City, the Venetian Senators took
so few of them, that of all other Nations they were reputed, and that justly,
to be the Salt of the Earth.

Next unto him, said Sabellicus, that while he wrote the Venetian History,
having most diligently observed the notablest Laws and Customs of this
renowned State, he wondered at nothing more, than at the Public Treasure,
which careful Senators managed with so great fidelity, that among the
Nobility it was held not only a capital excess, but exceeding great infamy
to defile their hands with one penny of their Patron S. Marks Treasury.

After him spoke Sannazzarius, that the strangest thing unto him was, that
seeing there were many among the Noblemen of Venice poor and ill provided of
the Goods of Fortune, yet nevertheless they endured with unspeakable patience
all their miseries and cross fortunes, without having the least thought of
affecting any of the public goods to be gotten either by engrossing of corn,
or by some unequal division of lands, matters which mightily perplexed the
State of Rome. And that it seemed unto him a thing worthy of commendation to
see a poor Nobleman in Venice so strive and force himself only by the help
of Virtue to comfort himself in his miseries, hoping in time to deserve some
honorable and profitable place of employment in his Country, whereby at last
it chances, that the virtue, valor, and bounty of the mind do serve an
impouerished Nobleman of this State in stead of a wealthy Patrimony.

Iouianus Pontanus said, that they which passed were great maruels, but in his
opinion this surpassed all things in the Venetian State, that the huge estates
and infinite wealth of some Noble persons wrought not those pernicious effects
to puff them up with vainglory and pride, as have been noted in many other
Commonwealths. And that it was a most laudable custom to see these Rich
Senators possessing Princely Treasures live very privately at home, and to
show themselves abroad little differing from ordinary people. Whereby all men
may conceive, that the Venetians only do know the true way and mean to
distinguish and sever from great riches those inconveniences of Ambition,
Pride, and Popularity, which the famous Roman State never knew, or could not
hinder in Pompey, Caesar, and many other powerful Senators.

As Soon as Pontanus had ended his discourse, Hannibal Caro said, that above
all other wonders he thought it a matter worthy of greatest admiration, to
observe the quality of the Duke of Venice, followed with obedience and
reverence, with Regal Authority, with a great command: And for all that to
see his Royalty and Princely sway moderated with a set Rule, and the power of
his will joined with modesty were tempers unknown to the prudent Lawgiuers of
ancient times, and a kind of wisdom luckily practiced among the Venetians.

Bartholomew Caualcanti, after him told his opinion, that as Pontanus had
intimated, it was strange indeed, that their Senators wealth and great Estates
did not cause some of them to be puffed with ambition: But it was a more strange
thing to see that such were the Orders of this Famous State, such the sacred
Laws of this everlasting Commonwealth, that the high places and supreme
governments, which some of their Senators inioyed as presidents in remoter
Countries subject unto their Dominion, did not sometime or other prick them
with ambition to rebel and usurp. And at that time when he lay there at
Venice, he wondered not at the great Treasure of Saint Mark, nor at the
Arcenall, nor at the Grand Canal, with the proud Palaces of the Cornaria, the
Grimani, the Foscari, and other magnificent edifices built with such Royal
expenses in this renowned City being miraculous things in the sight of ordinary
persons. But far more miraculous in his conceit was, that he saw the Noble
Signior Sebastian Venieri, a little after he had returned to Venice from that
memorable victory at Sea, which he had gotten being General against the
Turks, live retired at his private house, and when he walked abroad to the
market place, he differed in nothing from these Senators, who had stayed
behind at Venice, but went very plain and simple in apparel. And surely it is
a most singular Custom, which they have, that their Nobility can use that
ciuility and modesty in their own City, and being employed abroad in matters
of import and of high command, that they can suddenly transform themselves
into most costly garments, with such magnificence, and Princely liberality, to
let the world know them for no Citizens of an ordinary State, but for men borne
for great enterprises and for bra^e Commanders, as if they were subjects
descended from Royal blood; and also to make themselves famous unto all other
Nations by thus accommodating their affections and spirits to the nature of the
place, and framing themselves as well to modesty, civility, and thrift at
home, as to pompuous authority abroad. A thing so true, that whereas other
States for the reputation and countenance of public Magistrates are wont to
recommend to their Governors, that they maintain the Majesty of their
sovereign places, with magnificence and stately comportments both of courage
and gorgeous apparel. The Venetian State on the contrary have enacted Statutes
to forbid any of their Citizens, which supply Offices or charge under them in
any of their Territories to grace their presence with glorious shows, or to
wear any costly suits of apparel. So great a care have those politic
Senators of their Cities thrift and prosperity.

This spoke Caualcanti, when Flauio Biondo said, that when he was at Venice, he
became much astonished to find in a pure Aristocracie, that the Citizens and
Common people lived with such co^tentment in this fortunate country, that in
many years of his abode there, he could never learn, whether the public State
were better beloved and respected of the Nobility which commanded them, or of
the common people which obeyed.

Next to him spoke Paulus Iouius, that not only unto himself, but also unto
many great Princes, with whom he oftentimes had conference, touching the
wonders of Venice, it seemed a thing of great moment that the Senate of this
most famous Republicke, did altogether bend their endeauours unto Peace, and to
no other end at all, withal their vigilance and care, not studying to make
perpetual preparations for the wars, as others did, whereupon they all
concluded, that in this flourishing State alone, a man might find the Lady
Peace armed withal exquisite appurtenances.

After ^ovius ensued John Boccace, who said, that the true salt, which
preserved the Venetian State from the purrefaction and corruption of abuses,
was the sovereign Queen of all Laws, that most excellent Order, so
inuiolably observed of her, that for the advancing of a Senator to a higher
place, not the glory of his Riches, not the merits of his Father, or Ancestors,
nor the multitude of his Tenants or Friends, nor the favor of great persons,
but his own worth and naked virtue were had in most consideration. From whence
it comes to pass, that in Venice the vicious and ignorant Nobles were only
accounted a number, as Ciphers in Arithm^^ke, while the Virtuous alone, and the
best deserving subject, bare the chief sway, detur Digniori, with that prudent
care and circumspection, as is known unto all the world.

But Leonardus Aretinus after he had extolled the opinion of Boccace, added,
that the excellent usage of the Venetian State, in not granting to their
Nobility, the charge and Offices at the first iumpe, but by degrees, was the
true solid foundation, whereon their Greatness consisted most firmly built,
and withal the eternity of their Liberty. For this is one of their most
admired Precepts, That every Nobleman whatsoever, before he mount up into the
highest Dignity, must from his youth upwards be forced, like an enfranchised
Townesman, to begin from the lowest Offices, and not leaping wise and
suddenly. A most safe Custom, as that, which justly distributed this important
effect of upholding the true and substantial equality among the Nobility of
an Aristocracie, which gives long life to a free State, because according to
the certain and understanding policy of true government, the equality of
goods made not Senators equal in a Commonwealth, but that all the Nobles
should be first compelled to walk fair and softly to the most eminent places
of command from the inferior steps, which I have formerly showed. The which if
the Roman Empire had practiced, it had not shortened the life of their liberty,
nor wrought those dangerous and fatal infirmities of tyrannies and tumults.
Their gross abuses in affording the Consular authority and the charge of
armies unto Pompey, the Caesar's, and to other wealthy and powerful Citizens in
their green and unsettled youth, was no other then as if they had chosen some
of the Bloud-Royall in a Monarchy, as Lords and Patrons of their liberty,
rather then Senators of a well ordered Commonwealth. By which unwitting
error all men may note, that the freedom of Rome got her mortal wound and
utter desolation.

Albeit that the most excellent Lady of the State of Venice gave apparent
signs, that she seemed well contented with the opinion of Aretine, she
commanded notwithstanding th^^ her Virtuous Statesmen, who advanced themselves
forwards, to proceed with their opinions. And then Benedict Varchi thus began:
My Florentine State, which never knew the way of good fortune to bring in among
her Noble Families, that Peace, Union, and mutual love, which makes the
liberty of a Commonwealth everlastingly durable, in the end fell into the
infirmity of serui^ude, puts me now in a great amazement, and I think it may
surpass all other maruells in this State, when I consider with deliberation,
that a Nobleman of Venice, although most grievously offended for the life of
his sons, and for his own proper person, enforced more with a fervent
charity toward the freedom of his Country, then terrified with the severity
of Magistrates, had learned that difficult lesson of resolution, to forgive at
the instant the wrong which he had received at his Adversaries hands, and that
with a free heart. A resolution worthy of remembrance, and by so much the more
wonderful by how much it is clearly observed, that a Nobleman of Venice
referres the revenge of all received injuries into the Senates hand with all
willingness of mind, the which sensual and brutish men, yea and many of the
wiser sort without the length time and much struggling of nature cannot yield
unto God, to whom vengeance belongs, and from whom we must all acknowledge
our lives, living, and liberty to proceed. This Varchi spoke, when Lodouico
Dulce began the delivery of his Opinion, that if that were true, which all
confessed, that the rarest and most prized greatness that might be considered
in a Prince, was to disarme with facility and without danger one of his
warlike Generals, and to receive of him exact and conformable obedience, for
all that that this General did aforehand know, and long before his return,
how his Prince grew in suspicion of his loyalty, or in dislike of his service:
Then this custom usual in the state of Venice, deserved more to be wondered at
then any other, to be able to disarme with great ease, their Generals and
Admirals at Sea. Yea, and at such time when they understood how the Senate was
earnestly bent to punish them at their return, notwithstanding that they found
themselves very strong, beloved of their soldiers, and powerful enough to
offend the State, or to defend themselves from shame, it always fell out, that
as soon as ever they were sent for, they readily and presently obeyed,
voluntarily they resigned over their charge, and public command, and withal
speed hastened to Venice, to be sentenced by their friends and Citizens, though
with Capital punishment, which they willingly endured, rather then to hazard
the loss of their Country by unnatural innouations, and civil wars. So
dear unto them is the care of the Common safety.

The most excellent Venetian Lady, who without answering any thing to the
Virtuous aboue-named had attentively heard all these commendable Orders and
admirable Prerogatives said to Dulce, that the matter which he related, was
indeed of great consequence, yet not so rare, but that the Ottoman Emperors
likewise participated of the like benefit. Howbeit nevertheless, there was one
singular Prerogative, which she most exactly possessed, and wherein she
excelled all other Principalities, as well of the ancient, as present times,
whereto she acknowledged and ascribed all her Greatness, the which as yet she
did not hear any of them as much as touch.

Then spoke Hieronymus Mercurialis, that while he read the Physic Lecture at
the University of Padua, he knew some of the Plebeian and common sort at
Venice, that went in their Gundoloes to disport themselves upon the water with
some young Courtezans, according to their common custom, and there being
mightily misused by certain young Noblemen, whom they casually met, it
chanced that these Plebeians slew one of them in the affray. For which offense
upon complaint made by the parties friends, the Plebeians were sent for by the
Judges, who although they knew the power of the Law to be in the hands of the
Nobility, whom they had offended, never fled, but trusting in the uprightness
and integrity of the Senate and Magistrates, they doubted not to appear before
them, and to yield themselves prisoners. Neither did their hopes fail them,
for upon consideration of the cause given in evidence for their defense, how
they were provoked first by those young Noblemen, they were enlarged and
pronounced innocent to the honor of the Venetians uncorrupted Justice: so that
neither powerful parentage, greatness of friends, nor abundance of wealth can
blind and divert the Judges of Venice to wrong any man.

Last of all, these virtuous Statesmen spoke the most learned Hermolaus
Barbarus, that in a free State Tyranny begins then to usurp and work, when
the most weighty secrets concerning the general good of the Commonwealth,
are communicated to a few Senators. And for this cause the most Sovereign Lady
of Venice, to avoid shipwreake on that dangerous rockie shelfe, imparted her
Secrets, and deliberated the designs and pragmatickes of greatest import,
wherein her state was interessed in her highest Court of Magistracy or
Parliament of the Pregadi, a number consisting of two hundred and fifty
Senators and upwards; and to him it appeared to be a miraculous thing, how the
Venetian State could find among so great a number of Senators that Secrecy,
which many great Potentates for all their exquisite diligence and large
entertainment of gifts and rewards, had bootlesse sought in one only Secrtarie,
or in a couple of Counselors of State.

At these words, the most excellent Venetian Lady laid her hand on the
shoulders of Barbarus, and pronounced this verdict: Now thou have hit the nail
on the head, and named that most precious Jewel, wherein I most glory, and
prize my self above all other States, and for which indeed I ought to be
justly emulated and envied at, seeing that nothing else appertains for the
true government and managing of State-businesse, more necessary than Secracie.

CHAP. 11.
The Doctors of the Chair having admitted into their University some famous
Poetical Ladies, Apollo commands them to be dismissed home to their Families.
THe famous Doctors of the Chair, about a few months past, admitted the most
virtuous Ladies Victoria Colonna, Laura Terracina, and other learned Poetical
Ladies of Parnassus into their Academicall Corporation, where they used times
to resort to their public exercises. But it chanced so that many Scholars
enamoured with the beauty of these Ladies, did not only flock oftener than
they were accustomed, into the Schools, whenever they understood that these
Ladies repaired thither, but also consumed their precious time and wits in
composing of amorous Sonnets, which they dedicated unto these Ladies, as if
they were Goddesses, with such rare conceits and lofty tunes, as eclipsed the
glory of the Muses themselves. At length the savor of these Sonnets, though
fragrant and sweet in the Scholars apprehensions, offended Apolloes divine
nostrills worse than the stink of a Blackamore. For which cause before the end
of these Ladies probationship and their matriculation, his Majesty charged the
Cathedral Doctors to dismiss them out of the University. His reason was
because he well saw out of his Divine knowledge, that the true poetry of women
were the Needle, the Distaffe, and the Wheel, and that the School exercises
of Ladies among University men might well be likened unto the dalliance and
playing of Dogs, which after some fained snarling, catching, and gamesome
tossing one another, do conclude their sport in riding and mounting upon their
play-fellowes backs.

CHAP. 12.
The Lady Victoria Colonna entreats of Apollo, that the infamy which women
incurred for cuckolding their Husbands, might likewise extend to adulterous
Husbands. Apolloes answer.
THe most Excellent Lady Victoria Colonna a Princess of exemplarie chastity,
about three days past appeared in his Majesty's Court of Audience, and in the
name of all womankind said, that they all loved the excellency of chastity,
which was naturally given them for a most particular virtue, that they did not
awhit envy Courage, a virtue attributed to man's sex, because they well knew,
that a Lady without the soul of chastity, which renders her odoriferous to
the world, was but a stinking carcass: yet notwithstanding it seemed unto
them, that they had much cause to grieve and lament at the great inequality,
which they saw betwixt the Husband and the Wife in the particular punishment of
Adultery; so that women could not rest contented to see men in such wise free,
that the punishment of shame, which alone was wont to terrify honorable
persons, did now less serve to restrain them from committing against their
wives these beastly and libidinous defaults. In which dissolute courses they
said, that they proceeded so far, that many Husbands were not only not ashamed
to keep openly Concubines in their houses, but had oftentimes presumed to make
them partakers of the sacred bed of Matrimony. These abuses came to pass, by
reason that the Laws had not provided the like punishment against the
offending Husbands, as were thundered out and practiced against adulterous
Wives. And that in this case, the Laws showed too much favor unto married men,
in allowing them to revenge the injury with their own hands at the time when
they happened to take their wives in the adulterous act. By which notorious
aggrieuances the Sex of women being so much wronged, were now forced to
repair unto the clear fountain of true Justice, to the end that by
publishing equal punishment in the equality of the self-same fault, there
might be some competent remedy ministered for their oppressions. And that if
this did not stand with Apolloes good will and pleasure, there might be at
leastwise the like liberty granted unto them in this particular of Adultery to
keep amorous servants, or to marry again, as many men adventured to do.
After which liberty granted them, they would not perhaps make use thereof, but
only in terrorem tantum, under color of law to be enabled to bridle their
loose and lustful Husbands.

Unto this demand of the Lady Victoria, Apollo answered, that the Law of
Fidelity betwixt the Husband and the Wife ought to be indeed equal, and that
the defect and breach thereof ought to be punished no less in the one, than in
the other: but that in the Wife a more exquisite and perfect chastity was
required for the great and weighty respect to know the certainty of their
children, to which end Nature had assigned them the noble virtue of Chastity,
the which was so necessary for procreation of humane kind, that without it
the children should both lose their inheritance and their fathers affection. A
thing so true, that Nature herself has most prouidently allotted chaste wives
to all living creatures of the earth, where the Male concurres for the
industrious hatching of the Egg, or for the nourishing of their young ones;
all to the end that the carke of the fathers being employed for their children
welfare should prove somewhat pleasing, and that their charge should redound to
comfort, and to great gain in time to come.

At these words the Lady Victoriaes beautiful cheeks were stained with an
honorable blush, who with a Roman ingenuitie confessed unto his Majesty the
simplicity of her demand, and said, that indeed it were a great shame and
dishonor to the sex of women, if in the precious gift of chastity they
suffered themselves to be overcome of those unreasonable living creatures, who
although they pursue no other thing than pleasure, yet nevertheless do they
very religiously observe Chastity, because they would not anger the fathers of
their young ones by their wandering and inordinate lust. And for the important
reason, that Husbands desired to have their wives chaste, the laws against
adulterous women were too favorable, because the wound which the unchaste
Husband gives his Wife did only pierce the skin, whereas the Wife by her
lascivious deeds does stab and kill her Husband with the poniard of everlasting
infamy, and also does disparage her children.

CHAP. 13.
A Poetaster for playing at Cards and devising the Game called Triumph or
Trump, is brought before Apollo, who after he had deeply entered into the
mystical meaning of the said Game, not only dismisseth him, but grants him
an yearly pension to instruct his Courtiers in that new Art.
TO the end, that the Ignorant with the filthiness of their most beastly minds
should not profane the virtuous places at Parnassus, Apollo many years since
caused two companies of Skeltenicall Poets, dogrel Rimers, men that made verses
at random, and very aduentrous at ruffianly conceits to come out of Sicily,
whose office was to scour the country and to clear the coast, of vagabonds.
These, about eight days past, took prisoner a Poetaster, that had been
capitally banished from Parnassus, who although he was forbidden the use of all
books, and the exercise of his pen, notwithstanding as it were in despite of
Apollo, and in contempt of the sacred Muses, he defiled paper with his
dissolute rimes, and at last proceeded so far in his audacious arrogancy, that
he assumed unto himself the Sovereign name of a Poet. This exorbitant fault
of his became aggrauated with a pair of Cards, which those Catchpoles in
searching him had found in his pocket, for which being likewise a notorious
Vice and worthy of death they brought him incontinently with the said Cards
before Apollo, who when he saw them was wonderfully amazed at the brutish
invention, which the vicious had found out to cast away their precious time, to
consume their reputation, and to spend their means. But much more was his
Majesty astonished, when he understood, that men now a days were grown to
such a height of folly, that they used to call that thing a Play or Game,
whereat they dealt so cruelly in good earnest. And further that they esteemed
it a delight, sport, and pastime to put in suspense and to doubtful compromise
that money, which was gotten with so much toil and cares, and served so
necessary for such great uses, that without it, this present world would take
Aristotle to be an ignorant fool, and Alexander the Great a base Plebeian.

Then Apollo asked the Prisoner, what game at Cards was most familiar unto him,
and because he answered, that it was Trumps or Triumph, his Majesty willed him
to play it. The Prisoner obeyed, and plaide; which when Apollo had observed and
penetrated into the magiste^iall lessons and secrets of the Game, he cried out,
that this Game of Trumpe was the true Philosophy of Courtiers, the most
necessary Science, which all men ought to learn, that would not be thought
innocents or simple-witted. And showing how much the affront done unto the
prisoner did displease him, he enlarged him presently, and honored him with
the title of a Virtuous man. And the next morning commanded his Officers to
erect up a public School, where with a stipend of five hundred Crowns a
year, that notable Person for the common good should read as a Lecture that
excellent Game of Trumpe, and upon a grievous penalty to be imposed, he
charged the Platonicks, Peripateticks, the Stoics, and other Philosophers,
specially the Moral; and to all other the Virtuous crew residing at Parnassus,
that they should learn this most necessary Science, the which because they
should not forget, he bound them to practice themselves therein one hour at
least every day. Although it seemed strange to the Learned, how it could be
possible, that out of a most vile Game devised by the off-scum raskals of men
there might be drawn any profitable document for honest men: yet
notwithstanding, they all knowing that his Majesty never commanded any thing,
which did not afterward redound to their good and to a special purpose, they
obeyed so willingly that this School was in as great request, and frequented
no less than an University. But when the Learned had discovered the
Magisteriall secrets, the hidden mysteries, and admirable cunning tricks of
this triumphant Game of Trumps, they extolled Apolloes profound judgment to the
eighth Heaven, all of them with one voice celebrating and magnifying it in all
places, that it was not Philosophy, Poetry; nor yet the Mathematics, nor
Astrology, nor any other famous knowledge, but it was the most rare Game of
Trumps, which taught men, chiefly great men and Courtiers, that secret of most
import, how every several Trumpe took up and got, as aprey, even the
goodliest of all the Cards.

CHAP. 14.
It being noted, that Petus Thraseas in the Company of his son in law
Eluidius Priscus did use commonly to frequent the house of the Lady Victoria
Colonna, he is grievously rebuked by Apollo.
IT was observed by those virtuous Censers, whose office and delight consisted
in looking to other men's deeds, that Petus Thraseas, in the company of Eluidius
Priscus his son in Law extraordinarily haunted the house of the Lady Victoria
Colonna, and also of other learned Dames of this Court. And though the said
Thraseas were reputed for a man of singular good parts, that one would hardly
suspect any obscene or lewd action in so great a Senator, his usual and daily
visites together with his continual abodes in these Ladies houses, occasioned
so great a scandal, yea, among the virtuous themselves, that the smell thereof
ascended even to his Majesty's nostrels; who to extinguish the flames of these
slanderous murmures, about two days since sent for Thraseas, and expressly
commanded him to reveal what business he had in resorting so often to these
Ladies houses. Thraseas answered, that he frequented them, only to exercise
charity among these Ladies, by reading every day unto them a Chapter of Boethius
his book of the Consolation of Philosophy. Upon this answer Apollo was so
grievously moved against Thraseas, that in great anger he said: If with your
talent and zealous office by giving office by giving comfort and consolations
to the afflicted, you hope to merit grace at Gods hand, and to obtain good
will among men, go your ways to comfort those poor wretches, who die of
mere necessity and pure want in the Hospitalls, or those unfortunate people,
who are condemned to the gallows or Spanish galleys. But to sit all day long
closely among Ladies, as Sardanapalus used to do, thinking to make men
believe, that you exercise Spiritual doings, they are such hypocrisies, as
will move the veriest idiot to laugh at you, and will make them to burst with
rage, that know, how these which go often to the mill become whited with
meal. And a man of your wisdom ought to understand, that at such time as a
woman conceiues of two infants, which we call Twins, if both be male, they
are enclosed within one membrane, the which likewise comes to pass, if both
be female. But if it happens, that one be male, and the other female, most
provident nature preserues the female in a particular membrane, severed from
the male. Seeing that Nature thought good not to thrust a little brother and a
little sister of that tender age to dwell together in one place, she teaches
all men, and especially men of your fashion to live more warily and securely;
and in these doings, O Thraseas, whosoever trusts his own power, I hold him
to be more rash than wise.

And for that these disorders, in regard of our reputation and yours, had need
to be corrected, I do straightly command you, that from henceforth you leave off
such dangerous practices. The world is not so sottishly simple, as you more
simply conceive it, but that they do well understand, how the visites which
men of your quality use unto Ladies, do begin to smell after the second time,
and specially in their noses, that know, how fair and beautiful things seem
pleasing to all men, and that the provocation of the flesh is a natural vice
in all men, the which they cannot cure and keep back with a more excellent
remedy, than to stand a far off from such fair and goodly objects: There Is
no safer way to defend a man from error, than to shun the occasions. And all
your Philosophy cannot produce such proofs, as will make any man of judgment
believe, that a dainty bit of flesh does not agree with every man's mouth, that
is made of flesh.

Lastly, I must put you in mind, that a man of your credit and condition, who
makes profession above all things not to defile the white robe of your
Reputation with the sports of lascivious oil, ought not at all to busy
himself about lamps; it being not only great folly, but most insolent
rashness, worthy of the whip and strapado, to think he can make gunpowder in
a forge, where a smith works nails, and afterward to persuade men, that he
might go to the field without danger.

CHAP. 15.
A learned Gentleman of Rome begs a remedy of Apollo, to make him to forget
certain grievous wrongs, which he had received in the Court of a great Prince:
for which cause his Majesty causes him to drink a cup-full of the water of
Lethe, but with unfortunate success.
A Learned Gentleman of Rome, which some few days since arrived at Parnassus,
was yesterday admitted to his Majesty's Royal Audience, unto whom he showed,
that for many injuries, which he had received of diverse ill willers of his in
the Court of a certain Prince, where the Lawyers persecuted him, and made him
pay above three score several fees by their cunning tricks of Law, he has
sithence lived very much troubled in mind, and so much the more, for that he
could not work his revenge upon them without incurring far greater troubles,
then his Enemies had plunged him in. And on the other side, he found that he
was not endowed with that generous resolution of forgetting and forgiving them.
For which cause, and now to be freed from this hellish torment, wherein he
perpetually lived, he repaired to his Majesty, whom most humbly he entreated
to bestow upon him some present remedy to heal his mind, which was galled
with the passions of hatred and revenge.

Apollo did much pity this Gentleman's case, and commanded that one should give
him a large cup-full of the water of Lethe, prepared in such manner, that it
might cause him to forget odious things, and not to take away the remembrance
of benefits received. The Gentleman with great greediness drunk up the water,
the which to all men's wonder was found to have only the virtue to blot and
cancel out of his mind those injuries, which he had received of his
inferiors in condition; and that the injuries which were done unto him, by
greater persons than himself, had inflamed and exasperated his mind rather
with an everlasting memory of them, than any way caused him to forget them.
Whereat many began to murmur, that the famous water of Lethe had lost that
precious virtue, which the Poets had blazed of it. But his Majesty gave them
to understand, that the water of Lethe had evermore the same virtue, which it
had in the beginning. And in that it did not work the expected effect in that
Gentleman; the reason was, because persons nobly descended, and of great
spirits, had ever this custom proper unto their natures, to write in the sand
these injuries, which they received of base people; but in solid marble with
eternal characters those aboue-handed blows, which were given them by their
equals, or superiors; it being the property of a noble mind to remit wrongs
by magnanimity, but not to pardon them of necessity.

CHAP. 16.
Apuleius his golden Ass, and Plautus his Ass do complain unto Apollo of
the great severity which their Masters used in beating them. But they are sent
away with no pleasing answer.
ABout the eight of the Current Apuleius his famous Ass accompanied with
Plautus his Ass, appear before Apolloes Majesty, who in the name of all the
sort of Mules, Asses, and Pack-horses, said, that if any kind of beasts
subject to mankind, which were of small expense and of much profit, had
deserved better usage than others; they had most reason above all other beasts,
to grieve at their Masters rough and rigorous dealings. And although they bare
the whole burden of their Lords houses, and maintained them both day and night
by their perpetual labors, and were content to feed ordinarily on sedge,
straw, and water, and to keep their Shrouetide with branne, and such poor
prouender; all this notwithstanding they were ingratefully, cruelly, and with
great indiscretion entreated by their Masters, and being the most unhappy of
all creatures, they were now become the miserable spectacle of all drudgery.
For as much as they could not by their prostrate and humble services mollify
the passionate minds of their Lords, they petitioned his Majesty in most lowly
manner to commiserate their Asinine miseries, if not to conclude and end them,
yet at least to order the matter so, that by his Majesty's command their
Patrons would thenceforth use them, though not grateful respects for their
great services, yet with moderation of passion, and with more hmanitie.

Unto these Apollo answered, that the severity, which Masters used toward
their pack-horses, whereof they so bitterly complained, proceeded not out of
their Masters natural cruelty, since that it is plain, that no man yet hated
the utility and benefit of his heritage, but rather from their monstrous
sloth, and stupendous stupiditie of the pack-horses, through which most
brutish defaults, their Masters were enforced furiously with whips and goads to
prick them on to do that labor, which otherwise for want of quickness they
had not spirit enough of themselves to perform. And whosoever would exactly
judge and determine of any man's cruel and rigorous dealings, he had need not
only to have regard unto the genius and nature of him that exercises and uses
this correction, as to the quality and manners of him, that complains he is
hardly dealt with.

CHAP. 17.
A general Reformation of the world by the seven wise men of Greece, and by
other Learned men, is published by express Order from Apollo.
Justinian the Emperor, that great Composer of the Codes and Pandects, some few
days since brought a new Law unto Apollo, to have the same approved of his
Majesty, whereby it was straightly forbidden, that any man should wax so
cruel against his own person, as to be the Author of his own death. Apollo
seeing this Law, had it in so great horror, that with a sigh, which proceeded
from the bottom of his heart, he brake forth into these speeches: Is the good
government of Mankind precipated into such disorder, O Justinian, that they
will now a days voluntarily attempt their own deaths, because they will not
live any longer, as they ought? And whereas I have hitherto hired a great number
of the wisest moral Philosophers, to the end that with their tognes and
writings they should Minister under me grave and civil conceits unto others,
which might make Death seemed less terrible, are things now reduced to that
great calamity, that men will no longer live, not yet learn to accommodate
themselves to die well? And do I carelessly sleep, while these disorders abound
among my learned Fraternity? To these words of Apollo, Justinian answered,
that this Law was very necessary, and that many notorious effects having
happened by these desperate courses, more inconveniences would yet ensue, if
his Majesty did not in time provide some convenient remedy to salve the
wilful disorders of these Frantic fellows. Whereupon Apollo took diligent
Information of that manner of life, which the world lead, and found that it
became extraordinarily depraved with evil customs, the which to reform he
resolved to create a Congregation of some notable Personages, the most prudent
and ingenuous Politicians of his Empire. But in the very beginning of this
serious talk he met with invincible difficulties, for being come to the point,
to appoint a number of subjects among his Moral Philosophers, and those
innumerable Virtuous Spirits which attended his Court, he could not light on
any to his absolute liking, sufficiently enabled for so great a business, by
reason that his Majesty knew, that the sanctity of life, and the good example
of the Reformer wrought a greater force and power in them, which were to be
reformed, then the best Rules, which the wisest State could enact and publish.
In this penurious exigent, Apollo referred the charge of the Worlds universal
reformation to the seven wise men of Greece, men that are held and reputed to
be in the chiefest credit at Parnassus, was those which in all men's conceit
have learnt the receipt and way to make straight the Dogs leg, which with so
much pains (yet always in vain) Antiquity hunted after. The rumor of these
news being come to the Grecians ears, it rejoiced them exceedingly for the
honor, which his Majesty vouchsafed unto their Nation; as on the other side,
it much troubled the Latins, it seeming unto them, that they herein had
singular great wrong offered unto them to be excluded. Apollo perceiving, that
this emulation might much hinder the general Reformation, to take away all
impediments, and to yield some satisfaction to the discontented Romans, to
those Grecian Sages he adjoined Marcus Cato and Annaus Seneca, and in favor of
the Italian Philosophers, he constituted Iacobus Mazzon Secretary of the
Congregation, whom he graced with a consultiue voice.

Upon the ninteenth day of the aforesaid month, all these famous Sages and new
Reformers bravely accompanied with a great Troop of the Noblest Virtuous of
this State went into the Delphick Palace, the place appointed for this
business of Reformation, and to the Learned it was a pleasing sight to behold
the great number of Pedantes, which with table-books in their hands went
quoting and laying down the Sentences and Apothegmes, which these continually
let slip out of their harmonious mouths.

As soon as these learned and wise Lords were reunited to declare their
remedies, the fame is, that Thales the Milesian, the first of the seven Sages,
began in this manner:

Most prudent Philosophers; The business for which we are now here assembled
together, is the greatest, which the wit of man can treat of; and although no
other enterprise may be found so hard, as to heal an inueterate Neapolitane
bone-ache, an infistulated Gangrene, an incurable Canker, yet notwithstanding,
the insuperable difficulties, which wear out other men's brains, ought to
animate men of our rank to overcome them, seeing that the supposed
impossibility of the Cure will augment our glory, and will maintain us still
in that sublime and high degree of reputation, wherein we are elevated; and now
I firmly assure my self, that I have found out the true Antidote for the easy
expulse of these venomous and banefull corruptions. I am confident, that there
is not any of us, but assures himself, that no other disease has infected the
healthful life of this present Age, than the hidden hatred, dissimulation,
equivocation, and treachery of men covered over with the fair mantle of
Religion, of Love, Simplicity, and Charity; the which, my good Lords, being
corrected with Cauteries, Razours, and with Corrosiue Plasters fit for this
cancred wound, such as I shall now discover, all men living, which at this time
are by these vices brought even to Deaths door, all other Physicians having
left them without hope of recovery, shall suddenly become restored to their
former health, and shall resume that sincerity, that verity of speech, and
that holiness of life, which in ancient times has been esteemed true-hearted
candor, genuine simplicity, and plain dealing. The true remedy then is of
necessity to reduce men into an ingenuous kind of living, and to embrace that
simplicity of the heart, which they can never do, before Princes have with
their high authority chased out of their Kingdoms irreligious hypocrites of a
different Religion, as Wolfes of State, and also to cut off wrangling suits at
Law; nor these can they ever bring to pass without diminishing the number of
Lawyers, and needless Courts of Justice, which hearten even sheep to turn
upon their keepers. These, these abuses, most virtuous Lords, being so
restrained, then lies, falsehoods, double dealing, and hypocrisies, will depart,
as the chief nourishment of the Infernal Spirit out of the possessed souls
homeward to their Master the Devil.

In such wise did this opinion of Thales work within the rest of the Sages
hearts, that he was ready to go away with all their suffrages and voices, when
Mazzon the Secretary commanded him to rehearse the same unto Apollo, who
approved so well of Thales his remedy, that he commanded out of hand a
Surgeon to make a little window in the heart of man. But in the same hour,
when the Surgeon had prepared his instruments to open the breast of man for
that purpose, Homer, Virgil, Plato, Aristotle, Auerroes, and some other learned
men repaired to Apollo, and signified unto his Majesty, that the chiefest
instrument, which with great facility governed the world, was the reputation
of those which commanded it, and that a jewel of that worth ought never to be
exposed unto any peril by wise Princes. They laid before his Majesty's
consideration the credit of a holy life, the opinion of the bounty of customs,
wherein the excellent Philosophical Senate, and the Honorable College of the
Virtuous were had in great reverence among all the learned Subjects of Apolloes
Empire. And if his Majesty would suddenly cause all men's hearts to be opened,
the greatest and best sort of his Virtuous Followers could not but suffer
infinite shame and infamy, whonow were in chief credit about his sacred
Person, when they should see even boys to take notice of their foolishness,
as who is wise at all seasons? Yea and his Majesty himself would grow into
hatred with his most principal Favorites, when he saw they were not such
notable persons of an unspotted life as he reputed them to be. And by these
means he should lose the most part of his Dependants, to the utter
depopulating of famous Parnassus. And for this cause, before his Majesty would
attempt this important enterprise, they humbly desired in the name of all the
Virtuous, to grant them some competent time to purify their minds, and to lay
them a little a bucking. The advice of these famous persons greatly pleased.
Apollo, and by a public Edict he prorogued the term of making the window
until eight days were expired, in which time the Virtuous in such manner
toyled themselves in cleansing their minds of all hidden fallacies, of
counterfeit friendship, of inbred rancour, and other stinking vices, that in
the Grocers, Druggists, and Apothecaries shops of Parnassus, all the sweet
Conserues, Cinnamon, Cassia, Syrops, Lozenges, Roses, Violets, and other
precious wares were all spoiled with the taint, and the stench abounded so
corrupt, that all the quarters of the Platonic and Peripatetick Philosophers,
smelt worse than if the filthiest I aches of the Country were emptied; whereas
the street of the Latin and Italian Poets, smelt only like the broth of
reheated Coleworts. Now the time for the universal bucking and purifying, that
was limited, became almost ended, when the day before the opening of the window
in men's hearts, the great Hippocrates, Galen, Cornelius Celsus, and other
experimented Physicians of this State went to Apollo, and freely spoke their
minds in this manner:

Royal Sir, if this work goes forward, we must needs deface this little
world of mankind, most noble for the miraculous workmanship, wherewith it is
wrought with evident peril of an important musckle and a principal vein, and
by that means kill and destroy the whole fabric of Man's Microcosme, or at
least make it for ever sickly and crazed. And so great an evil we might
practice only by the benefit of four ignorant persons, seeing that not only
the profoundest wits, but likewise men of mean judgment only with four
days practice, which they may have with any notable Hypocrite whatsoever, they
know how to penetrate into the most inward gutt. With Apollo this speech of the
Physicians so prevailed, that he resumed his former deliberation, and by
Ausonius Gallus made it known unto the Lords Reformers, that they should
continue their Philosophical opinions.

Then Solon thus began: The cruel hatred and poysonfull envy, which
universally breed among men, and domineere over them in these days, are these,
most prudent Lords, which to my thinking have so confounded the world in the
case, as we see it. The correction then consists in insusing of Charity in
men's hearts, and the sacred love toward their Neighbors, which is one of the
Precepts of God. We must now employ the whole engine of our ablest wits to take
away the occasions of Hatred, which make them so savage and implacable. I have
to the uttermost of my understanding diued into the mystical cause of this
Hatred, and I find it to proceed of the inequality of worldly goods by that
hellish usage of Mine and Thine among our worldlings, the very rock of all
scandals. And it is manifest, that men's minds depraved by Ambition,
Covetousness, and Tyranny, have occasioned this inequality and
disproportioned Division. And seeing that is true, which all must confess,
that this world is no other than an inheritance left by one Father and one
Mother unto mankind, from whom as Brothers we all descend; what Justice is
there, but that every one of us should not have share and share like throughout
all the wide world, the one as well as the other? But now it falls out
otherwise, that the Good and Virtuous have the least part, and the wicked the
greatest part: The honest man a beggar, the dishonest by a preposterous order
have gotten their right, and will not communicate the same, no not to their
own flesh and blood, and nearest kin. Now I have discovered unto you the
wound, it is easy to apply the medicine. The best advise which I can give, is
to come unto a new division of the world, and to let every man have his share;
and by this means there will be enough for every one of us without troubling
one another: Though Tyrants and Lawyers may for a time grudge at this
equality, yet true Justice requires it for the pacifying of this unnatural
hurlybarly. And further to take away all disorders in time to come, let there
be a Law enacted to forbid all chopping and changing, all buying and selling
to the worlds end.

A long time this opinion of Solon was canuased, the which although it was
esteemed necessary, but not altogether good, by Bias, Periander, and Pittacus,
was reproved notwithstanding by the rest of the Philosophical Lords; whiles
that the judgment of the wise Seneca prevailed, who with most lively reasons
made all the Lords of the Congregation to understand, that if now they should
come to a new division of the world again, there would ensue a very great
disorder, that too great a part would fall into the share of Gluttons, and too
little among brave Spirits, who hold Sobriety, Temperance, and Reason, the
chief means to distinguish them, which bear the image of God in their souls
from bestiall Satanicall creatures; and that the Plague, Famine and War were
not, as many thought, the most rigorous scourges wherewith God in his anger
afflicts mankind, but that the sorest and most grievous whip, wherewith he may
torment them, is to enrich villains, and base minded misers, whose pelf will
at last work the ruin of their dearest and better part being their Souls.

As soon as Solons opinion was refelled, Chilon produced his: Which of you
(quoth he) most wise Philosophers, knows not, That the insatiable thirst of
Gold and Silver has not occasioned such mischiefs in the world, as we all
see and many of us have felt? What impiety, what wickedness, what unnatural
act is there, which men will not commit, and that with all diligence, to rake
together a mass of money and wealth? Conclude ye then all courageously with
me, that to root those vices out of the world wherewith this Age is corrupted,
there is no better way than to exterminate and utterly to abolish the use of
those pestiferous metals, Gold and Silver, the true prouocations of all these
miseries: Irrimenta malorum.

Very goodly and specious in appearance seemed the sentence of Chilon, but when
it came to the scanning and trial, it proved not solid at the stroke of the
hammer of lively reasons. Because it was answered, that men had brought the use
of Gold and Silver, that it might stand for the measure and counterpoyse of all
bargains and commerce betwixt party and party. And if Gold and Silver were
prohibited, they must of force employ some other metal or commodity to
supply their necessities, which likewise would replenish the world with the
same greediness of mind as before: As in some part of the Indies they use
shells as current as we do money. And Cleobulus in particular with a kind of
Ironicall scoff said; My Lords, we may as well banish out of the world Iron,
seeing that it is also a metal, which has wrought infinite confusion among
men. Gold and Silver for the use destinated of God to be the balancing
proportion of all things, whereas Iron produced of Nature to make Ploughs,
Spades, Harrowes, necessary tools for tillage and gardens, as for buildings,
has been maliciously perverted toswords, poniards, and other instruments of
war to destroy mankind.

With this opinion of Cleobulus, albeit most true, it was nevertheless
concluded by all the Lords of the Reformation, that it being a thing impossible
to convert Iron from men without perverting Iron, it should be no prudence to
multiply their miseries, and to heal the wound with more blows. Unanimously
it was resolved and concluded, that men should still retain the metals of
Gold and Silver, but to admonish the Refiners to take care for the well
purifying of them, and not to lift them off from the fire, until they were
thoroughly assured that they had cleansed them from that clammie and fast
clinging Turpentine, which these kind of metals have in them, which caused
that their Coins stuck exceeding fast to men's hands, yea sometimes to their
hands, whom the world reputes for honest men.

After this with extraordinary gravity Pitiacus began thus: The world, most
learned Philosophers, is fallen into deplorable miseries, because this modern
generation of mankind have relinquished the beaten way of Virtue, and have
chose to walk through those crooked bypath of Vice, whereby they steal away
those Rewards due only to the Virtuous. Things are now reduced, Lords, to this
pass, that no man enters into the house of Dignities, of Honors, and of
Rewards as in old time, through the Gate of Merit, true desert, and by virtuous
pains, but by the windows they clammer, like unto filching thieves, which
climb to peare-trees with their back-sides turned to the true owners. Yea, and
we have known some, with the force of favors and Violence of Bribes have not
been ashamed to enter through the tops of Chimneyes, and by casting down the
tiles, have through the very roof come into the house of Honor. To amend this
corrupted course of behavior, the best way in my judgment is to decree upon
pain of Death, that no man hereafter be so hardy, as to get into any
well-deseruing place, whether it be of Honor or Gain, but by the Royal
highway of Desert; and to shut up all other dark and damnable ways, only fit
for Scritchowles, and Savage Beasts. This is a great disheartning of our
Learned rank. Wherehence many of our best understanding Spirits do verily
believe, that those Hypocrites have joined unto their Craft the Spells of the
Magic Art, and thereby, like Zoroastres, they bewitch, enchant, an taint the
minds of some Princes, yea and those of the wiser sort.

All the Reforming Lords admired this speech of Pittacus, and were about to
conclude with him, if Periander had not thus opposed: The disorder specified by
Pittacus, most prudent Lords, is very true; but for what cause a judicious and
wise Prince refuses to prefer virtuous and learned men so pleasing to God,
so honorable and profitable for his State: and wherefore in their stead he
serves himself, being the life and fountain of all goodness, or at least
seeming so to be, with debauched, unworthy, and base-minded wretches, is a
point of great import and to be considered of us. I know the common opinion is,
that the Prince chooses men which are like to humor and sooth him up in his
affections before the best deserving Creature. And I acknowledge that it is a
Rule of State, for a wise Prince to advance no man to any degree but either for
his wisdom or valor. This foundamentall Rule of State is well known unto
him, yet experience shows, that few Princes practice it, and mock at such as
shall tell them that they do the contrary by a careless respect to the honor
of their place. But the truth is, they promote ignorant persons, new fellows,
and of small desert before learned and virtuous men, not by any default of
their side, but by errors (I am sorry to speak it) of the learned and virtuous
themselves. I confess with you, that Princes have need of such, and of brave
minded Commanders for the wars. But none of you will deny, but they stand in
more need of loyal and faithful Ministers of State, who with the gift of
Secrecy may stead them as much as all their Treasure. And now it is more than
apparent, that if honorable personages and valiant Soldiers had bin as true
and Secret to their Country, as they ought, we should not behold the infinite
disorders, which we see and observe to our great grief in this present age,
even Pigmeyes in four days to shoot up as tall as Giants, and all these
unworthy spectacles to happen for want of Fidelity, and firm regard to the
interest of State. So corrupted is the mind of many men, that forgetting their
own worths and valorous magnamities, they will be tempted with gold and
ambition, yea and after sufficient promotion by their native Prince some have
turned so unthankful, as to become mercenary slaves to another Prince. Which
disasters Princes distrusting, they are feign to confer Honor and Offices unto
unworthy persons, who might serve them with their Secrecy and Fidelity, and
prove more thankful for their favors.

As soon as Periander had ended his Opinion, Bias spoke in this wise: There is
not any among us here, but knows, most wise Lords, that the world is become so
much depraved, because Mankind is departed from those sacred Laws of a
contented state, the which God from the beginning allotted unto every Nation,
having assigned several stations, out of which they ought not to break out.
The Britains, diuisos orb Britannos, he has placed in Albion, as in another
world by themselves, the Goths in France, the Spaniards in Spain, the Dutch
in Germany, the Italians in Italy, and so other Nations in other habitations.
And because every one of them should not trespass, or like a Deluge break out
upon their bordering Neighbors. His foreseeing Majesty framed the fearful
Ocean to compass about Great Britain, the Pyrenaean Mountains, as a wall
betwixt France and Spain, and the Alps between the Germans and Italy, as
some part of them deuides this from France also. The like wary division the
Divine Majesty has set betwixt Europe and Afric, as the Mediterranean Seas.
The which he did of purpose, that none should encroch upon the other, and not
mingle one with another language, as heretofore fell out at Babel, nor subject
the other to foreign Laws and Customs, whereby each one living at home with
their nearest kin might agree the better together without innouations or
Tyrannies, and not like Drones, intrude into other men's lives to purloyne the
sweet, which others wrought. Now for as much as the world is infected with the
company and customs of strange Nations, let every Nation be ordered to return
into his proper limitation; and for fear of the like sudden and violent
intrusions in time to come, let it be also enacted, that no ships be suffered
to pass for the space of many years to come, nor any to be built, and if any
Bridges lie betwixt several Principalities, to sunder them the better, that
these Bridges be pulled down. If this course be taken, people shall live more
peaceably in their own native soil. With wondefull great attention this
Declaration of Bias was heard, the which notwithstanding it was subtly
examined by the profound wits of the Congregation, at the last seemed not
expedient to be put in practice, by reason that they knew that the hatred,
though excessive, which reigned amongst diverse Nations, are not natural, as
some very simply have coniectured, but occasioned either by the artificial
sleights of some Princes, or at least by the cunning tricks of some of their
principal Ministers to busy their Princes and States brains, while they
enriched their Cofers with part of the Treasures, which were to be laid out for
the wars, or casually brought into the Kingdom from the wars, as prizes
and booties. Besides, some Princes are skillful masters to put in execution
that old Maxim of policy: Divide and Impera; Divide and command. As for Bias
his counsel to forbid Navigations, who knows not but among all Nations united
together that harmonicall perfection is picked out for political Government,
which cannot be found in any one particular States, and this is gotten by
peregrination into foreign countries, so that an expert Traveler returns
home like the grand Ulysses, having bettered his understanding faculty by
noting the diversities of Spirits, manners, Laws and Customs. To this may be
added the other exceeding great benefits, as arise by Navigations, as the
establishing of Plantations, where their own country ouerswarmes with
multitudes of people, the transportation of Commodities, and the ciuilizing of
Savage Nations. They observe the wonderful difference of Climates, the
several natures of the cold, the temperate, and the Torrid Zones, with many
other remarkable events, to the glory of our Creator and their unspeakable
pleasure.

Then Cleobulus desired leave to speak, who boldly thus began: As far I see,
we proceed like those lightheaded fellows, who make public Languages with
new conceits and curious fancies, to the outside beautiful, but not with
matter of profit, as might edify and reform the world, the only cause of our
meeting at this time. To what purpose then for the rooting out of Vias should
we open a window in man's heart, as Thales would fain^ persuade his Imperial
Majesty? Wherefore should we undertake that most painful charge and task
for the dividing of the vast wide world into equal parts, as Solon proposed?
The opinions of Chilon for banishing of Gold and Silver out of the world, of
Pittacus to enforce men to walk the beaten way of Merit and Virtue, of Bias to
limit men their habitations, and to forbid Navigations the miracle of this
world, what are all these but Sophistical Dreams, and Chymerizing Ideas of
shallow imaginatiue Scholars, no way participating of the practicke real way
to extreminate those modern corruptions, which are crept into the world? we
must not treat of impossibilities, but fall to mat^ers actually in earnest, and
to be put in execution, not how things ought to be done, but how substantially
to reform the world, according as now we find it most strangely deformed; and
this we must perform warily, secretly, and without long arguing pro and con,
or critical animaduersions, the cause of new tumults. In brief then I say,
that all the reformation of this present Age consists in these few words: To
reward the good, and to punish the wicked.

Here Cleobulus rested, against whom Thales thus violently opposed, showing
unto all men, how dangerous a thing it is, albeit for the Truths sake, to
offend those persons, who live in the repute of Freedom and Prudence, which
made this sage Philosopher break forth into these speeches: Both these
Reverend Lords and my self, most wise Cleobulus, seeing that you had derided
and despised our Opinion as Sophistical and Chymerizing, expected some rare
project to proceed from your prudent brain, or that you had brought from the
Indies some new and miraculous Bezoar for the sudden cure of the present
enormities, when you slighted our cares, and propounded a Receipt more, I will
not say difficult, but indeed impossible, which might pose and go beyond even the
most curious Princes of secrets, Caius Plin. and Albertus Magnus. There is not
any of us here, my Cleobulus, but knows, that the reformation of the world
depe^ds upon rewarding the good, and punishing the wicked. Therefore let me
demand of you, I pray, who be those good men and those wicked? And then I will
return you this resolution, that that man lives not, which can discern and
distinguish Truth from Hypocrisy. Do you not perceive, that counterfeit Art
and dissimulation are in these times grown to that height of perfection, that
a great number of Spirits are so artificially and cunningly wicked, which seem
to wise men to be currantly good? And that those good men, which live
sincerely, ingenuously, simply, as innocent as Doves, without the least
painting or dawbing of Hypocrisy, are reputed scandalous, and of a libertine
loose behavior? All men naturally love the good, and hate the evil. Yea and
most Princes themselves do so as well by natural instinct, as in respect of
Interest of State. And when Hypocrites or sly crafty knaves are exalted to
promotion, and the good are vilipended and neglected, that comes to pass not
by the Election of Princes, but through the deceit and fraudulent tricks of
others. Only true bounty and ingenuous Candor are known to God and by him
rewarded. By him Vices are discovered and punished, for he alone enters into
the depth and profundity of the heart. Yea, and my self too with opening the
window in man's breast had pierced into the bottom of men's thoughts, had not
the enemy of this honest project and profitable field wherein I had sown this
memorable Grain, cast in before me his Seed of Tares.

Incredible satisfaction did these words of Thales produce to the Congregation,
who casting their eyes upon Periander, he as if he had been bidden to show his
reason, thus began: The diversity of Opinions, which hitherto I have heard of
you, most prudent Philosophers, confirm me in my ancient Opinion, tht many a
man does die, because Physicians have not apprehended the certainty of their
Patients disease. For which errors of theirs, they are to be excused, because
men may easily be deceived in these things, to the knowledge of which they
walk only with the feet of aim and conjecture. But for us, who are thought
by his Majesty, to be the curers of the world, to be ignorant in the cure of
this diseased world, it is the more shame, by how much the disease increases.
Yet as far as I see hitherto by reason of the varieties of the medicines, we
go about to heal the arm in stead of the breast that is corrupted. The truth
is, that Disorders have ever reigned among men. But now adays by reason of the
Worlds decrepit age, which cause men to abound with Avarice, Ambition, and
Pride, the true occasions of Hatred. These being occasioned by some mighty
Potentates, which intrude upon their Neighbors states, have bred in
continuance of time iealousies, wars, and as it were an hereditary
heart-burning of one Nation against the other. The medicine therefore is, that
Princes repent them, and content themselves with a moderate fortune, leaving
their neighbors at rest, and not under some imaginary pretenses challenge a
Catholic Supremacy over their brethren.

Here Periander ended his discourse, whom Solon thus opposed: The true causes
of the present evils, O Periander, were not omitted by us of ignorance, as you
perhaps suppose, but of a wary circumspection. The world from the beginning
has bin corrupted, and still continues. Yet it is a point of Prudence to wink
at some disorders, rather than with danger to seek to remove them. All men
living have some faults. And many dishonorable acts which Princes perpetrate,
we must not meddle with, lest we aggrauate and make them incurable, whom Time
may correct. Therefore let a wise man either speak charitably of their spots,
or hold his peace. For we shall find work enough to reform the hatred of the
common sort; by whom they proceed we must not scan, but refer the prime
workers of their disorders to the King of Kings, who sometimes hardens Pharaohs
for their own ruin, or Nebuchadnezzars for scourges to punish his rebellious
servants.

With these words, applauded of the Congregation, Solon made end of his speech.
After whom Cato began in this manner: Exceeding well have ye parlied, O grave
and famous Grecians, in showing the means to supplant and suppress Hatred and
other humane vices. But as I conceive, they are those, which languish of an
incurable Ptisick, which spit up their lungs, and do cast off their hair. In
men there is no help; therefore the best advice which I can give, is to desire
a final consummation of the world, and for us to join in prayer to the Divine
Majesty, to open the Cataracts and windows of Heaven to drown the whole
Earth again, yet with prouiso, to preserve in new Arks all those male
children, which have not past twelve years of age, and that of all the
Feminine Sex, of what age soever, there may remain no other thing behind
them, save their unlucky memory. And I beseech the Divine Majesty, that even
as he has allotted unto Bees, Fish, and to other infinite creatures, that
prized and singular benefit to breed without the help of the Female kind,
that the like grace he will grant unto men. For, my Lords, I am assured, that
while women live in the world, that men will prove but a Swinish heard of
ungracious brood.

It is not possible to believe, how much the Congregation did stomach this
discourse of Cato, who had this conceit of the new Deluge in such horror, that
all the rest of the Honorable Philosophers fell prostrate upon the ground with
their hands lift up toward Heaven, and devoutly desired God to preserve the
precious Sex of Women, and to defend Mankind from any such inundations, which
none would wish but frantic brains, or Chymerizing Heteroclites; and also to
protect them from fraudulent Make-bates, who under color of the Laws with
their mercenarie tongues put even the best natured by the ears; and that if
men would not be ruled to follow more wholesome counsel, he would beat them
with his scourges of Famine, War, and Pestilence, until they were made to
know themselves, and their duties to their Neighbors; And if it pleased not
his Majesty to be so severe and rigorous, yet that he would vouchsafe of his
Sovereign Bounty to grant this one request, Not to enrich villains.

This unhappy event had the opinion of Cato, when Seneca thus began his
Discourse: The Reformations of these modern abuses, as I conceive, ought not
to be handled too bitterly, before they be first dealt with gentle hands, and
managed with some mild medicines in the beginning of their Cure. For what
shame will redound to that Physician, whose Patient happens to die with his
Recipe still in his body remaining? To pass from one extremity to an other,
and to neglect the due means is rash counsel; because Man is not capable of
sudden and violent mutations. And seeing that we find that the world in
thousands of years is now fallen into this dangerous infirmity of calamities,
he is not very wise, nay very foolish, which thinks in a few days to reduce
this corrupted body to his former health. A gross and corpulent person, if the
Physician thinks it expedient to bring him low and lean, is to be prescribed a
Diet of one kind of meat at his meal, and to feed each day less than other,
that so by degrees he forgo his gurmandise and gluttonous custom. And so a
sickly person upon his recovery, or a Seaman returning from a long voyage
must for the first fortnight sup broths, gellies, and such weak nourishments,
until time reduce him stronger to feed on stronger meats; to which agrees that
Aphorism of Hippocrates, Corpora, quae longo tempore extenuantur, lent
reficere oportet. Besides this, both the quality of the Reformers, and the
condition of them which have need of reformation, are to be considered. As for
example, our selves, who at this present are appointed to reform the World, if
the parties to be reformed, are Scholars, Booksellers, Clerks, Pen and Ink
men, or such like, we may prevail to censure and correct their faults. But if
we go out of our limits, and enter into other men's professions and trades to
reform their enormities and knauish customs, we shall prove like that
ridiculous Cobbler, who going beyond his naule, presumed to judge of colors,
and to censure the exquisite picture of Apelles. Let us which are Scholars
meddle with matters only in our clement. Which of us, I pray here, have ever
dealt among Tailors, to judge of their deceits; among Vintners, to tell of
their sophisticating of wines; among Butchers, to show their blowing up of
flesh; among Clergymen, to censure of Simony; or among Lawyers, to entrap them
in their equivocations, quirks, and quillets? yet all these require
reformations, and the whole Earth groans and cries for ease and peace. But
shall we adventure to put our hands to hinder these disorders so far remote
from our professions? Shall we like so many blind bayards, endeavor to stop
bottles so cracked and cleft, and by that means let all the wine to spill about
the room? Then surely will a true Reformation fall out, and not before, when
the Mariner is called forth to show his judgment of the Seas and Winds, the
Soldier of marshalling a Battle, the Shepherd of his fleece, and he that
has been beaten by Lawyers and baffeld by their iuglings, can best
demonstrate unto us, how to tame their Hydra furies and poisonous qualities.
Therefore let us call unto us out of every Craft, Mystery, and Profession,
four of the honestest, most renouned for their integrity of life, and confer
with them touching the means, how to amend what is amiss.

Although this grave counsel greatly pleased Pittacus and Chilon, yet all the
rest detested it as bad as Catoes, saying, that he offered them a scandalous
affront, and an indignity to Apollocs Majesty, to call in such base-minded
people not traind up in Philosophy to be joined with men of their degree. And
that they were the Souls precious faculties, which gave the well-being to a
business of this nature, which those wanted. Further, they concurred in this
purpose, with might and maine, to preserve the Jurisdiction of their
Philosophical Court, whereof they protested to be as jealous as Husbands of
their fairest Wives; And that they thought so wise a man as Seneca was reputed
to be, being the Archphilosopher of the Latins would have yielded to have
twenty ounces of his blood drawn out of the best vein of his life, than to
persuade them to lose one ounce of their Jurisdiction, whereon their reputation
consisted.

The Lords Reform ^s after they had thus checked Seneca, were wonderfully
perplexed, and in a manner hopeless of effecting any good, because Mazzon who
was yet to speak, they adjudged a new man, and without experience. Yet now
that his turn came to speak, he thus pithily spoke: Not by any desert of
mine, most prudent Philosophers, but by his Majesty's mere and special favor
am I admitted into this Honorable Assembly. And I freely acknowledge, that at
this virtuous meeting it were my part to employ my ears, rather than my
tongue, being fitter to learn and to be silent. And if that any other matter
had been to be determined saving this, I would not presume to speak. But
because the subject now in hand concerns the reformation of modern disorders,
which now adays reign in the world, I being a modern man, even now come from
the world, where I left them continually disputing and keeping a stir about
reformations, am the better encouraged to lay my helping hand, and though I say
it, I am as good a Proficient in this matter, as Euclide in the Mathematics.
The true cure of the bodies disease is to visit the sick in person, and to
confer with him of the causes and other occurrences of his sickness. Even so
for the cure of the Worlds infirmities, let us call in the World himself,
question with him, feel his pulses, and look upon the diseased parts of his
body, whereby the Cure may become the sooner remedied, which now seems
desperate and incurable.

In such wise did this advice please the Lords of the Congregation, that they
suddenly commanded the World to be called unto them, who incontinently made his
repair, being drawn in a Coach by the four Seasons of the Year, and by them
was led into the Delphick Palace. He was a man well stricken in years, yet
seemed to be of a galliard and robustuous complexion, which betokened that he
might live many years longer. Only it seemed, that he had a wheezing in his
pipes with some difficulty of breath, and in speaking he showed himself to be
somewhat hoarse, and wept continually, which argued he ayled somewhat, and
labored as yet more with some grievous tormenting pain in his brain or some
other inward part of his body. The Philosophers asked him, how he had his face
so ruddy and Iouially appearing, which was a sign that he was in health,
having store of pure radical moisture, full of natural heat, and could not
but have a good stomach. And they remembered, that about a hundred years
sithence, they had seen him look yellow, as if he had been sick of the
yellow Iaundise, yet now it seemed unto them, that he was recovered. But for
all that they charged him freely to open his griefs, that they might prescribe
thereafter some remedies to help him.

Hereupon the World answered: My Lords, Presently after I was borne, I fell
into sicknesses and griefs, whereof I languish at this instant. My face, which
you behold so seeming red, is done over with Ladies licks, slicks, and other
painting stuff of the Levant. My Infirmity is like the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea, with the self-same water in it, for all it seems to increase, and
fall; but with this interchangeable course, that when I have a good countenance
outwardly, my grief lies within me, as I feel my self at this instant: And
when I look ill outwardly, I am in perfect health within. But if you please to
try in what case I am indeed without dissembling any longer my miseries, pull
off my mask and gaudy coat, and you shall see when I am stark naked, that I
am indeed but a living carcass. The Philosophers out of hand disrobed him, and
when the World was stripped naked, they saw, that the poor unfortunate Creature
had a scurfe four fingers thick over his flesh, as bad as the Leprosy, or
the Catholic disease, which did eat into his flesh dangerously: Whereupon the
wise Reformers took ten Razours, and every one of them with a Razour began
very diligently to shave and pare off that thick scurfe in appearance, and
busied themselves so long, until they pierced to the quick bone, but could
not in this huge Colossus meet with one Ounce of good substantial flesh. Which
when the Reformers perceived, they stood a while amazed, and when they had
reuested him with his mask and ^oolish Robes, they licensed him to depart. And
then after conference among themselves, concluding the Cure too desperate and
past help, they abandoned the care of their public thoughts, and resolved to
provide for the saving of their private reputation unstained. And therefore they
all joined together to satisfy the common peoples expectations, and because
they should see they were not idle, nor careless of their good, they caused
Mazzon the Secretary to pen and publish the general Reformation, wherein with
a preamble of magnificall words, they testified to the world, the perpetual
care which his Majesty took for the virtuous conversation of his Learned
Society, of his indefatigable pains from time to time, sustained for the
safety of Mankind, and of the infinite labor and toil of the Lords Reformers
for the compiling and setting out of good Orders; and afterward descending to
particulars, they did put down the prices of Coleworts, Pilchards, Pumpions
and Melons. And now when all the Lords were ready to subscribe to the
Proclamation, Thales the Milesian remembered them, that some sly Hucksters,
when they sold Lupines, Pease, and Oaten meal, used a little Dish, that i^ was
a most intolerable scandal not to foresee this disorder. This last advice of
Thales seemed very expedient to the whole Congregation, and as most necessary
it was added to the Reformation, that these Dishes should be greater therefore
from thence forwards. Presently after they caused the Gates of the Palace to be
opened, and going into the Market place, they commanded the Crier to read the
Proclamation concerning the Reformation of the World, which was done with such
applause and joy to every man, that all Parnassus rebounded with their clamours
and shouts, as tokens of the great contentments they took for this serious and
long expected Reformation. But the wisest sort smelt out the drift, and laughed
in their sleeves to see the rascality and foolish Idiots to delight themselves
with bables, as babies with nuts. Men of understanding know, that vices will
abound, as long as men live in the world, Vitia erunt donec homines; and that
humane Prudence does consist in this, to have wit sufficient for this one
difficult resolution, to forsake the world as another has found it, or to live
as not to live.

CHAP. 18.
The Duke of Hernia his Speech in the Council of Spain to a proposition,
Whether it were expedient for his Catholic Majesty to conclude a peace with
his brother in law the Duke of Sauoy?
I Could wish in these present stirs of Sauoy, that I were rather a Minister
and an executioner of your Majesty's Will and Commandment, then an Inuentor of
counsel, which if it chance to succeed ill in the event, may return
prejudicial to the Author, and hurtful to your Majesty. But since we are
brought to this pass, that it is necessary to collect the sum of your
deliberations, and that this charge is now imposed on me, I will enforce my
self, as far as the weakness of my wit extends, to satisfy the obligation
of the Loyalty, Affection, and Devotion, which I owe unto your Majesty and my
country. The most sacred King Treats now, whether he ought to lay down arms
and hostility, and to forgive all such injuries, as he received at the Duke of
Sauoyes hands, by that means pleasuring the Princes of Italy, and the Pope in
particular, who by his Nuntio does earnestly solicit the same? Or else whether
your Majesty ought to deprive him by force of war, either of all his estate,
or of part, thereby to secure your Duchy of Milan from his treacheries, being
a member of so great importance, both by it self and by the opportunity of the
situation, with the which it binds together all the Body of this great
Monarchy, that it is deservedly held to be the key of all your Kingdoms,
seeing that with the benefit of this Dominion, we enjoy the pre-eminence of
G^noa, and the commodity of the Sea with havens, from whence in times of peace
by Traffic, we receive very great Gain, and in times of wars we open a
secure passage to our Armadaes and Armies? From hence the Kingdom of Naples is
preserved, where we shall hardly arrive with our armed Galleys, through the
midst of the Tirr^ene Sea in a tempestuous Winter, if we touch not and ride at
Anchor in one of these places. From this State in brief we are enabled to go
into Switz^rland and Germany, there to levy Soldiers for the Low Countries,
to give and receive aid from the confederate Princes; besides that with the
situation of this place, being in the midst of Lumbardy, we hold the residue of
Italy bridled, that they dare not stir to oppose our wills. The which things
although they be known unto this most prudent Council, and better yet to
your Majesty, I would notwithstanding put you in mind thereof, because you
might excuse me, if I seemed perchance fearful or jealous for the
preservation thereof; and certainly when I shall conceive that there is some
security and sufficiency in these courses which now are propounded, I will
then rank my self among the first to incline to peace, wishing, that after
our tedious and long wars in Flaunders, which have consumed both the men and
Kingdoms, we might breathe a while, and recover some fresh blood, and also
refresh our drooping vital Spirits, to be the better able one day gloriously
to encounter and lead our armies against the Infidels, and to spread in their
countries both the Christian Faith and the Empire. But what security do we
see in th^se propounded Treaties? The Popes Nuntio does promise, that if we
would free the Duke of Sauoy from the fear he is in, to be prevented and
oppressed, the Duke should likewise disarme, and hold himself always
hereafter your Majesty's good kinsman and servant, and that he shall never more
minister cause of innovation, nor nourish any intelligence prejudicial to the
State of Milan. And to secure us from fraud, that he shall leave his second
Son at your Court for pledge. But he speaks nothing of alienating and
separating himself from the friendship and aliance of France; nor that he will
oppose himself against their forces, when they shall attempt to assault this
State of Milan. And who does not here see his fraud, as if we were so simple in
belief, and knew not how to diue where his thoughts tended? Are not we
sufficiently choked and made perfect of his cunning devices? Seeing that the
Count de Fuentes has written from Milan, that we ought not to trust him; that
his Treaties and practices holden with the King of France were most certain
for the surprising of that State; let no man tell me, that it is security
sufficient to lay a son of his in our hands for hostage, because he having
other sons left him at home, among whom is his Eldest son, will never care
to remove him hence to hinder his designs, no more then King Francis was
hindered and stayed from raising Arms against the Emperor Charles the fifth,
after he had left his two sons in pledge: Or the Prince of Orange, who for
all that he had given a Son of his in pawn, desisted not to conspire the ruin
of Flanders against your most glorious Father. He has declared himself what
he is, and what remorse of conscience he feels, that now has complotted
against a King, his Kinsman and Benefactour; against that house, which twice
restored him to the State which he holds, in that he would compass and effect
the French Match, notwithstanding your Majesty's disagreement and disswasion.
For your Majesty foresaw, that this match would prove a Seminary of Discord,
and a rock of Scandal. Now he tries and compasses by all means only to
avoid the present peril, and to watch an occasion to deceive us another time,
or to take us unprovided. For all this, he comes not with humility to procure
pardon from the magnanimity and generositie of your most sacred mind, but
casting himself into the arms of your enemies with weapons in hand, and with
threats he goes about to terrify you, and with the greatest indignity to force
your Majesty to a peace no less ignominious, then ill secured. We have too
much lost (if it be lawful form to speak the truth) our reputation in
yielding to a Truce with the States of Holland, though the same was accounted
necessary for our Affairs in regard of the difficulty to sustain the charge
of a war so far remote. To which now let us adioyne this point, that there
is not so vile an adversary, who dares not to move and convert his thoughts at
every nouelty, and already we see the rest of the Italians discontented with
our Greatness, willing to rise against us, yea, and to call the Jews and the
Turks in to their succor, albeit with their own dangers, if God and the
Angel Guardians of your Crown do not work continual miracles for our
Defense, truly I cannot see, who shall deliver us. What then remains? Most
sacred King, I am of opinion, that Peace is not to be refused, so that the same
be concluded with safety, the which can no way be, but by holding in deposit^
and impawned in your hands those Forts, which shall be thought fit by your
Captains, and to relieve them upon his cost, and for your good, or at least
that he disburse the greatest part of the expense occasioned hitherto through
his default. This Demand ought not to seem strange unto him, seeing he has
wittingly and advisedly used such ingratitude and deceits so oftentimes against
you. Therefore we must let him understand, that we may not repose any
confidence in him, except we have these Forts in pledge, that so we may safely
with our Reputation, reduce our matters to a sound issue, not leaving place for
him in reason to complain of us as the Authors of the war. But if the Duke
will not consent to these our just demands, and will refuse to receive our
Garrisons into his Forts* I am of the mind it is better to make war against
him, then by protracting time to expect troubles hereafter in our own home.
Another time we may run into a greater hazard, and we may have to do with
a more powerful Prince. In the mean while it is convenient for your Majesty's
honor to adventure all into the hand of Fortune, then voluntarily to yield
with so great indignity to conditions of so little safety. Howbeit I see not
where those dangers lie, which some would make so great. I am sure, that in
respect of the Justice of the cause, where a man is not stirred with any desire
to spoil another of his due, but with necessity to preserve his own State,
and that with greater facility then some imagine, the Duke of Sauoyes power is
not stronger then ours. I am sure, that he is in a manner weak, and for two
reasons to be slighted, as well in knowing him to be dangerously suspected, as
also in that he is driven to stand Armed and on his guard, which cannot but
consume him in a short time. Nor does their opinion any whit move me, which say
that he shall not want succors out of France, and out of those parts of Italy,
which are interessed for their preservation, because the French which should
aid him, are derived from a Government, whereof the Head is a Woman, divided
in Religion, full of emulation, and of sundry disagreements among themselves,
where it is no hard matter still to nourish and increase their doubts with
their dissentions and diuersified resolutions, so that the effects of them will
fall out to be of small security, vain, or long and uncertain.

And the dessignes of the Italians environed with our bordering States are
become weakened and worn out by the sudden death of the French King, in whom
they had grounded their hopes; so that now being afraid of our neighboring
Forces, and by the rising Fortunes of your Majesty, they will not presume
openly to descend into this war, but rather by observing other men's
proceedings, and vainly trusting to the benefit of the time, they will stand
idle as mournful spectators of the tempest, which beats on their Neighbors
fields; unto whom it shall be in your Majesty's power to give them that ^orme
and Law, whatsoever your Benignity shall please to impose, and hereafter shall
be advised according to the times. Neither let your Majesty fail to
entertain them with sundry cautions and artificial promises, and with
protestations to affirm unto them, that what you take away from their Father,
you will restore it to the Son, granting that to your Blood, which now you
have denied to the Father for his ill deserts. With these hopeful promises let
the Prince Philebert be fed, and extraordinarily made much off. In the mean
time then let the provisions for the war be speedily hastened on, assembling
soldiers out of the State of Milan, which are not enfeebled, as some (I know
not whether they do it of zeal or interest) do express, to minister an
occasion to the enemy of insulting. We have men for number and valor
sufficient for a greater enterprise then this, among these good store of old
Soldiers exercised in the Wars of the Low Countries; nor are there wanting
Captains of estimation and experience.

And if your Treasure seems somewhat scanted, you have a way to find out so
much money as you please, by departing with diverse Merchandises, and by feeding
your Creditors with the particulars of the Fleets at their return from the
Indies, and also by other extraordinary means. And seeing that your Majesty
has no wars at this present in any other parts, the ordinary Revenues of
your Kingdoms are enough to supply the charge of this war. Besides the seat
of the war will fall out to be in a great part of the Enemies own
Territories, which will every day produce more fortunate conditions. Only let
your Majesty resolve, and determine to pass (as Caesar did) the Rubicon; and
then all things will succeed easy, plain, and the fruits of the victory will
always overcome the lightness of belief. Occasions are rare, and you had
need to meet with them: For whosoever thinks you may aspire to the Empire of
Italy without vnsh^^thing your sword, or a^iding the hazard, shows that he
has had but small doings in the world. God and Fortune do favor the
Aduenturous, the vigilant, and valiant; and despises the fearful, the
sleepy, and the pusillanimous. Shall we for frivolous suspicions of remote
dangers contemn lively and assured hopes?

I do then conclude, Most invincible King, that unless we may have some Forts
impawned into our hands, without the which the State of Milan will still
remain in the same peril, we ought not in any wise to embrace that other
Treaty, which is offered by the Popes Nuntio, nor to stay so long until the
new King of France be grown to his riper years, lest he be then incited and
provoked by this Duke, who is full of vast and irregular conceits to pass the
mountains to your damage, but now whilst he is a Pupil, it is necessary to
prevent the inconvenience and to transfer the War into the Enemies Land. I
beseech your Majesty to consider with what good opportunity the way is made
open for you to the Monarchy of Italy, and to the greater part of Europe, as
God has lately favored you. In what manner has he dissipated and confounded
our Enemies Counsels by the sudden death of Henry the fourth?

That Kingdom is now without a Head, Italy disunited and weak, Germany all
tottered and divided; The Turk is beaten back, and entangled in the Wars of
the Levant, so that none is able to withstand your designs. The Injury is
apparent, which pricks you to a just revenge, and frees you from any blot of
too much desire of Rule. Your Age which is now at the flower, is pried into,
and expected that it walk with some travel through the way of Glory, with the
which your Greatness shall no less be conjoined, then the Advancement of
Religion, together with the safety of all Christendom. By which proceedings we
shall see that verified of your Majesty, which many Learned men with no
ambiguous observations of the Celestial Influences, and of the worlds
passages, have oftentimes affirmed to have been ordained in Heaven, that this
most Noble Province having been oppressed for so many Ages, under the hard
bondage of Strangers, ought at last in the Revolution of so many years to
stand above all, and to extend their Empire to the uttermost Confines of the
Earth, and to remain nothing inferior to that of the Persians, of the
Macedonians, or Romans.

FINIS.

