BOHEMICA IVRA DEFENSA.

THE BOHEMIAN LAWS OR RIGHTS DEFENDED, Against the INFORMER: OR An Answer to
an Information, falsely so called, secretly printed and divulged against the
Writings published by the States of BOHEMIA.

Translated out of Latin by I. H.

M.D.C.XX.

The Translators Preface.
HOw hard a thing it is to translate from one language to another, and make the
same word for word to answer one another, as face answers face in a glass;
the right sense, phrase, grace, and propriety thereof observed, is not
unknown to the learned, who have acknowledged, and found by experience, this
so great a difficulty. Much more hard (I say) then to compose a thing anew,
and bring forth a man's own free conceptions: which yet is both hard and
painful, as all new births be. Neither is it to be expected, or possible for
any one, always so exactly to express the very words and phrase, which in
diverse languages are different: a liberty therein left to all Translators,
which here I challenge. Nor have I varied much from the Authors words herein,
but only in some few places (and that consulting with better judgments then my
own:) which had I translated verbatim, might have remained very obscure. And
so I refer it to the censure of all those who favor the equity of this so
Christian a cause. Being an answer to an Information (or rather
misinformation) of the Adversaries both of Truth and Religion, who are now
grown to that height of impudency, as they will Inform, affirm, yea and
contradict and deny almost any thing, though as clear as the Sun, either in
matter of right or fact, to maintain their own desperate cause. Witness all
those idle rumors we have heard with our ears, from time to time dispersed
amongst us, and daily hear: which Time already in part has showed to be
palpable and false, and (I hope) will do more and more; coming from the
father of lies, and his malicious instruments: with such contumelious and
unworthy aspersions, upon that most Noble and Heroical Prince, now King of
Bohemia, and his proceedings; whereby they endeavor by all means to disable,
disgrace, and disparage him, (and so have done even from the time of his
Nuptials to this last Action, which has set them all on fire) as (I hope) God
in due time will make all the world eye witnesses and judges thereof by the
event; Exitus acta probat: and hereupon we will join issue with them. If Rome
be not Babylon, and Babylon fall not, then are we palpable liars (as they call
us) like themselves, neither has the Lord spoken by any of his Prophets: but
if it be, then let them be liars (as they are, and the children of their
father the Devil) and God only true, as it is written: in the mean time,
desinant maledicere, I say no more. If there be any escapes either in this
translation, or the former impression of the Latin (whereof I was an ouer-seer)
as also of the other Reasons and Relations, formerly published, (wherein was
promised further satisfaction, and justification of the cause, since made good,
both by the King of Bohemia himself, and other his servants and well-willers)
I say as then: Me, me adsum qui feci; I hope the Christian Reader will pardon
and pass over them. If those of the adverse part, friends and well-willers to
the Informer, perhaps meet and quarrel with such small matters, they shall
but only bewray their distrust, and weakness of their own cause, not finding
greater matters to challenge, therefore carping at the least: remembering that
saying (whereof they make good use) Calumniare audacter, semper aliquid haeret.
And so I conclude with the Author in this his prooeme following, referring (as
before) the further censure hereof to the discreet and judicious Reader: let
the wise judge whether is more solid; and let the prudent Reader adhere and
cleave unto that which is the plainer, and grounded upon best proofs.

The Bohemian Laws or Rights defended, Against the Informer.
THAT most excellent clear Lamp of right reason, is not so altogether extinct
by the fall of man's nature, but that some little spark, (and so much)
remains, that even those who do most of all offend against right reason, and
confound, and overthrow both divine and humane Laws, do yet covet, and would
be thought to do those unjust things they do, (or endeavor to do) by Law
and by right. There be some go a fowling after Kingdoms, and hunt after
Scepters: and send abroad their hounds, that they may assault the wild Beast
lying hid safe and secure in her own Lords Parkes: pretending her now to
belong to the jurisdiction of another, lest they should seem injurious to any.
Such a hound we see a certain Informer to be: who, tooth and nail, by right
and wrong, would (if he could) draw the Kingdom of Bohemia (in hope devoured
of his Lord) to the jurisdiction and rights of the same Lord of his: that he
might be thought but only to seize upon his own prey, and not to drive
another man's away. From the mouthing, and biting of this so great a Dog, to
deliver this noble wild Beast, were a work both just and equal, well worth
the labor: that she might be detayned under her own lawful and friendly
Keeper, in her own proper Pastures: and not exposed to the ouergreedy jaws of
others, to be devoured, and swallowed up. Our Informer knew very well, no right
at all to the Kingdom of Bohemia, to belong to the most Illustrious Archduke
Ferdinand now Emperor. He saw the laws and rights of the Bohemians (by them
explicated in a short sum) among honest minded men, and all of the wiser
sort, to be held impregnable, not to be shaken. What should he then do? Not
to persuade the Wise: (for of that he is out of hope) but to the intent he
might induce the base, and rude multitude into that opinion; that the writings
of the Bohemians are sufficiently answered; and that the Laws in them
contained are by him wholly shaken: he has caused to be printed a certain
Treatise, here and there patched up to that effect; that (at leastwise by the
printed book) The ignorant might persuade themselves the reasons of the
Bohemians to be sufficiently confuted. If the Informer would have dealt with
the prudent only, and experienced in affairs, and in the laws of government,
there was no cause why he should publish those vain commentaries, secretly and
by stealth imprinted. For he had adversaries very ready, who were able to
discover unto him sufficiently, the falsehoods, arts, deceits, and wiliness of
those commentaries: and lay open the matter before the wise without disguising
and fallacies; yet did he promise to himself the victory, if he first could
communicate those things (which were only debated among the wiser sort) in
print to the ignorant multitude. There was no cause truly (I confess)
wherefore by this information of the adverse part, the reasons of the Bohemians
more largely explicated, and in vain oppugned, should have been committed to
the multitude in print; bua that the other Informer, has even in forced good
men; favoring the equity of the cause hereunto! who surely (lest he should
seem both to himself and others over wise) have thought this Information very
fit to be published. Let the wise judge whether is more solid: and let the
prudent Reader adhere, and cleave unto that which is the plainer, and grounded
upon best proofs.

THE ANSWER To the Information against the Apologies and Writings of the
States of Bohemia.
The first Part.
THE pretended Information therefore says, Fol. 1.
The Kingdom of Bohemia is not Elective but in case, etc. And a little after,
Fol. 2.
Neither is it true that it has continued the ELECTIONS free from six Ages.
First of all, The scope of this first Part.
therefore we must establish the Right of ELECTION belonging to the Bohemians,
which the Informer goes about to overthrow: then after must examine the
proofs produced to the contrary; from the selfsame Historians which the
Informer, for the defense of his own cause does allege. For the Kingdom of
Bohemia, with the Provinces incorporate, (any one void of passion being judge)
it is most certain, that from the very first beginning, it has been
altogether free, and never subject to any Hereditarie Succession; and has
preserved this Liberty entire, and hitherto inviolable: not at all verbal
only, of no force, virtue and effect; as the Informer falsely informs. The
words of the Informer are these: That in the Bohemian tongue every assumption,
or receiving of a King, Fol. 5. Not every receiving of a King, signified by the
word Election.
indifferently, whether it be done by right of Succession, or by true
ELECTION; is signified by the word ELECTION, largely and generally taken,
though improperly.

Is not this tergiuersation more then ridiculous? For the Bohemian tongue is
not so barren, but that it is able to distinguish ELECTION from Inheritance:
yes those words of ELECTION, and Inheritance, in the Bohemian Language to be
most different, the Bohemian Historians (as also others who have written in the
Germane and Latin Tongues: to wit, Dubrauius, Aencas Syluius, and others; and
the Privileges also of diverse Emperors) do teach and declare.

Therefore for the confirmation, The most free Election of the Bohemians proved.
and strengthening of the said free ELECTION of the Bohemians; it is to be
noted, the same (together with the most free States and Bohemian Nation) from
none, either Emperor, King, Monarch, or Prince to have taken her first
beginning.

For Czechius (after whose name even to this day, Haiac. Fol. 20. Aeu. Syl. c.
34. Dub. lib. 1.
the Bohemian Nation in their own Proper speech is so called) was the first,
who with his Legions inhabited that Kingdom, before desert; adorned with no
Laws, or Policy: who being dead; when, for the want of a Prince, diverse
Controversies, Iarres, and Discontents here and there did arise: it was
decreed by common counsel, and with one consent, for the ELECTING of some one,
to whom as to their Prince, they might perform obedience. Instantly hereupon
Crocus, a man excelling all others in fame, and highly beloved of all, was
ELECTED: And so in the year of Christ, 670. the first foundation of the Right
of ELECTION was laid. Anno 670.
By this form of most free, and lawful ELECTION, and by no other Law, or
Right whatsoever, all the succeeding Princes, called Dukes of Bohemia, from the
said year 670. unto the year 1109. and so for the space of 579. years fully
complete; without any manner of Impediment of any, either Prince or Lord; have
been advanced to that Government. And chiefly the circumstances of Historians
in these cases are well to be weighed. For scarce (or not at all indeed) any
succession of a new Prince is at any time described, where there is not mention
made of the conuocations, (at leastwise) of the Nobles of the Kingdom, and of
the consultations for the ELECTING of a new Prince. And there can be no
example found, See here what kind of Succession in the Kingdom of Bohemia.
Haiec. Fol, 3.
although the Son succeeded the Father, where ever the said ELECTION has been
omitted: and ofttimes, the children of the dead Prince neglected, his brethren
or others, also many times the younger before the elder, have been preferred
and ELECTED. Yea, the children and descendents of Czechius, the first founder
of this state, not regarded, they have ELECTED Crocus wholly of another Family:
as Haiecius testifies. For during that most great Confusion and Anarchie, the
wiser sort, and haters of evil, called the whole people of both Sexes to the
Sepulcher of Czechius; proposed the ELECTION of a new Prince, and with the
general consent of all, ELECTED the aforesaid Crocus. And the reasons of this
ELECTION are also set down by other Historians. For Cosma Pragensis says
thus: This man was in deliberation of judgments discreet, to whom, as well out
of the proper Tribes, as out of the Comminaltie of the whole Province, even as
Bees unto the Hiue, all men did flock, for the deciding of controversies.

And George Bartholdus testifies: Crocus a just man, (...). Barth in Boh. ^ia,
page.11
and of great esteem and authority at that time among the Bohemians, was
Elected Prince.

Five Months after the death of Crocus, Fol. 8. Anno 710.
which happened in the year 710. the States of the Kingdom, and the Prelates
again assemble, for the ELECTING of a new Lord; and do establish in the
Government Libussa: whereof growing very weary, (as being foeminine) she
speaks on this manner to the States: Depart ye, Fol. 11.
and that day I appoint you return to me again: whomsoever then you shall
ELECT for your Prince, he shall be my Husband. Anno 722.
And by this means Premislaus, Anno 722. obtained both the Principality, and
Libussa. Where Cosma Pragensis introduces the people speaking thus to
Premissaus: Our Lady Libussa, Page 6.
and all the whole people do command that thou come quickly, etc. Thee our
Duke, thee our Judge, thee our Governor, thee our Protector, thee only do we
ELECT for our Lord.

Premislaus diseased and grown old, calls the States together: as Haiecius
testifies, Anno 745. gave them great thanks that they had ELECTED him; and
did entreat for Nezamislius that he might be ELECTED: who also, by this
means, of the Nobles was ELECTED and advanced to the Government of the
Kingdom.

After his death, Fol. 36.
the Barons, Nobles, and Peers, with the whole people, Anno 783. assemble
together before the gates of the Castle of Prage, and with one consent do
ELECT, and salute Mnatha the son of Nezamislaus for their Prince.

Duke Mnatha, Anno 804, Fol. 41.
leaving his Son Vogenus desperately sick, dies. If the free right of
election did not belong to the States of Buhemia, by what right could they have
chosen this Rohonicus?
The States lest also his son should est-soones pay his debt to nature, and
so (by reason of the ambition of the Nobles) fearing sedition might arise, each
one of these great ones aspiring to the Dukedom) they constitute another,
Rohonicus by name. But this man ruling with very great rigor, they assemble
again, ELECT Vogenus, and lead him to the Dukes seat, to wit, the castle of
Vicegrade. But Rohonicus, who at that time was in the said castle, pretending a
former ELECTION, does defend himself with very great force. At length,
breaking open the gates, by flight he seeks his safety, and Vogenus is
confirmed in the Throne.

After the death of VOGENVS, Fol. 50. If the State of Bohemia were hereditarie,
without all doubt the elder brother had been retained.
the whole people well nere of all Bohemia, Anno 822. do assemble together at
the Castle of Vicegrade: where there arose great controversy, whether of the
two sons of VOGENVS (when some for the goodly stature of his body, wished
rather the younger, others the elder) ought to be chosen, CREVOMISLIVS at
length, after diverse concertations, is ELECTED: and both the brothers, to wit,
CREVOMISLIVS and VRATISLAVS, were contented to abide the decrees of the Nobles
and States. And this solemn act of the confirmation of CREVOMISLIVS, in so
great an assembly of people (in their own Language, applauding, Viuat, viuat,
CREVOMISLIVS, this is our Duke, and will preserve us in all honor and
prosperity) comes well to be noted.

CREVOMISLIVS dying, Anno 852. the States assembled again, Fol. 56.
saluted, and ELECTED NECLA with very great acclamations: who departing this
life, all the people come together at the fountain of Gesenlia, and there
ELECTED HOSTIVITIVS the son of NECLA, Anno 873.

The History in this place makes mention of a sort of Nobles of Bohemia, Fol.
65.
called LOPOTES: these were Lieutenancs of Provinces, who did prescribe Laws
both to the people and Peers of the Kingdom; yea, even to the Dukes
themselves, and says, they did also participate of the government of the
Kingdom.

The ELECTION also of BORIVORIVS, Fol. 71.
the son of HOSTIVITIVS (which fell out in the year 890. Heathenish Sacrifice
being used) as also of the Duchess, who afterward by the said LOPOTES, was
joined in marriage with BORIVORIVS) is with diverse circumstances described by
the Historian.

BORIVORIVS, who first received the Sacrament of Baptism, Fol. 72.
willing to bring in Christianity, (expulsed out of his Kingdom) in his place
STVGMIR of Bauaria was ELECTED, Anno 895. Whom notwithstanding, seeing he was
ignorant of the Bohemian tongue, after two months, sufficiently rewarded, they
sent home again. Whereupon (a Prince now wanting) again great tumults did
arise: Wherefore a general assembly was called at Vicegrade, for the ELECTING
of a new Duke; and there pro and con, both for and against BORIVORIVS, great
clamor, disputed by arms; at length (the Boriuorians Victors) it was
concluded for BORIVORIVS.

The year following 897. Fol. 74.
in the month of March, the States do again assemble, and there with one
consent an Embassage decreed for the recalling of Boriuorius out of Morauia.
This man, after (with the consent and approbation of the States) resigned the
Dukedom to his son Spitigneus: who a little while after dying, thereafter
Anno 907. the aforesaid Lopotes do assemble: where, after diverse and long
treaties, Boriuorius again is called; who when as now he had given himself to
a private and quiet life, giving thanks to the States for their so propense
love toward him, he does entreat them for his son Vratislaus to be ELECTED.

Notwithstanding the States, Fol. 78.
although they had conceived some doubt by reason of his sons tender age, yet
animated with the fathers counsels, at length they ELECTED him, and advanced
him into the seat of the Dukedom.

Vratislaus dying, Anno 916. Fol. 83.
after diverse public assemblies, Wenceslaus his son, being now of riper
years, in the presence of the States does speak unto his mother (a Widow, and
hitherto euilly administering the Dukedom) on this manner: Know (mother) that
the Lopotes, Lords and Nobles of this State, have ELECTED me for their Duke;
wherefore rest thou thy self contented with the right of thy widowhood, leave
the charge of reigning and ruling to me. And thus was Wenceslaus with the
consent and applause of the States and people, declared Duke of Bohemia.

This Wenceslaus, famous for his piety and Sanctimonie, Fol. 101.
being slain by his brother Boleslaus a tyrant; into his place, Anno 967.
Boleslaus the second (as the Historian testifies) was ELECTED.

Anno 1003. the States again assembled, Fol. 126.
and ELECTED Iaromyrius the son of Boleslaus: his father (and that against
the counsel of the States) departing into Polonia, and desiring, that if any
disaster should befall him (as indeed afterward he was deprived of his sight)
they would ELECT his son into his room.

Vdalricus, Fol, 41.
persecuting his brother Iaromyrius, Bretislaus, Anno 1037. was ELECTED. But
the ELECTION of Spitigneus the son of Bretislaus (which happened in the year
1055.) by reason of the multitude of the dead man's children, was very solemn:
for the States in very great number assembled, and (the testament of the Duke
deceassed well weighed) all of what condition, state, or age soever they were,
ELECTED the elder son of Bretislaus, Spitigneus by name.

After him, Fol. 163.
his brother Vratislaus, who (according to our Author) first obtained the title
of King from Henry the Emperor,) by common suffrage of all is ELECTED.

To him, Conradus his brother, by the free voices and ELECTION of the States
was substitute: who although he left behind him two sons, yet (those
rejected) they did ELECT his cousin Bretislaus, and after that Anno 1100,
Borsiuogius.

After this, those that were descended from the Dukes and Kings stirred up
great tumults; wherefore, Suatoplucus the Duke Anno 1109. being slain in
battle, the Emperor at that time present, spoke thus to the Bohemians: My
Lords, I call God to witness, I take the death of this Prince heavily; but
seeing it was his will, it is your parts now, which soever of his sons
suruining, you had rather, to ELECT into the Place of his Father. But the
States at that time present, desired Otho, the brother of him that was dead,
the Emperor approving thereof: unto whom notwithstanding, after, the rest of
the States opposed themselves with all their might; whereof hereafter more at
large.

Thus far Haiecius, the most famous Writer of the Bohemian affairs, alleged
also by the Author of the information himself: out of whose Copy printed at
Prague in the Germane Tongue, Anno 1596. with the privilege of Rodulph the
Second, of godly memory, Emperor, all these things were faithfully
transcribed, and translated. Where also the Germane words, Election, or Right
of Electing, do differ from the words of Receiving or Hereditarie succession,
as far as heaven from earth. For another thing is Erivahlen, to ELECT,
Anegmen, to receive, and Ererben, to take by Hereditarie right. Which words
also in the reuersals of the Emperors, Rodulph and Mathias, de Anno 1608. (as
hereafter more at large shall be demonstrated) are read expressly distinct. And
for the greater demonstration of the vain gloss of the Informer, let us hear
the Authors who hitherto have written the affairs of Bohemia in the Latin
tongue. Dubrauius making mention of Nezamislius, the son of Primislaus,
expressly says thus: Though he were dull, and void of understanding, yet for
the memory of his father, he obtained the favor of the States, and of them in
the solemn accustomed manner, was saluted Prince in the castle of Visserade,
Vicinus taking it hainously, who thought himself rather worthy the same
dignity of a Prince. And after, Hostivitius (his younger brother taking it
grievously) was put by the States in his fathers place. Lib. 3. page 20.
Item, In that assembly Vratislaus is declared Prince by all the States. Lib.
8. p. 59.
These phrases also are often found elsewhere. Aeneas Syluius uses phrases
without any ambiguities: Him do they make choice of for their Prince.

He through the favor of the people governed. And although this Author
handles our matter somewhat succinctly; yet, confronting him with the things
before going, it may easily be understood. Hereunto agrees the testimony of
Cosma Pragensis: these be his words: After the (...) of Brecislaus, all the
Bohemian Nation, Chron. p. 30. Anno 1055.
both great and mall, by common counsel, and a like affection and will do
ELECT for their Duke, his first borne son, Zpingnen: singing, KYRIE ELEYSON.
Item The Bohemians all favoring Vladislaus, he is exalted t^ the Throne. And
again, The Bohemians all assenting, Vladislaus is advanced to the Throne.

These and many other testimonies are found among the Historians, which if they
should all be put here, the day would sooner sail than they: for, from the
very first beginnings, even until the year 1109. they have remained in a
continued course without interruption. In which year, Suat^plucus being
slain, when as the Emperor, at that time present (as before we have touched)
at the instance of certain noble men of Bohemia, remaining in the camp,
desired that Otho, the brother of Suatoplucus, might be ELECTED, and published:
the Author expressly says thus: In the general assembly, the chief Lords
found themselves agrteued at the ELECTION made in the camp, contrary to the
institution and decrees of their Ancesters:

To wit, whose ground works (as the Fundamentals of a most free and lawful
election) were laid, Anno 670. And the ancient manner, etc. That is to say,
their old observed customs, even to that very day inuiolably maintained. Lib.
11. page 53.
Wherefore also the States (as Dubrauius and other Historians testify) would
not ratify, nor admit for good the ELECTION formerly made: but to preserve
their ancient right, rejecting Otho, with the general consent of the whole
people, they elected for their Duke, Vladislaus: notwithstanding that
Borsiuogius was the elder brother. These are the words of Vladislaus in the
Author: That it was no private thing which Borsiuogius desired, but belonged to
the suffrage of the whole people. And therefore not from one brother alone; but
from all the States the government to be sought and sued for, because that in
fine is like to be firm and stable, which by common counsel shall be decreed.

Vladislaus dying, the States do elect Sobislaus his younger brother: not only
three of the dead man's children put back, but again also his elder brother,
the aforesaid Otho, not caring, though as then he had the castle of Prague in
his hands and keeping.

Otho would not yield unto him the castle of Visserade, before he first
perceived that by the general assembly, he was declared Prince, with so great
and general consent of the States, that he despaired of keeping the castle any
longer: which after he had quit, he returned in anxitie into Morauia, and in
threatening wise, as though in short time he would revenge this injury in that
the Bohemians had preferred before him (who was the elder) his younger brother
Sobislaus. Here a man may easily see, that to the States of the kingdom wholly
belonged the pure and free ELECTION of creating and choosing their King.
Afterward, in the year 1135, in the time of Sobislaus, in the general
assembly of the States (the Prince and the States consenting together) diverse
decrees concerning the ELECTION were ordained, and among other things:

1. The form of the government, in time of vacancie, Haiec. fol. 233.
what it ought to be.

2. How and in what manner the States ought to be called unto the ELECTION.

3. The Parliament assembled about the ELECTION, not to continue above three
days.

4. That the Prince ELECTED, presently after his entry, ought to confirm by
Oath that he will make good, and preserve the privileges of the Barons,
Nobles, and Comminaltie.

Afterward, Hitherto the institutions of Ancesters, and the old customs
concerning the Election of the Du^es were observed.
Frederick the Emperor, Anno 1159. (as before is said of Henry, and
Vladisl^us declared King of Bohemia) created Vladislaus King, but not as yet
the royal name used, until Philip the Emperor, Anno 1200, gave the golden
Crown to Primislaus Otthocarus, and so renewed the royal dignity. Hence so
many letters, so many privileges, so many reuersals, and the explications
thereof following thereupon. For from the very first ELECTION even to that
time, without the benefit or favor of any Emperor, by no confirmation regal,
or any other law written, but only by custom, they have exercised their free
ELECTION. But afterward (the regal dignity with the dependences thereof
coming in place) express Authentickes were necessarily required. Nor yet,
that the said Emperors did offer any manner of prejudice to the liberties and
privileges of the Bohemians, but rather ratify, and more perfectly confirm
them, the Letters of Philip the Emperor do witness.

That, Haiec. fol. 286. There (...) confirmed: the kingdom of Bohemia nothing
at all to belong to the Emperor, but in re^pect of the regal dignity.
to wit, for ever it should be lawful for them (Zuewigen zeyten) by virtue of
their ancient customs, to Elect whomsoever they would for their King. The same
in a certain privilege of Frederick 2. Emperor, is confirmed in the words
following: We do constitute and confirm him King: and this so sacred, and
worthy a constitution we approve, and the kingd^me of Bohemia freely, and
without all exaction of money (according to the accustomed justice of our
Court) we grant to him, and his success^rs for ever. Willing that whosoever by
them shall be Elected for Kings, come unto us, or our successors, in due manner
to ask the Regal dignity.

Hence it appears manifestly, the Emperor to have reserved to himself and
the Empire only, the recognition of the Regal dignity, as proceeding from him
and the Empire: but the right of free ELECTION to have left altogether
untouched. For the Bohemian Kings and Princes themselves, did never interpret
these things any otherwise. For when as Anno 1216. Wenceslaus Son to King
Primislaus (his Father yet living) was ELECTED: hereupon such letters of the
Emperors approbation were erected: Our faithful and well-beloued Henry
Marquess of Morauia, and the whole State of the Lords, and Nobles of Bohemia,
have declared to our Highness, that by common consent, and assent of our well
beloved Ottocarus King of Bohemia they have ELECTED for their King Wenceslaus,
the first borne son of the Kingdom of Bohemia.

Behold here a testimony more then authenticke of a most free ELECTION, where
(to wit) the sons of the Kings themselves, could no other way be advanced to
the Crown of Bohemia, but by the free and lawful ELECTION of the States
preceding: which also by every approved Writer of the Bohemian affairs may be
proved. And although seldom they ouer-passed them who were sprung of the blood
Royal; yet sometime also it happened: Examples, King Rodulph, Albertus Duke of
Bauaria, Georgius Podibradius, and others.

Nor more does the continued Succession of blood of the former Kings serve to
the pretended Inheritance, Favor not to be drawn as a consequent, nor good
deeds to be rewarded with evil.
than that of the Polonians, which (by reason of the ELECTION of the Son of a
precedent King) has bin always the same. Insomuch as even to their present
King (though otherwise a Of Sweden.
Suecian) the favor of the Mothers Line originally derived from the Posterity
of Iagellus, sometime Prince of Pole, was much available to him for the
obtaining of that Crown of Polonia. Mean while, yet this Kingdom, without
any contradiction to be plainly and most freely ELECTIVE, no man ever denied.
For seeing that these two Kingdoms have (almost) both the selfsame
foundation, (to wit from Czechius and Lechus brethren) and time, and people:
yea and Language but a very little differing (as all Histories witness,) what
should hinder, but that they even from the first beginning, in this point of
Politic Government, have resembled each other? But besides this of Poland,
Both the Son and Nephew, and Nephews Son and Nephews Nephew (the Father dead)
are elected. What Succession hence of Hereditary right in a Kingdom Elective*
The upper Palatinate of Baua^ia.
we may produce also other examples, even of the Sacred Roman Empire, where
the Heirs in blood have succeeded one to another* albeit they could have no
just claim, or hope grounded upon Hereditarie Succession. Surely the Ancesters
of the Bohemians never suffered the most free right of ELECTION to be wrested
out of their hands: in so much as they opposed themselves with all their might
to John the son of Henry the seventh Emperor, Anno, 1311. elected King. For
that he had a purpose to exchange Bohemia with the Palatiate: this being
repugnant to their free ELECTION, which grants to no King (without the
consent of the States) any power either of treaty, transaction, or disposal,
or testament, or translation any other way whatsoever made, that may be
hurtful to their Privileges. The Letters given to the King by the States at
that time solemnly assembled at Cubit, (commonly called Elboga) do declare
this sufficiently, the tenor whereof is such: We are ignorant (Sir) for what
desert on our parts your Majesty should go about to overthrow our free, and
most ancient Rights of ELECTION. It cannot be hid from your Majesty, that
neither of force nor arms, but only of our propense love toward you, you have
bin ELECTED King. Wherefore not without just cause, we marvel, that by any
pretensed exchange, your Majesty would seem to subject us to Lodwick of
Bauaria, and s^ spoil us of our most free Privilege of ELECTION. Surely
Lodwick shall never by any means (except by force of Arms, or our free
ELECTION) bear rule over us.

This resolution of the Bohemians seen, King John both procured the cassation
of the Treaty, Haiec. Fol. 388.
and also made a reconciliation with the States of Bohemia.

This also testifies Dubrauius in these words: There in a very great Assembly
of the Bohemians, Page 193.
Lodwick by his own testimony, does purge the King of that so grievous a
suspicion they had of him, and shows unto them in writing the Paction or
Agreement already begun with the King: wherein it was expressly and plainly
added; the same to remain ratified and firm, If it were confirmed by the
common assent of the Bohemians.

By this short deduction a man may easily see; the States always to have
preserved the Right of ELECTION; and that from the first Original of the
Bohemian Nation, not to have acquired or sought the same from any, either
Emperor, or King. But Charles the fourth, when to him as Emperor, the
aforesaid Privileges of Frederick the second, concerning the receiving of the
Regal Dignity, were to be confirmed: moved no doubt with the love he
carried to his Posterity, and in hope to confirm the Hereditary Succession,
limited thus (but of his own head) the free ELECTION of the Bohemians.

In case only and event, where none Male or Female shall remain alive,
legitimate, (which God forbid) descended of the Lineage, Progeny, Seed, or
Royal Offspring of Bohemia. But to Charles it belonged not to insert a new
clause to the Confirmation, and by this means to overthrow the States free
Election, no more then to his Father John, to exchange Bohemia with the
Palatinate. Also no Confirmation does add any new thing. Neither does it
belong to any King to overthrow the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom:
especially seeing they proceeded not from the precedent Kings, but had their
beginning even with the Nation it self. Wherefore also the said clause (the
which for default or want of power and (...) by it self is nothing) was never
observed by the States. Also Charles in another Privilege both of the same day
and year with the former, approouing in the words following, the free ELECTION
of Wenceslaus, the eldest Son of Primislaus Ottocarus, is most evidently
contrary to himself. The words be these: And the Letters of the sacred King
of the Romans, Frederick, wherein is expressed that the illustrious Henry
Marquess of Morauia, and the whole body of the Lords, and Nobles of Bohemia,
by the assent, and will, of the Illustrious Ottocar, sometime King of Bohemia,
our most dear great Grandfather, have chosen for their King the Illustrious
Wenceslaus, his eldest Son: and the same ELECTION by the aforesaid Frederick
King of the Romans was approved.

And again, seven whole years after the afore-alleaged Confirmation, to wit,
Anno 1355. the same Charles does allege the ELECTION of the said Wenceslaus in
these words: Who is known to have held the same Marquisate, with all the
Honors, Dominions, and appurtenances thereof, by no other means, than as by
this example our self hold from the Illustrious John of famous memory
sometime King of Bohemia, our most dear Father. As also that may be a very
probable Argument, out of the Letters of the sacred King of the Romans,
Frederick, wherein is expressed, that the Illustrious Henry, then Marquess of
Morauia, and the whole body of the Peers, and Nobles of Bohemia, with the
assent of the Illustrious Ottocar, our great Grandfather, elected for their
King his Illustrious firstborn Son Wenceslaus, and the same ELECTION by the
aforesaid Frederick was confirmed.

If therefore Charles himself do both acknowledge and approve the ELECTION
of the Son of the King yet living; by what right does he endeavor of his own
brain, to bring in that often mentioned restraint, which does altogether
oppugn this free ELECTION? And how otherwhere can he deny to the States power
of Electing, the Royal Issue yet remaining? Do not all these things savor of
manifest Contrarieties? Moreover the words of Charles the fourth, well
considered, it will appear he speaks of the Males, or Females suruiuing of
the Royal Blood only of Bohemia. What can this therefore profit Ferdinand,
borne of the Archdukes Blood of Austria? Neither is that instance of
Ferdinand, (so far fetched from his great Grand-mothers Mother) any thing
material, which were it of any force, that Royal Blood would extend it self
in infinitum: and so a free power of Electing, should never be granted to the
Bohemians. Which yet Charles the fourth expressly set down; and others also
might be found both nearer, and worthy to be preferred before Ferdinand. Hence
therefore it is evident, that the intention of Charles the fourth, can by no
means be extended beyond his own Children; as also the disposal of
Vladislaus which also the clause of Charles the fourth, (which eight years
after he put in the Golden Bull Imperial) does approve. These are the words
of the Bull: Saving yet always the Privileges, Rights, and Customs, of our
Kingdoms of Bohemia, as touching the ELECTION of a King in case of vacancie,
by the inhabitants of that Kingdom, who have right of Electing a King of
Bohemia, doing according to the contents of their Privileges, and long
observed Custom from the sacred Roman Emperors, or Kings obtained: the which
by this Imperial Decree, we mind in nothing to prejudice: Yea, we do order
the same now and ever hereafter, in all the tenor and form thereof, shall be
of most undoubted strength and validity.

Seeing therefore Charles the fourth, here-hence in the now cited Bull
Imperial, does so strictly in case of vacancie of the Kingdom, prescribe the
manner of Electing according to the Privileges and long observed Custom of the
Bohemians: And that there the Customs and Privileges of the Bohemians, have
nothing at all which may make for the aforesaid clause of confirmation. Yea, in
as much as Wenceslaus (his Father Ottocarus yet living) by no other Right but
of ELECTION attained to the Kingdom* and this ELECTION approved, and
confirmed by Charles the fourth himself: It follows necessarily that now
Charles the fourth has debarred himself from the right of that clause, and
that in no wise it can be extended further than the Issue descended of his
Family, now at this day extinct. And if others of the Female Line descending
from Charles the fourth, should be substitute; assuredly both Kings, and
Electours, and Dukes, (whereof hereafter more at large) from thence also
drawing their Pedigree, would be found much nearer to the Crown. Add hereunto
that by the new constitution of Charles the fourth, de Anno 1356. the Sons of
the Kings could by no means reign without ELECTION going before. The States
also afterward observed this very strictly, and chiefly, Anno 1438. For so
says Dubrauius: Albertus made haste into Bohemia, that by his own presence
he might approve, and confirm the ELECTION there of him made, against all
those who not only dissented from it; but had made choice of another for their
King (a very Child) to wit, Casimire, brother to the King of Polonia.

And Curaeus a Writer of Silesia, (one of the incorporate Provinces of Bohemia)
has these express words: Sigismund the Emperor dying without Heir Male,
before his death was a chief Author, and means to the Nobles of both
Kingdoms (to wit, Hungary, and Bohemia) that they would ELECT Albertus Prince
of Austria, with whom Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sigismund was joined in
Marriage. The counsel of Sigismund was yielded unto, and the Government
conferred upon Albertus.

If the Kingdom had been Hereditarie, and to have fallen by right of
Succession to the Daughter of Sigismund, the Wife of Albertus, what needed the
Authority of Sigismund or his Counsel? After the death of this Albertus,
notwithstanding he had a Son borne after his death, they ELECTED Albertus
Duke of Bauaria, without any respect at all had, either of Blood or Lineage.
These are the words of Syluius.

The Bohemians (after the death of Albertus was known) assembling at Prage,
Cap. 57.
make one body of the whole Kingdom, and appoint a day for the ELECTING of a
new King. Those who hated Albertus, deny his Son to be King. This sentence
prevailed. Therefore Albertus Duke of Bauaria, by the greater part of the
voices of the Lords is declared King. And here is very remarkable the reason
of Duke Alberts refusing of the Kingdom: Albertus of Bauaria, why he refused
the Kingdom.
which (as Dubrauius testifies) was not in respect either of Blood, or not of
competent Election: but of the difference only of Religion, and of discord.
For so expressly writes DVERAVIVS: Albertus Prince of Bauaria, contrary to all
men's opinions, excused himself for not accepting of the Kingdom of Bohemia:
Answering that he had rather dye then reign in that manner as the Bohemians
desired; for they desired that he would not only allow and approve the
Communion in both kinds, but also protect the same with all his estate and
power, against all Adversaries whatsoever.

Haiecius also does by all means confirm this excuse of Albertuss, Fol. 138.
saying he was otherwise much inclined to receive the Crown, and that he went
to the Confines of Bohemia, as far as Chamus; that he entertained the
Bohemian Ambassadors sent thither, in the Bohemian Tongue, and gave them
thanks for so great Honor conferred upon him: Neither to have regarded the
Reasons of the Emperor Frederick, (pretending I know not what right for his
Nephew,) but only to have alleged the Dispute of Religion. Which done the
Regal Dignity was offered to Frederick; who although he did produce for
excuse the rights of his Nephew Vladislaus, yet there were other, and that more
pregnant reasons of his refusal of the Kingdom, which Haiecius does deduce in
Anno 1441. Two years after, Fol. 139. Fol. 141.
the States again send their Ambassadors to Frederick, and because he refused
the Kingdom, they desire out of hand to know whether he would permit and grant
it to Ladislaus: Adding that otherwise they would proceed to another Election.
Frederick therefore does attempt all means for his Nephew, who being elected,
and afterward dead, the Right of ELECTION, Anno 1458. was again confirmed
much more: For so Dubrauius.

In Bohemia there was never more ambitions and hot pursuit in Parliament for
electing a King: so many, Lib. 30. Haiec. Fol. 167.
and so great Competitors there were, which kindled it. Where (among seven or
eight, among whom the Emperor himself, If this Kingdom had bin Hereditarie by
force of that clause of Charles the fourth: What hope had there bin for so many
great Personages? Lib. 30. p. 344. The King of France, by what consanguinity I
pray you was he joined to the precedent Kings of Bohemia?
Kings also and Princes were Competitors) the States to show their most Free
Right of ELECTION, with one consent (all the former rejected) elected for their
King Georgius Podiebradius, etc. Here the words of Dubrauius come well to be
noted: If the French Ambassadors might have been admitted and heard in
Parliament, the opinion was; that they would have carried it away by voices.

Where is here (although the aforesaid Suitors omitted not to allege what
pretended right every one of them had) where (I say) is that so often repeated
clause of Charles the fourth, or restraint, or limitation? Had not the free
power of ELECTING a King, taken deep root in the hearts of the Bohemians? Yea
for the greater demonstration of this Liberty, (the Sons of Podiebradius
that was dead, neglected, whereof hereafter more at large) a new and solemn
Parliament is celebrated, for the ELECTING of a King: hereupon Dubrauius: It
was a solemn custom that the Parliament for creating a King should be
celebrated at Prague, Lib. 35. Maiec. Fol. 18^.
but it seemed good among so many diverse affections and dispositions at that
time of all the States, and having Prague in great jealousy, and suspicion, to
translate the Parliament to the Hills of Cuttemberg, public assurance and safe
conduct being given to all men to come thither, and return freely, and with
great liberty to end the giving of their voices. Rosensis and others, etc.
giving their voices with great content, helped Matthias, but the mayor part
desired for their King Vladislaus, the Son of the King of Polonia, a young
man, and by reason of his age not infected with any partial Factions: the
greater number prevailed.

In this Election there can no Historian be alleged, who says, that there
was mention made of Blood and Lineage. For if the Royal Stock and Lineage had
given any occasion to ELECTION, well might the Sons of William of Saxon,
coming of the elder Sister of King Ladislaus, Haiec. Fol. 213.
have been preferred before Casimire, Son to the King of Poland, of the
younger. And although afterward the before named Vladislaus King of Bohemia,
agreed with the States for the electing and crowning of his Son, yet after
his death, when his Son sent his Ambassadors, (with the Ambassadors of the
Emperor and King of Poland) to the States, the first time they suffered a
great repulse; at length after a whole year very great controversies (by
reason of the Oath and other circumstances) arising, and first extinguished,
with very great difficulty he is elected. These are the words of Dubrauius.

The States do promise the free Government to Lodwick, upon this condition,
that so soon as he should come into Bohemia, he should confirm the Laws and
Liberties of all the States with his own mouth by Oath, as is accustomed to
the Kings of Bohemia. Lodwick being dead, Fol. 267.
the ELECTION again was held with very great Solemnity: where although
Ferdinand alleged his double right, as well in respect of his Wife, Anne the
Daughter of Lodwick that was dead, as also in respect of the Pactions of the
Family; yet the States (none of all these things regarded) did make haste to
the solemn ELECTION. And ordained out of every of the three Provinces eight
ELECTORS for the choosing of a King: yet taking first a solemn Oath to elect
the most worthy. It is true indeed that Ferdinand, Ferdinand, by no Hereditary
Right but only by the free Election of the States is crowned.
was elected but for other causes; wherefore also thenceforth, he renounced
those Rights before pretended and by his Ambassadors moved, by express
reuersalls: the tenor whereof is this: We Ferdinand, by the grace of God King
of Bohemia, Infant of Spain, Archduke of Austria, Marquess of Morauia, Duke
of Luxemburgh, Silesia* and Marquess of Lusatia, etc. Do make known to all
men by the tenor of these presents, how that the Barons, Nobles, and also
Cities, and the whole Comminaltie of the Kingdom of Bohemia, of their free and
mere good will, according to the Liberties of that Kingdom, have ELECTED us
for the King of Bohemia: wherefore we acknowledge that we have understood
this thing from their Ambassadors, and know (indeed) and find, that the
foresaid States and Comminaltie of that Kingdom, not of any right, but so as
before is written (choosing us for King of Bohemia) of their free and mere
good will have made that ELECTION. Witness these our Letters confirmed with
our Seal annexed: Given in the City of Vienna the 13. of December, 1526.

For the answer of these reuersalls, that they (to wit, Anno 1545. and 1547. in
the Parliament) were changed, the States with the Provinces incorporate, do
allege Ignorance altogether: and they of the house of Austria, seeing they
affirm it, let them also look unto it, how they will prove it: yea, if
further inquiry should be made into this Parliament, it would easily be
euicted, their proceeding to have been very prejudicial and dangerous to the
liberties and privileges of the Bohemians. And so the Bohemians shall be
destitute of no defense either of exception of default of authority, or of
constraint by violence, or fear, or of other things that may make for them.

After that, in the year 1549, Maximilian, at the instance of his father
Ferdinand, in the same manner altogether, as the son of Prim^slaus, was
ELECTED King: and after his fathers death, Anno 1562, was crowned.

The same happened, Anno 1575, with Rodolph the son of Maximilian.

How Matthias, Anno 1608, came unto the Crown, there is no man ignorant: for
the reuersall Letters, as well of Rodolph, as of Matthias, do plainly show,
that he attained to the Crown of Bohemia neither by transaction, or disposal,
or privilege, or treaty, or by the clause of Charles the Fourth, or any other
Right: but only by the free and lawful ELECTION of the States. The reuersalls
of Rodulph, among other things, are in this manner: We have required the States
of Bohemia The reuersall Letters of Rodulph the Second, Emperor and King of
Bohemia.
that if we should happen to die without heirs Males, they would accept for
their future King, the Archduke Matthias, our eldest Brother: after that he
has lawfully sought it of them, according to their privileges, and that after
our death, they would ELECT and crown no other but him; steadfastly hoping that
the States, both for the aforesaid weighty reasons, and the general good of
the Kingdom, will condescend to this our friendly petition. We on the other
side, for us, our heirs, and all our successors of the kingdom of Bohemia, do
promise, that this acceptance (and after our death, ELECTION, and coronation
of our well-beloved Brother) shall no way be fraudulent, or prejudicial,
neither to their received privileges, statutes, donations, customs, etc.
especially from the time of Ottocarus, John, Emperors; Charles, Wenceslaus,
Sigismund, Albert, Ladislaus, George, Lodwicke, Ferdinand, and Maximilian, our
most dear Father. In witness, etc.

The words of the reuersall Letters of Matthias are these: We have often
desired our Lord and Brother the Emperor Rodolph, that during his life time he
would desire the States, for the acceptance of us, (we notwithstanding first
lawfully demanding the same) as the eldest brother of his Majesty, so as his
Majesty dying without lawful heirs Males, they would not ELECT for their
King, and crown any other besides us. To whom assembled (a large proposition
being made from his Majesty, The reuersals of Matthias the Emperor, King of
Bohemia, and Predecessor of Ferdinand that now is.
and our Ambassadors present) we have there promised, that if the petition of
his Majesty be yielded unto, this shall nothing at all der^gate from their
liberties, privileges, and ancient observed customs. Which done, the States
with a free and joint consent, upon his Majesty's proposition and our petition,
have declared us for the time to come, and after the deceasse of his Majesty
without heirs Males, (as the eldest brother of his Majesty) to be elected and
crowned King, etc. And this declaration of the States, we do promise shall
not derogate, or any way be hurtful to their privileges, nor ought to be, etc.

By that which hitherto has been said, it may easily appear, the Kingdom of
Bohemia to be altogether ELECTIVE, and not at all hereditarie; yea, and that
the right of ELECTION can never by any treaty, disposal, paction, or any other
way be infringed, or limited. For the right of ELECTION (as has been often
remembered) took her beginning, not from any Prince, but from the most ancient
foundation of the Kingdom, even to this day inuiolate, and untouched, in a
continued course and order without any interruption at all. And although
against the aforesaid acts, laws, and privileges, some things might be
objected, yet the reuersals of Rodolph and Matthias now already produced, do
prove an undoubted right of ELECTION. And if the pretended right of Succession
were or ever had been so manifest, what needed so many words and reuersals?
Also it is to be noted, that the said treaties of the two brothers, Rodolph and
Matthias, (which they begun by a mutual consent with the States) are of more
force than all other declarations, and precedent disposals: not only in
respect of time, but also in respect of form and matter. For there expressly
the common consent of all the States is alleged, which no otherwhere, neither
in the privilege of Charles the Fourth, or the disposal of Vladislaus or in
any other writing is to be seen; nor yet the said privilege or disposal of
any Emperor, one or other, found to be confirmed: which surely does put upon
this whole matter no small suspicion. And by good right Charles the Fourth,
Vladislaus, and Ferdinand, (seeing they always spoke in favor of themselves
and their posterity) are reported to have been but bad witnesses in their
own cause; neither were their letters confirmed by the succeeding Emperor.
But if they had bin approved by the common consent of the States, they might in
some sort have been borne withal: but seeing the Kings are both actors and
witnesses, very well in this case may their testimony be rejected.

By all these things may any one (not ouer-taken with passion) easily see, that
the States in all ages even to this day, by force of their proper liberty,
have strongly maintained, and preserved, the free and absolute power of
ELECTING Kings: so that none whosoever is able lawfully to pretend any right at
all to the Crown of Bohemia, but only by the lawful and free ELECTION of the
States, ELECTED. And also he that shall attempt any thing against the free
ELECTION of the States, ipso facto does disable himself of the Crown.

Now let us see the Arguments of the contrary INFORMATION.
First of all, he cites privileges, and in the Margen, The frivolous and
feeble grounds of the Informer answered. Fol. 1.
the Golden Bull Imperial of Charles the Fourth. But the Author of the
Information seems to have put the same of purpose out of the List of the
other fundamental reasons: for by the former alleged words of the said Bull,
it is manifest that the same does rather make against him than for him, no
mention at all being made of the Royal issue, either Male or Female.

Therefore the first fundamental reason in order is, Fol. 1.
the confirmation of Charles the Fourth, of the said privilege of Frederick
the Second. Hereunto even now and already is answered, and to any one looking
well into this information it may easily appear.

First, That the same is called the Golden Bohemian Bull, in title only.

Secondly, That it is no other thing then the confirmation of the privilege of
Frederick the Second.

Thirdly, Further, that nothing else was demanded from the Deputies of the
States at that time, whose Names are prefixed in the said writing.

Fourthly, The words of the said writing do testify the same.

Fifltly, Therefore, that the clause of the succession of the royal issue,
annexed by Charles the Fourth, to the advantage of himself and his children,
was inserted to the great prejudice of the liberty of the Bohemians.

Sixthly, Neither did the Bohemians ever allow the same. Also in later times
(although there were many Emperors of the house of Austria) there appears yet
no ratification of any Emperor: all which do argue the manifest inualiditie
of the said clause, and the imperfection of their pretense or claim. There is
yet in the said confirmation this clause: In case or event, where the Male or
Female not suruiuing, This clause is subject to a thousand expositions and
ambiguities.
or by any other way shall happen to be vacant.

By the force of this confirmation, and clause in other places alleged against
the Bohemians, it seems easy to prove that these things make for the States,
and that the vacancie of the Kingdom does not simply and merely consist in
the default of heirs Males or Female, but also in other defaults. But
howsoever this be, daily practice (as is aforesaid) is altogether contrary to
the strict restraint of this confirmation. And although the often repeated
clause of the said Bull, together with the consequence of the Austrians drawn
from thence, were of some moment; yet it is manifest that the Offspring
descending from the house of Luxemburg by the elder sister Anne, the wife of
William Duke of Saxon, the eldest daughter of the Emperor Albert, of the house
of Austria, should rather come nearer the Crown of Bohemia, then those of the
house of Austria at this day living. For the Austrians do descend from the
younger sister, to wit, Elizabeth, the second daughter of Albertus the
Emperor, and wife of Casimire, King of Polonia, the great grandfather of Anne
wife to Ferdinand of Austria, the brother of Charles the Fifth, Emperor. Now on
the other side, let us see the offspring of the said William Duke of Saxon.
Surely among them of the house of Brandenburgh, of Denmark, of Mekelburgh, and
others, are found so many, that even the most renowned Queen of Bohemia,
Elizabeth, the daughter of Great Britain, may derive from thence her
pedigree. Wherefore this argument, the of the Austrians, without all exception
the greatest (as they would have it) may easily be overthrown.

Charles the Fourth, Emperor, King of Bohemia, the Author of the often
repeated clause. Sigismund. Elizabeth, the wife of Albert of the house of
Austria, Emperor, and King of Bohemia. Anne, the eldest daughter of Albert,
wife of William Duke of Saxon. Margaret, the wife of John, Elector of
Brandenburgh. Anne, the wife of Frederick the First, King of Denmark.
Christianus the Third, King of Denmark. Frederick the Second, King of
Denmark. Anne, the wife of James, King of Great Britain. Charles Prince of
Wales. Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia.

Elizabeth, the younger daughter of Albert, the wife of Casimir, King of
Polonia. Vladislaus, Elizabeth, after her name changed and called Anne, the
wife of Ferdinand, of the house of Austria. Maximilian Empe. Rodulph. Matthias.
Charles. Ferdinand now Emp.

Sophia, the wife of Frederick Marquess of Brandenburg. Marie, the wife of
Frederick Simm^rensis: Elector Palatine. Lodwick the Fourth, Elector Palatine.
Frederick the Fourth, Elector Palatine. Frederick the Fifth, King of Bohemia,
etc. Elector Palatine, etc.


The clause has thus: the Male or Female of the royal Linaege. But the most
renowned King and Queen of Bohemia, Frederick and Elizabeth, are (as you see)
of the royal lineage. Ergo.

The second Argument of the Informer is, Fol. 1. The disposal of Vladislaus.
the disposal of Vladislaus; but this is both of less force than that, and in
some sort does seem to make for the States: where (to wit) he does affirm
King Lodwick of the mere free (...) will of the States of Bohemia, to have
been received King, which free will (surely) overthrowing Succession, does
again seem to stablish ELECTION. And it was the true intent and meaning of
this disposal, only to assure the States of the Education and Marriage of the
Children of Vladislaus. Now whatsoever is there said concerning the Succession
of Anne the Kings Daughter, that is only spoken incidentally and by way of
narration, not to prove any thing at all. Neither was it in the Kings power in
this case, by express Law to dispose; and although the said disposal were of
some weight, yet it is to be understood not of all in infinitum, descending
from the said Anne, but only of her self, and so the same for Ferdinand
appears to be of no efficacy.

As for the third Argument of the Informer, to wit, Fol. 1. The Reuersals of
Ferdinand changed.
the Reuersals of Ferdinand, even now and before is answered, so as it is to be
judged of no moment. For Ferdinand himself, Anno 1526. (not as then ignorant
of his own pretenses, nor needing to be informed thereof, nineteen years
after to have understood of them,) does clearly confess, and declare
sufficiently both by his Ambassadors at that time sent, and Letters reuersals:
that thereby he does renounce all those his pretenses. Surely that those
Reuersals, either after the space of nineteen years, or for other adverse
accidents, Anno 1545. and in the years following (whereof more in their due
time and place) should suffer shipwreck and miscarrie, there is no reason that
can endure to hear of it. And in whatsoever manner and sense the Reuersals of
the year 1545. be taken, yet they do always make mention of the forepassed
ELECTION saying, Of their own free and mere good will they have elected and
received us for their King and Lord, which forwardness of the States, and
ELECTION and receiving of our Person for King, we will both prosecute and
recompense with all clemency.

And this is that which the States of right desire, Ferdinand the first also
himself approved; but to Ferdinand the second, of whom now the question is,
this is altogether displeasing. Wherefore the States do so often complain of
the said Ferdinand the second, both that he offered violence to their
Privileges and Liberties: as also that the alleged Confirmations, and
Reuersals, (sometimes approving Hereditarie Succession, sometimes ELECTION of
free and mere good will, with promise of gratuitie) are altogether
contradictorie; and so the Kingdoms Hereditarie, (as the Austrians contend to
make Bohemia) to have nothing common with the Elective, rend^ing of thanks and
other promises thereupon. And it remains more then manifest, Hereditary and
Elective to be incompatible, and cannot agree together: and hereupon
necessarily the most strong Arguments of the Austrians to be vain and of no
effect.

Hitherto we have answered the grounds of the Informer, The Constitutions of
the Kingdom.
which he has produced under the title A. 1. 2. 3. 4. Under the Letter B. he
alleges the Constitutions of the Kingdom, X. but here the Originals are to
be sought out of the Records at Prague, and not of Vienna, from whence the
Informer took the concordances. But the States of Bohemia do allege, apply,
and expound their Constitutions, according to the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom; practice observations, and by their Privileges and confirmed
Customs. And why should the Bohemia^s, who even to this day (as before at
large is declared) have had and exercised always a free ELECTION, admit any
restraint or limitation thereof.

Under the Letter C. is alleged the Parliament of the Kingdom of the year
1547. inserted in the Tables of Kingdom, Fol. 1.
but in the Margin only; neither is there any Argument worthy of an Answer
drawn from thence.

Under the Letter D. are again cited the Constitutions of the Kingdom, Fol.
1. Fol. 2.
B. 3. B. 7. B. 8. but without any further deduction. In the end he does
allege the Oath of the Inhabitants of Prague, and Leutmeritz made in the time
of John and Charles his Son; but that serves only for that time, neither
can be drawn to any further consequence: and the tenor of the said Oath does
seem to disagree with the intent of the Informer. For behold the express
words of the Oath: The Heirs and Successors descending of the Line Masculine.

Hence it appears that the vigor of that Oath was expired for default of the
Line Masculine of Luxemburgh, Fol. 2: John of Luxemburgh, by what right he
attained to the Crown of Bohemia.
and rather to make against the Austrians, whose pretense is grounded upon the
Female.

The Informer says: That John of the House of Luxemburgh attained to the
Kingdom, it was because he had to Wife the Daughter of the King of Bohemia.

For confirmation hereof, the Informer alleges Historians, when as it is
altogether manifest that they meant another thing. For they say it was done by
ELECTION, and the States of Bohemia to have offered the Kingdom to John the
Son of Henry the Emperor, which though the Emperor rather desired for his
Brother Walramus, then for his only Son, as yet of more tender age,
notwithstanding upon the great instance of the Ambassadors (as they had in
command) at length the said John married to Wife the Daughter of the King of
Bohemia. And so was first elected, and afterward by reason of this ELECTION
married to the Kings Daughter. See the words of Dubrauius: In the Parliament at
Numburge, there publicly in the Assembly with open voices they desired another
more fit King; hereunto inclined the voices and suffrages of all, that John of
Luxemburgh, the son of Henry the Emperor should be made choice of, for King
to the Kingdom of Bohemia.

And this history by Haiecius is more at large described, Henry of Carinthia,
wherefore deprived of the Kingdom.
by reason of Henry of Carinthia, who married the eldest Daughter of
Wenceslaus. The Informer, saying that he was dejected from the Throne of
Bohemia, for rebellion against the Roman Empire, speaks childishly: for not
the pretended rebellion of the Informer, but his extortions and cruelties made
him odious to the people. The words of Dubrauius are these: That they might be
delivered from the intolerable Government of Henry.

Neither could the Wife and Daughter of Henry (had the Kingdom been
Hereditarie) for his fault have been deprived of their Right. Neither did the
Daughter of Henry (although nobly married, or his Son ever pretend any right
at all to this Kingdom. It is false therefore that the Kingdom fell to the
younger Sister, by the elder Sister and her Husbands falling from their right,
but by virtue of Election: and this Henry to have been ELECTED, and not to
have obtained the Kingdom by right of Succession. Dubrauius testifies
expressly in these words: The States assembled in a lawful Parliament, do
strive with great contention for ELECTING of a King: some altogether despising
a stranger-King, the rest distracted betwixt Rodolph the son of Albertus the
Emperor, and Henry of Carinthia who was present.

As for the Succession of the House of Luxemburgh, and of Albertus the
Emperor, as also the ELECTION of the Duke of Bauaria, and those things that
follow, is already answered: and the solemn and free ELECTION of Albertus
sufficiently proved. Neither is it material that the Morauians did expostulate
with the Bohemians (whereof notwithstanding the History makes no mention,)
for the said free ELECTION of Albertus: For to the deciding of our case this
does nothing at all appertain. The ELECTION of Podiebratius was not only
lawful, but also confirmed by Frederick the Emperor himself, the head of the
House of Austria, and to Podiebratius his Predecessor, Ladislaus at the point
of death speaks thus: I must now dye, the Kingdom to come into thy hands: I
ask of thee two things; one that thou govern the Prouincials justly, etc. The
other that those who have followed me out of Austria, and the other Provinces
thou send them back safe into their Country without any violence offered
them. Where is this Hereditary Succession?

Wherefore the words of the Informer concerning the Successor of Podiebratius,
where he says: After the death of George, Fol. 4.
although he left Heirs Males, yet the Kingdom to have returned again of
right to the ordinary Succession;

Is nothing but a mere Cavil, and idleness: for these are the express words
of Cromerus.

Podiebratius signified to Casimire, King of Polonia, that he would ordain
one of his sons, Lib. 27. P. 393.
(with the consent of the States of Bohemia) for his Successor; his own
sons neglected; not by any Hereditarie right of a Kingdom (which is none at
all among a free Nation) but by a singular inclination and affection of all the
Bohemians toward Casimire, and communion of Language with the Polonians. Where
is this ordinary succession, which the Informer dreameth of? Is it to be
found in the designation of Podiebratius? or in the inclination of the
Bohemians? or in the communion of Language with the Polonians? or lastly, in
the words now repeated, Not by any Hereditarie Right of the Kingdom, which is
none at all among a free Nation?

Here for conclusion it is to be known, and noted well, that Lodwick King of
Hungary and Polonia, Ad page 156.
had two Daughters; the elder whereof Marie, married Sigismund the Emperor,
and King of Bohemia: the younger, Iagellus Prince of Lituania. After the death
of Lodwicke, Sigismund was ELECTED King of Hungary, and Iagellus of Polonia.
And although afterward, the Queens both of them dyed without any issue at
all, yet the Kingdoms remained to both the Kings: the reason, because they
were both of them not Hereditarie (otherwise they had fallen to the Queens next
Allies) but merely Elective. And although after that, the said Kings
contracted other marriages nothing at all pertaining to the Bloud-royall of the
aforesaid Lodwicke, or his Daughters, yet the children by them begotten were
ELECTED afterward for Kings. You see here succession, nothing at all to have
prevailed, but only the free ELECTION of the States. Surely in Kingdoms
hereditarie it is far otherwise. Philip the Second, King of Spain, being
joined in marriage with Marie Queen of England, after her death was forced to
quitte all and be gone, and the Kingdom fell to Elizabeth the sister of Queen
Marie: the reason, because it was hereditarie, and not (as the aforesaid
Kingdoms) ELECTIVE.

Ferdinand of Aragon, and his wife Isabel heir of Castile, dying, and leaving
behind them many daughters, the eldest daughter (the wife of Philip of Austria)
was preferred before the rest in the succession of all those Kingdoms: The
reason, because all those Kingdoms were hereditarie, and not (as ours is)
ELECTIVE.

Robert, King of Naples, leaving behind him three Neeces, the eldest of them
(the two younger excluded) was admitted into the possession of the whole
kingdom: the reason, because that Kingdom is hereditarie. And so this is to
be observed in all Kingdoms where women succeed. You see here between the
Kingdoms of Poland, Bohemia, and Hungary (which are ELECTIVE:) and the
Kingdoms of England, Castile, Naples, etc. (which are hereditarie, that also
women succeed) very great differences of succession. For if our Kingdoms
should have been translated to women, surely Sigismund and Iagellus (their
wives being dead) should have been forced to have left all and departed. Which
not being done, it necessarily follows the said Kingdoms to savor of no
hereditarie succession at all.

Hitherto briefly the ELECTIONS successively following one another, with their
principal circumstances, have been declared: to demonstrate the Bohemians not
to be guilty at all of rebellion, disloyalty, and conspiracy as the
preiudicate Informer urges. And if the Informer do truly accuse them of such
crimes, why does he not express their cases? which if he had done, without
doubt the Bohemians would easily have confuted them. Also the Informer does
proceed to that audacitie, as to deny those Kings (whom he names) to have
been ELECTED: and so by his glosses is not ashamed to offer violence to a
language, whereof (perhaps) he is ignorant. Whenas notwithstanding the same
Kings themselves, especially John, Albert, and Ferdinand in their letters (yea
and that in the Latin Tongue, and Latin phrases written) do confess that
they were ELECTED by the free ELECTION of the States.

The Informer proceeds. Fol. 6.


Neither an absolute nor conditional ELECTION does belong to the States, but
in case, etc. Answer. What further conditions therefore have the Bohemians
prescribed to Rodolph of Austria, Podiebratius, and others (who obtained the
Crown through no precedent consanguinitie, but only by ELECTION) then to the
rest which were either brothers or sons of the precedent Kings? And the
Letters reuersall, and the solemn oaths taken by all the Kings, what are they
else but conditions, or covenants of great force, and conditional ELECTIONS?
Fol. 6.


But the Informer persisteth:

Although they did not observe them, yet ought they not to be deprived of the
Kingdom. Answer. Surely the contrary, by the aforesaid examples, does
clearly appear, and what other consequence can there be implied in the
reciprocal obligation of a King and his subjects?

The Informer says: Fol. 6.
Such penalty is not provided for by Covenant, Laws, nor Parliaments.

Answer. Haiec. fol. 233.
The ancient observed customs of the kingdom of Bohemia are in stead of
written Laws, yea among other constitutions, the States in the reign of
Sobislaus expressly decreed: That if at any time the King of Bohemia should
without reason make war against the Bohemians, then the States and people
ought to be exempted, free, and absolved from all obedience and subjection.

The Informer proceeds: Fol. 6.
It is against equity, that any one should be both an accuser, a witness, and
a Judge at once.

Answer. The examples of Henry of Carinthia, of John, in respect of his
exchange of Bohemia, and of other Kings, do teach, that this is nothing at all
against equity. For the States ever have been, and are yet, the Censors and
Guardians of their privileges: yea also the later Emperors ordained them to
be Defendors of their Edicts, and Liberties, and chiefly of Religion.

To the examples of Wenceslaus, and Podiebratius, Fol. 6.
is already answered.

The excuse upon the receiving of Matthias, Fol. 7.
made Anno 1608. and 1611. that it was in the midst of Garboyls and wars,
without any exact order, and that it makes nothing for a free ELECTION, is
altogether ridiculous. For the order there, (as those solemn acts and
reuersals testify, where the States free and lawful right of ELECTION is
confirmed) is most perfect. Yea if no other reason remained to the States,
suerly this so extraordinary, and so solemn sworn contract, by the joint
consent of two Kings, of Rodulph being present, or rather precedent, and of his
Successor Matthias, and of all the States of Bohemia, and the Provinces
incorporate, (which seldom before has been seen) might suffice for proving
the free ELECTION of the Bohemians to be lawful. For the arms, and power of
writing, were wholly in the hands of the two Brothers the Kings. Neither has
the Style which in writing they use, either one to another, or to the States,
any such effect as the Informer pretends. Neither were themselves ignorant of
the rights and privileges of their own Family or persons: Nor (to conclude)
would their Counselors, who then were present, (had there been any things of
importance) have passed them over in silence.

Those things which follow, concerning the Treaties, Confederacies, with the
Austrians, the Golden Bull, Inuestitures, and Imperial Diets, seeing they are
of no weight, I do not see it worth the labor to insist in them any longer.

The end of the Answer to the FIRST PART.
AN APPENDIX To the Reader.
SEeing (gentle Reader) the person of the Archduke Ferdinand now Emperor, and
the question concerning him, (to wit, Whether he by that ELECTION, or by
Admission, and Coronation, which he had in Bohemia, purchased the Right of that
Scepter) does require a special Treatise, which (God-willing) very shortly
(under the title of An Answer to the Information against the Apologies and
Writings of the States of Bohemia, the second Part) shall follow: I would have
thee to know for a conclusion of this first Part, and for a Prooeme to that
which is to follow: that no Regal Right at all to that Kingdom came to
Ferdinand, by the said ELECTION, or by Admission and Coronation. For the same
to be Elective, and not at all Hereditarie, in this Part is sufficiently
proved. I omit now to say that ELECTION not to have been lawful, because it
was not free, but for the most part surreptitious, fraudulent, and against the
Laws of the Kingdom: wherefore also it was no ELECTION, but altogether void,
which being matter of Fact, I come to the point of Right: yea, supposing that
they had proceeded lawfully, freely, and simply after a voluntary manner
therein.

And first the nullitie of that Admission, and Coronation, for that reason is
manifest, because by supposition, that Kingdom is Elective; therefore no man
can acquire any Regal Right therein, but by the ELECTION of those to whom it
belongs to elect, according to the Laws and Customs of that Kingdom. But
Ferdinand was not elected, neither by ELECTION entered into the Kingdom (as his
own Writings confess, by which it is manifest that he would not be elected,
but only admitted by Hereditary Right, as the adopted Son of the last
lawful King Matthias, or by some other right of Blood) therefore he was not
elected. But Coronation in an Elective Kingdom does presuppose a lawful
ELECTION, which if it do not first precede, all such Coronation of Right is
frivolous, and none at all. Neither can they call that Admission (in what
manner soever it was) ELECTION, or reduce it to ELECTION, because they do
expressly deny themselves to challenge that Kingdom by Right of ELECTION, and
betake themselves only to Succession. When as therefore it shall be proved,
that Kingdom to be Elective and not Successionarie, by this only proof,
whatsoever shall be done without that which is properly called true and
lawful ELECTION, falls to the ground.

Secondly be it, that the said ELECTION were free, voluntary, and lawful; it
is plain that the same was conditional: to wit, that during the life of
Matthias, Ferdinand should not entermeddle with the Government of the Kingdom,
and should swear to the Pactions, and observe them: which Conditions do quite
take away all force from ELECTION, if any thing be done against them. Because
ELECTION is not absolute, but conditional: Now where the Conditions are
wanting, there ELECTION is not ELECTION; for ELECTION ought to be voluntary;
but a thing voluntary conditionate, is not voluntary, except the condition be
performed. But Ferdinand has broken the Conditions, (as is manifest in Fact)
therefore his ELECTION is of no force, and consequently neither his Coronation.

Thirdly, this ELECTION although it were an ELECTION, yet indeed it was none at
all, of no validity, or efficacy; because, (the King living and reigning) no
other can in any wise be elected: Argument C. in Apibus 7. 9. etc. And the
reasons are two, and both evident. The first, because the Electours have not
power of Electing, but when the seat of the Kingdom is vacant: therefore he
was elected of such as had no power then of Electing. They may design, and
promise (as much as in them is for their time) a future Election, but can by no
means make a present Election, because the right of Electing is not then open
unto them. Bald. in C. licet de vitanda Electione. The other reason is because
injury is done to the true Electors, which shall be lawful, and have a full
power of Electing when the seat is vacant: whose power is usurped by
preoccupation of them, whereof (perhaps) not one, or very few shall be Electors
when the seat shall be vacant. And it suffices (if the injury be done to one
only) to make the whole Act unjust, and therefore unlawful. Bald. vt supra,
and Jason in L. fin. C. de Pact. There may (perhaps) two at once reign
together as if they were one, (as in times past they that were fellows in the
Empire:) the King also living, may resign his Regal Right, to the end his
Son, or some other may be elected; but in our case there is no such thing:
because neither Matthias resigned his Regal Right, but manifestly retained it,
neither did he assume Ferdinand as his companion. And that Election and
Coronation was made with express reservation of all full Royal Power wholly
and entyrely in Marthias, and with an inhibition, that Ferdinand by no means
should intrude himself into the Government of that Kingdom. These reasons
likewise do constrayne us utterly to deny that he is lawfully chosen King of
the Romans, who is chosen King of the Romans, that is to say, future Emperor
while the present Emperor lives, and does not resign the Right of the
Kingdom of the Romans: that is to say, the Roman Empire: because the
Electours then Electing, had not in act, and indeed, but only in habit, power
of Electing, the seat being not yet vacant. And injury is done to the
Electours, when the seat of the Empire is vacant, whose actual power was
unlawfully usurped. Therefore might the Electors of the Empire come to a new
Election, the Emperor being dead, the King of the Romans (who was wrongfully
chosen,) excluded. The same reasons do altogether nullify all Reuersions, and
benefits in expectance, as also may easily be proved out of the Laws.

Fourthly, See the Pactions concerning a perpetual Succession in the Kingdoms
of Hungary and Bohemia, and the Provinces thereunto appertayning, for the
further declaration of the truth; annexed to this Appendix.
(to conclude) that Election and Coronation of Ferdinand, although it were of
validity, (which we have showed to be false) yet well might he be deprived
thereof by the Kingdom; because now he consented to the oppression of the
liberty of the Kingdom, vexing the Kingdom with Arms, and endeavoring of
Elective to make it Successionarie; and to translate the same Kingdom after
him to others; and notwithstanding as yet not actually possessed of the
Kingdom, nor having received power from God: by men therefore he might upon
just cause be deprived of that right which he had, not in the thing, but to
the thing only. For a King is Elected for the preservation of the Kingdom,
and not for the destruction. And a Kingdom may defend her own proper liberty
lawfully against any whosoever; yea against her own King: especially such a
one who has bin only designed, and thereby become an Enemy of the Kingdom,
and an unjust oppressor of the liberty thereof.

The same reasons also prove that the Hungarians might justly come to another
Election ( Ferdinand excluded,) it being supposed likewise, that Kingdom also
to be Elective as they prove. For there was no Election of Ferdinand, but an
Admission, and if it were an Election, (the lawful King as yet living and
reigning) yet was it void: Neither is it material that the Hungarians held as
ratified their Election of the person of Ferdinand after the death of Matthias,
(which yet the Bohemians have not done) because that ratification, whether it
were tacit and vertuall, yea, or also expressed, is of no effect: For that
which is nothing cannot be accounted ratified. SYLV. consensus q. vlt. unless
the Electors knew their Election to be of no validity at all, and knowing it
do not ratify the same but make a new Election. And if they think it was of
validity, when it was not, and do ratify it, not making a new Election, this
ratification is of no force. Caiet. secund. secunda. G. 189. Art. 8. etc.

THE INSTRVMENTS of the Pactions or Conditions concerning a Perpetual
Succession in the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, and the Provinces thereunto
belonging.
THE INSTRVMENTS OF THE 6. and 15. of the Month of June, Anno 1617. made at
Prague.
PHILIP the III. King of Spain, renouncing his right, and ratifying the
resignation of his Mother ANNE, daughter to MAXIMILIAN the second Emperor: As
also for this resignation couenanting as well for a compensation or recompense
to be made to himself, as for a Restitution to his Heirs whenever the
Heirs Male lawfully begotten shall fail in the right Line of FERDINAND
Archduke of Austria. FERDINAND Archduke of Austria accepting, approving and
ratifying them, and (in case of defalt of Heirs Male in the right Line
lawfully descended from him,) promising restitution. MATTHIAS the II. Emperor
of Rome, not only procuring these Pactions by his Intercession; but also by
his Imperial and Royal Authority confirming them.
For the weal and safety of the Catholic Religion, and Majesty of the House
of Austria.

MDCXX.

