MEDITATIONS UPON THE XLII. PSALM. BY WILLIAM BLOYS Esquire.

snake wrapped around cross held by two hands

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for George Lathum, at the Bishops head in Paul's
Church yard. Anno 1632.

TO THE READER.
IT is the Apostles rule, 1. Pet. 3.15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks you a reason of
the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. The multitude of my thoughts
thereof, have constrained me to give some public testimony, whereby to
absolve my self from any sinister abuse of that retired privacy which I have
hitherto enjoyed. I choose rather to have my life embrightened by use, than
consumed by the rust of ease. There is no kind of life so mean and unworthy as
that of the voluptuous man, who fills himself with vain delights, as with
the wind, and has no other pleasure than that which is common to the
creatures, yea more proper to them than unto man; not deserving to be called a
life, for such as live in pleasure are dead while they live. Other professions,
as they are commendable in themselves, so being rightly used, they may become
helpful unto us, in making our calling and election sure. There is a blessing
bestowed upon the Peacemaker, which labors to destroy that bitter root of
dissension, and to establish goodwil among men: But let him consider how
miserable an estate he is in, though he has been an instrument of concord,
and a means of charity, if he wants this inward peace of a good conscience;
and the perfect assurance that God is reconciled unto him in Christ Jesus. The
Ruler must remember how inexcusable he is, if he condemns himself, in doing
the same things wherein he judges another: How can he punish swearing and
drunkenness in other men, when himself does deserve to be smitten five or six
times, even till he be consumed, with the arrows of Gods vengeance, because
of his transgressions? The Advocate that seeks for the temporal benefit of
another man, with such vehemence, may be put in mind to sue for his own
spiritual good, with greater importunity: If he be so diligent to obtain a
corruptible reward, then he ought to be much more careful to obtain an
incorruptible crown, which is more precious than gold or silver; being given
unto us by Christ our Mediator, who pleads for us, and in whom we also have
boldness and access with confidence unto the throne of grace. The
Soule-physitian must first heal himself, before he can cure the infirmities
of other men: And his chief care and fear must be, lest that by any means,
having preached unto others, he himself should be a cast away: Thus should the
soul be lifted up in all our employments. But the common course of the world
is to lanch forth into the deep, not having Christ to be their Pilot; where
they are exceedingly tossed by stormy winds, and mighty tempests, and in danger
to fall into quicksands, or at least to be prevented by the winter of
sickness and death, so that their voyage is with much hurt and damage; and
sometime they make ship-wracke of faith and a good conscience. Only the true
believer has arrived at the fair havens of blessedness and tranquillity: He
only is rapt up to such an height, that he is exempted from the harmfull
violence of thunder and rain. His understanding is not over-clouded with dark
ignorance: He is not carried about with every wind of inconstancy, But having
found by comfortable experience, that it is good being upon this holy hill; he
has there pitched his tent, and fixed his habitation. From whence God
suffers him to look down, upon the Gomorrah of this rebellious people, this
sinful world: The cry of whose grievous sins, being very great, does ascend
up like a vapor, and will cause the Lord to shower down his judgments.

The good man that depends upon God alone, Pro. 14.14.
and is satisfied from himself, having full contentment in the portion
received, is to be esteemed of all men most happy. Were not the deceitful
heart like that bag with holes (whereof the Prophet speaks) which can never
be filled, Haggai 1.6.
this competent estate, for which Agur prayed, and for which we ought to give
thanks, might bring abundant satisfaction, and cause us to seek more devoutly
for heavenly blessings. The chief contentment I have found in framing this
small work, may be expressed in the words of Jacob, though with plainer truth,
The Lord thy God brought it to my hand: My special benefit which I intend, is
to bind my self to a vigilant observation of those things, which I have
thought meet and needful to prescribe unto others: If hereby any glory does
redound unto God, I have obtained the prize for which I run: As for any fame
unto my self, I neither deserve nor expect it: And though it were never so
well beautified by Art, and adorned with Rhetoric, I would shake it off as the
dust, and tread it under foot, rather than be seduced with fond affectation of
empty praise. I regard not man's day, nor will I hearken unto the voice of man,
when (as I hope) God himself has called thereunto.

From my Study at Grundesburgh in Suffolk. WILLIAM BLOYS.

PSALM XLII.
AS the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God.

2 My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: When shall come and appear
before God?

3 My tears have been my meat, day and night, while they continually say
unto me, Where is thy God?

4 When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone
with the multitude: I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy
and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday.

5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.

6 O my God, my soul is cast down within me; therefore will I remember thee
from the land of Iordane, and of the Hermonites from the hill Missar.

7 Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waves, and
thy billows are gone over me.

8 Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time: and in the
night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

9 I will say unto God, My rock, why have thou forgotten me? Why go I
mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?

10 As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me, while they say daily
unto me, Where is thy God?

11 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE XLII. PSALM.
TO compare Scripture, with Scripture, it is neither safe nor convenient, all
Scripture being given by inspiration of God. Betwixt the holy Scripture and the
works of other men, there can be no comparison: All other writings have either
withered, and been consumed by the worm of time, like those books that
Solomon wrote of trees; or have bin plucked up by the roots, through the malice
of some tyrant; Desunt nonnulla.
or if still extant, many branches are fallen off, diverse parts are wanting;
Desunt plu^ima.
Or lastly, though entire and whole, yet are they (as the Authors themselves)
subject to infirmity; being like the tree of Knowledge of good and evil;
therein we may know some good to be collected, and some evil of error to be
reformed, or ignorance to be pitied, or sin the worst of evils to be avoided.
Only this book (which alone deserves that title) though in part most ancient,
does still continue, and one word thereof shall not perish: being like that
tree of Life, whereof if we eat, we shall live for ever.

The book of Psalms has always been in great estimation; being as a
spiritual library of most kinds of doctrine fit for meditation; a common
treasury of all good learning; a rich magazin furnished with spiritual armor
to withstand any assault of our Adversary: The which was so frequently cited by
Christ and his Disciples, who derive not fewer than threescore and four
testimonies from two and forty several Psalms. Herein we may see an
abridgement of the history of the Church, even from the Creation, until those
times; and many prophecies of those things which should come to pass in
succeeding ages. Here is the Law, and the judgments thereof, when he relates
Gods dealing with the wicked, and the confusion of the ungodly: And here is the
Gospel and the sweet comforts thereof, when he shows Gods mercy and love
toward his children. So that it is most useful, as for the Church in
general, which has appointed a more frequent use of this than of any other
portion of Scripture: So likewise for every one in particular, and that in
every estate. Many of these Psalms do resemble the life of a Christian; for
though in the former verses there is mention of sorrow and trouble, and
manifold afflictions; yet in the conclusion there is consolation, and
thankesgiving. And the aim and desire is so to do the will of our heavenly
Father upon earth, as it is done in heaven; wherein we may hear a voice, like
that of the Angels, saying; Blessing and glory, and wisdom and thankesgiving,
and honor and power and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. But when all
is said that can be, the heart of a good Christian will indite more than the
pen of a ready Writer in the praise of these Psalms; who in his passage
through the valley of this world does make them a well of comfort. Deformitas
corporit turpitudine certabat in^ e^^.
Then may we abhor the censure of that evil Angel Politian (whose heart was
worse than appeared in his outward deformity) foming out his own shame by
preferring Pindars Odes before David's Psalms, Ferrea epithera P^ndari.
dross and iron before the purest gold.

The chief Author of these Psalms, was David the King; for that is the title
which is given to him alone among many Kings, Mat. 3.
as being an example unto them all. Nor did those women intend him less honor
in saying that he had slain his ten thousands; 1. Sam. 18.7.
which is the just sum whereby the name of Emperor has since been deserved;
^sal. 78.7^.
Him God took from following the Ewes great with young, to feed Jacob his
people, whom he fed in the integrity of his heart, and brought them to green
pastures, plenty of outward blessings, and still waters, the pure worship of
God and means of salvation; And like a good sheapherd he was willing to lay
down his life for his people, when he speaks, Let thine hand, 1. Chro. 21.17
O Lord God, be on me, but as for these sheep, what have they done? And yet
this precious Diamond, though he were made the more eminent and illustrious by
his predecessor Saul, who was as a foil unto him, yet was he not without his
flaw and infirmity. You see him upon the roof of his house, which prospect was
another gallery for his sight to walk in, where he burned in lust after her
that washed her self. But in his repentance he bathed himself in his tears,
Psalm. 6.6.
wherewith he watered his couch. You see him numbering his people, making flesh
his arm; Psalm. 40.12.
But after he does number his sins, and confess his iniquities to be more
than the hairs of his head: None ever fearched deeper in his foundation of
sorrow, nor reared an higher building of comfort unto his own soul: So
powerful was his repentance, which makes those things that were, as if they
had never been, that by Bathsheba her self, he obtained that son which did
succeed him in the Throne: So great was the love that he received from his
people, 2. Sam 21.17. and 18.1. and 19.41.
though unstable as water, that he was esteemed as the light of Israel, worth
many thousands of them; And the men of Judah and Israel strove who should have
the great'st right in him. Such grace and favor did he find before the Lord,
that he was esteemed a man after his own heart, most eminent for his zeal,
most excellent for his praising of God. I can hardly desist from commendation
of him, but I hear him speaking as the Angel to John, Do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants: So that I ascribe all glory to God, who gave such great gifts
to the sons of men. His sepulcher continued after Christ's time, Act. 2.2^.
his fame and renown shall endure unto the worlds end.

The occasion of this Psalm we may safely believe to be Absalom, who, like
as Domitian sought to defraud his father the warlike Vespasian, Ce^ialis fidem
tentavit, an sibi imperium traditurus foret, Tacit.
of the government, And his brother Titus the delicacie of mankind, that
should succeed, So he did endeavor to obtain the Kingdom from the valiant
David his Father, and to prevent his brother Solomon the wisest of men: Using
the worst means to fulfill his desire; His pretense was, that there was none
appointed to do justice; A true complaint in him, that found so much mercy:
And by his outward show of humility and courtesy, like a serpent going upon
the belly, he stole away the hearts of the people. O Viper, O generation of
Vipers, thus to destroy the parent of your country; whose greatest revenge for
this your treachery, would have been to have suffered you to accomplish your
unlawful desires; Nil rex mai^s minari ma^e parentibus posset, quam ut abiret
e regno. Senec.
And (as the ancient manner of Kings was, when their subjects provoked them by
their evil carriage) as the greatest punishment to have forsaken his dominion:
Had their treason been legitimated by the success, what an happy alteration
had they made? There was none to be praised like Absalom for beauty, and
Absalom to be praised for nothing but his beauty As their first King was
higher by the head than the people; so the chief praise and height of this
King had been his head; the hair whereof, he was more fit to weigh, than to
guide the balance of justice. Such as was the case of David, 2 Samuel 16.11.
such is the case of every one of us: He complains, My son, which came out of
my bowels, seeks my life: Mat. 15.19.
That which comes out of us seeks our life, and would defeat us of the
kingdom we have, and of that we hope for. And as to Absalom there joined
Achitophel, whose counsel was as the Oracle of God; so with our corruptions,
there does join, Satan, whose counsels for a long time were Oracles: Both of
them cruel murderers in their advice and suggestions. In these extremities
David finds favor in the eyes of the Lord, and is compassionate toward his
son; Not like Manlius, Summum Iu^.
who being over-just, caused his son to be executed for fighting against the
enemy, Hictor deliga ad palum. Livi. lib. 8.
though not without victory, yet without authority: Nor like that Senator that
gave command to have his son Fulvius put to death for joining with a traitor:
Quem retractum ex itinere parens necari iussit. Salust.
Nor yet like Saul, who would have put Jonathan to death as being too good a
son to live under so bad a father: But he showing himself to be as naturally
a father of pity, as of this unnatural son, commanded the Captains for his
sake to deal gently with the young man. 2. Sam. 18.5.


If we take this Psalm to be prophetical, it may be referred unto the
Jews; and that in a twofold estate: Either as they were captives at Babylon,
where being reproched and oppressed by their enemies, they desire to be
restored to Jerusalem, that they may worship the Lord; Or else being in a more
cruel bondage while they serve the lusts of their own hearts, Rom 11.10.25.
(their darkness and blindness being worse than that of Zedekiah) it pleases
the Lord, the fullness of the Gentiles being come in, to open their eyes, and
mollify their hearts, and to cause them to seek and sue for the means of
salvation. If thou art not satisfied in those former explications, but do
apprehend the aim and intention of the Psalm to be more general, I will
speak that to thy consolation which Nathan does to the terror of David, Thou
art the man; who being wearied with daily reproaches of the wicked, and heavy
laden with the manifold afflictions of this life, do desire to depart, and be
with Christ, where is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.

Here we see the carriage of the godly in time of trouble how far it does
differ from that of other men: The Lord does not require that we should be as
the dead sea, Non est tranquillitas: Malacia est. Senec.
never to be moved by any tempest, Apathia etiam ipsis Stoicis improbata. Gelli.
But in all our distresses to be supported with inward comfort, expecting a
joyful deliverance; as our Author does in this place, in assurance that he
shall yet praise the Lord his God. Whereas other men are ready to sink and be
swallowed up in any trial. Plutarchus.
Cicero, how did he droup and wither in the time of his suffering, as if his
soul^ also had been banished out of his body; not being able to speak one
word to persuade himself? And Cato so often magnified by Seneca, (whose works
are fraught with the doctrine of desparation) as if wisdom had dyed (or
rather had killed it self) with him; Job 12.2.
with what poverty of spirit did he surrender himself? Hirtius in bell. A^ex.
Senec. epist. 13.24.70. etc. and in lib. de Bon. vir.
That his violent fury, and outrageous madness, how is it applauded as a work
of liberty and glory? Diverso itinere malos a bonis loca taetra habere. Salust.
And yet formerly upon another occasion, he himself was able to speak that
there was a place of horror reserved after death, for such as were evil: (...)
cum Deus istis te corporis custodiis liberaverit. etc. Macrob.
And it was their own opinion, that only they could pass into the place of
bliss whom God did call thereunto. But the estate of Christians is otherwise,
who are so far from being overwhelmed by crosses and afflictions, that like
trees, exercised by the stormy wind, they grow to be better rooted and
established in all graces, Psalm. 92.12.
And do flourish like the Palm Tree; who not being surcharged with those
burdens imposed upon them, Non deorsum palma cedit. etc. Gellius.
at last obtain a victorious triumph.

In our approach to the entrance of the Psalm, wherein David speaks to the
Lord, we may see the excellency and dignity of prayer, which is a sovereign
remedy for every trouble. So long as we seek to hide and conceal our sorrow,
we carry a fire in our bosom which will burn us. The wind being pent and
restrained within the bowels of the earth, what overthrowes and desolations are
wrought thereby? 1. Sam. 1.15.
But if with Hannah out of the abundance of our grief we can power out our
souls before the Lord, spreading our misery and necessity before him, as
Hezekiah did the letter of Senacherib, the Lord will fill us with comfort, and
make a way for us to escape out of all our trials; Si operam meduantis
expectas, oportet ut vulnus detegas tuum. Boct.
Then do not thou keep silence lest thy bones be consumed, but discover thy
disease, that so thou may be healed.

VERSE I. As the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so pants my soul
after thee O God.
THe Heart pants after the water-brookes, Quibusdam anni temporibus
incredibili ardore a quas expetit. Calvin.
as being unable to endure heat, which to prevent it will wade into the depth:
Aquas or^ tenus subit. Iul. Scal.
Or else there being deadly fude between the Heart and the Serpents, Plini.
when she has devoured any of them she desires the waters to cool her;
Pierius.
Festinat notos subito se ^ergere in amnes. Bargaeus. Aelian l. 13. cap. 35.
Occuliturque undis praeter caput Bar. Cerva in palude delituit. Gell. Pluvio
cum forte secundo, deflueret. Virgil. Novas vires colligit. Calv. Fragrantem
and toto de corpore ponit odorem. Bargaeus.
Or being flung by them she hasteneth to the Rivers where she obtains her
medecin. Or Lastly, being chased by the Huntsmen, she takes soil, using the
water for a refuge, being very expert in swimming; And that her thirst being
abated, her strength may be renewed; And she being cleansed by her washing
may be free from the sent, and so avoid the danger. For these and the like
causes does the Heart desire the water: But our reason to pant after the Lord,
the fountain of life, is much greater; which does not only cleanse us from the
outward leprosy of the body as Iordane did Naaman, healing all our diseases,
but from the inward leprosy of the soul, purifying us from all our sins,
and corruptions: Neither can we pretend that this precious water is hidden and
sealed up from us; Veteres ad purification^m non quavis aqua contentos, sed
vivam. etc. Tu^neb.
For this Fountain is open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in: And the water
thereof is stirred not by one alone, but by many Angels; And that not at
certain seasons only, John 5.4.
but as well out of season, as in season; That so, not only he that steppeth
in first, but how many so ever shall step in, may be healed of whatsoever
diseases they have: We are often called upon by the preaching of the Word, to
wash and be clean; And the danger is great if we neglect it; John 13.^.
For unless we be thus washed we have no part with Christ. Then let us
cleanse not our feet and hands only, (as in ancient times they did daily being
made unclean by labor;) nor, as Peter adds, our feet, Brachia and crura
quotidie abluebant. Senec.
our hands and head; all which are ready instruments of unrighteousness, and
therefore have great need to be purged; Isay 1.6.16.
But seeing from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot there is no
soundness in us, let us wash the whole man, and make us clean; not with the
Pharisee the outside only, but as Christ came by water and by blood, so both
the outward and inward part must be made clean. Nunquam difficilius
obsequantes aegrotos habuere olim medici, quam, etc. Causab^n.
It was a great complaint of Physicians, that they never found their Patients
more opposite and impatient, than when they did forbid them the use of baths,
so great was the delight and contentment that they received thereby though
pernicious unto them: But here being a fountain able to save us, and make us
sound, if we will come unto it; and yet how few there be that will make use
thereof. Are we not more strange and unwilling than ever that Leper was to obey
the Prophet, that badde him wash seven times? Like those which wallowed in the
burning sand, N^^ ^ non and tepi^ ^is con^ol^e (...) corpus areui^ Sammo^^. c.
Ens^ lat. 10.
or walked naked in the sun to dry up the moisture of their bodies, we had
rather be scorched, and inflamed by the hear of our lusts, than thus to be
cleansed from all sin and pollution. In the old Law a fountain wherein there
was plenty of water should continue clean though any unclean thing did fall
thereinto; Levit. 1^ 36.
Surely this Fountain does not only continue holy and pure, but will als^
make our sinful souls to b^^ clean, if they be washed therein. Then lead us
O Lord to this living fountain, and wash us thoroughly from our iniquities,
that we may be presented before thee without spot and blemish.

The resemblance which is here used is very fit, in regard of that war and
hatred between the Heart and the Serpent. Genesis 3.
The first and greatest wound we ever received, was by the Serpent, the poison
whereof does still abide within us: Since which time there has been, and ever
shall be enmity between us and the Serpent Satan himself, And the seed of the
Serpent, both wicked men which are his spawne, and our sins and vices which
come from him, and are as dangerous to the soul as the biting of Serpents was
to the gainsaying Israelites, Numb. 21.6.
bringing men to that fire which never can be quenched: In this estate of our
warfare, we are to pant after the Lord; and if our heel be bruised, as in the
original of the Gospel we are forewarned to expect it: If that wicked one
does touch us, and we be hurt by the malice and subtilty of that old Serpent,
we are to cry unto the Lord to deliver us from this body of death; Romans 7.
and if we overcome, we must give thanks unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

The reasons are diverse, why David or any faithful man may be compared unto
the Heart: Genesis 1.30.
This creature does continue in the use of that meat which was given unto it
in the beginning, eating every green herb: And a Christian has the same
heavenly food and nourishment for his soul which Adam had in the estate of
innocence; it is his meat to do the will of his heavenly Father, and to
contemplate his glorious works. Metusone congrega^. Stat. Agmina cervi,
Pulverulenta fuga glomerant. Virgil.
The Hearts keep together in herds, not alone like beasts that devour the
prey, and are helpefull to one another in swimming: Maria tranant capi^a
imponentes precedentium clunibu^. Plini.
So there is a communion between those that are godly, who seek not their
own good, but the good of others, bearing one another burden; and being
spiritual, they restore such as are overtaken in any fault. The Heart has
always been the emblem of speed: So a Christian does make haste unto the
Lord, In volucri tonuis fictucia cursu Star.
and desires to run the race, that he may obtain the price. The Heart,
Cornibus armatur trepidandis; quis tamen illum etc. Natal. Comes.
though he be armed, yet does not use the same, either for to harm other
creatures, or to defend himself: So a Christian, though he has strength and
power, yet he had rather suffer than offer an injury; and being smitten, he
will not turn again, unless it be in obedience, as he is commanded, that by
patient enduring, he may heap coals upon his enemies head. Nunquid o^^s
lupum perequitur?
The Heart is pursued and followed; so a Christian is persecuted; oppression is
as the Genius of piety, which ever attends upon it. But our comfort is, we
know the world hated Christ before it hated us; and he was tempted that he
might succor us in all our temptations, whereof this is none of the least.
There is no beast that has more enemies than the Heart; Sic Cerva leonem. Ovid.
and Star. Ceu tigride cerva H^rcana cum pressa tremit. Sil. Ital. Cerva
cruentis circumventa lupis. Statius and Livi. l. 10. Omnium bestiarum
inim^cis^imus homo Iul. Scal. in Arist.
For beside the Serpents, the Lion, the Tigre, the Wolf and Dogs, and the like
seek to destroy it, and a more cruel enemy than all these, Man: So a
Christian has many enemies that compass him about, and rise up against him.
And as the Heart is not killed like the sheep that is led to the slaughter, but
there is much sport and pleasure in the death thereof: So there is great
delight and contentment to the wicked in the overthrow of those that are good.
How did the heart of Herodias dance within her for joy, that John was put to
death? with whose head they sported as with a Tennis-bal. How did the fire
wherein the Martyrs were burned, warm the very hearts of their persecutors?
unto whom the light thereof seemed more glorious than the Sun in the
firmament. Confugi^nt ad homines. Plini. Cantu mulcatur animal stupidum. Iul.
Scal. Aut p^niccae septum formidine pennae. Virgil.
As the Heart seeks relief from man when it is distressed, and is deluded by
a pleasant sound, and readily driven into the nets and taken: so there is
nothing more easy than to deceive a good man, who many times reposeth
confidence in those that prove treacherous unto him, in charity believing all
things, hoping all things, not having that worldly wisdom that others have.
But as the best and surest refuge of the Heart, when his might is empaired, and
he begins to descend and be spent, then to proffer and desire the river;
so it is thy wisdom in affliction early to seek unto the Lord, who redeemeth
thy life from destruction, Psalm. 103.4.5.
and satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is renewed like
the Eagles. In the time of our necessity there is no help for us, but only in
the name of the Lord. All other succor and relief will prove as weak and
impotent as the broken reed of Egypt was to the Israelites, or the horns of
the Altar to Ioab, where we may be taken and utterly destroyed. If we trust to
riches, we provide for our selves, Luke 12.19.
as the rich man did, that bade his soul live at ease, because he had
plenteous increase of the fruits of the earth; whereas the soul of man lives
not by bread, and therefore being famished, may that night be taken from him.
If we trust to wisdom and policy, when the hour of darkness comes, we may
with Ahitophel, set our house in order, but what mansion have we provided,
whereinto our souls may be received? In the time of our sickness if we seek
to the help of man alone, as Asa did, we may well expect the same success
that he had. If we think our house to be our castle to defend us from storm
and violence, know, Job 1.
that Jobs heir had as good an habitation. How soon may we with
Nebuchadnezzar be driven away and exposed to the dew of heaven? Dan. 4.33.
Miserable comforters are they all; for who is God, save the Lord? Psalm. 18.3^.
but let my soul long after thee O God. Observe the benefit we have by
affliction, when the winter of persecution and trouble does kindl^ our
affection, and stir up in us a desire and appetite toward heavenly things.
I^ poverty was to be liked because it showed the fidelity and constancy of our
friends, then may we esteem this to be a great commodity, that we have by our
affliction, discovering not other men's, but which more nearly concerns us,
our own hearts. It makes us see our poor and weak estate, and to seek for
strength and a rich supply of heavenly graces. Our want does cure our
wantonness, and calls us, who are troubled about many things, to seek that
one thing needful which is yet wanting. Before we were afflicted we went
astray like the Prodigal, and walked in our own inventions; But when we come
to suffer hardship, and are ready to dye for hunger, we begin to think of
returning to our Father. Et sua quemque advigilare sibi iussit fortuna
premendo. Manil.
Our calamities lying heavy upon us do awaken us out of the sleep of
security, and are as beneficial as the mighty tempest was unto Jonah, bringing
us to true confession of our sins, to fervent prayer unto the Lord our God, who
does restore us unto the joy of his salvation. If our trials have this happy
and comfortable effect, we may safely conclude, It was good for us we were
afflicted, as David here, who being hunted as a Partridge in the mountain, is
thereby excited with the more vehemence to seek after the Lord.

To seek after the Lord we have great encouragement, who is a God nigh at
hand, ready to hear and deliver us in the day of trouble, who is found of
those that sought not after him, that asked not for him. Then doubtless will
he in mercy reveal himself unto us if we cry unto him: And our extremity is
Gods opportunity; when all other help is vain, then we see it to be the Lords
right hand that our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler.
Then we are bound for ever to be thankful unto the Lord who saves us out of
all our troubles: Then we are taught to put our whole confidence in him, having
tasted and seen how good the Lord is, in assurance that we shall not want any
good thing if we seek him. The ungodly are not so, but are like the chafe
which the wind drives away, having no harbor of safety, being more destitute
than any bruit beast; The foxes have holes, the conyes have rocks, the Heart
desires the river; no creature but has some place of shelter when it is
distressed, whereby it is relieved: But these men though they have been unjust
with the Steward, Luke 16.4.
yet wanting his providence, have not any house whereinto they may be received;
living within the reach of Gods might, Eucherius ad Valerian.
out of the protection of his love: Being outlawed from his favor and custody,
they may fear with that fugitive, and vagabond Cain, Genesis 4.
that every one that finds them shall slay them. When the sound of Gods
justice shall be more terrible than the voice of thunder, and their own
guilty conscience like lightening shall strike them with horror and amazement,
will they with that unworthy Emperor which hid himself under the bed, Ad
maiora tonitrua and fulgura, sub lectum se condere solebat, Caligula. Sueton.
seek a covert to keep them from the presence of the Almighty? No, their
nakedness and shame will then appear to God and themselves. Therefore
acquaint thy self with the ways of the Lord, seek him while he may be found,
let thy heart be fixed and prepared, Mat. 25.6.
that though at midnight there be a cry made, though thy danger and trouble be
both great and sudden, thou may with the wise virgins be received into the
favor and tuition of the most high.

Art thou oppressed and disquieted by an evil son, who in stead of
fulfilling his name or thy hope in being the Fathers peace, proves contrary
like Absalom the Fathers war, seeking to thrust thee forward unto thine end,
Eucherius.
and desires thy death though he received his life from thee? Quis non
patrisuo supremum diem, ut ^nnocens sit, optat etc. Senec. Quid enim maius dare
numina possunt. Iuven. Mat. 8.21.
who would willingly join with that disciple which in vain asked leave to go
bury his Father, as if the greatest part of his duty consisted in his diligence
about that last office? Thereby thou art put in mind of thy former
disobedience unto the Father of spirits. Surely this wounded David most when
his son rebelled against him, the remembrance of his rebellion against the
great King, with whom he warred in the murder of Uriah. Also does thy son
greedily desire an earthly inheritance, and art thou careless and negligent in
seeking for a crown of life, whereof thou can never be deprived? No, rather
upon experience that all things are vexation of spirit, and those of thine own
house thy greatest enemies, be thou provoked with the more zeal and vehemence
of affection to pant after the Lord. This observation I should willingly have
passed, as Solon did to make a Law against parricides, hoping there were none
such; Mat. 10.21.
but that a wiser than Solon or Solomon himself, has foretold that children
shall rise against their parents.

Art thou persecuted by some cruel Nimrod, Lam 1.6. and 4.18 and 3.52.
some mighty hunter, who chaseth thee sore, and hunteth thy steps, so that thou
art become like an Heart without strength before the pursuer? (as the Prophet
speaks) Then, as the Heart pants after the river, so let thy soul pant
after the Lord. The Israelites being distressed by Pharaoh, that followed them,
cried unto the Lord, and saw his salvation, the waters were a wall unto them on
the right hand, and on the left, but covered their enemies, and like that river
Kishon swept them all away: Judge. 5.21.
When thou art in a great strait, call upon the Lord, who knows how to
deliver those that are his; and thou may see thy desire upon thine enemies,
even that which thou most desire, their conversion. Being sore vexed by some
bloody minded man, Act. 9.1. Josh. 8.
who does breath out threatenings and slaughter, compare thine estate with that
of Gods people pursued by the men of Ai, who being full of malice followed
Israel, and perceived not that ambush which was laid against them, whereby
their city was set on fire, and themselves overcome. Does thine enemy seek
after thy life or thy good name? Would he hurt thee with the sharp sword of
Esau, or the bitter words of Ishmael? call upon God as Ioshuah did, who will
give thee a glorious deliverance: In the mean while he that hates thee does
not discern how powerful that enemy is which lies in wait against him, by
whom his tongue is set on fire (as Saint James speaks) in cursing, and his
heart enraged by anger and envy, so that he is utterly confounded and
overthrown.

Such an enemy is not to be feared, whose aim and power does extend no further
than to kill the body; But there is another more dreadful enemy that seeks
to destroy both body and soul in hell, against whom we must implore the help
of the Lord. He it is that goes to and fro in the earth and walks up and
down in it; having the whole world for his forest, wherein he hunteth after
us: who is not satisfied with out blood, which he hunteh after, being a
murderer from the beginning. And as hunters in ancient times were clad in
white garments; Antiqui Venatores albis vestibus inclut. Iul. Scal.
so he can transform himself into an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.14.
using any shape and disguise that he may deceive us; dealing therein like this
our Absalom, who took his brother Amnon in a snare that he had set for him, 2.
Sam. 13.28.
and killed him. And now by chase and pursuit he hops to take David his
father. So does Satan set snares and ginnes that he may bring us to
destruction: And how many does he take by presumption? If by that means he
cannot prevail, Ingentem clamore pr^n^s ad re^ta cervum. Virgil. 1. Pet. 5.8.
then as a roaring Lion which seeks whom he may devour, by terror he
would invelope us in the pit of desperation: He himself being master of the
game, with the help of his assassinates in that bloody work did assault our
blessed Savior, Psalm 25. inscript^^^
whom the Psalmist compares to the Heart of the morning, who was rowzed early
in the morning (as he was from his birth by Herod) and chased all his life
long: And at last, early in the morning, Luke 22.66. Psalm. 22.16. Matutino
tempore a rabiosis hominibus dilaniatus. Flamin.
as soon as it was day, many dogs compassed him, and he was stricken and
pierced and wounded for our transgressions; being as the goat that was
offered, Leuit 16.7.
that we might escape damnation. So that now though we be as an army of
Hearts, weak and timorous, yet having the Lion of the tribe of Judah to be the
Captain of our salvation, Revel. 5.5. Heb 2.10.
from him we receive strength, courage and safety: For as the Heart royal
escapes being chased by some Prince, so our soul shall be defended when we
are pursued by the Prince of this John 12.31.
world, if we pant after the Lord, and pray unto him to save us, Psalm. 7.2.
lest he tear our souls like a lion while there is none to deliver. There is
mention of one Sertorius the great Impostor amongst the Romans, Ab ea, se
quaenam aut agenda aut vitanda esset praedican. Val. Max. A. Gel.
who kept a tame Heart, and used it as Mahomet did his Dove, to delude his
soldiers, pretending that he was thereby admonished and directed what to do:
But surely it will be our wisdom to be led and guided by this Heart which
pants after the water-brookes, to pant after the Lord. And doubtless this is
the most blessed use of the creatures, when in the sight or remembrance of
them, our minds are elevated, and raised up to heavenly cogitations: And in so
doing we shall be followers of Christ, who upon all occasions, as of the
water, the vine, the corn, and in all his Parables did instruct and edify
those that heard him. And thus may we be affected. Is there such delight and
contentment to be received from the creature? then what joy and happiness from
the Creator of all things? Is there such pleasure in the cheerful use of
these things here below? then how great are those pleasures at the right hand
of God for evermore? Does the distressed Heart desire the river that she may be
relieved? Then how blessed are they that have the God of Jacob for a refuge?
from whose love, Romans 8.^^.
neither persecution, nor any other thing shall be able to separate them. And
seeing that enmity which is between us and the creatures, and between the
creatures themselves, we are put in mind of that great sin of our first
parents: Since which time they have cast off the yoke of subjection unto man,
who had first cast off that easy yoke of obedience unto God. And in the
pursuit of any of them, we may well consider that we our selves are pursued
by the enemy of our souls, Sed maiori cum fastu: Vbi aspexit venientem ad
retia cervum, Venator tacito ^audia cord premit. Bal. Cast^^o.
who does more desire to take us than we to take the Heart in our toils: And
we may at the same time both take and be taken, as many are, who turn their
liberty into licentiousness. If after this manner our thoughts be lifted up in
the time of refreshing, Meditabar aliquid, ut si manus vac^as plenas tamen
ceras reportarem. Plini. Iun. Vt quamvis nihil ^^perim, non n^hil ^eferam. Idem.
though we get nothing we may gain something; and both the outward and
inward man may be renewed

We deny not this exercise of hunting to be very commendable, Romany solemn
viris, opus ut^^etan ae, vitaeque and membris. Horat. venat^o Suevorum vtres
alit. Cae^ar.
the which was much used by many nations in ancient times, who beside that
help of sustenance, found many other benefits thereby; Their health was
preserved, their bodies were strengthened, Hoc se labor durant ado^escentes
Gorm^^^. Idem.
and themselves by the hardship endured, the better fitted and enabled for more
serious employment; especially, for military discipline, Venatu extendere vitam
abnuit. Silvis. Non me ulla vetabunt f^^gora. Virgil. Manet sub Jove frigido
Venator Horat. Iugurtha in Salust. Olim certabant cum ^^gacibus feris, cursu,
cum a^dacibus r^bore, cum cailidis ast^. Pli. ^^. in Panegyr. P^al. 32.9. Illa
i^sa (...) delectant, n^cesse est, ^v^cent ab intention operis dest^nati.
Quinti^an. lib. ^o cap. 1. Maleficium ^o^^us quam artific. um. Io. Sarisb.
when by those beasts which they hunted, they may learn from such as were
swift-footed speed and agility; from such as were daring, valor and courage;
from such as were crafty, stratagems and policy: Moreover the mind being
surcharged may thereby find some release, BUT, in the use of them we must not
be as the horse which has no understanding: Our affections must be
restrained, that our delight therein be not either inordinate or immoderate:
God created us for his own service, we must not be so re-created by our
sports, as if we had been framed for nothing else: Heb 11.25.
In so doing we make them pleasures of sin for a season, and that very
short; and it is folly in any man to place his chief contentment in that which
he cannot constantly enjoy: Also it does discover the unsufficiency of these
sports to satisfy the heart of man, when we shall see many being satiated
with their former delights, to be ever desirous of new; esteeming that to be
tedious and irksome which before seemed most pleasant. Great forests and wide
deserts for beasts of chase have proceeded from undigested riches and
boundless luxury: Barbarae opulentiae, haud ulla sunt maiora indicia quam
magnis nemo^bus ^altibusque n^b^lium ferarum gr^ges cla^si Quin. Curt. Camden
in Oxon.
And it is a strong presumption of the vain and riotous prodigality of this
Kingdom, The having more Parkes than all Christendom beside. That prophecy of
the Apostle may strike terror and examination into every one of us; where he
says, That in the last days perilous times shall come, 2. Tim. 3.^.
when men shall be lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. Such as are too
violent therein do renounce that which is of more consequence, and ought
chiefly to be sought after: And those that are ravished with the pleasures of
this pilgrimage, Qui best^arum cubili^ ^ndagat potiora deserit. Segec. Heb.
11.14.16. Cui peregrinatio du^ ^^non amat ^atriam. Gen 25.^7.
declare plainly, they do not desire a better Country, that is an heavenly.
Profane Esau is described to be a cunning hunter, and was thereby occasioned
to sell his birthright; And afterward while he was hunting he lost the
blessing also, finding no place of repentance though he sought it carefully
with tears. Quam nunc ^nc^gnita vellent lustra sibi; nu^losque datos venatibus
annos. Val. Flac. O pereant sylvae deficiantque canes. Tibul.
Take heed lest while thou art wholly devoted to thy delights, our heavenly
Father does confer his blessings upon those his children which formerly sought
unto him: and so thy vanities end in vexation of spirit. Then let your
moderation herein be known unto all men; Phil. 4.5.
Veloces iaculo cervos, cursuquae satigat. Acer an hela^ti similis Virgil.
Spend not your whole strength and best endeavors so wastfully, so
unfruitfully; Let not thy soul pant after the Heart, but as the Heart pants
after the water-brookes, so let thy soul pant after the Lord.

There are two natural causes of panting: Weariness through overmuch labor;
Defatigatio ex laboris nimietate: vel propter pulmonis parvitatem. Causabon.
and so we being wearied with the restless troubles of this life, should
thereby be excited to pant after the Lord. The other cause of panting, is when
the lungs are strait and small, and not able to receive much breath: which is
differing from this; for we pant after the Lord, not when we are straightened in
our own bowels, like the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 6 12.
but when our mouths are open to cry unto him, and our hearts are enlarged to
seek after him: Then be you also enlarged, and imitate this holy man David,
whom you may hear speaking of himself, Psalm. 63.8. and 84.2.
My soul follows hard after thee, My soul longs, yea even faints for
the Courts of the Lord, Psalm. 119.20.
My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times. Thus should we from the beginning of our lives unto the end thereof
pant after the Lord, who is Alpha and Omega, (...).
who breathed into our nostrils the breath of life. Gen 2.7.
That wise man among the Heathen, Dici suspirium potest. Hoc est, ani^am agere.
Medici hanc med^tationem mortis vocant, facit a^quando spiritus ille q^^d saepe
conatus est. Senec. ep^st. ^5.
being tormented with the disease of short breathing (which he thought to be
most painful) does call it the Meditation of death, wherein the breath does
often attempt to do that which one day must be done. Then well may we so
often as we draw our breath be put in mind of our latter end, when the spirit
does return to God that gave it: And yet the greatest part of men are never
sufficiently instructed to pant after the Lord, until extreme sickness and
the pangs of death do teach them: whereas, it the former part of our life had
been spent in numbering our days, and remembering our Creator, with what
assurance and comfort might we expect our dissolution? Worthy Calvin,
D^sp^ae^. Assidu e e^p^^^o, dum me a^heli^us d^^ic^at.
who labored of this bodily disease, looked daily when his panting should have
an end; and would often say, Quousque Domine^.
How long O Lord? And some space before his death (which was just in the same
moment when the sun did set) his prayers were nothing else, but an expression
of his souls panting after the Lord. The death of Coma was thought to be very
rare, Intra pect^s inc^usa a^ mafi^^m s^ repe^^ etc. Val. Man lib 9. cap. 13.
who dyed by his violent retaining and holding in of his breath: But now there
is nothing more frequent than this kind of death, though not of the body yet
of the soul, in those men which do never pant after the Lord. We think it
be the sign of a dying man when his breath grows cold; And our coldness in
seeking after the Lord, does discover that the soul does languish, and is void
of the life of grace: For if our souls were inflamed with zeal, the Kingdom
of heaven should suffer violence, Mat. 11.12.
and be taken by force.

VERSE II. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: When shall I come
and appear before God?
IN that expression which David used of panting after the Lord, we may well
observe, that it was not a weak and faint desire; but most strong and
forcible. Now that we not think it to be too violent to endure, and to pass
away as a sudden flame in his outward speech, rather than to burn constantly in
the holy disposition of his heart, it pleases God to perfect his own good
work, and to give him this heavenly thirst: And nothing is more frequent than
for these two, Aeris alternos angustat pulmo meatus, Resc^soque nocent suspiria
dura palato. L^^an. Oraque retro sorbet anhela sitis. Statius.
Panting and Thirst, to accompany each other. If we take them as perturbations
of the body, that may be said of them, which is spoken of worldly sorrow, that
they dry the bones and cause death: But, as in this place, being rich
endowments of the soul, they bring life, and peace, and joy: By those the
outward man does perish, by these the inward man is renewed daily.

There is a thirst which begins when we hang upon our Mothers breasts, and
continues in the strength and vigor of our lives, and does not leave us in the
time of old age, but even to the very end we hold a just proportion with this
last age of the dying world, Nec sitis est extincta prius quam vita bibendo.
Ovid.
in desiring wine and strong drink, that thereby our vital heat and radical
moisture may be preserved. So that, through abuse this vice of intemperate
drinking seems to have a special right in these days wherein we live. The
unclean drunkard thinks there is no other thirst but only that with which
he is possessed; nor any better means whereby to obtain health unto
himself, or to confer it upon others, than by profound drinking; whereunto he
addresseth himself as if he were to encounter with his greatest enemy;
Persae, potum tanquam adversarium aggred^entes. Aelian.
and does more than fill himself with strong drink, inflaming wines, and hot
waters; and, though improperly drinking more than these, only to kindle a
desire of drinking more. Vt Anglorum corpora, in Barbarorum naturam degenerasse
videntur. Camden in Elizab.
I affect antiquity herein, and will not name that which I find was never
anciently named: Hereby does he deprive himself of his reasonable soul, and
becomes void of sense, and worse than the brute beasts, having no life left,
but only that of the plants, not being able to move and help himself: And,
which I cannot mention without horror, how many are pierced with the dart of
death, as with the javelin of Phinehas in the act of wickedness? Judge. 4.21.
whose end is like unto that of Sisera, after he had drunk, at the same time
to be smitten in the head and deprived of life. And whereas the death of a
good man is called a sleep, the death of the drunkard is contrary, whose
senses being bound in the time of his life, that he could not use them, by
death he is awakened; Then does he see his estate to be miserable by the
pains of loss and sense: where again he thirsts and cannot obtain one
drop of water to cool his tongue. But why do I speak to him who is not
capable to hear; whose case is most fearful? For, whereas other sinners may
be convinced by reason, he by the wilful loss of understanding has made
himself a fool, and is in danger of hell fire. The contentious man thirsts
after the waters of Meribah; and the cruel man (for they must be joined)
thirsts after blood, M. Anten. vino gravis sitiebat tamen sanguinem. Senec.
Cyri caput in Val. Max.
wherein is the life: Nothing can satisfy him but the fall of his enemy. But
the bloody minded man shall not live out half his days: for though the divine
vengeance should not overtake him, as for the most part it does, with rancor
and malice he consumes himself and drinks his own blood: whose estate is
worse than a Serpents, for he bears about him such a poison as does destroy
his own life. The covetous man is thirsty as the horse-leach, Pro. 30 15.
crying, Give, Give. The adulterer refusing to drink waters out of his own
cisterne desires to drink stolen waters, and 9.17.
which he thinks to be sweet. And the adulteress thirsts for that bitter
water which causes the thigh to rot (a common judgment of these times. Number
12.18.21.
) The swearer is so thirsty, that he cannot speak without an oath in his
mouth; whose cursing shall come like water into his bowels, Psalm. 109.18.
and like oil into his bones. In a word, every sinner thirsts for the water
of Marah, which will be as gall in the belly, and bitterness in the later end.
Of all which I may speak as Samuel of the sons of Iesse, The Lord has not
chosen these to obtain a crown of life. But this holy thirst of the soul for
God, for the living God: And whom should the soul thirst after, but God alone?
For with thee is the Fountain of life; Psalm. 36.8.9.
thou do make me drink of the river of thy pleasures: and 23.5.
My cup runs over, and 63.5.
My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness: and 65.9.
Our gracious God does visit the earth, and 104.11.
and waters the ridges thereof abundantly, and gives drink to every beast
of the field. Does God take care for oxen? 1. Cor. 9 9.
then much more for man, 1. Tim. 5.23.
to whom he gives liberty to use a little wine, which makes glad the heart;
But most of all for the soul of man, and therefore he calls, Ho, Isai. 55.1.
every one that thirsts come ye to the waters; and, John 4.14.
whosoever drinks of this water that I shall give him (that is, and 6.35.
he that believes) shall never thirst, but out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living waters. and 7. 38.
and 4.14.
The water that I shall give him, shall be as a Well of water springing up
unto life everlasting. Then spring up O well, sing ye unto it; Number. 21.17.
and let thy soul thirst after him, John 19.28.
who in his passion said, I thirst; who thirsted after us and our salvation;
who drank off the dregs of the cup of his Fathers wrath, that we might drink
the cup of blessing. By the cluster of grapes that the spies brought they might
judge of the fruitfulness of the land: And by the first fruits that the Lord
gives us in this life, we may in part discern what the whole vintage will be
hereafter. Even by tasting we see how good the Lord is; Psalm. 34.8.
who does sustain us in this our pilgrimage, and 107.5.
when we are hungry and thirsty, and our soul faint within us, if we cry unto
him he will relieve us. And as the Lacedaemonians do never satisfy their
children with food, Ita liberos alunt, ut nunquam satientur. Heraclides.
that thereby they may learn to endure hardship: So those blessings which God
gives, if rightly used, do make us the more to thirst after him. And to
speak as the Church does, stay me with flagons: Cant. 2.5.
knowing that the best wine is reserved until afterward, John 2.10.
and the greatest comforts until that better life.

For this kingdom wherein we live, we may speak as the Lord does of Canaan,
Deuteronomy. 11.10.
that it is not like the land of Egypt, which thou wateredst with thy foot, as
a garden of herbs: But a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains
and depths, that spring out of valleys and hills: we have enjoyed the waters
of life and the plenteous means of salvation. True it is, there was a time,
when the three years of Elijah his drought were doubled upon us; and therein
the burning heat of persecution: But as Isaac repaired those wells of Genesis
26.18.
water that had been stopped by the Philistims, which Abraham his father had
formerly dug; so our Deborah (of ever-blessed memory) has opened those
fountains which her father had dug: Isai. 12.3.
since which time with joy may we draw water out of the wells of salvation.
Then let us take of the water of life freely: Revel. 22.17. Milites religione
pluvia magis usi: ^am rati sese d^ts immortalib curae esse. Salust.
And as that army which would not drink, but only of the rain, coming as
they thought from the divine providence to relieve them: So let our souls be
enlarged in seeking of spiritual blessings; and thirst after the Lord, ^sal.
143.6.
as a thirsty land which opens it self to receive the hevenly showers.
Eucherius.
We may read how thankful great Kings have been unto those that in their
thirst did refresh them, Caesar. in Senec. de ben. Xerxes in AElian. Artaxerxes
in cod.
and give them water: Then how should we praise the Lord for giving us his
Son Christ Jesus, the fountain of all grace and comfort, who came down like
rain upon the mowne grass. Psalm. 7^.6.
And though it be the commendation of David (that merciful King) that he would
not drink the blood of those three mighty men that went in jeopardy of their
lives, 2. Sam. 23.16.
and brought water unto him, when he longed for it; yet will it be our
condemnation, if we do not drink the blood of our Savior, which not by the
hazard, but by the loss of his life he has given unto us: And surely we
have great encourageme^t to thirst after the Lord; For it is a blessed thing to
thirst after righteousness; Mat. 5.6.
and we have a promise that we shall be filled. And as by outward thirst some
are recovered from diseases of the body, Miraberis quosdam fame ac siti curari.
Senec.
so by this heavenly thirst we are cured of all maladies and troubles, both of
soul and body. Wherefore, as newborn babes let us desire the sincere milk
of the word, that we may grow thereby. It will be as strong drink unto us
when we are ready to perish; Prove. 31.6.
and as wine when our hearts are heavy. But most of us are so far from this
happy thirst, that we are ready rather with those stifnecked Israelites to
murmur against the Lord: Our stomachs are so full, that we loath the honey
comb, the word of life; which should be sweeter unto us than the honey and the
honey comb. Like those that have the jaundies, Mel omnibus dulce, ^etericis
tamen, etc Alex. Aphrodys.
that which is most pleasant seems bitter and offensive unto us: And as the
sheep, O^e aper^o, vento, rec^p^entes f^^m suam se (...). Val. M^^
whose thirst is quenched by the wind, we are better satisfied with vanities,
and more contented with our inventions, than with the water of life. How
justly, in regard of our contempt, may the Lord remove those blessings from us,
and turn our water-springs into dry ground, Psalm. 107.^4
and this fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein. ^ai. 65.13.
When his servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; and as the old
Historian speaks of a people that perished for want of water; Psylli
interciderunt: Auster eis omnia receptacula aquarum arfecerat. Herodot.
so this nation may be consumed for want of this living water which now we so
lightly esteem; at which time, Nocturnum ^^c^pere ro^em coge^tutur. Caesar.
bell. Civil.
like those that have been constrained to receive the dew of the night, we may
earnestly desire the least drop of heavenly comfort and not obtain it. Pandunt
orasiti, nocturnum que a^^a captant. Lucan.


If we duly consider, we will approve the wisdom of David, in this choice
which he made, to thirst after the living God: Whose mercyes never fail, but
they are renewed every day: with whom is no variableness nor shadow of change:
whereas all things else are subject to alteration. There is no life in them
unless it proceed from the Lord: If we repose confidence in any worldly
benefit, we may as soon be destitute as Hagar was, Genesis 21.15.
when her bottle was empty; there had been a worse casting out than the
former, unless the Lord had opened her eyes to see the wall of water. Do we
receive sustentation and comfort by any outward gift? As the brook Cherith
dried up, 1. King. 17.7.
because there had bin no rain in the land, so we shall presently be at our
wits end, if the Lord withdraw his mercies from us: Yea thoug^ we have
abundance of these things here below, though our well be deep like Jacobs,
and our river does overflow the banks like Iordane; how soon can the Lord
stay the course thereof? Psalm. 74 15.
He dries up mighty rivers. So that in our greatest necessity we may be to
seek; when our goods, which we thought to be our chiefest good, shall deal by
us as those brooks did by the troops of Tema, Job. 6.17.
what time they wax warm, they vanish, when it is hot, they are consumed out
of their place: But let us grant their request, which is the desire of the
most, and the most they do desire, that they may possess great plenty of all
things during their life: yet even therein do they deceive their own souls.
Their greedy desires being more boundless than the sea, which has it is
limits, how far it shall pass: whereas they are never satisfied until death
robs them of all. And that which is added unto them, Cum plen^ aqua sint
sitiunt semper. Alex. Aphrod.
is but as so much drink ^o him that has the dropsy, to increase his thirst.
The more wood is heaped on, the fire is the greater; and their covetous
appetite increases with their means: Also, though for the present their
thirst does seem to be allayed, yet will it be like the use of snow-water,
cool and pleasing at the instant, Tabemque and morbos, sensim v^^cenbus
^^semina^^ A. Cell.
but ingendring manifold diseases. Their wealth which seemed most delightful,
will prove a cause of sorrow and anguish unto them: When they are in perplexity
their estate may be like his, Pomp^ius cum tot ^^umina possideret mendicavit
stillicidia. Sense.
who had the royalty of many rivers, and yet was driven to beg a few drops of
water: So they notwithstanding all their treasures will be compelled to sue
for inward consolation, and yet find the door shut against them. Offer unto
that man which is thirsty, the best provision of meat, and he will reject it
as unprofitable unto him: only give him drink, and his spirit will come
again as Sampsons did, Judge. 15.19.
and he shall be revived. And therefore well might Saul have a cruse of water
together with the spear at 1. Sam. 26.21.
his bolster, showing that the one was as needful to sustain life as the
other to defend it. In the greatest exigent, when our strength is dried up like
a pot-sheard, Psalm. 22.15. and 32.4.
and our moisture is turned into the drought of summer, who can relieve us but
God alone? what can refresh us but only this water of life? Then let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth rather than I should thirst after any thing,
but the God of my salvation.

How intolerable a torment thirst is, there is none but have had sufficient
experience: Our Savior chose to express the pains of hell by the torture
which the tongue has in extremity of a burning ague. And here the sick man
comes to be cured, Flagrat incensum siti cor. Senec. in Thyest.
whose disease is like a fire in his bones, whose bowels are burnt like an
hearth, whose heart is melted like wax: Then does he implore the help of man;
Vbi definit medicus incipit theologus. Psalm. 146.3. Quae sitaeque nocent ar^es
cessere magistri. Virgil. Cadunt medentes morbus auxilium trabit. Senec.
for to proceed otherwise is a method unknown to the world, and thought to be
ominous. But there is no help in the son of man; his breath goes forth, and
he returns to his earth. Unto whom it may in vain be said, Physician heal
thy self: As not being able to obtain deliverance from that anguish which
himself endures. At last some better help is required, at which time, that
saying of the Apostle is true, If in this life only I have hope, I am of all
men most miserable. Unless thy soul can find ease by thirsting for God, thy
fever is come to torment thee before the time. There Is no other remedy but only
the sure mercies of David, even in death it self to thirst for the living God;
who gives unto all men the life we now have, who gives unto King David, and
to us as Kings, 1. King. 1.31.
that life which is for ever.

In this my proceeding, I find the poor man desiring drink to quench his
thirst, I cannot pass by one in so great misery, but with the good Samaritan I
must make provision for him. Luke 10.34.
Do thou live in penury and sorrow? Know that Christ himself did drink of
the brook in the way; Psalm. 110.7.
that is, suffered manifold afflictions in this life. Art thou denied relief
for thy body? There is no new thing happened unto thee: Did not a woman refuse
to give water unto Christ, John. 4.
being wearied with his journey? And before that Nabal rejected David; Shall I
take my water and give unto men whom I know not whence they be? 1. Sam. 25.11.
And therefore well might Dives (that Nabal in the Gospel) be denied a drop of
water, seeing he denied to succor those in want. But though the hearts of men
be hardened, 2. Sam. 24.14. Isai. 41.17. and 55.1.
the mercyes of the Lord are great; who calls him to the waters that has no
money; who gives liberally, Iam. 1 5.
and upbraideth not (as man often does:) who calls not many mighty and noble,
but he sends the springs into the valleys, Psalm. 104.10
he causes the precious dew of heavenly comforts to rest upon those that are
lowest and meanest in this world. And if the denial of ordinary water has
been esteemed so great an indignity, Virgil. petiit a Nolanis aquam; nomen
urbis ex carmine suo derasit. A Gell.
then how should we esteem of Gods bounty toward us, Ic circo nimirum hoc
dicta es nomine Nola; Nolu^ris magnis quod placuisse viris. Sanuazar.
in giving the waters of life without money, and without price? O that we were
as sensible of the drought of the soul as we are of the body; then should our
souls thirst for God, for the living God, who has promised not to forsake the
poor and needy: When they seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fail for thirst, Isai. 41.17.
I the Lord will hear them.

And if it be so great a benefit to show the fountain unto those that be
thirsty, Benefic^^m ^st, arentibus si^, son^em ^sten le^e. Senec.
Then return, return, why will ye dye O ye house of Israel? All those that
have forsaken God and his true Church, wherein is the fountain of living
waters, and have hewed out cisternes, Ier. 2.13.
broken cisterns that can hold no water; Come again, and ye shall be
satisfied with the breasts of consolation: 1. Sam 30.11.12.
and as that Egyptian by eating of bread and drinking of water found his spirit
to come again to him; so you by the use of the Word and Sacraments, shall
find the holy Spirit to come into you. Come now and let us reason together:
Shall the soul of holy David thirst for the living God? and shall thy soul
thirst for many gods? for dead gods? for idols that are no Gods, but the works
of men's hands? Shall he thirst for God, who does satisfy us with all good
things? and will thou desire that thirst whereby thou can never be satisfied?
Abstemious men, without question! For when God has commanded to keep a feast,
they will keep a fast: When God has given unto all the cup of blessing, yet
they will refuse it (as counting themselves unworthy of so great salvation.)
What can they merit by this their abstinence? even to drink of that cup in the
hand of the Lord, Psalm. 75.8.
which he powers out for them. If they shall plead that the use of the cup is
freely given to some of them; yet then there must be a miracle in the change
(which among the Heathens themselves was thought to be prodigious: Insusum
paterae Xerxis vinum, in sanguinem conversum est. Val. Max.
) But were not that woman drunken with blood, Revel. 17 6.
she could not think that to be blood which she drinks. 2. King 3.^3.
But now both she and her followers by thinking that to be blood which is
not, as the Moabites did, they run upon their own destruction.

Now if any shall object, that David might well thirst after God who had dealt
so bountifully with him: who looked upon his poor estate and exalted him when
he was of low degree, unto the highest dignity: who gave him victory over all
his enemies, and made a way for him to escape out of the greatest dangers: So
that it had been unthankefulnesse in him to have done otherwise. As for
themselves, they desire first to compose their outward affairs, and settle
their estates, that they may not appear to be worse than Infidels: and then
afterward to devote the remainder of their lives to the service of God.
Whereunto let me answer: That thy petition is the same with Balaams, Let me
dye the death of the righteous. Thou art therefore unexcusable O man, who in
thy Testament do in the first place commit thy soul to God, and then dispose
of thy estate: But in the former part of thy life, by a confusion without any
good order, thy chief care has been about thy worldly possessions; and now
in thine end, it is not the love of God, but the love of thy self that
constrains thee to take care of thy soul. Whereas, such as have always used
a cloak of covetousness (a garment well known to Judas, but never worn by S.
Paul) how can they ever expect to put on the Lord Jesus, 1. These. 2.5.
or to be clad with the rich robes of his righteousness? No, that thine
unsatiable greediness will in the end be as deadly and uncomfortable unto
thee, as the Babylonish garment was unto Achan. Josh 7 11.
And such as addict themselves to voluptuousness, rejoicing in their youth,
Eccles. 11 9.
walking in the ways of their own heart, and in the sight of their eyes; but
intending to rejoice in the Lord, and that their souls shall thirst for the
living God, in the time of age and trouble, when they can find no relish in
vain delights: At last when God does bring them to judgment, can they expect
to hear that comfortable saying, Well done thou good and faithful servant,
enter into thy Masters joy? No, Luke 16.25.
they may fear to be told, that in their life time they received their good
things, but now there remains no comfort for them. Also such as are ambitious
to make themselves a name, laying a sure groundwork, as they think, of
honors and titles here upon earth; intending with those foolish builders,
which had begun that they could not finish, that the top of their tower should
reach up to heaven, hoping at last to obtain a crown of glory: But that their
Babel will prove their confusion; Genesis 11.
for they invert the order of Christ, who has commanded us in the first place
to seek the Kingdom of heaven: And as in the creation, Genesis 1.1.
heaven is named before earth, so our best endeavors should be to obtain that
estate of happiness, not casting our anchor of hope upon earth, Heb. 6.19.
but into heaven; as David here did, whose soul thirsted for the living God;
who did not then begin to serve God, when he had received many outward
blessings from him. Such an objection came from Satan, Job 1.
Does Job fear God for naught? For, who ever feared God for naught? we being
less than the least of all his mercies: De antiqu^s illustrissimus quisque
pastor erat. Varr^
But in his first estate, in that most ancient kind of life, made famous by so
many worthyes, as Abel, Jacob, Moses, and the like; he put his whole
confidence in the Lord who delivered him out of the paw of the Lion, 1 Samuel
17.37.
and out of the the paw of the Bear, which he remembered with thankesgiving.
and 16.16.
And having that leisure which shepherds have, Pastor otios^s. Otium
voluptatis, ac lasciviae pater In Scal.
he did not abuse it to wantonness and folly, as they were wont for the most
part to do, but being a cunning player on the Harp, and a divine Poet, Videtur
autem modulat^o in pastro^^b. inventa pr^mum. Id.
(that art of poetry having its beginning from shepherds, as the song of Moses
does testify) who formerly had led the flock of Iethro, Exodus 3.1.
who at that time led the people like a flock; He composed most heavenly and
melodious pastorals in praise of his Creator. After that being lifted up by the
right of the Almighty (who loves a cheerful giver) and not by his own
pride, whereof he was unjustly taxed by Eliab; who foresaw that the elder must
serve the younger, he kept in tune still, and did more excel the best of his
nobles in gratitude and zeal than in regal dignity: And here in his distress
(a time of sufficient trial) you see with what patience he endured the
cursing of Shimei, and what confidence he placed in God. He does not ask the
life of his enemies, you know the charge he gave to the contrary, and how he
was blamed for too much love of them. 2. Sam. 1^.6.
He does not ask long life, that he might be restored unto his Kingdom,
and many years added unto his reign; But having a wise and understanding
heart, he seeks for God himself, his soul thirsted for the living God; he
knew if his prayer were acceptable, God would give him more than he asked, as
he did afterward to Solomon: 1. King. 3.^3.
And if God gave himself, he would give all things also. Wherefore let us be
followers of him, as he was of God: Phillip. 3.8.
And with S. Paul, suffer the loss of all, that we may win Christ. It will
be our best advantage and greatest gain, by any outward loss, or imminent
danger to be excited to seek for heavenly blessings and spiritual graces.

VERSE II. When shall I come and appear before God?
IT was David's resolution, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I
seek after, Psalm. 27.4.
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. Here you
see the performance thereof: He does not grieve for the loss of any outward
benefit, nor so much as mention his former estate; but only desires to
appear before God, whereby he hoped to obtain that for which his soul
thirsted. It is true, that God sees us in all places; Whither can I go from
thy face O Lord, or whither can I flee from thy presence? But his favor and
loving countenance is chiefly revealed in the assembly of the Saints. Cant. 6.2.
My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices: God is
present in the congregation, where the prayers and praises of his children are
offered up as sweet odours before him. In it self the presence of God may
seem a cause of horror and fear to us sinners, who are as stubble be. him a
consuming fire. We know that the Israelites were afraid to come nigh Moses,
Exodus 34.30.
unto whom the Lord had appeared. Naturally we are ready to hide our selves
from the presence of the Lord God: ^en. 3.8.
But in Christ we have confidence and free access; and having found him a
loving Father, we for ever pray Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon
us: Psalm. 4:
which we desire above any good, above all the good in the world. The father
in the parable said, Luke 15.31.
Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine: So we by
presenting our selves before the Lord, come to be made partakers of all his
blessings: Thereby we are gathered under his wings of providence and mercy:
Mat. 13.48.
Thereby we are within the compass of the net; and shall be taken with the
good: Thereby we have communion with God, and his Angels, and one with
another. Then let us come and appear before God. The children of this world
are wise in their generation: If they have hope of benefit, or advancement
from any superior, how diligent will they be in their attendance? O^arem ut
o^^endas me (...) esse homin^^ non ing^atum. Po^^^ an. N^^ indignus, qu^m tu
al^q^^ndo respic^^.
How desirous to be ever in view? How politic in that which they give,
choosing some Present of use and remembrance? Happy were we, if we were thus
provident for our souls: Then would we set our selves before the Sun of
Righteousness, the light whereof would be sweet and pleasant unto our eyes.
Our dark understandings should be illuminated, and we made glorious within:
But if we neglect such precious means of salvation, our danger is greater than
that of Queen Esther; Esther. 4.
she feared to perish by a temporal death because she went unto the King,
not being called. We may fear to perish both body and soul, unless we do
come unto the great King, who has so often called us, who has held out the
golden scepter of his word unto us. Absalom having lived two years in
Jerusalem, and not seen the King, showed the dutiful affection of a good
son in this particular, 2. Sam. 14.32.
that he had rather be put to death (if there were any iniquity in him) than
to be any longer deprived of the sight of his father: By which example we may
learn to value this royal privilege that we have in appearing before God,
And to count it more dear unto us than life it self: And yet most men do not
value this singular prerogative that God has given them; even the whole world
abides in this sin. There was a day, Job. 1.
when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord; but the
sons of men care not for the seventh day, nor any other day wherein to
present themselves before him: Some there are that be worse than the three
guests invited to the marriage: Luk 14.18.
for they pretended that they could not come; these absolutely deny, and say,
they will not come: and before that they will come they will pay the earnest
penny here, and reserve the greatest payment until the last. For, with what
comfort can they expect to appear before God in that great day; who never
cared to appear before him in their life? yea, rather than they would then
appear they will call to the hills to cover them. There be others, that are so
encumbred with the affairs of this life, that they little think of appearing
before God; until that he does punish them for that neglect. As the Law was
our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ by instruction; Gal. 3.24.
so the judgments due by the Law for our sins, have been as our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ by correction. When we have been as
wanton children addicted unto play, and omitting that which we ought most
seriously to intend, the Lord has dealt with us as he did by Lot and his wife
(being merciful unto them; Genesis 19.16.
) while they lingered, and were backward in departing from Sodom, God sent his
Angels which laid hold on them and brought them forth: While we have been
unwilling to forsake our sins, and ascend up into the holy mountain, God
has sent his Angels with their swords drawn; some great plague which has cut
off many thousands in the way, that could not then come and appear before God;
and has scourged others into the Temple which before were careless in that
duty; and though formerly we would not say with Samuel, Speak Lord for thy
servant hears; then we have been enforced to say, Hear Lord for thy
servant speaks; Being poor we have spoken supplications, we have humbled
our souls in fasting and mourning, and the Lord in wrath has remembered his
wonted mercies.

Some there be that come abruptly without due preparation, as if they were
brought thither unawares, by some great and strong wind; 1. King. 19 ^
but the Lord was not in that wind: They look for the same immediate and
miraculous assistance of Gods spirit which the Apostles had, who took no
thought what to speak, Mat. 10.19.
for it was given them in the same hour. So they take no thought what they
hear, nor how they hear, thinking it shall be given them in the same hour.
Their customary performance in the first entrance I cannot relate without
indignation: how rude and insufficient it is, does appear unto all men. Will
God regard that prayer, which thou thy self do so little regard? Whereas thy
Soliloquie then, though performed with the best reverence, should be but as the
Amen to thy private devotions that went before: judge in your selves, is it
comely so to do? Holy David, who so earnestly desired to appear before God,
when he had that liberty granted unto him, did he rashly and unadvisedly
thrust himself into Gods presence? He whose music was so celestial, did
he not first bring his instruments into tune, and then praise the Lord upon
them? Psalm. 26 6.
He first washed his hands in innocence, and then did compass thine Altar O
Lord.

There be many that do lend their bodily presence, but do not give their
souls unto God: Some that have not entered into Jobs covenant with their eyes,
and they gaze after vanity: others that mind earthly things, and they rob God
of his honor, making the house of prayer a den of thieves: Mat. 21.13.
And though Christ when he came as Man, did correct those money changers with
the rods of men, only making a scourge of small coards to drive them out of
the Temple; John 2.15.
yet at his second coming he will whip them with scorpions, even with that
wo^me of conscience which never dies: How shall any sinner presume to appear
before the Lord, before whom all things are naked and manifest, unless he
resolve to abandon all wickedness? He sees thee, as if thou were then acting
thine heinous sins: And if the Lord did threaten to punish a secret sin
before all Israel and before the sun, 2. Sam. 12.12.
then how terrible will he be in taking vengeance upon those daring presumptuous
sinners, who make that most holy place a stage of wickedness, and a cage of all
uncleannes? Therefore let us renounce all sin, and with Cornelius present our
selves before God, to hear all things commanded of God: Let me not seem
uncharitable, I would be sorry to offend the least of those little ones; There
be some that desire frequently to come and appear before God, which is a good
gift, and comes down from the Father of lights: But then you must take heed
lest that tares grow up in lieu of the good seed: If any shall think the work
done, that is, being present in the Congregation to be a work meritorious, it
proceeds from that old leaven of popery, and must be purged out. So often as
God suffers thee to appear, he gives another talent, which being well used
will further thine account, but otherwise increases thy condemnation: Think
that which thou hear to be of the nature of a prophecy, which is never
fulfilled but by thy practice. Be not like he blinded horse that goes ^lwayes
in the same compass. 2. Tim. 3 7.
It is good to be ever lea ning, but it is most dangerous to be never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth; and if not to the knowledge, then much
less to the practice of it: Though custom in sinning takes away the sense of
sin, yet let not our ill doing of good have the same bad effect: Cursed will
he be that does the work of the Lord negligently; and a surfeit by the abuse
of Gods blessings must needs be mortal. The continual sound of the Word has
been like the Catadupes of Nilus, to make us deaf, And the frequent us^ of it
has rebated the edge of our affection; so that we do not hearken unto the
Lord, though the Lord has been pleased to hearken unto us: As yet the Lord
has been slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, Mal. 3.16.
not rewarding us according to our iniquities; Psalm. 103.
For a long time we have enjoyed this freedom to come and appear before God:
The Word has continued as long as man lives; the years of the Gospel have
been threescore years and ten, and if those years be made up fourscore,
we must wonder at the Lords mercy. Now is the acceptable time and the day of
salvation: So long as we have this blessing to approach into his presence,
there is hope of pardon and reconciliation; Esther 7 8. and 6.13.
but if once our faces be covered (as Hamans was) that we may not appear
before the King of Kings, we may fear that prediction of Zeresh will be
fulfilled in us, Ne amplius faciem regis videret: ut sicbat apud Persas ris qui
a gratia regis exciderant. Iun.
We shall not prevail, but shall surely fall into woe and misery. It is true
that God sometimes denies this liberty unto his beloved children (as here unto
David) that they cannot join with the assembly; but then they are uncessant in
their prayers to be restored and enlarged, and their hearts are the more
inflamed with the love of God, and they learn more highly to prize those
blessings which before were offered unto them; As the Church refused to open
unto Christ when he knocked, Cant 5.6.
but after he had withdrawn himself she sought him with all diligence. And
thus God prepares a table for us in the wilderness, and relieves us in our
greatest necessity: We may see what assurance David had in saying, When shall
I come? he does not say, I shall never come, but believes there will be a
time of comfort, Psalm. 27.4.
when he shall inquire in the Temple. Nor is it without cause that he so much
desires to appear before God, having ever found his ear open unto his
prayer: As for Saul, the Lord was angry with him, and would not answer him,
neither by dreams, 1. Sam. 28.5. and 23, 2, 4, 11, 12, and 30.8.
nor by Urim, nor by Prophets; but when soever David inquired of the Lord, he
received a gracious answer; which made him say, How amiable are thy
tabernacles? Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, Psalm. 84.
for a day in thy courts is better than a thousand; and he was glad when they
said unto him, and 122.1.
Let us go into the house of the Lord: yea in his greatest agony after he had
lain all night upon the earth, and his head both was and seemed to be as a
fountain of tears, even then, in the beginning of comfort he went into the
house of the Lord and worshipped before he would eat any bread: 2. Sam. 12.20.
And now when he fled from his son, he thought it the best testimony of Gods
love that he might come and appear before him; 2. Sam. 15.25.
If I find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show
me both the Arc and his habitation. And although he were prohibited from
building of the material Temple, yet had he dedicated his body, being the
Temple of the holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 6.19.
unto the service of God: And he erected a Church in his house, wherein all
the vessels were holy, Romans 16.5.
for none that wrought deceit might dwell therein; Psalm. 101.7.
and there also God was honored. And lastly he set up a Basilica (a building
well beseeming such a King) when he, and all the house of Israel did bring the
Arc into Zion, which was an assurance of Gods presence among the people:
Wherefore let the same mind be in you Philip. 2.5.
which was in David and in Christ himself, Psalm. 16.8.
who foresaw the Lord always before his face. Act. 2.25.
Let thy closet be as an Oratory, and therein do thou appear before thy
Father, who sees in secret, and will reward thee openly. Mat. 6.6.
Let thine house be like a Church, wherein thou and thine daily and duly in
the day may serve the Lord; and not like those Chapels in great buildings
which are rooms of greatest necessity, but of least use.

VERSE III. My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually
say unto me, Where is thy God?
BEfore he thirsted for the living God; and now he says, That his tears were
his meat: So that until such time as his soul shall be filled with heavenly
comfort, he does continue mourning. My tears have been my meat: Whereby we
may understand the greatness of his sorrow, which held him from taking his
bodily sustenance: My heart is smitten, so that I forget to eat my bread. Psalm
102.4.
And we know that in the time of grief, the Elders of his house could not
persuade him to eat meat with them; 2. Sam. 12.17.
Haec itaque sibi recordata est, Postquam satigata ^uerat lacrymaudo. Sc.
Niobe. Homer: Il. 24.
whereas the chief mourner in outward sorrow desired meat: Or else, his
tears were his meat, that is, he received the same strength and comfort by
his tears, that others did by eating. He was fed with the bread of tears,
Psalm. 80.5.
and had tears given him to drink in great measure: And he had tears for his
meat, they were his whole repast, so that no part of his food was wanting in
them; and that not only in the day, when others use to eat, Psalm. 102.9.
and when he himself did mingle his drink with weeping, but his tears were
his meat both day and night. As Christ said to his Disciples, I have meat to
eat that ye know not of; John 4.32
so may every good Christian say, I have meat to eat that the world know not
of: He finds great comfort by the tears he sheds, which are the best
evidence of Gods favor and love unto him. For as it appeared that Elijah his
sacrifice was accepted by the fire that fell, 1. King. 18.38.
so it is evident that our sacrifice is accepted by this water that falls
down.

Man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward: The crying of the child
after birth, is but the beginning of sorrows: Naturally we are inclined to
remorse in our selves, Mollissima corda, humano generi. etc. Iuvenal.
and compassion toward others. And there be many that have not power to
retain their tears; Excidunt etiam retinentibus lacrymae. Senec. Act. 22.28.
but as the chief Captain said, that he was not free borne, but with a great
sum he obtained his freedom: So we by our birth, are not able to shed such
tears as David did, but with many prayers we obtain this freedom, that we
can mourn before the Lord. It is a sign of life in the child if it cries;
and it is a blessed testimony, that we are borne again, and have the life of
grace in us, when we cry unto the Lord, and do humble our selves in weeping
and lamentation. Tears do accompany any vehement commotion, Lacrymae omnis
fere gravioris commotionis com tes Causab^^.
and perturbation of mind: True it is, that any vain and unworthy occasion
does produce tears sooner than godly sorrow, which alone deserves them: If we
knew rightly how to bestow them, Nulli parcendum est rei magis quam huic cuius
tam frequens usus est. Sen.
we would not lavish them so fondly as we do. In our selves we are as
withered branches, having no sap nor moisture, but from the root Christ Jesus:
The manifold troubles and miseries of this life do make us to be obdurate;
Quantum est Helena quod lacrymat malum. Sen. in Tro.
and our hearts thereby come to be harder than stones, which give against the
weather. As Moses did smite the rock twice, Number. 20.11. Lam. 2.18. Terque
quaterque manu p^ctus percussit honestum. V^rgil.
and the water came out abundantly; so we must often strike our hearts, that
tears may run down like a river day and night: And we must pray unto God,
who turns the flint into a fountain of waters, Psalm. 114.8.
to take out our hearts of stone, and to give us hearts of flesh. He it is that
raises the springs from the depth of the earth, Psalm. 104.10.
and causes them to run among the hills; that works in us a broken heart, and
makes the eye to run down with rivers of water: Lam. 3.48.
Wherefore as Achsah having received a South-land of Caleb her father, Josh.
15.19.
did sue unto him to give her also springs of water, and he gave her the upper
springs, and the nether springs; so we should pray unto our father, to give
us the upper, and the nether springs; even an heart bleeding for our sins,
Lam. 3.49.
and an eye trickling down with tears of repentance: yea we should resolve
not to give rest unto our eyes, nor slumber unto our eyelids, until that we
have mourned for our transgressions: And although those Jews were accursed of
God and themselves, being bound neither to eat nor drink till they had killed
Paul; Act. 23. v. 12.
yet we shall be blessed, yea thrice blessed shall we be, if we bind our
selves neither to eat nor drink, until we have fervently sued for this
meat, which was David's diet, most comfortable to the soul: And as Adam in the
sweat of his face was to eat his bread, so we by our importunate and
effectual prayer, should seek for this food of our souls, which may be
compared unto Manna, that came down from heaven, Exodus 16.14.
and it is God that gives this unto us; that came with the dew of the night,
and this we receive with those tears which we shed; that ceased when they
came to Canaan, Josh. 5.12.
and this shall cease when we come to the heavenly Canaan, Revel. 21.4.
for then shall all tears be wiped from our eyes. Lastly, as there was a
golden pot of Manna kept in remembrance thereof; so there is a bottle of our
tears, Psalm. 56.8.
which God keeps in remembrance thereof: And that of it self may be the most
powerful argument to make us distill some tears, because they are not as
water spilt on the ground which cannot be gathered up again, but God has
provided a flagon to put them in. Also we may consider the necessity of them,
Nec non etiam precor lympham. Quoniam sine aqua omnis arida ac misera
agricultura. Varro.
that as the labor of the husbandman is vain and fruitless, without a
plentiful rain to water the ridges thereof abundantly; so other actions will
be of small purport, without these heavenly showers to refresh us when we are
weary: Genesis 43.30.
Wherefore, as Joseph sought where to weep, and he entered into his Chamber and
wept there; so let us seek some retired place, Ier. 13.17. Nemo sibi tristis
est. Sen.
that our souls may weep in secret, as Jeremiah did: Worldly sorrow desires
to be manifest, and appear unto men; but this godly sorrow is hidden from the
eyes of men; Siquis adest iussae prosi^unt lacrymae Martial.
none but our heavenly father sees it. And these our tears must not be like
the morning cloud, or the early dew; Hos. 13.3.
but as the former and the latter rain: they must begin in our first
conversion, and they must continue so long as we continue, ever running down
plenteously like Aarons ointment, Psalm 133.
which went down from his head to the skirts of his garments; so we should
wish our head to be a fountain of tears, Ier. 9.1. Cur non ocul^s plures
^^bis na^^^ (...). Sen. in T^^b. Cum^us fire. didedert^n ^^um du^taxat diem.
Senec.
and that we had many eyes, that we might sufficiently bewail our iniquities:
And that not only for a day (which was the time set apart for sorrow) but
until our eyes do fail with tears, weeping until we have no more power to
weep. Lam. 2.11.
1. Sam. 30.4.
It is said of David, that he lift up his voice and wept: So we, when we
weep must lift up our voice and our hearts also, unto the Lord in prayer; that
so the tears which we power out, may be as a drink offering, acceptable
before him. And though by reason of our tears we be not able to speak unto
the Lord, yet as Perseus wrought compassion in the people by his tears which
stopped the passage of his speech; Sed aliquo^ies dic^re incipientem cum
lacrvmae praepea^^^ent. Liv^.
so will the Lord have pity upon us, when through the greatness of our sorrow
we are not able to speak unto him: Vocisque repens singulens apertum
inercepit iter. ^ at.
yea, then we cry unto him with best success, when we seem to be
overwhelmed with our sighs and tears, that we cannot distinctly utter our
complaints before him: Then also the spirit helps our infirmities; for we
know not what we should pray for, Rom 8.26.
as we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be expressed. Omnia Iugentium officia solerter finxit,
sed lacrvmae procedere nolucrunt Apul. Lacryma^ non sponte cadentes eff^dit,
gem^tasque expressque pecto^e laeto. Lucan.
Other gestures of sorrow may be acted, but tears are not so easily forced;
and though they sometime be drawn out to make some appearance of outward
grief, yet in godly sorrow, we know, they be always sincere and just;
wherein they do as much excel the other, as orien pearl do common glass:
But let us think them to be serious and without guile; yet how superfluous
are they for the most part, as one spoke of a sorry Comaedian, Rhodophili
comaedia, adeo infulsa est, ut misericordiam potius quam risum excitet. I^l.
Scal. Quanto risu pro^equenda sunt quae nobis lacrimas educunt. Sen. Quae causa
ind^gna serenos faedavit vul^^s. Virgil.
that he did stir up compassion rather than mirth: So we may affirm the
contrary, That the tears of many deserve thus to be reproved rather than to
be pitied: And unto others that are more passionate and dolorous, yet not
squaring their sorrow according to the rule of the Word, we may speak as Paul
did, What mean you to weep and to break mine heart? Acts 22.13.
as having a fellow-feeling of their weakness, who for want of comfort and
courage, are weighed down under the burden of any calamity. We should not
be ignorant of the devices of that wicked one, who seeks to deal by us, as
Cyrus did by those whom he besieged; Herodot. li. 1.
he divided the great river into diverse currents, by the which he passed
over and subdued Babylon: So our Enemy hops for victory by turning that
stream of our tears, which ought to be for our sins, into new passages. If
we have any loss, we lament with unfeigned tears: In the death of children
we refuse to be comforted because they are not: In the departure of our
friends, we mourn as those that have no hope: yea though we part but for a
time we strive who should exceed in weeping: whereas it would be our wisdom
to keep this river of tears within the proper bounds, that it may not exceed
the limits (as Jordan does in time of harvest) and thereby hinder us from
reaping our b^st benefit. Can thou mourn at some doleful story? yea it may
be at some slanderous and malicious fiction, Invida cur in me stimulasti musa
Maronem? Auson. Q^od commentus est in odium Cartha ganiensium. For. Scal.
as that of Dido killing her self? And can thou not mourn for thy sins
both desperate and presumptuous, whereby thou have labored to destroy thine
own soul? Quod puduislet ipsum histrionis incommodis and affection
bu^^isericordem videri, etc. AE ^an.
As that cruel King arose, and went from a Tragoedy confounded with shame and
sorrow, that he should seem to be touched with remorse at the false semblance
of an Actor, and yet be without any commiseration toward his own subjects: So
we may abhor our selves that we can dissolve into tears upon some
frivolous occasion, and yet be without any contrition when it is most
needful. Christ says, Mat 20.15.
Is thine eye evil because I am good? What eye so evil and so full of malice,
as that which is an enemy to the soul? Wilt not thou mourn because God is
gracious in giving his blessings? in forgiving thy sins? Rather let the
bounty and long sufferance of God lead thee to repentance. Strangulat inclusus
d^ lor atque ^or, aestuat^ntus Ovid.
Do we find such enlargement and quiet by those common tears we let fall,
when we are surcharged and ready to break for want of vent? Fletus aerumnas
levat, Sen.
then how great consolation may we find by our godly sorrow, when we are as
good grapes trodden in the wine press, and do yield that precious liquor
whereby the heart is cheered? Est quaedam delendi volup^^s prae ertimsi in
amici sinu defleas. Plin. Iun. Magis exurunt quos secretae lacerant curae. Sen
in Agam.
Do we receive solace and release in the sympathy of a friend, unto whom we
power out our complaint, who pittieth us, and mingleth his tears with ours?
then how shall we value these which we shed in the presence of the Almighty,
Psalm. 39.12.
who is not silent at our tears but speaks comfortably unto our souls? Who
is not like our friend that bids us be warmed and filled, not being able to
give us those things we want; But he does warm our hearts with his blessings,
and fill our souls with comfort; He has delivered my soul from death, Psalm.
116.8. and 30.5.
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. Weeping may endure for a
night, Vt levis quaedam and moderata hum^ctatio terrae affundatur. Kecker.
and be like unto the dew, whereby a gentle moisture is spread upon the earth,
but joy comes in the morning: In the beginning of that great day, when the
Sun of righteousness does arise, Mala. 4. Isai. 25.8.
he will wipe away tears from off all faces. In the mean while during this
disconsolate estate, we receive light and comfort by that day star arising
in our hearts, 2. Pet. 1.19.
the glad tidings of the Gospel: So that as sorrowful we always rejoice. 2.
Cor. 6.10.
It is most just that tears should be our meat, when as the eyes did at
first offend in desiring to eat the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.6.
which seemed pleasant unto them, and to be desired for food: where we must
observe the Lords gracious dealing with us, who has taken out the sting out of
our sorrow, and turned that into a blessing, which might justly have bin a
curse and a punishment: For as meat came out of the eater, so we receive
comfort by our sorrow, which might have been as a lion to devour us; And as
Paul provided for the excommunicate person, 2. Cor. 2.7.
that he should not be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness; So the Lord in
mercy receives us that deserve to be cast out of his presence, and gives us
this savoury meat, better than all the delicious fare in the world; for the
which our souls do bless him both in life and death: As it was a testimony
of Joseph's love unto Benjamin, Genesis 43.34.
that his meal was five times as much as any of his brethren; so it is a most
sure pledge of God his love when he gives us a large portion of this heavenly
meat. It was a great honor unto Mephibosheth to eat continually at King
David's table, 2. Sam. 9.13.
but it is much more honorable unto us, to eat the same spiritual meat, and
to drink the same spiritual drink which David did. Then let us covet this
heavenly gift; and as the Disciples said, Lord evermore give us this bread; so
let us say, John. 6.
Lord evermore give us this meat, that we may live for ever. Non in sacris
tantum, sed etiam in penore tangendo observavere veteres. Turneb. Mar. 7.3, 4.
It was the tradition of the Elders to wash diligently before they did eat,
And Christ blamed the Pharisees for their superstition therein, who made clean
the outside, but within were full of wickedness. But this meat does cleanse
that which is within, and the outside is clean also. Hereby we our selves are
cleansed, and all things are clean unto us: We have right unto the creatures
to sustain our bodies; and this meat is a preparative unto that spiritual
meat: By the tears which we shed in our examination, we become in some
measure worthy receivers of that food of our souls.

I may produce some examples of those that have mourned, that we being
compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, may likewise break into a
shower of tears. And first, behold how our blessed Savior loved Lazarus, John
11.35.
weeping for him being dead: And have thon no love to thine own soul? Can
thou not weep for thy self, being dead in sin? Did he weep, Luke 19 41.
foreseeing the destruction of Jerusalem? And can not thou mourn to foresee,
yea to behold before thine eyes, the miserable estate of Gods people? Does not
the blood of the Saints, and servants of God that is shed move thee to shed
some tears? Shall Mary Magdalen weep enough to make a bath for Christ's feet?
And wilt not thou weep that thine own soul may be washed and cleansed? Did
Peter weep bitterly? And do thou delude thy self as Agag did, 1. Sam 15.32.
thinking the bitterness of death to be past without the bitterness of
sorrow? And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me to tell of Job,
Job 16.20. Act. 20.19. 2. Cor. 2.4.
whose eye powered forth tears unto God; of Paul, who wept with many tears; of
Jeremiah his Lamentation, and of the rest of the Prophets: Only look upon
David, who, were it not for the disparagement, Sic parvis, etc.
may be compared to Heraclitus, Et ipse inter deplorandos erat Senec.
ever weeping: But the one was to be pitied for weakness, the other to be
imitated for holiness. His eyes were consumed because of grief; Psalm. 6.7.
and 32.10.
His life was spent with grief; He mourned because of the oppression of the
enemy, and 43.2. and 88 ^. and 55 ^.
and by reason of his affliction; and 119.136. and 38 6. and 6.6.
He mourned in his complaint, and rivers of waters ran down his eyes because
they kept not thy Law; He went mourning all the day long, and all the night
he made his bed to swim; His tears were his meat both day and night: Let
this move us to weep with him that wept so much; Romans 12.15.
knowing, Psalm. 6.8.
that God hears the voice of our weeping. Thereby we cast aside every weight
both of sin and sorrow; And our eyes being thoroughly washed by the tears of
repentance, we come to see those things which the ear has not heard, nor is
the tongue able to utter: Psalm. 126.5.
And at last after this wet seed time, we reap in joy. Now let us behold the
doubtful estate of those whose hearts are hard as the Adamant, being yet in
the bond of iniquity; who think that this expression of sorrow does arise out
of an effeminate tenderness. But we may say of laughter, it is mad; Eccles.
2.2.
The mirth and jollity of the wicked, being like the laughter of a mad man, for
the which all his friends do grieve. Such being in subjection to the Prince of
the air, Neque solum linguam nutusque servitu^e constringeret, sed etiam
oculis a natura tributam libertatem eriperet. Aelian.
he deals with them, as that tyrant did, who having interdicted private
conference, and discontented gestures, and hearing of some that wept and
mourned, he sought to forbid that also, lest thereby some conspiracy might
begin against him. So Satan fearing lest that by the tears of contritio^ they
should cast off his heavy yoke, and not suffer sin to reign in their mortal
bodies, his chief practice is to keep them from godly sorrow: And therefore
he deals with them as the Fox does by the Goose, which he takes by the
neck and so hinders from crying out; He stops our complaint, and prevents
our crying unto the Lord; Like a thief he climbeth up and enters in at the
windows of this our earthly house, and robs us of all grace and comfort.
He keeps the eyes for his own passage, making them instruments of
wickedness, and brethren in cruelty: Whereas if they were like the poole of
Heshbon, full of this holy water, he should not be admitted thereby. Heb.
12.17.
If Esau found no place of repentance though he sought it carefully with
tears, what can we think of those that come short of him, who (as we may
fear) came short of heaven? Where it is said, that in place of torment, Mat.
8.12. Sum Nilus, sumque Aetna simul. Sanaz.
There shall be weeping; the punishment is most just for them that never
mourned in the time of their life. The light of the body is the eye; Luke 1^.34.
The light of the soul are the tears in the eye: And as One, Gallum
Terrinium, captum repent oc^^is and ob ad media mori destinantem. Sueton.
who had lost the sight of his eyes did resolve to famish his body; so they
that want these tears do seek to overthrow the good estate of their souls,
not having this heavenly nourishment which David had, Whose tears were his
meat day and night.

VERSE III. While they continually say unto me, Where is thy God?
AS the friends of Job, that came to mourn with him, did sit down by him, and
none spoke a word, for they saw that his grief was very great; Job 2.13.
So likewise if we that pass by the way will enter into the house of mourning,
and consider and behold the greatness of David's sorrow, we shall be dumb
with silence, and our sorrow also will be stirred: And yet these his enemies
having no regard do persecute him whom the Lord had smitten; as if the
corection of the Almighty were too merciful, they are enraged with bitter
malice against him. It was not one, or some few, but many of them that spoke
thus unto him: Nor did the storm suddenly blow over, but they persevered in
this their fury; And having singled him out, they give him no time to recover
strength, but make him to be the only mark at whom they shoot their arrows,
Psalm. 64.3.
even bitter words. And this they did not in the time of prosperity, but in his
greatest necessity, and 71.11.
when (as they thought) God had forsaken him, and there was none to deliver
him; 2. Sam. 16 9.
then these dead dogs cursed the King: They do not upbraid him with any
outward loss, for they knew how lightly he esteemed all earthly things; but
having travailed with iniquity, Psalm. 7.1^
and conceived mischief, they bring forth falsehood, and say, Where is thy God?
As all the city cried out, when the Ark of God was taken, And the wife of
Phinehas about the time of her death named the child Ichabod, ^. S^m. 4. verse
1^.2^.
that is, Where is the glory? which was then departed from Israel: So these his
enemies, thinking to make his sorrow to be deadly and desperate, do say unto
him, Where is thy God? in whom thou have heretofore gloried, as if thou had
some peculiar right and interest in him: Numb. 16.3.
whereas all the congregation are holy, every one of them; and the Lord is
among them: He has bin and ever will be a God of mercy unto us; And because
the cry of that innocent blood, which thou have shed, is come up before him,
He will arise and show himself a God of vengeance in punishing thy sins: So
that thou art taken to thy mischief, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial;
Job. 4.8. and 8.2^.
Having plowed iniquity, and sown wickedness, thou must reap the same; for
God will not help the evil doers: Yea rather than thy sins shall go
unpunished, thine own son shall lift up himself against thee. Thus did he
bear in his bosom the reproach of all the mighty people: Before this, Psalm.
89.50.
he was checked for the pride and naughtiness of his heart, and that by a
brother, which should rather have been a comfort unto him: He was scornefully
used, and counted as a servant that had broke away from his Master, where he
formerly deserved kindness. He was cursed with a grievous curse by Shimei,
who threw stones at him that in disgrace was called The Stone, as if all his
credit came by hitting Goliath; and cast dust at him, thereby telling him, that
God had raised him out of the dust, but now he had provoked the Lord. He
whose tongue was his glory, who made so many divine hymns in praise of God,
yet was he a proverb to the wicked, and the song of the drunkards. Psalm.
69.11, 12.
And what could be more grievous unto him, than to be reproached for that
faith and confidence which he reposed in the Almighty? as if his former
profession were nothing but hypocrisy: Also the measure of his grief was the
fuller, because he saw that this their calumny, and words of hatred, did
reflect upon God himself, as if he should forsake those that put their trust
in him: And therefore he mourned because they violently ran upon their own
destruction, Psalm. 1^9.13^
in sinning against the laws of God. And such is our condition, that when God
has gathered us under his wings, whosoever does seek to hurt us, they strike
at God himself; and in our persecution he also is persecuted. Neither did
they wound him with their tongues only, which they thought to be their own,
Psalm. 140.3.
having adders poison under their lips, whereby being stung, he lifted up his
eyes unto the Lord; But also by their disdainful carriage they vexed his
righteous soul from day to day; Psalm. 109.26. Isai. 59 9. A tergo qu^m nulla
ciconia ^^^it. Persius. Vel co^ mo^^ vel digiti in ^^a^iorie. C^^^bon.
It being usual to shake the head and to put forth the finger in disgrace.
Look how it was in the days of David, so it is now, and so it will be unto
the coming of the Son of man: If a good man be in affliction and sickness
(God chastising every son whom he receives) some there be that will say,
Psalm. 3.2.
There is no help for him in God; thinking that bodily diseases are always a
sign of Gods wrath: If he fall into any offense, through infirmity, (for who
is he that sins not?) they, 1. Cor. 13.
being uncharitable, will rejoice in his iniquity. As when David wept and made
sackcloth his garment, it was to his reproach; Psalm. ^9.10.
so the least spot upon the garment of those that mourn before the Lord, shall
be made to appear for their disgrace: Yea, though they walk wisely and
circumspectly, yet there be some that perversely will make that which is
straight, to be crooked. When David, in an holy zeal and heavenly joy, did
dance before the Lord, yet even for that, Michal, the wife in his bosom did
despise him in heart. Many that be now in the same bosom of the Church, and
hope hereafter to be in the same bosom of Abraham, will speak contemptuously
of those that desire to have a good conscience in all things, Heb. 12.^8.
and are willing to live honestly. With the tongue bless we God, even the
Father, Iam. 3.9.
and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God: So
those men will speak to the praise of God, that they may be reputed the
children of the most High; and yet will vilify such as they in scorn, and the
Scripture in honor call Brethren, who labor to repair that image which was
defaced by the fall of Adam, and do give unto the Lord that which is the
Lords: But envy has ever been like unto fire, which ascends unto that which
is highest. David, Invidiam tanquam ignem summa pet^re Livi.
whom God exalted to be head of the people, had many enemies; And the men of
this world, do hate those whom God has chosen out of the world; unto whom he
will give a crown of life: Yet their own consciences do tell them, that they
are more righteous than themselves. Wherefore those servants that shall thus
smite their fellow servants (for many Mat. 24.49.
stripes are more tolerable than evil words) their Lord shall come in a day
when they look not for him, Q^i mortem ac ver^era tole^^biliora c^^ a^ quam
(...) ^^^^osa verba. Sense,
and appoint them their portion with the hypocrites. As for our selves, (...)
2.20.
if we suffer for doing well, and take it patiently, it is acceptable with God:
And hereunto were we called, because Christ also suffered for us; who when he
was reviled, reviled not again: Let us consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners, Heb. 12 3.
lest we be wearied, and faint in our minds. Ye know how the whole band of
Soldiers mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews; And they that passed by
reviled him, saying, If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross:
Yea the chief Priests like whited walls, contrary to the law, spoke evil of
the Ruler of the people, of the Lords Christ, of that high Priest that offered
up himself for us: He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him if he will
have him: And the thieves themselves, to make the cause of their suffering to
be more just, thought they could not spend their last breath better than by
casting the same in his teeth. All which reproaches were but as so many
variations of that which was here spoken to David, Where is thy God? True it
is, that our blessed Savior did seem to be forsaken of God for a time, that
we might for ever enjoy the presence of the Almighty. If we love him, both He,
and the Father will come unto us, Mat. 28 20. John 14.
and make their abode with us, even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: But ye know him, for
he dwells with you and shall be in you. How then can wicked men object,
Where is thy God? seeing he is graciously present with us at all times, and
nearest unto us in any trouble; as he has promised to be with us in fire and
water, In gravescente rerum adversarum mole^ta frangitur piorum animus, ut
etiam ipsi dicant sibi, etc. Flami^.
and the greatest danger: Yet we our selves in the time of affliction, through
weakness and want of faith, may think that we are cast out of his sight,
not clearly discerning his love toward us: But as Jacob, when he awaked out
of his sleep, said, Surely the Lord is in this place and I knew it not; Genesis
28.16.
so when the Lord does raise us from our deadness and heaviness of spirit, we
then find that he was present with us in our disconsolate estate, disposing
all things for our future good: And therefore we may answer them as David
does, Psalm. 115.3.4.
Our God is in the heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased; Their idols
are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. Such are the idols of all those
that serve Mammon, who keep their gold and silver safe, as being their only
gods that must defend them: Genesis 31.34.
But as Laban sought for his gods and could not find them, so they may hope
for comfort, and not find it: And then we may say unto them, Where are thy
gods? We know that no man can see God and live; The people said unto Moses,
Exodus 23.20. and 20.19.
Let not God speak with us lest we dye: Gideon and Manoah feared death,
having seen an Angel: And the soldiers themselves, Mat. 28.
became as dead men when the Angel of the Lord descended. And yet such is the
perverse corruption of man's nature, that they neglect the worship of God the
Creator of all things, and do bow down to such Gods as they see with their
eyes: The Israelites having formerly seen the Egyptians worship Apis (which is
the same with Osyris) in the likeness of an ox, Sandys.
they forgot God their Savior, and began with a calfe, saying, These be thy
gods, Number. 32.4.
O Israel; which in a short time would have multiplied into many gods. The love
and reverence which little children bear to their babies, are evident seeds of
Idolatry: Moulin. in buckler. Imagines and statuae deorum n^hil aliud sunt quam
grandes pup^e.
and the Images of the gods are nothing else, but babies come to the full
growth: Such as have blotted out that second commandment may justly fear that
God will take away their part out of the book of life.

If in the time of affliction, when God punishes us for our offenses, it be a
great addition to our misery, the harsh censures and malignant speeches of
wicked men; Then it is our best wisdom so to walk with God, that he may be
unto us a sun, and a shield, bringing all good, and defending from all evil;
And as Enoch pleasing God, Heb. 11.5.
was translated that he should not see death; which is the wages of sin; So
if we be in all things obedient unto Gods Word, he will take us into his
favor, and we shall be delivered from unreasonable men, Romans 3.13.
whose throat is an open sepulcher: Wherefore as the lamp went not out, in the
Temple, before the Lord called Samuel; 1. Sam. 3.3.
so the light both of good works and also of joy, should ever ascend, until
God call us unto himself: That others beholding the same may be ashamed that
they have falsely accused our good conversation; and may be stirred up to
glorify God. 1. Pet. 3.13.
For who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?
Also our own guilt does set an edge upon the reproaches of wicked men, and
make them to be like a sword in our bones; Whereas if we were innocent, we
should like the daughter of Eli, neither answer, nor yet regard what is spoken
unto us: Bitter invectives being contemned do vanish away, but by anger we
confess them to be true: S^reta exoleseunt; si irascar agnita vid^ntu^. Tacit.
Wherefore that we may be compassed about with that brazen wall of a good
conscience, and secured from the censures of uncharitable men; as Mithridate is
made of the viper, so let us make that to be our Antidote, which is here
spoken by those that had sharpened their tongue like a serpent; Psalm. 140 3
judging our selves, that we may not be condemned by them. In the time of
prosperity let this be ever sounding in thine ears, Where is thy God? And
thou shall be kept from wrath and misery, when they do wound thine heart,
while they continually say unto thee, Where is thy God? Had Eve thought upon
these words, they would have bin an ornament of grace unto her head, and
chains about her neck: She would not have believed the father of lies before
the God of truth; but for want thereof she miscarri^d, by eating that
forbidden fruit, for which her soul longed. Had David thought upon these
words, being on the roof of his house, he would have said, as he did at
another time, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handy-worke: Then would he not have defiled himself with her that was
purified from her uncleanness; Neither should these his enemies have said unto
him, Where is thy God? And although this affliction be grievous for the
present, yet we receive many benefits thereby; which may be sufficient to
deter an evil speaker from that outrage. Thereby we are put in mind to
examine our selves, and to humble our souls for our former sins. We know
they could not speak thus without Gods permission; We hope that the Lord will
requite good for their cursing; We mourn before him, we duly consider his
dealing with us, and fervently pray to be set at liberty: as David when they
spoke thus unto him, he had tears for his meat, he remembered these things
and he powered out his soul in him.

VERSE IIII. When I remember these things, I power out my soul in me.
FOrmerly he powered out his tears, and now he powers out his soul: For as
the body without the spirit is dead; so our tears without the soul are dead
also. We know that young Ptolomy being in Cesars custody he wept before him;
Regius animus disciplinis failacis^imi^ cruditus. Hirt.
But when he was dismissed he warred against him: So there be too many, that
while they be under the rod of correction do lament greatly, feeling present
anguish, and fearing future torment: But being set at liberty, they return to
their pollutions: which shows plainly, that though they shed many tears,
they did not with holy David power out their souls: He remembered the reproach
of the wicked; for how could he forget that which was so often objected
against him? and this made his soul melt for heaviness, Psalm. 119.28. Job
30.16.
and be powered out upon him (as Job speaks:) He remembered his happy estate,
which compared with the misery now suffered, did augment his sorrow, Lam. 2.19.
and made him power out his heart like water before the face of the Lord (as
Jeremiah does counsel:) And he hoped to be restored unto his former joy, and
to find comfort by prayer; and therefore he powered out his soul before the
Lord (as Hannah practiced. 1. Sam. 1.15.
) And he was enlarged by trusting in Gods mercies: He received a twofold
benefit by considering the days of old, the years of ancient times: The one
was to sustain him in his trouble, Psalm. 77.5.10.
by remembering the years of the right hand of the most High, who had dealt
bountifully with him: Heb. 11.21:
And as Jacob worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff; So he in this weak
estate did repose himself upon the grace and favor of the Almighty. The other
was to mak^ ^^^e sins to be as detestable unto him as they were abominable
before God, by calling to mind how gracious the Lord had been toward him,
how unworthily he had requited the Lords goodness, and how great blessings
he had lost by the sins he committed: For I had gone with the multitude,
even with all the house of Israel, being of one heart, and of one mind: But
now I am constrained to flee with my household, with strangers and exiles: I
went with them to the house of God; But now I go from the house of God: Nor
dare I suffer Zadok, who should be a Seer, to carry the Arc, which ought to
abide in the city, with me in this my private condition, lest that anger of
the Lord which smote Uzzah, be kindled against me also: I went with the voice
of joy and praise, playing upon all manner of instruments, with shouting, and
with the sound of the trumpet; blessing the people in the name of the Lord: But
now we weep and have our heads covered: I went with a multitude that kept
holyday: unto whom I gave bread, flesh and wine; Yea I danced before the Lord,
and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings: But now I may fear that I am
appointed as a sheep for the slaughter, and that the Lord will have no delight
in me. In this disconsolate estate he flies unto God by prayer: And as he
powered out his complaint before the Lord when he was pursued by Saul, Psalm.
142.2.
and was delivered; so now he powered out his soul, and thereby became more
im^r^g^^ble, than he should ^ave been by abiding in the strong hold of Zion.
Having found such safety therein, he commends the use thereof unto others:
Trust in him at all times ye people; P^^l. ^1.8.
Power out your heart before him; God is a refuge for us. In the time of
trouble we must renounce all strength and worthiness of our own, and then
God will have mercy upon us: We must empty our selves, that so we may be
filled with heavenly comfort. How glorious things are spoken of Prayer in the
holy Scripture? Moses would not let God alone until he had quenched that
wrath which waxed hot against the Israelites: Exodus 3^.10.
Jacob would not ^et Him go, Gen 32 28.
until he had obtained a blessing, and was ^^^refore called Isra^l. It is
^^ported of Archimedes, that he vainly presumed by ^is art, he could move
the whole earth if he might have been lifted up from it: But we know
assuredly, that righteous Elijah being cast down upon the earth, 1. King. 18.4^
did move the heavens themselves: Iam. 5 7.
he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: He prayed again, and the
heaven gave rain. So that prayer may be compared to the ladder which Jacob
saw in his dream; Genesis 28.12.
It was set upon the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven; and behold the
Angels ascending and descending on it. By prayer, men (made a little lower than
the Angels) do ascend, and the Angels do descend for our protection, to pitch
their tents about us: As Jonathan climbed up the sharp rock and subdued his
enemies; 1. Sam. 14.13.
So by prayer we overcome principalities, and powers, and spiritual
wickedness in high places. But then we must take heed to observe the manner
here prescribed, which is, to power out the soul, to confess all our sins,
to purge out the old leaven: We cannot think to possess our vessels in
holiness, 1. These. 4.4.
if we suffer any dregs of uncleanness to remain in them. And as the sent
and taste of the first liquor will continue a long time in a vessel after it be
emptied; Quo semel est imbuta ^^cens servab ^odorem Testa diu.
So though we have sincerely repented of all our sins, yet that original
corruption remaining will make us cry unto the Lord to deliver us from this
body of death: But such as are indulgent to themselves may fear that their
presumptuous sins will get the victory over them: Wherefore as it is more
commodious in the first making and digging of a garden, to have it once well
weeded (when the bad roots may be taken out) than many times afterward; So if
thou would be like that paradise wherein God walked, like that garden into
which Christ delighted to come, Cant. 5.1. and 6.2.
then search every corner of thine heart, in the time of humiliation, that
there may not be any root bringing forth gall and wormwood: Deuteronomy. 29.18.
We know that the least child remaining in the house, does hinder in giving
state; And how can God take possession of thy body to be his Temple, when there
is any sin reigning therein? If we sin we have an Advocate with the
Father: And as that client is like to speed ill in the trial, who gives
advantage to his adversary, in concealing the worst of his case from the
Council; So he shall be confounded in the day of judgment, that has sought
to hide his sin. For Satan, thine accuser, will discover that which thou
did hope should have been for ever buried: Then learn of Him that thus
humbled himself, to acknowledge all thy transgressions. He is a fool in
worldly affairs, that powers out all at once: But it is heavenly wisdom, in
confession of sin, Pro. 29.11.
to power out all at once, and not to keep it in until afterward: David
says, I power out my soul in me. His prayer was sincere before God, and it
was inward and hidden from the world: There was a time when he cried unto the
Lord, Psalm, 22.1.2.
Why art thou so far from the words of my roaring? But now the greatness of
his sorrow for his grievous sins, and the calamities waiting upon them, made
him stand amazed, as not being able to speak. And doubtless there is great
benefit in the use both of secret and open prayer: As Paul became all things to
all men that he might win some; so we may use every kind that we may
receive a gracious answer: Sometime to cry aloud, lifting up both heart and
voice, to show our fervency and importunity; and it shall be opened unto us
that knock. Sometime to show our reverence by a still voice, that God may
therein reveal himself unto us. Sometime praying with the spirit and with
understanding, speaking in the heart only, not daring to use our tongues to
call upon his name, seeing we have dishonored him thereby: H^miles preces in
excelsa por^^gite. Boet.
And those our humble prayers will ascend into heaven. Though we shut both the
door of our closet, and the door of our lips, when we pray, being wholly
spiritual therein; our Father sees in secret, and is well pleased with such a
sacrifice. If we desire to make our tongue to be our glory therein; yet the
sound of our words may be submissive, and rather a gentle noise than a voice:
They that do thus, they speak softly, Qui Deum precantes susurrant, tacit
loquuntur, atque intus clamant.
but inwardly they cry aloud: Hannah when she prayed did move her lips, but
her voice was not heard; yet she found such comfort that her countenance was
no more sad.

VERSE IIII. For I had gone with the multitude.
HIs present misery is increased by comparing the same with his former
comfortable estate, wherein he served the Lord: And the sorrow for the loss
of his perfect freedom does exceed the grief of worldly men in their crosses,
as much as the gladness in his heart Psalm. 4.
had formerly been more than the joy which they received by the increase of
corn and wine. Outward benefits are deceitful and vain: Riches, and the
like, may betake themselves to their wings, and fly away: But heavenly
blessings are unchangeable, did not we by our disobedience stop the course of
Gods mercies, and cause his judgments and curses to fall upon us. Wherefore,
when our destruction does come from our selves, when by our rebellion we shall
pull down Gods anger; Infelicissimu^ genus est infortunii fuisse felicem. Boet.
Then the remembrance of our former happiness is the greatest aggravation of
our present wretchedness and woe.

Also we may observe, that he was not satisfied with that good which he had
formerly done, neither did he rest contented therein. But his chief desire
was ever to continue in those holy exercises. From whence we receive this
instruction, that we ought to forget those things which are behind, Phil. 3.13.
and reach forth unto those things which are before, pressing toward the mark:
having set our hand to the plough, not to look back, nor to spare and favor
our selves, during the time of our pilgrimage. Such as desire to worship the
Lord unto the end of their lives, and are constant unto death, they shall
receive a crown of life, and an everlasting inheritance: But ungodly men that
forsake their first love, like those foolish Galatians, bewitched by that evil
spirit, and with Demas do embrace this present world, 2. Tim. 4.10:
they shall undergo the fierce anger of the Almighty: And as Jordan divided
the tribes of Reuben and Gad from the rest of Israel, who, Number. 32.
allured with the fertility of the country, did set themselves down, and take
up their habitation before they came to the land of promise; So there shall be
a great gulf to separate the wicked (who like sluggards fold their arms
together, as if they had wrought sufficiently) from those that abide in the
place of blessedness.

Whereas he speaks of himself, that he had gone with the multitude, it
will not be impertinent to consider his twofold regiment, Over the Priests, 1.
Cron. 15. verse 17. Rex Anius, ^ex idem hom^num P^aeb que sacerdos. Vittis,
etc. Virg.
and the people; For at this time when he blessed the people, he had put on a
linen Ephod over his kingly robe; Also his son Solomon succeeded him
therein, who was called the Preacher. This was observed by many nations that
their Kings were Priests: Genesis 14.18.
So Melchizedek was King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God. So was Numa
the second King of the Romans, Livi. lib. 1.
and Augustus the second Emperor, who after the death of Lentulus, did take
unto himself that dignity of being chief Pontifex, Pontificatum max^mum
mortuo demum Lentulo suscepit. Suet
that thereby his authority might be made complete. Gratianus p^^mus
Imperatorum Christianorum, dese^vit ab hoc m^^oru^ in s^^t^^o, Causabon.
Which order continued until that Gratian did neglect that rite and custom
observed by all those Christian Emperors before him: This has been the use in
this Land, since that intolerable yoke of servile subjection unto Rome has bin
cast off, that our anointed Sovereign should be the chief head of the
Church, and in all causes Ecclesiastical supreme governor. Now where much has
been given, there much will be required: Therefore that should be imprinted
in their hearts, which was written upon Aarons crown of fine gold, Exodus 19.30.
Holiness to the Lord; And as the head does guide and conduct the body, so
ought they that are most eminent to lead and direct such as are under them:
that they may walk in this way which brings to life and salvation. We use to
say, that the meanest officer would be known in his place, being unwilling to
be abridged of the extent of his power: Then how should they that are raised
to highest honor exercise their authority to reduce men to the service of God,
as thinking to be their most royal prerogative so to do? Blessed are the
people that be in such a case, yea blessed be the people whose God is the
Lord: And great is the comfort that would be found by the serious performance
hereof; when the chief ruler like a good shepherd, John 10 4.
does go before his sheep, and they do follow him; then may he have this
good testimony in the latter end, and 17.4, 12.
That in some measure he has finished the work which was given him to do;
and has not willingly lost any of those that were given unto him: At which
time he may pray as Nehemiah did, Nehem. 13.14.
Remember me O my God concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I
have done for the house of my God: Surely there is a fullness of joy, in the
fullness of the assembly; when the voice of the congregation praising the Lord,
like that noise of Charets which the Syrians heard, 2. King. 7.6.
shall be able to put that enemy to flight which does continually besiege us.
Also therein is a most blessed resemblance between the Church militant and
triumphant; for as God comes with ten thousands of Saints, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
and has ten thousand times ten thousand Angels to stand before him; Dan.
7.10.
So likewise many and great multitudes of his servants here upon earth do
desire to appear in his presence: Luke 15.10.
And as the Angels rejoice over one sinner that repents, so the Saints do
rejoice in this powerful means, whereby many sinners are converted.

Also it will not be impertinent to consider how David was willing to join
with the meanest of his subjects in the service of God; And would be base in
his own sight, though in so doing he seemed vile unto others. Thus in the
Kingdom of grace, Isai. 40.4.
every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made
low. Where truth and sincerity are, there is also a ready disposition to
receive benefit by those of least account, yea and to do good unto them
without respect of persons: Paul that was endued with such excellent gifts, yet
as he desired to be brought on his way toward Judea by 2. Cor. 1.16.
the Corinthians; so in like manner he desired to be conducted toward that
heavenly country (whereof Judea was but a figure) by the Romans; where he
writes, Romans 1.12.
For I long to see you, that I may be comforted together with you, by the
mutual faith both of you and me.

Whereas David makes mention of that singular consolation, which he found in
this communion with the people, they that are most mighty and noble may from
hence learn how to esteem of their poor brethren, for whom Christ died.
Amongst barbarous nations there is most tyrannical usurpation of power; who
think the vulgar unworthy to inhabit the same walls, Quod spiratis, quod
vocem mittitis, quod formam hominum habetis indignantur. T. Livi. lib. 4.
to enjoy the same light, to breathe, to speak, to have the shapes of men: But
as the brethren of Dives, and all others who seem to be gods upon earth, shall
dye like men; So they which now seem to be as worms and no men, after death
shall become glorious.

Likewise we may take notice how worthy of blame they are, who do oppose
themselves against the godly example of David, thwarting and contradicting his
heavenly carriage by their unadvised practice of the contrary. Here he
speaks, that he went with the multitude, and they peremptorily affirm that
they will not go because of the multitude. He who was a true Israelite, John
1.45.
in whom was no guile, knew right well, that they were not all Israel which
were of Israel: Romans 9.6.
But yet the duty it self being holy, and ordained as the royal means to
make chose which were the seed of Abraham to become children; he was ready to
join with them therein. Who have more need of the Physician than the sick?
and to be called to repentance than sinners? Wherefore they offend that
forbear assembling themselves together: And they also may justly be reproved,
who think if they should go with the multitude, their name would lie hid in
obscurity, and therefore out of vainglorious singularity, Ambitio magnis addita
est virtutibus. Et eminendi fervor, and vinci dolens Cupido famae. Dom.
Baudius. Act. 5.36.
they seek out many inventions, with Theudas boasting themselves to be some
body. Thus do heretics and sectaries by jarring, war against the peaceable
estate of the Church: But there was a curse pronounced against him that should
attempt the building of Jericho, Josh. 6.26.
which was overthrown by Ioshuah; And there is no blessing due unto them, that
again do lay the foundation of these confused Babels, which have been razed
and laid level by the Churches champions. That may be said of our times,
which was once spoken of the Israelites, The wood devoured more people than the
sword. 2. Sam. 18.8.
We may praise God that we are delivered from the sword of persecution and of
our enemies: But in the mean while, how many do lose themselves by intricate
bypath, thinking there be more ways than one to walk in; and thereby fall
headlong into dangerous errors? It shows the desolation of a country, when
the Kings way shall be forsaken, Isai. 33.8. Judge. 5.6.
so that none do travail therein; And we may fear that it does not
prognosticate any happiness unto our Land, when this way of King David shall
lie waste: For now men will go by themselves, but he went with the multitude.

VERSE IIII. I went with them to the house of God.
BEcause the greatest number do go in the broad way that leads to
destruction, Mat. 7.13.
and we are forbidden to follow a multitude to do evil; Exodus 23.2.
therefore upon the first mention he presently adds the place whither he
went with them, which was, to the house of God. He was not occasioned thus to
do in imitation of others which did the like; though it were to be wished
that we had attained thus far, that we would be followers together of him,
Psalm. 3.17.
and mark those which walk after this ensample: But as it is more blessed to
give than to receive, Act. 20 35.
so it is a greater happiness to give this good example unto others, than to
take it from them. Thus David shined as a Light in the world, Phil. 2.15.
that the people being illuminated by this pillar of fire, might come to the
estate of blessedness. And thus we, Vt sidera contrarium mundo iter
intendunt; ita sapiens Senec. Et qui exemplo aliis esse debetis, aliorum
exemplo peccetis potius quam alii vestro recte sacitis. Livi. lib. 3.
if we desire to shine as the stars (whose motion is contrary to the world)
we should labor to rectify others, rather than to be depraved with their
vices: Though we fail of this holy ambition, or want means and ability to
be as Leaders in this noble army, yet we may be drawn by the example of the
multitude (which for the most part use to be very powerful) to join with the
assembly in all heavenly duties: And not to do like unto those which stand
convicted, because they will not go with the flock to hear the voice of the
shepherd: Nor yet like those which discover their backwardness, by coming
after the multitude to the house of God; Whereas it were more commendable to
go with them, or before them. Such may fear to receive a curse in the end for
their negligent sloth, Occupet extremum scabies. Horat.
rather than the blessing in the conclusion. In Carvans, which go unto the
Temple at Jerusalem, Sandys.
the hindermost are exposed unto the greatest danger of the free-booters: And
in this passage to the house of God, they that are last may soon be surprised
by the enemy, and hindered in their dull proceeding: Whereas if we were endued
with the Spirit (like those Worthies which brake through the host of the
Philistims, 2. Sam. 23.
to draw water) we would overcome all impediments, that we may obtain the
water of life: And as the chains did fall from the hands of Peter, so we
should cast off all encumbrances wherewith our feet are bound, that we may
run the ways of thy commandments: Yea then we would think Gods house to
be like Goshen, enlightened by his gracious countenance; And to be debarred
from it, more grievous than all the plagues and judgments of Egypt. There the
frogs came into the house and chamber of Pharaoh; Exodus 8.3.
And thou have noisome lusts and unclean thoughts in thine heart, which should
be the throne of the great King. They had thick darkness which might be felt,
and 1^.2^.
so that no man rose from his place: But thy gross darkness which has
overspread the whole man, is the more fearful, because thou have no feeling
thereof; whereby thou do continue in the estate of wrath as at the first.
There was the death of the firstborn (in whom p^rents seem to live even when
they are dead: and ^2 29.
) And thou destroyest thine own soul, which in the beginning did give life to
thy body; and by which the righteous shall live for ever in bliss and
happiness. And yet though Gods judgments be so great and terrible upon those
that want or neglect this means of perfect freedom, and the mercy and
deliverance so rich and plenteous, that is offered thereby, how foolish and
careless are most men, in their contemptuons vilifiing, and disdainful
rejecting of this blessed liberty? Mention is made of one that was slain by
the people which trod upon him in the gate, 2 King ^. ver. 17.
when with greedy violence they strove for their bodily sustenance: but there
is no such violence offered in seeking for that heavenly food; and yet we live
not by bread, but by the Word, which is exhibited unto us in the house of God:
And in the time of famine, of war, 1. King. 8. ver. 37, 38.
of pestilence, and any other calamity, we find release by the prayers and
supplications which are offered up unto the Lord. Come then, and let us go up
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: He will teach
us of his ways, Isai. 2.3.
and we shall walk in his paths. One day in his courts is better than a
thousand. How glad was David when they said unto him, Psalm. 84.10 and 122.1^
Let us go into the house of the Lord? As here he testifies, that when he
went into the house of God, it was

VERSE IIII. With the voice of joy and praise.
AND now we would think that the whole world should follow him; Omnes cendunt
ad gaudium. Senec.
for what man is there that does not labor for joy? But as some have put out
the element of fire, affirming that there is no other but this gross
terrestrial fire which we use: So most men think there is no other joy but
this which they find in their sensual delights. True it is, that there may be
a confused sound of joy in earthly pleasures; but the voice of joy is only in
heavenly things: And as that excellent music of the voice is to be preferred
before the harmony of instruments without life, whether pipe or harp, though
they give a distinction in their sounds: So this joy does far transcend all
those vain and empty delights which we find here upon earth. It is reported
of some that they have been able to contain their greatest joy within
themselves, Metellus summum gaudium intrase cont insit. Val. Max.
that none could take notice thereof; Nec sunt grata tibi gaudia siqua atent.
Martial.
but David's joy was so great, that out of the abundance of his heart he could
not forbear to speak with his mouth: And ever since in our best mirth and
rejoicing, we seek to imitate the voice of David in singing of Psalms: Iam.
5.13.
whereby we endeavor to be composed and prepared for that life, when we
shall always be lauding the name of the Lord: Psalm. 108.1, 2^
And as David says, I my self will awake early, I will sing and give praise
even with my glory. So we that are dead in Christ, shall then rise first out
of those beds where we have slept and rested, that we may for ever sing
praises unto the Lord. These two, Joy and Praise, are so joined togeth^r of
God, that no man can put them asunder: Where God has filled the heart with joy
it will break forth in praise and thankesgiving; And to offer the sacrifice of
praise without rejoicing were to offer a dead sacrifice without any life: By
both these we are supported when we walk in the ways of salvation: If David
found such comfort in the passage, then how was he transported with joy when
he came into Gods house? If we find such consolation in our pilgrimage, then
how great blessings are prepared for us in our long home? If the first fruits
be so precious, how plentiful is the harvest? When our lives are ended, then
begins our perfect joy: when our souls and bodies are again united, then
there is fullness of joy; yea then both Joy and Praise shall be joined for
evermore.

VERSE IIII. With a multitude that kept holy day.
BEcause we should not be perplexed with the difficulty of these words, in
regard that our celebration of those days which we call holy, does so far
differ from that which is here intended; I think it most needful to represent
the manner how this day was solemnized: In which, the desire of David and the
people was like that of the Angel and the multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, Luke 2.13, 14.
and saying; Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
men: So this blessed company did first seek the glory of God, in sacrificing,
oxen and fatlings, in offering burnt-offerings and peace offerings, in the
sound of music, lifting up the voice with joy, And that there might be peace
upon earth when God's Ark should be placed in the midst of the tabernacle, and
his worship duly observed. Lastly, good will toward men, when the King
blessed the people in the name of the Lord, and did distribute bread, and
flesh, and wine; Tanquam necessarium labo^ibus interponentes temperamentum. Sen.
So that he did not exclude the outward refreshing of the body, after the
serious and devout performance of all heavenly duties. The makers of laws in
ancient time did institute festival days, that the people might not be
overcharged with too much labor; Quia aliquando nihil cum populo agi utile
futurum erat. T. Livi. Luce sacra requiescat humus, requiescut arator. Tibul.
but re-gaining strength and vigor by the cessation, might proceed in their
work with alacrity and diligence. The best use and benefit that we can make
of any holy day is to take off the mind from worldly cares, wherewith we are
naturally surcharged; and to addict our selves to divine meditations and
religious exercises: Even among the Heathen, Et adhuc Mincia proles Vrget opus
spernitque Deum festumque profanat. Ovid.
those Sisters mentioned in the Poet were thought to be justly punished, for
being too intent to their domesticke labor, which made them omit the public
rites. 2. King. 7.9.
We do not well; this is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace: We
may fear lest the leprosy of those four men should cleave unto us, if we
neglect to praise and glorify God for his manifold blessings. Livius Drusus
dixit, uni sibi nec puero quidem unquam ferias cont gi^^e. Senec.
We cannot complain as Drusus did, that from his childhood he never had a
good day: For though we should endeavor to keep every day in the year holy,
yet we could not correspond in thankfulness, with the riches of his bounteous
love, and plenteous mercy: yea we may rightly acknowledge that every day in
our life has been an holy day: For as it was the custom of most nations not
to punish malefactors upon days of festivity and rejoicing, 2. Sam. 19.22.
Mar. 14.^.
so the Lord has been gracious in pardoning our offenses, Observatum ne
quoties introiret urbem Oct. Aug. supplicium de quoquam sumeretur. Suet.
not dealing with us after our sins, nor rewarding us according to our
iniquities. And therefore we must bless his holy name, who has not only
delivered us from evil, but also has bestowed so many blessings upon us; who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness
and tender mercies; who satisfies thy mouth with good things: Hilaritatis
instrumen^ a d^mestic^s prae bebat. Causabon.
And as the master of the family upon such days did bring out unto his
children and servants, all things which might be a means of delight and
recreation; so God, like a good householder, has accomodated us his servants,
with all things useful and convenient for our cheerful service of him, that
we might make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob. Psalm. 81.1.
Omnia iam fes^a fervet domus utraque pompa. Stat. Tibia pro li. tuis, etc.
Claud. Iste dies semper dapibus celebretur opimis. Idem. Pro 9.2.
Upon those days they had instruments of music; and what a sweet harmony is
there, when the will and the affections, and every power and faculty of the
soul does consent in praising the name of the Lord? They had plenty of
provision and abundance of wine; And has not Wisdom killed her beasts, and
mingled her wine, and furnished her table? Does not God give unto us that
heavenly Manna, the bread of life, satisfying our souls as with marrow, and
making our cup to run over? They did then put on their costliest garments:
Quaeque semei toto vestis n^ni sumitur anno. Ovid. Psalm. 45 13. and 32.1.
Revel. 7 9. Aperta multa recta collucent face. Senec. in Thyest.
And we have a wedding garment at this feast, which is as a clothing of
wrought gold; and as a white robe whereby our nakedness is covered: They did
set up many lights; And we have many golden candlesticks, and shining lights;
yea the word is a light unto our feet. Therefore let us keep the feast in
sincerity and truth: Let it be our chief aim and endeavor, that the inward
man, as well as the outward, may thereby be renewed. Pas and iura sinunt --
Insidias avibus moliri. Virgil.
Among the Heathen, it was thought to be lawful upon the best days to spread
nets to take birds: Sure I am, that Satan who is a cunning fowler, upon these
days is most industrious in setting of snares. In festis diabolus
occupatissimus.
How circumspect ought we to be in avoiding this danger, mounting up with the
Eagle, Job 39.27.
which makes her nest on high; raising our souls by the wings of fervent
prayer and heavenly contemplation? Sine causa educebat; praecipue pluviis and
festis diebus Suet. Sic Epaminondas.
And as Caesar did lead out his soldiers upon festival days, and have them
in a readiness, lest that the enemy should get an advantage against him; So
ought we to exercise our selves, and to stir up those gifts that are in us,
that our adversary may not bring us to destruction. How happy is that man,
which does thus reclaim himself, and labors to be righteous as Lot was,
Nisi forte his maxim d^ebus animo imperandum est: ut tunc voluptatibus solus
abstincat, cum in illas omnis turba procubuit. Senec. 1. Chro. 15.13
in a sinful generation; When the whole Herd of the vulgar people do run
violently into the greatest dangers. David and the multitude did begin to keep
this holy day when Uzzah was smitten; at which time the Lord made a breach upon
them, for that they sought him not after the due order. Most men do not seek
after the Lord upon such days; or if they do, it is rather with confusion
than good order; and therefore may fear a curse for doing this work so
negligently. The Lord may now speak, as he did by the Prophet; Isai. 1.14.
Your appointed feasts my soul hates; for you choose your own ways, and
delight in your abominations. It was the policy of the Benjamites to catch the
daughters of Shiloh, Judge. 21.22.
when they came out to dance in their daunces at the feast of the Lord:
Iuventus Romana ad rapiendas virgins discurrit. Livi.
The like policy was used by Romulus upon the same occasion. And thus very many
both men and women are captivated and brought into bondage, at that time when
we celebrate our greatest deliverance: who being carnally minded do loosen the
reins, Nam remittere animum est amittere. A. Gell.
and walk after their own lusts, sinning, that grace may abound, and using
their liberty for an occasion to the flesh. The carriage of most men in our
chief holy days, may be compared to that of the Romans in their Saturnalia:
But wherein they testify their joy and thankesgiving for the nativity of
Christ, I am not able to discern; when as the pipe, and harp, and wine are in
their feasts: But they regard not the work of the Lord, Isai. 5.12.
neither consider the operation of his hands. If music be so needful at
such a time, then that people may be commended which did chant to the sound of
the Viole, Amos 6.^.
and invented to themselves instruments of music like David; But they
profanely depraved his holy example: for he used them as helps to devotion,
not as provocations to luxury and wantonness. We know that the minstrels were
put forth before the dead was raised; Mat. 9.23.
And we may be assured, that by them we receive no furtherance toward our
new life of grace. If dancing be so pertinent at this time, Mat. 6.22.
the daughter of Herodias may seem to be well nurtured; but you remember what
an evil effect was produced thereby: If costly garments and outward ornaments
be the best expression of our joy; then let us join her that tired her head,
1. King. 9.30. Luke 16.1^.
unto him that was clothed in purple and fine linen, as a fit couple for such
an occasion: If variety of meat can suffice to cheer the soul, then that
wicked nation might have been spared which offended in fullness of bread:
Ezech. 16.49.
If gaming and pastimes must necessarily be annexed hereunto, then let us view
that people which sat down to eat and drink, Exodus 32.6.
and rose up to play: But we have not thus learned Christ, 1. These. 4.6.
being taught not to go beyond, and defraud our brother; Nor to suffer
filthiness, foolish talking or jesting, Ephesians. 5.4.
nor drunkenness and revellings, which are works of the flesh. Let no man
mistake me, as if in any of these abovenamed particulars (which may be used
without mixture of evil) I would derogate from the freedom and bounty of that
man, Psalm. 112.5.
who does guide his affairs with discretion: But if we ought to bring again
our brothers ox, Deuteronomy. 22.1.
when it goes astray; then much more our brother himself: and to show him a
more excellent way; that so he may not be lord of mis-rule, by letting him
that is unjust to be unjust still, Rev. 22.11.
and him that is filthy to be filthy still: When his house which at all times,
and especially at this time, ought to be a Church, shall rather be like unto
Golgotha, a place of rottenness, where Christ shall be crucified afresh, by
all manner of looseness, and profanation. We are exhorted to hospitality,
because thereby some have entertained Angels: Heb. 13.2.
But in receiving such a dissolute company, there is little hope of harboring
either Angel, or Saint. Most that come are not worthy; and others would be
compelled to come in, who in a modest sobriety do forbear that bold
intrusion: Wherefore when thy fountains be dispersed abroad, Pro. 5.16.
and thou do draw out thy soul to the hungry, Isa. 58.10.
remember especially the household of faith, and them that be industrious, that
their bowels may be refreshed by thy liberality, which will be as sleep to
the laboring man, Eccles 5.12.
sweet and comfortable. Such was the practice of this man of God which he now
records, who after the people had joined with him in the service of the Lord,
he gave unto them for the relief and sustentation of their bodies: Also at
another time, when he offered toward the building of the Temple, after that
he and all the congregation had worshipped the Lord, 1. Chron. 29. verse 22.
and sacrificed sacrifices, they did eat and drink with great gladness.

It was a just complaint in ancient times, Olim mensis December fuit, nunc
annus. Senec.
that December was changed from being a month, to be a year: We cannot boast
of any amendment in our days, which would be more useful than the Gregorian
reformation. Some do presume to prognosticate of the twelve months by their
observation of the twelve days; but we may with more safety judge what the
conversation of some men will be the following year, by marking their
carriage during these festivals: David speaks here but of one holy day which
he and the multitude kept, whereas these men are willing to keep a multitude
of holy days, being fit to live in a commonwealth like unto that of the
Athenians, who had more days of pleasure than of imployme^t. I lures voluptat.
bus dicati quam negoti^^si and i^^^d^ci. Causabon. V tam sicut peregr nantes
transie^c. Sa^ist.
Such do greatly offend in abundance of idleness, passing their time as
strangers here, but without preparation for their long home: Never calling to
mind how many good days they have lost, Amici diem perdidi. Suet.
without the least benefit either to themselves or others: And yet, as the rich
man in the Parable, who had many flocks, and herds, could not be satisfied
unless he might take that little ewe lamb of the poor man; 2. Sam. 12.3.
So these men are not contented with the great number of profane holy days, as
they make them, unless they may incroach upon the Lords Sabbath: Whereof I
will forbear to discourse, lest I might seem to prevent my self, by giving
an answer to David's demand, before I come to the question; which is,

VERSE V. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou d^squieted in
me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his
countenance.
Wherein he makes further declaration of his sorrowful and perplexed estate;
that his soul in this time of trouble did pant and thirst, and was powered out,
and cast down, and disquieted, not finding release from misery, nor evasion
out of these calamities. Now if the light that is in thee be darkness, Mat.
6.23.
how great is that darkness? and if the soul that is in thee be sorrowful,
how great is that sorrow? Pro. 12.25.
When heaviness in the heart of man, makes it stoop, yea to be cast down as
David's was; And yet there is great cause that the soul be lifted up with joy,
and not dejected with grief; if we consider the original of it, Igneus est
illis vigor, and coelestis origo. Virgil.
that it proceeds from God himself, Genesis 1.27. and 2.7. Psalm. 8.5.
Mortalibus alti quantum coelicolae, tantundem animalibus isti praecellunt
cunctis. Silius. Eccles. 3.21. and 12.7.
who created us after his own image, breathing into us the breath of life,
whereby we became living souls: So that we who were made but a little lower
than the Angels, were made much higher than all other creatures: For when the
spirit of the beast goes downward to the earth, our spirit shall return to
God that gave it. Also there is cause of joy unto the soul in regard of the
body: Deus dedit corpus animae ut illud in coelum eveneret. Non dedita animam
corp^ri, ut, etc.
God gave the body unto the soul, that it might raise the body unto heaven;
He did not give the soul unto the body that it might press the soul to the
earth. Admonet figura, etc. Boet.
Shall the body be erect toward heaven, and the soul decline toward the
earth? Let us consider how helpful the body is to the soul in the worship of
God, when our eyes wait upon him, and our tongue is our glory to praise him,
and we lift up pure hands, and daily bow our knees before him; when our feet
do carry us to his house, and there we prostrate our whole body in his
presence: Thus in our estate of grace there is an happy union and consent
between them both. But as Eve, ^en. 2.18.
who was made a meet help, proved a cause of the greatest woe and misery; So
the body which should assist the soul does rebel against it, and thereby
becomes a great annoyance: Like that kind of torment, when they did bind the
dead and the living together; Corpora ca daveribus ad versa adversis alligata.
Val. Max.
So the soul that lives for ever, and is willing to do good, is joined unto a
body that is weak, yea even dead to any holy duty: And then the servant is
upon an horse, Ephesians. 2 5. Eccles. 10 7.
and the Prince does walk as a servant upon the earth; the hand-maide is
advanced, Eucherius ad Vale^ian.
and the mistress brought down to the footstool: The body does bring the
soul into captivity, and make it of a king to become a servent, Modo rex es^
modo tyra^nus. Sense.
o^ else a tyrant. Wherefore when we find a law in our members warring
against the law of our mind, we must pray to be delivered from this body of
death. Romans 7. verse 23.24
It was observed that when the body sleeps, Anima dum corpori vires
adm^nistrat, nequaquam vacat sibi, etc. Hippocrat.
the soul has most liberty: And we know assuredly, that when our bodies
shall be laid to sleep in the grave, our souls shall be enlarged, Terreno
carcere resoluta caelum ibera pet^^. Boet.
and delivered from that earthly house, wherein they were long pent and
imprisoned: Vt novus serpens pofita cum pelle senecta, etc. Ovid.
And as the serpent does become young again after it has cast off the skin,
so the soul shall be clothed with majesty and glory, when this frail body
shall wax old like a garment, and be folded up as a vesture, until the end
of all things; and then this vile body shall be fashioned like unto the
glorious body of Christ: and being reioyned unto the soul, shall enter into
the joy of our Master. If that father did so rejoice when he saw his son to
be alive, Genesis 46.30.
whom he thought to be dead, then how excellent shall our joy be, when the
body which was dead shall be alive, and they both being knit together shall
live in bliss for evermore? and 29.20.
Did those seven years seem to be but a few days, and 31.40.
for the love that Jacob had to Rachel, though he suffered the drought in the
day, the frost by night, and watched both day and night? Then how wonderful
ought the love of the soul be to the body? cheerfully serving the Lord,
patiently enduring all trials and afflictions, not being cast down, as if it
were without hope, but looking for the Savior, who shall unite both soul and
body; And we shall be as the Angels of God in heaven. Mat. 22.30.


Let us now take notice of David's examination of himself, that we thereby may
learn to judge ourselves, and we shall not be judged. Formerly he had with
his whole heart sought unto the Lord, to show him the light of his countenance;
He had earnestly desired to appear before God; He had humbled himself in
sorrow for his own transgressions, and the sins of other men. Now God
accepts the will for the deed; And they that mourn have a promise of
comfort. Mat. 6.
Why then art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me?
Psalm. 4.4.
Also he did commune with his own heart, and was no fugitive from it, as many
are, who have greatest reason to be sorrowful, and to fear lest their souls
should be cast down lower than David's was, because they never look home to
examine and prove themselves, and to know that Christ is in them, 2. Cor. 13.5.
except they be reprobates: But David did make diligent search in his own
heart, Psalm. 77.6.
and in all things desired the good and comfortable estate of it. Then, why art
thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Remember the
works of old, how graciously the Lord has dealt with thee. Say not within thy
self, that his mercy is clean gone for ever, for thou do still enjoy many
blessings, and his grace does now keep thee from fainting. Consider that in
this chastisement the Lord deals with thee as with a child: and it is not
his good pleasure that thou should have sorrow upon sorrow; but that this
light affliction working for thy good, may bring thee to an everlasting weight
of glory: wherefore acknowledge this to be thine infirmity; rebuke and smite
thy self, saying, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted in me? It must not be denied, that the soul is sometime
disquieted, when we are not able to give any reason of it; But then it
behooves us to make strict inquisition into our selves, and to see if there be
any root of evil, Josh. 7.
like Achans wedge, which is the cause of our trouble: If there be any Jonas
lurking in the bottom, which may be sufficient not only to cast down the
soul, but also to cast away the soul by a tempest of Gods wrath. When we find
our selves to be innocent from great offenses, and acquitted from regarding
iniquity, we must with patience wait upon the Lord: How unsearchable are his
judgments, Romans 11. verse. 33.34.
and his ways past finding out? For who has known the mind of the Lord?
Job. 11.
Lo he goes by me, and I see him not; He passes on also, but I perceive
him not. Behold he takes away, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
who can hinder him? He wounds, and he heals; he brings low, and he
lifts up. Shall we receive good at the hand of the Lord, Job 2.10.
and shall we not receive evil? Have we learned to abound and be full of
spiritual comfort, Phil. 4.11.
and have we not learned to suffer need, and be abased in the sense of our
wants, and confession of our unworthiness, who are less than the least of all
his mercies? God will have us to see that we are not able to merit any of his
blessings, which are wholly in his own disposing: It is not in man that
walks, Ier. 10 23.
to direct his steps: There may be many devices in his heart, nevertheless
the counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Pro. 19.21.
Also we must know that we are now in our passage through the vast
wilderness of this troublesome world, unto the heavenly Canaan: And we were of
all men most miserable, if our greatest comforts were not reserved for a better
life. God does first cast us down, and then raise us up to a glorious estate:
Though we walk in the midst of trouble, he will revive us: Light is sown
for the righteous, Psalm. 138.7. and 97.11.
and gladness for the upright in heart. That which thou sowest is not quickened
except it dye first: 1. Cor. 15. verse 36.
So although we seem to be without the life of joy, yet we hope to reap
everlasting consolation: As sorrowful we always rejoice. 2. Cor. 6.10.
There is an outward appearance of grief; There is an inward substance of true
joy: But I may well desist from speaking of this sadness, whereof we can give
no reason; when there are so many causes of heaviness, whether we look upon
the sins of other men with charitable compassion, or upon our own offenses
with sorrowful compunction: Psalm 119.136.
How did David lament for the transgressions of the people? And may not we take
up the complaint of the Prophet; Isai. 1.6.
From the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundness in it?
How great is the number of them that have sold themselves to work wickedness?
and never think of their redemption by Him, who paid the ransom for us;
Quibus contra naturam corpus voluptati, anima oneri fuit. Salust.
whose bodies serve them for pleasure, and their souls are as a burden; such
a burden as will be greater than they can bear, ready to sink them to the
pit of destruction: Yet who does repent of his wickedness, saying, What have I
done? Every one turned to his course, Ier. 8.6.
as the horse rusheth into the battle: Which of them does search their heart
by the light of the Word, as with a candle? and say, as justly they may,
inverting these words of David, Why art thou not cast down, O my soul, and why
art thou not disquieted within me? Wherefore, leaving them unto this
examination, let us reflect upon our selves, and as the Circle, Circulus
fortitudin^, atque capacitate caeteris figuris praecedit. Clavius.
which does return upon it self, is the strongest and most capacious figure;
and may be resembled by the shape of a man's body; Vmbilicum esse centrum, etc.
Iul. Scal.
So if we do return unto our selves, and search our own hearts, we shall
become more strong and capable of grace. The opinion of Aristotle is to be
preferred before that of Plato; The one held, Visio fit recipiendo. Arist.
Emittendo spiritum animalem, Plato. Keckerm.
that our sight was by receiving the image of the object into the eye: The
other, by sending out those opticke rays unto the object. It will be our
wisdom to keep within our own bounds, and to look into our selves, rather
than to exceed in curiosity to discover the blemishes of other men: Like her,
whom they feigned to have used her sight only when she went abroad; Lamia in
vimineum cophinum oculos exemptiles in^ici^bat. Erasmus.
but not when she returned to her own house. We ought rather to look into
our selves with David, who seems here to strike his hand upon his breast,
saying; Why art thou full of heaviness, O my soul? God only knows the
hearts of all the children of men; but by this private search, 2. Chron. 6.38.
1. King. 8.38.
every man may know the sore, and the grief, and the plague of his own heart;
and may find that his foul is cast down, when it is surcharged with thorny
cares, which choke the good seed, O curvae in terris animae and coelest^um
inanes, Persius.
and makes him to become unfruitful. Can that soldier fight the good fight
of faith, who intangleth himself with the things of this life? Habak. 2.6.
Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick clay: Such a man may in vain
beat the air, but he cannot run with patience unto the race that is set
before him; Heb 12.1.
unless he does cast aside every weight that may hinder him therein. At the
time of death we see how dangerous and offensive it is, by clamor to
interrupt the soul in its departure from the body: O that we could as
heedfully practice this during our whole life. 1. Cor. 15.31.
Every good man, with Saint Paul, does dye daily; being at all times ready to
yield up his spirit: How prudent should we be to avoid all means of
disturbance, that our soul may not be vexed and disquieted within us; as it
is oftentimes through distrust and infidelity, when there is an inward combat
between the flesh and the spirit, the one lusting against the other, Gal. 5.17.
and being contrary the one to the other; Genesis 25.22.
like Jacob and Esau struggling in the womb. Whereas if Christ did dwell in our
hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
we should overcome the world, and be delivered from this vexation. 1. John.
5.4.5.
Now we are come to touch upon the true cause of David's heaviness; where I
should willingly go backward with Iaphet, and by silent charity cover this one
infirmity of him, whom, as Saint Matthew joyneth with Abraham, Mat. 1.1.
so we may honor as a Father of the faithful: Yet because that he
testifies as much against himself; And his being thus cast down may warn
those that stand by faith, to take heed lest they fall; and may show unto those
that are down, the way how to rise again, I may not without prejudice pass
it over. David confesses that his feet were almost gone, his footsteps were
well nigh slipped, Psalm. 73.2.21.
and his heart was grieved through distrust of Gods providence, when he saw
the prosperity of the wicked. In the time of persecution, 1. Sam. 27.1.
Labascentem and inclinantem ipsius fidem exprimit. Iun.
he said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: And nere
being surprised by the same wavering diffidence, he speaks, I shall now
perish one day by the hand of Absalom: whereas by faith he might have been
persuaded, that neither Principalities, nor Powers, Romans 8.38.
nor any other creature should be able to separate him from the love of God,
who will not suffer the rod of a wicked son to rest upon the lot of a righteous
father. Wherefore let us not please our selves by any vain conceits of our
own ability; Psalm. 125.
Romans 15.2.
but in lowliness of mind esteem holy David much better than our selves.
Phil. 2.3.
If this natural branch, so deeply rooted and established in all graces, was
yet notwithstanding thus tossed and carried about by the wind of infidelity,
in this dreadful storm of Gods displeasure; then how should we poor
unstable souls (who were wild by nature, Romans 11.24.
and are now graffed into the good olive tree) fear and tremble, lest when the
winds do blow, and temptations arise, we (who have not by faith laid sure
hold, that we might partake of the root) be broken off from continuing in the
goodness of God? And yet how do we live like the people of Laish, at quiet,
and secure, Judge. 18 27
not fortifying against the assault of the enemy? In this our day of liberty
and visitation, Luke 19.41.
the things that belong to eternal peace are hid from our eyes, which are
dazeled with the bright sun shine of prosperity; so that our sight is
imperfect, Mark. 8.20.
like unto the blind man's, who saw men as trees, walking: But when Christ made
him look up the second time, he saw every man clearly. At first sight we
think our selves to be as strong as the oak, but when God does break us
with a tempest, or we do frequently look up in prayer, Job. 9.17.
to have our darkness enlightened, we then come to discern plainly, that
we are frail men, and our strength is not the strength of stones, Job 6.3.22.
nor our flesh of brass: yea then we complain that our grief is heavier
than the sand of the sea, and our souls are cast down within us. Now the same
graces do both prevent and cure this infirmity of the soul: By faith we are
kept from this discouragement. The prudent woman is not afraid of the snow,
Pro. 31.21.
for all her household are clothed with scarlet: So they that are of the
household of faith, and have their garments dipped in the blood of the Lamb, shall
not need to fear the winter of persecution and trouble: Also such as have
been overtaken in a fault, and are ready to faint through weakness; yet if
their hope be firm, they shall recover: And God will restore them to the joy
of his salvation. Act. 27.23.
As the Angel stood by Paul in the night, after he had been exceedingly
tossed with a tempest, when the sun in many days had not appeared, and assured
him of a gracious deliverance: Assidite nata mas inter sp^metusque fluctus.
Lipsius.
So our hope does stand by us in our greatest perplexity, when the Lord does
seem to hide himself, and withdraw the beams of his mercy, and seals unto
our soul, that notwithstanding our present calamity, He will make his face,
Revel. 10.^.
which is as it were the Sun, to shine upon his servants: And we shall yet
praise him for the help of his countenance. psalm. 31.16.
The enemies of David, seeing him in misery, were ready to say, and 3.2. and
41.8.
That there is no help for him in God; and now that he lies, he shall rise
up no more: So our corrupt nature being the greatest adversary, does suggest
unto us when the soul is cast down, it is a sign that it is cast out of the
sight and favor of God; When it is disquieted it is a forerunner of despair,
by reason of our grievous sins: as for our hope, it is but the dream of men
waking; Plato dicebat, spec vigi^^tium ho^^num esse somnia.
and as he that thinks he eats is hungry when he awaketh: so thou
think to be sustained by hope, which in the end will vanish away. Call to
mind thy former sins, which have cried for vengeance: look upon thy present
afflictions, and acknowledge thou do receive the due reward of thy deeds:
Then what place is left for hope of deliverance? Why should thou add to thy
sufferings by thine expectation of freedom? Can the Divine justice, so highly
incensed, be so soon appeased? Shall not the God of truth be just and
righteous in multiplying his judgments upon thee, who would for ever have
multiplie^ thy sins against him? What hope of favor to be showed unto thee,
who have deserved so great wrath, and have not merited the least mercy? Does
not thine own conscience accuse thee, and thy sins bear witness against
thee? and shall not the Judge of all the world do right in thy condemnation?
Have thou not served sin, and must therefore receive the wages of
unrighteousness, death and destruction? Now in this combat, the believer is
armed with hope of salvation for an helmet: 1. These. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.16.
with faith for a shield and breast plate, wherewith he is able to quench the
fiery darts of the wicked: Being stung by the old Serpent, and feeling both the
guilt and smart of his sins, he looks with the eyes of Faith and Hope unto
Christ Jesus, being lifted up; who powers wine and oil into our wounds, and
makes us inwardly glad, outwardly cheerful, and then do we praise him for
the help of his countenance. What a great encouragement is it to the servant,
when his Master does look upon him in the conflict? And though in striving we
sometime take a foil; yet then the Lord does turn and look upon us as he did
upon Peter: Luke 21.61.
and being sorrowful for our infirmity, we become strong. Also in our
heaviness, either for sins past or present misery, the Lord does behold us
as he did his servant David, delivering us out of all afflictions: And in the
performance of holy duties he sees us as he did Nathaneel, Ioh. 1 48.
sending his grace to prevent, accompany, and follow us. Lastly, when that
which is perfect is come, we shall with Paul see him face to face: 1. Cor.
13.12.
Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the Sun: Eccles. 11.7.
If this outward light be so delightful, then what an excellent blessing is
it, Number. 6. verse 25, 26.
when the Lord does make his face to shine upon us, and is gracious unto us,
and does lift up his countenance upon us? That we may obtain this
benediction, we must be obedient unto his Word: When he says, Psalm. 27.8.
Seek ye my face. Our heart must answer, Thy face Lord will I seek: Not for
a short time, and 105.4.
but continually. And though a man beholding his natural face in a glass
goes away, Iam. 1.24.
and straightway forgets what manner of man he was; yet we, when the Lord
has in mercy revealed himself unto us, must not forget his benefits, but ever
be mindful of his gifts that are without repentance; and always praise him
for the help of his countenance. We cannot expect deliverance out of trouble,
unless God does help us; and when we have received many blessings, we shall
neither desire, nor yet be able to praise him, without the help of his
countenance: So that God does provide both the altar and the sacrifice; He
freely bestows his benefits, and he does enable us to offer our
thankes-giving, and to praise him for the help of his countenance.

VERSE VI. O my God, my soul is cast down within me.
When the disciples could not cure him that was lunaticke, Mat. 17.15.
they bring him to Christ himself: So when David could not by his own
endeavors cast out this spirit of heaviness, he seeks unto the Lord of
life, to speak the word, and this disease of his ^oule shall be healed. Ha^
he recovered his life of comfort by a steadfast hope in Gods mercy, which he
labored for in the forme^ verse, yet then he must have confessed, that it was
the grace of God whereby i^ was effected; But that which is obtained by prayer,
does come more immediately from Gods right hand; and for such blessings we are
most thankful: We come with confidence unto the throne of grace, when we
have used, and do use all good means to recover strength and assurance. Does
God bid us do some great thing? we do it willingly: Does he command some
small thing? therein also we yield our cheerful obedience. I cannot give
sufficient testimony unto these two, so excellent duties, serious examination
of the soul, and fervent prayer unto the Lord: The former like Mount Sinai,
full of terror, when by looking into our selves, we fear and tremble,
because of our guiltiness, having offended against the laws of God: The
latter, like Mount Sion, Heb. 12.
bringing consolation through Jesus the Mediator of the New covenant, whose
blood speaks better things than that of Abel. In the right performance
whereof, our grief is assuaged; if we prostrate our selves before the Lord in
prayer, he will raise up our souls with spiritual comfort. This is the best
refuge of every believer, whereby he hops for these sure mercies of David:
And this is the Sanctuary of a Christian, from whence he cannot be taken, and
wherein he shall not perish. Our sorrow may often cause us to call upon the
Lord, but the soul is never cast down so low, as to be wholly disabled from
prayer: Being of a sorrowful spirit, though we cannot express our misery,
yet we can speak in our heart unto the Lord. David being dejected by grief
and heaviness, does yet lift up his soul in prayer, and believes that God is
his God, though now he seemed to forsake him. When the wind does blow we
wrap our garments more close about us; in trouble we draw near unto God, and
labor to apply his promises unto our souls: The child walking in the dark
does adhere unto his father, and takes hold upon him, that he may guide him,
and preserve him from danger: So we in the most disconsolate estate do cleave
unto the Lord, and repose our whole confidence in his love. Our Author in
speaking of God and his soul, does thus plead for himself; Thou art my God,
and I am thy servant: Let the wicked be clothed with shame and dishonor, let
their heart dye within them, But redeem my soul that I may not be desolate,
because I trust in thee. Deliver me from all my fears, and thou Lord shall
be magnified, which have pleasure in the prosperity of thy servant. My soul
is thy gift, it came from thee, and I have given it unto thee. How can it
ascend toward thee, when it is thus pressed down by manifold troubles? The
waters are come in unto my soul: Psalm. 69.1.2.
I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing. My soul abiding in this
dark house of earth, lies prostrate upon the ground, and is not able to rise:
Lord hear the poor, and despise not thy prisoner. Let thy salvation, O God,
set me up on high, let thy light and thy truth lead me, and bring me unto thy
holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.

VERSE VI. Therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the
Hermonites, from the hill Missar.
ANother help which David used to sustain himself in this time of trouble,
was by calling to mind the goodness of the Lord in the land of Jordan; Josh.
3.
where God provided a passage for the Israelits, and preserved him when he
passed over to shun Saul: So now going over the river, 2. Sam. 17.22.
he hoped that God would make a way for him to escape the danger that might
come by Absalom. Whereas he names the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites,
he suggesteth to our remembrance the victory which God gave unto his people,
when they took the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon
unto Mount Hermon: at which time Og, Deuteronomy. 3.8.
who was of the remnant of the giants, was overthrown: And thereby his hope
might be confirmed, that although high-minded Absalom was swollen with proud
conceits, 1. King. 20.11.
and girding on his harness di^ boast himself as if he had put it off; yet
the right hand of God was not shortened, no^ his power diminished: Bu^ he will
save and deliver all them that put their trust in him. Now these three places
here mentioned, being the bounds of that country inhabited by the Israelites,
Jordan toward the East, Hermon the North, and the hill Missar the South; he
might from thence have this comfortable assurance, that God who was pleased to
give unto his people so fruitful a land after their tedious passage through
the wilderness, would likewise in mercy give him all good blessings needful
for him, after he had waded through these troubles which he now endured. In
the mean while being deprived of his former liberty of worshipping the Lord in
the assembly of the Saints, he does stir up the gifts and graces that were
in him, by remembering the goodness of God; and the blessings which he had
received. In so doing, he becomes a good example unto all them, that are robbed
of that blessed means of comfort which they formerly enjoyed; and unto all
inhabitants of villages, which in the old law were counted as the fields of the
country; Levit. 25.31
And (as too frequently) wanting a faithful watchman, are more exposed to the
treacherous assaults of the enemy, than Cities environed with Gods favor, and
enriched with the pledges of his love; that they would provide against the
worst famine, and keep those things which have been committed unto them, 2.
Tim. 1 14. and 1. Tim. 6.19.
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come;
that they may lay hold on eternal life. As Paul gave direction for the
collection of the Saints, that every one upon the first day of the week,
should lay by him in store as God has prospered him: So we for the
furtherance of the work of our sanctification, in our first days, which we
ought to remember to keep holy in remembrance of our Creator; while we reside
in places that are enlightened with Gods favor, should lay up against the time
of want; Dan 6.10.
that as Daniel prayed and gave thanks unto God, his windows being open in
his chamber toward Jerusalem; So we looking unto the former part of our
lives, may be excited to prayer and thankesgiving. He is a wise son that
gathers in summer, Pro 10.5.14. and 6.8.
laying up knowledge and keeping instruction. Solomon might justly produce the
Ant gathering her food in harvest, thereby to convince the slothfulness of
most men; when the least and meanest of the creatures shall exceed man in
prudence: And surely most men if they should rightly consider of the former
part of their lives, they could not with David here remember God in so doing,
for God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4.
nor his fear before their eyes. Their days have been few, but the evils
therein committed very many: Where the youth is vain, the age is like to be
unprofitable, when nothing shall be left but the lees and dregs of our life.
Eorum animi m^^es, and aetate fluxi, dolis haud difficulter capi^bantur. Salust.
As Catiline desired the acquaintance of young men, who being pliable were
soon taken with his fraudulent baits; So Satan labors to bring such unto
destruction: and when the strong man does get possession in time of strength,
he is not readily cast out. Difficulter reciduntu^ vitia quae nobiscum
crevciu^t. Senec.
It is an hard thing to pare off those vices which have grown up together with
our selves: Wherefore let us so order and dispose of this instant time, in
doing good, that the use which we make thereof may be beneficial unto us for
the present, and comfortable in remembrance hereafter.

Whereas David remembers God from these places here named; we may collect,
That if we be well affected, there is no place, wherein we may not be put in
mind of the bounty, and goodness of God: Whose eyes run to and fro, 2. Chro.
16.9.
throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them
whose heart is perfect toward him. And as Joseph in a place of pleasure
provided against death, which at first sprung up in a garden: So those places
which in themselves are most delightful, may by our good improovement become
most profitable: whereof I may have occasion to treat hereafter if it shall
please God to give life and ability. In Christ's Kingdom every valley shall be
exalted, Isai. 40 4.
and every mountain shallbe brought low: 1. King. 20.28.
The Lord is God of the hills, as of Hermon and Missar; as also of the plain,
as this land of Iordane: From the valley which adjoyneth to the river, Genesis
48.16.
(where fishes grow into a multitude) and is thereby made the more fruitful,
we may learn to be humble, and God will give grace unto us: And by the hills
we may be put in mind, and 22.8.
of Abraham his offering up his son upon a mountain; of Christ his
transfiguration upon an high mountain, Mat. 17.
of his frequent praying upon Mount Olivet, Luke 22.39.
and at last his ascension upon the same Mount: Act. 1.12.
Which may instruct us to offer up the sacrifice of our prayers unto God, that
he would make us inwardly glorious, and in the end receive us into his heavenly
kingdom. If we lift up clean hands and a pure heart, we shall ascend into his
holy hill: The Psalmist does first speak of the land of Jordan and then of
Hermon and Missar, showing the low estate whereinto he was now brought, when
the waters were ready to overwhelme him, and the stream to go over his soul.
But then having confidence in remembering Gods mercy, he will fear no evil
though he walk through the valley of the shadow of death: Psalm. 23.
Thy judgments are as a great deep, (...) 36.6.
thy righteousness like the great mountains; God who by his strength sets
fast the mountains; and 65.6.
which bring peace to the people, will establish and support his children, and
give them a good issue out of all their trialls.

As a man that thinks he has escaped the peril of water being come unto the
shore, and yet is presently beaten back by the tenth wave, and brought into
his former estate of danger: So David who began to be refreshed in remembering
Gods love, is now again overtaken with sorrow: When,

VERSE VII. Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts; All thy
waves and thy billows are gone over me.
DUring our whole life there is a continual ebbing and flowing; And this time
of David's affliction is like a double tide, wherein new troubles did arise,
before the other were past away: If he found a short time of release, it was
like a fair day in winter, which we use to say does breed foul weather
afterward. That strength which he then recovered did enable him to undergo
those calamities which should come upon him. But for the most part, in this
time of chastisement, there was no other voice heard, but that of the flying
Angel, Revel. 8.13.
which said; Woe, woe, woe; as if God, who afterward did smite the people for
the sin of the King, should now smite the King for the transgressions of all
the people. As in Jobs trial, Job 1.14, 15, 16.
while one messenger was speaking, another came bringing sad tidings; so here,
before one calamity was past, another cause of sorrow did afflict him: To be
cast out of the city where he lived; To be expelled out of his kingdom
wherein he governed, as unworthy to come within the borders of it: and yet God
had promised that his throne should be stablished for ever; and when his days
should be fulfilled, his seed should be set up after him, but not before him
(as Absalom desired, building his house upon his fathers ruin;) Then to have
his concubines defiled in the sight of all Israel: And all this not by an
enemy, for then he could have borne it more patiently; but by his own son:
And one messenger brings word, that the hearts of the men of Israel are after
Absalom; Another tells him, that Ahitophel the Kings Counselor was among the
conspirators: Moreover Shimei does vex his righteous soul with malicious
reproaches. Now what could be done more, that was not done to make the measure
of his sorrow, to be pressed down in heaviness of soul, and running over in
the outward expressio^ of his grief? How great and manifold are the dangers of
them that go down to the sea in ships, ^sal. 107.26.
that see the works of the Lord? For he commands and raises the stormy
wind, which lifts up the waves thereof: They mount up to heaven, they go
down again to the depths: So here, Deep calls unto deep; David is exposed
to the greatest perils that may be. The windows of heaven are opened, ^en.
7.12.
as in the flood: There is the noise of thy water-spouts; but no Arc of
deliverance like Noah's; no not so much as that little Arc of Moses, Exodus 2.3.
whereby he may hope to be drawn out of these miseries. There is a mighty
tempest, but no ship to defend him; nor yet any sign of a calm, as to the
Mariners; neither any creature to waft him to the shore, Jonah 1.4.
as Jonah had: There is a boystrous wind, that made the billows to go over
him; but the helping hand of the Divine providence is not stretched out to
uphold him, Mat. 14.30. Psalm. 69.2.
as unto Peter. The floods overflow him, the proud waters go over his soul:
and 124.5.
He is cast into the deep, and all thy waves are upon him: Jonah. 2.3.
Not one wave alone, but many, but all of them. There was such a variety of his
crosses, and such a succession of his trouble; that as the day was prolonged
until such time as Ioshuah had subdued his enemies; so here the night of his
misery was doubled, until such time as God had perfected the work of
humiliation in him. God, who is most perfect, will finish every good work that
he has begun in any of his children: And being the author of time, he
disposes of all things for our good, making us strong when we are weak; so
that we may take pleasure in infirmities, 2. Cor. 12.10.
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's
sake. And by seeing our miserable and weak estate, we learn not to trust in
our selves, but in God who raises the dead. When the water of affliction does
flow over our head, we are thereby cleansed, that we may be presented unto
Christ without spot and blemish: As Pharaoh and his host were covered by the
depths, Exodus 15.5.
and sanke into the bottom, as a stone; so they that want faith to stand in
temptation, are ready to be swallowed up of despair. But every one that is
godly has this comfortable protection; That in the floods of great waters,
Psalm. 32.6. and 18.4.
they shall not come nigh unto him; and though the floods of ungodly men make
him afraid, though he be compassed about with many tribulations, Psalm. 130.1.
yet out of the depth of his misery he cries unto the depth of Gods mercy;
and prays unto the Lord on high, who is mightier than the noise of many
waters; and 93.4.
yea than the mighty waves of the sea, to deliver him from them that hate him,
and 79.14, 15.
that the water-floud may not overflow him, nor the deep swallow him up: And
in conclusion he finds this comfort, that neither height nor depth shall be
able to separate him from the love of God. Romans 8.39.
When Christ was asleep in the ship that sailed over unto the other side of
the lake, Mat. 8.26.
there came down a storm, insomuch, that the ship was covered with the waves:
but when the disciples awoke him, he said, Why are ye so fearful, O ye of
little faith; and rebuking the sea, there was a great calm: So in our voyage
to heaven, when the wind does blow, the rain does fall, and the waves do
beat upon us; In strong temptations, when we are opposed on every side, and
looking up to heaven, see nothing but the terror of Divine justice ready to
fall upon us; looking down, we see the horror of the pit ready to shut her
mouth upon us; and looking about, we see all the creatures armed for our
destruction, then through want of strength we are ready to sink under the
burden of our calamities: But when the quickening spirit shall revive our
faith, that slumbred within us, and restore us to the life of grace, we begin
to be comforted, in assurance that God will put an end to our trials, and
deliver us out of all affliction: Such was David's anchor which he cast out now
in this storm, and thereby hoped for safety. Though the waves and billows do
go over me,

VERSE VIII. Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time,
and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my
life.
AS before his tears were his meat day and night; Verse 3.
So now he finds cause of rejoicing both day and night; for the loving
kindness of the Lord who did put songs of praise into his mouth: His misery
and trouble were now present before him; His comfort was only hope, but not to
be discerned by sense and reason: Yet such was the strength of his confidence,
which he had fixed upon Gods love, that thereby he became as fully assured of
deliverance, as if he were already restored to his former liberty. The wicked
shall fear day and night; Deuteronomy. 28.66, 67.
in the morning he shall say, Would God it were Even, and at Even he shall say,
Would God it were morning: And his greatest woe, shall then begin, when time
shall be no more: But the righteous that like Anna serve God night and day,
Luke 2.37.
shall at all times be refreshed by trusting in Gods mercy: who will command
his loving kindness in the day time; as He has promised to command the
blessing upon them that observe his Laws: Deuteronomy. 28.8.
And we know that all things obey the voice of God. Has he spoken, and shall
he not perform it? Do the soldiers come when the Centurian calls, Mat. 8.9.
and shall not all creatures be ready pressed to do the will of God? Though his
loving kindness be as it were unwilling to come and reveal it self unto us,
that have so highly offended; yet when God commands, it must yield obedience:
Yea he so commands, as that we may therein discern his favor unto us: He
sends the Angel to comfort Hagar, in her distress: And he commands his
kindness, which is as his messenger bringing glad tidings of great joy unto
his children.

His kindness is not without love: Pro. 12.10.
The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, but the chasticements of God do
proceed from his love: An if our chasticements, then much more his kindness:
He is a Father of mercies; they are as natural and as dear unto him as a
son to his father; And though a mother should forget her child, He will never
forget his love to his children.

Mat. 5.45.
Our heavenly Father causes the sun to rise on the evil, and on the good,
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust: He is kind unto the
unthankful and evil. Luke 6.35.
But as Hanun used the messengers of David disdainfully, 2. Sam. 10.2.
when he thought to show kindness unto him: So wicked men do abuse the
goodness of God, and pervert it unto their own destruction: But they that are
endued with wisdom from above, do sing praise unto his holy name, and do
pray unto the God of their life, for the continuance and increase of all his
blessings.

The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, by restoring him
to his former liberty of appearing before God: And after he had in an holy
manner performed the duties of the day; he did in the night meditate upon the
laws of God, and rejoice in the gracious benefits which he had received: Genesis
3.17. ^abor exori^r durus and omnes agitat c^ras, etc. ^enec.
The day is made for man to labor. It was the punishment upon Adam and his
posterity, to eat their bread in sorrow all the days of their life: Yet
through the goodness of God, we receive many blessings therein. It is a time
of salvation unto us, if we does works of righteousness while it is day, and
labor to know those things which belong unto our peace: 1. Pet. 3.10.
If we desire to see good days we must eschew evil and do good: 1. King.
3.14.
Then the Lord will lengthen our days, Deuteronomy. 30.20.
yea he himself will be our life and the length of our days: Wherefore let us
ever remember the love of God, and 11.19.
and speak to the praise of his name: not only when we rise up in the day, but
when we lie down in the night; Then to call to remembrance our song as David
did, who remembered God upon his bed, Psalm 77 6. and 63.6.
and did rise at midnight to give thanks, and 119 62.
whose eyes prevented the night watches, ^48 and 139.18.
and when he awaked he was still with him: And howsoever the sons of perdition
do turn night into day, whose evil conscience hates the light, 1. These. 5.7.
and being by darkness robbed of all shame, Quippe omnem pudorem nox ademetat.
Tacit. Gravis malae conscientiae lux est. Fastidio est lumen gratuitum. Senec.
do scorn the day so freely given unto them, And are drunken in the night,
committing all kind of wickedness and uncleanness therein: Forgetting that
the darkness hides not from God, but the night shines as the day; the
darkness and the light are both alike to him: Psalm. 139.12.
Nox faecundo operum pulchraeque accommoda fraudi. Stat.
Yet they that are godly do receive much strength and consolation in the
night, to the refreshing both of soul and body. It did discover the tinorous
weakness of Nicolemus, to come unto Christ by night; Nox hominum genus, and
duros miseraca labores. Val. Flac.
But it shows our holy confidence, then to sing praise unto the Lord; and
with our soul to desire him in the night, yea with our spirit within us to
seek him early: Isai. 26.9.
In former times God appeared unto his servants in visions of the night; and
therein revealed his good will unto them: God came to Abimelech by night, Genesis
20.3.
and with held him from sinning: And surely we may make a profitable use of our
dreams in the night, Job 33.15, 16.
whereby many times God shows us the great corruption of our deceitful
hearts, wanting his grace to make resistance unto the assaults of Satan, who
will not give us any time to rest from his temptations: But as that great
Commander did suddenly come upon the enemy, Ma ius ^n Salust. be. l. Iugur.
by marching diverse nights; so he does then beset us, and seeks to wound us,
by casting his fiery darts, evil thoughts into our hearts: Sometime we offend
by carnal affections, sometime by uncharitableness, careful thoughts, and
vain imaginations. Psalm. 16.7. Dicetur merita nox quoque Naenia. Horat.
My reins also instruct me in the night seasons; and such a night requires a
song of lamentation: But when the Lord has proved our heart, Psalm. 17.3.
and visited us in the night, and has tried us, and shall find nothing; then
may we have a song in the night, and gladness of heart, as when an holy
solemnity is kept. Isai. 30 29.
There is great cause of joy, for that the Lord does refresh and sustain us by
quiet sleep, after we have been wearied with the evil of the day: And as he
gives rest after labor, so he gives ease and deliverance after affliction
and trouble. In the night, Act. 12.7.
a light shined unto Peter in the prison, and the Angel of the Lord raised him,
when he was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: So the
Lord does look graciously upon us in our most disconsolate estate, when we are
environed with many miseries, and lifts us up by his favor, making away for us
to escape out of the greatest dangers. At midnight, Paul and Silas prayed and
sang praises, and immediately, Act. 16.25.
by the earthquake, all the doors were opened, and every ones bands were
loosed. In the midst of trouble, if our mouth be opened in prayer, our hearts
also shall be enlarged in thankes-giving: Even in the time of affliction there
is cause of rejoicing, in that it comes from Gods fatherly love, who makes us
to trust in him for relief after the time of trial. Shall a man that is
miserable delight himself in music? Philoxenu i^ Al^iano.
and shall not we be comforted by singing praise unto the name of the Lord?
Joseph's brethren thought evil against him; Genesis 50.10.
but God meant it unto good; that he, being advanced, might preserve life: When
we think our selves to be nearest unto destruction, God may then intend our
greatest happiness and comfort. As the heaven is high above the earth, so the
height and depth of his wisdom and love do exceed the capacity of our
shallow understanding. We are not able to apprehend the manner of his gracious
dealing with us: When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, Psalm. 116.1.
they were like them that dream: Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and
our tongue with singing. The Apostle himself in his gaole-delivery, Act. 12.9.
wist not that it was true which was done, but thought he had seen a vision.
At what time soever God is pleased to inspire his grace and comfort into us, we
ought to rejoice therein, and by night on the bed to seek him whom our soul
loves; Cant. 3.1.
Circumscribatur nox, and aliquid ex illa in diem transferatur. Senec.
abridging that time of rest and ease, that it may become as beneficial unto
us, as the day it self. David was not satisfied by offering the sacrifice of
thankesgiving in the courts of the Lords house, Psalm. 116.17.
and paying his vows in the presence of all the people: But in the night also
he would continue his song of Gods mercy; Siquis adest auditor lu^ciniae prius
al imus quam cantus deficiet.
Like that excellent bird, which is never weary or spent by continuing her
delightful notes: So this sweet singer of Israel was uncessant in praising
the Lord; not giving sleep to his eyes, until he had blessed his holy name. In
time of affliction he made his bed to swim, praying unto the Lord to
return, and deliver his soul: Now in prosperity he gives thanks for the
blessings he does receive. When our bones are vexed, and our sleep departs
from us, we pray unto God to deal mercifully with us; But when our diseases
are healed, we do not return to give thanks, being soon overtaken with
heaviness and security: And yet David did endeavor to watch in the night,
that he might sing praise unto the Lord. He did not then only meditate in the
Law of God, when he could not take any rest, (as Ahasuerus had the book of the
records of the Chronicles read before him, Esther 6.1.
when he could not sleep;) for now he might lie down in peace, and sleep,
when God made him to dwell in safety: Much less did he intend to procure
sleep by a sinister performance of any good duty; which notwithstanding is a
corrupt practice of many men, who by singing, or reading, or hearing, or
meditating, will have an unworthy aim to bring themselves asleep; and yet
confessing that the enemy is most busied, when they are best exercised. And
therefore David says, Psalm 149 5.
Let the Saints sing aloud upon their beds: Thereby to testify their
cheerful devotion, and also to prevent that spirit of slumber. Such as shall
think to obtain quiet rest by performing any such action (in it self
commendable) they do like unto that people which followed Christ, not because
of the miracles, John 6.26.
but because they were filled with the loaves: So these seek him, not that
their faith may be strengthened, but that their bodies, may be refreshed; The
words then used by them, being as a charm to gain their purpose. We know how
dangerous the fall of Eutichus was, Acts 20.9.
and yet he was overcome by a deep sleep against his will; whereas these men
do address themselves thereunto, stretching out the arm to welcome sleep,
rather than to declare any fervent zeal. And therefore as their offense is
more heinous, so their fall will be greater. And they also offend in an high
nature, who in public are not able to watch one hour; but do settle
themselves to their repose: With what horror may they fear to be awakened by
the sound of the last trumpe, who have despised the voice of God? And how can
they sleep without suffering many things, Mat. 27.19.
because of that Just Man, whom they so unjustly contemn in their neglect of
his Word exhibited unto them? This example may be very forcible to convince the
sluggard that folds his hands to sleep: Shall David improve the night to so
happy an use, and will thou consume both day and night in drowsinesse and
sloth? Also this good act here mentioned does confute them that neglect the
frequent use of so heavenly a duty: Whereas the Apostle does call upon us to
sing with a grace in our heart, Ephesians. 5 29. Col. 3.16.
making melody unto the Lord. Quod essent soliti stato die antelucem convenire,
c^^menque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Plin. Iun.
And in former time, Christians were so fervent in spirit, that they would not
forbear their spiritual songs in the night, though their lives were brought
in danger thereby. Vide Tertullian. in Apologet.
Bu^ now, excepting that general exercise in the congregation (where there be
too many abridgments of abridgements) the use thereof is not so common as it
ought to be. In some families it is rare, in other it is never thought upon: In
Societies and Colleges, where friends meeting privately in the end of the best
day, Luke 24.32.
perhaps their heart may burn within them while they talk about the Scripture,
but yet this holy duty is much omitted; which if it were conscionably performed
in a religious manner, would bring comfort unto the soul, by letting the
servants of God to depart in peace. Mat. 26.30.
That hymn which Christ sang with his Apostles, may be a president unto all
that are in authority, to do likewise.

David says, that the Lords song shall be with him in the night, Psalm. 118.14.
And, that the Lord is his strength and his song; which does confound the
foolish love-songs, and unreasonable poems, which are too much in request;
Songs in praise of Venus, and the great Diana, to the dishonor of their
Creator, and the shame of the maker; striving to get a name, though it be by
their own confusion: This their way is their folly, yet their posterity
approve their sayings. Of these we may say, as Ronsard spoke of the famous
Du-Bartas, He has done more in a day then I have done in my whole life: So
David has done more by this song in the night, than they by the writings of
their whole life: Wherefore let them forbear any longer to exceed their bounds
in loose dittyes, and wanton catches, whereby youth is soon taken; as appears
by the lewd songs, so common in their night-walks, more harsh to every good
ear than the voice of the raven or any prodigious bird.

VERSE VIII. And my prayer unto the God of my life.
BEfore he spoke of the blessings received, God commanding his loving kindness
in the day time, Of his thanksgiving for those blessings, singing praise unto
God in the night, And now he betakes himself unto Prayer, for the continuance
of those blessings, and supply of all graces needful. We see our poor and
weak estate in this life: If God withdraw his right hand, we fall and perish:
If he stop the fountain of his mercies, we dye for thirst: We cannot say that
we are rich, Revel. 3.17.
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing; For in our selves we are
wretched and miserable: Going out full in the morning, we may be brought home
again empty in the evening: Having in the day given thanks unto God, who
fills us with his blessings; before night we pray unto him for our daily
bread: In our thankful acknowledgment of the benefits we do enjoy, we humbly
pray unto God, to renew his wo^ted mercies, and to multiply his favors upon
us. How can we testify our due valuation of the bounty and goodness of the
Almighty, but by ascribing all glory unto him? when our souls do bless the
Lord, and all that is within us do praise his holy name: How can we better
declare the sincerity and devotion of our thanksgiving, than by our fervent
prayer for the increase of those graces, for which we desire to give thanks? He
that is in want, may move compassion: He that is grateful, will soon obtain
relief. Can we presume to beg any thing of God, not having rightly priced
those blessings, which we have formerly received from his bountiful hands?
David was so far from forgetting any benefit, that God had bestowed upon him,
that in this prayer, he does insinuate a dutiful remembrance of Gods gracious
dealing with him, in that he calls Him, The God of his life; who breathed
into him the breath of life: who in sickness healed his diseases, and brought
up his soul from the grave: Who delivered him from the Bear and the Lion, and
that lion-like man, Goliath, and that Fox, who sought after the blood of this
Lamb, and yet, confessing him to be innocent: And here from this ravening
Woolfe, Absalom, who in the morning devoured the prey, slew his brother Amnon;
And now thought to divide the spoil, by casting his father out of his throne
into his sepulcher: and labored to have the Sun turned into darkness, that
himself might have shined like a blazing meteor; But God was the God of his
life: The living, the living he shall praise thee as I do this day: Having
received so great a blessing, he does use it to the praise of his name: And
from Him he hoped for that better life, when this should be finished; for which
Bathsheba prayed, That the King might live for ever: Our life being a good
gift, does come from the Father of lights: In him we live and move and have our
being: And whether we live or dye we are the Lords: Then let us live to his
glory, and be willing to forsake all things to follow Christ; and to lose our
lives that we may save them at the last day: not like the unregenerate, who will
preserve their lives, though they destroy their souls; and will keep their
goods, though they spend their lives: as Ananias did, Act. 5.5. Mat. 21.19.
being like the fig tree, which brought forth the broad leaves of outward
profession, whereby he thought to cover his nakedness, Genesis 3.7.
But wanting sound fruit, he was blasted by the breath of divine justice, and
withered away. By this example of David, we may be taught unto whom to direct
our prayers: Even unto the God of our life, who has given us so great a
blessing, and is able to give us all things requisite for our good: How void of
all sense, and understanding are they, that neglect praying unto the eternal
and everliving God? and do pray unto Saints, which are dead, which never were
living; and do represent their prayers unto images, in a language equally
unknown to the idol and themselves; Psalm. 115 8.
They that make them, so is every one that trusts in them.

VERSE IX. I will say unto God, My rock, why have thou forgotten me? why go I
mourning, because of the oppressions of the enemy?
DAvid does here premeditate what he should say, when he comes to speak unto
the Lord in prayer: And in so doing he becomes a good example unto us, duly to
consider our necessity, that we may perform this holy duty with the more
reverence, and thereby obtain the more comfort. As we use to examine our
selves before we come to the Lords supper, where we are made the partakers of
the body and blood of Christ, So likewise we ought to search our hearts before
prayer, at which time we partake of the benefit of his sufferings: Mat. 6.7.
And then we must omit vain repetitions, for we are not heard for our much
speaking: A few words with fervency and zeal are better than ten thousand
without importunity and holiness. The Pharisee made a great sound in his
prayer, But the Publican like a vessel full of precious liquor, strikes
himself upon the breast, and draws out these few words, God be merciful to
me a sinner. Our care must be to fit our prayer unto the present occasion, And
that estate, wherein we then are: Sometime the soul is lifted up with joy, and
then there is cause of thanksgiving, and praising the name of the Lord for his
manifold blessings: Sometime it is weighed down with sorrow; and then we must
be humbled in confession of our own unworthiness, and labor to strengthen
our selves by trusting in Gods mercyes: All helps are good, that may either
assist us therein, or enable us thereunto: But above al, the Holy Spirit, which
teaches all things, and shows unto every man the grief of his own heart,
leading him in the way of life; By the which we must be guided and instructed
all the days of our lives: In comparison whereof, all other are but blind
guides, And not fitted to every particular exigent. Paul being unable to see,
was led by the hand, Act. 9.8.
But after the scales fell from his eyes, he needed no such help. And that
other blind man cured by Christ, John 9.21.
being of age was able to speak for himself. They that are strong men in
Christ, do pour out their complaint before the Lord: Yea, the newborn child
does cry, though not able to speak. In the beginning we cry unto the Lord in
sighs and groans: And afterward growing from milk to strong meat (as the
flax, which at first did but smoke, in the end does burn bright) we are able
to make expression of our want. When Zacharias his mouth shall be opened, Luke
1.63.
and his tongue loosed, that he could speak to the praise of God, the writing
table may be laid aside. Naturally we are all borne with this infirmity; and
unless God put forth his hand, and touch our mouth, as he did Ieremiahs, Ier.
1.9.
we are not able to speak unto him. Let us then covet this excellent
endowment, and pray unto God to open our lips, and to touch our tongue with a
coal from the altar, that we may obtain this original and fundamental
blessing, whereby so many graces are derived unto us; and we come to be built
up in our most holy faith: In our voyage to heaven, take heed of these two
dangerous rocks; Either to withdraw the shoulder, Nehem. 9.29.
laying the burden upon others, not seeking the bread of life by any sweat of
our own, but only as we wipe it off from the face of other men; Or else a
customary and negligent performance of this duty, whereby we rather quench the
spirit, than stir up the gift that is in us, 2. Tim. 1.^.
that it may shine clearly, for the benefit of others; and burn cheerfully for
the comfort of our own souls.

Now let us observe this resolution of David; I will say unto God: Ought he
not rather to have confessed with Job, Job 9.3.15.
That he was not able to answer him one of a thousand? And though he had
been righteous, yet would not answer, but make supplication unto his Judge: As
the Publican would not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven; So, might not
he have said, that he was unworthy to lift up his voice unto the Lord, and to
speak unto him? Who art thou, O man, Romans 9.20.
that reply against God? Has not the potter power over the clay? Woe unto
him that striveth with his Maker. Isai. 45.9. 1. Pet. 2.20.
Are servants commanded to take it patiently, when they suffer for doing well;
and shall Gods servants be impatient, when they are corrected for their
faults? as if, like Balaam, He did smite us when we did not offend against
him. Number. 22.28.
Also where he complains, that he is now forgotten, he speaks as if God
should repent of his love toward him; as Adam, when he thought to justify
himself, Genesis 3.12.
did impute the blame upon God: So David does not accuse himself, who had
provoked the Lord by his transgressions, but speaks as if God had forgotten
to be gracious, and had rejected him in his displeasure. In the former part, I
will say unto God, My rock; There is a strong confidence in Gods mercy, which
emboldened him thus to speak: In the latter, Why have thou forgotten me? He
speaks according to carnal reason, Judge. 2.3.
which is as a Canaanite in the land, a thorn in our side, not to be wholly
conquered, until the last enemy be destroyed. 1. Cor. 15.26.


Before you saw him panting and thirsting for God; but now he is come to the
rock from whence flows the water of life: Before the waves and billows went
over him; but now his feet are set upon the rock: For who is a rock save our
God? Psalm. 18.31.
He is a rock of refuge, and 62.7. and 94.22.
of strength, of salvation. Thus Hannah calls him in her song: and 95.1.
There is no rock like our God: 1. Sam. 2.2.
Thus Moses frequently in his song, Deuteronomy. 32 31.
Their rock is not as our Rock: Thus David in his song, 2. Sam. 22.47.
Blessed be my rock, and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation: God
who is pleased to call himself, Exodus 3.14.
I AM; may fitly be described by this title of the Rock, as being ever the
same: Yea more stable and permanent than any rock; Mat. 27 51.
For the rocks have been rent, but God is immutable, with him is no shadow of
change: wherefore let us put our whole trust in God. And as the conies, Pro.
30.26.
though a feebl folk, yet are commended as exceeding wise, because they make
their houses in the rocks: So it will be our wisdom to build upon this
Rock, Mat 7.24.
that we may no^ fall, when we are opposed and exalted by the prince of the
air. Ephesians. 2.
The dove is said to be in the clefts of the rock; Cant 2.14.
So let our souls, being purified by faith, enter through the wounds of
Christ, Isai. 2.10.
and be united unto him by love. In this appellation here used, My Rock; the
Psalmist alludes to Gods favorable dealing with the Israelites, whom he
relieved by causing water to come out of the rock at Horeb, Exodus 17.6. Number.
20.11.
and Meribah: The remembrance of Gods grace, and love showed unto others, does
bring comfort unto our souls: And it is the best menes for us to obtain the
blessings we want, when we do magnify his holy name for his mercy and
goodness unto his children, and for the great benefits formerly conferred upon
our selves: Isai. 17.10.
Not being unmindfull of the rock of our strength. It was David's infirmity,
having begun in the spirit, in calling God his Rock, thus to end in the flesh,
saying, Why have thou forgotten me? Had we faith as a grain of mustard seed,
Mat. 17.20.
we might be able to remove mountains; but it does discover our unbelief,
when we think that our Rock does forsake us, that our God forgets us: We
do, with Iesurun, Deuteronomy. 32.18.
forget the Rock that begat us, the God the fo^med us; but he never forsakes
his servants that wait upon him. How often would he, like the hen, gather us
under the wings of his providence and mercy? But when did he, like the Ostrich,
Job 39 14.
leave us wholly destitute of his favor? Shall the man that falls through
his own weakness, or is overthrown by the strength of the winds, and power
of the waves, accuse the Rock whereon he stood, for instability? The Rock is
fixed and sure, but we are feeble: yet such is our error, that as in passing
by water, the eye is ready to apprehend that the rocks do remove, and the
vessel wherein we are does stand still: So we many times do deceive our
selves, by thinking that God does go from us, when as we do run from him
by disobedience. 1. John 4.10.
We have not loved God, but he us: God has not forgotten us, but we him:
Does David demand, Why have thou forgotten me? Might he not as well have
asked, Why have thou dealt so favorably with me? There was great cause of
indignation, but no merit of love. 2. Sam. 7.8.
When God took him from the sheepe-coat, from following the sheep, and
anointed him King over Israel, and delivered him out of the hand of Saul, and
12.7.
and gave him his Masters house, and the house of Israel, and Judah; and if
that had been too little, he would have given him such and such things:
Having received so great blessings, he brought forth the grapes of Sodom in
lust and uncleanness; making his transgression to be like that crying sin of
the men of Gibeah, Judge 25.
where adultery and murder were both joined together: Wherefore it was a just
judgment of God, to forget him, who had so highly offended. And yet in this
we may see, that the ways of God are not like our ways, nor his thoughts as
our thoughts: We think he is well pleased with us, when he is most angry;
and that he forgets us, when he begins to look upon us in mercy. David
during the whole year that he slumbred in his sin, thought the time to be
like a jubilee of joy, wherein all things succeeded prosperously; but now that
God does punish him for his iniquity, and like a good shepherd, with his rod
does bring home this straying sheep, he thinks that he is forgotten and cast
out of Gods fight. Of our selves we are not able to discern Gods fatherly
chastisements, and the trials of our faith, from the punishment of our
rebellion; yea we think that we do him good service, when we provoke him
to wrath. Being punished for our sins, we are ignorant of the cause of his
anger; unless he shall tell us the cause why many are sick, and weak, and
many sleep: For the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Being thus ignorant, we ought to inquire
of the Lord, and to pray that he would show us the cause, why his anger is
kindled against us, and his hand is heavy upon us: As David here, out of a
desire to be informed, says, Why have thou forgotten me? It seemed strange
unto him, that God should forget to be gracious, and that his mercy should be
clean gone for evermore, considering how graciously he dealt with his people,
the Israelites: When they dealt proudly, Nehem 9. Verse 16.
and refused to obey, thou were a God, ready to pardon, and forsookest them
not; yea, when they made them a molten calfe, 17.
18.
yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not: When they cast thy law
behind their backs, 19.
and slew thy Prophets, and wrought great provocations, yet in their trouble,
26.
when they cried, thou heardest from heaven and gave them Saviors. 27.
When they had rest, they did evil again, 28.
yet many times did thou deliver them, and would not utterly consume them:
Then why have thou forgotten me, O my God? Through the intercession of Christ
we shall for ever enjoy the favor and presence of the Almighty. If God sent Lot
out of the midst of the overthrow when he remembered Abraham, Genesis 19.29.
who prayed for Sodom, then we may be assured that God will not forget us,
having Christ Jesus to be our Mediator.

VERSE IX. Why go I mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy?
HAd this man of God spoken no more than he did before, that he was forgotten
of his Creator, we might have conceived his estate to be very disconsolate;
But now after the setting of the sun, to have such horrid darkness succeed:
After he seemed to be forsaken of God, to be thus vexed by the adversary, must
needs aggravate his sorrow; when he went from one place to another, not
finding ease or comfort, first to the wilderness, then to the ascent of Mount
Olivet, after that he passed over Jordan; not having his head adorned with a
diadem, but covered with sackcloth, making every place where he came to be
like Bochim, Judge. 2.5.
a place of weepers: While he was unjustly oppressed by one, who was an enemy
unto God, and to David, and to himself; who, as Judas sought to shed the blood
of Christ, who had formerly washed his feet, So Absalom sought the destruction
of his father, who before had washed the guilt of blood from him with tears of
compassion, weeping sore for the evil done by him, and remitting his great
offense, he received him into his bosom; Yet this untamed heifer lift up his
heel against him: This is the enemy that has persecuted his soul, Psalm.
143.3.
that has smitten his life down to the ground, that made him to dwell in
darkness, as those that have been long dead. Had God dealt with him as he did
with Saul, 1. Sam. 15.28.
to have rent the kingdom from him, and to have given it to another better
than himself, he might have endured it with the more patience; Let the
righteous smite me, Psalm. 141.5.
it shall be a kindness: But now, that the son of pride should make this
humble servant of God to mourn, that the enemy to holiness should thus
afflict the child of Abraham, 2. Chro. 20.7.
Gods friend; it must cause him to walk heavily, and to be full of perplexity:
like the Heart which he mentioned in the beginning, which is in danger to be
devoured unless it be refreshed by the water-brookes; So he is even consumed
by these troubles, unless that God, who makes the lame man to leap as an
Heart, Isai. 35.6.
be pleased to renew his strength, and to put an end to these calamities. If we
offend against God, we shall be punished by them that are worse than our
selves, who shall be as his rod and his hammer for our correction. We cannot
think those to be vessels of mercy, who were the instruments of his wrath
against the Israelites, that went mourning by reason of the oppression of the
enemy, imposing such heavy burdens upon them in their captivity.

It is our infirmity in time of any cross, to look rather unto the hand of
him that smote us, than to the divine permission, or our sins provoking: No
man could have power against us unless it were given from above: John 19 11.
There is no evil of punishment which God has not done; our destruction
proceeds from our selves: And therefore David, who was unwilling to mourn
because of the cruel oppression of an insulting enemy; might yet have prayed
unto God to break his heart, and to give him true sorrow, that he might lament
for his own sins; whereby he had incensed Gods displeasure, and by which, as
by the most tyrannical enemy, he was oppressed and brought into bondage, when
lust and corruption did set up their throne in the heart of him, who was
advanced to the kingdom; And were more unsatiable in their exactions, than
ever the taskmasters of Egypt, were against the distressed Israelites. Deuteronomy.
4.20.
And his work was more servile, than theirs in the iron furnace, when his
soul did burn in lust; and though he were a King, 2. Sam. 23.39.
yet he betrayed the life of his faithful subject, 1 Samuel 18.14.
yea of one of his Worthyes, altogether unworthy of such an untimely end: And
that he might make him sure, As Ioab thrust three darts through the heart of
Absalom; So he seeks to kill Uriah thrice; First, to rend him asunder as
Samson did the Lion, Judge. 14.6.
when he took away his wife from him; He put him to a second death, when he
made him drunk: 2 Samuel 11.13.
And surely drunkenness may well be called the second death, as being the next
way thereunto; And thirdly he caused him to be slain by the enemy. Now this
was a fit time for him to have cried out, Why go I mourning because of the
oppression of the enemy? when Satan, as afterward in the numbering of the
people, stood up against David, 1. Chro. 21.1.
and overthrew him. What greater sorrow, than for sin? What more dreadful
enemy than Satan? What oppression comparable unto that which is undergone by
the vassals of Satan? whose condition is worse than that of the Gibeonites,
Josh. 9.23.
who were bondmen, hewers of wood, and drawers of water; or than that of the
men of Rabbah, who were put under sawes, 2. Sam. 12.31.
and harrowes of iron, and axes of iron, and were made to pass through the
brick-kilne: There is no act so vile and fordid, that he does not put them
thereunto; no torment so cruel, that he does not inflict upon them. How
circumspect ought we to be, that the wicked one may not touch us? and
whenever we are overtaken in a fault, how importunate should we be in our
prayer unto God, night and day, to deliver us from that thraldom? I am thine,
Lord save me, and let thine ear be attentive unto the prayer of thy servant,
Nehem. 1.11.
who desires to fear thy name. Thou know, O Lord, that mine enemy is thine
enemy: He first rebelled against thee, and justly suffered thy fierce wrath, by
reason of his pride. He assaulted our blessed Savior with diverse and sundry
temptations, and would not leave him, until being vanquished he was commanded
to depart: Mat. 4.10.
But for ever he continues his malice against me thine image; and often, too
often he prevails against me, so that I am brought into subjection, and the
irons do enter into my soul: Arise, O Lord, Psalm. 105.18.
for my deliverance; Thou have bought me, not with gold and silver, but with
the blood of thy Son; O then redeem me out of this captivity: Why should
this traitor destroy thy subject, that labors in all things to be faithful
and obedient? Why should Satan vex thy servant, that endeavors to do thy
blessed will? Why go I mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy?

VERSE X. As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me, while they
say daily unto me, Where is thy God?
What grievous vexation and anguish holy David did endure, by the reproaches
of wicked men, may appear by the description thereof in this Psalm: Before
there was the outward expression in tears; and here is the inward torment, A
sword in his bones. Not some little hurt in the skin only, nor some small
wound in the flesh, but the breaking of the bones; which how deadly it is, may
appear by the practice of the Jews toward them that were crucified. John
19.32.
This here mentioned, is not much unlike to that which is spoken of the Word of
God, being sharper than any two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of the joints and the marrow: But that
sword does cut down sin from the good, with one edge; and with the other it
destroys the soul of the ungodly: Whereas this does wound the righteous, and
like an Egyptian reed does enter into the hand, yea into the soul of him that
uses it. Had they spoke thus unto him in sudden anger, and unadvised passion,
he could the better have endured these disgraces: But their obstinate
continuance in the daily use of it, did discover their inveterate malice, that
they were given over to a reprobate sense; and living without God in the world,
they did scorn and vilify all those that put their confidence in him:
wherefore he had just reason to say, that they were bloody enemies unto him.

There was a time, when there was no sword found with the Israelites; 1. Sam.
13.22.
It were an excellent blessing if now in our Israel, there were none that did
strike at the good name of their brethren, by slanderous reports, and
uncharitable censures: But as then, Gal 4.29.
he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the
spirit, So it is now: Many think they cannot better declare their freedom
from vice, than by reproching them that are virtuous. Ephesians. 6.
A good Christian shall have need of the whole spiritual armor, that he may
be enabled to withstand the fierce assaults, and to quench the fiery darts of
the wicked: He must have his loins girt about with truth, that he be not
weakened, and shaken by the dissolute, and railing accusation that is brought
against him: He must have the breast plate of righteousness, to oppose against
their wickedness, and his feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, that he may not run with them in the crooked paths leading to
destruction: And the Sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, that he may
thereby disarme them of these instruments of cruelty. There was a flaming
sword, Genesis 3.24.
which turned every way, placed to keep Adam, from reentring into Paradise:
These flaming swords, these tongues set on fire from hell, keep many men from
walking in the ways of godliness, and from approaching unto the tree of life,
Christ Jesus: who wanting a constant and firm resolution, will choose to halt
between two opinions, Psalm. 107.27.
yea to reele to and fro, and stagger like the ship mentioned in the Psalm, in
unknown ways, rather than with Micaiah, 1. King. 22.24.
to be smitten and reviled for their sincere profession of the truth. Could
that blessed Martyr endure the picture of the devil which was put upon on his
head, John Hus in Fox.
and esteem it a crown of glory unto him? And shall not we undergo the
terms of disgrace, cast upon us by wicked men? which being rightly considered,
are no other than be used in holy scripture; So that their sin is the greater
by the profanation. And it may be our greatest sorrow, that we have not
attained to be such as they accuse us to be; Or as we our selves desire to be.
Now the success which they shall find by this their violent carriage, will be
no other than Asahel had, 2 Samuel 2.23.
who ran upon his own destruction. Mat 26.52.
All they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword: Psalm. 64.3.
They whet their tongue like a sword, but it shall enter into their own heart.
and 37.15.
Ier 9.3.
They bend their tongue like a bow for lies; and shoot their arrows, Psalm.
11.2.
even bitter words, at the upright in heart: and 64.3.7.
But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.
and 52.2.
Their tongue devises mischief like a sharp rasor, working deceitfully: But
in the end it will bring them to torment. and 79.12.
They speak evil of those things they know not, and persecute the faithful;
Nehem 4.4.
But God will render seven fold into their bosom, their reproach, and turn it
upon their own head: We may demand the cause of this their inquisition, Where
is thy God? He might have asked them one question, John 9.27.
Will ye also be his disciples? Had they intended to have taken his yoke upon
them, David would willingly have instructed them in the way, yea he would have
been their guide; Come and see Him, who has told me all things that I know,
and 4.29.
and knows all things that ever I did; is not this the only true God? But
they meant to honor him no otherwise than Herod thought to worship Christ,
Mat. 2.7.
when he enquired diligently after him: He hoped to have killed the Lord of
life, and they purpose to do no less, coming out with swords, Mat. 26.55.
as against a thief; though they aim at the members, yet they smite the head
it self in their persecution: Act. 9.4, 5.
What is done to one of those little ones, is done unto Christ; and what is
done to Christ, is done to one of them. A servant of God cannot hear His holy
name, which we ought not to use without great reverence, to be dishonored,
but his righteous soul must be vexed thereat. It was this which did strike so
deep into David, and vex him so sore: See the coherence which he makes in
the same verse; Psalm. 69.9.
For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee are fallen upon me. How free he was from anger and revenge in
his own particular case, may appear by his carriage when Saul had a quarrel
against him: For though Saul had so highly offended God by his folly, in
offering a burnt offering, for the which he was told that his kingdom should
not continue; God having sought a man after his own heart: And again he
rebelled by disobedience, in sparing Agag, and the best of the spoil; at which
time the Prophet threatened him, that his kingdom should be rent away from
him. And though David was anointed by Samuel, and might have set upon Saul,
when he cut the skirt of his robe privily; and another time might have
suffered Abishai to smite him, and make him sleep his last; yet he would not
upon these pretenses put forth his hand against him, but lamented at his death,
and calls to the daughters of Israel to weep over Saul. But here, when God was
contemned, he was pricked to the heart, and his marrow was turned into the
drought of Summer: He was upon the rack, and all his bones were broken, when
he heard their evil speeches, whereby they infected the air, and poisoned
their own souls. Now between David and most men living in these days, there
is as great a difference, as between the King upon the throne, and the meanest
subject grinding at the mill: He had a sovereign command over him self, and
was slow to anger, not sinning by wrath, yet most sensible o^e. malicious
words, tending to the dishonor of God: Whereas many that in Gods cause are
like dumb idols, which have ears and hear not; as if it did not concern
them, being never touched with inward compunction, when his name shall be
blasphemed; but will rather give some consent thereunto, as if they were well
pleased with such lewdness: And yet when their own reputation shall be
brought in question, they will whet their tongue, like a sword, in sharp
invectives; and will whet their swords also, that they may wash off the least
disgrace with the blood of other men: But if God does whet his glittering
sword, and his hand take hold on judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.41.
he will render vengeance to all those which are of that merciless disposition
that Cain was, who thought the life of his brother to be the most acceptable
sacrifice.

VERSE XI. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of
my countenance and my God.
Whereas David so often repeateth these words, we may observe the manifold
troubles which befall us in this life. Having mentioned his teates, and his
banishment in the beginning, at the fifth verse he rebukes his soul for
sadness; Having rehearsed his other afflictions, he now again chides himself
for this distrustful heaviness: As Peter, Mat. 14.30.
though he began to sink the first time he went to Christ upon the water, Yet
he was not thereby discouraged from casting himself into the sea again; John
21.7.
and then he passed safely to the shore where Christ was: So though the waves
and billows went over David, when he hoped to approach unto God by faith, yet
here again he calls upon his soul, and casting himself upon Gods mercy, he
arrives at the port of blessedness: He did not overcome these temptations and
trialls, at the first assault, nor yet was he wearied with the continuance of
them; But whenever he was molested with any evil, he labors to strengthen
his confidence in Gods love, that he may be restored to comfort. As Paul prayed
thrice that the messenger of Satan might depart from him: 2. Cor. 12.^.
So our Author, shutting up the next Psalm with the same conclusion, does the
third time seek to be freed from this thorn in the flesh, this heaviness that
was so offensive unto him.

By this we may learn that lesson, which we shall have cause to remember, and
occasion to practice, That through much tribulation we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven: Act. 14.22. 2. Cor. 7.5.
Without are fightings, within are fears. A wounded spirit, who can bear?
What sorrow so near, what trouble so heavy, as this, when the soul shall be
disquieted with doubt of Gods love or sense of his displeasure? And yet we
must not faint and forsake our assurance, but continue faithful unto the
death, that we may receive the crown of life: In afflictions we must not
think some new thing does come upon us, which has not been before: We will
not compare our sufferings and trials with those which David endured. We may
take this one Prophet for an example of suffering affliction; yet did he not
cast away his confidence, but hoped in God: therefore let us also hold fast the
profession of our faith. Iam 5.7.
Behold, the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and later rain: let us
also stablish our hearts, that we may be refreshed with Gods favor. As in
water, face answers to face, Pro. 27.19.
so if we look unto the Lord, Psalm. 42.5.
we shall praise him for the help of his countenance, who is the health of our
countenance, and our God. The consideration hereof may be of special use and
importance in all the casualties of this life, but chiefly at the time of
death, Job 18.14.
when we are brought to the king of terrors: when this earthly house is
dissolved, we shall be conducted to the kings palace; when these old garments
be laid aside, we shall be arraied in long robes; I shall yet praise God, yea I
shall for ever praise God, when I shall always appear in his presence, Who is
the health of my countenance, who raised me from sickness to a sound estate,
who gave me strength after infirmity, who filled me with plenty after
adversity, who revived me with comfort after sorrow, and who will bring me to
life after death; Being then especially the health of my countenance, when he
makes my face to shine as the sun, by beholding his glory, And does change
this vile mortal corruptible body into a glorious body. The lame man, Act. 3.4.
who was laid at the gate of the temple, looking upon Peter, received strength,
and entering into the temple praised God: Though now our souls be cast down,
yet if we trust in the Lord, all our infirmities shall be cured, and entering
into the holiest place we shall bless the name of the Lord for evermore: Then
be not discouraged with present afflictions, let thy hope be steadfast and sure:
Though in tempests sometimes they cut the anchors and leave them in the sea,
Act. 27.40.
that the men may be saved, yet if we let our hope depart from us we perish.
The time of our life is but as six days of labor and sorrow, and in this
space we have so many nights of quiet and comfort, yea we have an evening
before the morning, a time of strength before a time of trial; But in the end
there is the eternal Sabbath of blessedness, when we shall for ever magnify
the name of the Lord: Amos 8.5.
Though the carnal man does with the Sabbath gone, that he may set forth
wheat, and falsify the balances by deceit; yet let not believers make have
by impatience, but wait upon the Lord, knowing that by this difficult ascent
we come to sit upon the throne.

FINIS.

