A RELATION OF THE DEATH, OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LORD, Sig.r Troilo Sauelli, a
Baron of Rome; Who was there beheaded, in the Castle of Sant-Angelo, on the 18.
of April, 1592.

With a Preface, containing diverse particulers, which are wholly necessary to be
known, for the better understanding of the Relation it self.

Domine, quis similis tibi?

Psalm. 34. O Lord, who is like to thee?

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Relation following, has been translated into diverse languages; though
not at all into ours, nor yet so carefully, into others, out of the true
Original Italian, as I could have wished. The differences between the copies,
which walk up, and down the world, are not great; saving, that when there is
question of truth; and that, concerning a noble subject; and the same,
accompanied with variety of natural, and lively circumstance, I cannot find in
my heart, to let any difference go for small. I have therefore, at once, taken
both pains, and pleasure, to draw store of copyes into my hand, and it has
not been without success. For if I have not laid hold upon the very first
Original, which was written by the Relatour himself; I dare say, that I am
grown very near it, and that it is precisely true. And this Elogium I will be
bold to give to the Discourse, which we have in hand, that it has been read
in several countries with extreme auidity. Nay perhaps there has not issued,
in many of these last ages, any one historical Relation, of a particular
accident, the The relation following has been seldom read without tenderness.
consideration whereof, has more often been attended by tears, then this.

The The birth, and person, and parts of this Noble Man.
Person whom it concerns, was a Baron of Rome, Sig.r Troilo Sauelli; a
branch, which sprunge up, from a root of as noble blood, as a most certain
extractio^ from the ancient Romans, could tell how to make it. His person, and
the parts of his generous mind, are best described in the Relation it self,
which follows; so that, I will not here by putting you to pains, prevent
the pleasure which there you will have to overtake them. The cause for which he
suffered, is not specified there at all; because his ghostly Father was the
penner of this narration; and it became not him, who was the others Judge in
foro Conscientiae, to become his Accuser, in foro Curiae. For although his
crimes were extant then, and are so still upon Record; and that the penitent did
besides (for his own greater confusion, and the exaltation of the invincible
Patience, and Mercy of Almighty God) give his Ghostly Father express leave, to
declare his sins to the whole world; the Father yet, would by no means
accept of that liberty; but speaking only in general words, of sin at
large; he The inviolable seal of the Sacrament of Confession; and how tender a
good Ghostly Father, is, and ought to be.
burieth the particulers in profou^d silence, and under the seal of
Confession, for reverence of that holy Sacrament, which must never upon any
terms be defaced.

But I, who am free, will not consent to have my hands tied up; but do think
it fit to let you know, that although his years were few, his crimes were
great, and many; as does still appear upon the Record of his Process. And
between the sixteenth, and the eightenth year of his age (till the former of
which times, his vigilant, and holy Mother, was able to keep him in the
discipline of piety, and virtue) he sprouted out, into great exorbitances; and
in the Company, and at the head of the These are men who for murders, and
other extreme insolencyes use to be banished and proscribed. They were wont in
Italy, to go, in great troops up and down, and to infest the passages. Sixtus
Quintus, was one of the first, who broke their back.
Banditi, he committed both rapes and murders, with a most tempestuous, and
transported mind. Ominis The bane which is brought upon young noble men by ill
company.
inimica amicitia, seductio me^tis inuestigabilis. He did too early, cast
himself into the hands of flatterers, and wicked followers; and they made the
way of sin so smooth to him, as that he could not hold from sliding through
it. Nor was his tender youth so innocent, nor his education so excellent, but
that the moath, and canker of lewd company, did soon corrode it.

Yet even herein, was not his misery so great, as the It is proper to God
alone, to draw good out of evil.
mercy of God, upon this occasion, was infinite. His crims were not known, but
by such alone, as would not easily adventure to draw upon themselves, the
displeasure of so great a house as his, by detecting them. The manner only of
his life, in respect of excess, and riot, was such, in the exterior, as
wounded his noble, and tender Mother to the very soul. The passages, and
proceedinges whereof, are delivered in the Relation it self, with so great
tenderness, in the person of her son, as strikes the heart of him that reads
the words. I will not therefore touch that flower, for fear of strikng off the
dew, every dropp whereof is a pearl. One circumstance only which is not
mentioned there, I will here express; because it will not fail to serve,
toward the increase of compassion, in all their minds, who read this story.

You A circumsta^ce of great importance, toward the moving of compassion.
shall therefore understand, that when the Mother had used all other possible
endeauours, both divine and humane, for the reduction, and reformation of her
son, and all in vain (for ought that she was able to perceive) she caused
him, for some offenses (which yet, were far from being Capital) to be
committed to Castle (k) S. Angelo; This is the chief prison in Rome, as the
Tower may be in London.
in hope that such a disgrace, with the help of time, would make him return
into hmself. To this course she was the more encouraged, and in this hope the
more confirmed, because by this restraint, he would be cut off from that ill
company, which was the very pest, and poison of his soul. But see, and wonder
at Gods providence. He Any little entrance into public disgrace carries
danger with it,
was no sooner in prison, but the fire of eager opposition brake forth of their
hearts, whom, by his other more enormous insolencyes, he had offended; for till
then, it had been smoothered under the ashes of that respect, and reverence,
which they carried toward the Dignity, and Nobility of his house. But now
public Justice taking notice of his excesses; and Pope Clement the eight, in
the beginning of his Pontificate, being desirous to show a strong example, of
what impartial Justice, the world was to expect at his hands; (especially in
repressing, and extinguishing that aforesaid damned crew of Banditi, who were
so pernicious to the State of Italy, and of whom this young Lord was grown a
leader) did suffer the law to pass upon his person (for his state was not
confiscated, but went to his heirs, in blood). Being even yet therein, more
Just, then Clement; though perhaps he would have been more Clement in
pardoning, then Just in punishing; if he could, by way of anticipation, have
seen the beauty, and bravery of that noble spirit, which deserved to live as
long, as a world can do; as a pattern, of a mind most rarely compounded,
between perfect Christian piety, and undaunted incomparable magnanimity.

But whylest the This Lady dyed in the year 1611. and was buried on the 21. of
October in the Theatines Church at Sant Andrea della valle; where she erected
ten masses to be said every day, for ever. She was of the house of the Dukes of
Cesi; and sister to the Marquess of Riano; her name was la Signo a Flaminia.
Mother, and the Son, are both of them restinge now in peace, and glory, as
we may piously believe; I know not how, in this particular, to be silent,
concerning the powerful, and wise, and infinitely good The providence of God,
deserves to be deeply pondered, in this particular.
providence, of Almighty God, toward both these servants of his. For, by the
way of the The Cross is the high way to heaven.
Cross, he brought the son, in a few momentes of time, to have a soul in
state of great perfection; and he gave him, in the last hours of his life,
that most happy kind of Purgatory, wherein he might not only suffer, in
satisfaction of the divine Justice, but pass on by merittes, (all grounded
upon the mercy of Jesus Christ our No action of man is meritorious, but by the
merits and first mercy of Jesus Christ our Lord.
Lord (as all merits are) toward instant, and eternal felicity.

And this he did, by as contrary means, as in the Gospel he cured a certain
Blind man, by The omnipotency of God, is not tied to means, but works his
will, how he will.
casting dirt upon his eyes. For here be used, the most indulgent tender care
of the mother, who loved that Son, as her own soul; toward the bringing
that about, which was indeed, to make him happy in the end; but in the mean
time, was the occasion of his sudden, and reproachful death, whereby her
very heart was to be broken. Taking him so from her sight, that so she might
enjoy a glorious sight of him for ever; and depriving her of all humane
comforts (which (for as much as concerned her) were abridged, and locked up in
him alone) that so she might, with contempt of the world, send her whole heart
up to heaven, whither now her treasure was gone before; and so be rewarded, for
that tender and entire care, which she had taken, for his pious education.

It The blind and blockeheaded discourse of worldly men.
matters not much, what the blind, and dull world conceaues; which placing
faith in fancy; and religious reason in the treacherous sense of flesh and
blood; thinks all that to be misery, which carries the face of pain, or
shame, or any difficulty; and that true happiness consistes in rowing for a
while in some boat A fit emblem to show the vanity of worldly pleasure.
of music, down the tide; though it carry them soon after, where they are
either to be split upon rocks, or swallowed up by quick-sandes. Whereas God
knows (yea and men whohaue his grace, are not ignora^r thereof) that a course
of felicity, not interrupted, or checked by contrary winds, is a kind of
fortune (for as much as concerns the next life) which in this, deserves
rather pity, then envy; and that, ever fince the death of Jesus Christ our
Lord, the way of the Cross, is The cross of Christ our Lord, has made
misery, to become happy.
not only the more safe, but even the more honorable; and that the pleasures,
and pastimes of this life, ar but a kind of butterfly, for boys to play
withal; and that the greatest earthly felicity, that ever was enjoyed by man,
if it dyed not as soon as it was borne (which yet is the ornary case of
Worldly pleasure speaks fair, but it lies.
worldly pleasure) at least, if it lived til it could learn to speak, it told
as many lies, as it uttered words; and charmed them first, whom quickly after,
it might lead toward a precipice.

How desolate, would a worldling think, that the case of Signor Troylo Sauelli
was, in that night when he received the news of his so instantely approaching,
co^tumelious death? And of that dear Mother of his, when she heard the blow
was given, which parted that head from those shoulders? And Affliction, made
the Mother, and the Son, seem miserable; and be happy.
yet with all, is it both well known, that the Mothers loss of such a son,
did cast her much more close, upon an union and sole dependence for all her
comfort, upon Almighty God; (wherein the happiness, which we can have in this
life consists) and it is morally certain, that the abundant grace of
Contrition, and Charity, which God infused into the heart of the Son, even by
the occasion of his very sins (so vastly and infinitely good is God) did put
him instantly, after his death, into a state so blessed, as that the Pope
himself, under whom he died, and those Princes amongst whom he lived, and all
the Monarchs of the whole world, may be accounted to have bin miserable,
according to their present state, in respect of him. Our dear Lord Jesus, be
eternally thanked (and not only by us, who know not how to do it well, but by
all his holy Angels, and Saints) for his own infinite goodness; since he
vouchsafes to He could easily honor himself otherwise, without any benefit to
us, if he were so pleased.
place the point of his Honor, in showing mercyes, and working wonders upon
man, so instantly, so sweetly, so powerfully, and so like a God. And for
having suffered, in his own sacred soul, and body, such desolations, and
torments, as obtained, at the hands of the eternal Father, not only the
remission of our sins, (if we will serve our selves of the Sacraments, and
other remedies which he has left in the bosom of his holy Catholic Church)
but the adorninge also of our souls, with the inherent gifts, and graces of
the holy Ghost. And yet further, for that he has known, how to make our very
sins, and greiuous crimes themselves, the means, some times, whereby we
obtain greater graces, then This indeed is a mercy, which may well become the
greatness of our God.
we should have done, if we had not committed those very sins. Let the whole
world therefore adore thee, O Lord, and sing praises to thee; and let all the
powers of all souls cry out, and say with that holy King, and Prophet David, O
Lord who is like to thee?

A great example, and proof of this power of God, and of the divinity of
Christ our Lord, and the unspeakable bounty of the Holy Ghost was the so speedy
illuminating, and inflaming the soul of this Baron. Who, as soon as he
received the notice of his death, did, in his proportion, follow the example of
the Blessed Apostle. For as he, to Christ our Lord, appearing said, O Lord,
what will thou have me do; so did this noble Caualliere of Christ, when the
Priest, and Lieutenant of God spoke to him, give himself away by these words,
as the Relation shows; Do The instant quiet resignatio^ of this Baron to the
good will of God.
you, in the place of God command me, I give my self, as bound into your
hands; and further it affirms, that he suffered himself to be managed, as if
he had been made, of the softest wax.

It is not impossible for a man to meet with some Roaring Boy, who may think
that the Baron was to submisse. But it is one thing to be a Roarer of the
damned Crew, and another to be an humble member of the body of Christ; who
assured us, by his own sacred mouth, That Humility is the true badge, of true
Christianity.
unless we became as children, we should never enter into the kingdom of
heaven. The world was lost by the pride, and presumption of the first Adam; and
repaired by the humility of the second. And The incomparable humility of Jesus
Christ our Lord.
he that considers well, how great that Humility was; and whose it was; and
for whose sake, and at the will of whom, he exercised the fame; had need of a
great proportion of stupidity, to make him think, that, since God himself
vouchsafed to be at the command of those base and impure wretches, who took of
his clothes, and required him to submit himself to those scourges, those
thorns, those nails, those blasphemies, for our sakes, and sins; yet, on
the other side, this An ugly and abominable presumption.
man, this proud rebellious worm, this crumme of dust, this drop of filth;
might keep, forsooth, a kind of State, and should not rather submit himself
(in imitation of the humility of Christ our Lord) not only to Superiors, but
to equals, and even inferiors also, and in fine to all This is the advice of
S. Peter; Subdits estote omni creaturae.
the world when just occasion should be offered.

The soul of this noble Man, was so well softened, and sweetened, by the unction
of the Holy Ghost; as that neither the greatness of his Nobility, nor the ardour
of his youth, nor the natural boiling courage of his heart, nor the fresh
memory of his prosperity, nor the unexpected arriual of his mifery, could make
A heart which is truly touched by Gods holy spirit, will overcome strange
difficultyes.
him once repine, or keep him from instantly abasing himself. But falling
deeply upon the consideration of his sins; and weighing duly how full of
demerit he was, in the sight of God; and knowing exactly, that nothing is so
truly ignoble, as a soul which has forfeited his grace; and that rich, or
poor, is little to the purpose; but wherein eternal, true Nobility does consist.
that the thing which imports, is to be, or not to be, the servant, or son of
God; it is not strange, to see him cast himself at the feet of common
soldiars; and to stretch out his hands, with such meeknes, at the will of the
meanest laylours, for the love of our Lord, to signify thereby the detestation
wherein he had himself, for having so presumptuously offended, that Eternal
Majesty, which by all the Angels is adored.

From The reasons why he was so frequent in confessing his sins.
hence also did it proceed, that he so frequently confessed himself, in that
last night of his life; and could never think that he had sufficiently
deplored his errors, and detested the discorrespondence, and ingratitude,
wherewith he had answered, the unspeakable benefits, of Almighty God. Wherein
if any man should think, that he did use excess; it willbe much more lawful
for me to doubt, that himself, either has a mean conceit of the Infinite
Majesty which is offended; or an ignorant apprehension, of the deformity of al
sin which is committed; or a proud, and paltry mistaking, of the Nothing
which man was, till he was created; and the worse then Nothing, which afterward
he grew, by sinning. For If you weigh these things well, you will change your
wondering at him, into wondering at your self.
he that po^ders these particulers, as he ought; and knows, that the offenses
into which he falls are innumerable; and that the least of them, which is
committed against an infinite Majesty, in respect of the object, is also
infinite; and that, as no one good deed shall be unrewarded, by the rich Mercy of
God, in Christ our Lord; so no one tra^sgression shall be left unpunished, by
his exquisite Justice; will easily believe, that in the space of a night, it is
hard for one to be too curious, and too careful, in setting straight the
account of his whole life, under the piercing eye of Almighty God. But this
Baron, did, even by moments, in that short time which was left, by the goodness
of God, acquire new Great light of God is wont to breed great love of him, and
great sorrow, for having so shamefully offended him.
light, and gain new love of our Lord, and new contempt, and detestation of
himself; and in the strength thereof, he found some actions to confess, which
he had not conceived to be sins before; and others which he had confessed, he
had confessed with a sorrow, far inferior, to that which then he felt.

For abstracting from the consideration which he had of his sins, against God
(in respect whereof, no soul is sufficiently able to quake, and tremble under
him) I trust there is not a readers eye in the world so dim, as not to
discern his undaunted heart. And The undaunted courage of this Baron.
that, no thought of death, had any power, to take the least clarity from his
understanding; the least presence from his memory; the least agility from his
wit; the least order from his speech; or so much as the least puntillio, from
the civil respects and complementes, which are used amongst persons of his
Nation, and Condition. Nor yet, on the other side, shall any man have reason to
think, that the punctuality, which (throughout the process of this Relation)
he shall find to have been observed by the Baron, in this last This courtesy
and complement was not affected, but free and natural.
kind of courtesy, did proceed from the least affectation thereof. Perhaps, if
we look near home, we may find some example to have been given of this, not
long ago; but in the present case, no suspicion of it, can be entertained;
both for many other reasons, which will occur to him that reads the
Relation; and because (as I said before) these exact terms of Honor, and
other respects to the company, which then is present, are is it were natural
to men of his country, and quality; and there would cost them more pains, to
omit them (unless their minds were put into disorder, by some passion) then
it would cost others, to observe them, where they were not so natural, as
being learnt by industry, and art. But yet, that in so sad a case, this man,
would, for good manners, forbear to set up his legs; or would not so much, as
stretch himself in the sight of others, though his body did much incline him
to it (according to that mention which the Relation makes thereof) may well go
for a great argument in him, of ciuility, of modesty, and of magnanimity.

And this is that which I thought fit to represent to you, by way of Preface,
to this Story. You will find the traces and footsteps of putting men to death,
and of the proceedinge which is held with The several ma^ners, of treating
delinque^ts in soueral cou^tryes.
delinquents, to be very different, from that of our Country, both concerning
the body, and the soul. I take not upon me, to say which are better, and which
are worse. With us, the Process of criminal persons, is ever made, in the
face of the world; but they are not suffered to have any advocates who may
defend their causes. In most other Countries, the delinque^ts are permitted to
have Advocates, but the Process is made, though in public Court, yet only in
presence of the Judges and some few Advocates, and Officers. With us, the
delinque^ts are suffered to live some days after their comdemnation; which
certainly is meant in compassion to them; in other parts, after they are
judged to dye, and that so it is declared, they think they do men a greater
courtesy, in putting them quickly out of pain. With us, there is no difference
in the manner of death, between a Clown, and the best Gentleman of the
Kingdom, under the degree of a Baron, unless it be, in some very rare case,
by most particular favor of his Majesty; but in all other places, that I have
seen, all Gentlemen are beheaded, to distinguish them, from such as are
ignoble. With us, no indignity is ever done to a Noble man of such as Barons
are, and al above them.
Title, by binding of his hands, or arms, or the like; and that custom I
commend, as full of Honor; but in many other places, they bear no such
respects; in regard of the experience which they have found, and I fear, which
still they are in, of insolences.

But for as much, as concerns the comfort of criminalls, in the preparation of
their souls, toward the death of their bodies, I cannot but note it, as a
point of charity, and piety most It is the greatest charity, to help me^ to dye
well.
remarkable, that in very many of the good towns of Italy and Spain, there
are certain Companies, or Confraternities, of Gentlemen, well borne and bred;
who put this obligation of duty upon themselves, to visit the prisons,
especially in the night precedent to any execution. And, together with
Religious persons, and Ghostly Fathers, they watch, and pray, and exhort, and
comfort the poorest criminalls of the Country, with the same industry, and
charity, which is here, affoarded to this Noble man. And they accompany them
all, to their death; and sometimes, they discharge their dying hearts of care;
either by undertaking to pay some of their debtes, or by assisting the poor
wife, and children, which are left behind; or by obliging themselves, to get S.
Moneys upon the point of her death, desired S. Augustine her Son, that he
would pray for her soul at the altar, when she should be dead: and so he did.
Vide August. Confess. l. 9. cap. 11^. and 13.
Masses celebrated for their souls. And in conformity of these good
endeauours, we see men dye in those parts, with another manner of disposition
toward God, then usually they have with us. Where it is a lamentable thing,
to see many of so profane stupidity, that after lives most lewdly lead, they go
either drunk, or dancing to the gallows. As if, they were but to dye in a
play; or as if, after this life, there were no immortality of the soul; or
else, at least, no account to be rendered, I say not, of idle words (which yet
must be done) but of most wicked deeds, whereof many of them are guilty.

The example which here we have in hand, will read, to all the Readers of it
in general, a good lesson of humility, patience, courtesy, magnanimity,
obedience, and charity. And All kind of people may profit, by the good lessons
which are here delivered.
it may serve for an instruction, not only to such as dye, by the hand of human
Justice; but to al them also, who are to dye by the hand of God, as we al
shall be sure enough to do. That so, we may the better take heed of sin, which
is to be so bitterly bewailed; and the more deeply we be fallen into it, the
more instantly we must implore the mercy, and goodness of Almighty God; and
dispose our selves to the doing of penance; that so, by his favor, we may
secure our souls, from the danger of being plunged, into that lake of eternal
pain. This lesson I say, may reach to al Readers in general. But particular
Readers may (...)

friend, The early, and humble resignation of this Noble man.
says he, behold, I am here, ready to obey thy will, and the will of all the
world, since the will of God is such. Having manicled him, they By this time
others were come in.
lead him toward the Chapel; when, at the issue out of his chamber, he
blessed He armed himself with the sign of the holy Cross Ad omnem actum, ad
omnem ntcessum manus ping at Crucem: At every action, and in every motion let
thy hand make the sign of the Cross, D. Hier. epist. ad Eustoch, 22. cap. 16.
himself, the best he could with the sign of the holy Cross, with both his
hands; and casting up his eyes to heaven, he profoundly sighed. For, seeing
perhaps, that there was more people, then might beneedful for the changing of
his lodging, This, says he, is another manner of business, then to change me
only, from one place to another; but by the grace of God, I am ready for all.

Thus, filently going down to the Chapel, he was met by the There are
Congregations of Gentlemen in Rome (as there are also in other great Cittyes of
Italy and Spain) who employ themselves for the helping of condemned men, to
dye, wol. The Governor and Broueditore are chief officers of these
Congregations.
Governor, and the Proueditore, and by three others of them, who are called
Confortatori della misericordia, in a fashion, very suitable to the occasion.
Then one of them said to him in this manner: My Lord, the hour which God has
prefixed for you, is even run out; render your self into his merciful hands.
And he, without being troubled, otherwise, then by fetching a sighe (which yet
was both soft, and short) did answer thus; Let God be blessed; behold I render
my self to him; and dispose you of me And so those good and charitable
Brothers of that Congregation, with some Fathers of the Society of Jesus,
casting themselves round about him; and endeavoring to sweeten the bitterness
of that news, by discreet and decent means, did comfort him the best they
could. He yielded to all, and did even prevent them; and then, knocking his
breast, and bowing down his head, and kissing the Crucifixe, he demanded pardon,
and like gentle wax, did suffer himself to be managed by them all.

One of those Confortatori, did, before all other things, put him in mind of
making his Confession. Upon the very first naming whereof (recollecting
himself) he said, And The first thing he did, was to confess himself.
where is the Confessor? And they showing him a Priest of their Company, with
his Albe These are some of the sacerdotall vestmentes which are used in the
celebrating of Mass.
upon his back, and his Stole about his neck (that afterward he might say
Mass, in the proper time) the first thing he did, was to be confessed; and we
all went out, to leave the place free to them.

He being confessed, and we returned, we began to dispose him, toward a good
end, by diverse spiritual exercises, fit for that purpose. And after many had
spoken, I also began thus to say; Signor Troilo, This is that passage, which
whosoever does once make well, does acquire eternal felicity; and if once it
be ill made, it draws after it, an everlasting misery. It now imports your
Lordship to make it well, that you may escape that eternity of torment. This
passage is narrow, uneven, hard, and full of stones, and thorns; all the world
does see it, and your Lordship finds it by experience; but Our Lord Jesus, does
even, the uneven way of death.
behold sweet Jesus, who, by his goodness, will even it all. Cast your self, my
Lord, upon him; and then you will be able to say with courage, Omnia I can do
al things in him that co^forts me.
possum, in eo qui me confortat.

He answered thus, with a cheerful, and even smiling countenance, Omnia
possum in eo qui me comfortat. By the mercy of my dear Jesus, I know the
necessity of making this passage well; I acknowledge his providence over me,
and to his providence I add, that, of his jove. Ror as much as with
extraordinary love it is, that he has brought me hither. I see it, I confess
it. And how often, dear Father, have I been, as I may say, in the very jaws
of death; which if at that time it had seized upon me, infallibly this soul,
and body of mine had perished. Behold He acknow ledgeth, and accepts of Gods
providence, with great alacrity.
the cunning of my Christ; to save me, he has made choice of this way. And
then bowing, and baring his head, and with great life of spirit, raising
himself from his chair, he further added; I accept of this election, which God
has made; and then casting himself upon his knees, before the Altar, Nay I
thank thee (says he) O my good Father, for thy so faithful, and loving care
of me; who have not only been a wandering, but a contumacious Son of thine.
To thee it does belong, to smooth and even the ruggednes of this way; since
thou have been pleased to address me by it. And so, bowing his face even
almost down to the ground, he remained a while, in men^all Prayer.

Being therefore wished to sit down, he was scarce settled in that posture, when
turning toward me, he said thus, in mine ear: You, whom through my good
fortune, I have here, to help me, in this so weighty and high affayre, in the
place of God do you command me. I He gives himself away to his Ghostly
Father.
give my self, as bound into your hands. The Prince has disposed of my body;
do you as much with my soul. I said therefore to him: I first desire, my Lord,
that you make the protestation This is a declaration of his faith with an
entiere submission to the good will of God.
which is wont to be beliuered by such as are going to God. Which being
publicly pronounced by him, with great sense and spirit, (he taking up and
repeating my words) I advised him further thus: You shall now make all those
acts of Contrition, which I shall call to your mind; having the eyes thereof,
first bent upon God, being offended, as a Creator, as a Preserver, as a
Iustifier, and as a Glorifier. Next, upon your self, who have offended him;
being his creature, his household servant, his Christian slave; and one so
deeply obliged, by his benefits. Thirdly, upon the offenses themselves which
you have committed; and be sorry at your heart, for having committed them; and
For who can ever call to mind all his particular sins.
if not in particular for them all, at least for the He had already confessed
his sin; and now he is but exhorted to renew his sorrow for them:
most greiuous of them, which shall represent themselves to your memory.
Fourthly, upon the good which you have omitted; and the time which you have
lost; and the years that you have misspent. Fifthly, upon the scandal which you
have given. And if any thing more be to be done; if We cannot be saved unless
first we make restitution, as well of fame, as of goods if it lie in our power.
to make restitution, either of fame, or goods; if to pardon others, or to ask
pardon your self; restore, and pardon, and ask pardon. If to perform any
vows, or fulfill any promises, perform, and fulfill them. Or finally, if you
leave any debts, or if you will make any signification of your repentance, and
pious end, you are now to put your hand to work.

To these things he offered himself most readily; and did execute them all,
with so great devotion, that every one now began, to change his style, in
speaking to him. And finding, that whereas before, they thought they should
have to do but with a young man, or rather but with a youth, and weakeling, He
infinitely overcame their expectation.
they were now to treat, with a manly, generous, and ripe Christian (far
superior to that, which might peradventure have been expected of him) one of
the Confortatori, began with great discretion, to discourse upon the horror
of Death, which our most sweet Christ Jesus, did by his agony dispossess of
bitterness. Confide, says he, and cast your thoughts upon him, and say, Pone
Place me, O Lord, near to thee, and let the hand of any other fight against me.
me Domine iuxta te, and cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me. And if now you find
any bitter taste in death in this short night, as without fail you will, say,
Pater O my Father, not as I will, but as thou will thy will be done.
mi, non sicut ego; volo, sed sicut tu, fiat voluntas tua.

The contrite Lord, made answer thus, The wickedness of my life does fright,
me, more, then the bitterness of my death O how wrechedly have I spent these
eighteen years? How ill have I understood my Savior? How ungrateful have I
been for his noble favors? How rebelliously have I lived against his laws?
And now have I run like a wild, unbridled horse, in these later years of mine;
without any manner of restraint, wheresoever the present occasions, or
conuersations, or The sinner; is only to blame himself for having sinned.
rather (for I have said ill) wheresoever mine own passions, and blind
affections, had a mind to plunge me? It is I, and none but I, who did
precipitate me; and yet you bid me fix my thoughts, and hopes upon God; and
say, Pone me Domine iuxtate, and cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me, fiat voluntas
tua.

Upon this, another of the Confortatori, did thus proceed. It is an act of
magnanimity, not to fear the angry face of death; and of humility, to
acknowledge our offenses; but of confidence, to hope for pardon, as your
Lordship does; who well may say, Propter nome tuum Domine, propitiaberis
peccato meo, muitum est enim. For thy names sake O Lord thou shall forgive my
sin, for it is great. O how great, said Signor Troilo? Even as great, after a
manner, as is the mercy of God, which is immense.

The Proueditere then said; Your Lordship, may, if you so be pleased, make your
last Will, and Testament; to the end that no other thought may solicit you,
but of your soul alon.

Hereupon the Baron, without the least delay, by way of answer, did bid the^
write. And having taken out of his pocket, a little note, which he carried
about him, he did suddenly dictate his Testament; wherein he delivered some
particulers, which, in my opinion, are very considerable. First, The
considerations which may be made, upon the manner of penning his will.
of tender Devotion; for he recommended his soul to God, by most dear, and
religious words. Secondly, of Ripenes, which was more then of a young man;
because, in a most particular manner, he had remembrance of all his servants.
Thirdly, of a most lively Contrition; because, with a most profound, internal
affection of mind, he demanded pardon of many, even by name. Fourthly, of
great Magnanimity; because he coniured the Lady his Mother, that she would
pardon all his adversaries, as he himself did pardon them a thousand times
over. Beseeching what a true, and noble Christian heart was this?
her, by a long, and christian circuit of words, that she would never resent
his death; but he laid the fault upon himself, in all things. Fifthly, of
Religious Piety; leaving large alms to many Churches, and other holy places;
accommodating many poor This is a devotion, and charity, much used in Italy.
Virgins, with dowryes, at the particular discretion, and to be performed by
the care of his heirs; that God might the rather have mercy on him. Sixthly, of
entiere Justice; because he took care, that even more then was due by him,
should be restored. Seauenthly, of noble Gratitude; because he rewarded,
whosoever had done him any scruice in prison. Eighthly, of affectuous Reverence;
because he did in a most sweet, and dear manner, ask pardon; of the Lady his
Mother, and of the rest of his kindred, besides the expressing of other
complements.

Having ended his last Will, Well Syrs (says he) behold we have this residue
of time, now wholly free, for the care of our soul. And turning toward me, he
said, It He speaks of his soul, for as much as concerned the guiding of it,
under God.
is in your hand, and therefore dispose of it; for this only is now, in my
power to give you. I then, by way of answer said, Give your self, my Lord, to
JESUS. I do so, said he; and he said it instantly. And I again, Give your
self wholly to him. He said, I do. Consecrate yourselfe; he still said, I do.
Make your self, said I, entierely his. But how (says he) O Father, shall I
make my self entierely his, if I be unworthy, and if perhaps, I be an enemy As
al grievous sinners are, if they do not thoroughly repent, which no man can be
sure that he has sufficiently done, though he may have great hope thereof.
of his. But in the mean time, whilst the Will was in writing, he that wrote
it, put us in mind, that it was to be publicly read; that so it might be shut
up, with a due A restament, is not valide there, if it have not seven
witnesses at the least.
number of witnesses. And whylest this was in doing, that is, whylest the
Notary was reading of it; three things of some consideration did occur. The
first, that when he read how he recommended his soul to God, My body (says
he, (drawing near me, according to his custom) I dispose not of; for now, it
is no longer mine. It once was mine, and I would it had not been so; but He
acknowledges the providence, and justice of God, in all things
it is more the^ reason, that I having had so great care of it, in my life
time, for my punishment, should not be suffered, to have any power over it, now
in my death. Let them therefore do with it what they will; for I sacrifice it
to God whatsoever it, be. Father, will not such an oblation as this, do me
good? It will, said I; without doubt it will; and what For he that gives his
body, does show in good earnest, that he has already given his soul.
more acceptable oblation, can be made to our Lord, then that of the body? The
second, That when the Legacies were read; it being observed, by the manner of
expressing one of them, that he delivered himself as faulty, in a certain
thing, wherein indeed he was not so; and therefore the Will was to be
redressed, as I desired, which served not only, (as before) for securing of his
conscience, but for the saving also of his honor. Upon this, putting off his
Montiera, or capp, O Father, says he (and he did it half smiling) are you now
taking care of my reputation, and of the puntillios of Honor, and of that
smoke or vanity of the world? Let my soul be saved, and let all the vain
Honor perish, which I either had, or might have had. Do you not remember that
which even This is not mentioned here before; but he said also many other
things which are not mentioned in this short Relation.
now you said, Mihi mundus: The world is crucified to me, and I to it.
crucifixus est, and ego mundo. In a word, let not the soul be touched, but
let my Honor be blasted, according to that accoumpt, which the blind world is
wont to make of Honor; that it may serve as a part of the punishment, which
is due to me. The third, that at the same instant, his hat was brought him; and
one of his people, being desirous to take his Montiera from off his head, what
are you doing says he? They answered, they would give him his hat. But he bad
them let it alone, saying, That it imported not; and he added, with a soft
voice* Look here a while; they would feign honor this head of mine, which I
am to loose, within few hours, for my sins.

The Will being then read, and shut; he throwing himself, as it were upon me,
with a most modest kind of sweetness, said, Father I am already reconciled; but
I would feign make a general Confession of my whole life, to your Reverence.
And although, since I came into prison, I did the same, in effect, at the
instance of my Lady, my Mother; yet know, that I had then no light, or feeling
of my sins, in respect of that, which now I discover in my heart. For, One
thing it is, dear Father, for a man to confess himself, when he is in the
sight of death; and another, to do it not thinking of death; or at least, but
considering it, as a far off. And so, calling for a There are every where to be
had little books, of address, whereby men are taught how to confess their sins
exactly.
little book, which he had above in the prison (showing a man the way, how to
confess his sins, exactly well (which his good MOTHER had ^rought to him
some days before) he began his confes^^on. Wherein, my Lord God ^oth know,
that, as it is ^awfull for me, by that most ^mple authority, which himself gave
me, to declare as much thereof, as I should think fit; so if I were able to
express it, I say not, that Rome would be astonished at it, but all Italy
would be so. For if I speak of the exact manner that he held; for as much as
concerned the particular descending even to idle words, an^ any other
Confession is no such cursory or superficial thing, as they which know it not,
conceive, and say.
such little thing, me thought I wa^ hearing some well exercise^ Religious man.
In the explicating of circumstances^ and the unfolding of intricate and
entangled cases, i^ was, as if he had bin some profound Divine. In relating the
determinate number, and the various kinds of his sins; he made proof of one,
who had a most fresh, and happy memory.

This rare Gentleman pawsing now and then, between the Confession of his
sins; and suffering certain tears to fall quietly upon my knees, he would
be wiping them away; and that being done, he would often use to say with
sighs; O Father, how He had great reason to say so.
good has our Lord been to me? Let him now be blessed, as often, and yet more
often, then I have offended him, in my former life. Why lest he was accusing
himself of his faults, he would express the^, in certain few, but they, all
lively, and most pious words; and in some particular cases so dearly tender;
that, in his countenance, one might see evident signs, of how his very heart,
was even rent, within. So that between He pawsed sometimes between both to
resthimselfe, and to recall his sins, more freshly to his memory: for though it
were interrupted, it was al but one Confession, till the Absolution were given.
the times of his confession, the Confortatori, (doubting least perhaps he
might grow to faint) would be asking him if he needed not somewhat to restore,
and comfort himself. To which he answered (speaking privately, and more then
once to me) This An admirable Contrition.
only comfort, or restoratiue I would desire; That my very heart might burst for
grief; and satisfaction might so be To the justice of God; his sorrow being
dignified by the death and passion, of Jesus Christ, our Lord.
given, for my sins, if perhaps even that, would serve the turn.

But for as much as, to my thincking, he did melt as it were by so enlardging
himself in his Confession, I had an eye upon him, and I ventured to say thus
unto him. My dear Signor Troilo, be not so excessiuely curious, and
particular, in accusing your self; especially of those your former sins,
which lie not now upon your soul. O See how truly this heart was touched with
sorrow for his sins; and the knowledge of himself.
Father (said he) I have wasted my whole life, in offending God; and will you
have me, or shall I content my self, in one single hour, to demand pardon of
so many offenses? So long in sinning, and so short in confessing my sins?
That I am trouble some to you, my dear Father, I well discover; but what can I
do withal, if I be forced to it? And here again, he began to make for
himself, a very bath of tears. And interpretinge what I had said, after his
own conceit, he added, with tears redoubled, And this also do my sins
deserve, by way of punishment, that having cast so much, and so much time away,
in prejudice of my salvation, I should now want time, wherein I might even
confess my sins* Pardon me, dear Father, and endure this trouble for the
love of God; for you shall To do a good work by the grace, and for the love of
God, is meritorious; for so Christ our Lord has made it.
merit, in his sight, by helping this poor soul of mine, toward salvation;
and I will remain with obligation to you, when I shall go by the mercy of God
and your good means, into the place of rest. And finding that still he grew in
tears, I confess my weakness, for I was not able to contain my self, from
expressing also tenderness, by tears.

As soon as he perceived this, he said; Father, your Reverence weeps, and yet
you weep not for your self, but for me; and yet you will not have me weep,
for my self. But then, both of us being silent for a time, he after, began
again to confess, with those accustomed short words, but full of substance,
and propriety; making me write down al those things, which he confided to me,
for the dischardge of his conscience. Whilst I was writing, he would needs
for his contentment hold the Standish, in his own hands; and read those lines,
when I had done; and kiss them, and then bath them in tears.

But of nothing did he accuse himself so much, as of all that, which had any
relation to the Lady, his Mother. Nor am I able by any means to express, with
what abundance of tears, he accompanied those accusations of himself. For,
beginning even from his very Infancy, Father (says he) I A lardge expression
of the unspeakable grief he had, for his disobedience and in gratitude to the
Lady his mother.
have committed many offenses against God; yet at this time, me thinks, I am
not so much afflicted for any thing, as for not having known, how to serve my
self, of that tender love, and prudence, and patience, which my Lady my
Mother, expressed, in the education of me. For even when I was yet a child, she
gave me in charge, to certain learned and religious Preceptours; who till I
arrived to have sixteen years of age, did with great fidelity, and
sufficiency, teach me, not only the litterature of Humanity, but Philosophy
also. And so did they further show, how I was to address my self toward
piety, by their good example, and advice. Nor yet content with this; how
sollicitous was she also, to procure by many other means, that I might
proceed, both in Learning, and Virtue? For See here the Image, of a holy and
tender-harted mother.
concerning that of Learning, she gave me store of books, of time, of
opportunity, and a thousand tender favors she did me, which were convenient for
those years of mine. And for the inducing me to Virtue, she addressed me to
choice of good Conuersations, spiritual Discourses, excellent Sermons, and
Persons, who might from time to time give me counsel. Commanding me, and
causing me to be lead to Confession; not only upon all the principal Feasts
of the year, but once moreover every month.

And, till this very time, when I am speaking to your Reverence, you may, if
you will take the pains, find among my papers, most evident testimonies of
what now I am saying; and especially Note the diligences which this holy mother
did use, for the pious education of her son.
a short manner of Instruction, how to spend the whole day, well. The things
besides whereof she did admonish me, were in a manner, infinite. When I was
yet a little one, she kept me in bridle, by threats, yea and by strokes
sometimes; and when I was grown elder, she endeavored to do it, by the fair
means, of requests, and promises; and oftentimes, with so many tears, as that
now, they are as many lances to pass through my heart. For this, did she
procure that Blessed Philippo Nerio, was his Godfather, at Confirmation. The
Chiesa Noua was a new Church, wherein God was served by him and his. I do not
ordinarily translate these names, out of Italian, because they are proper,
either to persons, or places.
blessed man Philippo, of the Chiesa noua to assiste, and hold me, when I was
confirmed; and that afward I should make particular friendship with him.

She kept me far off from looking upon ill examples; and held me near her
self, after the manner, as I may say, of a Religious life; exhorting me often,
day and night, that I would live Nobly, True Christianity, is true Nobility.
and like a Christian. Nor did that blessed mouth of hers, ever cease to say,
Troilo, my Son, fear God, and love God. For this did she take upon her, the
government of all my Castella in Italian, does signify both the mansion house,
and the Town, or vilage belonging to it.
Castles; and the care of all my affairs; living in a continual state, of
between hope, and fear, of the proof that I would made. Nor was there a
Religious House, or Monastery, to the prayers whereof, she reco^mended me not
Nor came there any Religious persons to her, nor did she meet with any abroad,
to whom, all forgettefull of her self, she would not say, Pray Some body
prayed so well for him, as to make him a Saint.
for my Son.

And I, ungrateful to her so great labors, when I grew to have sixteen
years of age, did render her, so ill payment, for such a huge sum of love;
as that I even parted house with her; and did outrage her, both by words, and
deeds; in such sort, as that the uttermost of all punishment, seems a hundred
times less to me, then my demerit. And when, dear Father, I think upon the
tears with she was ever sheading for me, both by day, and in those nights, so
sadly spent; and on the agonyes which she suffered upon my occasion, I find
contentment, in that I am to dye; whereby, me thinckes, I grow, in part, to
ouershaddowe, so many of my lewd behauiours.

Neither The invincible love of this Mother, to her Son.
yet, after I had separated my self from her, did she give over to solicit
me with notes, and letters, and messages, and a thousand other inventions, that
I would be induced to retire my self from vicious conuersations; and she would
pray me, and importune me, and conjure me, that I would take to good. And well
I know, that no kind of devotion was omitted by her, for my reformation, both
by visiting as many Churches, and Religious persons, as she knew in Rome.

And in fine, she came often to me, both by day and night, whilst I was
wandering up and down in such company; and It seems to have been a kind of
strife and war, between how kind, a Mother could tell how to be, and how unkind
a son.
when she found me out, she would cast her self, even at my feet, that so I
might once be drawn to open mine eyes, and would consider the precipice that I
was approaching to; and the ruins, besides the shame, that would ineuitably
come upon me; and that I would return to Christ; and that once, I would truly
weigh (for these were her very words) whose Son I was; and that I would
consider, what thing that was, which ever had been wanting to me, that so, in
that desperate fashion, I should abandone all care of my Estate, of my Life,
and of my Honor. And usually she acco^panyed these admonitions, and requests
of hers, with most tender tears.

Sometimes again, she would turn aside, and casting up he^ eyes to God, she
would besee^^ him, either to convert me, o^ else Her prayer was hear^ in a
better, though in another manner, then she most desired.
to take me to himself. And this I can say with all truth, that even from the
beginning, to this very hour, wherein now I live, she has never ceased to
procure my salvation. For even from the first time, that she She was in Rome at
his commitment, but when she saw how the world would go with him, she retired
from thence, with her load of sorrow.
came to see me here in prison, she exhorted me to Confession, and ever since,
she has come, as thick as hail upon me, sometimes with Religious men, and
sometimes with pious Books. So long, that now at last, I am by the favor of
God, returned a little into my self. And besides the cutting off, of all
occasions of doing il, she gave me many great opportunityes of good; besides
the exhortations, which she her self made to me, in most fervent manner, that
I would restore my self, to the service of God.

Nor could ever any Son desire any favor, or contentment of a Mother, which
mine, did not, of her self, impart to me. And I, on the other side, have
served, but to make her life most unfortunate, by this period of mine. I
beseech our Lord forgive me, and to receive the future affliction of her heart,
in present discount of my offenses.

Then toward the end of his Confession; I desire (said he) a favor of you
now, dear Father, which you must not deny me. It is, that I may have liberty
to lament my sins with tears; and that, by them, I may give testimony to the
Divine Majesty, of the That so the penitent himself by finding it, might have
increase of comfort.
grief, wherewith my heart aboundes within. Weep out, said I, since our Lord
does give you such a desire of weeping.

I had scarce brought forth this last word, when already, there began to
fall, a most abundant shower of tears from his eyes; in such sort, An
admirable and almost miraculous Contrition.
as that he bathed a good part of one of my arms; and my sleeue was as wett
through, as if it had rayned from above. Which accident I observing, after some
half quarter of an hour; and doubting, least his heart might so discharg it
self by his eyes, rather for the apprehension which he might have of death,
then otherwise; I desired, that for the love of Jesus, he would quiet himself,
and not multiply his affliction, nor continue to torment his mind, in that
manner. To this he answered; Father, I give you my faith, that I do not, at
all, be wayle my death; but I do only, and purely, lament the offenses, which I
have committed against Almighty God. And A happy conjunction of Christian
sorrow, with noble coutage.
I have so much hope, in the mercy of my dear Lord, that not only I shall
shead no tears, for my death; but not so much as change my countenance.
Father, I bewail my most unfortunate life, and not my most happy death. That
life was, indeed, most unfortunate; whereas this death, is most happy; for in
fine, if in that, I lived an enemy to God, I hope, in this, I shall dye his
friend.

Well then, said I, proceed in your Confession, that so you may dye the friend
of God; and lay, a part of your tears, aside, the while. Whereupon. The most
obedient young Gentleman, accommodatinge himself to my direction, did just
proceed, where he had left.

At this I wondered so much themore; for as much as I my self had forgotten it,
though I also had one of those little books in my hand, which instruct how a
Confession may be well made. But he going on, did lay before me, (as if it had
bin in one single prospect) the whole course of his life; with so great
clarity, and breuity, that I found my self, as obliged, to ask him, if during
many days before, he had not applied himself to make such a preparation. To
which the young Noble man made this very answer: So great is the light (as I
have already insinuated) which my dear Lord Jesus vouchsafes to give me at
this instant, of my whole life, that even whylest I am confessing, me thinks I
behold all my actions This was a very extraordinary, supernatural fauous of
Almighty God.
as in a glass; and I read all my thoughts, and words, as in a book.

And, without doubt, so it was. For he, without ever, mistaking a word, did so
call all his sins to mind, that by that time he wanted little of having
declared them al distinctly. Only at the very end, as it were, of his
Confession, he returned to repeat some things which he had already said; and
I doubting that he did so, as having forgotten what he had expressed before, I
told him of that inaduertence (as I reputed it,) when yet he made me this
answer: I know well, dear Father, that I repeat some things; but I do it,
to the end that I may now more perfectly detest them, and be confounded in my
self. And especially How desirous this soul was, to make God amends.
since I have passed the greatest part of my life in such things as these, to
the displeasure of our Lord, I do now for the better pleasing of him, pass
this time of my death, in a misliking remembrance of the same. And if it be
troublesome to your Reverence, as I know it is, so often to hear my so many
offenses; do you remember once for all, that this soul, is, of a sinner, for
whom Christ dyed.

Nay said I, if your Lordship, have any such apprehension, you may repeat as
much, and as often as it pleases you; for I only advised you of it before, as
thinking that perhaps you might have done it by error. The error (says he)
was mine, and a grievous error it was, to offend them so many ways, who did
ever stand in my defense. But howsoever that be; in this respect, as in some
others, I shall dye contented, in that I can never satisfy my self, with
cofessing my faults to you, dear Father. Which now, by the goodness of God,
are as well known by me, as heretofore they were little esteemed; and are now
as bitterly lamented, as heertofore they gave me gust, though it were a false
one. I The man did even melt between grief and love.
wish, Othou most sweet Savior of my soul, that I had, as well, a thousand
tongues, that so I might fully confess them; a thousand eyes, that so, I might
bitterly bewail them; and a thousand hearts, that so, eternally I might detest
them. And that this grief for my sins, committed against God, might so break
my heart* as the instrument of Justice, will take my head, for them, which I
have committed concerning men.

I do, good Father, (by the goodness of God) know what a sinner I am. As a
sinner, I lament my self, and as a sinner I will dye, but a sinner, all
humbled, and contrite; and with my tears I will make my Funerals; then suffer
me to perform them, after mine own fashion. And here cuen I, not I cannot
blame him,
being able to contain my self from weeping, he observed it, and said thus.
Most happy Funerals are therefore these of mine, which are solemnized by the
servants of God. Yet this part belonges not to you, but only as being a Father
to my soul. Who knows, but that by these mutual tears, and this exchange
of tenderness, my impure conscience may indeed be cleansed? Thus both of us,
being silent for a while, he then proceeded: Well, my good Father, it is now
high time, that by the This authority, was given to his true Church by Jesus
Christ our Lord; and in his name, and by his power, it is exercised.
Authority, which God has given you, to loose, and bind men on earth, you
loose me, from so many chains of sins, which hang upon me. To the en^ that,
as you have taught me, (...) may say, Auditui meo dabi^ gaudium and laetitiam,
and exultabunt ossa humiliata (...) And first do you give me Absolution, and
then, I may perform my Penance. Though indeed what Penance, carrying
proportion to my sins, is your Reverence able to impose. At this, he cast
himself at my feet, and bowed his head to my knee, where I had laid my left
hand; and he all bathed it with tears, and kissed it; and expected the Penance
and Absolution. Which I gave him, fully, in form of a This is an application
of the superabundant merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, to the souls which stand
in need thereof.
Plenary Iubiley, according to the most ample privileges, By the Popes.
which are granted to them of that Congregation, which is called of the It is
called a congregation of Misericordia, because it is so great a work of
charity and mercy whereupon they employ themselves.
Misericordia. Being absolved, and having done his Penance, with incredible
affection of mind, he sat down again by my direction; and then, the rest did
come, and circle him in round about, after the accustomed manner.

I then spoke first to him after this sort: Most Illustrious Lord Troilo, our
Blessed Saniour JESUS Christ, whom here we have present, did, by dying upon the
Cross, gine remedy, in his person, this night, to three things, amongst many
others. He An application full of life and comfort.
dyed, in the flower, and vigor of his youth; that your Lordship, might not
have too much tenderness, and compassion of your own tender youth, and so might
say, O, but why is my life taken away in so tender years? And this is the
first. He dyed, and he dyed of a violent death; that to your Lordshippe it
might not seem insupportable, to dye upon necessity, and so you might say, O,
but why is the flower of my years, cut off by a violent hand? and this is the
second. He dyed of the most reproachful death, which in those times was
inflicted; that it might not seem strange to your Lordship, to dye by the hand
of Justice, and so you might say, O, but why died not I in my cradle, or at
least by some other natural accident?

Nay, if your Lordship will accept this death, in so tender years, you offer
him the best part of your time. By dying of a violent death, you may make that
which is necessary, to be voluntary; and by dying of a dishonorable death,
(taking it as a Penance for your sins) you may fly the shame, of that last
terrible day. And so much the better, you may accept thereof, for that you are
not to dye in public, upon the Bridge, as the ordinary Custom bears; but It
is there accounted of less dishonor, to be put privately to death. They who
dye privately, dye within the Castle, they who publ^kely, at the foot of the
Bridge.
privately here below, in the Court, as is wont to be used, toward your
Peers. I added also some other considerations, and so ended my speech. To
which the Baro, who was ever ready, made this answer.

And How wise, the grace of God, is able to make a very young man, upon a
sudden.
I, O Father, for as much as concerns the first, dye willingly in this fresh
age of mine; because thus I shall be sure not to offend my Lord, any more. And,
from this instant, I offer him my years, my age, and my life; and a hundred
years, and a hundred ages, and a hundred lives. As for the second; I will make
a virtue of necessity; and being to dye perforce, and according to reason; I
will dye willingly, that so I may yield willingly, unto force, and willingly
give satisfaction to reason. But as for the third; I could wish for a more
ignominious death. And be you pleased to know, that to have dyed in public,
would have given me I know not what increase of consolation, and gust. For so I
might have hoped by Because public sins, require public satisfaction.
public Penance, to have made a better amends, for my public crimes. And
God does know, that I take no contentment, to receive the favor of dying
privately. But yet howsoever, if the determination which is made, be such; I
resist it not. Our Lord will accept the promptitude of my will.

Hereupon, the Proueditore took up the speech, and said: Let your Lordship
accommodate it self, to the will, and providence of God; who has not only one
way, of ariuing to save our souls, nor one only means of drawing them to him.
He leads one by one means, and others by another. It imports not that Money
of Gods judgments are secret but they are all just.
his Judgments be hidden from us, but it suffices that they are just. Who can
tell, if your Lordship should have dyed in any other sort the^ this, whether or
no, you should have bin saved? I am he (says the Baron) who can tell you that;
for I should have tumbled headlong into hell.

Do you not know how God has proceeded with me? It is just as a Huntes-man
would do, when he would take a wild beast, but he would have him brought to his
hand, whole, and sound; and not to be torn by the teeth or paws of dogs; nor
strocken by the bow, nor bruized by nets, or snares. He drives this beast,
sometimes one way, and sometimes another; but never lets slip the dogs, nor
discharges the arrow; nor spreads he the net, or Toil upon the ground, or
sets the snare; but, at the most, with some outcryes, or else by throwing of
some stones, he rowseth him, and addresseth him toward the place designed;
and so long does he drive the beast by several ways, that, at last, he
bringes him thither, where he would have him. The Huntes-man knows this well;
and did long expect him there; and he takes him, and enioyes him, all sound,
and safe.

I am Note how wittily, and piously, he makes this application to himself.
he, O my Good Jesus, who have been this beast, hunted hither, and thither;
but thou had a mind, to have me safe; thou had a mind to have me sound. And
so thou did not permit, that I should be torn with dogs, nor pierced by
arrow, nor taken by nets, or Toils, or snares; when thou deliueredst me out of
so many dangers of death, in which, though very young, I have found my self;
and wherein, if I had dyed, without fail, I had perished for all eternity. Thou
did only throw stones at me, and thou cryedst out after me, when by so many
admonitions, and inspirations, thou did solicit me. And now I repent my
self, that I was so deaf to them. But what marvel, if I were deaf, who
after a sort was By sin
dead? And thus has his goodness conducted me to this strait pace, without my
knowing of it; that so I may be forced to leap into his lapp. For whither am I
able to turn my self more securely, then to my dear Jesus? Yea, and yet, if
I were able; I would not turn, any way but to him. It is true, that I am
forced; but yet I am content withal.

One of the Confortatori then replied: It is enough, Signor Troilo. So great,
and so liberal, is the goodness of God, that he accepts all, and he does it
with delight. And one of the Chiesa nuoua said; That although our Lord received
a Precept, or Commandment that he should dye; yet nevertheless it is affirmed,
and it is true, that he dyed voluntarily. And having accompanied this speech of
his, with diverse choice examples, one of our Fathers shut up that discourse,
with showing, by what means, that which was necessary, That punishment which is
imposed by necessity, may be made voluntary, by a voluntary acceptance thereof.
might so grow to be voluntary, by a voluntary accepting of it: and, that so
much more, it would be meritorious, as it should more willingly be embraced.
Then teach me (said the Baron) how I may make this necessary death truly
voluntary. And then certain devout, and apt ways how to do it, being
declared, by the Governor of the Congregation of the Confortatori, and
embraced by the Baron, I said; Perhaps Signor Troilo, we weary you to much. How
can you weary me? said he. These discourses, make the night short to me, and
they make my disastre, fortunat. And here, all were silent for a while; when
he rising up (for he was sitting) said, That he would speak with the Father.
And drawing near me, the Whom the patient, did accompany therein.
Confortatore said the Confiteor; and, that being ended, I desire (says he) if
it please you, Father, to call again to mind, some of the things aforsaid;
both for the better repetition of them, and for the addition of some others.
Which I refusing, out of the assurance I had, that it was not necessary, he
said; And it is possible, dear Father, that you will not give me this last
contentment? Will you not permit, at least, that I may satissiy myself, with
confessing the offenses, which I have committed against God? And besides, does
not your Reverence remember, that we must speak together of The Father it
seems had made him some such promise before.
penance? And I answered, Let that Penance be, to dye, and to dye well.

Then teach me that, (said he.) And I, thus to him: Offer now, this death of
yours, to God, with your whole heart, in penance, for the sins with you have
committed. I do (says he) offer it with my heart, and with my mouth; and it
grieves me, (as our Lord does know) that I have not, this night, a thousand
heads, that in this one of mine, they might be al cut off, and a thousand
lives, that they might all be lost. Nay How much does he give to God; and how
little does he think it to be: and yet how faithfully does he acknowledge it
all to be of God.
I confess, and know, that even that penance, would yet fall short; but since
more I cannot, more I know not what to do; and since more I have not, I can
give no more; and even the doing, and giving, of this little, do I acknowledge,
to proceed from the hand of God.

I told him, by the way of reply, that it was well; and that he should still be
doing so. And when (said I) you are laying your head upon the block, say thus
in your heart. O Lord, by this act of mine, I protest, to do penance for my
sins, as if I had a thousand heads and a thousand lives; and I acknowledge, and
confess, that it is all but little. But I doubt Signor Troilo, whether then,
you will be able to remember this; for then perhapps you willbe, as it were,
not your self. It is no trifle to look death in the face, take my word for
that. The magnanimous Lord made this answer. I will not presume so much upon my
self, but I He can never fail who puts all confidence in God, and none in
himself.
hope well, and confide greatly in God, that he will not let it fall out of my
memory. And if, by many accident, you should perceive that I were unworthy of
so great a grace, do me the favor to bring me in mind of it; for you shall
find me ready to put it in execution. In the mean while, I beseech your
Reverence tell me somewhat else toward this end of mine, and that quickly, for
the time has wings. I bad him leave the care of that to me. For I will (said
I) go intimating from time to time, whatsoever you are to think upon; and
whatsoever you shall be to say, eue^ til your last breath.

And He exhorts him to a great devotion to his good Angel.
very now, you shall begin to make a strait friendship with your Good Angel.
And first ask pardon of him with your heart, for the little gratitude which you
have expressed, for the Custody that he has affoarded you; which has binso
incessant, so patient, so diligent, and so full of love. Upon which words, he
said (casting himself upon his knees;) Yea, not only with my mouth, but with
my heart, I beg pardon of him, for the much, and much ingratitude, which I
have used, notwithstanding his so great benignity, and love to me; and so
kissing my knee, he sat down again. So that I proceeded, and said: Consider
then with your self, that your Saint Hierome says expressly, That every soul
has an Augaius Custos assigned to it by Almighty God, from the first instance
of the birth till the last of life. Vide Hier. lib. 3. conc. in 18. cap. Matt.
The holy Scriptures and holy Fathers do also abound in proof of the ministry
of Angella in the help of men.
good Angel now is here, who even from your very first beginning, when you were
borne, and so much more at this hour, which is so full of danger, does assist
you, and especially, in six particulers. First, he hinders the impetuous
assaults of the devil, and weakens the force of all those malign spirits, who
do, at this instant, conspire to the damnation of your soul. Secondly, he
breathes into your heart, Preparation, Generosity, Devotion, and Contrition.
Thirdly, he lightneth this Darcknes, this Anguish, and this Death. Fourthly,
with great solicitude, he carries foreward, and backward, those messages,
which pass between God and you; he gathers up your sighs, your very
countenances, and the humiliations of your heart; there is not one of them,
which he suffers to loose his way. Fifthly, he negotiateth with other Angels
of superior We read in holy scripture ( Daniel 10.) how one Angel helps
another, for the good of men; and both the holy Scriptures, and holy Fathers do
every where abound, with showing the tender care that the holy Angels have of
all things, that concern us, either in soul, body, or goods.
Quiers, so to procure effectual assistances for your salvation. In most
particular manner, he moves S. Michael the Archangell, that he will defend you
in this night. Sixthly, he solliciteth my good Angel also, that he may procure
me to be a competent instrument, in this passage, which you are making toward
your salvation.

Salute him therefore, and say thus with me; Angele Dei, O He pondereth the
prayer which Catholics say daily, and more often then so, to their good
Angel: Angele Dei, qui custos es mei, me tibi commissum, pietate superna,
hodie illumina, custodi, rege, guberna. O thou Angel of God, who art my
keeper, appointed by the goodness of God, illuminate me, this day, preserve me,
rule and govern me. Amen.
thou Angel of God, so ill known, and so ill used by me, qui custos es mei,
who keep me, with so continual care, and perfect love, me tibi commissum,
who am committed to thee, being a man so faulty, and brought by the providence
of God to this passage; but yet a sinner who by his mercy, and thy prayers is
contrite for his sins, pietate superna, by the goodness of God, for I find no
desert, but do cordially confess much demerit, in hac morte, and hac nocte, in
this death, which is due to me for my offenses, and in this last period of my
life, illumina, custodi, rege, and guberna, do thou illuminate, defend,
protect, and govern me, Amen. This good Noble Man, did repeat these words,
with affectuous and abundant tears; and even by his countenance, one might
see, his very heart split in his body. And not contenting himself, to say it
only once, he would needs repeat it then, three times; and afterward, he did
it again, so much more often, the same night, as that all the times arrived, I
think, to ten; letting me know withal, that he had not felt greater solace,
and gust, in any one spiritual exercise, then in this.

Secondly (said I) you shall take the Glorious Virgin, for your To pray for him,
as one man may do for another; though all the Saints, and much more, the
glorious Mother of God, do perform it, in a far more excellent manner.
intercessour; and then S. John the Baptist, and S. Paul, who were both,
condemned to the loss of their heads, as your Lordship is. It is true (said
he) that they were condemned as I am; but with this difference, That they
suffered innocent, and I for my faults; and therefore I I accuse my self, of
such, and such, and such offenses, which I have committed against God. Which
howsoever I confessed before, yet for the reasons which I have already touched,
I do willingly repeat the same. After he had ended his Confession, and
received Absolution upon his knees, I desired him to sit down again, that the
wonted company might come about him.

And ever, some one of them, would be taking up, some verse of the holy
Scripture, which might be appropriated to the present occasion. As for example,
Viam iniquitatis amoue a me, and de lege tua miserere mei. Suscipe seruum tuum
in bonum, and iustificationes tuas edoce me. Bonum mihi, quia humiliasti me, vt
discam iustificationes tuas. Cognoui Domine, quia aequitas iudicia tua, and in
veritate tua humiliastime. Fiat cor meum immaculatum in iustificationibus tuis,
vt non confundar. Miferere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiam tuam, and
secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum, dele iniquitatem meam. Erraui ficut
ouis quae perijt, quaere seruum tuum Domine. Deus propitius esto mihi
peccatori. Deus in adiutorium meum intend. And a hundred other, such as these;
which now, and then, were declared by some one of The Resigious men declared
them, though the Confortatori might represe^t them.
us, according to the present occasion, wherein he took much contentment.

But He was most tenderly devoted to the B. Virgin.
especially he had great comfort, in using these other Iaculatory Prayers,
Maria matter gratiae, Matter misericordiae, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora
mortis suscipe; repeating often these last words, and hora mortis suscipe. And
again; Eiaergo aduocata nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos ad nos
convert, and Iesum benedictum fructum ventris tui, mihi, post hanc noctem,
ostende, O clemens, O pia, O dulcis Virgo Maria. Ora pro me peccatore indigno,
in hac hora mortis meae, Amen, Amen, Ame^. Recordare Jesus pie, Quod s^^ causa
tuae viae, Ne me perdas ill^ die etc. In this exercise, tho^^ brothers, of the
Congregati^^^ of the Misericordia, were very perfect, and discreet; delivering
out, in fit times, a great number of these versicles, without importuning, or
perplexing him. And so also did other Religious men, according to the occasion,
without either interrupting the one the other, or yet ouerweariyng the young
Noble Man; and they also brought things so, as to accompany them with certain
motives, and considerations, with breuity, but with great life of devotion.

When these things were ended, I said: It will not be amiss that we recite
the Letanies, if these Gentlemen shall think it fit. And I (said the young
Lord) if you, and they be so contented, will be he, that shall recite them.
They all made answer in the negative, saying to him; Your Lordshippe, would
but weary your self, too much. Nothing less, (says he) but to me it will be,
of extreme contentment. And so, (with out more dispute) they put the book into
his hand; and (kneeling even, by me, against a form) he began the Letanyes,
to which we answearing, Ora pro eo, Pray for him, there It must needs, be an
object of great compassion.
was not a man amongst us, who accompanied not the words of his mouth with the
tears of his eyes. And especially, when with incredible affection, and
devotion, he repeated, these words, A mala morte, A porestate diaboli, A
poenis inferni, libera me Domine. Deliver me, O Lord from an evil death, from
the power of the devil, and from the torments of hell. But Nothing but only
his sins could move him to tears.
he (O admirable repose of that mind) did not shead one tear. Nay my self
being in tears, who held up the candle by him (and not being able to repress
them) he stirred me with his elbow, and made other signs to them, that so,
giving over their weepinge, they might answer him. And speaking of it to me
after ward, he said, That there wanted little, of their making him also weep,
for company.

When the Letanies were ended, he said (turning to me) Father, say you the
prayers over me, that follow. And then, he took the light out of my hand, and
so giving me the book, I said those prayers over him, which are wont to be
said, over such as are in their last agony; Comme^ao These are as admirable and
affectuous prayers, as any are used in the whole office of the holy Church; and
I wish all the Readers of this, to procure to see and read them.
te omnipotenti deo etc. And that other which follows, Deus misericors, Deus
clemens etc. And at the end of these, he said with a loud voice, the Pater
Noster, the Aue maria, the Credo, and the Salve Regina; and so he returned to
sit down, the others making the accustomed circle about him. And so one, with
representing some sentence of Holy Scripture, another, some example, another,
some other spiritual Consideration, we always kept him alive, and quick, and
even all kindled in devotion; till such time, as the hour of colebrating
Mass, approached.

Then the Noble Man said thus: If these This rigor is used in those parts,
for the great insolences which have sometyms been expressed, in the like
extremityes, by delinquents.
manicles be put upon me to give me pain, or punishment, let the will of my
Prince be done, who is pleased to have it so; but if the meaning be, but to
make me sure; in vain is he tied without, who is bound Because his heart was
more chained, by the love of God, then his hands could be, by a load of iron.
within. Upon which words, all of us being full They had great reason.
of tenderness; and in particular one of those Confortatori (who showed
himself, throughout that whole night, as a most compassionate Gentleman, in
service of this Noble Man) caused the keys to be instantly given him, and so
took the manicles off; which yet, the Baron would needs An humble, natural,
and most Noble Soul.
kiss, and kissing them, he sighed, and so held his peace.

When he had been silent a while, and having made a sign that he desired to
confess again; and when he had blessed himself, with the sign of the
Cross; Father He is much solicued by the memory of his disobedience to his
Mother.
, (said he) I who have given so many disgustes, and so bitter ones, to my most
dear Lady, and Mother, through the whole course of my life; what comfort does
your Reverence think, that I might be able to give her in my death? By dying
well (said I) and in a holy manner. To which he answered thus; How shall the
unfortunate woman come to know it? I told him, that I would relate it to her by
word of mouth; and in fine I would write it for her; and I will not only notify
it (said I) to her, but to any other whom it may import to know it. It is
enough, (said he) and he reached his hands out to me, that I might give him one
of mine, and withal, my word. And so he kissed it often, and holding it
between both his, he continued to speak after this manner.

I could wish, dear Father, that in my place, your Reverence would often visit
and comfort my Lady my Mother, after my death. And when so, you shall see her
first, I desire that you will ask forgiveness of her in my name, a thousand,
and a thousand times, as here I have done, both now, and the other day, since I
came to prison. And especially, beg pardon of her, for such, and such a
particular offense, and then say to her thus; Your Troilus who is dead, begs
that blessing from your most afflicted Ladishippe, which being alive, he
neither deserved, nor had time to ask. He further recommendes the care of his
soul to your Ladyship. He prays, he beseeches, he coniureth your Ladyship,
to grant him this his last and now only suite; that having put your soul in
peace, you will not so much as resent, or call to mind, and much less procure
to If she thought that the adverse parties, whom he had wronged, had
prosecuted him with too much eagernes.
revenge your self, for any injury; but that you will remit the whole, and
your self withal, to the Eternal Providence of God. Put her in mind, that it
is the part of a Roman, and Christian heart, after a generous manner to pardon
offenses. And, giving her all comfort, do you assure her, that I have
particulerly re^^sed, all those irreuerent wor^^ that I have formerly used
toward her; and that I ha^^ remembered all those most sweet, dear benefits,
which I ha^^ received from her; and all those Maternall favors, which she has
vouchsafed me. And above all, let her know, the in^^stimable contentment that I
have to think of the This was a Mother, not only of her sons body, but of
his soul also.
Christian love, which she has expressed to me, in this last passage; without
ever reflecting upon those offenses, and great demerits of mine.

Say to her moreover, that I dye her son, and a son, who is most profoundly
penitent, for all the ill words, and deeds that I have ever uttered, and
performed against her; and that, in the other world, I will by Gods grace, be
as grateful to her, as I have been ungrateful, here. Relate to her my last
passage, in most particular manner; and oblige her, liberally to reward al my
followers, who have been in prison, upon my occasion. Of whom, I do with all
the very bowels of my heart, ask pardon, for the pain, and peril, wherinto I
did idly, and absurdly cast them. And assure her, in a wo^^ that if for nothing
else, yet eu^^ for the very disgustes which (...) have given to her, I shall dy^
content; finding a kind of joy in my heart, that I perform this penance, in
this manner, which I have so well deserved. And so, I dying in such sort, a
your Reverence may be pleased to let her know, she cannot but receive some
comfort in my death; and she will also find, that she is even engaged, so to
range her self to the will of God, as, by his mercy, I have done.

To my Lady, my Grandmother, what shall I say, dear Father? O how compassiue
am I of her great age! What pain does my soul feel, for that pain of hers!
Give her also to understand, that I beg pardon of her, for so many disgustes,
as, in this old age of hers, I have given her; beseeching her in my name, that
as long as she shall live, she will weekly, cause a Mass to be celebrated, for
my soul. And in like manner I humbly ask pardon of my Lord Marquess, my
Uncle, from the most inward parts of my soul, as I also do of the rest of my
blood; beseeching them all to (...) cuse this youth, or rather ign^rance of
mine. Putting also th^^ in mind, that once we shall al me^^ in heaven. And if
ever your R^uerence can procure to be in my Castles, ask pardon, I beseech
you, in my name, a hundred times, of all my vassalls. Making a promise to them,
that instead of the ill example which (...) have given them, I will not forget
them in heaven, when by the mercy of God, I shall be there; and let them, in
the mean time, excuse my youth.

Forget not also to do this office, with This was a person of great authority
and place, who took his examination.
Monsigr. the Governor of Rome, who about some four times, has examined me,
with so much respect and courtesy. Giving him assurance, from me, that although
my death do grieve me, yet I accept willingly thereof. And beseeching him,
that, when time shall serve, he will also with how great piety, he speaks of
the Pope, as he was his supreme Pastor, and with observance as of his Prince.
assure our Lord, Pope Clement, his Holiness, that I dye his most devoted Son;
and most satisfied, with the proceeding of his Holiness, toward me. With this
moreover, that am grieved at the very roots of my A noble circumstance of
ciuility and curtesy.
heart, for having ginen (...) Holiness, so much cause (...) trouble, and grief;
especially (...) this beginning of his Pontif^cate, and in the midst of the
joy, which has been expressed for his assumption, to the Se^ Apostolic. And
let him b^ further told, that by placing my self, as I do at your feet, (...)
make accoumpt, that I lay my head under the feet of his Holiness; that so he may
vouchsafe to give me his benediction. I having this comfort, in the midst of
all my afflictions, that his sentence, and my death, will serve to his whole
State, for a lawful, and plentiful example of his Justice. And verily, if it
grieve me, at this time, to dye, it does also grieve me, that even by my death,
I am not able to give complete sat is faction, to his Holiness. For what a noble
civil Soul was this?
as much as he, being my Father, and my Pastor, he cannot, in fine, but feel
the death of a Son, and sheep, of his, with displeasure, and grief.

Upon which words, he finding, (even more then before) that there fell some
tears from mine eyes, to his hands, This is well indeed, (said he) your
Reu^rence, commendes my courage, but why then do you weep yourselfe? At least,
let not others see you. Then I replying said. Do you believe, my Son, that I
have no feeling in me? Do you think perhaps, that I am some piece of marble?
Proceed you on to the rest. And then, naming diverse of his particular friends,
he desired me to ask pardon for him, of them all; and this he did, with words
of extreme sweetenes, and prudence. This being then said by him with a most
admirably intrepide heart, he concluded with this desire; I beseech your
Reverence, that in the last place, you will beg pardon for me, of Almighty
God, as I my self do now, with the most internal part of my heart; and of your
self, I ask my Penance, and Absolution.

Which as soon as I had given him, the Brothers of that Congregation of the
Misericordia, did put us in mind how it was time that Mass^ should be
celebrated; and so the Priest, as soon as he was vested, began. The devout
young Lord, and I kneeling together against a four me, he said thus to me. The
Priest is beginning Mass; and I (with your good leave) will have a new
Reconcilation, according to that, which my Good Angel shall bring to my
remembrance, of whom I have desired this favor. The Priest was saying the
Confiteor at the foot of the Altar; to whom one of the Congregation (making
answer) was so over wrought with tenderness, that he could not get to the end
of it; in such sort, as that it was necessary, that some other should do it
for him. Then the good Noble Man, who answered softly to the Cositeor, leaning
toward me, said thus, Give He had the gift of tears, in a strange measure.
me leave to weep, whylest I say the Confiteor, since that Gentleman weeps so
bitterly, to whose office it belongs not greatly, that he should weep. I
answered, that he might weep in the name of God; since he had given him so
great desire so to d^ And it was an admirable effect of divine grace, that
instantly, I saw the tears streaming down his cheeks, and pouring themselves,
even upon the cushion, that lay before him.

When the Confiteor was done, and all Till after the Gospel.
the while that the Priest was reading with a loud voice, he did not move at
all, but was most fixedly attentive, and as it were rapt toward the The
Crucifixe was of stone, or wood, but his mind was upon the Original and not
upon the picture, which was but a picture or Image.
Crucifixe, upon the Altar, which was there most devoutly made. And shortly
after, turning toward mine ear, he accused himself of diverse little things,
which suddenly then did surprise his mind. And the Priest being come to About
the middle of Mass.
Sursum corda; Father (said he) do you think indeed, that by such a death as
this, and so well deserved, I may yet go straight to heaven? And why not (said
I) with so great and so well conditioned affectuousnes of mind, might your
Lordship undergo this death, as that your soul would be sure to fly up
instantly, from the block, into heaven. O my God! (said he) And what kind of
affectuousnes must that be! O teach it me a little! O that our Lord, would
grant it to me! Pray (said I) very earnestly unto him for it, and peradventure
he will grant it. At which time, the Priest being in the very act of the
Elevation of the body of our Lord, the young Noble Man, spoke these very, very
words. O bone Jesus, sis mihi, in hac hora, Jesus. O dear Lord Jesus, be thou,
in this hour, a Jesus to me. And this he said, with so ardent affection of
mind, though with a low voice, as that after it, he was wholly immovable, till
the Priest went on, to The later end of Mass.
Domine non sum dignus, etc. And then, he said thus to me. I have not, Father,
been attentive, either when the Pater Noster, or the Agnus Dei, was said; may
I yet nevertheless communicate? I answered, that for the present, he should do
such a This was perhaps, the knocking of his breast, or some such other thing,
which might be done at the instant.
penance, whilst I was giving him Absolution. Which being done, he went, of
himself, to the Altar; and kneeling down, did with exemplar devotion, receive
the most Blessed Sacrament; and soon after, he came back from Mass, toward
me, where he remained, without any motion at all.

After this, turning about to all them who did assist, he said, I give thanks
to you all, for your Charity and courtesy; and pardon, I beseech you, the
painful night, which I have brought upon you. And then, he desired me, for the
love of him, to repeat those words, to every one of them, in particular; and
so I did. Being the^ entreated to sit down, the wonted circle was made about
him. Where every one procured, to animate him, toward that combat which was
the^ at hand; by representing the shortness of the pain, the imme^sity of the
reward, the vanity of the world; and above all, the abundant grace, which, in
the space of so few hours, our Lord had communicated to his soul; and had
given him with all, such a pregnant sign of his Predestination; wherein the
Noble Youth, did And so he might most justly do.
show to find extraordinary gust.

Amongst the many disoourses which were made to this purpose, as well by the
Confortatori, as by our Fathers, I used this. And what think you, Signor
Troilo, will the grace which God has given you, be sufficient to make you
bear this punishment? Nay I tell you, that in imitation of Christ, you should
do well to desire it, and that desire, would serve to make it, a small matter,
to you. Nay it would make it seem no punishment at all; and lastly it would
make it seem sweet. Even as it happened to Christ our Lord himself, to The
immense love which our lord Jesus bare to man, made all that he suffered, seem
little to him.
whom his Passion, seemed so small a matter, that whereas others called it, by
the name of a huge thing, an Ocean, a deep sea, (Veni in altitudinem maris, and
tempestas demersit me) himself does call it, but a Cupfull, (Calicem quem dedit
mihi pater, non vis vt biba^ illum?) Again, after that huge heap of
bitterness, and torments which he had endured, it seemed nothing to him. For
being asked by those disciples who were going to Emaus, if he knew of that vast
cruelty, which had lately then, bin executed at Jerusalem, upon the person of
the greatest Saint of God; he answered, by asking, Quae? for in fine he
esteemed it all as nothing. Therefore speaking of his Passion, he used the word
Baptism, saying, Baptismo habeo baptizari, et quomodo coarctor etc. And you
know that bathes do serve for delicacy. What say you then Signor Troilo? Does
not your punishment by this time, seem small to you? Small; (says he?) it
seems nothing. Yet can I not say, either that it is nothing, or yet very
pleasant; but yet nevertheless, it is dear to me, and as such I prize it. And
How mightily this noble man, grew up in grace, even by mome^ts.
I do assure you, that at the present, it would be as it were, a kind of
trouble for me, to escape it. Before I desired to escape; I sighed for it; I
labored for it; and I know not what of that kind. But I had not then, that
knowledge of my self, which now, by the favor of God, me thinks I have; in
such sort, that now, I can affirm to you, in the word of Truth, that I This
so ardent desire, of suffering for his sins, must needs be a great
dispositition toward the obtaining of pardon for them, through the mercy of
Christ our Lord.
desire my end, how painful soever it may be, toward the remission of my
sins.

To this, another Father said; Your Lordship speaks wisely; for in fine, God
knows, whether otherwise, you should ever have been so well prepared for
death. Whereupon, one of the Co^nfortatori proceeded, saying: If your Lordship
had dyed naturally in your bed; what, with the pain of your body, and the
anguish of your mind; it may be you would scarce have been master of your
self. And if you had dyed, by any other accident, perhaps you would not have
had time, to bring forth, so much as the name of Jesus. Whereas now, it
Supposing first, the grace of God, as is declared afterward.
is in a manner, in your own power, to dye as well as you will, your self;
with what grief of your sins you will; with what love of christ you will;
and, in a word, in that best manner, which the grace of Almighty God will
impart to you; which we perceive, even so to ouerflow your soul, that we are
as much astonished, as comforted, by the knowledge thereof.

Heereunto the constant Noble Man, made this answer. You shall know, that by
the goodness of God, I find not in my self, any trouble, or tentation; and me
Nothing but the very hand of God, was able so to have co^ducted him, through
these stony ways. And it seems, that God commun^cated himself to the
delinquent, in a very particular manner.
thinks I am in a hand which bears me up. I desire, and I resolve to dye, in
that manner, which I shall be taught to be the best; and I am most ready, to
obey in all that, which for the saving of my soul shall be commanded me. This,
said I, you shall therefore do. You shall bar you self, in that hour, of some
ease. That is, you shall for the love of Jesus, and, in imitation of what he did
and suffered for you, deprive your self of somewhat, which you might have; and
which, at that time, might be agreeable to you. For, if you do well remember
it, they gave twice, unto our Lord, to drink. The first time, when they gave
him vinagre, he drunk; but when they gave him wine, as soon as he had tasted
it, he put it by. But do you know the reason? It was this. To such as were
condemned to dye, it was the custom to give wine, with an infusion of myrrh;
that by the comfort thereof, they might faint the less, under their torments.
Now our Lord (who was pleased to deprive himself entierly, and fully, of all
consolation, for love of us, and for our example) refused that, but he accepted
of the vinagre, which was mingled with With Gall.
another most bitter ingredient; that so, he might suffer the most he could;
both for our example, and benefit otherwise.

The Proueditore said, that this was most certainly true; whereupon some
expound those words, which Christ spoke upon the cross, Deus Deus meus, vt
quid dereliquisti me? That Christ our Lord, did greiue thereat, because the
Divinity, began as it were, to hide it self from the Humanity; and
consequently by little and little, his life was leaving him; and by occasion
thereof, he was able to suffer no longer; which the most enamoured Jesus
observing, did complain of the matter, to his Father, by the words aforesaid.

To these things a Father of ours, adding other devout, and short discourses,
the Confortatore said; That for the time his soul was sufficiently fed; and
that it would be well done, to refresh his body. The Baron answered, that there
was no need. But they pressing it much, there was brought in some wine, by a
servant of the Lord This Government, is the place of greatest confidence which
the Pope bestows
Governor of the Castle, which, one of the Gentlemen there present, pouring
forth into a glass, presented to the Baron; who said again, that it was wholly
needles. And yet (said he, turning then toward me) if I should need it, your
A good memory he had, and a more pious will.
Reverence told me a while ago, that in imitation of Christ, I should do well
to deprive my self thereof. Father, is it not so? Nevertheless, being entreated
by all the Assistants, that he would drink, or at least, that he would, so
much, as wash his mouth; this last he did twice, without swallowing any wine at
all. And this was so much more remarkable, because such as are in that case,
use to be extremely taken with thirst, and it is wont to be held, for one of
their greatest torments.

The wine being then carried away, diverse questions were asked of this most
Illustrious Lord, to which he Note and wonder at these answeares, which are so
full of piety. wisdom and courage.
answered, with so great prudence and iudggement, that more could not be
imagined. He was asked first (for, of many, I will mention only a few) and this
first question he was asked often;) Signor Troilo, will your Lordship have any
thing? He still answered; that he desired nothing, saving that once, he held
his peace, but made a sign up to heaven. Besides, he was often asked, Signor
Troilo, of what are you thinking? Sometimes he a^swered, upon nothing in
particular; Sometimes, upon our Lord; Sometimes, upon my sins; Sometimes;
upon my approaching end; Sometimes, he said, I think upon the so many guiftes,
which God has bestowed upon me, and that I have been, so very ungrateful; yea
and even unmindful of them all. Being then asked in this manner, Does your
Lordship dye willingly? He answered thus: And what? would you have me bustle
against the order of the Prince? Or should I not be content, with the
providence, and good pleasure of God? Is it possible, say done, that the Devil
should not strive, to make you think your death unjust? I do not, says he,
esteem it only to be just; but most just; and as for the Devil, I neither
have, nor will I have, any more to do with him, I have had enough, and too much
of him already.

Another asked him what he said, of the Lady his Mother, his Friends, his
Kindred, and himself; if he were not much afflicted, with the thought thereof?
Concerning my Lady, my Mother (says he) I confess, that in the most inward
parts of my heart, I find extreme affliction; but, on the other side, I rejoice
that I am paying the offenses, that I have committed against her, with my
blood. And I hope, that the readiness wherewith I inbrace this penance, for my
wicked carriage toward her, will be so well accepted by Almighty God; that he
may, through his goodness, give her no small comfort, even by this very death of
mine. I think upon my kindred with grief, as having been a cause of pain, and
trouble to them. Of my friends, as having given them ill example. Of my self,
I take no care; for behold who A great faith, and hope, and love.
does it for me; making a sign toward the Crucifixe, which he had hard by him.

Being asked, whether the time did seem long to him or short? Neither This do
I find to be a strange answer, in the superlaciue degree of strangenes.
long (says he) nor short. And another replying to him thus; Is it possible,
that you are not grieved, that you must dye? I do not (says he) deny, but that
I am grieved at it; but yet it neither troubles me, nor so much as alters me,
more the^ you see. It being wished, that he should suffer his chair, to be
drawn a little forward, that so he might sit at greater ease; To what end (says
he) should I give my body ease? I am well here; and with the help of God, I
shall be shortly free, from needing that, or any thing else. Being desired to
raise, and rest his feet, upon a place of advantage, where they used to kneel,
for that so, he should be in a more commodious posture; he said (drawing near
toward mine ear,) Father, it is a piece of ill manners, to fit with a man's
legs raised up, in the presence of other men. But I telling him no, and
aduising him howsoever, that he would set them up; he did instantly accommodate
himself to my desire. Being asked, to what devotions, he had bin most
particulerly affected: He answered, To that of our He was ever much devoted to
our B. Lady.
Blessed Lady, in whose honor, I did daily recite her Office, but with an
impure mouth; and how then, could that be accepted by her? And till within
these two years, I made said he, much account of going to Confession, which
through the mercy of my Lord, I resolved never to intermitt, unless it were by
some very unlucky accident, that should have interposed it self. And I ever
carried living, in my heart, the memory of many things, which formerly, upon
several occasions had been represented to me by sundry Religious Fathers,
with whom I had much conuersed, (insinuating thereby, as I conceive, the
Fathers of the Chiesa Nuoua.) And when I had means, to do it in private, I
never failed any day, to salute the Blessed Virgin upon my bare knees. And
then, I saying (I know not well, upon what occasion) Ah poor Signor Troilo.
Poor (said he) I was, when I was without the grace of my Lord God, but now, I
take my self to be rich.

But then the time of his end drawing on apace, we rising up from our seats,
did circle him in, upon our knees. And (after the manner of two Quires,
interchangeably answering one another) we began the seven Penitential Psalms;
pondering some of the verses now and then, and causing him, to resume diverse of
them. They being ended, he was advised to say often, Eia These are parts of
some Hymns, which are recited by the holy Church, in honor of our lord Jesus,
and our B. Lady.
ergo aduocata nostra etc. And then, Maria matter gratiae. And then again,
Recordare Jesus pie, and the like. Which he pronounced, with so clear a voice,
so constant a memory, and with a countenance so serene, that all such as were
present (himself only excepted) did weep outright. Which he observing, and
making silence, and taking his own face into his hands, he stood still a while,
in mental prayer. And then turning toward me, he said; Confiteor The
entrance whereby, we begin to makour Confissio^.
Deo Omnipotenti, and tibi Pater. I accuse my self of this, and this, and
that; Ideo This we use to say when we have ended it.
precor etc.

And then, instantly he added this: Father, I would desire A far greater matter
it was to ask this suite, then to grant it.
this last favor of you; that you would confess me at the block; and that,
whylest I, on the one side, with my beads in my hand, might say, O bone Jesus,
sis mihi Jesus; O good Lord Jesus, be thou a Jesus to me; and you on the other,
Ego te absoluo etc. I absolve thee etc. at the same instant, the iron might
fall upon my neck. Not so, my Lord, said I. For so, by giving a sign to the
executioner for the cuttinge off your head, I should become By the Canons of the
holy Church, a Priest may not cooperat to the death of any man though never so
far off; but only for the punishment of delinquents in course of Justice; nor
then neither, but with particular dispensation, and that in very rare cases.
The Inquifition has nothing to do heerin, but only examineth, and leaves such
as are faulty and impenitent to the secular Judges.
Irregular. No, no, I will not do it, by any means. But then, observing that
he was much afflicted, by my negative, and so rather to quiet him, then for any
thing else, I said it might perhaps be thus, better done. You may confess at
the block; and being confessed, you may begin to inuoke the name of Jesus; and
when I shall see, that the Executioner is ready to let down the iron, I may
say with a loud voice, Ego te absoluo etc. Yet perhapps again, this would be
more inconvenient; for by giving you a sign, of when the iron were upon the
point of falling, it might fright you in such sort, as that, if by the motion
of your body, it should not fall just upon you, it would mangle you, and so
afflict you, with a double pain, and a double death. I will not do it, by any
means.

At these words, casting his head upon my bosom, he said; Ah Father, even by
all that love which you bear to this miserable sinful soul, do me this
favor. I make a promise to you, in the name, and by the help of God, that you
shall not put me into terror by it. For Gods love believe me; I beseech you
give me credit. Whereupon yet, I continuing, as I had resolved before; O God
(said he) and might not thy divine Majesty, move the heart of this my Father,
to esteem me worthy of this favor? Well, be of courage (said I, to quiet him)
I promise you, that I will do it. Then give me (answered he) that The hands of
Catholic Priests, are anointed and consecrated with great solemnity.
sacred hand of yours. And I gave it to him, with this purpose, that if he
should not remember it at the block, as I verily thought that he would not,
then I would let it pass; and that if he remembered it, and did franckly call
for it, I would perform it. But it seemed (as I said) to me, that a man could
hardly be of so undaunted a mind; as that, in so hard a passage, his memory
would serve him for such a business; and that, whereas all men procure to divert
their mind from such a blow, this Baron would needs have an express sign
thereof. But, in fine, where the grace of God does enter, it produces effects,
which do far out-stripp all the power of nature; and no wit of man arriueth
to them.

When I had made him this promise; I His heart wrought mightily toward humility
would know (said he) whether your Reverence, will not think it fit, that I
give thanks, and demand pardon, of them who have had most to do with me, in
this place. I told him, that I liked well of it; and having given him
Absolution, I entreated him by a sign, to sit down. Then he said; Father,
take you the care of my journey from hence to the block, as you have already
promised; and you shall go aduertising me, from pace to pace, of such things
as are fit, that I may have, my whole soul for God alone. I will advertise
you, (said I) of all; Keep your self prepared, and sit down.

As soon as he was set, all the stringes of our very hearts, seemed to be moved
at once, to pray him that he would be mindful of us in heaven. And It is a
sign that they saw strange tokens of Gods favor in him.
every one of us who were present, both with words, and tears, did reco^mend
himself to him, the best he could; and we were not able to satisfy our
selves, in the desire we had of expressing kindness toward him. And verily,
this was a death, of so much tenderness, that the remembrance of it at this
time, does affect me, at the very soul. Only the young Noble Man, remained with
a most Angelical Countenance; and with a heart which seemed, not so much as to
know, what belonged to fear.

This A description of Signor Troilo's person, and fashion.
Signor Troilo, was tal of stature; of delicate constitution; of color rather
oliuaster, then very fair; of black hair and thick; of face, neither fat,
nor lean; his eyes were black, and full, and quick; his nose sweetly
raised; his mouth of a just proportion, and rather smiling, the^ other wise;
his forhead compete^tly spacious, and he had not so much as one single hair
upon his cheeks. Of a sweet voice, of ready answeares; and so complete in
good fashion, that even at the block, he failed not to salute, and resalute all
men, according to the occasion, and their condition; and not being able to take
of his hat himself, to make others do it for him. It happened once that I
desired him to let me wipe his face with a handhercheife; not that he was in
any sweat, but only to refresh him a little. But he, having suffered me, to
begin to do him that service, said; Father, I need not this. But I desired,
that at least he would rub his face with his own hands, for it would refresh
him; and instantly doing so, he said, to me in mine ear; Father, I had an
extreme desire, to stretch my self, but me thought, it had somewhat of the
Clown.

In conclusion, he caused all those souldiars who had kept guard over him, to
pass before him, one, by one; and so, It is a true sign, and a certain fruit
of true penance, to submit a man's self mightily for Gods sake.
casting himself upon his knees, to every one of them, as they singly passed,
he asked pardon, most humbly of them, with Noble and Christian words; and he
left them also, liberal donatiues. To the Gentleman Porter, he did the like,
and more; excusing himself for the trouble which he had given him.

But now there remained no more to be done, for the time was run out, when the
In those Countries there ringeth a bell every morning, noone, and night, when
all men recite 3. short prayers, in remembrance of the Incarnation of Christ
our Lord. This they do wheresoever they be, when the bell ringes, though it be
in the streets; and there they salute one another, with a wish of the good day,
or night.
Aue Maria bell, did sound. Upon the hearing whereof, we al recited that
prayer, and he said it also, upon his knees. Then saluting all the company, he
sat down, and was silent. And whilst he held his peace, we spoke amongst our
selves, with astonishme^t at many things, which we had observed in him, and
they were these. He did never sweat. He never complained of any thing. He
never placed himself, with any show of wearines upon his chair He never
showed any unquietness. He never wept, but whylest he was making his confession.
He never sought to ease himself, in the course of Nature. He never had any
thirst. He never fainted. He was never sleepy. He was never ouerwroght with
sorrow. He was ever fresh, and strong, having been, in that night, so many, and
many times upon his knees. He ever answered readily, and with a lively voice.
His memory never failed, or so much as wauered. He was handsomely, and modestly
apparelled. He A strange image of perfection, was this young Noble Man.
spoke not so much as an inconsiderate word. He never expressed a desire of any
thing. He had, at certain times, and upon certain occasions, a discharged,
and smiling countenance. He did completely give every man those titles of
respect, which was his due; without failing so much as once; as to one, of
Reverence, to another, of Honor; to another of You. He declared, most
currantly, his last Will, which was, a sheet of paper, long. He was not taken
by passionate tenderness, but only upon the speech of the Lady his Mother. He
spoke most honorably, and christianly, of the Prince, and of the Judges; yea
and even of them, who prosecuted the cause against him. All which particulers,
or the most part of them, do happen otherwise, in others, who are subject to
the like condition. So that all those old experie^ced Confortatori of that
Congregation, which is called of the Misericordia, were amazed, to see how
abundantly the Grace of God, had wrought upon that soul, in the space of a
few hours.

When this most devout Noble Man, had thus held his peace, and we had been
discoursing, amongst our selves, of the things aforesaid, he calling me
toward him, who yet was standing not far off, spoke to me, in this manner.
Dear Father, let us make our last Reconciliation with God. And then he made a
short recapitulation, of all his faults; and began A happy soul to be so
speedily, and so intierly cleansed.
to accuse himself, of things so extremely small; as has given occasion, and
matter to this soul of mine, until this day, wherein I write, and will, until
the hour of my death, both to be comforted, and confounded.

Being upon the end of his Confession, he fell into a most ardent weeping; in
such sort, as that bowing down his head toward my hand, I was not able to
endure the heat of his breath. And when I said to him, Troylo my Son; Cast a
bridle upon those tears of yours; do not exasperate your own wound; it is now
enough, and again enough; you have wept enough; you will have time to weep yet
again, when you come to lay your Head upon the block, for He was to suffer
death for his misdeds, but he was to bear it patiently and willingly, for the
love of Christ
Christ. His answer was this; I have already told you Father, and now I tell
you so once again; I weep for my sins, and not for my death. And when your
Reverence shall have given me Absolution, and I shall have performed the
Penance, which you will impose (which only deserves to be accompanied with
tears) you shall find, that I will weep no more. And just so it happened; for
wiping his face when I had absolved him, and I having acquainted him, with some
necessityes of mine own, to the end that he might give me By this holy prayers
in heaven.
assistance, in the sight of our Lord; he remained, with eyes as full of
serenity, and as void of tears, as if, in all his life, he had never wept.

But then having raised himself, it was thought fit, by all the Company, that
certain Psalms should be repeated, whereof, I was to po^der some of the
verses, together with the Confortatori; till such time, as his hour should
ariue. Whereupon he said, It is now broad day, and there cannot be much time
remaining. Our Great piety and gratitude.
Lord be blessed, for making me pass through this night, so happily, and so
holily. I thank you dear Father, and you Gentlemen, for your so great
favor. The good God reward you for it. And here, all of us recommending our
selves again to his prayers, we also again began the Psalms.

At this time, the Executioner came in, and no man had the heart to tell him of
it; but he perceiving that there was a press of people, did gently turn his
face about, and saw him, As soon as he had set eye upon him, he was not
troubled with it at all; but Undaunted, holy courage.
he armed himself only with the sign of the Holy Cross; and making a
countenance to me, who stood close by him, he rose, and said: Well, the hour
is come; Gentlemen, let us go, and that cheerfully And they all answearing
thus: Yea let it be done cheerfully, Signor Troilo, cherefully, for the love
of Jesus; he turned toward the Executioner, who kneeling down at his feet,
to ask his pardon; Do your office (said he) in the name of God, for so, he
will have it. Your Lordship (said he) is to vnbutton your doublet, about your
neck. And he (being as ready on the one side, as he was modest on the other)
with his own hands began to vnbutton. It is not enough, said the chief
Executioner; the doublet must be put off. But the rest of those Officers of
Justice, were not desirous, that he should put of his doublet. Yet the generous
Noble Man said, That howsoever, be would do it, if they thought it fit. For
(said he) it shall not greatly trouble me; and if you have a mind to it, I will
strippe my self, from head to foot, for the love of God. Already therefore, he
was beginning to untie himself; but it sufficed that he was vnbuttoned to the
shoulders. Then, one of the Confortatori putting him in mind, of Non erubescam
etc. and the Officer coming to tie his arms, in such a fashion, as that, when
he should be arrived at the block, his body might not have much leave to
move; In the name of God (says he) bind both my arms, and my hands too, if
your will be such. For This man had true faith in Christ our Lord, and his
sacred Passion, who in contemplation and imitation thereof, was so willing to
suffer, as you see.
my Lord Jesus, was yet, much worse bound for me.

Being therefore thus accommodated, they cast a gown about his back; and he
kneeled down, before the Altar; in act, as if he had craved a benediction, at
the hands of our Lord. And, without the least change of color, beginning the
Miserere, of himself; and being come as far as the outward room, he paused
there, with an incredible decency, and grace. And he said, to some of the
bystanders, Might I not thank my Lord, the Governor of the Castle, before I
dye? And they, presenting I know not what excuse, of his not being risen, he
accepted thereof; and commanded a Gentleman, who served the Governor, that he
should thank him in his name. And having demanded pardon of many of the
Assistants, and exhorting them in some very few words to virtue; by the
example, which there they had before their eyes of the contrary, he went on
with the very same verse of the Miserere, where he had left before. And
sometimes, turning toward me, he would be saying, Come See whether this Baron
were afraid of death or no.
Father, come; to heaven, to heaven. And it was a strange thing, that he being
in pantofles, and going down such a long pair of staiers, as that is; (which
stayers are much broken by reason of the Artillery, which upon frequent
occasions, is drawn up and down by that way) yet did not his foot once slipp.
Nay, and I, failing to tread right many times, though I were in shoos, he
willed me to take care of my self.

When he was arrived to the other open stayres, where many persons of the
Castle were to see him; one of the Confortatori, who was well experienced in
those occasions, and stood on the one hand, placing a Crucifixe before him (and
as it were covering him therewith) cried out, with a strong voice, Let Viua
Giesu Christ.
Christ Jesus live; be not frighted, my Lord. To which he, (after he had ended
the Verse, which he was pronou^cing) made this answer; Yea, let Christ Jesus
live; in whom, whilst I am hoping, I do not fear to be confounded. And then
said I, In te Domine speraui, non confundar in aeternum; which being repeated
by him, he spoke thus to them; Take A noble courage.
the Crucifixe aside; let all the people see me. For if I be good for nothing
else, at least I may serve them, for an example. There passed one that way, with
a bottle of wine in his hand, who saluted the Baron, upon his knee, and the
Baron, courteously resaluted him; and so returned to the same verse of the
Psalm, which he had formerly begun. Soon after, passing through the people,
which stood there, a little, thick, he said; Learn Few words, and well
chosen. It is not there the fashion, for a man to stand preaching, at the place
of his execution.
by my example, to live well, and pray for me. And thus with Psalms, and
Iaculatory prayers, he came to the block, where there was store of lookers on.

The intrepide Baron pausing there, said thus. I would desire, in these last
moments of my life, to see, at least, and salute, and thank, the Lieutenant
Governor of the Castle, since I cannot see my Lord, the Governor. But the
Lieutenant, by no means resolving to go toward him (for the extreme
tenderness, wherewith he was taken) the Noble Youth, perceauing it, and turning
to me, said; Father, his heart serves him not to come; and perhaps I make the
people stay too long. O most valiant, and most undaunted mind, which was
troubled more with the slight incommodity of others, then with the
apprehension of his own imminent death. At last, he cheerfully aduauncing
forward, the Lieutenant, came before him; and the Baron, casting himself upon
his knee, said to me, In courtesy, Father, take off my hat. Which the good
Gentleman observing, A kind contention who should most exceed in courtesy.
did, with a most bitter, and loud cry of tears, even spread himself, all
upon the ground; and the bystanders, upon that occasion, did cast themselves
all, upon their knees; nor was there any thing heard, but a loud voice of
tears This generous young Lord, said the^, thus to him. Sir, do not weep; I
had no design, but to salute you; to thank you; and to beg your pardon; as
now I do, both of your self, and, in your person, at the hands of al them, who
are present here; desiring them to learn at my cost, and to pray for my soul.
This he said, with so strong a voice, as that he was heard, notwithstanding
the noise of their weeping. I also, was not able to stay my tears; when he
leaning toward mine ear, spoke these very words, now below, as before he
had done, above: Behold, your Reverence is weeping; and yet still you tell me,
that I must have a Noble Heart. Then having repeated, diverse times, In manus
tuas Domine, commendo spiritum meum; and, Suscipe me Domine, secundum eloquium
tuum, and non confundas me ab expectatione mea; he was wished to ascend and
then to lay himself down upon the Scaffold. At the same instant, one of the
Confortatori saying to him, Cheerfully Signor Troilo, courageously Signor
Troilo; and a whole cry of prayers being raised, and made by all the company
for him; that valiant Heart, did answer even with a smiling countenance; Know A
noble, and holy, valiant heart.
Gentlemen, that I dye cheerfully, for the Love of Jesus Christ, and in
Penance for my sins.

As therefore he was laying down his head; where (said he) is the Father? And
turning toward the Executioner, he said, Stay a while; for I will be
reconciled. And beckning me, first, toward him with his countenance; Father
(said he) on this hand, I place my These Saines he used, as intercessours for
him to Christ our Lord.
Good Angel; and on that, S. Paul, and S. John the Baptist; our B. Lady, shall
stand before. Your Reverence must remember, to perform the promise, which you
made me. I will say, O bone Jesus, esto mihi Jesus; O good Lord Jesus, be thou a
Jesus to me; and when you shall see, that the cord is in cutting, you must
say, Ego te absoluo etc. that so, when I shall inuoke the name of Jesus; and
you absolve me; my soul may begin her journey, from this body of mine, toward
heaven, by the mercy of my Lord, as I confide it shall.

I do ingenuously confess, that I was so mightily amazed within my self, and
I fell into such an excess of weeping, that I had not a word to answer, at
the instant, but in the language of tears. And he, in laying his head upon the
block, expressly spoke these very words: Dear Father, draw near me. Let it
suffice, and I take you to witness, That So that his memory and courage was far
from failing him; and perhaps there is hardly to be found in any history, a
nobler Character, of wisdom, presence of mind, magnanimity, and sanctity.
I protest my seife, in my desire to lay down a thousand heads, in this one
head of mine; and in this one life, to offer up a thousand lives. I accuse my
self, for not doing it, with that fervor of devotion; that vehemence of
Contrition; and that promptitude of resignation, which I have been told, and
taught. But I know not how to do more. I accuse my self, as truly, of all the
sins, which I have confessed unto your Reverence, as if now I did repeat
them to you, one, by one. In Penance, if it please you, I will give my head to
Christ, as a punishment which is most deserved by me; and of you I desire
Absolution.

So did this Noble heart, which neither was, nor was to be conquered, or
daunted, lay down that head, upon the block. And saying then, Bring See how
this true Christian courage, co^tinues even to the end, and in the end.
hither the Crucifixe, that I may see it; he began also to say, O bone Jesus,
sis mihi Jesus; O good Lord Jesus, be a Jesus to me, being accompanied by all
the people, who were already upon their knees, and who also, inuoked the name
of Jesus. And my self, standing close, at the one side of his head, and looking
still, when the Executioner would go about to cut the cord, as soon as I saw,
that the knife was lifted up, for that purpose, I said outright, Ego I absolve
thee from all thy sins in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost.
te absoluo ab omnibus peccatis tuis, in nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus
Sancti, Amen. He did then, both more speedily, and more lowdly then was his
custom, say, Jesus, sis mihi Jesus; O Jesus, be thou a Jesus to me. And at the
instant, his head flew off, at once, from his body. And my self, with many
others also, did see, that his head being already cut off, did produce the last
syllable of the name of Jesus, with a strong kind of hiss, or whisper. And the
soul, I trust, did fly up free, into His body was interred, in the Chiesa
Nuoua.
Heaven; adorning all his former life, with a holy end; upon that very day, of
the year, whereupon the most Illustrious Lord his Father, had departed out of
this life, before this Son of his was borne; that former being the 18. of
April, Anno Domini 1574.

FINIS.

