A Revelation of the true Minerua.

The effect of this book.Who on earth be gods: and by what means mortal men
may be made immortal.

Psalm. Lxxxii. God stands in the congregation of the gods: he is Judge
amongst the gods.

1582.

engraved decorative border

To the very virtuous and my singular good Lady, the Lady Leighton, one of the
Ladies of the Queens Majesty's most honorable privy Chamber: the Pilgrim
wishes a long and happy life, with such increase of honor, as her Ladyships
godly endeavors do deserve.
HOw far little England (my very good Lady) does in perfect felicity
surpass all the large kingdoms of the world, that travel and small
experience which I have had, has sufficiently taught me: and in truth (were
it not that the general plenty of passing much happiness, does make a great
multitude of people to forget in many respects their duties,) I would without
doubting steadfastly believe that the Sun it self neither does, nor ever has
shined upon any place, whose prosperity might compare with this Islands:
brought in deed to that worthy pass by the great good government and
singular industry of the Queens Majesty's most excellent wisdom. The due
consideration whereof, did move me continually to force my self in the praise
of so great a personage, and finding my weakness equal with mine
unworthiness, I was still restrained from that attempt, and had indeed never
attempted but that necessity constrains the ignorant to speak when the
learned be silent, and the truth may with great commendation be uttered out of
the mouth of a child. At my last return out of the maine Ocean, being entered
into that brod and boystrous bay of Portingale, there (I may truly say)
amongst the most mighty and greatest ouergrowne Seas in the world, the
strength of my desire so prevailed, as it forced me (even there) solemnly to
vow, presently after mine arrival I would endeavor to strain my breath to
the uttermost, so to sound forth her excellent praise, who of a barbarous I Will
has made a most flourishing common wealth. And being arrived in that pleasant
Tempe, immediately solitary contemplation so acquainted me with the heavenly
divine powers, that not by imagination, but with present familiare conference,
I was continually conuersaunt with the Muses, with all learnings Ladies, even
with the ansient Gods and Goddesses themselves, who have repaide my diligent
service with a small ability to use my pen as a proper instrumente against
yrkesome idleness, and a sharp swoorde to vanquishe her brutish daughter blind
ignorance mother to error, the dreadful vndoer of mankind. By this means I
filled of late five queeres of paper with mine own devises, if a man may
esteem that his which the great worldemaker, I know not by what secret
divine infusion conuaieth into him, which book for that it is in deed but a
brief repetitio^ of the Queens majesty's due deserved praises, therefore I did
entitle it A Revelation of the true Minerua: in whithe discourse for that it
pleases many of the worthiest that ever lived to utter some speeches in the
praise of her most excellent Majesty, and to surrender and resign over their
titles, being as it would seemee, provoked thereto by her majesty's due
deserts, I not able to co^ceale that part, have abruptly rent it from the rest
which made it once more beautiful. And because your Ladyships exceeding great
wisdom has made you a very worthy member of her majesty's most royal Court,
and has enriched you with such credit as you may mightily defend all godly
and good endeavors, having your place continually very near unto her majesty's
elbow, therefore I have set forth this first part under your tuition, hoping
that the matter therein contained shall please even as many as shall read it,
and thus your Ladyships most humble servant does end, wishing unto you in every
respect your hearts desires.

The Printer to the Reader.
GEntle reader, the intricate sense of some things contained in this small
treatise, may induce thy doubtful mind into diverse judgments: therefore by
observing the Alphebeticall order set down in the margent, and so conferring
the notes which I have hear prefixed with the authors discourse, thou shall
(I doubt not,) find a light sufficient to lead thee through that darkness,
and thou understanding thereby his intent wilt (I hope) remain sufficiently
satisfied, which thing I heartily wish.

BEcause that diverse very good Philosophers have interprited Saturn to
signify the plentiful abundance of a mind endued with true understanding,
deriuing it from the greek word (...): because also in his time the golden
world was in the most flourishing estate: therefore he is here brought in, as
one endued with the true understanding how to govern and rule a common weal:
and so generally throughout this treatise, when any one whom the heathen for
his worthiness woorshipped as a god is rehearsed, not the man, but the virtue
which made him of so great estimation is to be regarded, and in this place the
author with great admiration, finding all virtue, goodness and godliness, to
concur in a woman, because he thinks it no herisie to affirm that every
good man having the place of a Maiestrate is a god: therefore his intent is,
that they whom virtue made gods, should create this goddess, the very
beloved of God, on whom God has abundantly bestowed his great and best
blessings without measure, and thus he takes his exordium from the Psalm. 82
God stands in the congregation of the gods, etc.

Pallas and Minerua by the authority of many Poets Pallas the daughter of
Jupiter is called by the name of Minerua: yet this is most certain, we read
but of one Pallas whose name is derived of (...): she is of some called
Bellona the goddess of war, of other Tritonia, taking that name of the Fenne
in which she was first found: she was compted the goddess of human
knowledge, and Aristotle calls her Scientiarum and prudentiae dea: but we
read of 5. Mineruae: all the Philosophers, and especially Tully (contrary to
the opinion of many Poets) do call one of them Disciplinarum, and Sapientiae
dea, the great and greatest goddess, even she who had the knowledge of
heavenly wisdom: but how so ever it was his intent is to show that worldly
wit is of none effect without heavenly wisdom, and for that cause Pallas does
here lament the loss of Mineruae, thinking it not possible that the pollitike
laws of any common weal can be of sufficient force to beat down sin, and
to bridle the ranging desires of man's disposition without divinity, and that
the body cannot be brought to obey any law, except that the working of the
conscience be the chief cause thereof: and so he proceeds to his purpose,
to prove that heavenly wisdom is the knowledge and fear of God, and she
which is endued therewith, does well deserve to be called Minerua, the very
true goddess of wisdom.

Alecto that spiteful furiesse of hell (for so have the Galathea, a light and
very wanton woman, and thereby may be seen how blind spite and hatred are:
whose desire is always to destroy the virtuous, and to advance the wicked.

Decorum.

Farewell.
The Preface.
A Poor Pilgrim who seeks the circle round
Of all the world to find his hearts desire,
On tope of hie Pernassas hill he found
This book, which all the Muses did admire,
With golden chain on deske of Genepire
Fast locked it lay upon Apollos seat.
This in his breast did kindle first the fire,
Both night and day he did the Gods entreat,
Long time he serude with trickling drops of sweat
Like drudge to learnings Ladies small and great:
And in the end they gave him for his hyre
Such knowledge as of them he did require.
Minerua now revealed is renownde,
For fame her name and due desert does sound:
Her happy head with goodly crown is crownde,
Long may she live and clime in honor hier,
All means remoude that may move her to ire
The Pilgrim prays, doubting his own retire.
Go straight and fear not.
A Revelation of the true Minerua.
Almighty Jove, he Saturn sage did send,
Commanding Mars, and Mercury to meet,
Apollo passing prudent did attend:
And Neptune left the seas, and all his fleet,
The God of gods, these Goodly Gods did greet:
Then thus he said, let it be known by you,
Whom I on earth most worthy do auowe.
Forespent with speed, consumde well near with haste,
Pallas, she there did piteously complain,
Both I, and all the world is quite digrast,
My dear sister, Minerua mine, in vain
I live alas, for now there does remain,
No no, not one Minerua done away,
Which in her place is meet to bear the sway.
The Muses mourn, and mourn they may for me
Since goddess she of greatest grace is gone,
Poor Pallas I perplexed with misery,
Am left alone, (alas) and all alone:
To you, you gods my state I do bemone,
And if you will have Pallas still remain,
Then you a new Minerua must ordain.
Apollo sat with Saturn by his side,
Hence Mercury, go get thee hence he said,
Do seek and search through all the world so wide
For her, who may be new Minerua made,
Whose due deserved fame shall never fade.
The winged God went thence as swift as wind:
And Saturn sage did thus declare his mind.
All savage then like tearing Tigers fell,
more brute then beasts, there lust most lewd was law:
Men liude when I a man with men did dwell,
Then men by men were rent and eaten raw:
From wicked wild even I these men did draw
To civil life, by my good government:
They were inclinde to know what reason meant.
Then laws I made, and right at last did reign,
All men with one consent put to their hand:
From hills and woods in the most pleasant plain
men met like friends, and as they there did stand,
Both how, and who, should rule, and till the land
I did ordain, cities and towns they then
did build, of beasts, they were by me made men.
Then none did eat the sweet of others sweat,
For thine by right, and merry mine I made,
Therefore a God of all the gods most great
They me ordainde, my fame can never fade
Till heaven and all the earth be quite decaide:
For Saturn sits aloft in seemly sphere,
Even so does Mars (said Mars) as you shall hear.
Thy mine and thine did breed such bitter strife,
From out the world when thou were once away,
As every man did seek each others life,
That witless will might have the power of may
To rule vnruld, to bear the chiefest sway:
Then king with king, the weakest went to wrack,
And mighty mine made feeble thine his lack.
Then might was right, for all thy laws were lame,
The goodly ground with blood was then imbrude,
Then wars and warlike weapons I did frame,
And force perforce, I right again renude,
Most quiet peace my bloody wars insude:
My trained troops of soldiers kept in awe,
All such whose lewdness made their lust a law.
You greatest gods do grant and give me grace,
Silenus sage (all Satier like) did say:
To tell a truth here in this press and place:
Mars half amazde, his story there did stay:
They gave him leave, then he without delay*
men may be gods, even gods of great degree,
Such gods must die like men, and so did we.
Why, how, and who, by God and men be made,
Of mortal men immortal gods give ear,
when due deserved fame can never fade:
Report by right above the earth shall rear
All such, and set their names in seemly sphere,
Such live on earth more happy then the rest:
Such have in heaven a bliss of all the best.
Bacchus did plant, and Ceres sowde the ground,
Neptune deuisde the swelling Seas to sail,
Apollo for his learning was renownde: Haec prude^tiae, illa sapie^tiae dea.

For worldly wit dame Pallas did prevail,
Even she who here Mineruas want does wail,
These all were gods by due desert, and she
A goddess, next Minerua by degree.
For heavenly wisdom Minerua
she excelled each one,
Her knowledge was, the soul from sin to save,
Which knowledge now is known alas to none,
For all the world it is so bounsing brave
As none, no one does think upon his grave:
If Sapiens divine wisdom be dead,
Then Pallas may with tears consume her bred.
Divinity is made a masking coat,
To compass what the diuelishe do devise,
Deceit and craft has set their force aflote,
All men have wit, and no man now is wise:
Like Proteus proud they do themselves disguise,
No Gods but Devils, no men but beasts they be:
Practicing craft and deep hypocrisy.
As men before Saturnus time were rude,
Now much more brute and savage they will be,
If care of conscience does not sin detrude:
You must therefore erect divinity,
And one ordain of great and good degree,
Who must possess Mineruas former place,
So all the world true knoweledge will embrace.
Then he and they all silent sodenlie,
Their musing minds did mourn and marvel much,
That this the last and latter age should be
Forlorn, the grieved Gods here at did grutch.
Then Mercury his quick return was such,
Like hagarde hawk from haughty heaven he sell,
And thus he did to them his travel tell.
Where Troy once stood no city now does stand,
A rude unlearned rowte in Thebs remain,
In Athens now there be a beastly band,
And Rome is rude her vaunting is in vain:
Even so is France, all Italy, and Spayn,
No Liuye lives, no Tully can be found,
There is not one good Poet on the ground.
That haughty hill Parnassus heavenly hie
For learning where the louly Laurel grew,
The bramble brier has got the victory:
The banks once brave with flowers of goodly hew,
All Helecon is black with molded blewe:
Permessus springes be dry, the Nymphs be dead,
The gorgious garlands gone, the Muses flead.
The wars has wipt what worthy was away,
And Barbarye does Christendom devour,
The Turk, the Moore, the prince of Persia,
They daily do increase in strength and power,
They learning loathe, they build like beasts their bower
In igoraunce, they fear nor God nor devil,
They hate the good, they honor what is evil.
Yet I am sent that Phoenix rare to find
Whom all in vain I seek and can not see,
And yet she lives, and is of Saturns kind,
Begot by Mars, preserud by Jove, and she
Remaynes alive, in place not known to me,
The firm of all the world my self have sought,
Yet her to find the Oracle has taught.
Where Arctike poole with Guardes does stand
L. and two Lacking a third part.
degrees from land
Minerua does remain:
Where want of war and quiet peace
Has cloid the country with increase
of gold and goodly grain,
Where Troynouant, where Athens new,
where noble Nymphs do dwell,
Where many modest Muses be,
even such as do excel.
This greatest goddess there in throne
Of highest dignity alone
does sit, and bear the sway:
Olympus there, Pernassus hie,
Permessus springes be never dry,
the ground is green and gay:
The Palm and Laurel there does grow,
even there her biding is,
Out from the world, yet on the ground,
even in a place of bliss.
There comes quoth noble Neptune to my mind
That same of yore which sober Sybill said,
When Mercury in vain shall seek to find:
When all the world with wars shall be dismaide:
When learninges light shall seem to be decade:
Let Neptune then rejoice with triple mace,
Let all the gods depart and give him place.
Where at the gods greatly grieved did frown,
And said, the sea could not the land excead:
But suddenly there was a goodly crown
With garlandes gay on noble Neptunes head,
Imbroderd brave in roman letters read
All percell gilt, and burnished with blewe,
The truth was set, and thus it did insewe.
The tearing tract of time has wasted and worn out the worthy,
The mighty maine now may mourn such loss, since the sea has her glory.
The grieved gods did marvel all amazde,
Such unknown sightes upon this crown were seen,
About the top a swelling sea was raysde:
In which a chalkie cliffe with meadows green,
There in on stately throne a royal Queen,
A pransing Pegasus stood by the dame,
And on his back sat everlasting fame.
On hiest top a heavenly angel stood,
Hard by his side a Harraulde had his place,
From raging seas, even from the Ocean flood
Appearde a prince, bold Brutus by his grace,
To Harraulde he declarde his royal race:
The king at arms his petigree he pende,
The Angel markte and did his miss amend,
The Queen to noble Brutus blood was found
By long desent alied linially,
Aeneas he who was so much renownde
From him did Brute descend successively:
The wandering prince had his nativity
For him who was the eldest son, in seat
His grandsier sat, of all the gods most great.
The seat wherein this courtly Queen did sit
was Rubie rare, none seen forsice so great,
a golden globe was under both her feet,
a comely cloud did compass all the seat,
the sea in vain the cloud and globe did beat
with foming froth, about her heavenly head
Pallas persaude a posie, which she read.
Not such a godesse again in Asia, Europ, or Affricke,
for virtue, great degree, for her magnanimity,
Now let Apollo give place, let Neptune sit in the chief seat,
since in his sea she does dwell, ruling a world at her will,
Blissed and blissed again, three times thrice happy minerua,
with thee and thine estate no mortal man may compare.
Then Pan (when Neptune had Apollos place)
that rural god and clownishe rustikes king,
with shepheardes three attending on his grace,
he plide his pipe, the one of them did sing,
the second sighth, the third his hands did wring,
when pastor Pan persaude their pitious plight,
his pipe laid down he made his men resight
their cause of care.
From walled town I Bembus wonted was
a mighty mass of money once a year
full xl. crowns I did return, alas
now xx. grootes I can not compass clear,
my stock, my store, my household stuff most dear,
I spend, and spoil, and all to none avail,
lawgh he that list, Bembus shall weep and wayle.
On pleasant pipe to play did please me much,
I did delight sweet ditties to indight:
But now the woes of wretched wars be such
As nothing else but how in field to fight,
And how to keep the flock from soldiers sight:
That ravening woolfe, whose never filled mawe
With rage does make his wicked will a law.
Poor Colon I, and careful Comma she
My weded wife, once happy, now forlorn,
Let us complain of fortunes cruelty,
The countries grace, and now the countries scorn,
X. men, v. flocks, v. plowes, to sow my corn
I keept, but now the greater is my care
My flocks be stolen, my fruitful fields be bare.
The people for the princes pride are plagde,
It falls to the faultlesse subjects lot,
To double drink in cruel cup of care,
When perverse princes madding mind does dote:
Bellona then does sound a doleful note,
Then blooddie men of war the sweet does eat
Without regard of us the shepheardes sweat.
My Bembus dear thou know this Summer last,
Whose army laid all level with the ground
Our corn half ripe, our vines were spoild as fast,
Our towns be burnt, our woods worth many a pound
Be quite destroyde, and where may now be found
One hedge, or ditch, not torn nor trodden down,
This cursed crop we reap from hie renown.
In winter now when Boreas bitter blast
Forbiddes in field that armed men should meet,
A greater grief we country men do taste,
We cessed are, the soldier eats the sweet
Of all our toil, a thing nor just nor meet,
Such is my state: yet this my hireling
when Pan does pipe what does he then but sing.
And sing thy servant must good Colon, he
Does hope to have (as he before has had)
A place of rest exempt from misery,
You both (I think) do sin to be so sad,
Take mine advise and be you ever glad,
Do follow me, forsake these fields though known,
My self can give the like they be mine own.
For I Epizenes a pastor am,
Though now thy man yet I my self keep men,
With in my fields skipes many a lusty lamb,
I dwell where beef and bacon meat for men,
where milk and honey flows like the fenne:
I dwell where want of war and quiet rest
Does plainly prove Britain to be the best.
Epizenes thou seemst to have no sense,
Bembus shall prove thee mad or ignorant,
If so it be, why did thou run from thence?
wherefore? because all things they be so scant
where thou do dwell, that naked need and want
Did drive thee thence, my neighbor Colon can
Report thy state, when first thou were his man.
Bembus, do hear the story of my state,
Cloyd with the bliss which now I do desire,
I know not what the froward force of fate
I being well, did make me to aspire,
By travel I did think to clime up hier,
Thus not content in paradize to dwell,
seeking for heaven, I found out hateful hell,
By sea and land my self with restless toil
The circle round of all the world have sought,
Since first I left my lovely native soil
with dear expense my knoweledge I have brought,
The spice of Spain, Canary wine is naught,
The grapes of France, the fruit of Italye,
Nor pleasant fields in Flanders pleases me,
What tax, what toll, what tribute do they pay?
with daily wars, what wretched lives they lead?
Kings they do cause continual decay,
Their subjects live in daily doubt and dread.
They woeful wightes, do hate their hurtful head,
They curse their kings, like slaves which make the^ serve,
They till and toil, and yet for food they starve.
Oppression rules with cruel tyranny,
In Spain is spiteful superstition spread:
Hard roughnes does remain in Germany,
Fidelity from faithless France was flead:
In Italy fancy is suprime head:
Blind ignorance in Barbary remain,
The Turk does love the devil, and God disdain.
But none of these in Britayne brave abide,
Where godesse great Elizabeth does rain.
For God almighty with his grace does gyde
Her highness heart, and all her courtly train,
That happy he who may with her remain:
Both poor and rich does quietly possess
Their own, the haven of heavenly happiness.
When lust most leude made justice leave the law:
And vice destroyed dame virtues stately style:
Divinity esteemde not worth a straw:
These three disdaind were banished to exile,
They left the land, on seas they saild a while,
And at the last on Brittayne brave they fell,
Where queen Eliza made these Ladies dwell.
Religion first a certain sign of grace,
Not next, but in her high^^^s heavenly heart,
Amidst her mind virtue (...) take her place:
She did command Justice not to depart
From her right hand, nor from her side to start:
Then thus she spoke, during my doubtful date
I will be Queen, you three shall rule my state.
Epizenes (quoth) Pan if Bembus be,
If Colon with his Comma be content,
We will depart to place unknown with thee,
And sell or let the sheep courses for rent:
Some god perhaps thy self has hither sent,
Us to conduct to place where as we may
Live like the men in rich Europia.
And better much for liberty and gain,
if so you will, then let us hence away.
The winds be good, do never think it pain
to sail the Seas, within a month we may
have happy haven, and be in blessed bay:
my self will take that stately charge in hand,
to guide your course, and win the wished land.
With this cross staff, wherewith I wonted was,
height, length, and breadth of every thing to tell,
with that, and with an Astrolob of brass,
Globe, Compass, a Nocturnall will do well,
with these, and with my Card which does excel,
I so will sail, as you shall understand:
that Palinurus hate the Helm in hand.
When Titan sittes in middayes circle seat,
when goodly Guardes does Artike Pole displaie,
then shall you see a shephearde do the feate,
and perfectly direct you on your way:
over the place where as I mean to stay,
The North star stands at fifty two degree,
That height found out, we find felicity.
They were content, and as they did depart,
The greatest god of all this goodly train,
I see (he said) thou have the Sea man's Art:
My Mercury has ceaselesse sought in vain,
Minerua there, Minerua does remain:
Go forth my son and travail to new Troy:
He went, and came, and brought increase of joy.
For as you see the swiftest Swallows wing,
Does cut the sky, and leaves her haunt behind:
So Mercury the post of Gods did bring
His message back, whom Homer has assignde:
A messenger to them of heavenly kind:
To whom he did with speed his speech adresse,
And thus what he had seen he did express.
My travail proves the Oracle most true,
The workmahship on Neptunes noble crown,
Does represent half the deserved due,
Of her the greatest goddess of renown:
Minerua lives, let Pallas cease to frown,
She is alive, my self her grace have seen,
In majesty, of Britayne brave the Queen.
To wh m when first I made my message known,
And said, O Queen the gods do thee salute,
Saturn himself whose fame about is blown:
Mars Neptune, and Apollo great by brute,
Pallas thy younger sister has a suit
unto thy grace, they all, but chiefly she,
Sent me to know thy state and great degree.
The Queen replide, I know no God but one
And he of heaven, who guides me by his grace:
The Heathen had their Gods which now be gone,
Whose Idols I by Gods spell did deface:
There is one God and him I do embrace,
No sister I, yet what they do intend
declare, for I all goodness will defend.
Most mighty prince Saturn does signify
good government: Neptune and Mars of might
By Sea and land in war haught valiancie,
Apollo how divinely to indight,
Pallas wisdom to rule and reign aright:
Such virtues great from these men did descend,
They are and shall be gods unto the end.
Yet banished now they live in dark exile,
For where is valor or good gouernemente?
Learning has left her former stately style,
From prudence craft her right with rage has rent:
The cause why these destressed Gods have sent
me to this I Will, from that most mighty maine
is this, they hear thy highness here does reign
By right, ruling thie Realm with equity,
Heavenly wisdom and godly zeal does rest
with thee, pity and perfect piety:
God with his grace abundantly has blessed
thy grace, and thee inritcht above the rest,
They, (other) Princes of another kind
Do banishe such as thou do seek to find.
Hopeless of help which when these gods did hear,
They sent in post on message Mercury:
I am not fame which flies here and there
For Mercury dear dame, doeh signify
A messenger, and for the gods am I
Sent with this suit, if it may please thy grace,
Both they and I will serve thee in this place.
And then the Queen, my servants? no, my saints,
Copertiners of my crown and dignity:
Let them leave off their heretofore complaints:
Bid them come rule this mighty Realm with me,
And let them know my state and great degree:
Tell them that nothing can delight me more,
Then they whose names I chiefly do adore.
Then might you see the prudent Pallas glade,
And all her mourning garments done away,
All her assistants sighde and sobd full sad:
Rejoiced now, and Solemnizde that day
With songs, and making garlandes gorgeous gay:
Then thus she spoke, good Mercury at large,
Report the things committed to thy charge.
His reply.
Her heavenly hew, her more then mortal grace,
(For virtue may mortal immortal make,)
Her stately steps, her princely royal race,
Her Majesty makes mortal men to quake,
Her dignity does make the gods to shake:
When earthly eyes her highness do behold,
They do affirm her form not from the moulde.
Over her head, angels with swords in hand,
Betwixt her eyes does right remorse remain,
Before her face the fear of God does stand,
Salomons bliss abides in her brain,
Her ears be stopped to matters vilde and vain:
From goodly lips her learned tongue does tell
The way to heaven, where she no doubt does dwell.
Contented life within her mind does rest,
Upon her breast does perfect bliss abide,
And charity does sit upon her chest:
A certain sure state that cannot slide
Is fixed as best beseemes fast to her side,
Most worthy praise for her virginity,
Diana never half so chaste as she.
Her arm does rule a mighty Realm by right,
Her hand does give each one his due desert,
To walk in righteous ways is her delight,
From perfect path her feet do not depart,
Her steps most straight do show her heavenly heart,
Under her feet raging revenge does couch,
At her command her valor to auouche.
When treasons spightful, hid conspiracies,
They would untwine her worthy warped twist:
These heavenly Angels then with Argus eyes,
Do force the blooddie blade from traitors fist,
Whose gotten gain is heavy had I wist:
When foreign foes would reaue her princely crown,
Then black revenge does beat their boastings down.
This true report whilst Maias son has made,
And brought the gods from marvel to a maze,
Withouten shape all substantlesse a shade
Appearde in sight, on which they all did gaze,
Whose bended brows an inward grief did blaze:
This shadow seemde with all her might in vain,
To turn the wheel where mankind does remain.
On top whereof Minerua has her place,
A glorious seat by which but one did sit,
and he not known, princes of royal race
about the sides in place for them most fit,
A godly youth and of a worthy wit
Was plast with them, whose mothers due desert
Quite from the wheel had laid her down apart.
Alecto then, the breader of debate
Though pale, and wane yet blewe with ruthful rage,
Fie fortune fie (quoth she) fie on thy state,
A goddess? no, thou wart in elder age,
Contemned now of plowman, prince and page,
No homage done, honor, nor sacrifice,
Come take revenge of this contempt, arise,
By nature I all happiness do hate,
The gifts I give are bitter griefs like gall,
Hate, spite, malice, and madness, stay my state,
With these I daily do devise to thrall
All such as sit aloft in stately stal:
My pleasure is the fortunate to foil,
All my delight is in their speedy spoil.
With mighty arm to turn this wheel make have:
Let them below above in bliss remain,
My gorgeous Galathea is disgrast,

Of thee, and to thy grace she does complain:
Hear her at last, and let her not for aye
By due desert be drowned in decay.
But fortunes force was now of none avail,
When vices vilde to cave of cruel care
Do cast, her power then can not prevail:
When godly life, and virtues very rare,
When they advance, what fickle fortune dare
molest such one, whom God in highest place
has set, whose steps be guided by his grace.
Alecto lewd the hater of good hap
when she perceiude dame fortunes feeble force,
She made about and spide a second gap
wherein she leapt, O Pluto take remorse
on us she said, with voice hollow and hoarce:
She sits thou sest in highest dignity,
which does destroy thy mighty monarchy.
The world thou know, I all the world was thine,
Thy caves were cramd, when heaven all empty was,
Blind ignorance that mighty mother mine
she ruld, she rainde, she brought it so to pass
That all was thine, even she maintaind the mass,
And she it was which gave the triple crown
To him of Rome, of more then Ironi^.
much renown.
But now, (not from Apollos learned brain)
Out from the stock of Mars is sprung a maid,
Who does both him, and thee, and me disdain,
Thou sest by her thy kingdom is decayed,
Thou sest her force, her fame can never fade,
True knowledge shortly so shall stuff the heaven,
That all thy state shall stand at six and seven.
Quoth Pluto tell my Metropolitan,
To no such end he has his princely place,
He keeps the keys, his might may bliss or ban,
Yet does he see and suffer this disgrace,
Tell him from me I him and all his race
will quite destroy except he does pluck down,
All such as be rebellers to my crown.
Thus did the Devil with patience reply,
But when the Pope had heard his princes mind,
His heavy heart in raging wrath did fry,
In have, post have a counsel he assignde:
Bals balling Priests (not only bald but blind,)
From every coast in flocks like Coutes they came,
Thus spoke the woolfe clad like a simple lamb.
My ghostly care with mercy mixed too much,
Has brought contempt, cursing shall now prevail:
This stubborn wretched wicked world is such.
Now punishment and whippes of bitter bail:
They must and shall refourme, I will not fail,
To pluck them down with vengeance ruthful reed:
Which do deny me to be supreme head.
Have I the power to curse, to bliss, to bind,
To lose, to send to heaven or else to hell?
Or is this key and triple crown assignde
To me, to suffer them thus to rebel?
No no, I will subdue them very well:
To France, to mighty Spain, to Italy
I Britane give, Scotland, and Germany.
Whose princes proud are fled from former faith,
And do devise to rob me of the rest,
When as my state was at the hiest haigth
Then happy he who with my toe was blessed,
Then all was mine from the'st unto the west,
Then on the backs of Emperors I trod*
Then who but I, there was none other God.
But now alas I live in low degree,
A woman does me and my might defy,
The Gospel now my mortal enemy
By means of her is preached both far and nie:
As it reuiues, so I your pope do die:
As I do droupe, so you your selves must mourn,
Look well heereto before you be forlorn.
This careful court in haste it did devise,
It sent forth sects, it traitors did retain,
Those rebels fled for fear which feign would rise,
It made them practice matters vilde and vain,
Alectos Galathia did complain
Whom to advance they have, they do, and will,
On feeble fort such show their slender skill.
For as the seas do roar against the rock
In vain, and winds no mountains may remove,
So there at Rome these forcelesse priests did flock
None of their popish practizes would prove,
Which did so much that mighty monster move,
As straight he did a holy league conclude,
Meaning by might the Gospel to detrude.
Then Galathia presently was blessed,
If he may bless who could nor can not curse,
He made a shot and yet the mark he mist,
He stretched the stringes of his plentiful purse
In vain, and all in vain he did disburse
His Peterpence, all things had such success,
As well descrude his worships worthiness.

Peter put on his considering cappe,
A fruitelesse flower passing poor and pale:
Without or smell, or taste, or sense, or sap,
A hidden hook, a train, a secret trappe,
Away the witch, the winds were not to scant,
The fleet was rigde, and yet there was a want.
Then from that board he cast his sails about,
He did and does an other drift devise,
Alecto with her stobourne servants stout
Does further forth his diuelishe enterprise,
With false report to every coaste she flies
And filles the ears of every king with ire
Against her grace to make them all conspire.
The present gods seeing this great turmoile,
Made haste with speed her person to defend,
Said Saturn let us keep her from the foil,
This wicked world she all her force does bend
To sink such as by virtue would ascend.
This is (said Mars) a valiant troop I trow:
which dare attempt one woman's overthrow.
And does the devil and he his depute there?
Do kings consult, and furies fierce of hell,
My daughter from her hie estate to tear?
Dare they against both Jove and us rebel?
O hie devise, their courage does excel:
They feign would frame the overthrow of one
which must and shall remain when they are gone,
Whose pride, but first their rage we will resist,
Menacing Mars with eyes like flaming fire,
His face showde what was shrouded in his breast:
He made all that were present to admire
At his revenge, and dare they thus conspire?
They will (quoth he) and I will do the deed
which shall prevail, when she shall stand in need.
Pallas with secret sudden joy reuiude,
Forgetting quite her griefs forerunne she said,
Attend and hear the song I have contriude,
Give ear you gods, lend me your loving ayd^:
Apollo thou the best that ever plaide
Take Lute in hand, tune to the waters fall,
Minerua lives, whom Pallas honor shall.
Farewell you kings of all the continent
both far and near,
Against both gods, and goodness you be bent
with sword and spear,
Therefore with you the furies fierce of hell,
We with the virtuous English Queen will dwell,
she can not slide
for we will side
Her steps, and make her fame excel.
For true report with golden trumpe does sound
her worthy praise:
But your reproach by rumor does rebounde
in the hie ways
Of all the world, so you in infamy
Must live, and she in royal dignity:
how can she fade
whom virtue made
The greatest godesse by degree.
Rejoice you gods to sing we will not cease,
now we have found
The chiefest place of rest and quiet peace
upon the ground.
For we shall sit even by her seemly side,
Whose mighty mase the golden world does gide:
so worthy a Queen
was never seen,
Whose heavenly state shall never slide.
From striking of his stringes Apollo stayde,
Which brought this sudden end to Pallas song,
His Lute laid down he thus unto them said,
As we be gods, so let us do no wrong,
you know the charge which does to us belong,
How mighty Jove the only god above
Would us on earth show whom he best does love.
If Pallas and the tried truth does prove
The English Queen of all most worthy praise,
Then may we boldly boast that God does love
Her best, if most she walks in his ways,
Which if to prove make we no more delays
But let us hence, for we with her will dwell
If such she be, if so she does excel.
Then her we may and will immortal make,
A goddess great Minerua be her name,
My Mercury he shall him self betake
To all the world, and there he shall proclaim
Both far and near her due deserved fame:
All men that live her grace they shall adore
Both at this present time, and evermore.
Quoth Pallas let it be as you have said,
we will depart, yet doubt not of the dame,
She is by proof and oracle displayde,
Most certainly I know she is the same:
And I before I hence depart, will frame
A comely Coronet of goodly green,
which shall right well become a maiden Queen.
And we said they will break down Floras bower
Yielding thereto the floweres of the field:
Syluanus then stepped from his stately tower,
And I thereto such branches brave will yield
(Said he,) as has been seen but very field,
Of woods, of groves, of goodly green the god
I am, you know they bow if I but nod.
Though hateful Hyems wasting winters rage,
With bitter blastes my tender bows does bite:
Yet friendly Ver her rigor does aswage,
And all my groves with goodly green does dight:
The modest Muses flock for their delight
Amidst my green, they daily march for meede,
They sing, they dance, they there, their fancies feed.
Within my groves such sacred trees do grow
As never will their lovely green forgo,
Them on your goddess garlande I Will bestow,
Not only them, but many flowers more,
Herbs of all sorts if you will have it so.
Quoth Neptune, pearls and precious stones great store
I will supply, what would Pallas have more.
Then forth they went and gathered all was good,
Great mighty bows and branches home they brought,
they did disgrace each forest, field, and wood.
Neptune returned who had his Indies sought,
From thence he Jewels which were never bought
For price, nor pay, they were so passing rare:
To order all Pallas had all the care.
Dame Flora with her nimble Nymphs came in,
Even there they did their lovely lappes unlade,
And in her hand the pretty fairie Queen
She held a glass, these flowers shall not fade,
Them to preserve this water I have made:
They shall not die, nor droup, but flourish fair,
Nor feel the force of Summers swelting air.
The Muses ix. ix. colors did present
Of sowing silk untwined yet in twist,
To sow, to weaue, to bind was their intent
where need requirde, then with her fair fist
A Morian maid when she the place had blist,
Crystal, Currall, Amber, Bugle she
Laid down, and said these for your gerland be.
The Graces called Charites came in,
Two bags, the third she did a bottel bear,
In which full twenty several rooms there bin
All filde with water delicate and dear,
Distilled all: and in the bags there were
Musk, Mirre, Siuit, and Ambergreece the best
That has bin seen, from th, est unto the west.
They all as one imploide their second care
More busy then the bird which buildes her nest,
To take the choice whose virtues were most rare,
They little slippes and branches of the best
Did bring, they left and laid away the rest:
Pallas her self did work this worthy wreath
most passing brave above, and brave beneath.
Ix. noble worthies mighty Mars they prayde
To pass with him to please their chief delight:
Vij. sages then they thus to Saturn said
we will with thee to see this worthy wight:
Three Mariners indude with deep insight
Of seamans skill, worthy to frame a course
where Neptune was in spite of Eols force:
A learned troop unto Apollo pressed,
Of which were two inseparable seemde,
Silenus, tho like mouners, yet the best
Theo^^^^ by deeds and doctrine deemd,
to him they went, of him they were esteemde:
To garnishe Pallas work with greater grace,
By them each branch and flower had her place.
The Fur tree first her branch they did forbid,
For it does spears and warlike weapons make,
The Olives branch (whose virtue lies hid)
It hates, his roots do grow from Limbo lake,
The mourning Cyprus bow they did forsake:
The first with read, but that with black they bound
For them (from this) an other use was found.
The Flowerdeluce though lovely to behold
In question these the wisest did it call,
And to refuse the same the gods were bold:
It representes trouble and cruel thrall,
The leaves like swoordes do grow both tough and tall,
The root though pleasant, poison is to such
As do it drink, which made the Muses grutch.
These thence for secret cause they cast away,
As too too bad to have their being there,
This comely crewe did solemnize that day,
And Pa^^as made her perfect skill appear,
The N^mphes, and Ladies of the fountains clear
More busy then a swarm of bees, they brought
In laden arms such things as they had sought.
A Pantarbe strange of great and goodly sise,
with workmanship as rare as was the stone,
She there the first foundation did devise,
Grene grass she strowde a handful thereupon,
Trefoiles, Cincquefoiles, and caterfoiles among,
The chosen slips of the Pomegranet tree,
These bound with black, with white those did agree,
whose secret sense Libethrides did sing,
whilst Dryades did other flowers bring.
Within the Salamanders head
a precious stone is found,
Of value rich, of virtue rare,
none such upon the ground:
Who does possess the same,
may stand unhurt in flame
of fires force with fame.
Nor Cupids might
Can hurt such one with spite,
Thrice happy wight
Who has the Pantarbe found.
Grass is green common like corn,
yet does it far surmount,
For only grass maintains man,
and is of chief account.
The Roman Captains wore
garlandes thereof of yore,
because they did restore
the quiet peace,
and made the wars surcease.
A great increase
it plainly does present,
The Primerose or Caterfoile
first in the prime does spring,
It is the messenger to May
of wild flowers the king:
Who first it finds must note
his mistres by her Her colors
coat,
It grows like true love knot,
and does present
she never will repent
her voude intent,
happy who first it finds.
The Cincquefoiles sanctity is such,
the Gentiles did apply
It chieflly in their sacrifice
when they did purify,
In it nine colors bin,
but chiefly white and green
the colors of a Queen,
it does declare
The wearer has great care
with virtue rare
to keep her soul from sin.
The Trefoile has his secret sense,
the unity of three
It does declare, and is in league
with the Pomegranet tree:
Cupid that branch did bear,
Whose hand with cruel spear
Each lovers heart does tear,
it does present
All flesh to love is bent,
and must repent
their loss of liberty.
Thus though each Lady needs must love
and seek for unity,
Yet she who does the Pantarbe find
shall live at liberty:
With her reason shall rest,
Fancy shall bilde no nest
Within her blessed breast,
the great increase
of perfect love, and peace,
shall never cease,
Where these flowers be worn.
You happy Hamadryades
now press you out a pace,
Bring forth what best may beautify
the second rank or race:
This work is well begun,
For we our parts have done,
Now you must thither run,
in Pallas lap
You must your flowers wrap,
Mineruas cap
She will therewith adorn.
Two branches then of everlasting wood,
which never will corrupt nor waste away,
But ever green, their savor passing good,
They do declare her fame cannot decay
Which does them wear, by due desert I say
Pallas them plast, and gave the next degree
Unto the Cedar and Geniper tree.
A thousand orient pearls she hangde thereon,
For white with green will ever well agree,
Sweet Williams then she placed them among,
And Lauinder for liberality:
For her good works, a branch of Sauorie,
Al these the worthy woodbind did embrace:
The Honisuckle gave a greater grace
Unto them all, whose branch with crystal dight,
Did much increase the beholders delight.
The Double Dill^ for her humility,
Laus tibi (health) the Affodill does show,
The Oking branch her diuturnitie,
And thereuppon did golden Acornes grow
In comely knopps, hanging in seemly row:
To furnishe these she set a slip of sage
For sustinance, all anger to aswage
Next this she gentle Gezemen did place,
And thrifte she tide within our Ladies lace.
Pallas a comely Carbuncle did take,
whose royal raise were bright like Phoebus bsames,
A triple towred top she meant to make
Thereon, for well she wist the glittering gleames
Thereof did shine with goodly stately streams,
And leand unto the lookers on such light,
That they might judge of every thing aright.
And when she had the herb Alimon found,
Alaluya by and by she spide,
The Larkesfoote fast with white to Burnet bound,
Dictamum she to Pencryall tide,
with goodly green she made them all abide:
And bear the branche whose tender twigges did bend,
with golden fruit as though their rine would rende:
About the Lillies stalk Hearts ease was wrapped,
And love within our Ladies smock she lapt.
The pretty Pincke, the goodly Marie gold,
Musk Roses mixed with seemly Sops in wine,
Sweet Violets, of colors manifold,
The gentle Gyllyflower florisht fine,
Rosemary tide unto a little Time,
with Basell, Balm, Isope* sweet Margerie,
These were intrayld with branche of Rasper tree
Even then she did the double Daseye down
with blewe she bound it to the Laurel tree:
The little Pauncie greatest of renown,
Cornations came with great humility,
Doing unto sweet Eglintine duty:
And then a branch of Palm with goodly grace,
Her spreading spraise did beautify the place.
From hiest top out of one stately stem
Two royal Roses white and read did grow,
The Olive tree most bravely grew by them,
And by their roots were set in seemly row
Flowers and herbs whose names I do not know:
Pallas her comely Casket did unlock,
Before her face the Muses all did flock.
The Redrose first with precious pearls they dight,
The white rose they inritch with rubies rare,
Their stalk with Azure Saphires garnisht bright
A secret hidden virtue did declare,
The Olives goodly branches were not bare,
For all her twigges with Emeraulds did bend,
The Smarage did the Olives green amend.
Of Topazes two sorts there have bin found,
One sort like gold this garnisht Eglintine,
Not on but by the Pauncie most renowmde,
The other much more green then grass did shine,
(By due desert the Ardonix is thine:)
Thou doutie double Dayseie for thy tree
The Dainty Diamon does well agree.
The other herbs with Margarites were mixed,
And here and there did hang an Amatest,
And every where a Iasynth betwixt
Them both, and comely Crystal to the rest,
With guled Currall, Bugle of the best,
Spangles of gold and silver there were seen,
All these set forth dame Chloris goodly green.
The Fayrie Queen did season this with sweet,
And when she had consarude it in such wise,
As neither Brumas blastes, nor Atumns heat
Could hurt, she did with all her wit devise,
From every branche a sweet perfume did rise,
The flowers did retain their proper smell,
Quoth Pallas stay, this work is passing well.
Diana and her dainty damsels did
Their friendly fingers undefiled frame,
When sacred solemn rites were finished,
To bear being whithout or blot or blame
Unto her grace who was of greatest fame
This rare devise, with double dignity
Meaning to crown Mineruas majesty.
The Poets Pince, and Harauldes chiefest king
Mighty Palaphilos you might persaue
To place each one appointing every thing
As it should be: the gods were bounsing brave,
No goddess there, no muse nor Nymphe was grave,
All did with joyful Jubilee rejoice
Shouting Minerua lives with often voice.
Then might you see the rural dames come in,
The youth like fry, old folk like fowls did flock:
With bags and baskits filde up to the brimme,
For Fauni did the Forest gates unlock:
And simple Cate clad in a russet frocke
Brought branches thence, and flowers aporne full,
The ways were woods made by the gadding scull,
Apollo took in hand his pleasant Lute,
And he his Harp who said Euridicen,
Thales did force with lovely lips her Flute,
Calliope on Sitarne did begin,
Melpomene on Vial praise did win,
The Napeae with the Nayades
They did devise and singe these sweet ditties.
The Nymphs and Ladies of the lake,
Perform this great solemnity
All for their new Mineruas sake
noble Naiades.
And where renowned Napea
Is she who does deserve such fame?
In England now Naiades,
Elizabeth her name.
With flant a flant this flanting flock,
The greatest goddess by degree,
They mean that maiden Queen to make
with royal dignity.
Thither go all this fair flock
with such so great solemnity,
All for their new Mineruas sake
noble Naiades.
Thus they at last were come where Lud had laid
Though not the first, foundations long before,
Where then this courtly maiden Queen she staide
With all her train, and many straingers more
For then there were Ambassadors great store:
Whom to delight, the people did prepare
Triumphs, perfourmde with courage passing rare.
The court it self none such my self have seen
In France, in Spain, nor curious Italy,
The courtiers, first the beauty of the Queen,
Her goodly grace, her garments what they be,
No Empress can make such show as she,
For gold, for pearl, for precious stones of price,
No one like her for robes of rare devise.
Then from the prince unto the porest page,
The worste in silk, the best in cloth of gold
Richly inricht, the noble man so sage,
The gentleman so ciuell to behold,
The courteous serving man the boy though bold,
Yet he and they each one in his degree,
Did plainly prove him self civility.
When Titans beams had banished Lunas light
And duskish dim which did the day with dark,
Sent forth from fame report that worthy wight,
With trompet shrille made heaven and earth to hark,
Immortal gods and mortal men did mark
The message which with great solemnity,
was thus declarde to all of each degree.
The sheuered staves will well declare the mind
Of them who here this day will show their might,
An Earl by birth and of an noble kind
His challenge will perform even in despite
Of him or them which dare withstand in fight,
Therefore you Brutes which would enrich your name
Cast armor one and try the Tilte for fame.
The Mertials and the Judges had their place,
The Harraldes pressed to pen each due desert,
The Queen was come, there waited on her grace
A hundred Ladies beautiful and brave,
The foreign princes and her counsel grave,
When all the show and every thing was seen
No colors cold compare with white and green.
The challenger proudly presumde to say
That white and green had not the brauest hew,
But that his Maistris bore the bell away:
Her courtly colors were most worthy vewe
He said and swore, wherewith the trumpets blewe,
The splents of spears which climde the clouds above
Did well declare the force of mighty love.
A Fierce defendant with a counter buffe
Of this proud chalenger did change the cheer,
Spite of his force and all his cootes of proffe
He made him leave the field for feeble fear,
Assistantes three forthwith there did appear,
The first did well, the second in his place,
So did the third but for this one disgrace.
In Helmet for the honor of his dear
The Lady whom they all did most commend,
Her gallant plume and colors he did wear,
Which for her sake like life he did defend:
Yet force perforce, them to the ground did send:
And then the people cride God save the Queen,
No colors can compare with white and green.
Therewith the cloud which did the gods enclose
That they might walk, and see, and not be seen,
Was quit with drawn, the people did suppose
Heaven was broke loose, so might the royal Queen,
So did the court, so all the world might deem,
The armed knights the people in a trance
Did muse, and makt the order of this chance.
First Saturn and vii. sages past before,
Then mighty Mars with him ix. worthies went,
Neptune he had three sailors and no more,
Apollo Castor and Pollux.
two for a learned intent,
Silenus Preachers.
v. all v. from heaven were sent,
Then Mercury the ruler Fame.
of report,
Thus these vi. gods entered into the court.
Next these dame Floras noble Nymphs came in,
The Fayerie Queen, and Ladies of the lake,
Diana and her Damsels then were seen,
A troop which did to chastity betake
Themselves, come thither for Mineruas sake,
There Pallas and the learned Muses staid,
And Pallas thus unto Minerua said.
Most mighty prince almighty Jove the just
Would us on earth show whom he best does love,
We have inquirde, and now it is discust
It is thy self, whom he who sittes above
Has so inricht that thou can not remove,
From that which with his will does well agree,
Being of all the best felicity.
Now since we see thy goodly government,
And find how passing straight thy steps do stand,
We all be come, all we for this intent
To live with thee, to be at thy command,
And for that cause Pallas and all her band,
Does here resign unto thy worthy will
Their worldly wit, and all their learned skill,
Thy due desert has thee Minerua made
A goddess great, with whom none can compare,
For he of heaven has set it down and said,
The Britttain Queen shall be that Phoenix rare,
Whom death to touch with dart shall never dare:
Thou shall on earth eternally remain
As I have done, though greater be thy gain.
Behold these gods all ready to resign
The gifts for which they were eternized,
Receive thou them because they be all thine,
Receive also unto thy heavenly head
This Corronet, this garlande garnished
Not like thy mind with gifts of greatest price,
But as we could inricht with rare devise,
She thus adornd with double dignity
They did of mortal her immortal make,
As thus she sat amidst such majesty
The lookers on with loving fear did shake,
Her goodly grace did make the gods to quake:
The Muses then and all the people said
thy due desert has thee Minerua made.
And then the Queen with more then mortal grace,
The life (quoth she) of every living thing
Must perish quite, for death will it deface:
But death to death by due desert to bring
Such death on earth is life everlasting,
I know right well such immortality
you have obtainde, and such remains for me.
And then forth from the slender suttel skies
All Angellike there did a shape appear,
Even as it is of ghosts divine the gise
A heavenly humane form she did on there:
And yet she was as Tytans beams so clear,
Immaculate not having spot of sin,
All clad in white thus did her grace begin.
Within this world at last is one
who has inricht her name
with everlasting fame,
This Lady only she alone
she shall enjoy the same:
the goddesses divine,
and all the Muses ix.
to her they shall resign:
Because the due desartes which them immortal made
This Lady has obtaind, her fame shall never fade.
Proceed my Muse assist thy servant now,
Able his pen to publishe forth her praise
Whose life is like dame Sinthias silver raise.
That mighty God of heaven Ioua great,
He does permit, his highness does allow
Unto her grace all earthly bless shall bow,
And bide, and be at her commandment,
With perfect bless to beautify her seat,
Even for that cause Euthumia is sent.
With her this goddess evermore shall stay,
Then thus bespake blessed Euthumia.
Goddess of great account
whose due desert does far surmount
the peoples praise,
in no such wayse
did ever woman walk:
Fair Lady sweet with thee, with thee I mean to talk,
Talk and resign to thee, even to thy self my state,
of all the world most fortunate,
whose happiness
with perfect bless
is furnished, now I must dwell
with thee, because thou do excel.
Thy virtues rare
Do well declare
To what thou art inclinde,
The worthiness of woman kind,
Thou do approve that sex is such
As does mankind exceed, exceeds man by much,
By much and most of all, of all the royal rest,
Thy perfect great estate is best,
Thy birth right great, greater thy fame,
Euthumias noble name
I yield to thee
my dignity.
Thy due deserved right, in deed thy right reward
Rewarded by the gods, for when the gods had hard
In what a perfect path you tread,
And how your life you lead,
They did ordain
Me to remain
With her whose state
Was fortunate,
So sent from them to you,
to you, only to you I bow,
And bend, and bind my self, my self unto your will,
Your will? that is my work, my work that to fulfill.
Sweet Eglintine shall have the place,
And notice of thy name,
Which flower to defend, even to defend the same,
Of passing pusiant power
In hiest throne
He which does sit, he shall defend
thee from thy fone,
and so preserve the seat, the seat where thou do sit,
as neither hatreds heat
nor wicked wit,
shall bloot thy goodness with disgrace,
amongst the gods thou shall remain
for evermore.
Aglaia most like the morning star
that godesse next Euthumia did appear,
none of the muses might with her compare,
much like her self she found Minerua there:
Such beutie, bounty, personage and grace,
Greatly amazde she pausde a pretty space:
Apollo then did down his mighty mace,
He thus describd the favor of her face.
Like new refined gold Queen Hellens hair,
She has the brows of blissed Brissis brave,
Egerias eye, she has Egestas ear,
Chionis cheek, and Chloris goodly grace,
Neeras nose on fair Venus face,
The tongue of Telesilla, Tethis teeth,
And Ledas lips to lend lovely relief.
Of modest Myrta mild the smiling cheer,
Dame Floras breath so sweet as violet,
Clitias chin, like Collitina clear,
The neck of Nemesis, Doris, or Eudora,
Her breasts be brave like Diopeia,
She is of all the world the brightest star,
Begot by Mars the mighty god of war.
Apollo staide, Aglaia did proceed
Though much amazde to see as it were her self,
Aglaias eyes they on her face did feed,
And could not satisfy themselves with sight,
There was containd in it so great delight:
Yet at the last her words did well display
Her in ward thought, thus did the Lady say.
Lady of all delight
Delight of Ladies all,
All the most worthy wight
Most worthy wight they shall,
Shall they? They shall in deed,
Indeed, adore thy name,
Thy name with everlasting fame.
Fame fly thou forth with speed,
With speed let it be known to all under the Sun,
The Sun has shinde upon none such since first the world begun.
To whom Aglaia does resign,
For new Mineruas praise does shine
More bright then heretofore did mine:
With all a flaunt a flaunt,
Thou as thou should do vaunt,
The Gods of heaven do grant
Thee evermore their heavenly grace,
To prosper thee in every place.
That goodly goddess great renowned Clytia
she pressed into the press, the^ thus the dame divine did say,
Brave Besse how are delights
Of beauties brauest bright
Plast in thy passing perfect personage,
Stand forth you worthy wights
Behold you here in sight,
The chiefest glory of this present age:
Unto this gallant gay
Does worthy Clytia
her name and fame resign,
All glory has been mine,
All glory now is thine,
With glory thou do shine, so like the seemly Sun,
Brave Besse shall be thy name when all the world is done.
Next her appeard a muse of great degree,
And thus bespake comely Calliope,
A Lady like my self at last,
at last my self have found,
that she may be renowmde:
Fame tells her name with busy blast
To all upon the ground:
The sweetness of her voice
Does make the gods rejoice,
Therefore Calliope
To little Englands worthy Queen
Does give her great degree.
And then the Graces called Charytes
With these speeches did all the people please:
Amidst a gallant gardine green,
Where natures worthiest work is seen,
Impald with perfect bliss,
Wherein one form our selves have found
All the good graces on the ground,
Even there our biding is,
With merry minds we there remain,
The place does please us so,
It never shall be seen nor said,
That we from thence will go:
As food feeds mortal flesh,
Even so our minds do eat
The perfect pleasures there do grow,
Most meet for Angels meat:
Dido that courtly Carthage Queen,
Of Troyes decay that fine Helen
And gallant Venus gay,
Juno nor Pallas never dare,
Diana chaste may not compare,
With mighty Minerua*
For she has that which all they had,
In much more perfect plight
Then mind of man imagine may,
Or Dittie can indight:
We vaunt not then in vain,
For only we are blessed
Who do enjoy of all the world
the very worthiest:
Enjoy? we only do possess
The highest haight of happiness,
Therefore we will rejoice,
For where all virtue does remain
Even she who all the rest does stain
is made our only choice.
And this to you of heaven we vow,
whilst you her life do lend
Only with her we will remain,
our faith shall her defend,
her beck we will obey,
I she shall have our heart,
and we with her will run and ride
we never will depart.
On earth heavenly felicity
even here on earth not one but we,
and we have found the place,
Where every perfect sweet delight
does rest, and does remain by right:
we do the branche embrace,
whose buds the blossoms be of bliss,
whose fruit Ambrosia,
God keep Minerua from mishap,
God keep her from decay,
For with that goddess great
we do possess our place,
And we will dwell for evermore
in her most fair face.
Then Clio sister to Calliope,
That modest merry Muse of great degree,
Found out this Queen who had her goodly grace,
she all her gifts and goodness did embrace,
Whom long she did with marvel much behold,
Thus she at last her fancies did unfold.
Macthlesse for music once I was,
none could my note come near,
now thou do pass,
thy voice most clear
From healtfull lights and lounges below does send,
Such sweet and pleasant harmony,
The gods their ears do bend,
And after thee
we see
The rest of all the Muses run,
to gaze upon thy grace,
Which as they do behold they find,
thy mothers fair face,
to thee
I Clio here
Do give eternity,
Thou noble Nymphe that have no peer,
Thy name and fame shall live and never fade,
The only piece of work that ever nature made
Thus she who once was but a mortal Queen,
And subject sat on fortunes turning wheel,
The greatest goddess now on earth is seen:
Whose hie estate can neither roll nor reele,
Nor fortunes force shall never hurt her heel:
For virtue did and due desert advance
Her grace, and not the force of changing chance,
She is not now as other princes be,
Who live on earth to every tempest thrall,
Desert has crownde her with eternity,
Her godly zeal in seat sempiternal
Has set her now, from thence she can not fall:
But lively live on earth eternally:
And have in heaven heavenly felicity.
Therewith this curious court brake up, and I in ragged rhyme
Was made the trumpet to their talk, the touchstone of the time.
Amongst the gods there is none like thee O Lord,
There is none can do as thou do. Psalm. Lxxxvi.
The Pilgrims postscrip.
Evermore my Muse shall magnify thy name
Most gracious, most right renowned dame
Now that I know thy due deserved fame:
most mighty prince the means thou have made
that all the world does know
how virtue like a sea does flow
in thee, and how thou do forslake
the bitter bent of cruel Caepides bow,
free fro the force of fancies flashing flame,
Most gracious, most right renowned dame
Now that I know thy due deserved fame,
Evermore my Muse shall magnify thy name:
first with thy wit who can compare,
thy virtuous inclination
is known to every nation,
thy learning and thy gifts most rare
make perfect declaration
nature thy equal never yet did frame.
Now that I know thy due deserved fame
Evermore my Muse shall magnify thy name,
Most gracious, most right renowned dame.
Your Majesty's poor pilgrim, Thomas Blener Hasset.

Here ends the first book of the revelation of the true Minerua.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Woodcoke.

1582.


