The good Huswiues handmaid, for Cookerie in her Kitchen in dressing all manner
of meat, with other wholesome diet, for her and her household. etc.
To boil mutton with mallows or turnips.
TAke a neck of Mutton, cut it in rib^s, and put it in a pot, and a good
quantity of beef broth, and make it boil: then take your Turnips or
Mallows, and cut them in pieces, of the bigness of your mutton, then put into
your pot a little pepper, and so let them stew till they be very tender, then
take them of and serve them upon sops.

To boil mutton with Spinach.
TAke your neck of mutton and cut it in pieces, and put it into a fair
Pot, and a good quantity of mutton broth, and make it boil: then take
sweet^ ^^^con, and cut it of the bigness of your fin^^^^nd of the length, and
put it in your pot^^ (...) ^^u^n pieces: then take three good ha^^^^^^
Spinnage, wash it very clean, ^^^^ing the water from it, and cut it small,
and put it into the pot, and a little pepper and salt, look that you have no
more broth then will cover your me^^ so let it stewe very softly till it be
tender, then serve it upon sops.

To boil mutton with Carrets.
TAke a breast or neck of Mutton cut it of the bigness of your thombe, and put
it into an ea^then pot with fair water, and make it see^h: Then take Carret
roots, and ^^ape them clean, and cut them of the bygnesse of your Mutton,
and let them sees, then put in half a handful of stripped Time, as much of
Sauorie and ysope, and a little salt and Pepper: Let them sees till your
Mutton and roots be very tender then serve them upon sops.

To boil mutton with Coleworts.
TAke a neck of fat Mutton, and cut your ribs, and broyle them upon a
girdyon till they be half enough, then put them in a fair earthen pot, and a
good quantity of beef broth and make them boil: Then take (...) handful of
Colewortes, and wash them clean, and beat them in pieces, and put th^^
^^^^^our Mutton, and a ladle full of the fat^^^ (...) beef broth, and a little
Pepper and (...) and so let them stewe till they be very tender, and put them
upon Soppes, put no salt in till the meat be ready to be taken up.

To boil a leg of mutton with a pudding.
First, with a knife raise the skin round about till you come to the iointes,
and when you have perboyled the meat, shred it fine with suet or Marie,
Parsley, Marioram, and Peniroyall: then season it with Pepper and salt,
cloves, Mace, and Sinamon, and take the yolks of nine or ten eggs, and
mingle with your meat a good handful of Currants, and a few minced Dates, and
put the meat into the skin of the leg of Mutton, and close it with pricks,
and so boil it with the Broth that you boil a capon, and let it sees the
space of two hours.

To boil a leg of mutton with Lemmons.
When your Mutton is half boiled, take it up, cut it in small pieces: put it
into a pipkin, and cover it close, and put thereto the best of the broth, as
much as shall cover your mutton, your Lemmons being sliced very thin, and
quartered, and Currants, put in pepper gross beaten, and so let them boil
together, and when they be well boiled, season it with a little Vergious,
sugar, pepper gross beaten, and a little Saunders, so lay it in fine dishes
upon soppes. It will make three mess for the table.

To boil mutton with Endive, Borage, or Lettice, or any kind of herbs that
may serve thereunto.
When your mutton is well boiled, take the best of the broth, and put it in a
pipkin: and put thereto an handful of endive, borage, or what herbs you list,
and cast thereto a few currants, and let them boil well, and put thereto a piece
of upper crust of white bread, season it with pepper gross beaten, and a little
vergious, and a little Sugar, and so pour it upon your meat.

To boil mutton for a sick body.
PVt your Mutton into a pipkin, sees it, and scum it clean, and put thereto a
crust of bread, Fenell roots parsley roots, currants great raisons (the stones
taken out) and herbs, according as the pacient is. If they be cold, hot
herbs may be borne: if they be hot, cold herbs be best, as Endive, Sinamon,
Violet leaves, and some Sorrel: let them boil together. Then put in Prunes,
and a very little salt. This is broth for a sick body.

To make balls of mutton.
TAke your Mutton and mince it very fine with suet. Then season it with sugar
sinamon, Ginger, cloves and mace, Salt and raw eggs, make it in round balls.
Let your broth sees ere you put them in. Make your broth with Currants, Dates
quartered, whole mace and Salt. Thick it with yolks of Eggs, and Vergious,
and serve it upon sops.

To boil a Capon with Orenges after Mistres Duffelds way.
TAke a Capon and boil it with veale, or with a marie bone, or what your fancy
is. Then take a good quantity of that broth, and put it in an earthen pot by
it self, and put thereto a good handful of Currants, and as many Prunes, and
a few whole maces, and some Marie, and put to this broth a good quantity of
white Wine or of Clarret, and so let them sees softlye together: Then take
your Orenges, and with a knife scrape of all the filthiness of the outside of
them. Then cut them in the midst, and wring out the juice of three or four
of them, put the juice into your broth with the rest of your stuff, then slice
your Orenges thin, and have upon the fire ready a skillet of fair seething
water, and put your sliced Orenges into the water, and when that water is
bitter, have more ready, and so change them still as long as you can find the
great bitterness in the water, which will be six or seven times, or more, if
you find need: then take them from the water, and let that run clean from
them: then put close Orenges into your pot with your broth, and so let them
stewe together till your Capon be ready. Then make your sops with this broth,
and cast on a little Sinamon, Ginger, and Sugar, and upon this lay your Capon,
and some of your Orenges upon it, and some of your Marie, and toward the end
of the boiling of your broth, put in a little Vergious, if you think best.

To boil a Capon in white broth.
Boil your Capon in fair liquor, and cover it to keep it white, but you must
boil no other meat with it, take the best of the broth, and as much Vergious
as of the broth, if your vergious be not too sour, and put thereto whole Mace,
whole pepper and a good hand full of Endive, Letuce or Borage, whether of them
ye will, small Raisons, Dates, marow of marow bones, a little stick of Sinamon,
the peele of an Orange: then put in a good piece of Sugar, and boil them well
together: then take two or three yolks of eggs sodden, and strain them and
thick it withal, and boil your prunes by themselves, and lay upon your Capon:
pour your broth upon your capon.

Thus may you boil any thing in white broth.

An other way to boil a capon in white broth.
TAke marow bones, break them, and boil them and take out the Marrowe. Then
sees your capon in the same liquour. Then take the best of the liquour in a
small pot to make your broth withal, then take Currants, Dates, and Prunes,
and boil them in a pot by themseiues, till they be plum, then take them up,
and put them into your broth, then put whole Mace to them, and a good quantity
of beaten Ginger, and some Salt. Then put the Marrowe that you did take from
the bones, and strain the yolks of Eggs with Vinegar, and put them into your
Broth, with a good piece of Sugar, but after this it must not boil: then take
bread, and cut thereof thin sippets, and lay them in the bottom of a dish then
take sugar, and scrape it about the sides of the dish, and lay thereon your
Capon, and the fruit upon it, and so serve it in.

To boil a Capon in brewes.
YOu must boil your Capon with fat meat, then take the best of the broth,
and put it in a pipkin, and put whole mace to it, whole Pepper, some red
Currants, half as much white Wine as you have of broth, good store of marrowe
and Dates, and scum them clean, and keep your liquor very clear, and season
it with vergious and Sugar, and then lay your Capon upon brows finely cut, and
so pour your broth upon it.

To boil a Capon with Orenges or Lemmons.
TAke your Capon and boil hint tender, and take a little of the broth when it
is boiled, and put it into a Pipkin, with Mace and Sugar a good deal, and pare
three Orrenges and pill them, and put them in your Pipkin, and boil them a
little among your broth, and thicken it with wine and yolks of eggs, and Sugar
a good deal, and salt but a little, and set your broth no more on the fire,
for quailing, and serve it in without sippets.

To make Sops for a Capon.
TAke tostes of bread, Butter, Claret wine, and slices of Orenges, and lay them
upon the tostes, and Sinamon, Sugar, and Ginger.

To make Sops for Chickens.
FIrst take Butter, and melt it upon a chafingdish with coals, and lay in the
dish thin tostes of bread, and make Sorell sauce with Vergious and
Gooseberries, sees them with a little Vergious and lay them upon.

To boil a Mallard with cabage.
TAke the Cabage and pick them clean, and wash them, and perboile them in
fair water: then put them in a Colender, and let the water run from them,
then put them in a fair pot, and as much beef broth as will cover them, and
the Marie of three Mary bones whole. Then take a Mallard, and with your knife,
give him a lance along upon each side of the breast. Then take him of, and put
him into your Cabage, and his dripping with him, for he must be roasted half
enough, and his dripping saved, and so let him stewe the space of one hour.
Then put in some pepper and a little salt, and serve in your Mallard upon
sopps, and the Cabage about him, and of the uppermost of the broth.

To boil a mallard with Onions.
TAke a Mallard, roast him half enough, and save the dripping, then put him
into a fair pot and his grauie with him, and put into his belly six or seven
whole Onions and a spoon full of whole pepper, and as much abroad in your pot,
put to it as much Mutton broth or beef broth as will cover the Mallarde, and
half a dish of sweet butter, two spoonefuls of Vergious, and let them boil
the space of an hour. Then put in some salt, and take off the pot, and lay
the Mallard upon soppes, and the Onions about him, and power the uppermost of
the broth upon them.

To boil a Ducke.
Sees the Ducke with some good Marrow bones, or Mutton, and take the best of
the broth, and put therein a few Cloves, a good many sliced Onions, and let
them boil well together till the Onions be tender, and then season your broth
with Vergious and a little bruised pepper: Take up your Ducke and lay it upon
sops, and give it two slices upon the breast, and stick it full of Cloves, and
power the broth upon it.

To boil Stockdoues.
Sees them with beef or mutton. Take the best of the broth, and put in a
pipkin, and put thereunto Onions finely minced and a few Currants and so boil
them till they be very tender, and season the^, with vergious and a little
sweet butter, and power them upon your Stockdoues, when they be laid upon your
sops.

To boil a Conie with a pudding in his belly.
TAke your Conie and flea him, and leave on the ears, and wash it fair and
take grated bread, sweet suet minced fine, Corrans, and some fine herbs,
Peniroiall, winter sauerie, Parslie, Spinnage or ^eetes, sweet Marioram, and
chop your herbs fine, and season it with Cloves, Mace and Sugar, and a little
Cream, and salt, and yolks of Eggs, and Dates minced fine. Then mingle al
your stuff together, and put it into your rabbets belly, and sow it up with
a thread. For the broth, take Mutton broth, when it is boiled a little, and put
it in, then put in Goose berries or else Grapes, Currants, and sweet Butter,
Vergious, salt, grated bread, and Sugar a little, and when it is boiled, lay it
in a dish with sops, and so serve it in.

To boil Chickens or Capons.
FIrst boil them in fair water till they be tender: then take bread and
steep it in the broth of them, and with the yolks of four or five Eggs, and
Vergious or white Wine, strain it, and there with season your broth and your
Capon in it. Then take Butter, Parslie, and other small herbs, and chop them
into it. And so serve them forth upon soppes of bread.

To boil Chickins with a Cawdle.
TAke your chickens when they are fair scalded, and trussed and stuffed with
Parselie in their bellies, and put them in a pot with fair water and a
little salt, and put to them twenty Prunes, half a handful of Corrans and
Raisons, and let them boil altogether till your Chickens be tender, then take
six yolks, and a pint of Vinegar, and strain them together, and put thereto
a quarterne of Sugar, or as ye think meet, and so let it boil, but ye must
stir it still, else it will curd: and when it boyleth take it from the fire:
then take your chickins, and put them in a colender, that the broth may go
clean away, and so put your chickens and the fruit into the cawdell, and make
soppes, and lay on your chickens and the fruit, and power on the cawdell.

To sees chickens in Lettice.
TAke a neck of Mutton with a Marrowe bone, and so let it sees and scumme it
clean, and let it boil well together, and when it is enough, then take out
some of it, and strain it, and put in your chickens: then take a good many
Lettuce, and wash them clean and put them in. Then take a little white bread
and strain it, and put it into the pot to thick it withal. Then put a little
whole mace to season it, with Pepper and Vergious, and a little Sugar, and cut
Sops, and lay them on, and put on the marrow, and so serve them.

How to boil chickens with herbs.
TAke your Chickens and scalde them, and trusse the wings on, and put then
forte under the wings of your chickens, and set them on in a little pot and
scumme them fair, when they have boiled, put in Spinnage or Lettuce a good
deal, and Rosemary, sweet Butter, Vergious, salt, and a little Sugar, and
strayned Bread with a little wine, and cut sippets and serve it out. So may you
boil mutton, or Pigions or Conie.

How to sees Hens and Capons in Winter in white broth.
TAke a neck of mutton and a marrowe bone, and let them boil with the Hens
together, then take Carret roots and put them into the pot, and then strain
a little bread to thick the pot with all and not too thick: season it with
Pepper and Vergious, and then cover them close, and then let them boil
together, then cut sops and put the broth and the marrow above, and so serve
them.

To boil Calves feet or Lambs feet.
TAke your Calves feet after they be scalded, cut them in the midst, and put
them into an earthen pot, and put to them mutton broth as much as will cover them
then take a little Spinnage and Lettice, and a little stripped Time, and put it
in your pot, and a dishe of sweet butter, and a little salt, and let them boil
till they be very tender: and when ye be ready to serve them forth, take the
yolks of three Eggs, and almost a pint of Vergious, and stir them well
together, and take your pot from the fire seething, and put in your Vergious
and eggs, and stir it well, and serve them in upon sops.

How to boil a tripe.
TAke a Tripe and cut it in pieces, of the breadth and length of your finger,
and put them in an earthen pot, and put thereto as much Mutton broth as will
cover them, a little Lettice, Spinnage, a little salt and Vergious, so let them
stew softly til they be very tender, and when ye will serve them in, cast on
a little Pepper, and serve them on sops.

To boil tripes, pigs petietots or Neates feet.
TAke your Neats feet, tripes, or petitoes, and cut them in small pieces, and
boil them with butter, Sinamon, Currants, and a little vinigar, and serve them
in upon sops.

How to boil pigs petitoes another way.
Boil them in a pint of Bastard, and put thereto four Dates minced, with a few
Corrans and a little Time, chop the time small, so let it boil, till it be well:
season your pot with Sinamon, Ginger, salt, and a little Vergious.

To boil Chickens after the French fashion.
QVarter the Chickens in four pieces: then take after the rate of a pint of
wine for two Chickens: then take time and parsley as small minced as ye can, and
four or five Dates, with the yolks of four hard Eggs: and let this boil
together, and when you will season your pot, put in salt, sinamon and Ginger,
and serve it forth.

To boil tripes after the French fashion.
TAke a Tripe, and a few Onions, mince them small together, and boil them
together, and season your pot with a little Pepper, Vinigre and salt, and so
serve them.

How to make long worts.
TAke a good quantity of Colewortes and sees them in water whole a good
while, then take the fattest of powdered beef broth, and put to the woortes,
and let them sees a good while after: then put them in a platter and lay your
poudred beef upon it.

Triped mutton.
TAke a paunche of a Sheep fair scowred, cast it in a pot of boiling water,
and scum it clean and take up the fat. Then take it and cut it in small pieces
of the breadth of two pence, and put it in a pot of strong broth of Beef
or mutton, take Parslie blades minced and put to it, and let it sees. Then put
in powder of Ginger, a little Vergious, Saffron and salt, and let them boil
together till it be enough, so serve it forth.

How to boil a Lambs head and purtenance.
STrain your broth into a pipkin, and set it on the fire, and put in butter,
and scum it as clean as you can, and put in your meat, and put in Endive, and
cut it a little and strain a little yeast, and put into it, and Currants, and
Prunes, and put in all manner of spices, and so serve it upon sops.

How to boil Quails.
FIrst put the^ into a pot with sweet broth and set them on the fire: then
take a Carret root, and cut him in pieces, and put into the pot: then take
parsely with sweet herbs, and chop them a little, and put them into the pot:
then take Sinamon, ginger, nutmegs and pepper, and put in a little vergious, and
so season it with salt, serve them upon sops and garnish them with fruit.

How to smere a Conie.
TAke the Livers and boil them, and chop it, and sweet herbs, apples, and the
yolks of hard Eggs, and chop them altogether, and Currants, Sugar, Sinamon,
Ginger, and parsley, and fill the Conie full hereof, then put her into the sweet
broth, and put in sweet butter, then chop the yolks of hard Eggs, sinamon,
Ginger, sugar, and cast it on the connie when you serve it up, season it with
salt, serve it on sops, and garnish it with fruit.

How to make Hodgepot.
Boil a neck of Mutton, or a fat rumpe of Beef, and when it is well boiled,
take the best of the broth, and put it into a pipkin, and put a good many
Onions to it, two handful of Marigold flowers, and a handful of Parsley fine
picked, and gross shred, and not too small, and so boil them in the broth,
and thick it with strained bread, putting therein gross beaten pepper, and a
spooneful of Vinigar: and let it boil somewhat thick, and so lay it upon your
meat.

How to a make Hodgepot in pots.
TAke a good piece of a leg of Mutton, pare away the skin from the flesh
very small, and take half as much marrowe as you do flesh, and then put them
both into an earthen pot and put to it half a pint of beef broth, or half a
pint of Mutton broth that is not salt, and put thereto a Nutmeg beaten, and a
little pepper, two spoonefuls of currants, and twenty prunes and let them stewe
softly upon a soft fire, and stir it well together often, or else it will
gather together in lumps: and when it has stued an hour, put into it a
spoonful of vergious and serve it upon sops.

The order to boil a brawne.
TAke your Brawn, and when you have cut him out, lay him in fair water four
and twenty hours, and shift it four or five times, and scrape and bind up
those that you shall think good with hemp, and bind one handful of green
Willowes together, and lay them in the bottom of the pan, and then put in your
Brawne and scum it very clean, and let it boil but softly, and it must be
so tender that you may put a straw through it, and when it is boiled enough,
let it stand and coule in the pan, and when you take it up, let it lie in
Trayes one hour or two, and then make sowsing drink with ale and water, and
salt, and you must make it very strong, and so let it lie a week before you
spend it.

How to make a good white broth.
TAke two marrow bones and a Cock, and boil them together in fair water and
white wine. Then take Parsley, Time, Spinnage and Lettice, and bind them in a
bundell, and put it in the pot with the water and wine, the Cock and marrow
bones. Then take Prunes and currants, and bind them in a cloth, and put them in
the pot, and a quantity of whole mace, and bind them in like manner by
themselves, and put into the pot a piece of Butter, and a good quantity of
Sugar. When the Cock and the mary bones be sodden and ready to be served:
Then take from them the broth, and strain it very clean, and put it into
another pot. Then take the said mace, Prunes and currants forth of the clothes
and put them into the pot: the^ take three yolks of Eggs, and Rosewater, and
put them into the broth, and boil it a little while, fair and softly with a
little salt, and so serve it.

How to make Farts of Portingale.
TAke a piece of a leg of Mutton, mince it small and season it with cloves, Mace
pepper and salt, and Dates minced with currants: then roll it into round rolls,
and so into little balls, and so boil them in a little beef broth and so
serve them forth.

How to make Fystes of Portingale.
TAke some sweet suet minced small, the yolks of two eggs, with grated bread and
currants: temper al these together with a little saffron, sinamon, ginger, and a
little salt: then sees them in a little Bastard or sack a little while: and when
they have boiled a little take it up, and cast some sugar to it, and so make
bals of it as big as tennis balls, and lay four or five in a dish, and power
on some of the broth that they were sodden in, and so serve them.

How to make French pottage.
TAke the ribs of Mutton, chop them small the bones and all, with the flesh in
square pieces. Then take Carret roots, and for lack of them, Onions, or both
together and if you will, or else herbs, such as you like: sees al these
together, and when you will serve it in, season your pot with a little Synamon,
Pepper and salt, and so serve it forth.

How to make fine pappe.
TAke Milk and flower strain them, and set it over the fire till it boil.
Then take it off and let it cool, then take the yolks of eggs strain them and
put it in the milk, and some salt, and set it in the fire, and stir it till it
be thick, and let it not boil fully. Then put it in a dish abroad, and
serve it forth for good pottage.

A broth for a weak body.
TAke a leg of Veale, and set it over the fire in a gallon of water, and scum
it clean and when you have so done, put in three quarters of a pound of
currants, half a pound of prunes and a good handful of Borage, as much Langde
beef, as much of Mints, and as much of Hearts tongue, let all these sees
together till all the strength of the flesh be sodden out: then strain it as
clean as you can. And if ye think the patie^t be in any heat, put in Violet
leaves, or Succorie, as ye do with other herbs.

A good way to powder or barrel beef.
TAke the beef and lay it in mere sauce a day and a night. Then take out the
beef and lay it upon a hirdle, and cover it close with a sheet, and let the
hurdle be said upon a peuerell or cover to save the mere sauce that comes
from it: then sees the brine, and lay in your Beef again, see the brine be
cold so let it lie two days and one night: then take it out, and lay it again
on a hurdel two or three days. Then wype it every piece with linen cloth,
dry them and couch it with salt, a laying of Beef and another of salt: and ye
must lay a stick cross each way, so that the brine may run from the salt.

How to keep Lard after my Lord Ferries way.
SCald your hog, and even as you dress your Bacon hog, so dress this:
then lay it in salt, the space of three weeks or a month. Then take it up,
and let it hang there as in manner is no smoke: but when ye think it waxes
moist, let it be hanged so low that the heat of the fire may come to it: or
else put it in an Oven when the bread is drawn out, and when ye think it be
well dried, take it out again til it wax moist again, and so ye shall keep it
well enough three quarters of a year, and never take the lean from the fat but
as ye occupy it.

How to keep Larde after my Lady Westone Brownes way.
FLea the fat Lard from the flesh, and put in bay salt, ye must cast a good
deal upon it, and even so salt it, and roll it together round, and so put it
in a heap of salt, and when ye will occupy any of it, cut of it as ye need,
and lay it in water, and so ye may keep it as long as ye will.

The keeping of Lard after my Lady Marquess Dorsets way.
TAke a fat hog and salt him, and when he is through cold, quarter him, and
take all the bones and the flesh from the fat: and then take the fat of the
said hog, and couch it in fair dry white salt, and so keep it two or three
days: then change it again into fair dry white salt, every third or fourth
day, and at the fourteen days end, take fair cold water and white salt and
make a very strong brine, so that your brine be made so strong that it will
bear an egg almost clean above the brine, and put it in a fair close
vessel: then take the said Lard and lay it in the said brine, so that the
brine cover it over: so change it into new brine every fourteen days, for the
space of six weeks, and after that it needs not to be changed. But the brine
may not be made of well water.

To make Blaminger.
TAke a Capon, boil him in fair water very tender, then take the brawne of
him and chop it small, then take Almones, and blanch them, and beat them small,
and then put in your chopped capon and beat them together very small: then a
quart of Cream and the whites of ten Eggs, and the crum of a fine Manchet, and
your stuff, and mingle them altogether, then strain them, and when it is
strained put in a good quantity of Sugar, and a little salt. Then take a fair
pot, and put your stuff in it, and set it to the fire, stir it, and boil it
as thick as an Apple moise, when you have boiled it, lay it in a fair platter
til it be cold: then strain it again with a little Rosewater, and when you
serve it in, cast sugar upon it, and dish it in three parts.

How to make Blaminger without Cream or Eggs.
TAke a capon and almonds, and beat them as before is said: Then take fair hot
water, and put into your capon and Almondes: then put the crumme of a Manchet
in it, and let it stand and soke, then strain it, and when it is strayned put
in your sugar, and boil it of the thicknes of an apple moise: then let it cool
and strain it again with a little Rosewater and so serve it.

Stewed meats.
To make stewed broth either for flesh or fish.
TAke half a handful of Rosemarie, and as much of Time, and bind it on a
bundle with thread after it is washed, and put it in the pot, after that the pot
is clean scummed, and let it boil a while, then cut sops of white bread, and
put them in a great charger, and put on the same scalding broth, and when it
is soken enough, strain it through a strainer, with a quantity of wine or
good ale, so that it be not too tart, and when it is strained, pour it in a
pot, and then put in your raisins and Prunes, and so let them boil till the
meat be enough. If the broth be too sweet put in the more wine, or else a
little Vinegre.

To make stewed steakes.
TAke a breast of Mutton, cut it in pieces, wash it clean: then put it in a
fair pot: and fill your pot with ale or half wine and half water, make it
sees and scum it clean. Then put into your pot a faggot of Time and Rosemarie,
and Parslie, and three or four Onions cut round, take a little Parsley picked
very small, let them boil altogether. Then take Prunes, small Raisons, and
great Dates, and let them boil altogether: then season your pot with these
spices. Take Salt and a little Saffron Cloves and Mace, Sinamon, Ginger, and a
little Sugar: take a quantity of these spices, and put them into your pot, and
let them stew altogether, and when they be tender, put a little Vergious to
them, and let them stew again, then lay soppes of a Manchet under them in a
platter, at the first ye must put a good deal of marrow in it.

To stew a capon in white broth.
TAke marrow bones with the capon, and sees them in fair water, put to it a
few maces, and three races of Ginger minced, and salt: and when the Capon is
almost sodden, put in a good quantity of Lettuce, and let them sees a while.
Then serve in the Capon upon sops, and the herbs upon it.

To stew a Capon in Lemmons.
TAke and slice your Lemmons, and put them in a platter, and put to them white
wine, Rose water, and Sugar, and so boil them and sugar till they be tender.
Then take the best of the broth wherein your Capon is boiled: and put thereto
whole mace, whole Pepper, and red Corrans, Barberies, a little Time and good
store of Marrowe. Let them boil well together, till the broth be almost
boiled away, that you have no more than will wet your soppes. Then pour your
Lemmons upon your Capon, and season your broth with Vergious and Sugar, and put
it also upon your Capon.

To stew Chickens.
TAke the best of your mutton broth, and put thereto a little whole pepper, and
a little whole Mace, Parsley, and Time, and boil them. Then put in half a dish
of sweet butter. Vergious, and a piece of Sugar. Then take a good quantity of
Gooseberies, and boil them, by themselves in a little broth, and pour them upon
your Chickens: put into your broth a spoonful of yest.

To stew birds.
TAke small birds fair picked, drawn, the legs cut off, frye them in butter
or suet well. Then lay them in a fair cloth and let the Butter soak all away:
then take Onions minsed small, cast them in a pot, and take a portion of
Sauell, and of wine, draw them through a strainer, and cast it into the pot,
with the Onions and birds fried, with Cloves, Mace, and a little Pepper, let all
these boil together till it be enough, and put to it sugar, powder of Ginger,
salt and Saffron, and so serve it forth.

To stew Larks or Sparrowes.
TAke of your mutton broth the best, and put it in a pipkin, and put to it a
little whole Mace, whole pepper, Claret wine, marigolde leaves, Barberies,
Rosewater, vergious, sugar, and Marrow, or else sweet butter: per boil the
Larkes before, and then boil them in the same broth, and lay them upon sops.

An other way to stew Larkes.
YOu must take them and draw them clean and cut of their feet, and then take a
good deal of wine in a platter, and take a good deal of marrow, and put it in
the wine, and set them on a Chafingdish, and let them stew there a good while:
then take a quantity of small Raisins and wash them clean, and put them into
the broth, and take a little Sugar and Synamon, and a few crumbs of Manchet bread
and put them into the Larkes, and let them stew altogether. Then take and cut
half a dozen tostes, and lay them in a platter, then put them into a dish with
broth and serve them out.

How to stew a mallard.
TAke your mallard and sees him in fair water with a good marrowe bone, and
in Cabbage worth, or Cabbage Lettice, or both, and some parsnep roots, and
Carret roots, and when all these be well sodden, put in prunes, put in prunes
enough, and three dates, and season him with salt, cloves, and Mace, and a
little sugar, and pepper, and then serve it out with sippets, and put the Marie
upon them, and the whole Mace say on the sippets, and the dates quartered, and
the prunes, and the roots cut in round slices, and lay them upon the sippets
also, and the Cabage leaves lay upon the mallard.

To stew a Cock.
YOu must cut him in six pieces, and wash him clean, and take prunes, currants
and dates cut very small, and raisons of the sun, and sugar beaten very small,
sinamon, Ginger, and nutmegs like wise beaten, and a little maidens hair cut
very small, and you must put him in a pipkin, and put in almost a pint of
Muskadel, and then put your spice and sugar upon your Cock, and put in your
fruit between every quarter, and a piece of gold be between every piece of
your Cock, the^ you must make a lid of wood fit for your pipkin, and close it
as close as you can with paste, that no air come out, nor water can come in,
and then you must fill two brass pots full of water, and set on the fire, and
make fast the pipkin in one of the brass pots, so that the pipkins feet touch
not the brass pots bottom, nor the pot sides and so let them boils four and
twenty hours, and fill up the pot still as it boiles away, with the ^ther pot
that stands by, and when it is boiled, take out your gold, and let him drink it
fasting and it shall help him: this is approved.

How to stew a Neates foot.
FIrst let your Neates foot be scalded and made clean. Then take Onions,
slic^ them and boil them well in fair water

Then take half water and half wine, (...) much as need to serve for the
boiling of the Neates foot, which will be soon enough^ and pu^ it in a pipkin.
Put therein some cloves, and (...) the whole pepper, and take the onions out o^
water they were sodden in, and put them into the same pipkin, and the neats
^eet with them ti^ it be almost enough. Then take a little Vergious, half a dish
of sweet butter, and a little sugar, and let them boil a little together, and
serv^^ them in upon sops.

How to make stewed pottage in L^^^.
TAke a fair pot, and fill it full of water, take a saueer ^ul of Oil Olive,
and p^^ it into the pot* the^ set your pot on the (...) and let it boil. Then
take parslie roots, an^ fennel roots, and scrape them clean, then tu^ them of
the bigness of a Prune, and put them into the pot. The^ take bread, and cut it
in sop^ and cast it into a pot of wine: the wine (...) it, an^ put it in the
pot. Then take rosemary, Time. and parsley and bind them together, and put
them into the pot: then take Dates, Prunes, Corrans and great Raisons, and wash
them clean, and put them in the pot. Then season your pot with salt, Cloves,
Mace, and a little sugar. If it be not red enough, take Saunders and color your
pot therewith, look that your broth be thick enough.

How to stew beef.
TAke beef and smite it in pieces, and wash it in fair water, and strain
that water and put it in the pot with the Beef, and boil them together.
Then take Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Onions, parsley and sage, cast it thereto and
let it boil together: Then make liquor with bread and thick it: and so let if
seethe a good while after that the thicking is in. Then put in Saffron, salt,
and vinegar, and so serve it forth.

Another way to stew Beef.
BOil your flank of beef very tender, til the broth be almost consumed, then
put the broth into a pipkin, and put to it Onions, caret roots sheed small,
being render sodden before and pepper gross beaten, vergious; and half a dish
of sweet butter, and so lay it upon.

How to make brine to keep Lard.
TAke fair Water and white salt, and all to stir them with a staff a good
prity while: then lay the lard in it one night and one day to soake out the
blood of the Lard. Then make new brine in like manner, and beat it, until the
time that the salt is consumed, and then it will be clear: that done, put the
brine in a pretty tub that has a cover well fastened, the^ lay in your Lard, and
keep it under brine with splints, the^ cover the tub close: and thus ye may
keep the Lard white and sweet two or three years, with change of Brine when
need shall require.

To make Maunger Blaunch.
TAke half a pound of Rice very clean picked and washed, the^ beat it very
fine, and searse it through a fine searse, and put the finest of it in a quart
of mornings milk, and strain it through a strainer, and put it in a fair pot,
and set it on the fire, but it must be but a soft fire, and still stir it with
a broad stick. And when it is a little thick take it from the fire, and take the
brawne of a very tender Capon, and pull it in as small pieces as ye can, and the
Capon must be sodden in fair water, and the brawn of it must be pulled as
small as a horse hair with your fingers, and put it into the milk which is
but half thickened, and then put in as much sugar, as ye think will make it
sweet, and put in a dozen spoonfuls of good Rosewater, and set it to the fire
again and stir it well, and in the stirring, all to beat if with your stick,
from the one side of the pan to the other, and when it is as thick as pap, take
it from the fire, and put it in a fair platter, and when it is cold, lay three
slices in a dish, and cast a little sugar on it, and so serve it in.

How to sowce a Pigge.
YOu must take white wine, and a little sweet broth, and half a score of
nutmegs cut in quarters: then take sweet Margeram, rosemary, baies, and Time,
and let them boil all together, scum them very clean: and when they be
boiled, put them in an earthen pan, and the sirrop also, and when ye serve
them, a quarter in a dish, and the baies and nutmegs on the top.

Baked meats.
To make paste, and to raise coffins.
TAke fine flower, and lay it on a board, and take a certain of yolks of
Eggs as your quantity of flower is, then take a certain of Butter and water,
and botle the^ together, but you must take heed ye put not too many yolks of
Eggs, for if you do it will make it dry and not pleasant in eating: and ye
must take beed ye put not in too much Butter, for if you do, it will make it so
fine and so short that you cannot raise: and this paste is good to raise all
manner of Coffins: like wise if ye bake Venison, bake it in the paste above
named.

To make fine paste another way.
TAke butter and ale, and sees them together: then take your flower, and put
thereinto three eggs, sugar, saffron, and salt.

To make short paste in Lent.
TAke thick almond milk seething hot, and so wet your flower with it: and
sallet oil fried, and saffron, and so miggle your paste altogether, and that
will make good paste.

How to bake Venison, or mutton instead of Venison.
TAke lean venison or mutton, and take out all the sinews, then chop your
flesh veris small, and season it with a little pepper and salt and beaten cloves,
and a good handful of Fenne^l seeds, and mingle them altogether: Then take your
Larde, and cut it of the bigness of a goose quill, and the length of your
finger, and put it in a dish of vinegar, and al to wash it therein: then take
meal as it does come from the mil, and make paste with cold water, and see
that it be very stiff then take a sheet, and make a laying of the minced flesh
upon the sheet, of ye breadth that your Lard is of length, then make a laying of
your Lard upon your flesh, and let your larde be one from another, the breadth
of one of the pieces of the Larde, and so make four layings of lard, and three
layings of flesh one upon another, so press it down with your hands as hard
as you can for breaking ye paste and cast in a handful of pepper and salt, and
beaten cloves, so close up your pass, and let it bake two hours.

How to make sweet pies of Veale.
TAke veale and perboile if very tender, then chop it small, then take twice as
much beef suet, and chop it small, then mince both them together, then put
currants and minced Dates to them, then season your flesh after this manner. Take
Pepper, salt, and Saffron, Cloves, Mace, sinamon, Ginger and Sugar, and season
your flesh with each of these a quantitye, and mingle them altogether. This
done take fine flower, butter, eggs, and Saffron, and make your paste withal
as fine as you can, and make your pie with it, and when it is made, fill it
with your stuff. Then put upon your pie, Prunes, Corans, Dates, a little
sugar, and yolks of eggs hard. Then cover your pie and set it on a paper, and
set it in the Oven, and let it bake sokingly, if it be scortcht above lay a
paper double on it.

How to make Chewets of Veale.
TAke a leg of beale and perboyl it, the^ mince it with beef suet, take almost
as much of your suet as of your veale, and take a good quantity of Ginger, and
a little saffron to color it: take half a goblet of white wine, and two or
three good handful of grapes, and put them all together with salt, and so put
them in Coffins, and let them boil a quarter of an hour.

How to make chewets another way.
TAke a little Veale and slice it, and perboile it, then take it up and press
it in a fair cloth, and mince it very fine, take Corans and dates and cut them
very small, take some marie or suet, and the yolks of three or four Eggs,
and pepper, salt, and mace fine beaten, and the crumbs of bread fine grated:
the^ mingle al these together, and put in suet enough, and they will be good
pies.

How to make Chewets in Lent.
TAke a fresh Eele and flea it, and cut of the fish from the bone, mince it
small and pare two or three wardens and mince the^ likewise small, as much of
them as of the Eele or Oysters, and temper them together, and season it with
Ginger, Pepper, cloves, Mace and salt, and a little color it with Saunders,
and put currants and prunes, and minced great raiso^s and Dates, as you do to
the other pies of flesh, when it is half baked put them out, and put to it a
little vergious: and if your Gelly be not fat put to it a little Sallet Oil
fried with some sweet flowers or herbs, if ye put a little Rosewater and
salt it is good, but if you have any fat of fish it is better then oil.

How to make Oyster chewets.
TAke a peck of oysters, and wash the^ clean. Then shel them, and wash them in
a c^lender fair and clean, then sees them in fair water a little, and when
they be sodden, strain the water from them, and cut them small as pie meat,
season them with a little pepper, a peniworth of cloves and mace, a peniworth
of sinamon and ginger, a peniworth of Sugar, a little saffron and salt: then
take a handful of Corans, six dates minced small, and mingle them altogether:
then make your paste with a quantity of fine flower, ten yolks of Eggs, a
quantity of butter, with a little Saffron and boiled water, then raise up your
chewets, and put in the bottom of your chewets a little butter, and cast upon
them Prunes, Dates, and currants, so close them and bake them: let not your Oven
be too hot, for they would have but little baking, then draw them, and put in
every of them two spoonfuls of vergious and butter and so serve them in etc.

How to make special good pies either of mutton or Veale.
LEt your meat be perboiled, and mince it very fine, and then your suet by it
self: and after put to the meat, and mince them well together, then put
thereto five or six yolks of eggs being hard sodden and minced, small Corrans,
Dates fine minced: season it with Sinamon, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, a handful
of carowayes, sugar, and vergious, and some salt and a little pepper, and so put
it into your pass, whether they be chewets or Trunk pies.

To make paste, and to bake chickens.
TAke water, and put in a good piece of butter, and let it sees as hot as you
can blow off your Butter into your flower, and break two yolks of Eggs, and
one white, and put in a good piece of Sugar, and color your paste with
Saffron, then shall it be short Then take your chickens, and season them with
Pepper, salt, Saffron, and great Raisons, cloves, mace Corans, Prunes, and
Dates, then close them up, and make a little hole in the midst of the lid. Then
set it in the Oven, and to make sirrop for the same pie, take Malmsey, Cream,
and two yolks of Eggs, and beat them together, and put in Synamon and
Sugar, and when the pie is almost baked, then put in the sirrop, and let them
bake together.

To bake chickins in Summer.
CVt off their feet, trusse them in the coffins. Then take for every Chicken
a good handful of Gooseberries, and put into the pie with the Chickens. Then
take a good quantity of butter, and put about every chicken in the pie. Then
take a good quantity of Sinamon, and ginger, and put it in the pie with salt
and let them bake an hour, when they be baked, take for every pie the yolke
of an eg, and half a goblet full of vergious and a good qua^tie of sugar, and
put them altogether into the pie to the chickens, and so serve them.

To bake chickens in winter.
CVt of their feet, and trusse them, and put them in the pies, take to every
pie a certain of Corrans or Prunes, and put them in the pie with the Chickens.
Then take a good quantity of Butter to every chicken, and put in the pie: then
take a good quantity of ginger, and salt and season them together, and put them
in the pie, let it bake the space of an hour and a half, when they be baken,
take sauce as is before said, and so serve them in.

To bake Chickens with Damsons.
TAke your Chickens, draw them and wash them, then break their bones and lay
the^ in a platter, then take four handfulles of fine flower, and lay it on a
fair board, put thereto twelve yolks of Eggs, a dish of butter, and a little
saffron: mingle them altogether, and make your paste therewith. Then make six
coffins, and put in every coffin a lump of butter of the bigness of a walnut:
then season your six coffins with one spooneful of cloves and Mace, two
spoonefuls of sinamon, and one of Sugar, and a spoonefull of salt. Then put
your Chickins into your pies: then take Damsons and pare away the outward peel
of them, and put twenty in every of your pies, round about your chickens, the^
put into every of your coffins, a ha^dfull of Currants. Then close them up, and
put them into the Oven, and let them be there three quarters of an hour.

How to bake a Turkey.
TAke and clean your Turkey on the back, and bruise all the bones: then
season it with salt, and pepper gross beaten, and put into it good store of
butter: he must have five hours baking.

How to bake a Fesant.
TRusse him like a hen, and perboil him, then set him with cloves, then take a
little vergious and saffron, and color it with a feather, then take salt, Mace
and Ginger to season it, and so put it in the paste, and bake it till it be
half enough. Then put in a little vergious and the yolke of an eg beaten
together: then bake it till it be enough.

To bake a Capon instead of a Feasant.
CVt off his legs and his wings, and after the manner of a Feasant trusse him
short, then perboile him a little, and Larde him with sweet lard: so put him
into the coffin, and take a little pepper and salt and cast about him. And take
a good half dish of butter and put into the coffin, so let him bake the space
of four hours and serve it forth cold in steed of a Feasant. So likewise bake
a Feasant.

How to bake Red Dear.
YOu must take a handful of fennel, a handful of winter sauorie, a handful of
Rosemarie, a handful of Time, and a handful of Baie leaves, and when your
liquour seeths that you perboile your venison in, put in your herbs also, and
perboile your venison til it be half enough, the^ take it out, and lay it upon
a fair board that the water may run from it, then take a knife and prick it full
of holes, and while it is warm, have a fair tray with vinegar therein, and so
put your venison therein from morning until night, and ever now and then turn
it vpside down, and then at night have your coffin ready, and this done,
season it with Sinamon, Nutmegs and Ginger, Pepper and salt, and when you have
seasoned it, put it into your coffin, and put a good quantity of sweet Butter
into it, and then put it into the Oven at night when you go to bed, and in the
morning draw it forth, and put in a sawcer full of Vinegar into your pie at a
hole above in the top of it, so that the vinegar may run into every place of
it, and then stop the hole again, and turn the bottom upward, and so serve
it in.

How to bake Venison.
PErboile your Venison, then season it with Pepper and salt, some what gross
beaten, and a little Ginger, and good store of sweet butter. And when the
Venison is tender baked: put to it half a dozen spoonfuls of Claret Wine, and
shake it well together.

How to bake a Crane or a bustard.
PErboile him a little, then Larde him with sweet lard, and put him in the
coffin. Take Pepper and salt, a good quantity, and season them together and
cast upon it. Then take Butter, and put in the coffin, let it bane three hours.

How to bake a Mallard.
FIrst trusse them, and perboile them, and put them into the coffin: then
season them with pepper and salt, and four or five Onions peeled and sliced,
and put the^ altogether, with a good piece of sweet butter unto the Mallard and
so let them bake two hours, and when they be baked, put in half a goblet of
Vergious for every Mallard, and so serve them.

How to bake a wild boar.
TAke three parts of water, and the fourth part of white wine, and put thereto
salt as much as shall season it, and let it boil so til it be almost enough:
the^ take it out of the broth and let it lie til it be through cold: Then Lard
it, and lay it in course paste, in pasties, and then season it with pepper,
salt, and ginger, and put in twice so much ginger as pepper. And when it is
half baked, fill your pasties with white wine, and all to shake the pastie, and
so put it into the Oven again, til it be enough: Then let it stand five or six
days, or ever that you eat of them, and that time it will be very good meat.

How to bake wild Duckes.
Dress the^ fair, and perboil the^, then season them with pepper and salt, a
few whole cloves amongst them, and Onions small minced, and sweet butter,
Vergious, and a little Sugar.

To bake calves feet.
TAke Calves feet and sees them tender, pull off the hair, then slit them, and
make your paste fine, and when you have made your coffin, before you put in
your feet, take good Raisons and mince them small, and pluck out the kernels,
and strewe them in the bottom of your pie: then season your feet with Pepper,
salt, cloves and mace, the^ lay in the feet, and strew currons on them, and
Sugar and a good piece of butter in it, and close it up, and make a little hole
in the lid, and when it is almost baked enough, put in a mess of Vergious, and
so serve them.

To bake Calves feet after the French fashion.
TAke the feet, pull off all the hair, and make them clean, and boil them a
little til they be somewhat tender, then make your paste, and season your calves
feet with pepper, salt and Sinamon, and put them in your paste, with a quantity
of sweet Butter, Parslie and Onyons among them, so close it up, and set it into
the Oven till they be half baken. Then take them forth, and open the crown,
and put in more butter and some Vinegar, so let them stand in the Oven til they
be thoroughly baked.

For to bake a Pigge.
FLea your Pigge, and take our all that is within his belly clean, and wash
him well, and after perboile him, the^ season it with Pepper, Salt, Nutmegs,
Mace and cloves, and so lay him with good store of butter in the paste: Then
set it in the Oven till it be baked enough.

To bake a Pig like a Fawn.
TAke him when he is in the hair, and flea him the^ season it with pepper and
salt, cloves and Mace: then take claret wine, Vergious, Rosewater, sugar,
Sinamon, and ginger, and boil them altogether: then lay your Pigge flat like a
Fawn or a Kid, and put your Sirrop unto it, with a little sweet Butter, and so
bake it leysurely.

How to bake a Neats tongue.
Sees the tongue half enough, and blanch it and cut it in two, then scorch it,
and season it with pepper and salt, and put it in a coffin and a good quantity
of Marrow with it, and when it is almost baken, put in some red wine and sugar.

How to bake an Hare.
TAke your hare and perboil him, and mince him, and then beat him in a mortar
very fine liver and al, if you will, and season it with all kind of spices and
salt, and do him together with the yolks of seven or eight eggs, and when
ye have made him up together, draw lard very thick through him, and mingle
them all together, and put him in a pie, and put in butter before ye close him
up.

For to bake a Gammon of Bacon.
Boil your gammon of Bacon, and stuff it with parsley and sage, and yolks of
hard eggs and when it is boiled, stuff it and let it boil again, season it
with Pepper, Cloves and mace, stick whole Cloves fast in it: Then lay it so in
your paste with salt butter, and so bake it.

To make a rare conceit, with Veale baked.
TAke veale and smite it in little pieces, and sees it in fair water, then
take parsley, Sage, Isop and Sauorie, and shred them small, and put them in the
pot when it boileth. Take powder of Pepper, canel, mace, saffron and salt, and
let all these boil together till it be enough. Then take up the flesh from
the broth, and let the broth cool, when it is cold, take the yolks of eggs
with the whites, and strain them, and put them into the broth, so many til
the broth be stiff enough, then make fair coffins, and couch three pieces or
four in one coffin of the Veale: and take Dates minsed and prunes, powder of
pepper, Ginger and vergious, and put it to the broth. Then put the liquor in
the coffins, like as ye do with a custard, and bake it till it be enough, and
so serve it forth.

To make a florentine.
TAke Veale, and some of the Kidney of the loyne, or cold Veale roasted, cold
capon or feasant, which of them you will, and minse it very small, with sweet
Suet, put unto it two or three yolks of Eggs, being hard sodde, Corans and
Dates small shred. Season it with a little Sinamon and ginger a very little Cloves
and Mace, with a little salt and sugar, and a little Time finely shred. Make your
paste fine with butter and yolks of eggs, and sugar, roll it very thin, and so
lay it in a platter with butter underneath, and so cut your cover and lay it
upon it.

To make a pie to keep long.
YOu must first perboile your flesh and press it, and when it is pressed,
season it with pepper and salt whilst it is hot, then lard it, make your paste
of rye flower, it must be very thick, or else it will not hold, when it is
seasoned and larded, lay it in your pie, then cast on it before you close it, a
good deal of cloves and Mace beaten small, and lay upon that a good deal of
Butter, and so close it up: but you must leave a hole in the top of the lid,
and when it has stood two hours in the Oven, you must fill it as full of
vinigar as you can, and then stop the hole as close as you can with paste, and
then set it into the Oven again: your Oven must be very hot at the first, and
then your pies will keep a great while: the longer you keep them the better will
they be: and when ye have taken them out of the oven, and that they be almost
cold, you must shake them between your hands, and set them with the bottom
upward, and when you set them into the Oven, be well ware that one pie touch
not another by more than ones hand breadth: Remember also to let them stand in
the Oven after the Vinegar be in, two hours and more.

To bake small meats.
TAke Eggs and sees them hard, then take the yolks out of them and braie
them in a Mortar, and temper them with Cream, and then strain them, and put to
them pepper, saffron cloves, mace, small raisons, almonds blanched and small
shred, and grated bread: take Pears also sodden in ale, and bray and strain
the^ with the sam^ liquor, and ^t thereto bastard and honey, and put it in a pan
and stir it on the fire till it be we sodden. Then make little coffins and set
the^ in the Oven until they be hard, and then you must take them out again,
and put the foresaid liquor into them, and so serve them forth.

How to make a pie in Lent.
TAke Eeles and flea them, and cut them from the bone, take Wardens and Figs,
and mince them together, and put to them Cloves and mace, pepper, salt, and
Saffron, and season al these together, and mingle it with great and small
Raisons, Prunes and Dates, cut it in small pieces, and so put it into the
coffin, and let it bake half an hour.

How to make a Custard in Lent.
TAke half a pound of almonds, blanch them and beat them in a mortar. Then
take a quart of fair water, warm it luke warm, and strain your liquour with
the almonds. Then take a piece of the spawn of a Pike, of a Carp or a Roch, and
beat it in a mortar, then strain it into your almonds: for lack of spawne ye
may take two spoonfuls of the flower of Rice, and put it into your almonds Then
take Sugar, cloves, Maces, Saffron and salt, and season your liquor therewith,
eue^ as ye would season a custard of cream, then take three handful of fine
flower, and almost a pint of fair water boiling hot, and a little Saffron, and
make your paste therewith. Then make your custard and when it is made, put small
Raisons an^ Dates in the bottom of your Custarde, as you do unto a custard of
cream.

To bake Oysters shells and all.
TAke the best Oysters fair shaled, and the fairest and smoothest shells, wash
a good many, and to make them smooth, rub one shel against another, and when
they are very clean make your pie: and then let your grauie run through a
strayner of your Oysters and wash your oysters very clean, and season them with
Pepper and salt. Then take out of the deepest shelles, and put into them three
Oysters and three cloves, and a little piece of butter, and lay a flat shell
upon that, and thus set your pie with the shells and the Oysters in them till
they be full, and in void places put in a piece of Butter: then close your
pie, and set it into the Oven and when it has stood there half an hour draw
your pie, and then put in a sawcer full of your grauie. Then put the pie into
the Oven again, and so let it stand one other half hour, and then serve it
forth.

To bake Pears, quinces, and wardens.
YOu must take and pare them, and then coare them: then make your paste with
fair water and Butter, and the yolke of an Egg, and set your Orenges into
to the paste, and then bake it well: Then fill your paste almost full with
Sinamon, Ginger and Sugar: also apples must be taken after the same sort,
saving that whereas the core should be cut out they must be filled with butter
every one: the hardest apples are best, and likewise are Pears and wardens,
and none of them all but the Wardens may be perboiled, and the oven must be of
a temperate heat, two hours to stand is enough.

To bake quince pies.
PAre them and take out all the Core: then perboyle them in water till they be
tender: Then take them forth: and let the water run from them till they be
dry. Then put into every Quince, Sugar, sinamon and ginger, and fill every
pie therewith, and the^ you may let them bake the space of an hour, and so
serve them.

To bake orenges.
FIrst take twelve Orenges, and pare away the yellow rind of them, cut them in
two pieces, and wring out the juice of them, then lay your pills in fair
water, and when it is boiling hot, put your Orenges therein, let them sees
therein until the water be bitter. Then have another pot of water ready
upon the fire, and when it does seethe, put your Orange pills therein, and let
them sees again in the same water until they be very tender: then take your
Orenges out of the pot, and put them in a basin of fair cold water, and with
your thombe take out the core of your Orenges and wash them clean in the same
water, and lay them in a fair platter, so that the water may run from them:
then take a quart of Bastard, clearet wine, or white wine, if you take a quart
of Bastard, put thereto a quartern of sugar: if you take claret or white wine,
ye must take to every pint a quarterne of Sugar, and set it to the fire in a
fair pot: then put your Orenges therein, and sees them till the liquor come
to a sirrop: when it is come to a sirrop, take a fair earthen pot, and put your
Orenges and your sirrop altogether, so that your Orrenges may be covered with
your sirrop, if you lack syrrop, you must take a pint of Claret wine, and a
quarterne of Sugar, and make thereof a sirrop, and put it into your Orenges,
and stop your pot close, after this manner you may keep them two months, and
when you will bake them, take an ounce of Synamon, and half an ounce of ginger,
and beat them small, then take two pound of sugar, and beat it in like manner.
Then put your sugar, Sinamon and Ginger in a fair platter, and mingle them
together. Then take four handful of fine flower, and lay it upon a fair
board, and make an hole in the midst of the flower with your hand: then take a
pint of fair water, and eight spoonfuls of Oil, and a little saffron, and let
them sees altogether, and when it seeths put it in the hole in the midst of
the flower, and knead your paste therewith then make little round coffins of the
bigness of an orange, and when they be made, put a little sugar in the bottom
of them: then take your Orange pills and fill them full of sugar and spices
before rehearsed, and put them into your coffins, and fill the coffins full of
the same sugar and spices: when the spices be in them, close them up, and set
them upon papers, and bake them in an oven or baking pan but your Oven may not
be too hot if your coffins be dry after the baking, you may make a little hole
with the point of a knife upon the cover of the^ and with a poone put a little
of the sirrop to them, at another season you must make your paste with four
handfuls of fine flower, and twelve yolks of eggs, and a little saffron, make
your paste therewith.

Another good way to bake Orenges.
PAre the utter rind as thin as you can: the^ take the Orenges, and cut out a
little hole in the top, and with a narrow pointed knife pick out as nigh as ye
can all the pames: then sees them in fair water boiling a soft pace: and when
the water is bitter have more water ready, and change the first water, and so
let them sees in the second water a good while softly boiling, let them not be
very tender, for after that boiling ye must put them in an other liquor that
must be water and honey very sweet sodden together and scummed: then put into
that a good quantity of Saffron, and so put in your orenges, and let them sees
well in that water, til they be very tender, if ye will bake them, put Claret
wine and sugar together, and let it boil well. Then fill your Orenges of dry
Sugar and Ginger, and turn the hole of your Orenges up ward: then put the
Claret wine in, till your coffin be almost full: and see that there be Sugar
enough in the coffin and close it up, and a little before ye will serve it in,
put in more of the Claret wine and Sugar that was first sodden, at the hole
above in the coffin Thus ye may keep your Orenges in that same liquor that ye
did sees them in first, a month or more and if ye think that the liquor
changes: sees it again and it will amend, and if you think that the Orenges
do not look yellow enough, put Saffron in the liquor, and with a feather
color your Orenges.

To bake Peaches.
TAke Peaches, pare them, and cut them in two pieces, and take out the stones
as clean as you can for breaching of the Peach: then make your pie three
square to bake four in a pie, let your paste be very fine, then make your
dredge with fine Sugar, Synamon and Ginger: and first lay a little dredge in
the bottom of your pies: Then put in Peaches, and fill up your coffins with
your Dredge, and put into every coffin three spoonfuls of Rosewater. Let not
your Oven be too hot. etc.

To bake pippins.
TAke your pippins and pare them, and make your coffin of fine paste, and cast
a little sugar in the bottom of the pie. Then put in your Pippins, and set
them as close as ye can: then take sugar, sinamon, and Ginger, and make them in
a dredge, and fill the Pie therewith: so close it, and let it bake two hours
but the Oven must not be too hot.

To make a good Castard.
TAke a platter full of Cream, if it be a quart, then take six yolks of
Eggs, to a pint three Eggs, and when you set your Cream, over the fire, cut
your butter in small pieces and but it into your cream, and it be little more
then the quantity of a Walnut it is enough, and season it with salt, Sugar,
cloves, mace, and saffron, and so cover it, and let it be set upon a
chafingdish or pot of seething water, and when it is well hardened, cast on it
minced Dates and small Raisons, and so let it boil till ye think it be well
hardened: and then serve them forth. etc.

How to make a Custard in Lent.
TAke the milt of any manner of fresh fish, and a little of the milt of a white
Hering, and a quantity of blanched almonds, and crumbs of bread, and mingle al
these together and a little Water and Sugar, and a quantity of Rosewater, and
mingle that together: season it as ye would do another custard with all manner of
spices. Then mingle therewith Raisons corrans, and Dates, cut in pieces, and so
bake it in a platter or paste, whether ye will, the space of half an hour,
and so serve it in.

Another way to make a Custard in Lent.
TAke blanched almonds and bray them small put crummes of white bread in the
braying of the almonds. Then let a Pike be sodden, or fat Eels, that ye may
have the best of the broth and put that in the bottom of your platter, put in
also minced dates and corrans. Then strain your almonds with the water sodden
with sugar. Then season it with sugar, saffron, cloves and Mace: then put in
all the stuff in the platter, and so boil it upon a chafingdish a good
while: see the platter be not covered, for if it be the Custard will never wax
hard: when ye serve it forth, cast Sugar on it, and if your dates and corrans
be sodden in the fish broth before ye put them in the platter, they will be the
better, put to a little salt in the making, etc.

To make a tarte of apples and Orange pills.
TAke your orenges, and lay them in water a day and a night, then sees them in
fair water and honey, and let them sees till they be soft: then let them soak
in the sirrop a day and a night: then take them forth and cut them small, and
then make your tart and season your Apples with Sugar, Synamon and Ginger, and
put in a piece of butter, and lay a course of Apples, and between the same
course of apples, a course of Orenges, and so course by course, and season your
Orenges as you seasoned your Apples, with somewhat more sugar, then lay on the
lid and put it in the oven, and when it is almost baked, take Rosewater and
Sugar, and boil them together till it be somewhat thick, then take out the
Tart, and take a feather and spread the rosewater and Sugar on the lid, and set
it into the Oven again, and let the sugar harden on the lid, and let it not
burn.

How to make a tart of Apples.
PAre your apples and cut away the core, and cut the remnant in small pieces,
and sees it in rose water or wine til they be soft, and ye must stir it all the while it seeths, then draw it through a strainer, and season it with sugar
sinamon and ginger, and spread it in your paste: and if you will, ye may serve
it in a dish without past and cut a date or two and lay it on, for a change ye
may color it with Saunders if you will.

To make a good tart of Cheries.
TAke your cheries and pick out the stones of them: then take raw yolks of eggs,
and put them into your cheries, then take sugar, Sinamon and Ginger, and
Cloves, and put to your Cheries and make your Tart with all the Eggs, your
tart must be of an inche high, when it is made put in your cheries without any
liquor, and cast Sugar, Sinamon, and ginger, upon it, and close it up, lay it
on a paper, and put it in the Oven, when it is half baken draw it out, and put
the liquor that you let of your cheries into the Tart: then take molten butter,
and with a feather anoint your lid therewith. Then take fine beaten Sugar and
cast upon it: then put your Tarte into the Oven again, and let it bake a good
while, when it is baken draw it forth, and cast Sugar and Rosewater upon it,
and serve it in.

To make a tart of Cheries, when the stones be out, another way.
Sees them in white wine or in Claret, and strain them thick: when they be
sodden: the^ take two yolks of eggs and thicken it withal: then season it
with Sinamon, Ginger, and Sugar, and bake it, and so serve it.

To make a tart of Damsons.
Sees the Damsons in Wine, and strain them with a little Cream: then boil
your stuff over the fire til it be thick, put there to sugar, Sinamon, and
Ginger, so spread them on your paste, but set it not in the Oven after, but let
the paste be baked before.

How to make a tart of Eggs.
TAke twenty yolks of Eggs, and half a pound of butter, and strain them
altogether into a plater: then put two good handfuls of sugar in it, six
spoonfuls of Rosewater, and stir them altogether. Then make your paste with
two handfuls of fine flower, and six yolks of Eggs, and a quarter of a dish of
Butter: then make your Tart, and put your stuff therein and lay your Tart upon
a sheet of Paper, and so put it into the Oven, and when that it is baked
enough, then draw it out of the Oven, and cast a little sugar on it, and so
serve it forth.

To make a good tart of Cream.
TAke a quart of Cream, and put in twelve yolks of eggs, and a little Saffron,
strain them. Then put it in a pot and boil it, but all the time it stands
on the fire it must be stirred with a stick for burning. Also ere ye boil it,
ye must put a good dish of butter in it, when it is boiled, put in your Sugar,
as much as will make it sweet: then make your paste with Butter. Eggs, Sugar,
with a little Saffron and fine flower, and make your Tart with it and dry it in
the Oven, and when it is dry, put in a little Rosewater and butter, then fill
your tart with the stuff, when it is strained, so bake it, and when it is
baked, sprinkle a little Rosewater and Sugar, and a little Butter molten upon it.

How to make a tart of Prunes.
YOu must sees the prunees with Wine, then strain them, and season it with
Sugar, so bake it with paste, and first prick it in the bottom if that you will
boil your stuff upon a chafingdish, then the less baking after ward will
serve it.

How to make a tart of Spinnage.
TAke some cast cream, and sees some Spinnage in fair water till it be very
soft, then put it into a Collender, that the water may soake from it: then
strain the spinnage, and cast the cream together, let there be good plenty
of Spinnage: set it upon a chafingdish of coals, and put to it Sugar and some
Butter, and let it boil a while Then put it in the paste, and bake it, and
cast blaunche powder on it, and so serve it in.

To mke a tart of Veale.
TAke two kidneis of Veale and broyle them, then take off all the skin and chop
the fat very small, and put two yolks of eggs, a handful of Corrans, six
Dates cut small two handful of sugar, a spoonful of Salt, a spoonefull of
Sinamon, half a spoonefull of Ginger, four spoonfuls of Rosewater, chop them
altogether then make your Tart of fine paste, and fill it with your stuff:
then close it with a cover, and strike upon the lid of your Tart butter that is
molten, and cast fine sugar upon it, as you do to a Marchpane, let not your
Oven (...) too hot for it asks but little baking.

Ho to make a tart of cheese
MAke your Tart, and then take Banbery Cheese, and pare away the out side of it
and cut the clean cheese in small pieces and put them into the Tart, and when
your Tart is full of Cheese: then put two handfuls of sugar into your Tart upon
your cheese, and cast in it five or six spoonefuls of Rosewater, and close it
up with a cover, and with a fether lay sweet molten Butter upon it, and fine
Sugar, and bake it in a soft oven.

To make a tart of almonds.
BLanch almonds and beat them, and strain them fine with good thick Cream,
then put in Sugar and Rosewater, and boil it thick, then make your paste with
butter, fair water, and the yolks of two or three Eggs, and as soon as ye have
driven your paste, cast on a little sugar, and rosewater, and harden your paste
before in the Oven. Then take it out, and (...) it, and set in in again, and
let it bake till it be well, and so serve it.

How to make a tart of Medlers.
TAke medlers that be rotten, and strain them the^ set them on a chafingdish
of coals, and beat it in two yolks of Eggs, and let it boil till it be
somewhat thick: then season it with sinamon, Ginger and sugar, and lay it in
paste.

How to make a tart of hippes.
TAke Hippes, slit them, and pick out the kernels: then sees them in white
wine, or in fair water, when they be soft sodden, strain them as thick as
you can, and season them with Sinamon, ginger and sugar, and lay it in paste.

How to make a Curde tart.
TAke Cream, yolks of eggs, white bread sees them together, then put in a
sawcer full of Rosewater or Malmesey, and turn it: and put it into a cloth,
when all the whey is out, strain it, and put in Sinamon, Ginger, salt, and
sugar, then lay it in paste.

How to make Lumbardy tarts.
TAke beets, chop them small, and to put them grated bread and cheese, and
mingle them well in the chopping, take a few corrans, and a dishe of sweet
butter and melt it, then stir al these in the butter, together with three
yolks of eggs, sinamon, ginger, and sugar, and make your tart as larg as you
will, and fill it with the stuff, bake it, and serve it in.

To make a tart of bread.
TAke grated bread and put to it molten butter and a little Rosewater and sugar,
and the yolks of eggs, and put it into your paste, and bake, and when you serve
it, cut it in four quarters and cast sugar on it.

A tart to provoke courage either in man or woman,
TAke a quart of good wine, and boil therein two Burre roots scraped clean,
two good Quinces, and a potaton root well pared, and an ounce of Dates, and
when all these are boiled very tender, let the^ be drawn through a strainer
wine and al, and the^ put in the yolks of eight eggs, and the brains of three
or four cock sparrowes, and strain them into the other, and a little
rosewater, and sees them all with Sugar, sinamon and Ginger, and clones and
mace, and put in a little sweet butter, and set it upon a chafingdish of coals
between two platters, and so let it boil til it be something big.

How to make a tart of Gooseberies.
TAke Goseberies, and perboile them in white or claret win^, or strong ale,
and withal boil a little white bread: then take them up and draw them through
a strainer as thick as you can with the yolks of six Eggs, then season it up
with sugar, and half a dishe of butter, and so bake it.

Roasted meats.
To make Allows of mutton.
TAke fair Mutton, and cut it thin in flakes then take fair Parsley, Onions,
Yolks of Eggs, sodden Eggs, Marrow, or sweet suet, chop al these together,
and so roll it up wit^ the mutton, and roste it.

How to roast a Gybot of mutton.
CVt the flesh of a leg of Mutton, take out the bone, and take the flesh that
you cut forth, and chop it small, and put thereto yolks of Eggs, cloves and
Mace, Corrans, Rosemarie, Parsley. Time and some suet, and mingle them
altogether, and put them into a bag and sow it up, and so roste it.

How to roste a Hare.
FIrst wash it in fair water, then perboile it and lay in cold water again,
then larde it, and roste it on a broch. Then to make sauce for it, take red
Vinigar, Salt, Pepper, Ginger Cloves, Mace, and put them together. Then mince
apples and onions, and fry them in a pan: then put your sauce to them with a
little sugar, and let them boil well together, then baste it upon your Hare and
so serve it forth.

To roste a Calves head.
MAke a little hole in the head, and pluck out all the brains, and lay the
head to soake: then to make a pudding in it, take white bread, and lay it to
soake in milk, and strain it thick, then take four yolks of Eggs, cloves
Mace, Pepper, Saffron, corans, Dates, and a good quantity of Butter, make a
good Pudding, and fill the head full: then take the bone, and stop the hole,
and when it is almost enough, cast crummes of bread on it: then cleave it, and
make sauce to it with Synamon, sugar, Ginger, and vinegar, and boil them al
together, and then you may serve it forth.

To roast a Capon, Phesant or partridge.
ROste a capon with his head of, his wings and legs on whole: and your
phesant in like sort: but when you serve him in, stick one of his feathers upon
his breast: and in like manner you must roste a Partridg, but stick up no
feather.

How to roste Venison.
LEt your Venison be perboyled, then make it tender, and cast into it cold
water, then Larde it, and roste it, and for sauce: take broth vinegar, pepper,
cloves and mace, with a little salt, and boil all these together, and so upon
your venison serve it.

How to roste a quail.
LEt his legs be broken, and knit one within another, and so roste him.

To roste a Crane, Heron Curlew or Bitture.
ROste a crane with his legs turned up behind him, his wings cut off at the
joint next the body, and then wind the neck about the broch, and put the bill
into his breast, the Heron Curlew and Bitture, after the same manner, but let
the Bittures head be off.

To roste a Plouer or a Snite.
TAke and roste a plouer with his head of, and his legs turned upward upon
his back, but the Snite with his bill put into his breast, and his legs
turned upward upon his breast.

How to roste Woodcocks.
Pluck them, and then draw the guts out of them, but leave the liver still in
them, then stuff them with Larde chopped small, and Juniper berries, with his
bil put into his breast and his feet as the Snite, and so roste him on a spit,
and set under it a fair large pan with white wine in it, and chopped parsley,
vinegar, salt, and ginger: then make tostes of white bread, and toste them upon
a girdion, so that they be not burnt: then put these tostes in a dish, and upon
them lay your woodcocks, and put your sauce, being the same broth upon them,
and so serve them forth.

To sees fish.
To make fine rice pottage.
TAke half a pound of Jorden almondes, and half a pound of rice, and a gallo^
of running water, and a handful of oak bark, and let the bark be boiled in
the running water, and the almonds beaten with the hulles and al on, and so
strained to make the rice pottage withal.

To make good Lenton pottage.
TAke Eeles and flea them, and cut them in culpins, and cast the^ into a pot of
fair water, and take Parsley and Onions, and shred them together not to small,
and take cloves Mace, powder of Pepper and Synamon, and cast it thereto, and
let them boil together a white: also take a good portion of wine, and thick
yest, and put it thereto, and let it boil together a while. Then take saffron,
salt, and Vinegar, and cast it thereto, and serve it for good pottage.

How to sees a Pike.
TAke white wine, fair water, vinegar, and a little yest, or else a few
gooseberies, boil these together, and before ye sees your Pike, lay it in
vinegar and salt, this is a good broth.

How to sees a carpe.
YOu must take Red wine, and the blood of the carp, and a little Vinegar and
salt, and let it lie in this a while. Then sees your carpe in it, and put
pepper half broken in it, and a piece of sweet butter, and make your soppes
therewith and serve it in.

How to sees a Gurnard.
YOu must open your Gurnard in the back, and fair wash and sees it in water
and salt, with the fishie side upward: and when it is sodden well, you may take
some of the best of your broth if you will, or else a little fair water, and put
to it new yest, a little Vergious, parslie, Rosemarie, a little Time, whole
Mace and a piece of sweet Butter: and let it boil in a pipkin by it self till
it be well boiled, and then when you serve in your Gurnard, power the same
broth upon it.

To sees fresh Salmon.
TAke a little water, and as much Beer and salt, and put thereto Parsley,
Time, and Rosemarie, and let all these boil together. Then put in your
Salmon, and make your broth sharp with some Vinigar.

How to sees a Breame.
PVt White Wine into a pot and let it sees, then take and cut your Bream in
the midst, and put him into the pot: then take an Onion and chop it small,
then take Nutmegs beaten, Synamon and Ginger, whole Mace, and a pound of
Butter, and let it boil altogether and so season it with salt, serve it upon
sops, and garnish it with fruit.

To sees Roches, Flounders, or Eeles.
MAke ye good broth with new Yeast, put therein Vergious, Salt, Parsley, a
little Time, and not much Rosemarie and pepper: so set it on the fire and
boil it, and when it is well boiled, put in Roches, Flounders, Eeles, and a
quantity of sweet butter.

How to sees Stockfish.
TAke Stockfish and water it well, and then put out all the bal^e from the
fish, then put it into a pipkin, and put in no more water then shall cover it,
then set it on the fire, and as soon as it begins to boil on the one side,
then turn the other side to the fire, and as soon as it begins to boil on
the other side, take it of and put it into a Colender, and let the water run
out from it, and put in salt in the boiling of it, and take a little fair
water and sweet butter, and let it boil in a dish until it be something
thick, then pour it on the stockfish, and so serve it in.

To sees a Dory or a Mullet.
MAke your broth light with yest, somewhat sauorie with salt, and put therein a
little Rosemarie, and when it seeths put in your fish, and let it sees very
softly. Take fair water and vergious a like much, and put thereto a little new
yeast, corrans, whole Pepper, and a little Mace, and Dates shred very small,
and boil them well together: and when they be well boiled, take the best of
your broth that your fish is sodden in, and put to it straweberries,
Gooseberries, or Barberries, sweet Butter, and some sugar, and so season up
your broth, and pour upon your Dorie or Mullet.

To stewe Herrings.
TAke ale, and put therein a few onions small cut. and a spoonful of Mustard,
great raisons and saffron, and thick it with grated bread: if you will have
puddings in them, take the soft roes of the herrings, and stamp them with a
little thick almond milk, and put thereto some Dates or Figs minced, cloves,
mace, Sugar, saffron and salt, and some corrans, and grated bread.

To roste a piece of Stockfish.
TAke a quarter of stockfish and a little grated bread and a little cream, and
four yolk^ of eggs, a few Dates minced with corrans synamon, ginger, and a
little pepper, and so lay it to the fire and baste it well with Butter and
Vinigar, and some sinamon and ginger in your butter, wherewith you baste it,
and so serve it.

To bake fish.
To make herring pies.
TAke herrings and crush them in your hands, to shall you loose the flesh from
the skin, save the skin, as whole as ye can, and scrape of all the fish, yt
none be left thereupon: then take a pound of almondes, or as many as ye be
disposed to make, blanch them, and stamp them, and in the stamping of them, put
in one soft roe, and one hard row, and five or six Dates, and a spoonful or
two of grated bread, and a pint of Muscadell to grind them withal, but ye may
not grind them to fine, nor may not make them too moist with your muscadell,
but somewhat stiff, that you may fill the skins of your Herings: Then take
Rosewater, and a little saffron to color Almondes withal, when ye have
ground them. Then put in four Dates and cut them fine, and a handful of
Currants, and a little sugar, then make fine paste, and roll it as thin as you
can, and strewe thereon a good deal of sugar, then put your Herrings therein,
and bake them

How to bake a Carpe.
TAke of the scales, and take forth the Gall, and with cloves, Mace, and
salt, season it and take corans and prunes, and put about the carpe, and take
butter and put it upon him and let him bake two hours.

How to bake a ioll of fresh Salmon.
TAke Ginger and salt, and season it, and certain currants, and cast them about
and under it, and let the paste be fine, and take a little Butter and lay about
it in the paste, and set it in the oven two hours, and so serve it in.

How to bake a Breame.
SCale it* and take cloves, Mace, and salt, and put it in fine paste. Then
take corans and set about it, and a good quanti^^ (...) ter, and put it into
the belly of the (...) about it: let it bake two hours.

How to bake a Gurnard with (...)
TAke certain Eeles and a Gurna^^ (...) them into your Coffin, and take cloves
(...) and salt, and cast a little into the boff^^ (...) your coffin. Then take
the Eeles and lay them about the Gurnarde, and the resi^u^ of pour spice cast
about it, and take a quantity of Corrans and Prunes, let it bake three hours.

How to bake a trout.
WAsh it a little, and take two or three Eles, a few Cloves, mace, ginger, and
Salt, and season the Trout and the Eeles together, and put them in the coffin
together and a few Corrans about it, and a quantity of butter, and let them
bake an hour and a half.

How to make a good marchpane.
FIrst, take a pound of long small almonds, blanch them in cold water. Then
take a cloth and dry them as dry as you can The^ stamp them small, and put no
liquor to them but as you must needs to keep them from oyling, and that little
that ye put to them must be Rosewater, in like manner you should but wet your
Pestels end therein, for fear of putting too (...) ^^uor therein: and when you
have beaten (...), take half a pound of sugar or more, (...) ^e beaten to small
powder, but it must (...) ^^gar, and then in put it to your Almondes, (...)
them altogether, when they be bea^^ (...) ^ake your wafers and cut them
composse (...) of the bigness that you will have your Marchpane of. Then so
soon as you can after the tempering of the stuff, (...) it be put in paste of
wafers, and strik in abroad with a flat stick of wood as even as you can, and
pinch the very stuff as if it were an edge set on the^, put a paper under it,
and then set it upon a fair board and lay a Lattine basin upon it the bottom
upward Then lay burning coals upon the bottom of your basin, and ever anon
lift up your basin to see how it baketh: and if it happen to be brown, or to
brown too fast in some places fold paper as broad as that place is, and this
well tended, ye shall bake one in little more then three quarters of an hour:
when it is baked, put on your gold and your biskets, and stick in long comfets,
and then shall ye make a good Marchpane: But before that ye bake it, ye must
cast on it fine sugar and Rosewater, and that will make him to crispe like unto
yse, likewise you must have a hoope for to make your Marchpane in.

To make good Restons.
TAke a quart of fine flower, lay (...) ^^boord, and make a hole in the mi^^
(...) ^lower with your hand, and put a sa^^ (...) ^^le Yest therein, and ten
yolks of (...) put thereto two spoonefuls of Sinamo^^ (...) one of Ginger, and
a spoonefull of cloue (...) Mace and a quarterne of Sugar fine beat* and a
little saffron, and half a spoonefull of Salt. Then take a dishfull of Butter,
melt it and put into your flower, and therwithal make your paste as it were for
manchets, and mould it a good while and cut it in pieces the bigness of Ducks
eggs, and so moulde every piece as a manchet, and make them after the fashion
of an ackorn broad above, and narrow beneath Then set them in an Oven, and let
them bake three quarters of an hour. Then take five dishes of butter and
clarif^ie it clean upon a soft fire: then draw forth your Restons forth of
the Oven, and scrape the bottoms of them fair and cut them overthwart in four
pieces, and put them in a fair charger, and put your clarified butter upon
them. Then have powder of Synamon and Ginger ready by you, and Sugar very
fine: and mingle the^ altogether, and ever as you set your pieces thence,
together ^ast some of your sugar, Sinamon and ginger upon (...) when you have
set them al up, lay (...) fair platter, and put a little butter (...), and cast
a little sugar upon them, and (...) ^^em in.

How to make a Vaunt.
TAke marow of Beef, as much as you can hold in both your hands, cut it as
big as great dice. Then take ten Dates, cut them as big as small dice: then take
thirty prunes, and cut the fruit from the stones, then take half a handful
of Corrans wash them and pick them, then put your marrow in a clean platter,
and your dates, prunes, and Corrans: then take ten yolks of Eggs, and put into
your stuff before rehearsed. Then take a quarterne of sugar, and more, and beat
it small and put to your marrow. Then take two spoonfuls of Sinamon, and a
spoonful of sugar, and put them to your stuff, and mingle them altogether,
then take eight yolks of eggs, and four spoonfuls of Rosewater, strain them,
and put a little sugar to it. Then take a fair frying pan, and put a little
piece of butter in it, as much as a Walnut, and set it on a good fire, and when
it looks almost black, put it out of your pan, and as fast as you can, put
half of the yolks of Eggs, into the midst of your pan, and let it run all the
breadth of your pan, and fry it fair and yellowe, and when it is fried, put it
in a fair^ dish, and put your stuff therein and spread it a^ the bottom of the
dish and then make another vaunt even as you made the other, and set it upon a
fair board, and cut it in fair slices, of the breadth of your little finger, as
long as your Vaunt is: then lay it upon your stuff after the fashion of a
lattice window, and the^ cut off the ends of them, as much as lies without the
inward compass of the dish. Then set the dishe within the Oven or in a baking
pan, and let it bake with leisure, and when it is baked enough the marrow will
come fair out of the vaunt, unto the brim of the dish. The^ draw it out, and
cast thereon a little sugar, and so you may serve it in.

How to make Frians.
TAke three handful of flower, seven yolks of eggs, and half a dishe of
Butter, make your paste therewith, and make two Chewets thereof, as you would
make two tarts, and when it is driven very fine with your rolling pin, then
cut them in pieces of the bigness of your hand. Then take a quartern of sugar,
and one ounce and four spoonfuls of sinamon, and half a spoonful of Ginger,
and mingle them altogether, then take lumps of marrow, of the quantity of your
finger, and put it on your pieces of paste before rehearsed, and put upon it two
^poonfuls of your sugar and spices: then take a ^itle water and wet your paste
therewith: then make them even as ye would make a pastie of Venison: then prick
them with a pin, and fry them as ye fry fritters, when they be fried, cast a
little sugar on them, and so serve them in.

How to make frians in Lent.
TAke Valsome Eeles and see they be fat, and cut the fish from the bone, and
mince it small and a Warden or two with it. Then season it with Pepper, salt,
cloves, mace, and Saffron: then put to it corrans, Dates, and Prunes, small
minced, and when your fruit is altogether then pour on a little Vergious and
cut it in little pieces, and so bake it. and put a piece of Butter in the midst
of the pieces to make it moist, so close it, and bake it.

How to make Snow.
TAke a quart of thick cream, and five or six whites of eggs, a sawcerfull of
Sugar, and a sawcerfull of Rosewater, beat altogether, and ever as it rises
take it out with a spoone: then take a loaf of bread, cut away the crust, and
set it upright in a platter Then set a fair great Rosemarie bushe in the
midst of your bread: the^ lay your snow with a spoon upon your resemary, and
upon your bread, and gilt it.

To make a good Gellie.
FIrst, take four Calves feet, and scald o^^ the hair of them: then sees
them in fair^^ water til they be tender. Then take out your feet, and let your
broth stand till it be cold: then ye shall take of clean the feet from it, and
then put Claret wine and a little Malmesey to it: it ye have a pottel of Gellie
water: then put to it a quart of wine, and a pint of Malmesey, then season it
with salt, and put thereto one pound of Sugar, one ounce of Ginger, one ounce
and a half of Sinamon, twelve cloves, twelve pepper corns, and a little
Saffron, so boil all together: then take a good sawcerful of Vinegar and lay
your turnfall therein: and then put it to your Gellie, til it be somewhat
keeled, then put in your whites of eggs, and let al these boil together. Then
set all these by, and within a while let it run through your bag.

To make Gellie both white and red.
TAke four Calves feet, scalde them very clean, and cut them in the
midst, and as near as ye can, take away all the fat clean out of the ioints,
and let the feet lie in fair water four or five hours, and change the
waters often. Then take a clean pot, and put your feet in it: and put to them
three quarts of fair water, and scum it very clean, ever as any fat does
rise ^et it be taken away, and so let it sees till the third part of your
liquor be sodden away, and your feet very tender, then take it from the fire
and let the liquor run through a strainer into a fair earthen pan, and set the
pan in some cold place that it may be stiff; and when it is stiff take a
sharp knife and cut away the uppermost of the gellie as thin as you can, the^
divide your gellie in the pan, and put it in two earthen pots: take three
ounces of sinamon large, and wash it very clean: then break it of the
bigness of a penie. Take of case Ginger almost an ounce and pare it clean,
then cut it as much as if you would eat it with figs: then take two nutmegs and
cut them in four or five pieces: and put all this in one of your pots, and put
thereto a pound of Sugar, as ye think good, and put thereto a sawcerfull of
white Viniger, and a little fair white salt, fair picked, and very clean: then
set your pot in a soft fire, and so let it stew but not sees, and let the pot
be covered very close, when it has stued a while, with a spoone assay it
whether it be flashy in the mouth, if it be, put in a little more Sinamon, and
if it be hot of the spice, put in a pint of white wine, and let it stew a
while. Then take the pot from the fire, and let it stand till it be between hot
and cold, the^ take the whites of ten Eggs, and beat them well, and put them
into the pot, but see that your liquor be not too hot, nor too cold, when you
put them in. Then set your pot to the fire again, and when the Eggs be
hardened, with a spoone take them clean off, and set the pot from the fire,
ere yes take of the whites. Then have your gelly bag clean, and hang it in a
fair place, and put in the bottom of your bag a little Margeram, and so let it
run through your bag three or four times or more if need require, but keep
always a clean cloth over the mouth of your bag, then cast your dishes, when
all is run out, be well ware ye have no dust when it runs, or when you shall
cast it, and have a little fire beside your bag, when it is running, make your
red gellie of your other pot, and season it as ye did the white gellie, and do
thereto in the putting in of the Eggs as ye did before. But for the Nutmegs ye
must take twenty cloves bruised, and beware ye make not too deep a color of
your Turnesal at the first, but take of it by little and little at once, and put
in the bottom of your bag a little Rosemary, and so use it else in every thing
as ye used the white.

To make gellie with flesh.
TAke knuckles of Veal, and cut the ioints al to pieces, and lay them in fair
water the space of an hour, then wash them clean, and lay them in fair water
again the space of half an hour. Then take a fair pot and put your flesh in
it: then fill your pot with Claret wine and water, and set it to the fire, and
scum it as clean as ye can: then let it boil as softly as ye can, for the
sooner it is boiled the longer it will be ere it come to a Gellie: therefore it
must boil but softlye, when it is boiled, strain the liquor into a fair boll,
and when it is cold, take off the grease that lies upon it: then take of the
cleerest of the stuff, and put it in a fair pot and sees it, and then put in
your Sugar: then take Synamon, grains, cloves, long Pepper, Nutmegs and
ginger, of each of these a quantity, then bruise them, and searce out the small
spices, and put the greatest into your pot, when it boyleth, put in whites of
Eggs beaten: Then take a Scummer and scum them as they rise, and dry your
Turnesall by the fire, and rub it clean, and color your Gellie therewith,
then take your bag, and put Rosemarie in the bottom of it, and hang it by the
fire side, and let your gellie run two times through your bag into a fair
vessel.

To make gellie with fish.
TAke Tenches and scalde them, and draw them and wash them clean: then put
your Tenches into a fair pot: then take white wine or claret and fill your pot
therewith: then take Isenbras as much as ye think best. Then take your pot and
set it on the fire, and let it boil the space of an hour and a half: then take
it from the fire, and let your liquor run through a strainer, then let your
liquor stand till it be cold. Then order it in every point as ye did the
other before that is made with flesh.

All necessaries apperteyning to a Banquet.
SYnamon, Sugar, Nutmegs, Pepper, Saffron, Saunders, Coleander, Anniseeds,
Licoras, al kind of Comfets, Orenges, Pomegranate, Tornesall, Lemmons, Prunes,
Corrans, Barberries conserved, Paper white and brown: seeds, Rosewater
Raisons, Rye flower, Ginger, Cloves and mace, Damask water, Dates, Cherries
conserved, sweet Orenges, Wafers for your Marchpanes, seasoned and unseasoned
Spinnedges.

To make a Tyssan.
TAke a pint of Barley being picked, sprinkled with fair water, so put it in
a fair stone mortar, and with your pestel rub the barley, and that will make
it tuske, then pick out the barley from the husks, and set your barley on the
fire in a gallon of fair water, so let it sees til it come to a pottell: then
put into your water, Succory, Endive, Cinkefoyle, violet leaves, of each one
handful, one ounce of anniseeds, one ounce of liquoris bruised, and thirty
great raisons, so let all this gear sees till it come to a quart: then take
it of, let it stand and settle, and so take of the clearest of it, and let it
be strained, and when you have strained the clearest of it, the^ let it stand a
good pretty while. Then put in four whites of Eggs al to beaten, shells and all,
then stir it well together, so set it on the fire again, let it sees, and
ever as the scum does rise take it of, and so let it sees a while: then let
it run through a strainer or an Ipocras bag, and drink of it in the morning
warm.

How to clarify Whey.
TAke the juice of Fumetorie, half a pint of the juice of Borage, of Endive,
of the tendering of hoppes, of each of them a quarter of a pint, the^ put al
these juices to a pottle of whey with three whites of Eggs beaten, and with
Sugar sufficient: then boil them on an easy fire, take away the scum of it as
it rises, and when it is cold let it run through a fair strayner: take
thereof every morning half a pint, and before supper as much: this will pure
your blood, and will continue good four days.

How to make fillets Gallantine.
TAke fair Pork, and take of the skin and roste it half enough, then take it
off the spit, and smite it in fair pieces, and cast it in a fair pot: then
cut Onions, but not too small, and fry them in fair suet, put them into the
Porke, then take the broth of Beef or Mutton and put thereto, and set them on
the fire, and put thereto powder of Pepper, Saffron, cloves and Mace, and let
them boil well together. Then take fair bread and Vinigar, and steep the
bread with some of the same broth, strain it, and some blood withal, or else
saunders, and color it with that, and let all boil together, then cast in a
little Saffron, and salt, and then may you serve it in.

How to make Gallantine.
TAke tostes of white bread, boil the^ on a chafingdish of coals, with vinigar
when it has soked before in the vinigar, and in ye boiling put in a branch of
Rosemarie, Sugar, Synamon and Ginger, strain it, and serve it.

How to make tostes of Veale.
TAke the kidneyes, choppe them very small, then put to it four or five
yolks of Eggs, three spoonefull of sugar, a little synamon and Ginger, a
spoonefull of Corrans clean washed and picked, choppe them altogether, then
make sops of stale white bread, and lay your stuff upon them, and take a
frying pan and a dish of sweet Butter in it, and melt it: then put in your
tosts and fry them upon a soft fire: then lay them in a dish, and cast sugar
on them, your fire must be very soft, or else they will burn.

To make an apple moyse.
TAke apples, and cut them in two or four pieces, boil them till they be
soft, and bruise them in a mortar, and put thereto the yolks of two Eggs, and a
little sweet butter, set them on a chafingdish of coals, and boil them a
little, and put thereto a little Sugar, synamon and ginger, and so serve them in.

To make Pescods.
MAke your past with fine flower, and yolks of Eggs, make it short and drive it
thin.

Then take Dates, Corrans and marrowe, and cut them like Dice, and season them
with salt because of the marrow a little: then put in Synamon, sugar and Ginger,
make your past as you do for the Frians in Butter or suet, and serve them in.

To make pescods another way.
TAke apples, and mince them small, take Figs, Dates, Corans; great Raisons,
Sinamon, Ginger, and Sugar, mince them, and put them all together, and make
them in little flat pieces, and fry them in butter and Oil.

Petty services.
TAke fair flower, Saffron and sugar, make thereof paste, and make thereof
coffins, and take the yolks of Eggs tried from the whites, and see the yolks be
all whole. Then lay three or four eggs in the coffin, and two or three pieces
of marrow: then take powder of Ginger, sugar and corrans, and roll the marrow
in it, and put all in the pie, and cover it, or bake it in a pan.

To make Spanish balls.
TAke a piece of a leg of Mutton, and pare away the skin from the flesh, chop
the flesh very small: then take marrow of beef, and cut it as big as a hasell
nut, and take as much of marrow in quantity as ye have of flesh, and put both
in a fair platter and some salt, and eight yolks of eggs, and stir them well
together: then take a little earthen pot, and put in it a pint and a half of
beef broth that is not salt, or else Mutton broth and make it sees: then make
balls of your stuff, and put them in boiling broth one after another, and let
them stewe softly the space of two hours, Then lay them on sopps three or
four in a dish, and of the uppermost of the broth upon the sops, and make your
balls as big as tennis balls.

To make balls of Italy.
TAke a piece of a leg of Veale, perboyle it, then pare away all the skin and
sinews, and chop the Veale very small, a little salt and pepper two yolks of
Eggs hard roasted, and seven yolks raw, temper all these with your Veale, then
make balls thereof as big as Walnuts, and boil them in beef broth, or mutton
broth as ye did the other before rehearsed, and put into your broth ten beaten
cloves, a race of Ginger, a little Vergious, four or five lumpes of marrowe
whole, let them stew the space of an hour: then serve them upon sops, eight or
nine in a dish, and betwixt the balls you must lay the lumps of marrow.

To make almond butter after the best and newest manner.
TAke a pound of almonds or more as ye will, blanch them in cold water, or in
warm, as ye may have leisure: after the blanching, let them lie an hour in
cold water: then stamp them in fair cold water as fine as ye can: then put
your almondes in a cloth, and gather your cloth round up in your hands, and
press out the milk as much as you can, if ye think they be not small enough,
beat them again, and so get out milk as long as you can. Then set it on the
fire, and when it is ready to sees, put in a good quantity of Salt, and
Rosewater, that will turn it, and after that it is in, let it have one
boiling, and then take it from the fire, and cast it abroad upon a linen
cloth, and underneath the cloth, scrape off the whey as long as it will run.
Then scrape together the butter into the midst of your cloth, and bind the
cloth together, and let it hang so long as it will drop Then take pieces of
Sugar, as much as ye think will make it sweet, and put thereto Rosewater a
little, as much as will melt the Sugar, and fine powder of saffron, as ye think
will color it, and let both your Sugar and Saffron steep together in that
little quantity of Rosewater, and with that season up your butter when you will
make it.

How to make Ipocras.
TAke of chosen Sinamon two ounces, of fine Ginger one ounce, of grains half
an ounce of Nutmegs half an ounce, bruise them al, and stamp them in three or
four pintes of good odifferous wine, with a pound of Sugar, by the space of
four and twenty hours: then put them into an Ipocras bag of woollen, and so
receive the liquor. The readiest and best way is to put the spices with the
pound of Sugar, and the wine into a bottel, or a stone pot stopped close, and
after xxiiii hours it will be ready, then cast a thin linen cloth, and letting
so much run through as ye will occupy at once, and keep the vessel close, for
it will so well keep both the spirit, odor, and virtue of the wine, and also
spices.

To make Ipocras another way.
TAke a gallon of wine, an ounce of sinamon two ounces of ginger, one pound of
Sugar, twenty cloves bruised, and twenty corns of pepper big beaten, let all
these soake together one night and then let it run through a bag, and it will
be good Ipocras.

To make Eggs upon sops.
TAke Eggs and potch them as soft as ye can, then take a fine manchet, and make
soppes thereof, and put your sops in a dish, and put vergious thereto and Sugar,
and a little Butter: then set it to the fire, and let it boil: then take your
eggs and lay them upon your sops, and cast a little chopped Parslie upon them, and
so serve them in.

To make Eggs in Lent.
TAke Hens Eggs, and put out clean the white and the yolke. Then wash your
shel clean, and take almond milk, and sees it with Isanglas, or of the broth
of a Pike or a Tench, and when it is sodden, take it off, but before ye take
it from the fire, ye must season it with sugar and salt, and fill your egg
shells before the milk be cold. Then make a hole in the Egg above, and cut out
so much of the white as ye will make your yolks, then color your milk that he
left before with Saffron, like the yolk of an egg, and fill up the hole again
therewith, and let it stand til it be occupied.

How to make cast cream.
TAke milk as it comes from the Cow, a quart or less, and put thereto raw
yolks of Eggs, temper the milk and the eggs together. Then set them so
tempered upon a chafingdish of coals, and stir it still and put sugar to it,
and see it curd not, and it will be like cream of Almonds: when it is boiled
thick enough, then cast a little sugar on it, and sprinkle Rosewater upon it,
and so serve it in.

To make cast Cream another way.
TAke the milk that is milked over night, and scum off the Cream, then take
the milk and six whites of eggs, strain them together, and two yolks of eggs
mingled together, and boil them altogether until they turn to a Curds, then
put thereto a quantity of Virgious, and then it will turn: then take the
same, and put it in a linen cloth, and hang it upon a pin a little while, and
let the whay run from it. Then take it down and strain it into a platter, and
season it with a little Rosewater and Sugar, and so serve it.

To make clowted Cream after Mistres Horsmans way.
WHen you have taken the milk from the Kine, straight set it on the fire, but
see that your fire be without smoke, and soft fire, and so keep it on from
morning tell it be night or nigh therabout, and ye must be sure that it does
not sees all that while, and ye must let your milk be set on the fire, in as
broad a vessel as you can. Then take it from the fire, and set it upon a
board, and let it stand al night: the^ in the morning take off the cream and
put it in a dish, or where ye will.

How to make Cream of Almonds.
TAke thick Almond milk, and sees it a little, then take it from the fire, and
corn it with salt and vinigre. Then cast it in a cloth, and with a little knife
scrape in under the cloth and there will come out whey. Then put the Cream
together in the midst of the cloth, and hang it on a pin, and let more whey
drop out til ye think it be well. Then put it in a vessel, and put to it
sugar plenty, if it hang too long that it be too dry: then temper it with
sweet wine, and dress it if you will with small raisins and lay it like
morterels, or else put it abroad, and lay borage ^aues upon it, or else red
comfets and so serve it in.

How to make a good posset curde.
TAke your milk and set it on the fire, and set it s^^th put in yolks of eggs
according to the quantity of your milk: but see that your eggs be tempered with
some of the milk ere y^ put the^^ to the milk that is on the fire or else it
will fall together and mar all, and ye must stir it still til it sees and
begin to rise. Then take it off from the fire, but before ye take it off, have
your drink ready in a fair basin, on a chafingdish of coals, and power the
milk into the basin as it stands over the chafingdish with ^re, so cover it,
and let it stand a while Then take it up and cast on Sinamon and sugar and so
serve it in.

Mistress Drakes way to make soft Cheese all the year through, that it shall
be like rowen Cheese.
TAke your milk as it comes from the Cow, and put it in a vessel til it be
cold, the^ ^ake as much fair water, and set it on the fire when your water is
warm, put so much of your water is warm, put so much of your water in that milk
as will warm the milk. Then take a spoonefull of runnet and more, and put into
your milk, and make your Cheese, and put it into a fair cloth, and so put it
into the press, and turn it in the press often, and wipe it with fair
clothes, as often as ye turn it.

To make Fritters.
TAke a pint of Ale, and four yolks of Eggs, and a little saffron, a
spooneful of Cloves and mace, and a little salt, and half a handful of sugar,
put all this in a fair platter and stir them all together with a spoone, and
make your batter thereof. Then take ten Apples, pare and cut them as big as a
groate, put them in your batter: then take your suet and set it on the fire,
and when it is hot, put your batter, and your apples to your suet with your
hand one by one, and when they be fair and yellow take them out, and lay them
in a fair platter, and let them stand a little while by the fire side Then take
a fair platter, and lay your fritters therein and cast a little sugar on them,
and so serve them in.

To make Curde Fritters.
TAke the yolks of ten Eggs, and break ste^ in a pan, and put to them one
handful of Curds and one handful of fine flower, and strain the all together,
and make batter, and if it be not thick enough, put more Curdes in it, and
salt to it. Then set it on the fire in a frying pan, with such stuff as ye
will fry them with, and when it is hot, with a ladle take part of your batter,
and put of it into your pan, and let it run as small as you can, and stir the^
with a stick and turn them with a scummer, and when they be fair and yellow
fried, take them out, and c^st sugar upon them, and serve them forth.

To make Fritters with marrow.
TAke three handfuls of fine flower and more and lay it in a fair platter, and
put thereto six yolks of Eggs and almost a pint of ale, and a good handful of
Sugar, and two spoonfuls of Sinamon, and a spoonful of Ginger, and half a
spoonefull of cloves and mace, a little salt, and a little saffron to color
it withal. Then take a spoone, and stir all these for said things together:
and make your batter therewith: then take your marrow, and cut it of the
bigness of a groat: then have a frying pan ready with sweet suet therein, and
set it to the fire, and when it is hot dip your marrow in the butter, and put
it into the pan piece by piece, and ever be stiring them with a stick, and when
they be fried, take the^ out of your pan with a scummer, and lay them in a
fair platter, and take Sugar, Sinamon and Ginger, and cast upon them, and so
serve them in.

How to make Stock Frittors.
TAke a handful of Marrow, or the kidneyes of a Calfe, chop them small. Then
take ten yolks of eggs and put them in your marrow or kidne^es. Then take a
handful of Corrans, and wash them clean, put them to your stuff and take ten
dates and cut them small, and put them to your stuff, and take two handful of
grated, bread, two spoonful of Ginger, and one spoonful of sinamon, and a
spoonful of cloves and mace a quarter of Sugar and a little Saffro^, and mingle
your spices and stuff together in a fair platter: then take two handful of
fine flower, and six yolks of eggs, and make your batter therewith with ale
and Saffron. Then make of your stuff before rehearsed little pills as big as
a walnut. Then have a frying pan ready with fair suet therein upon the fire,
and when it is hot dip your pills into your batter, and put them into your
frying pan, and fry them as ye would fry frittors, and that done, put the^ in
a platter, and cast a little Sinamon, Sugar, and Ginger on them, and so serve
them in.

How to make Frittors with Apples.
TAke fine flower, and temper it with Butter and a little salt, and make a
batter, and take a very little saffron to color your batter withal, and when
your batter is made, strain it through a strainer, then cut your apples of the
bigness of a groat, and put them to your batter then put your suet to the fire,
and when it is hot, put a piece of your apples to your suet, and if it rise
quickly, then your stuff is well seasoned, if it abide in the bottom, then
it is no^ half enough: therefore when it rises from the bottom, fill pour pan
one after another as fast as ye can, and when they are fair colored, take
the^ out with a scummer, and put them in a platter, and always whiles they are
in the pan stir them with a stick, and look that ye have liquor enough. Then
take your frittors, and put them in a fair platter, and then scrape Sugar
enough upon them.

How to make frittors of spinach.
TAke a good deal of Spinach, and wash it clean, and boil it in fair water,
and when it is boiled, put it in a collender, and let it cool. Then wring all
the water out of it as nere as ye can, lay it upon a board, and chop it with
the back of a chopping knife very small and put it in a platter, and put to it
four whites of Eggs, and two yolks, and the crumbs of half a manchet grated, and
a little sinamon and ginger, and stir them well together with a spoon and take
a frying pan and a dish of sweet Butter in it, when it is molten put handsomely
in your pan half a spoonful of your stuff, and so bestow the rest after,
frye them on a soft fire, and turn them when time is, lay the^ in a platter,
and cast sugar on them.

To make Pancakes.
TAke new thick Cream a pint, four or five yolks of eggs, a good handful of
flower and two or three spoonefuls of ale, strain them together into a fair
platter, and season it with a good handful of sugar, a spooneful of Synamon,
and a litte Ginger: then take a friing pan, and put in a little piece of Butter,
as big as your thombe, and when it is molten brown, cast it out of your pan,
and with a ladle put to the further side of your pan some of your stuff, and
hold your pan aslope, so that your stuff may run abroad over all the pan as
thin as may be: then set it to the fire, and let the fire be very soft, and
when the one side is baked, then turn the other, and bake them as dry as ye can
without burning.

To make good white puddings.
SEe that your livers be not too much para^yled. Then take of the livers and
lights, ^ye let them be picked and chopped with knives, ^^^n stamp them in a
mortar, and strain them through a Collender, and put some milk to it, to help
to get it through, then put four or five Eggs and but five whites, and put in
crumbs of bread, Cloves, Mace, Saffron Salt, and some Pepper, and sweet suet
small minced, and let there be enough of it, and so still fill them up, and to
black puddings, otemeale, milk and salt.

To make Puddings.
TAke grated bread, the yolks of six eggs, a little Synamon and Salt, Corrans,
one minced Date and the suet of mutton minced small, knead all these together,
and make them up in little ball^s, boil them on a chafingdish with a little
Butter and Vinigar, cast Synamon and sugar thereon, and so serve them in.

To make Ising puddings.
TAke a platter full of otemeale grotes clean picked, and put thereto of the
best Cream sodden that ye can get, blood warm, as much as shall cover the
grotes, and so let them lie and soake three hours, or some what more, till
they have drunk up the cream, and the grotes swollen and soft withal. Then
take six eggs whites and yolks, and strain them fair into your grotes:
then take one platterful and a half of beef suet, the skin clean pulled from
it, and as small minced as is possible So that when ye have minced it, you
must largely have one platterfull and a half, and rather more than less:
then mingle these well among your gross then season them with some salt and some
saffron: and if ye will put in cloves and mace: then fill your Puddings but not
too full, and see they be fair washed and sweet, and beware ye pull not away
too much of the fat within, for the fatter they be within, the better it is for
the puddings: also if ye find too much cream left among the grotes, after
they have line four hours: then put out part of it, and so sees up your
puddings.

How to make a tansey.
TAke a little Tansey, Fetherfew, parsley, and Violets, and stamp them all
together, and strain them with the yolks of eight or ten Eggs, and three
or four whites, and some Vergious, and put thereto sugar and salt, and fry it.

How to make a tansey another way.
TAke half a handful of Tansey, of the youngest ye can get, and a handful of
young borage, strawberry leaves, Lettice, and Violet leaves, and wash them
clean, and beat them very small in a mortar: then put to them eight Eggs
whites and all, and six yolks besides, and strain them all together through a
strainer: then season it with a good handful of sugar, and a Nutmeg beaten
small. Then take a frying pan, and half a dish of sweet Butter, and melt it:
then put your Eggs to it, set it on the fire, and with a sawcer, or with a
ladle, stir them till they be half baked: then put them into a platter, and all
to beat them still till they be very small: then take your frying pan made
clean, and put a dish of sweet butter in it, and melt it: then put your stuff
into your pan by a spoonefull at once, and when the one side is fried, turn
them and fry them together: then take them out, lay them in a platter, and
scrape sugar on them.

How to make a tansey in Lent.
TAke all manner of herbs, and the spawn of a Pike, or of any other fish, and
blanched almonds, and a few crumbs of bread and a little fair water and a pint
of Rosewater, and mingle altother, and make it not too thin, and fry it in in
Oil, and so serve it in.

The making of fine manchet.
TAke half a bushel of fine flower twice boulted, and a gallon of fair luke
warm water, almost a handful of white salt, and almost a pint of yest, then
temper all these together, without anis more liquour, as hard as ye can handle
it: then let it lie half an hour, then take it up, and make your Manchetts,
and let them stand almost an hour in the oven Memorandum, that of every bushel
of meal may be made five and twenty cast of bread, and every loaf to way a
pound beside the chesill.

The making of manchets after my Lady Graies way.
TAke two pecks of fine flower, which must be twice boulted, if you will have
your manchet very fair: Then lay it in a place where ye do use to lay your
dowe for your bread, and make a ^itle hole in it, and take a quart of fair
water blood warm, and put in that water as much leaven as a crab, or a pretty
big apple, and as much white salt as will into an Egshell, and all to break
your leven in the water, and put into your flower half a pint of good ale
yest, and so stir this liquor among a little of your flower, so that ye must
make it but thin at the first meeting, and then cover it with flower, and if it
be in the winter, ye must keep it very warm and in summer it shall not need so
much heat, for in the Winter it will not rise without warmeth. Thus let it lie
two hours and a half: then at the second opening take more liquor as ye
think will serve to wet all the flower. Then put in a pint and a half of good
yest and so all to break it in short pieces, after ye have well labored it,
and wrought it five or six times, so that ye be sure it is thoroughly
mingled together, so continue laboring it, til it come to a smooth paste, and
be well ware at the second opening that ye put not in too much liquor sodenlie,
for then it will run and if ye take a little it will be stiff, and after the
second working it must lie a good quarter of an hour, and keep it warm: then
take it up to the moulding board, and with as much speed as is possible to be
made, mould it up, and set it into the oven, of one pecke of flower ye may make
ten cast of Manchets fair and good.

To make short cakes.
TAke wheat flower of the fairest ye can get, and put it in an earthen pot,
and stop it close, and set it in an Oven and bake it, and when it is baked, it
will be full of clods, and therefore ye must searse it through a searce: the
flower will have as long baking as a pastie of Venison. When you have done
this, take clowted cream, or else sweet Butter, but cream is better, then
take sugar, Cloves, Mace and saffron, and the yolke of an Egg, for one doozen
of Cakes one yolke is enough: then put al these foresaid things together into
the cream, and ^e^per the^ altogether, the^ put the^ to your flower and so make
your cakes, your paste will be very short, therefore ye must make your cakes
very little: when ye bake your cakes, ye must bake them upon papers, after the
drawing of a batch of bread.

How to make leauened bread.
TAke six yolks of Eggs, and a little piece of Butter as big as a Walnut, one
handful of veri^ fine flower, and make al these in paste, and all to beat it
with a rolling pin, til it be as thin as a paper leaf, then take sweet Butter
and melt it, and rub over all your paste therewith, with a feather: then roll
up your paste softly as ye would roll up a scroll of paper, then cut them in
pieces of three inches long, and make them flat with your hands, and lay them
upon a sheet of clean paper, and bake them in an oven or pan, but the Oven
may not be too hot, and they must bake half an hour, then take some sweet
butter and melt it, and put that into your paste when it comes out of the
Oven, and when they are very wet, so that they be not dry, take them out of
your butter, and lay the^ in a fair dish, and cast upon them a little Sugar,
and if you please, s^namo^ and ginger, and serve them forth.

How to make buttered Beer.
TAke three pintes of Beer, put five yolks of Eggs to it, strain them
together, and set it in a powter pot to the fire, and put to it half a pound
of Sugar, one penniworth of Nutmegs beaten, one peniworth of Cloves beaten, and
a half penniworth of ginger bealen and when it is all in, take another pewtec
pot and brewe them together, and set it to the fire again, and when it is
ready to boil, take it from the fire, and put a dish of sweet butter into it,
and brewe them together out of one pot into another.

A Purgation.
TAke an ounce of Seen, and as much of Polipody, bruise them, and lay them in
steep with a little Anniseed, and a little Ginger, bruised in three parts of a
pint of white wine, so let it lie al a day or a night: then sees it to a
quarter of a pint, and in the morning drink it early.

Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces: these three be the best signs to take
purgations in.

The order how all manner of meats should be served to the table, with their
proper sawces both for flesh and fish.
For flesh days at dinner.
The first course. POttake or stewed broth, Boiled meat or stewed meat,
Chickens and Bacon, Powdered Beef, Pies Goose, Pigge, roasted Beef, Roasted
veale, Custard. The second course. Roasted Lamb, roasted Capons, Roasted
Conies, Chickens, Pehennes, Baked Venison, Tart. The first course at Supper. A
Sallet, a Pigs Petitoe, powdered Beef sliced, a shoulder of Mutton or a
breast, Veale, Lamb, Custard. The second course. Capons roasted, Connies
roasted, Chickens roasted, Pigions roasted, Larks roasted, a Pi^ (...)
The table of all the principal matters contained in this book.
TO boil Mutton seven sundry ways fol. 1 To Boil mutton for a sick body.
fol. 2 Balls of Mutton. fol. 3 To boil a Capon with Orenges after mistres
Duffieldes way. ib To boil a Capon in white broth four manner of ways. fol.
3.4. Sops for a capon fol. 4. Sops for Chickens. fol. 5 To boil a mallard two
sundry ways. ib To boil a Ducke. ib To boil Stackdoues ib To boil a Conie
with a pudding in his belly. fol. 6 To boil chickens or capons. ib To boil
chickens three other ways. fol. 6.7 For to sees hens and capons in winter
in white broth. ib To boil calves feet or Lambs feet. ib To broile a tripe.
ib To boil tripes, pigs petitoes, or Neats feet. fol. 8 To boil pigs petitoes
another way. ib To boil chickens after the French. ib To boil tripes after the
fashion. ib How to make Long worts ib Triped mutton. ib To boil a Lambs head
and purtenance. ib To boil quails. fol. 9 To smere a Conie. ib For to make
Hodgepote two ways. ib To boil a brawne. ib To make a good white broth. fol.
10 How to make farts of portingale. ib How to make fystes of portingale. ib
How to make French pottage. ib To make fine pap. fol. 11 A broth for a weak
body ib A good way to powder or barrel beef. ib For to keep Lard three manner
o^ ways fol. 11.12. How to make Blamieger two ways. ib. To make stued broth
either for flesh or fish. fol. 13. Stewed steakes ib. How to stuf a capo^ three
ways ib. To stue birds. fol. 14 To stue Larks or Sparrowes. ib. To stue a
Mallard. fol. 14. To stue a Cock fol. 15 To stue a Neats foot. ib. To make
stued pottage in Lent ib. To stue beef two ways fol. 16 To make brine to
keep Lard. ib For to make Maunger blaunch. ib To sauce a pig. fol. 17 To make
past, and to raise (...) ib To ma e fi^e past two other ^aies. ib To bake
venison, or mutton in ^leed of venison. ib For to make sweet pies of V^ale.
fol. 18 To make Ch^we^s four ways. ib How to make special good pies. etc.
fol. 19 To ba^e chickens four wa es. fol. 20 To bake a ^ur^ie ib To bake a
Fe^ant. ib To bake a capon in steed o^ a Fesant. fol. 21 To bake red Dear. ib
To bake Venison ib To bake a Crane or a buttard ib To bake a mallard. ib To
bake a wild boar. fol. 22 To bake wild Ducks ib To bake calves feet two ways.
ib How to bake a Pig. ib How to bake a Pigli^ (...) fawn fol. 23 To bake a
Neats tongue i To bake an ^a^e. ib To bake a ^ammon of bacon. ib How to make a
rare conceit with veale. ib A flarenti^e. fol. 24 A pie to keep long. ib To
bake small meats ib To make a p^^ in lent. fol. 25 To make a custarde in Lent.
ib How to bake Oysters ^he^e and all. ib To bake pears, quinces and Wardens,
ib To bake Orenges two ways, fol. 26 To bake peaches. fol. 28 How to bake
pippins, ib To make a custarde two ways, ib To make tarts neenteen ways, fol.
29, 30, 31, 32 How to make Allows of mutton, fol. 32 To roast a Gibot of
mutton. ib How to roast a hare. fol. 33 To roast a calves beas ib To roast a
capon, fesant or partridge. ib How to roste venison, ib How to ro^te a Quail,
ib To r^ste a crane, Heron or Bitture ib How to roast a Plouer or S^^te. fol. 34
To roste woodcocks ib To make fine Rice pottage, ib To make good Lenton
Pottage, ib To sees a Pike, carp, and Gurnard. ib To sees fresh Salmon,
Bream, R^ches, F^ounders, Eeles, Stockfi h a Dorte or Mullet, fol. 35 To stue
herrings, fol. 36 How to roste a pe^ce of Stockfi^h. ib To make hering pies ib
To bake a carp a ^oll of fresh salmon, a breame, a gurnard, a tr^^t. fol. 37
How to make a good Marc^pane. ib To make Restons, fol. 38 To make a Vaunt, ib
For to make Frians, fol. 39 To make ^^^we, ib To make Gellie four sundry
w^^es, fol. 40, 41 All necessaries belonging to a banquet, fol. 42 A t^ss^n, ib
To clari^e When, ib To make fillets Gallentine two ways, fol. 43 Tostes of
Veale, ib An Apple Moye ib To make Pesco^s two ways, ib Pett^e services, fol.
44 Spanish bal^es, ib Bal^es of Italy. ib How to make Almonde butter. etc ib
To make Ipocras two ways, ib Eggs upon sops, and to ma^e Eggs in Lent. ib To
make cast cream two ways. fol. 46 To make clou^ed cream after Mistre^^
^orsway. fol. 56 To make cream of Almonds, ib A posset curd, fol. 47 Mistres
Drakes way in make soft cheese, ib To make fritters sir sundry ways, fol. 48
To make Pancakes, fol. 49 For to make pudding^s three ways, ib To make a
tans^y three several ways, ib The making of marcher two ways. fol. 51 To make
short cakes, fol. 52 How to make leane^ed bread, ib To make butterd bees fol.
53 A purgation, ib The order how al manner of meats should be served, with
their sauces. fol. 54
FINIS.

