A DISCOVRSE ABOUT THE STATE OF TRVE HAPPINESS:

DELIVERED IN CERTAIN Sermons in Oxford, and at Paul's Cross:

By ROBERT BOLTON.

2. Corinthians. 13.5. Prove your selves whether ye are in the faith: examine
your selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates? AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for EDMUND
WEAVER, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great North-gate of Paul's
Church. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, HIS VERY GOOD PATRON, SIR AVGVSTIN NICOLS, Knight,
Serieant at the Law; the glorious comforts of Grace here, and the blessedness
of immortality hereafter.
SIR, I having been often and much solicited with variety and iteration of
strong importunity, to publish and let pass into the eye of this censorious
world, these, thevery first fruits and essaies of mine employment and
business in the Ministry; did apprehend and embrace this season with better
contentment, and with more cheerefulnes address and compose my self thereunto:
because I did see opportunity offered thereby, to let appear abroad my
thankful acknowledgement of your respectfull and more then ordinary favor
unto me; and a public testimony of your worthy and exemplarie integrity, in
discharging your hands, and faithfully disposing that portion of the Church his
patrimony committed to your trust and conscience. An affair (though in these
desperately sinful times, fearfully and accursedly abused) of high and
weighty consequence, and of great power, as it shall be discharged with
conscience, or corruption, either further to ruin our Church, and bring it to
more misery and desolation, or to repair and advance it to better state and
more happiness. For mine own particular, it has so pleased God to guide your
heart in this business, and to bless me with his providence, that whereas too
many Patrones now adays; either by detaining sacrilegiouslie Gods portion,
agai^^^ all grounds of equity both divine and humane; or by furnishing
Churchliuings simoniacally and corruptly, do certainly pull upon their own
heads, souls and bodies, goods and posterity, an heavy and horrible W^ll a
man spoil his gods? yet have ^e spoiled me. But ye say, wherein ^aue we
spoiled thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are curs^d with a curse: ^or ye have
spoiled me, even this whole nation. Malach. 3.8.
curse, and shall thereby make their account to be without favor at the last
day: and whereas many worthy men, after they have wearied and wasted their
bodies and minds, their spirits and patrimony in study, and worn out their
hopes with long and tedious expectation, pursuit and dependence; come at
length, with much ado, to no great matters, and when all is done, it is well
if they escape all galling and gash of conscience, such is the strange
iniquity of the times: yet I say, so worthily have you dealt with me, and so
uprightly in the Church his cause, that upon your own first motion you sent
unto me to accept the place I now enjoy from you, and offered me a fair, a
free and comfortable passage to the exercise of my Ministry abroad; which
next unto the salvation of mine own soul, I hold most dear and precious; when
I neither sought after, nor thought upon preferment. This your rare and
singular bounty, did at the very first affect me with a secret sense of an
extraordinary obligation, for all inward affectionatnes, and with a desire of
representing it in some visible form of outward testification. But when I did
after further consider, first how that Sacrilege and Simonie, that damned
couple of crying sins, like two ravenous Harpies, and the two insatiable
daughters of the Horsleech, had seazd even upon the Heart of our Church, ready
to rent and tear in pieces her very heart strings, and to suck out the inmost
blood and last life of our dearest Mother: when I looked above me in this
famous University where I have lived, and saw many reverend and learned men,
full of the light of divine truth, and of the water of life, able gloriously
and comfortablie to illighten many dark places and dry souls in this land,
ready to expire and power out their souls in the bosom of this their famous
Nurce; not brought up by her to die at her breasts, but if they might have
honest and lawful passage, ready and resolute to enlarge Christ's kingdom
abroad, and to oppose with all their power, against the bloody torrent of
Popery and rage of Antichrist: lastly, when I weighed with my self mine own
natural declination and resolved unfitness, to make a noise and stir in the
world for preferment: I did find that as these considerations did before give
small hope of changing my station; so now they were of power yet further to
double the impression of your worthy and extraordinary goodness unto me,
and freshly to renew the thankful devotions and apprehensions of mine heart.
Out of which has sprung in me a thirsting earnestnes and contention of spirit,
to return unto you, for these temporal favors, so far as the nature of
that high Ministerial function, wherein I stand, shall guide me, and the power
of my poor ability can reach; the Blessings of Heaven, and comforts of a
better world. To which end, I here present unto you this Treatise, which I have
intended to be, so far as my gracious God has given me understanding in the
point, as it were a Looking-glass or Touchstone, to whomsoever it shall please
to take through notice thereof, for the discerning and trying, in some good
measure, whether he already be of the number of those few which truly live
the life of God, and under the Scepter of his Son; or lie as yet enthralled
in the invisible chains of damnation and death, and under the large and
powerful reign of Satan. For I am persuaded, that in this glorious noontide
of the Gospel many thousands deceive not only the world, and others, but even
themselves and their own souls, about their spiritual state: thinking, if
they find in themselves a freedom from gross and notorious sins, fairenes
of conditions, civil honesty, a formal profession of Christianity, outward
performances of religious services, that then their case is good enough for
heaven; though there be wanting the saving power of inward sanctification, and
the truth of a sound conversion; though they be strangers to the great
mystery of Godliness, and disacquainted with a conscionable and constant
course of Holiness in their lives and actions. But we must conceive, that over
and besides these degrees of goodness, with which millions of men content and
deceive themselves; yea, and quite beyond, and utterly without the compass of
all worldly glory, all visible pomp, the most admited greatness and
sufficiency upon earth, for which a great part of the world exchange the
everlasting happiness of their souls; there is a Paradise of Christian
comforts, a Royal Peculiar, a victorious Simplicity, a neglected Innocence,
a marvelous Light, an invisible Kingdom, an Heaven upon Earth; which I call
the state of Grace; and labor in the ensuing Discourse to difference from al
perfections and sufficiencies attaineable in the state of unregeneration. I
meddle not purposely with the notorious sinner: for me thinks, in these days
of light, there should none so wilfully and deeply inwrap himself in darkness;
but that in his cold blood, and more sober consideration, will acknowledge and
confess, that the state of notorious sinfulnes, is the state of wretchedness
and of death. And that there is no hope for the Drunkard, the Swearer, the
Lier, the Usurer, the unclean person, the Sabbath-breaker, the Sacrilegious,
Simoniacall, and sinners of such infamous rank; but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and, without repentance and forsaking their sins, an eternal
separation both from al possibility of grace and sound comfort in this life,
and from the fruition of the joys and blessedness of heaven hereafter. I
therefore endeavor and desire to come nearer and closer to men's consciences,
and to tell them, that out of a conceit of their moral honesty, and outward
religiousnes, they may persuade themselves that they are rich and increased in
spiritual store, and have need of no more for the attainment of heaven; when
in deed and truth, as concerning the power of saving grace, and sincere
exercise of religion, they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind
and naked. In these lukewarm times, many there are, who with the fruits of a
temporary faith, and some light of the general graces of the Spirit, make a
fair show, and win good reputation for their spiritual state, both with their
own hearts, and with the world abroad, when to the eye of heavenly wisdom, and
in truth, they are but only Blazing-stars, and earthly minded, not fixed in the
same firmament with the Sun of righteousness, nor of an heavenly stamp. And
if they rise not higher in their affections and conversation from earth and
earthly vanities, when their rootlesse graces shall be withered and wasted
away, their fall will be sudden and fearful; and their former vanishing
flashes of vain hope for future happiness, will be turned into horror and
extremest miseries of despair. Most behooffull then is it for every man, in
time, to search and examine himself whether Christ Jesus be in him or no. And
it is one of the worthiest and noblest employment of the soul, to reflect upon
it self, and with an vndazeled and vndissembling eye thoroughly to try and
descrie clearly it own state, whether it be already washed with the blood of
Christ, and enliued with a supernatural vigor and life of grace; or yet lie
polluted in it own blood, and under the power of the first death. I wonder how
any man can be at rest and quiet, until he be assured and secured in this
point, since upon it depends his everlasting estate in another world. Nay, since
even in this world, every unregenerate man, let him be otherwise never so
great, or adored above others, never so absolute in all other excellencies and
perfections whatsoever; yet being out of the state of grace, is a very limb of
Satan, a child of darkness, and one of the family of Hell. The wrath and
vengeance of God, all the fury of the kingdom of darkness, the rage of all
the creatures, though he little think upon it, are every hour ready and
addressed to seize upon him, as a traitor and rebel to the highest Majesty, and
to dragge him down into the bottom of Hell. Whereas the state of true
Christians, and Gods faithful Ones, is most comfortable and glorious even in
this life in this vale of tears, and in these Tabernacles of clay. For their
comforts are not fading and earthly, springing out of the sinful pleasures and
transitory glory of the world; not fastened unto honors, greatness and
possessions, to the increase of Corn, and Wine, and Oil: but they are of a
right noble and heavenly temper, framed and emplanted in the sanctified soul
by the spirit of all comfort; and therefore everlasting and unconquerable, able
to keep a man in heart and resolution against the malice and cruelties of all
adversaries, of all creatures. They only are truly and soundly persuaded by the
sweet and secret testimony of the spirit, and by the evidence and experience
of their own holy life, that after the approaching and much longed for period of
a few and evil days, they shall reign with God almighty, the holy Angels
and glorified Saints, in unutterable and endless pleasures for ever and ever:
and therefore easily and resolutely with much indignation and contempt,
ouer-looke and throw out of their hearts, all worldly thoughtfulnes, all
excessive desires of earth and earthly vanities, all restless aspirations
after transitory honors, the noble miseries of this wretched life. They alone
have fastened the eye of their minds, illightned from above with saving faith,
upon the invaluable pretiousnes and lasting beauty of their immortal crowns
in heaven; and therefore all the glittering and golden representations, with
which the flattering world has formerly deceived and dazzled their eyes,
appear to be nothing but darkness and desolations. Their glory indeed here
upon earth does not consist in outward pomp and state, it does not shine to
carnal eyes, it is indiscernable to the sharpest sight of worldly wisdom and
policy: but inwardly and with spiritual fairenes, their divine graces make
them so truly honorable and lovely, that somewhere in Scripture they are called
the Glory of God, and are as dear unto him as the precious ball and apple of
his own eye. They are in so high esteem and account with Angels, that those
excellent creatures with much joy and alacrity become their Guardians, and
serviceable unto them with extraordinary care and tenderness. All the creatures
groan, and desire to be delivered into their glorious liberty; and in the
mean time, with a secret and insensible reverence, they adore the sacred
character of divinity that is stamped upon them. All the Saints acknowledge
them to be more excellent then their neighbors, of the household of God and
heirs of heaven. Nay, the wicked themselves, many times, are confounded and
stand amazed at the height of spirit and resolution that possesses their
hearts, and at the sober and undaunted majesty that shines in their faces.
This, and a thousand times more then this, is the blisfull state of Gods
children even in this life. Howsoever they be neglected and trampled upon by
the world and wicked men; yet in the judgment of God himself, the blessed
spirits, and all men of true worth indeed, they are the only Angels upon earth,
and the royal citizens of this kingdom of Grace. The prosecution of this
point would be comfortable, but so I should be more tedious. No more but this
therefore at this time: Certain it is, if a man were crowned with the royal
state and imperial command of all the kingdoms upon earth; if his heart were
enlarged to the utmost of all created capacity, and filled with all the
exquisite and unmixed pleasures that the reach of mortality and most ambitious
curiosity could possibly devise, and might without interruption and distaste
enjoy them the length of the worlds duration; they were all nothing to the
enioyment of the precious and peereles comforts of the state of Grace, but even
for an hour. I speak the truth, I use no Hyperbole, the Spirit of all
comfort, and consciences of all true Christians bearing me witness. Good Sir,
let me humbly entreat you with a proportionable zeal and feruencie, to
incline and enlarge your affections to the pursuit and practice of so excellent
and glorious an happiness. Which that you may do, I will continually
prostrate and power out my soul in prayer, before the throne of Grace and
mercy: And rest,

Your Worships to be commanded ever in the Lord Jesus, Robert Bolton.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
CHristian. This Discourse which now stands so close together, was delivered in
five several sermons, but all to a most judicious and intelligent auditorie;
therefore there is a continuance of matter, coherence, and style. I must entreat
thee, out of thine ^ngenuous discretion, to distinguish the places where they
were preached, as thou shall find the direction of my speech, and some
particular applications more naturally and necessarily with individual
reference appropriated thereunto. The reasons why I spent the most of my
meditations, and stick so long in descrying and desciphering the state of
formal hypocrisy (for therein I have trod a something uncouth and unusual
path) are these:

First, I considered that in this full light of the Gospel, a great know and
acknowledge, their broken and bankrout state in spiritual things; I therefore
desire and endeavor to awake them out of their golden dream of imaginary
future happiness; that with open eyes they may see their present spiritual
poverty, and so betimes prevent the anger to come. I hope in the Lord, and wish
heartily, that by a dispassionate and through perusal of this Treatise, they may
take some scantling of their own estate with God; and entering a serious and
impartial search and examination of their consciences, discover and reveal
themselves unto themselves; and so if they belong unto the everlasting covenant
of grace, s^ep forward into the state of grace, the paradise of true
Christianity, and practice of holiness; that their dear and precious souls
may be saved in the day of the Lord Ies^s.



As for the first: By our horrible sins and hateful ingratitude for mercies
without measure, and miraculous deliverances, we grow so heavy upon the Lord,
that we press him, and the bowels of his tenderest compassions. as a ca^t is
pressed that is full of sheaues; so that it is impossible, but that shortly,
without great humiliation and general rep^ntance, we should wrest out of his
hands the vials of his last wrath, and force him to come against us with the
beesome of utter desolation. It is to be feared (so grievous and endless is
the impiety and imp^nitencie of this land) that his forbearance in the mean
time, is not for any hope he has of us (for what good has a durable and
extraordinary plague done upon us?) but only by reason of the cruel and
implacable insolency of our enemies; because ^ee is loath to make us a prey to
the Wolves of Rome, and matter of triumph to such a merciless and murderous
generation. Who knows but that the Match had reached unto the Powder, had not
the Lord out of the bottomless depth of his unlimited mercies laid hold upon
his own argument, Deuteronomy. 32.26.27. I have said, I would scatter them abroad, I
would make their remembrance to cease from amongst men, save that I feared the
fury of the enemy, lest their adversaries should wax proud. Left his and our
adversaries, those breathing devils the Gunpowder Papists, should too proudly
and barbarously have insulted in the ruins of his people, and the banishment
of his glorious Gospel. The Lord give us understanding hearts to consider
these things in time, lest he come upon us with his wrath, never more to be
appeased, and tear us in pe^ces when there is none to h^lpe. May any man drive
away an hungry Lion in the wood? or quench the fire in stubble, when it has
once begun to burn? may one turn again the arrow that is shot of a strong
archer? If the Lord once whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold on
judgment, with purpose to root out a sinful and rebellious nation; there is
no power or policy, no multitude of men, or magnificence of State, no armor
of the mighty, or arm of flesh, shall ever be able to give any succor,
relief, or deliverance.

Concerning the second: Certain it is, that our blessings of peace, and
strength of State, breed by accident much abatement of forwardness, and zeal
in godliness, secret indeuotion, and coldness even in many true Professors,
carelesnes in observing their ways, weariness and vncheerefulnesse in doing
good, and performing holy duties, vnpreparednesse in coming to divine
services, religious exercises, and the Lords Table, sleightnesse and
unprofitableness in prayer, meditation, Christian conference, and daily
examination of their consciences, neglect of opportunity in winning their
brethren unto the fear of God, and of working upon, and prevailing with their
kindred, acquaintance, familiars and families. Thus wickedly and unthankfully
turn we the mercies of God into occasions of sin, and suffer our temporal
happiness to wast and consume our spiritual blessings. And the more we are
secured in our outward state, the more heartlesse we are in the service of God,
and the affairs of the life to come. But let us look unto it: for as the
louder and crying sins of this land are the great and strong cartropes; so
undoubtedly, these as lesser cords have their part and some power in drawing
upon us heavy judgments, and in preparing further vengeance, except we
amend, and return to our first love. Would to God that we would keep fresh in
our minds but this one consideration: That the same God, which against the
expectation both of heaven and earth, of Rome and hell, of devils and Papists,
turned our fears and amazements at the death of that glorious Saint, the late
Queen, into safety, and a sure foundation, by the most happy succession of
our gracious Sovereign, and his royal seed; can out of his just judgments
for our unthankfulness and security, in the very turning of an hand and
closing of an eye, dash all our hopes, and shut up the whole Body of this
flourishing kingdom in the pit of irrecouerable destruction. It had bin done,
had Fauks fired the powder: and who knows what those busy and bloody heads
are even now hammering in the same kind? Besides these two now mentioned, there
is another capital cause of Gods heavy displeasure; which though i^ make no
great noise, nor be much taken notice of upon earth, yet ^t is much lothed of
God almighty, and cries loud in heaven for vengeance upon us: It is a
Lukewarmenesse, and vnzealousnesse, a cold and careless mediocritie in
spiritual matters, and as it were, a neutralitie betwixt notorious sinfulnes
and saving sincerity. When men perhaps with diligence, willingness and
forwardness submit themselves to the hearing of the word; but subordinate the
power and practice thereof to their ^ase, honors and worldly contentments:
When they will needs hold an outward correspondence with the world, and yet
inwardly maintain and nourish hope of salvation in themselves: When they
strain their wits, and strive to partake both of the comfortable favor of
God, and corrupt fashions of the times; both of the pleasures of their sweet
sin, and the sweetness of the true peace of conscience, which are as
inconcurrent as two parallel lines, and as incompatible as light and
darkness. These men, though in the worlds opinion, they be of civil honest
carriage, of moderate spirits, and of a stated temper in religion; and in their
own conceits, rich and enriched, and want nothing, yet indeed they are mere
staruelings, and stark beggars in respect of the true riches, and lasting
treasures of saving grace, and in the very case of those (except in the mean
time they buy of him gold, garments and oil) which shall never see Christ
Jesus in his Kingdom to their comfort: for Amen, the faithful and true
witness has vowed it, that he will spue such out of his mouth; and wishes
much rather that they were key-cold, then such formal Christians: His speech
imports thus much: I had rather you were Pagans and Infidels, then professors
without zeal. Now my chief and special aim is, with all humble submission
to be^ter judgments, and the censure of the Prophets, to lay open the state of
th^se men, because besides their fearful deceiving their own souls, and
particular certain damnation if they so continue, they mightily ince^se the
Lords wrath against this la^d, with an insensible and vnacknowledgde
provocation, and mainly hazard the continuance of his glorious Gospel amongst
us. It is commonly conceived indeed, both of themselves, and of the world; that
if they be morally honest, and outwardly conformable to the ministry of the
word; so that they be hurtlesse, and innocent in respect of humane justice;
that they are also, I know not how, harmless and guiltless before the
Tribunal of God. But the Evangelist tells us, Luke 16.15.
That that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of
God: And God himself by Isaiah, Isai. 55.8.
That his thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are his ways our ways. For
certainly the state of Lukewarmnesse, and formaliti^ in religion, howsoever it
may be full of worldly applause and happiness, and bear away the bell upon
earth; yet it is as burdensome and hateful unto God, as lukewarm water, or
the most loathsome potion to the nicest stomach: And does with a more natural
importunity then other sins, knock at the gates of divine justice, for the
remooueall of our candlestick, and the glory of his Gospel from amongst us.
All kinds of sins according to their nature, measure and ripeness have
proportionally a part and hand in drawing down all manner of plagues upon the
sons of men: but this has a peculiar and predominant power, in hastening
that particular and greatest of all judgments, the famine of the word. For God
cannot endure without special indignation, that his word, which is his power
unto salvation* should rec^iue such limitation and prescription from men's
wisdom; that it should work no further upon them, nor beget more change and
holiness, then may consist with the enioyment of their worldly contentments,
reputation, and the pleasures of their beloved sin. He cannot abide, that men
discontented with the stra^tnesse of the gate of grace, and impatient of a
strict course of godliness, should labor to find out, and follow another way
to heaven, then that which is sanctified by his word, and which has and must
be trodden by all those that will ever see the Lord. Knowledge and profession of
Gods truth, without sanctification and zeal, are but means in the mean time,
to put out the glory of Israel, and will hereafter but increase the number of
stripes, and add weight unto endless torment. In the name of God therefore
let all lukewarm and formal Christians be contented to take notice of their
state; and before the Sun go down^ over the Prophets, suffer their hearts to
be thoroughly heated with true zeal; and besides their outward reformation, and
general lightnings of the Spirit, to entertain that special saving and
sanctifying grace, which only can save their souls, and prepare them for the
glory that is to be revealed: Lest now at length (for he has borne with us
miraculously) our just God cause our Sun to go down at noone, and
darkness to surprise us in the clear day: L^st he root us out of this good
land, as a fruitless and faithles nation, turn us out of our houses of peace,
as the unworthiest, and vnthankefullest people under heaven; and let out his
vineyard to other husbandmen, which will deliver him the fruits in their
seasons. And the more secure and fearelesse we be (as we were never more)
the more sudden and inevitable is like to be our surprizall and destruction.
For as Gods mercies are then most magnified, when they relieve the extremest
misery, and shine into the depth of discomfort and darkness, when all other
help is utterly despaired of: so his judgments are most glorious, when they
strike at the height and top of pride and impenitencie, while they think
themselves most sure, and with greatest confidence repose upon the arm of
flesh, and policy of man.

The third reason and motive why I insist so long in the point of first
resurrection. For when they find themselves far above others in all other
excellencies, and whatsoever remarkable worth the world takes special notice
of; they conceive also that in a proportionable congruitie, (as indeed it
should be) they are inferior to none, in those sacred apprehensions of heaven,
and taste of eternal life. Upon this consideration, I was bold* out of a
Christian jealousy, to treat on this argument, being persuaded of their great
wisdom and gracious humility to listen to any heavenly message, which might
either discover or prevent spiritual danger.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Robert Bolton.
A DISCOVRSE ABOUT THE STATE OF TRVE HAPPINESS.
PSALM. 1. 1 Blessed is the m^n that does not walk in the counsel of the
wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.

2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate
day and night.


THere is no greater encouragement, or stronger motive, to stir a man to an
eager, and earnest pursuit of the means then to purpose unto him an end,
wherein at length his heart may repose, as in a concurrence of all comforts and
contentments. To which, there is no possibility of attainment, but by
pureness of heart, holiness of life, constancy in a course of
sanctification; which only lead unto the face, and presence of God, where, and
with whom alone is the highest perfection of bliss, a river of infinite
pleasures, the well of life, and endless rest of all created desires. For the
capacity of man's soul, cannot possibly be filled with the sufficiency of any
creature; no, not with a world of creatures; for they are all nothing to the
worth of a man's soul; Christ himself having preferred it in valuation: Matthew.
16.25.
What shall it profit a man, though he should win the whole world, if he lose
his own soul? And therefore can never be free from motion and vexation; until
it reach unto, either in certain hope, or actual fruition, an object,
infinite, as well in excellency of nature, as duration of time. Blessed then
was the wisdom of the disposer of these heavenly Songs of David; whether it
was himself, or Ezra, or whomsoever, in that he prefixed this excellent
Psalm, as a preface to all the rest; wherein is proposed, and comprised a
matchless happiness; whereby the godly man, may even in this life flouris^ like
a Palm tree, P^alm. 92.12.
and grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; refreshed continually with rivers of ioies,
and comforts, shed into his heart by the spirit of God: and may stand like
mount Zion vnas^onished and vnremou^d, Psalm. 125.1.
at that great, and fearful day, when the wicked shall call for the
mountains to cover them, and wish they had never bin. What ingenuous mind
would not be inflamed with zeal, to the prosequution of those means, which
lead unto an end as full of happiness, as the Sun is full of light, and the
Sea of waters? What heart not possessed with an iron s^ew, would not thirst,
and long after found, and undissembled sincerity, even as the Heart brayeth
after the rivers of water, and as the dry ground gapeth for drops of rain?
since by it alone we purchase, and put on an unconquerable resolution, issuing
from an assurance of being in Christ, and from the clearenesse of a good
conscience: Prou. 13.1.
whereby we may walk even. as bold as Lions through this valley of tears, amid
the mercilesle vexations of profane men; Psalm. 91.13.
nay, we may walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and the Dragon we may
tread under feet; and hereafter be sure to be satisfied with the fullness of
joy in the presence of God, and with pleasures at his right hand for evermore.

This happy man is here described unto us by many arguments.



Secondly, his happiness is liuelily set out by a similitude,

Illustrated by an opposition of the misery, and unhappy

Concluded with the causes of them both, to wit, of the

The negative properties in the first verse are three: He does not walk in
the Counsel of the wicked; He does not stand in the way of sinners; He does
not sit in the seat of the scornofull; amplified with a threefold gradation in
the persons, actions, and objects of the actions. The gradation in the persons,
the wicked, sinners, and scornful, implies all forts of ungodly men. The
gradation in the actions, walk, stand, and sit, all manner of commerce, and
correspondence with them. The gradation in the objects, the counsel, way, and
fear, all kind of iniquity; inward corruptions, or outward impieties. The
whole verse labors with an emphaticall exaggeration, to set down hi^
blessed forbearance of sin, and communicating with sinful men.

The second verse containing his imploiment in piety, seems to answer in
opposition, the three negatiues, with three affirmatiues. His delighting in the
Law of the Lord, is opposed to the counsel of the wicked. His mediation, and
exercise in that Law to the way of sinners. Day and night: there is his
constancy, and habit, oppos'de to the seat of the scornful.

Why then, let the profane, and flattering world say what it will: let
sensual, and unsanctified men judge as they lift. That man, and that man alone
is truly, and everlasting happy: That walks not in the counsel of the
wicked; that is, that does not delight in their vain imaginations, sinful
affections, lustful desires, speculatiue wantonness. In their proud and
swelling thoughts; which conceive mischief, and bring forth a lie; chafe, and
bring forth stubble; the wind and bring forth the whirlewind. That does not
partake with their impotent passions, unhallowed policies; their exorbitant,
and indirect proiects, for their pleasures, honors, and profits. Whose souls
desire not to come into the secret of their cruel consultations, and malicious
designments. In a word, whose heart hates, and abominateth all venom of
inward pollution, that has either fountain or seat in any power of the soul.

That stands not in the way of sinners. That is, that breaks not into open
profaneness; that imitateth not their actions, and conversation. Whose mouth
is not full of bitterness and lying; whose lips a^e not infected with the
poison of Aspes* whose hands are not full of bribes, and falsehood; whose f^et
are not swift, to run after mischief, vanity, and leaud companions.

That ^itteth not in the seat of the scornful. That is, that confineth not
himself to the chair of iniquity; that confirms not himself in his malice
and hardness of heart; that does not make a mooke of sin, and jest with the
sacred word of God; that does not direct the poisonous arrow of a spi^^full
tongue, even at the apple of Gods own cie, his dearest Saints and servants.
That, with the scorner, does not dare the highest majesty of the Almighty, to
whet his glittering sword, and take hold on judgment; to put on his habergeon
of righteousness, and the garments of vengeance for clothing: saying, as it is
Isai. 5.19. Let him make speed: let him hasten his work, that we may see it:
and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw near, and come, that we
may know it.

Thus far his forbearance of sinful actions. Now follows his practice in
actions of piety.

But his delight is in the Law of the Lord. That is, the whole doctrine
divinely inspired is the very joy of his heart, and delight of his soul. It is
sweeter unto him then honey, and the honey comb. It is more precious unto him
the^ gold, yea, then much fine gold. It is more worth unto him, then heaven,
and earth. And when the heart is once enkindled with love, there the
imagination embraces with dearest apprehension; the thoughts are impatient of
any other object; all the powers of the soul are united in a strong endeavor
for the attainment. The whole mind must needs be possessed with meditation* If he
delight in the Law of the Lord, he must needs meditate therein. And this
feruencie of the heart, cannot possible be enclosed within the compass of the
breast: it will spread it self in speech and actions. As is plain, Psalm.
37.30. The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue will
talk of judgment. The reason follows. For the Law of his God is in his
heart. And Psalm 119, 167. My soul has kept thy testimonies: for I love them
exceedingly. And this love, delight, meditation, and exercise in the Law of
God, of this happy man, is not as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew,
before the Sun: but like the light of the Sun, that shines more and more,
unto the perfect day. It is not for a start, for fear, for restraint, for
reputation, for advantage* or to cover the terrors of conscience, for a while,
with a few flashes of deceivable comforts, out of some misapplied promises in
the word of God: but it is out of a free resolution, and with undaunted
constancy day and night.

But give me leave, I beseech you, before I proceed to the explication of the
rest; or deduction of Doctrines from these particulars; to propose unto you
this general Doctrine, which has his strength from the body of the Psalm,
and the maine scope of the spirit of God.

There is in the book of God, proposed* and offored unto us, an happiness,
standing in opposition, to all the vain felicities, which ancient Philosophers
deuisde out of their deep speculations; or profane men frame out of their
corrupt affections: not consisting in pleasures, riches, honors, greatness; in
civil honesty, formal hypocrisy; or the whole possibility of nature: but in
supernatural grace, and the blessed consequents.

The whole book of Ecclesiastes, Salomons sacred retractations, is a large, and
sound demonstration of this Doctrine. Solomon was son unto the worthiest
king, that ever swayed scepter upon earth; and he was predecessor in the royal
line unto the Son of God; and so matchless for nobility, if true happiness
had consisted therein. He was king of Jerusalem, the lady of the world, the
perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole earth. He gave silver, as
stones, and gave cedars as the wild figtrees, that grow abundantly in the
plain. He built him houses, and planted Vineyards. He provided him men
fingers, and women fingers; and the delights of the sons of men. Whatsoever
his eyes desired, he with held it not from them: and withdrew not his heart
from any joy. For wisdom, and understanding, he had a large heart, even as
the sand, that is on the sea shore. It speculatiue knowledge, he excelled the
wisdom of all the children of the East; and all the wisdom of Egypt. He
was able to discourse from the cedar tree, that is in Lebanon, even unto the
Hyssope, that springs out of the wall. In wisdom of polity, and
government, there was none like unto him before him, neither after him shall
arise the like unto him. So that Solomon was the most fit, and absolute man,
that ever lived, both for ability in understanding, abundance in possession,
and desire in searching, to take an exact measure, and the ^tmost extent, of
the worth and sufficiency of all creatures; and to raise from them the best
contentments they could possibly afford Yet when he had wearied himself in
the variety of passages of this life; and in the book of E^clesiastes becomes a
public penitentiary to the whole Church, and to all posterity; see his
judgment: he utterly disauowes and disclaimes them all, as miserable
comforters, as mere shadows, and dreams; wherein there is no more matter of
sound comfort, then there is light in the greatest darkness, or taste in the
white of an egg. He says of laughter, Eccles. 2.2.
thou art mad, and of joy, ha^ is this that thou do? And whereas wisdom
and knowledge, are the most incomparable treasures this transitory world has;
Eccles. 1.18.
he says, that in the multitude of wisdom is much grief: and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow. And of these, and all other things
under the sun; yea, and if to the glory of all created natures, were an
addition of ten thousand excellencies, that never man saw, or enjoyed; he has
pronounced of them all, in respect of true happiness, and divided from the
grace and fear of God, and a sanctified heart; that they are all vanity. And
if he had stayed there, it had been well; that argues but a passive
imperfection, and a weakness of being in the things themselves; but they are
vexation of spirit. Nothing in themselves, yet full of power, and actiuity to
inflict vengeance, and vexa^ion upon the spirit of a man. The spirit of a man
being sound in sincerity, and seconded with a good conscience, is able to bear
out his infirmities, and all the miseries incident to his nature: It is able to
pass by, with a resolute, and contented patience, the lying imputations of the
prophanest malice: It is able by the grace of God, to encounter with the
terrors of death, and the fearfulness of the grave; yea, to endure with a
gracious humility even the pr^sence of God, and Angels at that great day. But a
wounded, and an afflicted spirit who can bear? If the eye be dark, how great
is that darken^sse? If the spirit of a man, which should refresh all the
faculties of the soul with comfortable cheerfulness, and fill the whole body
with a lively vigor, be it self wounded with vexation and ter^or; how
comfortless is that man? I^ his strength were the strength of stones, and his
flesh of brass; yet would the torment of a bitter afflicted soul grind him
to powder; and melt as the dew before the sun, whatsoever he accounts
strongest, and most powerful to relieve his heaviness; it would turn all his
choicest, and dearest pleasures into worm wood and bitterness. And this
v^xation, with which riches, honors, or what other vanity desirable in this
life does afflict the unregenerate heart, is twofold: In the very pursuit of
them, is much anguish, many greeuances, fears, i^alousies, disgraces,
interruptions, discontentments. But after the unsanctified enjoying of them,
follows the sting of conscience, that will everlastingly v^xe the soul; which
is the very earnest of the fire of hell; by which, a man does expect with
inconceivable horror, the consummation of the wrath of God; which burns
far hotter, and more vnquenchably, then any fire, though augmented with
infinite rivers of brimstone, to be powered upon his body and soul for
evermore, in the world to come. How then possibly can there be any happiness
in these vexations? Wherefore Solomon having proved the negative part of my
doctrine, concludes the positive in the last chapter: That to fear God, with
reverent regard to keep his commandments, is the only way to be possessed of
true happiness, to find peace of conscience, and assurance of the favor of
God. For let a man, while he will, in this world of vanity, either sport
himself in the soft, and green way of fading pleasures; or please himself in
the glorious miseries, of honors and high places; or tire himself in the
toils of insatiable greediness; or brave it in his oaths, blasphemies, and
strength of pouring in strong drink; or tread the fearful and desperate path
of contempt of the power of religion, the truth of God, and sincerity of his
saints: all the while, when he is at the best, he is but as the raging sea,
that cannot rest. For so Isaiah compares the wicked, Chap. 57.20. The sea, you
know, is not only many times tossed, and tumbled up and down, with winds and
tempests; but ever inwardly disquieted, even with her own motions, casting up
continually mire and dirt upon the shore, and breaking into some her proudest
waves against the rocks: Even so the heart of that man, which has reposed his
affections upon the glory of this life, is not only many times disquieted, and
cast down with outward crosses and occurrents; as with loss of friends,
discountenance of great ones, disappointment of his hopes, and preferments;
with wrongful railings, and disgraces; with looking upon the day of his death,
and vengeance upon the wicked; with all disturbers of his security in his
pleasures, and dignities: but is also besides the restless torture of his
conscience, ever from within, foaming out his own shame, the dishonor of God,
and the vexation of his brethren. But it is not so with him, that holds the
fear of God, for his surest sanctuary, that has resolved to resign up
himself in holy obedience to the will of God. His heart is like the upper part
of the world; which is ever full of serenitie, constancy, and brightness; be
the air below, never so troubled with storms and thunders; or the earth with
commotions and tumults. For let there be about him, the devouring sword of the
Tyrant, the consuming flames of persecution, the keen razours of lying
tongues, the mouths of Lions, the cruel combinations of his enemies; nay, let
the earth be moved, and let the mountains fall into the midst of the sea:
yet his heart is joyful, patient, resolute, and contented.

But to descend more specially to the particulars of the negative part of my
Doctrine: let me add to the many and strong reasons of the ancient
Philosophers, and late Schoolmen, against pleasures, riches, and honors, these
three; which will for ever utterly disable them for claiming any show of
interest in man's happiness.

First, they cannot possibly fill the unlimited desire of the

Secondly, they cannot secure the conscience distressed surprised the heart of
Belshazzar (...) his greatest iollities. Melting he was in pleasures, and
deliciousness; solacing himself amongst his wives, and concubines; carousing
in the golden, and silver vessels of the Temple. But when there appeared
fingers of a man's hand, which wrote over against the Candlestick upon the
plaster of the wall: a remembrancer unto his conscience, how contemptuously,
and sacrilegiously he had dishonored the highest Majesty; and that the vials
of Gods heavy vengeance were ready to be powered upon his head, all the joys
of his royal pomp vanished as the smoke. For then the Kings countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his Ioynes were
loosed, and his knees smote one against the other. And now, one pang of his
wounded conscience did much more torment him, then the kingdom, majesty,
glory, and honor, which he received from his father Nabuchadnezzar could ever
comfort him. So, I doubt not, but many times, the hearts of many glorious Ones
in this life, that are not in trouble like other men; but spread themselves as
green bay-trees; when they hear the certain judgments of God, denounced out
of his book by his Ministers, against those sins, to which by long custom,
and vowed resolution, they have fastened their affections, because thereon
depend their pleasures, honors, states, reputations, contented passing the
time, or the like: I say, that many times (except their consciences be feared
up with an hot iron, against the day of vengeance, and then their case is
unspeakably woeful) their hearts tremble, even as the trees of the forest,
that are shaken with the wind. Amid their laughing, their hearts are
sorrowful. Or if their mirth be entire; it is but like the noise of the
thorns under the pot. Thorns under a pot, you know, make a great crackling,
and noise for a little time; they blaze fair, and bright; but are suddenly
extinct, and brought to nothing. Neither are these cold comforters able to
quench Gods fiery jealousy, when it breaks forth in plagues, and judgments
against a sinful people. Witness the Prophets: Zepha. Chap. 1.17.18. Their
blood shall be powered out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their
silver, nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords
wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured, by the fire of his jealousy.
Ezech. 7.19. Their silver, and their gold cannot deliver them in the day of the
wrath of the Lord: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their
bowels, for this ruin^ is for their iniquity. Obad. 4. Though thou exalt thy
self as the Eagle, and make thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring
thee down, says the Lord. It is not then any wedge of gold, or height of
place, can privilege, or protect us; when our sins are ripe, and ready to
take the flame of Gods fierce wrath and indignation.

Thirdly, they cannot stretch themselves unto eternity. For All those things
are passed away like a shadow, and as a post that passes by: as a ship, that
passes over the waves of the water which when it is gone by, the trace thereof
cannot be found, neither the path of it in the floods: or as a bird, that
flies through in the air, and no man can see any token of her passage, but
only hear the noise of her wings, beating the light wind, parting the air
through the vehemency of her going, and flies on shaking her wings, whereas
afterward no token of her way can be found. If then the expiration of all
worldly comforts be most certain and inevitable, at the furthest at our
departure from this life; it is impossible, there should be any absolute joy
found in them: for there is wanting the very life and accomplishment of true
happiness, assurance of perpetuity. Imagine therefore, a man to be abundantly
encompassed even with all the desires of his heart; let him wash his paths with
butter; and let the rock power him out rivers of oil; let him heap up silver
as the dust, and gold as the mire of the streets; let him deck himself with
majesty and excellency, and array himself with beauty and glory; let him
drink up the pleasures of this world in as great abundance as Behemoth the
river Jordan; yet all is nothing, himself being covered with corruption, and
mortality; and the fruition of them with vanity and change. One generation
passes away, and another generation comes. He must at length necessarily
make resignation of al into the hands of a new succession. And he shall take
nothing away when he dies; neither shall his pomp or pleasures descend after
him. Yet, if a man besides an entire and uninterrupted possession of his
worldly contentments; which is never to be looked for in this life: chap. 14.22.
for, as Job speaks, While his flesh is upon him, he shall be sorrowful; and
while his soul is in him, it shall mourn; yet I say, if besides he were able
to extend his life to many millions of years, the matter were a little more
tolerable. But alas, the life of a man at the most is but a hand breath, or a
span long; and that which makes it much more miserable, he knows not in what
part of that short span, how suddenly, or how soon he shall be cut off from
the land of the living; and go, and shall not return, even unto the land of
darkness, Job 20.
and shadow of death. For the rejoicing of the wicked is short, and the joy of
hypocrites is but a moment. Though his excellency mount up to the heaven, and
his head reach unto the clouds; yet shall he perish for ever like his dung,
and they which have seen him, shall say, where is he? He shall flee away as a
dream, and they shall not find him, and shall pass away as a vision of the
night. So that the eye which had seen him, shall do so no more, and his place
shall see him no more. And in this respect, man's condition is far inferior
to other creatures. One generation passes, and another generation succeeds:
but the earth remains for ever. The Sun seems every night to lie down in a
bed of darkness; but he rises in the morning, clothed with the same glory and
brightness; and rejoices as a Giant to run his course: Chap. 14.10, 11.12.
But man (says Job) is sick, and dies, and man perishes, and where is he?
As the waters pass from the sea, and as the flood decaieth, and dries up; so
man sleeps, and rises not: for he shall not wake again, nor be raised from
his sleep, till the heaven be no more.

To let therefore these wretched vanities pass; as unworthy to be insisted on
thus long. For howsoever, the worldly minded man, wanting utterly the eye of
faith, and having his eye of reason dimmed with mists, that rise from his
tumultuous and fiery passions, gross ignorance, and wilful malice, so that
he only looks upon the honors, riches and pleasures of this life with a
carnal and sensual eye, may seem to see in them, some glimmerings of
happiness, and thereafter conform and proportion his desires, endeavors and
proiects; because he has his portion only in this life: yet certainly, the
truly generous mind may clearly out of the very apprehension of nature and
light of reason, discern them al, to be no better then a broken staff of
reed, whereupon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pearce it, yea,
and strike his heart too through with many sorrows; and that in the time of
trouble, they will all prove but as a broken tooth, and sliding foot. To let
them therefore pass, and die and perish, I come to two other branches of the
negative part: civil honesty, and formal hypocrisy.

These indeed, are the two great engines, by which in this full light and
glorious noonetide of the Gospel; the prince of this world draws many
multitudes into his snares in this life, and into chains of darkness in the
life to come.



First, I deny not, but that moral vertuousnesse is good, and excellent in it
self; the outward performance of religious duties, and the exercise of the
means of our conversion, are necessary. But if moral vertuousnesse were able
to put on the greatest magnificence, and applause, that ever it anciently
enjoyed amongst the precisest Romans; whereby it might worthily draw into
admiration and just challenge even these times of Christianity: yet in respect
of acceptance with God, and conformity to his will; and being not guided, and
^anctified by supernatural grace, it is but at the best, the very filthiness
of a menstruous clout. And outward actions of religion, be they performed with
as glorious a show, and indiscernable conueiance, as ever they were by the most
formal Pharisie: yet severed from a sound, and sanctified heart, the fountain
which gives (...), s^eetnesse and acceptance to all outward services, they are
but all, as the cutting off of a dogs neck; and the offering of swines blood.

Secondly, I do not here by any means purpose the discomfort of that man,
whose soul is yet wrestling with the grievous afflictions, and terrors of
conscience in the fore travel of his new birth: I wish unto him, the sweetest
comforts, that either he in his deepest agonies can desire; or the bowels of
Gods tenderest compassions are wont to power into broken, and bleeding hearts,
and that the joyful light of his Saviors countenance may break forth upon his
cloudy, and drouping conscience, with far greater brightness then ever the
clearest Sun upon the face of the earth. Neither do I purpose the
discouragement of him, who has happily passed the fearful, but necessary
pangs of remorse for sins; and has already by the grace of God, laid hold upon
the merits, and mercies of Christ, by a true, though a weak faith. I wish that
his soul, as a newborn babe in Christ, may be touched with the smoothest
hand of the most wise, and charitable discretion; and that it may be nourished
with the sweetest milk of the most gracious, and comfortable promises. I ever
esteemed it most bloody cruelty to quench the smoking flax, or break the
bruised reed, or to add sorrow to him whom the Lord has wounded; and
therefore rather infinitely desire, to turn the smoking flax into a burning
fire of zeal; to refresh the weak, and wounded heart, with softest oil of
Gods dearest mercies; to make the bruised reed a pillar of brass, that it may
stand strong, and sure, at the day of trial. Whereupon, I pronounce out of
most certain grounds of Gods eternal truth unto the weakest faith, if true
and sound; that the gates of hell, with all the fury, and malice, of the
prince and powers of darkness, shall never prevail against it. That neither
Angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come; nor depthes
below, nor heights above, nor the creatures of ten thousand worlds, shall
ever be able, to work a separation of it, from that infinite love of God
which first planted it in the heart, or a disunion of it from Christ, which
inspires it continually with life, spirit, and motion. It is not difference of
degrees, and measure, that takes away the nature and being of it. A small drop
of water is as well, and truly water, as the whole Ocean: a little spark is
as truly fire, both in essence and quality, as the mightiest flame: the hand
of a little child, may receive a pearl, as well as the hand of the greatest
Giant, though not hold it so strongly: a weak faith, may be a true faith, and
so a saving faith, as well as the full persuasion and height of assurance. This
only I must advise in this point; that if this grain of mustard seed watered
with the dew of grace, grow not toward a great tree: if this spark, enkindled
by the spirit of God, spread not into a big flame: if this small measure of
faith be not edged with a longing feruencie after fullness of persuasion, and
seconded with an assiduous and serious endeavor after more perfection; it was
no sound and saving faith, but only a counterfeit show and a deceiving shadow.
But yet for all this I cannot without a woe speak good of evil, and evil of
good: I must not put darkness for light, and light for darkness: Wise Solomon
has taught us, Pro. 17.15.
that he that iusti^ieth the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even
they both are an abomination to the Lord. And therefore I must tell you, that a
man may be great in the eye of the world, and in the judgment of the greater
part for his civil honesty, and solemn performances of outward duties of
religion; (to which many thousands never attain) and yet himself be not only
a stranger from the life of God, and right happiness, and holden fast under
the power and tyranny of the first death: but also by accident, being pust up
with a conceit of an imaginary perfection, become a violent opposite to the
power of religion and true godliness. The reason whereof may be this: Our
corrupt nature, as in matters of understanding and opinion, works in every
man a too too much love of his own inventions, and conclusions; all opposition
inflames the affection, and sets on foot the wit to find out arguments for
their proof, lest he seem to have been too weak of judgment in framing
them, or too inconstant in not defending them: even so also in matters of life
and conversation: and the more plausible a man's course is, and the more
gloriously it is entertained of the world, the stronger is his resolution to
continue in it, and the more impatient he is of all controlement and
contradiction. So that moral honesty, and outward religiousnesse, being in
themselves good and necessary, and a good step to Christianity: yet by
accident are many times a strong bar to keep men from the power of
godliness and unfeigned sincerity. Because, when they consider their present
course is in good acceptance with the world, and that it may well consist with
the free enioyment of their honors and pleasures, at least arising from their
beloved and secret sins, they willingly and peremptorily rest and repose upon
it; contented with a probable error of being in the state of grace, and with a
plausible passage unto eternal death. And the rather, because they know full
well, if they should step forward unto forwardness in religion and that inward
holiness, without which they shall never see the face of God; they should not
only raise up against themselves many thundering tempests, of the worlds
insolent, false, and spiteful censures; but also even from the bottom of hell
many disturbances and fearful tentations. For I am persuaded, while a man
lies secure in the course of unregeneration, if the devil can procure it, he
shall enjoy his hearts desire, he shall bring his enterprises to pass, and not
fall into trouble like other men. He only then begins to bestirre himself,
when a man begins to stir toward grace; or that by his trains, he has
brought him to some point of advantage, to some dead lift, to his deathbed;
that he may have a full stroke at his destruction, that he may suddenly and
certainly swallow him up, body and soul; and then he paies him home with a
witness: for either through senselessness, or despair, he sinkes him down
irrecouerably into the bottom of hell.

These two objections thus prevented: I come to the proof of the point in
hand. And first, these reasons following may demonstrate, that he which reaches
but to civil honesty, comes far short of being in Christ, and consequently
of true happiness.

First, some of the heathens, out of those weak notions and inclinations to
vertuousnesse, which corrupted nature confusedly imprinted in their minds,
attained a great measure of moral perfection. This Elogie the Cato, homo
vir^^ti similimus, qui nunqua^ recte fecit, vt facere vider^t^r, sed quia all
^^r facere non potera^; cuique idsolum visum est rationem haeb^re, quod haberet
iustitia^; omnibus humani^ vitij^ immunis, semper fortunam in sua potestate
habuit. Paterculus lib. 2.
Historian gives of the Roman Cato. Cato was a man, which did animate the
fair speculatiue image of virtue with lively executions and practice.
Goodness was so habitually incorporated into his honest mind, that he did
good, not for respects and reseruedly, but because he could possibly do no
otherwise. Impartial indifferency was the rule of his actions; and being free
from the corruptions of the time, he was the same man, and had a free command
over his passions, both in time of acceptance and disgrace. It is further
reported of Fabricius, that a man might sooner turn the sun from his course,
then to sway Fabricius by respects from honest and ingenuous dealing. And yet
all these excellencies of morality are justly and truly censured by Divinity,
to be but Splendida pecca^a.
glorious sins. Austin, that great disputer, and worthy father, confirms it
unanswerable; especially from that ground in the Epistle to the Cap. 11.6.
Hebrews: Without faith it is impossible to please God. Let a man's works be
in show never so good, so magnificent, so charitable; except the heart be
purged from dead works by a lively faith, and pure from an evil conscience,
he is but a painted sepulcher, or whited wall. But yet take this by the way;
if these Heathens, in the twilight of reason, became such admirable lights of
uprightness and honesty; and yet Christians in these days, when all the
beams of Christ's blessed Gospel are shining and shed round about them,
continue still in darkness, cold and frozen in prophannesse, and security;
certainly, as it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon at the day of judgment,
then for Chorazin and Bethsaida: so it shall be easier for many Heathens,
though to them impossible, then for those Christians, that pass not them in
virtue and integrity. Cato and Fabricius at that day shall rise up against many
luke warm professors of our times, to their eternal shame, confusion, and
condemnation.

The second reason is grounded upon the words of saint Paul, 1. Cor, 2.14. The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him* neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. In this place, by ( natural man) is not meant only, the carnal and
sensual man, swinishly wallowing in vanities and pleasures: but, as the best
and soundest interpreters conceive it, even a man considered with the whole
compass of the reasonable souls possibility. And ma^s reasonable soul, by
that strength it yet retains, since it was by God justly disinherited of
alspirituall patrimony for Adams rebellion, may purchase some kind of
perfections. First, in it self it may be excellent, if endowed with a sharp
wit, a quick apprehension, a strong mind, a piercing judgment, a faithful
memory, a more moderate will, and milder affections. But if by industry and art
it furnish and fill every several faculty with those ornaments and qualities, of
which they are naturally capable, the perfection is much more admirable. And
yet besides these excellencies in it self, it may shine gloriously to others;
it may go further, and enable it self by action, experience and observation,
with such an universal wisdom, that it may not only be fit and qualified for
notable offices of society and intercourse in politic Bodies: but also reach
unto y^ depth of foresight, and large comprehension of circumstances, that it
may be worthy imploiment in affairs of State, and in the direction and
guidance of whole kingdoms. All these perfections may concur upon the soul,
and yet it remain stark blind in the mysteries of salvation. Imagine them all
jointly in one man, and in the highest degree of perfection of which
unsanctified mortality is capable, and let them be never so much admired, and
flattered of the world; yet without the salt of grace to season them, and the
life of faith to animate them, they are but as gay and rich attire upon a
leprous body, as jewels, chains, and bracelets, upon a dead and rotten
carcass. Let no man then deceive his own heart: he may be enriched with
singular pregnancie of all the faculties of the soul, he may be stored with
variety of the choicest and profoundest learning, he may express in action
and civil honesty the absolute portraiture of Aristotle's moral virtues; he
may be as politic as Ahitophel: Whose counsel, which he counseled in those
days, was like as one ^ad asked counsel at the Oracle of God: and yet without
supernatural illumination, and the divine graces, of faith, love, zeal,
sincerity, spiritual wisdom, a sanctified contention of spirit, in making
toward God in all kind of duties, which only put a man into possession of
true happiness, and sit him for a blessed association with God, Angels, and
holy men; I say without these supernatural graces he cannot only, not
perceive the things of the spirit of God, but (which is a horrible and fearful
curse) even esteem them foolishnes.

Nicodemus, John 3. Nicodemus, I am persuaded, was an honest and an ingenuous
man; I am sure he was a great man, and a teacher of Israel; yet when he comes
out of his civil honesty and natural wisdom to reason and confer with
Christ about the salvation of his soul and eternal happiness; he is
strangely childish and a mere infant. For when Christ tells him; Except a man
be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God; he replies: How can a man
be borne which is old? can he enter into his mothers womb again and be borne?
A reply, which may breed an astonishment in all that shall ever read this
story understandingly unto the worlds end; nay, it seems to seem strange to
Christ himself, by his interrogatiue admiration afterward; Art thou a teacher
of Israel, and know not these things? And no marvel; for who would think,
that one of the best of the Pharisees, a ruler of the Jews, a professed Doctor in
the Law and the Prophets, and one careful to save his soul, should be so
grossly and palpably ignorant, in a most material and necessary point of
salvation; especially, having many times, no doubt, read it in Moses and the
Prophts? Amongst many places, he might see, Ezech. 36.26.27. most clearly laid
down the great and glorious work of our new birth: A new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take the stony
heart out of your body, and I will give you a heart of flesh. etc. But when he
comes from teaching, and reading of this and the like places, to be examined in
the practice and experimental feeling of these graces of regeneration upon his
own soul; why, he talks of a man that is old, entering again into his
mothers womb: from whence he should certainly return with a doubled
pollution and corruption of nature; and once more the child of Satan, then he
was before. But so it is, where the heart is not seasoned with saving grace; let
the understanding be never so great with swelling knowledge, the practical
powers of the soul never so pregnant with wisdom and policy, and perfected
with moral virtues; yet there is nothing to be expected from that man, in
matters and mysteries of salvation, but darkness and blindness, childishness
and stupiditie.

Fourthly, the young man in the Gospel may be a fit instance Matthew. 19.
He was unreprovable in the external justice and outward obseruances of the
second table, wherein civil honesty does principally consist: but how far
he was from inward sanctification, the state of grace, and happiness of Gods
children, appears in the story. For when the sacred and powerful words of our
blessed Savior, had insinuated into the secrets of his soul, and struck at
his sweet sin of covetousness; the young man is presently cast into a fit of
melancholy, Christ is too precise a preacher for him, he cannot digest such a
strict and severe course; he will not abandon his pleasures of worldliness,
his palaces, his possessions, to follow Christ the Lord of heaven and earth in
this life, though he assure him of the rich treasures of eternal blessedness in
the life to come: When the young man heard that saying, he went away
sorrowful: for he had great possessions. Whereby we may see, that a man may be
ciuilly honest and vncensurable in outward works of justice, and yet harbor
and nourish some close corruptions, and sweet sin in his heart: from which,
rather then he will part, he will lose his part in Christ, the bottomless
fountain of endless ioies and comforts, and his portion of invaluable glory
in the new Jerusalem.

This point being thus manifest, for conclusion I will lay down certain
differences, betwixt the righteousness of faith and sanctification, and the
righteousness of civil honesty, that a man may have some directions to
examine his soul and conscience in this respect.

Adam. But the cause and fountain of righteousness of civil honesty, may be
goodness of constitution and ingenuousnesse, whereby a man may not be so apt
and inclinable to notorious sins, or want of trials and prouocations, or
fear of laws and temporal punishments, or desire of reputation and rising,
or a vain hope to stay Gods judgments for inward corruptions by civil
outwardnesse, or at best, the restraining Spirit of God; by which he does
only repress the furies and outrages of the wicked, and reduce them to some
moderation and honesty, for the quiet of his Elect and conservation of
Kingdoms. For if God did not put his hook into the nostrils of profane men,
and his bridle into their lips, every one of them, (since every man has in
his corrupt nature the seeds of all sins that ever have, are, or may be
committed) I say, every one of them might become a cruel Senacherib, a railing
Shemei, a traitorous Judas, a bloody Bonner, an hellish Fawkes, fierce Woolues
and Lions against the silly and innocent Lambs of Christ's fold.

has in all actions, for the maine scope and principal end, the glory and
honor of God: and if infirmity do sometimes distaine them with some mixture
and adherence of respects, (for who can say my heart is clean? even the purest
actions are mixed with some spice of corruptions) it works in the faithful
soul much grief, sorrow, striving against, repentance and humiliation.

Thirdly, righteousness of faith does labor watchfully,

Fourthly, righteousness of faith does strive with greatest

Fifthly, civil honesty makes no great conscience of smaller sins; as
lying, lesser oaths, gaming, profane jesting,

Sixthly, civil honesty does not use to make opposition ready to tread upon a
serpent, and to start aside like a broken ^ow. But righteousness of faith does
stand out for the honor of God, and ordinarily goes through stitch, in good
causes; come what come can; crosses or calumniations, good report or evil
report, men or devils. For it is completely armed with confidence of future
happiness, and has sixth the eye upon the crown of immortality; which if
heaven and earth conspired, they were not able to pull it out of his hand, that
reserues it in the heavens, for all those that sight a good fight, that keep
the faith, and run with constancy the race of sanctification.

The next point of the negative part of my doctrine is formal hypocrisy.
Which that you may more clearly understand, consider with me three kinds of
hypocrisy: privy hypocrisy, gross hypocrisy, formal hypocrisy.

regeneration is become more excellent, Prou. 12.26
then his neighbor; as indeed he incomparably is, howsoever the worlds
estimation be otherwise: Because the one is, as yet, a limme of Satan,
receiving from him the cursed influence of scule pollutions, of uncleanness, and
lying, of malice and revenge of pride and prophanenes, etc: The other is
already a blessed member of Christ's mystical body, continually inspired with
holy motions and the life of grace. The one lies polluted in his own blood,
encompassed with the menstruous clouts of loathsome corruptions; of all
natures, except only the devil and his angels, the most wretched and woeful;
of the family of hell, heir of horror and desolation: The other by the
immortal seed of the pure and powerful word of God, 2. Pet. 1.4.
is made partaker of the divine nature; clothed with the rich and invaluable
robe of Christ's justice, guarded with an invincible troop of heavenly Angels;
justly entitled to a kingdom of inconceivable glory and pleasures, more then
the stars of the firmament in number. The one is a wrongful usurper of the
riches, honors and preferments of this life, for which hereafter he must be
condemned to chains of eternal darkness, and a dungeon of endless misery
and confusion: the other while he continues in this world, is a rightful owner
and possessor of the earth, and all the creatures and blessings of God; and
when he departs hence, he shall be made a glorious inhabitant of those sacred
mansions, where constant peace, unmixed joys, and blessed immortality even for
ever and ever do dwell. Which great difference when the godly man perceiues,
and his own prerogatives, he is filled with a strange and joyful amazement
and admiration at his own happiness: which Satan seeing, who is perfectly
experienced in all advantages and opportunities for spiritual assaults, and
working upon the relics of man's proud nature, does cunningly draw him to
advance above that which is meet within himself, in his own opinion, the
worth of his own graces and virtues. Which that he may convey and repr^sent to
the view of the world, with an excellency proportionable to his own
ouerweening conceit; he is forced to admit the secret and insensible poison of
privy hypocrisy, which he does more easily at the first entertain, because
the pestilencie and bitterness thereof is not discernable by reason of the
predominancie and sweetness of the fresh present graces of Gods spirit in his
soul. But when by afflictions or disgraces, by some extraordinary temptation
or particular checkes from the Ministry of the word, the ugliness of it is
discovered to his conscience; he for ever abhorres it, as a consuming canker,
that would fret out the very heart of grace, and extinguish the life of
sincerity; and therefore with much humiliation and feruencie does pray against
it, strive against it, and by the mercies of God prevail against it.

This kind of Hypocrisy belongs not to my present purpose; only by the way
let me give advertisement to the child of God, for to him only I speak in
this point: to the end he may keep his heart unblameable in holiness, and
preserve the true relish and sound joy of good actions entire, and
vndistempered: that he would strongly fence his heart, with a gracious and
unfeigned humility, against privy pride the mother of this hypocrisy; as
against a close, undermining, and a most dangerous enemy; and the more
seriously and watchfully for these reasons: partly drawn from the nature of
the sin; and partly from the state of his soul. From the nature of the sin:



but this does single out the chosen of God, and takes up his seat in the
sanctified soul.

Thirdly, this sin does unavoidably wind it self into the

Fourthlie, there is no depth of knowledge, no measure of Paul, that great
instrument of Gods greatest glory, in whom there was a matchless concurrence
of divine graces, and variety of all manner of afflictions, notable means to
keep the heart of man in humility; yet lest he should be exalted out of
measure through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto him a prick
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him.

Reasons taken from the state of the regenerate soul, are these.

First, let the best and most mortified man turn the eye of etc. and out of
this consideration, he will be so far from selfe-conceitednesse, and a
partial ouerualuing of his own gifts and virtues, that he will find much
matter and just cause to renew his repentance, to stand upon his guard against
spiritual pride, to continue and increase his humiliation, to double his zeal
and resolution for the glorifying of God, and subduing his own secret
corruptions.

Secondly, let him consider, how before his calling he marched furiously and
desperately under Satan's colors, in the pursuit of pleasures, vanities and
worldly honors; with how resolute hatred and contempt he opposed against
sincerity and saving grace, as against needless preciseness and folly, how
fearelesly and how far he ran in the paths of iniquity, and the sinful
passages of the kingdom of darkness; where no reward was to be expected but
shame and misery. But after it pleased the Lord to place his Angel in the way
to stop the torrent of his impieties and to set his sacred word before his
eyes, as a glorious light to direct him in the ways of righteousness; let him
remember how often he has started aside for false and imaginary fears, how
often he has stumbled even in the even path through his own heedlesnesse, how
often he has stood still in his way, either gazing on the painted and lying
glory of the world, or listening to the allurements and deceitful charms of
his own flesh. Nay, how sometimes he has bin enforced to retire by some
cunning train and malicious stratageme of Satan. So that since his conversion
he has but run faintly and slowly, and won little ground in the race of
godliness, although there be set before him the price of ^^ high calling, the
highest advancement of the soul, fullness of joy, and the precious treasures
of immortality. And if he demurre a while soundly upon this point, he may for
ever fear lest a selfe-liking of his own excellency, be justly plagued with
a scandalous fall into some gross sin, which besides it own particular
sting, will unto his great discomfort awake the old sins of his
unregeneration, like so many sleeping Lions, with open mouths to charge afresh
upon the conscience with new terrors and fearful vexations.

depth of his own bounty has reached unto him, whatsoever gifts he has;
whether of body, or mind, of honors or outward possessions, of nature or
grace: and he shall find far greater reason to be continually grieved and
humbled, that the bright and unspotted beams of Gods sanctifying Spirit are
soulely darkened and lessened in his body of death, then to be exalted in his
own conceit, in that it has pleased God of his mere and free mercy to
illighten the darkness of his heart; without which supernatural illumination
he should have lived in blindness and miserably until death, and after this
life bin cast out into utter darkness and remediless desolation.

Fourthly, let him take heed how he harbors and nourishes

These reasons may justly move every faithful Christian, with much
earnestness and prayer to labor after, and settle surely in his heart a true
and undissembled humility, as the only sovereign means to preserve the life
and vigor of his graces in his own soul, their fruit and benefit to others,
their blessing and acceptance with God; and with the watchfullest eye of his
spiritual wisdom, to hold in perpetual jealousy the cunning sleights and
windings of this insinuatiue sin of privy pride, that both so pestilent a
canker may be kept out of the soul, and the passage may be stopped to privy
hypocrisy; with which, I told you before, Satan does endeavor with might and
maine to discomfort and disgrace the actions and exercises, even of the child
of God.

The second kind of hypocrisy is gross hypocrisy; by which a man professes
that which is not in his heart at all, and so deceiues others, but not his own
heart. And this is most properly hypocrisy: For the Greek word (...),
signifies a stage-plaier; who sometimes puts on the roabes and majesty of
a Prince, himself being of a base and neglected state: Or the gravity and
wisdom of a Counselor, himself being of roguish and dissolute conditions:
Sometimes he represents a chaste and modest lover, his own life being a
practice of uncleanness: Sometimes he assumeth a good and honest vocation, his
own being accursed and unwarrantable. Even such is the gross hypocrite upon
the stage of this world; a very painted sepulcher and whited wall, glorious
indeed in outward fashions and solennities, in shows and representations to
the eye of the world; but if it were possible for a man to make an exact
inquiry into the close and hidden passage of his heart, he should find many
black and bloody proiects, for compassing revenge even upon surmised
opposites, many ambitious steps built upon flattery and dissembling baseness
and briberie for his rising and preferments; many stinging swarms of fiery
lusts and impure thoughts, which are either spent in speculatiue wantonness
and the adulteries of the heart, or else for fear of the worlds notice, break
out only into a strange and secret filthiness. In a word under the veil of
his outward religiousnesse, he should see a perfect anatome of the infinite
and deceitful corruptions of the heart of man, and many plausible and
politic conu^iances to bleare the eyes of the world, howsoever wretched man
upon his own fillie and forlorn soul he certainly draws an exceeding
weight of vengeance. This kind of hypocrite is more miserable and of less hope
then the open sinner.

which manner of sinning makes him incapable of saving graces. For how can that
heart which to natural hardness adds a voluntary obfirmation in sin and
resistance to godly motions, receive the softening and sanctifying spirit of
God? How should those unruly affections be tamed by the power of religion, who
please themselves, and hold it their greatest glory to seem most moderate
outwardly, when inwardly they boil most intemperately in lust, pride, malice,
contempt of zealous simplicity, and in other soulest pollutions? How should the
brightness of wisdom shine, where the windows of the soul are shut close,
wilfully and upon set purpose?

Secondly, by reason of the shining lamp of an outward

Thirdly, all public reprehensions and aduertisements

Fourthly, he is justly obnoxious to an extraordinary measure or outward
services and employments; how much more the God of heaven and earth, who sees
clearly into the inmost closet of the heart? For hell and destruction are
before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sons of men? I say, how much
more must he needs double his infinite hatred of sin against the double
iniquity of hypocrisy? how must his soul abhor that wretched creature,
which bears the world in hand, and makes a show unto men, that he stands for
God and his honor and service; but indeed is a close factor for Satan, his
own pleasures and the powers of darkness? And as the hypocrite is subject to
Gods extraordinary hatred; so is he liable to an extraordinary weight of
vengeance: For when the wrath of the Lord is once enkindled against him, it is
powered out like fire, and burns even to the bottom of hell. His fear comes
like an horrible desolation, and his destruction like a whirlewind. Terrors
shall take him as waters, and a tempest shall carry him away by night: And so
certain are these plagues, that as though the hypocrite were already turned
into a devil, or into the very fiery lake, it is said in the Gospel, of
other sinners, that they shall have their portion with the hypocrite, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Good Lord, it is strange and fearful, that so noble and excellent a creature
as man, endewed with reason and understanding like an Angel of God; having
besides the pretiousnes of the holy book of God, those great and universal
motives, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, the joys
of the kingdom of heaven, the endless pains of the wicked, which except he
be a damned Atheist, he does certainly believe; and whereas he might live on
earth with unconquerable comfort, and shine hereafter as the brightness of the
firmament, be a companion of Saints and Angels, and stand in the glorious
presence of the highest Majesty for ever and ever: yet for all this will even
wilfully against the light of his conscience, and with the certain knowledge
of his heart, by his gross hypocrisy, secret abominations and uncleanness,
privy practices for some wretched pleasures and preferments, make himself in
the eyes of God, howsoever he deceive men, a very incarnate devil upon earth;
and after this life, justly heap upon his body and soul all the horrors and
despaires, tortures and plagues which a created nature is capable of.

Oh that the hypocrite would consider these things in time, lest the wrath and
fiery jealousy of the Lord break forth upon him suddenly and ineuitably like
sorrows upon a woman in travel, and tear him in pieces when there be none
that can deliver him. Well may he carry the matter smoothly for a time, and by
his iugling dissimulation cast a mist about him, and inwrap himself in
darkness from the eye of the world; yet let him know that in the mean time
his sins are writing by the hand of Gods justice, with the point of a Diamond
in the register of his conscience, and when their number and measure is
accomplished, the Lord will come against him even with whole armies of plagues
and vengeance, as against the most hateful object of his revenging justice,
the most base and unnatural Opposite to so pure a Majesty, and the most
notorious and transcendent instrument of Satan's deepest malice.

This kind of hypocrite belongs not to my present purpose; and therefore I
leave him, without sound and timely repentance, to some strange and markeable
judgment even in this life: Or if he pass these few days honorably and
prosperously, as it is many times the lot of the wicked, lot him expect upon
his deaths-bed the fiery darts of Satan empoysoned with hellish malice and
cruelty, to be fastened deeply in his soul, and such pangs and anguish of
conscience, that will possess him of hell before hand. Or if he depart out of
this world without sense of his sin, or else at the best with some formal
and perfunctorie show of penitencie; yet let his heart tremble for the fears
that it shall fear at the great and terrible day of the Lord, when the vizard
of his hypocrisy shall certainly be pulde off his face, and he ashamed and
confounded in the presence of the blessed Trinity, of Angels, and all the men
that ever were, and irrecouerably abandoned from the face of God and from the
fruition of his joys, to the most consuming flame of the fire of hell, and the
lothsomest dungeon of the bottomless pit.



For a more perspicuous explication of this point, conceive with me those
perfections which may befall a man as yet unregenerate and in state of
damnation.

We may suppose in him: first, all those gifts which the possibility of nature
can confer upon him, all ornaments of Arts and knowledge, of wisdom and
policy, not only that which is purchased by experience, observation, and
employment in points of State; but also the spirit of government, as Saul had.
To these we may add, gentleness and fairness of conditions, an exactness
of civil honesty and moral justice, immunity from gross and infamous sins.
And thus far the heathens may go: And thus far we proceeded in our last
Discourse. But in these times of Christianity a reprobate may go far further
then ever the most innocent Heathen that ever lived could possibly; though some
of them were admirable for their mild and merciful disposition, some for their
virtuous severity, some for integrity of life, some for constancy and
resolution in goodness some for preferring the vnspottednesse of their life
before most exquisit tortures. For to all these he may add a glorious
profession of the Gospel, a performance of all outward duties and exercises of
religion, many works of charity and monuments of his rich magnificence. Nay,
besides all this he may be made partaker of some measure of inward
illumination, of a shadow of true regeneration, there being no grace
effectually wrought in the faithful, whereof a resemblance may not be sound in
the unregenerate. This last point will more clearly appear unto you out of
the 8. of Luke, and the 6. to the Hebrews.

In the 8. of Luke, the hearer resembled unto the stony ground, is the formal
hypocrite; who is there said, to believe for a time, and therefore by the
inward, though more general and inferior working of the spirit, may have a
temporary faith begot in him. In which faith we may consider these degrees.

First, he may be endewed with understanding and knowledge

He may be persuaded that it is divinely inspired, and that

He may see clearly by the Law of God the grievous intollerablenesse

He may be amazed and terrified with fearful horror,

He may give assent unto the covenant of grace in Christ,

He may be persuaded in a generality and confused manner,

He may be troubled in mind with grudgings and distractions, with reluctation
and scruples before the commission of sin, out of the strength of natural
conscience, seconded with a servile apprehension of divine vengeance, but
especially illightned with some glimmerings of this temporary faith. Much ado
was there even with Pilate, inward trouble and tergiuersation, before he would
be brought to give judgment on Christ. Herod was sorry before he beheaded
John Baptist. And these men I hope, were far short of the perfections
attaineable by the formal hypocrite.

Achab, and with a slumbering and superficial quiet, secure the conscience for
a time. And from this faith may spring fruits: Some kind and measure of hope,
love, patience and other graces. It is said in the Evangelists, that that
hearer which we call the formal hypocrite, receives the word with joy. Whence
may be gathered:









that they may with more security and absoluteness reap in this life what
sensual profit or pleasure soever the world yields, endeavor to banish and
extinguish all thought and notice of heaven or holiness.

The word of God by this temporary faith and other graces the unclean spirits
going out of a man: Matthew. 12.43. A flying from the pollutions of the world: 2.
Pet. 2.20. A washing: 2. Pet. 2.32. And may have such power upon him, that he
may do many things thereafter. Herod is said to have reverenced John, to have
heard him gladly, and to have done many things: Mark 6.20.

To these for illustration, and because we are hereafter to consider their
differences from a true, entire and universal sanctification; we may add
those five degrees incident to the reprobate: Heb. 6.

First, he may be illightened in his understanding, with

Secondly, he may have some taste in his heart of the heavenly

Thirdly, he may be made partaker of the holy Ghost, the

He may in some measure enjoy the good word of God,

He may have some taste and feeling even of the powers of

Nay, and besides all these, that which nails him fast unto formalitie, and
makes him with contentment to walk in a plodding course of outward profession;
is a persuasion that he is already in the way of life, when as yet he never
entered no not the very first step unto it. For indeed he may be persuaded,
though from false and mistaken grounds, that he is rich in heavenly things and
has need of nothing, and that he is already possessed of the kingdom of grace
and entitled to the kingdom of glory; and yet be most wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. His state in this case being not
unlike the dream of a poor or hungry man, which in his sleep fills
himself with variety of dainties, or tumbles himself amid his rich treasures
and heaps of gold: but when he awaketh, behold he is faint, his soul longs,
and he embraces nothing but emptines and air; yea, and besides, the very
imaginary fruition of his supposed happiness, when he is awaked, increases
his languishing, and doubles the sense of his necessities. Even so the formal
hypocrite in this life dreams of much comfort to come, makes sure of heaven,
^. Tim. 3.5.
thinks himself the only man, his (...), as the Apostles calls it, his
form of godliness in his conceit, is the only true state of salvation;
whatsoever is short of him, is profaneness; whatsoever is above him is
preciseness. But when upon his deaths bed he awaketh, and has his conscience
illightned, and his particular sins revealed unto him, in stead of catching a
crown of glory, which he has vainly possessed in his hopeful security, he
graspeth nothing but fear and amazement, anguish and sorrow. Yea, and now his
former false persuasion of his happy state enlarges the gulf of his
despair, and makes him more sensible of his present and unexpected miseries.

Give me leave I beseech you to enlarge this point, and to acquaint you with
some reasons of this persuasion. For a false persuasion of already being in
the state of grace, is a bar that keeps thousands from the state of grace
indeed.

The good spirit of God you know does persuade every regenerate man by a sweet
and silent inspiration, out of a consideration of an universal change and
sanctification, and present sincerity in all the powers and parts of his soul
and body, and calling, that he is most certainly in the state of grace and
heir of heaven. Whence spring perpetually whole rivers of unspeakable
comfort, that most then refresh his soul when he is nearest to be
overwhelmed of the maine Ocean of the worlds bitterness and pressures.

In a lying resemblance to this sacred work of the holy Ghost in the hearts
of Gods children, Satan lest he be wanting to his, puts on the glory of an
angel of light; and insinuates into the imagination of the formal hypocrite
some flashes of comfort and conceits that he is in state of grace, and shall
be saved. Whence issues a cursed security, a wretched opposition to more
sincerity then he finds in himself, a slumber and benummednes of conscience,
an impatiencie of having his formalitie censured by the ministry of the word;
a neglect of a more sound search into the state of his soul. For Satan in his
Angelical form tells him that more strictness and purity is but only a proud
hypocrisy and pretense of such as affect a transcendencie above the ordinary
degrees of holiness, and bids him take heed of being too busy and pragmaticall
in taking notice of every small corruption and infirmity; for tenderness of
conscience, and a too nice apprehensiuenes of every little sin, will
vncomfortablie enchaine him to Melancholy, Vnsociablenes, and some degrees of
despair. And howsoever, says Satan, some Preachers of preciser humor out of
their unhallowed zeal and censorious austerity breath out nothing against thee
but fire and brimstone, indignation and wrath, damnation and horror; yet take
not these things to heart, but let such peremptory comminations pass as
malicious thunderbolts, discharged from too fiery spirits, begot by indiscreet
heat, and directed to private ends. Thus this wily serpent cries peace, peace
unto his soul, when God knows there is no peace toward, but noise and
tumbling of garments in blood, and burning and devouring of fire. The
conscience indeed may be asleep for a while, like a fierce wild beast
gathering vigor and puissance, that being awaked by the hand of God at the
approach of sickness or death, may more implacably rent, devour and torment
for ever.

But I come to the grounds of this persuasion. I told ye before that the
spirit of God assures his children that they are in state of grace, out of a
consideration of an universal sincerity in all their ways. But Satan for his
children has other reasons, which I conceive to be such as these:

First, the formal hypocrite is notably confirmed that his out of the word of
God, and fellows of such notorious rank. But if besides the disclaiming of
these, his conscience be able to inform him of his civil honesty, external
justice, some works of charity, etc. why then the matter is put out of all
controversy, and he presently canonized a saint in his own conceit. You may
see his picture in the 18. of Luke: O God I thank thee, that I am not as other
men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this Publican. There is his
exemption from common prophanenes. I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of
all that I possess. There is his outward justice and religious solennities.
But you must not conceive that the formal hypocrite does proclaim this in
public with such gross and palpable ostentation: Nay, perhaps when it arises
he lets it not rest long in his own thoughts, left by this vanity his virtues
lose their grace and he his comfort. But certain it is, a consciousnes of his
being free from infamous impieties, of his moral honesty, performance of
outward duties of religion, and some inward, in some measure, though not
universally, nor to the degree of the children of God, is one of the best
grounds he has for his assurance of being in state of salvation. Parallel to
this of Luke is that, Prou. 30. verse. 12. There is a generation that are pure
in their own conceit, and yet are not washed from their filthiness. That is,
they imagine their temper of religion, their pitch of holiness, their formal
Christianity to be the very right path to heaven, when indeed they were never
truly humbled with a sense and sight of their sins out of the law and
judgments of God. They were never acquainted with the pangs of conscience in a
new birth or the mysteries of salvation. But within are full of
hollowheartednesse, lukewarmenesse and much bitterness against true godliness
and the power thereof.

Simplicity and the like. But before I descend to these particulars, give me
leave to propose unto you the fountain and ground of them, which I take to
be, that great and eternal* opposition which is naturally betwixt light and
darkness, the life of grace, and a death in sin, sincerity and
profaneness, the children of God and the wicked. Gods children, you know, in
this world live as sheep amongst wolves. In the stormy times of the Church
their persecutors are indeed even wolves in the evening, for their insatiable
cruelty and unquenchable thirst in drinking up the blood of the Saints: And in
the Halcyon days and fairest times of the Church, yet they have those which
will be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides. If they cannot vex
them in a higher degree, yet they will be sure to lay on load with base
indignities, disgraces, slanders and lying imputations. And their hatred is of
that strange nature and quality, that it is discharged even against the
goodness of the godly, their zeal, their forwardness in religion, their
faithfulness in their calling and the like, as against it proper object. Chap.
15.10.
This is plain in Jeremy: Jeremy neither borrowed on usury, nor lent on
usury, he was free from all color of giving offense or doing wrong: Nay, his
gracious heart was so wholly melted in compassion, that he wished that his head
were full of water, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day
and night for the destructions of his people. And yet of that people every one
contended against him, there was not a man but he cursed him. The only reason
was, because whatsoever the Lord said, that he faithfully spoke, and kept
nothing back, but showed them all the counsel of God. It is yet more plain
in David, Psalm. 38.20. They also that reward evil for Good, are mine
adversaries, because I follow goodness. The word there in the original
insinuates such an extreme and deadly hatred, (...)
that from thence comes the devils name, Satan. So that howsoever this enmity
betwixt the world and the children of light be many times bridled by the
restraining spirit of God, sometimes by the ingenuousnesse of the wicked, or
their moral virtue or policy or some by-respect, or by accident be turned
into love; because by the presence and prayers of the godly they many times
escape judgments, and receive blessings. Yet I say, howsoever it be thus
bridled, in it self it is more then ordinary or natural, and has in it some
degree and mixture of hellish virulencie. Ordinary hatred expires in the
downe-fall of his adversary: Nay, any one of generous mind out of the interest
he challenges in the common state of humanity, will commiserate the distress
and affliction even of his greatest and basest enemy; but much more of one of
noble spirit and eminent worth, and more then that, of one that has followed
him with all offices of kindness and love: yet the flame of this hatred is so
fi^rce and so set on fire by hell, that it is not extinguished even with the
blood of his supposed Opposite, but barbarously sports in his miseries, and
with insole^cy tramples upon his desolations. This appears clearly in the
example of David, Psalm. 35.15. But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and
gathered themselves together: the abiects assembled themselves against me, and
I knew not; they tare me and ceased not. Who without indignation can think
upon these leaud companions and base drunkards, that with the false scoffers at
bankets gnashed their teeth and cruelly insulted over the misery and disgrace
of that man, that was a man after Gods own heart, of incomparable excellency,
and so kindly affected toward them, that when they were sick, he clothed
himself with a sack, he humbled his soul with fasting, and mourned as one
that mourns for his mother? You see then the fountain both of the greater
stoods of bloody persecutions, and the lesser streams of inferior vexations;
as slanders, railings and false imputations. To some particulars whereof I now
come.

First for Pride. It is most certain that Pride truly so called, is the most
pes^lent and incompatible Opposite that Grace has: and therefore he that is
most sanctified, most fights against it. For besides that this fiery dart is
deeply impoysoned in our corrupted nature, Satan knows out of his own
experience how to manage it with notable cunning; and he follows this weapon
with such eagerness and confidence, that after it is broken upon the shield of
faith, yet he labors with might and maine to fasten some splinter or other,
even in the soul humbled for sin and vowed unto the service of God, as I
told you in the first part of privy hypocrisy. But I appeal unto the
consciences of the children of God, whether many times the world does not
interpret that to be pride in their actions and carriage, which is nothing else
but a gracious freedom of spirit, arising from a consciousnesse of their
innocence and independancy, whereby they are enabled to stand with courage
against corruptions and the sins of the time, to follow good causes with
boldness, and with resolution to defend a known and warrantable truth, and
indeed to prefer the salvation of their souls before the gaining of the whole
world. Innocence makes them as bold as Lions: Prou. 28.1.
The wicked flee when none pursues; but the righteous are bold as a Lion. And
their warrant is out of Isai. 51. verse. 7.8. Hearken unto me ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law. Fear ye not the reproach
of men, neither be ye afraid of their rebukes. For the moath shall eat them up
like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.
Independancie holds their hearts upright in all their actions, that they are
neither swaid awrie by partialities, or secret relations to wrong ends. I mean
not independancie in respect of laws, government, authority, charity, unity
with the Church or the like, I mean no such independancie: but in respect of
baseness, flattery, corruption, temporizing, indirect prosecution of their
honors and preferments, etc. which are setters of Satan, by which he confines
many to a wretched slavery even in this life, and without repentance to
endless misery hereafter.

Secondly, hypocrisy is many times by the world unjustly David had his full
portion in this imputation, as appears in many Psalms. The causes for this
time I conceive to be two.



Nicodemus. Nicodemus was a great Rabbi in Israel, a famous Doctor in the Law
and the Prophets, in which no doubt he had many times read the doctrine of
regeneration: yet when he comes to be examined of the power and practice of it,
he holds the new birth, (without which no man can ever see God) to be as
impossible as for an old man to return into his mothers womb and be borne
again. Even such is the judgment of others in his state, of the fruits,
effects and course of sanctification. And therefore I marvel that any child of
God will afflict his soul, hang down the head, or remit one jot of his zeal
in goodness for unjust censures in this kind: since he knows that natural
men though never so wise, so learned, or glorious in the world, want spiritual
taste, and therefore cannot relish the fruits of the spirit, are blind and
cannot see or judge of the light of grace, are in darkness and cannot
comprehend it.

Thirdly, the formal hypocrite does settle himself with

This note of singularity has in all ages bin imputed to those, that with a
good conscience have labored to keep themselves blameless and pure in the
midst of a naughty and crooked generation. Behold, says Isaiah, chap. 8.
verse. 18. I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are as signs and
wonders in Israel, by the Lord of Hosts, which dwells in mount Sion. It had
bin no wonder had they bin only as signs and wonders amongst the enemies of
God, and nations of uncircumcision; but that they should be signs and wonders
in Israel! God had chosen him but one little vineyard amongst all the spacious
forests of the earth; out of the glory of all the Kingdoms of the world he had
chosen him but one handful of people; and yet in that vineyard, his faithful
Ones are but as the berries after the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three in
the top of the v^most boughs, and four or five in the high branches. In that
little people, his children are but as the first fruits: so that even in Israel
they are become as monsters and spectacles of amazement. Then so it is indeed,
that a man drawn out of the darkness of this world and illightned with grace,
is like a star new created in the sky, that draws all the world to gaze
upon it. Nay, and he draws not only the eyes of men upon him, but is an
eie-sore unto the^. For thus speaks the wicked of the righteous man: Wisd.
2.15.16. It grieueth us also to look upon him, for his life is not like other
mo^s: his ways are of another fashion. He counts us as bastards, and he
withdraws himself from our w^ies as from filthiness; he commends greatly
the latter end of the just, and boasts that God is his father.

go down pleasantly; yet secretly and insensibly it strengthens the rage,
and sharpens the sting of the worm that never dies, against the day of their
visitation; for in the end, says Prou. 23.32.
Solomon, it will bite like a serpent, and hurt like a cock^trice.

This outward and worldly joy, because the children of God do not pursue,
because they will not rely upon those broken staves of reed, they are est^emed
the only melancholic and discontented men. But I marvel when or with what
eyes the worldlings look upon the faithful Christian.

It may be, while he is yet in the sore travel of his newbirth, and humbled
under the mighty hand of God with affliction of conscience for his sin. If
so, then they should know that men must mourn for their sins as one that
mourns for his only son: and be sorry for them, as one is sorry for the
death of his first borne. There must be in them a great mourning as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon: as it is Zac. 12.11. And
this sorrow is a blessed sorrow, for it brings forth immortality. And either
themselves must have a part in it, or they shall never be made partakers of the
fullness of joy at Gods right hand. What though the child of God lie for a
night in the darkness of sorrow and weeping for his sins? mark a while, and
the day will dawne, and a day star will arise in his heart that will never
set, until it has conducted him unto the light that no man can attain unto:
The sun of righteousness will presently appear and will dry away his
tears, and with everlasting light will shine upon him for evermore.

But it may be the worldlings take notice even of the whole course and best
state of the child of God, and yet can see nothing therein but uncomfortable
strictness, and sad austerity. But then I must tell them, they look only
upon him with carnal eyes and deceive themselves: for so indeed he does not
appear a boisterous Nimrode, or dissolute Ruffler amid the vanities and
delicacies of the world; that is for Satan's reuellers, who have smiling
countenances, but bleeding consciences; glorious outsides, but within nothing
but rottenness and prophanenes, much laughing when the heart is sorrowful.
But if they were able with illightened eyes to pierce into the inward parts of
Gods child, they should see within, hope already feasting upon the joys of
eternity: they should see faith holding fast the writings by which the kingdom
of heaven is conveyed unto his soul, sealed with the precious blood of the
son of God; that nor man nor devil is able to wrest out of it hand: They
should see the white stone mentioned in the Revelation, wherein there is a new
name written, which no man knows saving he that receives it. Whence
springs such a strong comfort and high resolution in the affairs of heaven,
that no sword of the Tyrant, no flame of cruelty, not the combination of heaven
and earth shall ever be able to amaze, abate or extinguish.

might outstep many of these great Ones in their Proiects of policy and the
precedencies of the world: but since they cannot, they da^e not, they will never
by the grace of God be so persuaded; they are well content with their
continual feast, a good conscience, while the others are fatted with their
wine and their corn and their oil against the day of slaughter. And then at
that day they will change their minds. For go, I beseech you, into the
sanctuary of the Lord and understand their end; they are now upon the stage of
this world in their full glory; but were they as mighty as Leuiathan, as cruel
as Dragons; could they rear their honors to the height of the clouds, nay,
advance their thrones above beside the stars of God, yet they must down,
they have but one part to play, they must make their beds in the dust; and then
when they are once disroabde of their greatness and glory, and stripped naked of
their honors and preferments, and without all mitigation by worldly comforts
left unto the full rage of a stinging conscience; then they change their note
and alter their judgments, and sigh for grief of mind, and say within
themselves: These are they whom we sometime had in derision and in a parable of
reproach: we fools thought their life madness, and their end without honor. How
are they counted among the children of God, and their portion is among the
Saints! Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness has not shined unto us, and the sun of understanding rose not
upon us: we have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction,
and we have gone through dangerous ways: but we have not known the way of the
Lord. But here by the way I must give this caveat lest I be mistaken in this
last point, or that which follows: I do not divide by necessary and
inevitable divorce greatness and godliness, holiness and high places; God
forbid: I make betwixt them no other opposition then David does in the 73.
Psalm. himself being most holy and most honorable. I rather infinitely desire
to inflame the noble and worthy spirits of all those whom the Lord has
advanced i^ gifts, in greatness, in honors, in government or any kind of
precedencie above their brethren, to a proportionable excellency of zeal and
sanctification. For certainly as power, policy, authority being abused and
not sanctified to the owners, become in the mean time strong pillars for the
supporting of the kingdom of darkness, pestilent instruments of much
mischief, and hereafter shall be soundly paid with an answerable degree of
extraordinary vengeance, horror and torment: so great wisdom, great
knowledge, great honors, being employed impartially, resolutely and
vnreseruedly, in soliciting and furthering the causes of God, in strengthening
the cold and languishing state of his religion, in refreshing the hearts of his
Saints which ordinarily are oppressed and disgraced by the cruelties of profane
men, procure in the mean time great honor to his great name, great good unto
his Church, great joy unto his Angels, great comfort unto the souls of the
owners, and fairer and brighter crowns of glory to their heads in the world to
come. And so I come to the

a non-causa. For all outward happinesses are for special reasons, and by
particular indulgence more often, and very plentifully in this world vouchsafed
to the wicked and profane. This appears Ierem. 12. verse. 1.2. Wherefore does
the way of the wicked prosper? Why are all they in wealth that rebelliously
transgress? Thou have planted them, and they have taken root: they grow and
bring forth fruit. Mal. 3. verse. 15. Even they that work wickedness are set
up, and they that tempt God, y^a, they are delivered. Job 21. verse. 7. etc.
Wherefore do the wicked live and wax old, and grow in wealth? Their seed is
established in their sight with them, and their generation before their eyes.
Their houses are peaceable, and the rod of God is not upon them. They send
forth their children like sheep, and their sons dance. They take the Tabret
and Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organs. Let him therefore that thus
concludes the happiness of his soul from his worldly prosperity, know and
consider, that as the end and reward of the godly and wicked is different in
place and nature; the one being the highest heavens, and the highest
advancement of the soul to the fullness of glory and bliss; the other the
lowest hell, and the very extremity of the greatest miseries and vexations,
which a created nature can possibly endure. So experience of all times teaches
us, and heavenly justice requires a contrary manner of passage and proceeding
to these ends.

The wicked in this world do easily run up without rub or interruption, many
times with acclamation and applause, all the golden steps of honors and
preferments; but upon the highest staire they find the most slipperie standing,
and the top of their earthly felicity is the most immediate and certain
descent unto their greatest downfall. They are roially mounted here upon
earth, and gallop swiftly over the fair and green plains of plenty and
pleasures; but at the end of their race they are ouerturned horse and man, and
tumbled headlong into the pit of destruction. They fairelie glide over the sea
of this world with full sail, with much calmness and sereniti^, and richly
laden, but in the brightest Sunshine, and when they least suspect it, they
suddenly and without recovery, sincke into the gulf of darkness and
desolation.

But it is just otherwise with the children of God, for they many times in this
their pilgrimage stick fast in the mirie clay of poverty and contempt,
sometimes they are enclosed even in a horrible pit, as David speaks, of fear
and terror of conscience for their sins. They are by the way companions to
Dragons and Ostriches, they walk among rebels, thorns and Scorpions, that
rent and tear, and sting them with many oppressions and cruel slanders.
Neither is the danger in the way all; they have persequuters which are swifter
then the Eagles of the heaven, who pursue and hunt them upon the mountains
even like Partridges, and lurk for them in the wilderness, as those that lie
in wait for blood. Nay, yet besides all these vexations from the world, the
immediate malice of hell raises many tempests of temptation against them, and
sometimes even all the waves and floods of God himself go over their heads.
This the way, the race, and the evening of Gods children in this world; but joy
comes in the morning, their end is peace, their reward is a bright morning
star, their haven is endless happiness and life eternal.

The reasons of this contrary state and condition of the wicked and godly in
this life may be these. First for the flourishing of the wicked.

some more honorable servitude and glorious misery. If he meet with a base
and earthly minded fellow, that preferres a little transitory trash before the
pretiousnesse of his own soul, and the lasting treasures of immortality; why
he can easily provide a golden wedge, and cast in his way to enrich him; he can
compass for him, though by bloody means and merciless enclosure, a Naboths
vineyard to enlarge his possessions. For all is one to him so he keep him his
own, whether by want and poverty he drive a man to impatiencie, murmuring,
and independencie upon the providence of God, or by heaping upon him abundance
of wealth, and filling him a full cup of temporal happiness, he cast him into
a deep sleep of carnal security, and a senselessness in all matters of
sanctification and salvation.

But whereas Satan has found by much experience, that such as are fenced with
riches and honors, do many times falsely assume unto themselves a conceit of
greatness and goodness of protection, and immunitie from dangers, so that
they are more fearelesse of the judgments of God, because they are not plagued
like other men, more careless of storing themselves with spiritual comfort
against the day of visitation, because they are in the mean time plentifully
encompassed with worldly contentments, more regardles and neglectiue of the
ministry of the word, because they would not willingly be tormented before
their time; therefore, I say, he follows with more hope and better success
this temptation by prosperity. And the rather, because crosses, afflictions
and heavy accidents, are many times lively instructions and compulsions to
bring a man to the knowledge of God and himself; to abandon all confidence in
earthly things, and to embrace the most comfortable and heavenly state of
true Christians. Wherefore if any man be content to stand for Satan's kingdom,
either by open and professed impiety, or by close conueiances and secret
practices and conniuencie; he will be sure to prepare, incline and dispose all
occasions, means and circumstances for his advancement into reputation with
the world. And how potent he is in these cases, y^u may conceive, since he
swaies the corruptions of the time, since he rules and reigns in the hearts and
affections of the most men; and is ever the arch-plotter in all Simoniacall,
indirect, corrupt and unconscionable consultations and compacts.



For what, I pray you, were not the Papists now able to do, who have enlarged
their consciences like hell, nay; they have stretched them beyond the whole
compass of all hellish darkness, even into a vault of their own; what, I
say were not they able to do, except they were countermanded by that
irrefragable, eternal, and particular decree of God, that Babylon must now
down as irrecouerably, as the great millstone in the Revelation cast with
violence into the sea? Why certainly they were able by their policies and
principles, not only to reestablish their former Antichristian tyranny, but to
cast the whole Christian world, nay this and the other world, and the whole
frame of nature into combustion, darkness and confusion. And no marvel: for
these fellows consciences can without ^emorse digest even the sacred blood of
Kings, and swallow down with delight the ruins and desolations of whole
kingdoms. Their bloody superstition has so quite and fearfully extinguished
all sense of common honesty, and put out the light of natural equity, and the
common notions of right and wrong; that they broch with bold faces the cursed
poison of equivocation, the devils old imposture in Oracles, a very straight
passage to damned Atheism, and the dissolution of all human society: that to
them the breach of the laws of God, of nature and nations, is meritorious and
worthy canonization, if it serve any way to the advancement of their execrable
idolatry; to the repairing of their decaying Babylon, and to rear their
Italian Idol, the Priest of Rome yet a little higher above all that is called
God.

In this respect then, that the wicked dare enlarge their consciences to the
utmost bounds of any pleasure, gain or preferment, they have great advantage
for the engrossing of all worldly happiness, and may easily purchase a
Monopoly of earthly prosperity. Out of this widenes of conscience proceed much
mincing and excusing, many interpretations, favorable constructions, and
distinctions of sins: As for example, that Usury is of two sorts, biting,
and toothlesse; when all kind of Usury is pestilent, and most certainly
damned in the book of God. That Symonie is either buying the gifts of the holy
Ghost, or buying Church-liuings; as though this latter were not so soul and
enormous when it is able in short time to bring a curse and confusion upon the
most glorious and best settled Church in the world. That of lies, some are
pernicious, some are officious, and for a greater good; whenas even the
learneder sohoolemen, who are far enough from precisenes, hold every kind of
lie to be a sin indispensable; whenas A^stin^ that worthy father and great
disputer, admits not a lie for the salvation of a man's soul, which is far
more worth then the whole world: Nay when a man is not to tell a lie for the
glory of God, as it appears, Job 13. then which there can be no greater good.
Of Oaths, that some are greater and more bloody; some are lesser, ordinary and
more tolerable; as though custom and commonnesse made these latter excusable
and unpunishable, when as the plague of God hangs continually over the head of
what swearer soever, ready every hour to seize upon him, and sink him down
into the bottom of hell. The flying book of Gods curse and vengeance shall
enter into the house of the swearer, and shall not only cut him off, but shall
consume the very timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Neither does this
plague rest within private walls, but it wastes the glory and prosperity of
whole kingdoms. Because of Oaths, Chap. 23.10.
says Jeremy, the land mou^neth* and the pleasant places of the wilderness are
dried up: nay if it were possible that the breath of the swearer should reach
unto the heavens, it would even stain the glory of the stars, and rot those
fair and immortal bodies, it is infected with such a canker and pestilencie;
and so immediat^ly strikes at the face of Almighty God. Many other such leaud
distinctions of sins there are, framed and followed by the sensual, greedy
and ambitious affections of profane men that they may more pleasingly to
themselves, and more plausiblie to the world, compass their ends and desires.
No marvel then though they have the wicked world at will.

Isaak the everlasting promises of love, mercy and blessedness: yet he was
content to make Ismael a great man upon earth. Concerning Ismael, says he to
Abraham, I have heard thee: lo I have blessed him, and will make him
fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly. Twelve Princes shall he beget,
and I will make a great nation of him.

his bountifulness, and patience and long sufferance, leading them to
repentance; they have heapt up as a treasure unto themselves against the day of
wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.

You have heard the reasons of the happiness of the wicked in this life: but
it is not so with Gods children. For they must mourn in this vale of tears
while the world rejoices. And as the wicked are filled and fatted with worldly
happiness and plenty against the day of wrath: so Gods children must be
prepared and fitted with afflictions, for the glory which shall be revealed.
They are shortly to become inhabitants of that great and glorious city, whose
foundations are precious stones, whose gates are Margarites, whose streets are
pure gold, as the shining glass; they must be companions of the blessed
Angels, and stand in the presence of that great and sacred Majesty; and
therefore in this life they must be cast into the Lords furnace, that in the
fire of affliction they may be more and more purified from earthlines and
corruption; and so with holiness and humility prepared for that high
perfection of heavenly beauty, glory and bliss. Let every godly man then with
comfort and benefit undergo those crosses which the Lord lays upon him: for
they are unto him as looking glasses, wherein God sees his faith and dependence
upon his providence; the world his pati^nce and constancy; himself the spots
of his soul, his decays of grace, the breaches of his conscience, his neglect
of the duties of his calling, his coldness in religigious services, his fall
from his first love: So that by them, God is pleased and glorified, others
edified and instructed, himself humbled, recovered by repentance, and more
sanctified.

I have stayed long upon the third reason of the formal hypocrites false
persuasion of being in state of grace. The reason is; because civil honesty,
performance of outward duties of religion, and worldly prosperity meeting
together in an unregenerate man, many times breed a very strong conceit of his
being the child of God, and an obstinate impatiencie of harkening and stepping
forward to grace, or any further perfection. I come now to the fourth reason,
whereby the formal hypocrite does falsely persuade himself to be in the state
of true happiness and salvation, and that is:

Adam immediately after his fall shifteth off his sin upon his wife; nay, he is
so blind in spiritual judgment of divine purity, that rather then he will
cry guilty, he will fasten the fault by consequent upon God himself. The
woman, says he, which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree,
and I did eat. So gladly would sensual men persuade themselves, that either
their sins deserve not so strict account and great judgments; or that God
does exercise too much rigor in inflicting them. For out of their worldly
wisdom they measure and esteem the unspotted and infinite Ocean of the
justice of God, by the finite, muddie and imperfect stream of humane justice.
Laws and constitutions of states and kingdoms are bridles to curb and
moderate our corruption, that we become sociable and peaceable; but they cut
off only from the Body politic by final execution, those that are of
notorious and desperate condition, such as are Thieves, Murderers, Traitors
and the like. A very proportionable conceit, I am persuaded, of divine justice
and comminations in the law of God, lurkes in the hearts of many; they think
that those sins that arise ineuitably out of our corrupt nature, or that are
committed by strong temptation, or that are less pernicious, are, I know not
how, naturally pardonable; and that if they be of the ciuiller sort, if they
be outwardly conformable in their lives, and harbor good meanings and
intentions in matters of religion, though they never trouble themselves with
more strictness, and a course of sanctification, yet they think that God will
be merciful in the end, and that it will go well enough with them; and that
only fellows of infamous note, such as are swearers, liers, usurers,
adulterers and the like, shall be excluded finally out of heaven. But I would
have these men know, that though the sea of Gods mercy be bottomless, though
the promises of grace be many and precious, yet not one drop of all that great
sea, not one jot of all those gracious promises, belongs to any, save only
unto him that groans and sighs under the heavy weight and burden of his
sins, that is of a broken and contrite heart, that trembles at his word, that
vndissembledly sorrows and repents for all his sins, forsakes them, and
resignes up himself in holy obedience to all his commandments. I would have
them know, that he is as infinitely just, as he is infinitely merciful, and
will as certainly power all the plagues and curses in his book upon the
impenitent sinner, as he will perform all his promises of grace to the
faithful Christian.

The fifth reason whereby the formal hypocrite does falsely and therefore
retires and reposeth himself upon his formal Christianity, as the best state
he sees any possibility of attaining unto. But if he will save his soul, he
must acknowledge and feel by his own experience the truth of that saying of
Isai. 59.15, He that refraineth from evil, makes himself a pray. For what
child of God is there truly converted, who at the very first step out of the
world, and the vanities thereof, met not with many crosses and discouragements?
He knows, and may remember full well whosoever he be, how his own flesh
fretted when it felt it self snaffled and guided by the Law of the spirit; how
by making conscience of sin he laid himself more open to the advantages,
wrongs and insultations of his enemies; how the companions of his former
lewdness and iniquity railed and raged against him, as against an Apostata
from goodfellowship and high resolution. And Satan, that he may give edge and
vigor to all these vexations, he busily bestirres himself, and casts about
to hinder our conversion. While a prisoner lies in a dungeon fast in fetters,
the Iaylor is quiet and secure; but if he once knock off his bolts, break
the prison and escape, there is presently a tumultuous clamor in the house,
the Country is raised, and he is followed with Hue and Cry: Even so while we
lie quietly in the captivity of sin, under the chains of eternal death, he
neither disquiets himself nor us: But if by the mercies of God we be once
enlarged, and set foot into the liberty and light of grace; why then all the
powers of hell are presently in arms and uproar, and with much malice and
fury the instruments of darkness are set on foot to regaine us into his
kingdom. This point appears in the fifth of the Canticles: Our blessed
Savior is there said to stand at the door and knock, being full of the
precious dew and drops of divine grace, and waiting patiently in the cold and
darkness of the night; but yet we see, what ado and stir there is with the
Christian soul, before she can get up out of the bed of pleasures and vanity;
the sweetness of sin and sensuality had so deeply possessed and bewitched
her, that by her excuses and delays she hazards so great salvation and
happiness, tendered unto her by her spo^se. Yea, and at length after she is
resolved to renounce her pleasures, and in some good measure has conquered her
inward corruptions, so that she opens the door and follows Christ; besides
other troubles and encumbrances she finds abroad, the very watchmen that should
have told her the way, and directed her after her spouse, even they set upon
her, and smite her, and wound her, and take away her veil. Every man then that
will come under the banner of Christ, and have part in the conquest, must
together with the new man put on a Christian courage, both to tame and repress
the rebellions of his own flesh, and to withstand and repel assaults and
persecutions from abroad.

The sixth reason, whereby the formal hypocrite does falsely

Mistake me not in this last point, beloved in Christ Jesus. For first, I do
not go about to confine the boundles and unlimited mercies of God, nor
absolutely to exclude repentance from the deaths bed. I know that precious
truth, registered in Ezechiel: But let no man bear himself presumptuously upon
this comfortable promise, but consider well the condition: for it is thus in
the Text: But if the wicked will return from all his sins, that he has
done, and keep^ all my statutes, and do th^^ which is law full and right, he
shall surely live, and shall not die. Ezech 18.21.
At what time soever a sinner, etc. like a Pearl in a ring, and a Star in
his Orb, shines, amongst many other gracious promises in the book of God,
with special comfort, unspeakable and glorious, upon the darkened and drouping
soul of every true penitent, at what time soever. But yet this I say in this
point; That any man that knows, and is acquainted rightly and truly with the
narrowness of the way to heaven, the nature of Gods justice, the cunning
sleights of Satan, the difficulty of true repentance, how fearfully man's
heart is hardened by custom and continuance in sin; he would not defer his
repentance to his old age, or deaths-bed for ten thousand worlds. I add this:
That

As a sudden death in respect of time, or a death, wherein appears much
impatiencie, fierceness and uncomfortable behavior, by reason of the quality
of the disease, or some extraordinary temptation for the time, or that God
will be so glorified, by justly hardening the wicked, may be the way to
everlasting happiness: so a lingering, patient, and lamblike death, may be a
passage to endless woe and misery. For that great judgment is to pass upon
our souls, not according to the strange effects and symptoms of our sickness,
not according to the short moment and violent passions of our death, but
according to the actions of our health, the former affections of our hearts,
and the general course of our life.

Secondly, I would by no means be too busy, or uncharitable in my judgment
upon those, which have already stood, or fal^e to their own master. But as I
esteem that cruelty and malice most savage and vile that is discharged upon
the body, or good name of the dead; so I would have also a charitable conceit
follow the soul of the departed, so far as spiritual, wisdom a good
conscience, divine truth, the glory of God, the safety of the souls of the
living, will give leave: But no further.

Thirdly, neither do I mislike or condemn Funeral Sermons. I could rather
wish; that as the death of his Saints is precious in the sight of God, so that
it might be glorious in the eyes of men. I could rather desire, that the just
praises, and true sincerity of the child of God were published even by some
Seraphicall tongue; that both the glory of his graces might pass along and
shine bright to all posterity; and that such a fire of zeal for imitation,
might be enkindled in the hearts of all the hearers, (especially the present
occasion making their minds more capable of persuasion;) that they passing
through the same course of holiness, might at length be made partakers of the
same happiness with the Saints of God.

Only in these cases I would have that spiritual discretion, truth, and
conscience used, that neither the godly be justly grieved and offended, the
wicked heartned and hardened in their courses, and false conceit of happiness;
nor the faithfulness and sincerity of the ministry disgraced and scandalized.

Thus far I have laid open unto you the state of formal hypocrisy: in which
may concur immunity from notorious sins, all natural and moral
perfections, admirable variety of learning, policy, and all other acquired
ornaments of the mind: an outward performance of all duties of religion, some
measure of inward illumination, a resemblance and shadow of the whole body of
true regeneration, and a persuasion (as you have now last heard) of being in
state of grace. Even thus far a man may go in the profession of Christian
religion, and yet be a stranger from the power of faith, and from the life of
godliness. I now come by reasons and arguments to disable it in those points
which have not been touched, for challenging any interest in the true
happiness of a man. And first to prove, that a performance of outward duties
of religion, without the power of grace upon the soul, and an universal
sanctification in all the faculties thereof, cannot produce any sound comfort
in the heart, or acceptance with God.

My first reason is that Principle generally received with all school Divines;
and very sound and Orthodox in true Divinity. The iniquity, defect, or
exorbitancie of any particular, of one circumstance, makes an action evil:
but an absolute integrity of all concurrents is required to make a good work
acceptable to God, comfortable and profitable to a Christian: The end must be
good, the glory of God; the action it self in it own nature must be just and
warrantable; the circumstances honest and seasonable; the means direct and
lawful; the fountain, the heart, sincere and sanctified. If this last be
wanting especially, though otherwise it be never so gloriously conucied, never
so wisely managed, of never so goodly a show to the eyes of the world, yet it
is not only mard and defaced, and no action of grace, but odious and abominable
in the sight of God. The Moralists by the light of nature saw a truth
proportionable to this, even in the actions of virtue: The truth and worth
whereof they did censure and esteem, not by the bare outward action, but by the
inward, free and independent uprightness of the mind: And therefore to an
action truly virtuous they required a resolved knowledge, an irrespectiue and
advised freedom of spirit, a constant and easy habit of the mind, an entire
love to the fairness of virtue. So that whatsoever honest actions sprung from
passion, humor, scare, respect, ambition or the like, they accounted virtuous
and good, only by accident and occasion, not inwardly and essentially:
whereupon they hold, that many great and honorable atchieuements of ancient
Worthies amongst the Heathens, howsoever they were admirable in the eyes of
men, and beneficial to the public State (for sometimes out of some sudden
elevation of spirit, or pang of vainglory, they were even prodigal of their
lives and blood, for the good and deliverance of their country:) yet to the
authors and actors themselves they were not the true works of virtue, but of
ambition, and a desire of immortal fame. It is even so in the higher actions
of grace and religion: Besides the outward performance, God requires sincerity
of heart and truth in the inward parts, to make them gracious and acceptable.
And howsoever otherwise they may purchase them a name amongst men, prosperity
in the world, some less torment in hell, and procure good unto others, yet
except they proceed from a faith unfeigned, and a pure conscience, to the
Christians themselves, in respect of all heavenly happiness, they are fruitles
and unprofitable.

My second proof is out of the 5. of Matthew. Except your The outward
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was famous in those times, and much
admired: So that if God did not principally respect the heart; if that were not
true in the 16. of Luke; That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
abomination in the sight of God; they might not only have carried away the
garland for piety on earth; but have justly seemed to have been the only
heirs to a crown of immortality in the heavens. For besides their forbearance
and protestation against grosser sins, Murder, Theft, Adultery, Idolatry
and the like, they were frequent and solemn in prayers, fastings, almsdeeds,
and that with far greater strictness and devotion, then the religious
actions of formal hypocrisy are performed in these times of the Gospel.
Besides, I doubt not but many of them were persuaded, that their way was the
way of life, and that they were in the state of true happiness: And yet for
all this, except we exceed their righteousness, the speech is peremptory,
we shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. For we see in the 23. of Mat.
what a chain of curses, out of the mouth of our blessed Savior, did justly
draw them into the bottom of hell.

Thirdly, this truth is manifest out of the Doctrine of the Esai. 1, Mich. 6.
Hag. 2. Psalm. 50. and many other places. Whence arises this conclusion: That
the principal and holiest exercises, the most solemn and sacred actions of
religion, without sincerity and sanctification of heart, are but as the
cutting off a Dogs neck, and the offering of swines blood. Their sacrifices,
oblations, and incense* Their n^w Moon^s, their Sabbaths and solemn feasts
were things commanded by Gods own^ mouth; ye^ where they were performed with
impure and prop^ane hearts, he tel^ them, that his soul hated them, that they
were a burden unto him, and that he was weary of them. For if the Lords
contentment had finally rested in the work wrought, and not chiefly respected
the inward affection of the worker, had he required only the ceremonial
action of sacrificing, and not the spiritual conformity of the heart to his
will; why he had not need to desire sacrifices of them, nor expected supply
from their hands; as appears in that sacred anti royal contestation of God
with his people, about the question of his worship, Psalm. 50. I will not
reprove thee for thy sacrifices, (s^ith God) or thy burnt offerings, that have
not been continually before me. I will take no Bullock out of thine house, or
Goats out of thy folds. For all the beasts of the forest are mine, and the
beasts on a thousand ^ils. I know all the sowl^s on the Mountai^es, and the
w^ld b^asts of the fi^ld are mine. If I be hungry* I will not tell the^: for
the world is mine, and all that therein i^. Will I ^ate the flesh of B^ls? or
drink the blood of Goat^s? Nay, if we consider God in his absolute
sovereignty, and essential glory, even that is true of the most sanctified
works of Gods child, which is in Job. 35.7. If thou b^^ righteous, wh^t (...)?
or what receiue^h he^ at thine hand? and that of David, Psalm. 16.2. My we^doing
extends not unto the. For what can that little spark of holiness in us,
which does first too proceed from him, and is only darkened in ou^
corruptions; add unto that infinite G^ory, and (...), and (...), that no man
can attain^ unto; with which he has incomprehensiblie li^n ^ncompassed from
al^terni^y? Only i^ple^seth him of his infinite goodness, and out of a gracious
desire of our salvation, to accept our sincerity though mix^ with
imperfections, and to crown his own gra^^^ in us* (...) then shall appear the
bare outwardnes of hollowhearted Christians? If the heart be wanting, what
magnificence or glory of outward services shall be able to dazzle his sight,
whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, and sees clea^ely
our inmost thoughts? Wherewith shall we come b^fo^^ the (...) or what shall we
offer unto him? Will the Lord be pleased with ten thousands of rams, or with
ten thousand rivers of Oil^? Shall we give our first borne for our
transgression, even the fruit of our body, for the ^inne of our soul? No;
though we^ gave all that we had to the poor, and our own bodie^ to be
burnt: nay, if it were possible, that by our means we could vindicate the
souls of all men now living from the jaws of eternal death; yet all would
profit us nothing, except our hearts be first purged by faith, pure from an
evil conscience, and possessed of a sound and constant love to God, his word,
his honor, his truth, and servants.

Let this then be the conclusion to this point: Though a man were a moral
Saint, an Angel amongst the Phrisees, absolute in all other perfections, yet
without the inward power of grace to give them life, he is but a spectacle of
commis^ration to Angels, and to me^; even as that body is, which adorned with
sundry other exquisite beauties, wants eyesight, the chiefest grace that
nature has in that kind to bestow. Or as a cunning Organist, skilful in the
outward touch of his instrument, yet without wind inspired, cannot possibly
strike the care, or please the heart with any m^lodious noise: so though his
actions be flourished over with a fair tincture of outward religiousnesse, and
he exact in moral honesty, yet without the breath and life of grace infused,
there can be no true spiritual harmony in his affections, wo^ds or
conversation, that either will beget sound joy and spiritual delight in the
soul, or be pleasing in the ^ares of almighty God.

You see then beloved in Christ Jesus, that the performances of outward duties
of religion, even the best, s^^h as are Prayers* hearing the word of God,
rec^iuing the Sacraments, almsdeeds and the like, though they be good in
themselves, commanded of God, necessary to be done of every Christian; yet if
they be divided from inward sanctification and sincerity of heart, are so
far^e from putting us into possession of true happiness, that they are odious
and abominable in the sight of God.

I told you in the beginning, if you remember, that besides outward
righteousness, the formal hypocrite may believe for a time, and therefore by
the inward, though more general and infe^iour working of the Spirit, may have
a temporary faith begot in him: and this faith may bring forth some fruits,
and some kinds of inward graces. But that all this comes short of salvation,
appears in the parable: For there the hearer compared to the stony ground,
which I call the formal hypocrite, is one of the reprobate hearers, upon whom
the word is not the power of God to salvation. As for those five degrees added
out of the sixth to the Hebrews, of which I told you the formal hypocrite may
be partaker; it is manifest out of the same Chapter, that they come short of
the state of grace. For a man but so furnished, may not only fall b^cke to a
worse, and more ordinary state of a r^probate, but even to the depth of all
impiety and apostasy. He may not only have his measure of inward
illumination, all his lighter joy and comfort in Gods word quite extinguished;
but become a wilful and malicious scorner of true godliness. He may not only
grieve, and quench the spirit; but he may tread under foot the Son of God,
count the blood of the Testament, as an unholy thing, and despite the very
Spirit of grace, so that it may be impossible, that he should be renewed
again by repentance.

In the last place I told you, that besides all these, the formal hypo^rite
might entertain a persuasion of his being in the state of true happiness; and
so with contentment and security walk in the path that leads to eternal
death: but how weak and false the reasons and motives to this persuasion were,
I have before largely delivered. It remains therefore, that I should now lay
down certain marks and properties of difference, betwixt the state of
formal hypocrisy and saving grace: but I must refer a large prosecution and
distinct treatise of them to some other place and time. Yet at this time, by
the grace of God, I shall deliver so much, that any man that will deal
faithfully with his own conscience, and follow me with attention to the end,
may in some good measure be informed, whether he lie yet in the shadow of
death, or live in the light of grace. Some difference then, first, may arise,
out of the distinction of the degrees and workings of faith. Which that you may
better conceive, you must remember three sorts of faith: Historical,
Temporary, Saving or Justifying faith.

Historical faith, is not only a knowledge of the word of God, but also an
assent of the heart to the truth of it. And this is of two sorts: either
Infused, which is wrought in us by the illightning spirit of God, and staying
it self upon his authority: Or Acquired, which is produced by the light of
reason, discourse, and created testimony.

The latter is to be found in the devils; for they believe and tremble. And in
the Papists; for their faith is no better, according to their grounds and
principles. My reason is this briefly; for I will deliver my self of this
point in a word. The Jesuits by their iugling have cast themselves into a
circle about the faith of the truth, and divinity of Scriptures; and that is
this: Ask any Papist in this land; how he believes Scripture to be the word of
God, and divinely inspired; he will answer, Because the Church delivers it
so to be. And why believes he the testimony of the Church? Because it it is
infallibly guided by the spirit. And how does that appear? Because it is so
contained in Scripture, as in John 16. The Spirit will lead you into all
truth. And how shall we know this scripture of John, to be the word of God
and divinely inspired? Because the Church delivers it so to be; and so they
must needs run round in this circulation.

Now I would propose to the Papists, the choice of these three; one of which
they must of necessity accept: First, whether they will run round in this
circle, and wax giddy, and fall, and sink into that pit, where Popery was
first hatched; or they will break the circle at the authority of the Scriptures,
and so by consequent, they must fall to our side, and the truth; or they will
break it at the testimony of the Church, and so all their faith, as I told
you, must needs be only acquired, because it depends on a finite and created
testimony, and consequently comes far short of salvation. I doubt not, but
the Papists will acknowledge and approve that difference betwixt infused and
acquired faith consented upon by the Schoolmen: That infused faith, relieth
immediately upon an increated authority; but acquired, upon a finite and
created testimony. I know the Jesuits, a kind of men inspired with a
transcendencie of Antichristian imposture, labor busily to pass plausibly
and handsomely out of this circle: but if their shifts be thoroughly sisted, and
they followed with force of argument; it is certain, they will either be
driven into the circle again, or enforced to start out, at the one of those
breaches I told you of. Beca^us, one of them, after he had long tired himself
in this circle, and at last by the help of Gregorius de Val. and former
Jesuits got out, but with shameful absurdity and inconvenience; in a poor
revenge to relieve himself, he threatens us with another circle; and so writes
a Treatise de Circulo Caluinistico; but very weakly and falsely, as might be
demonstrated even out of the sounder Schoolmen, in their question of the last
resolution of faith. But I intended no discourse of controversy, but of
sanctification; and therefore I proceed, and take the formal hypocrite along
further toward the state of grace. For besides knowing, and assenting to the
truth of Gods word by an historical faith, he may by the virtue of a
temporary faith, add three degrees more. That is: He may moreover profess it
in outward services of religion: He may inwardly rejoice in it: He may bring
forth some kind of fruit. But these things are only found in him, so long as
they do not mainely cr^sse, but are compatible with his worldly peace, wealth,
liberty, and other delightful contentments. Here therefore I must leave him;
and acquaint you with those workings and degrees of saving faith; which
qualified, as I shall propose them, are peculiar to Gods child; and so
distinguish and divide the regenerate man, from the state of formal
hypocrisy. They are these*

A feeling and special approbation of the word of life and promises of
salvation: a most fervent expetition and thirsting for the enioyment of them:
an effectual apprehension; a particular application; a full persuasion; a
delight and joy thence rising, sound, and unconquerable.

That you may understand these, you must conceive, that the soul of Gods
child, coming fresh out of the pangs and terrors of his new birth (a mystery
to the formal hypocrite) humbled under the mighty hand of God, by a sight and
sense of his sins, looks upon the whole body of divine truth, as upon a
precious jewel, wherein Christ and his gracious promises shine unto him
especially, as a stone of inestimable worth and valuation; whereupon with a
peculiar dearenes he sets such a liking, that with it he holds himself an
heir of heaven; without it a child of endless perdition. Hence follows an
expetition and desire of it, enforced with groans unutterable, and a gasping
for it, as the dry and thirsty ground for drops of rain. Thirdly, he
apprehends it with a fast and everlasting hold. Fourthly, he applies it
closely and particularly to his own soul. Fifthly, he is truly and fully
persuaded by Gods good spirit, out of a consideration of his universal change,
that it is his own for ever. Last^y* he lies down in peace that passes all
understanding: He is filled with joy, that no man can take from him: He
delights in the grace apprehended, as in a treasure far more dear unto him
then the glory of infinite worlds, or life it self. From the power and
workings of this inward grace, spring outward actions; both in his general
calling of Christianity, and his particular vocation, which by the mercies of
God are faithful, constant, uniform, impartial, resolute, universal,
comfortable. Whereas those which are produced by the more weak and inferior
degrees of temporary faith, incident to the formal hypocrite, are weak,
wavering, many times interrupted, variable; guided much by occasions; and the
time, forced by hope or fear; swayed by secret respects to private ends, and
worldly contentments.

But these more inward marks of difference, howsoever by a sweet and gracious
experience they be felt, and acknowledged of the child of God; yet generally,
and to the unregenerate, they are hidden mysteries, and indiscernable to the
brightest eye of the natural man. Therefore I will come to those marks of
difference betwixt the state of formal hypocrisy, and saving grace, which are
more outward, familiar, and more generally, and casilie discernable. Of which
one may be this:



Let those then examine themselves at this mark; who, howsoever shame keep
them from unclean practices, and grosser acts of filthiness; yet inwardly boil
in speculatiue wantonness and adulteries of the heart. Those, who howsoever
their indirect means speed not for mounting themselves to high estate, yet
spend their best thoughts all their life long, in proiecting and contriuing, as
though they were borne to advance themselves, and not to honor God in their
^allings. Those, who though they do not enclose, oppress and grind the faces
of the poor; yet have their hearts exercised in covetousness. Those, who though
they have forsaken some sins, yet maintain in themselves one known sweet sin.
Those, who though laws, and fear of danger restrain from railing with open
mouths against our State, yet harbor secret repinings, murmurings,
unthankfulness, and discontentments. Even a contemptuous thought of a king, or
lawful authority, is a sin of high nature: and me thinks, for the
miraculousnesse of the discovery; is paralleld in Ecclesiastes, to the
bloodinesse of actual murder. That which has wings (says the Preacher)
shall declare the matter. Chap. 10.20.


Lastly, let those examine themselves at this mark, who offer themselves to
those sinful occasions, breeders of many strange and fearful mischiefs, I
mean profane and obscene Plays. Pardon me beloved, I cannot pass by those
abominable spectacles, without particular indignation. For I did ever esteem
them, since I had any understanding in the ways of God, the Grand empoysoners
of grace, ingenuousnes, and all manly resolution: Greater plagues and
infections to your souls, then the contagious pestilence to your bodies: The
inexpiable stain and dishonor to this famous City: The noisome worms that
canker and blast the generous and noble buds of this land; and do by a sly
and bewitching insinuation so empoyson all seeds of virtue, and so weaken and
emasculate all the operations of the soul, with a profane, if not unnatural
dissolutenes; that whereas they are planted in these worthy houses of Law, to
be fitted and enabled for great and honorable actions, for the public good,
and the continuance of the glory and happiness of this kingdom, they
licentiously dissolve into wicked vanities and pleasures, and all hope of their
ever doing good, either unto God, the Church, their Country or own souls,
melts as the winter ice, and flows away as unprofitable waters. These
infamous spectacles are condemned by all kind of sound learning, both divine
and humane. Distinctions devised for their upholding and defense, may give some
shallow and weak contentment to partial and sensual affections, possessed with
prejudice: but how shall they be able to satisfy and secure a conscience
sensible of all appearance of evil? How can they preserve the inclinablenesse
of our corrupt nature from infection, at those Schools of leaudnes and S^nkes
of all sins, as (to omit Divines Councels, Fathers, Moralists, because the
point is not directly incident) even a Theatra desinire possumus, surpitudinis,
vi^iorumque omnium sentinam* ac scholam. ^odin. ^e repub. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Politician calls them. Alas, are not our wretched corruptions raging and
fiery enough, being left to themselves dispersed at their natural liberty;
but they must be united at these accursed Theaters, as in a hollow glass to
set on flame the whole body of our natural vitiousnesse at once, and to enrage
it further with lust, fierceness, and effeminatenes, beyond the compass of
nature? Does any man think it possible that the power of saving grace, or the
pure spirit of God can reside in his heart, that willingly and with full consent
seeds his inward concupiscence, with such variety of sinfulll vanities and
leaud occasions, which the Lord himself has pronounced to be an abomination
unto him? D^ut. 22.5.
How can any man that ever felt in his heart, either true love or fear of so
dreadful a Majesty, as the Lord of heaven and earth, endure to be present,
especially with delight and contentment, at Oaths, Blasphemies, Obscenities,
and the abusing sometimes of the most precious things in the book of God,
whereat we should tremble, to most base and scurrill jests? Certainly every
child of God is of a right noble and heroical spirit; and therefore is most
impatient in hearing any wrong, indignity or dishonor offered to the word,
name, or glory of his Almighty Father.



Let every man then examine himself at this mark, and with a single eye and
upright heart take a view of his affections; whether his joy be inward and
spiritual, that is, in the assurance of Gods favor, in his word, in his
children, in prayer, and a continual practice of godliness; or outward and
ca^uall, that is, in the attainement of greatness and wo^dly pleasures, in the
increase of his corn and wine, and oil. Whether he love the peace of
conscience far more de^rely then the favor of men, or his own life: Whether
he be more zealous for the honor and praise of God, then his own: Whether
he be more afraid of secret sins, then open shame; of offending God, then
outward afflictions: Whether he be more angry in the cause of religion, and
concerning Gods glory, or for his own private wrongs. And so through out the
rest of his affections.

Let the fierce and desperate gallants consider this point; which upon every
light occasion, and terms of disgrace, are ready, out of a graceles and
ungrounded opinion of declining cowardice, to sheath their swords in the body
of their brother. And let them assure themselves, that the meek and merciful
spirit of God, will never consist with such bloody and untamed affections; his
holy motions will not come into their secret, neither will his saving grace be
joined with their assembly. For in their wrath they will kill a man, and in
their self-will they will destroy the image of God. Cursed be their wrath,
for it is fierce; and their rage, for it is cruel.

Oh that they would but mark and foresee, into what an inevitable, and
endless maze of certain misery and vengeance they enter, when they enter into
the field, upon either offer, or acceptance of challenge. If they be slain,
they are accessaries to their own untimely murder: They violently and
wilfully pull themselves from the land of the living, to the abhorred regions
of death: They cruelly, and irrecouerably rent their own poor souls from
time of grace and repentance: They extinguish all hope of posterity; and
perhaps their house and family determines in that bloody act. But that which
is the accomplishment of all miseries and terror, they justly fall into the
hands of the living God, who will certainly judge them after the manner of
them that shead their own blood; and will give them the blood of wrath, and of
jealousy. And whereas they looked to leave a name behind them, it shall rot
away with as vile detestation, as their carcases in the grave: Prou. 10.7.
The memorial of the just, faith Solomon, shall be blessed: but the name of
the wicked shall rot. If it do live, it shall live to their shame and infamy.
For I dare say this boldly; There was never any man rightly informed, either in
the principles of nature, or in the gracious way to heaven, in the sober
passages of moraliti^, or in the justice of state and policy, or acquainted
with the fairness of true honor, that ever gave any allowance, or ever will
to the reputation of manhood, falsely so called, purchased in private quarrel
in the field. This is then all they get: for the loss of soul and body, of
heaven and earth, of name and posterity, they only gain the damned applause
of devils, swaggerers and wicked men.

But if it fall out otherwise, that they be not killed, but kill; mark what
befalls them they depart the field drunken with blood, as with new wine, and
therefore they shall be sure at length to be filled with drunkenness, and with
sorrow, even with the cup of destruction and trembling; they shall drink of it
deep and large, and wring it out to the very dregs. For presently after the
murder committed, they have Caines fearful mark stamped upon them: The furies
of conscience; and cries of blood, shall for ever persecute them with restless
horror: As they clothed themselves with rage like a raiment, so shall it now
come into their bowels like water, and sink like oil into their bones. In the
mean time they shall live in the hell of conscience upon earth, and expect
every hour to be tumbled into the h^ll of wicked devils for evermore in the
world to come.

Let me then in the name and fear of God advise them; if they would win an
opinion of true valor indeed, if they look for any portion in the mercies of
God, or honor amongst his Saints, to settle and compose such wild affection^
by the word of truth; to turn the greatness of their courage and gallantnesse
of Spirit, to the subduing and conquering of their own corruptions, and to the
wrestling against principalities and powers, against the worldly governors,
the princes of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses,
which are in the high places. This fight is Christian, and courageous indeed,
the victory is glorious, the reward is immortality.

A third note of difference may be this: Every child of

Beloved in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, let us every one of us, I
beseech you, try himself faithfully by this note of difference: And the rather
because our gracious God has most plentifully and incomparably vouchsafed us
in this land all means to bring us unto heaven. He has vis^ted us with his
word, his judgments and mercies, to the astonishment of the whole world. Now
let us consider, whether as they have bred admiration in men and Angels, so
they have brought salvation to our own souls.

Go, Chap. 35.
says God unto Jeremy, Go and tell the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: I have sent you all my servants the Prophets, rising up early, and
sending them; but you would not incline your care, you would not obey me;
therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring
upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the evil that I have
pronounced against them. I will do unto this house, whereupon my name is
called, wherein also ye trust, as I have done unto Shilo. I will cast them out
of my sight: And will make ^his City a curse unto all the nations of the earth.
And the Lord was so unremovable and setledly resolved upon this point (since
he had so long preached unto them by his Prophets, as he has done unto this
land, and it would do no good) that he bids the Prophet meddle no more, for he
would never hear him again: Therefore (says he) thou shall not pray for this
people, neither lift up cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me, for I
will not hear thee.

The judgments upon this land have been many and us for amendment, and we are
not bettered, but rather worse and worse; we may assure ourselves we yet want a
gracious mark, and effect of the power of true godliness; and mark what will
be the end both of us and our whole land; it can be no other then that of his
own people. And thus he dealt with them by his judgments, even as a Physician
with his patient. A Physician while there is any hope of recovery in his
patient; he uses the benefit of all the rules of art, all variety of means,
prescribing diet, letting blood, ministering pills and potions; but when he once
perceiues the natural heat to b^ so decayed, and strength of nature spent,
that his physic will work no more good upon him, but rather hasten his ruin
then his recovery, he then leaves him to the pangs of death and dissolution
of soul and body. Even so deals God with his people, while there is any hope
of repentance, he visits them by all kind of castigations, all manner of
punishments: But when all sense of religion, all heat of zeal, and life of
grace have so utterly forsaken the hearts of men; that they are rather broken
then bowed, rather hardened then humbled by his judgments; he gives them over
to their own just confusion. He leaves them finally, never more to be
entreated, to lamentations, mournings and woe; to the fear, to the pit, and to
the snare: to the Lion, the Wolf, and the Leopard. Thou have stricken them
(says Jeremy) but they have not sorrowed, Chap. 5.3.
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to rec^iue correction: they
have made their faces harder then a stone, and have refused to return. Verse. 6.
Wherefore a Lion out of the forest shall stay them, and a Wolf of the
wilderness shall destroy them: a Leopard shall watch over their Cities, every
one that goes out then^^, shall be torn in pieces, because their trespasses
are many, and their rebellions are increased. This course of Gods proceeding in
his judgments, we may see most clearly in the 4. of Amos. He first gave them
cleann^sse of teeth in all their Cities, and scarcenes of bread in all their
places; and yet they returned not unto him: He withheld the rain from them,
when there were yet three months to the harvest; so that two or three Cities
wandered unto one City to drink water, but they were not satisfied: and yet
they returned not unto him. He smote them with blasting and mildew; their
gardens and their vineyards, their figtrees, and their olive trees did the
Palmer worm devour: and yet they returned not unto him. Pestilence he sent
amongst them after the manner of Egypt: and yet they returned not unto him.
Therefore, says the Lord, thus will I do unto thee O Israel. He speaks after
the manner of a man, in whom just indignation stops passage unto speech, and
who wants words to express the horriblenesse of the punishments he purposes
to inflict: Therefore thus and thus will I do unto thee O Israel, even so as
he threatened in the beginning of the Chapter: The days shall come upon you,
that you shall be taken away with thorns, and your posterity with fish-hookes.
As if he should have said, I will make no more trial by judgments; I will now
do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two ears shall
tingle; yea, and all his heartstrings shall tremble. I will now sweep you all
away with the beesome of utter destruction. This is certainly now just our
case (For to cry peace, peace, where there is no peace toward, is wicked and
to no purpose* to bring conceits and smoothings to this place, will never serve
the turn; either for the discharge of our consciences, or the saving of your
souls) I say this is just our case: we are even already come to this last
point and period: By our many impieties and impenitency, we have brought our
gracious God to that question in the 1, of Isa. Wherefore should ye be smitten
any more? for ye fall away more and more. Or rather to this conclusion in the
4. of Amos; therefore thus will I do unto thee, O nation not worthy to be
loved. He has made trial by so many judgments, and so many times, and all in
vain; that the very next judgment we may justly fear and expect, without
true and timely repentance, will even be the beesome-of-vtter desolation.

As the judgments upon this land have been great saw, (...) of men enjoyed. I
will only name two, which cannot (...) ^ee fresh in ^uery man's memory: The
contr^uing of our peace, at the death of our late Soueraign of ever glorious
memory: And our deliverance from the Gu^powder Treason. Of which two when
first every man heard, me thinks he should have been afraid, lest he had
been in a dream: as it is said of the Israelites, Psalm. 1^6. When the Lord
brought again the captivity of S^on, we were like them that dream. Both
that, and these our blessings were things so incredible, and beyond all
expectation.

You know a little before the Queens death, the wisest were at their wits
ends, and every one stood amazed and astonished for the fears his heart did
fear. The Jesuits from beyond seas insolently insulted over us, and told us
in their books, that this kingdom would shortly become a prey to the greedy
ambition of all the neighbor nations; that huge clouds of blood hung over our
heads, and would melt and dissolve at the Queens death. But it was neither so,
nor so. They are the false prophets of the Beast in the Revelation, no marvel
though they lied: For he that dwells in the heaven laughed them to scorn, our
gracious God had them in derision. And when devils and Papists looked and
wished, that this land should have been clothed, even with blood and fire, as
with a garment; out of the infinite depth of his unsearchable mercies he
covered it with peace, joy and happiness, even as the seas are covered with
water.

In the Gunpowder Treason, the neck of our whole State, both of Church and
Commonwealth, the glory of this famous and flourishing kingdom, the hope of
posterity was laid as it were upon the block: The instrument of death was
lifted up by the damned instrument of the Popes malice and cruelty, he was even
ready to give the mortal stroke; and had not the Angel of the Lord stepped
in, in the very nicke; had not our merciful God, by his most miraculous and
immediate providence put to his helping hand, when our case was desperate and
all hope past, he had cut off from us the root and the branch, the name and
the remnant, the son and the nephew. Our land that before was as the garden of
Eden, had bin by this time a desolate wilderness: Our Church, which was before
a harbor of Saints, had been by this time a poole of snakes; I mean an
habitation of Papists. The fair body of this city, that before was enliued
with matchless glory and worth, should by this time have bin a rent and
dismembered carcass; and that which is worst of al, the neglected and forlorn
lims, inspired with the doctrine of devils.

Let us then examine our selves in this point. Have these incomparable
blessings melted our hearts into tears of repentance and thankfulness? Have
these cords of love drawn us nearer unto our God in all knowledge, love and
obedience? Why then we may assure our selves of a good testimony, that our
souls are seasoned with grace. But if it be quite otherwise: If these great
and undeserved mercies have bred in us a more frozen coldness in the service
of God, a more presumptuous security and a sounder and sweeter sleep in sin*
If since our miraculous deliverance, unparalleled by all Nations, times and
stories; there has bin amongst us no less profaning of Gods Name and
Sabbaths then before, no less pride and drunkenesse, no less oppression and
usury, no less uncleanness and vnconscionablenes in our callings, no less
ignorance in the word of God, and backwardness in the ways of holiness, no
less contempt of godliness and godly men: Nay, if all these gather head and
heart, more ripeness and readiness to receive the flame of Gods fierce and
last wrath: If there be rather a sensible decay of the fear of God, of zeal,
and true sincerity amongst us: If Profaneness, Atheism, Popery, and a
luke-warmenesse in religion, like a mighty Torrent, rush in violently upon us
daily more and more, and fearfully prevail and domineere in most places: Why
then, (you are a people of understanding) I leave it to your own consciences,
to consider what must needs shortly befall us, except we gather our selves
before the decree come forth; unless by speedy humiliation and unfeigned
repentance, we prevent so great and fearful judgments. And the rather,
because we may assure our selves, while the Devil is in hell, and the Pope at
Rome, the Priests and Jesuits, those notorious and transcendent instruments of
blood and death, will be working in the Vaults of darkness for the confusion of
the children of light, the subversion of the Kingdom of Christ, and by
consequent the ruin of our Church and Common wealth. Little know we, what
fearful and hellish plot may be even now in hatching and hammering, or how
near it is to the birth, while we are most secure. And for us in the mean
time, without repentance, and rooting out Idolatry, to depend still upon
immediate and miraculous discoueries and deliverances, is at the least an
unhallowed and desperate presumption.

I cannot follow distinctly at this time, any more differences betwixt the
state of saving grace and formal hypocrisy. For conclusion therefore only, I
will acquaint you more fully with the effects of saving grace, and follow in
few words the trace and steps of the Spirit of God in the great work of
regeneration; that thereby every man may examine his conscience, judge
himself, and try what his state is.

The working and property of this saving grace, and true godliness vouchsafed
peculiarly and only to Gods children, which does translate them from
darkness to light, from the corruption of nature, to a state of supernatural
blessedness, you may thus conceive and understand. It is like leaven (for so
the power of Gods word is compared in the Gospel) it is of a spreading nature:
First, it seats it self in the heart; after it is dispersed over all the
powers and parts both of soul and body; over all the actions and duties of a
man whatsoever: It softneth and changes the heart: It purges the inmost
thoughts: It awakes the conscience, and makes it tender and sensible of the
least sin: It sanctifies the affections: It conformes the will unto the will
of God: It illightnes the understanding with saving knowledge: It stores the
memory with many good lessons, for comforts, instructions and directions in a
godly life: It seasons the speech with grace: It so rectifies, and guides all a
man's actions, that they proceed from faith, they are warrantable out of Gods
word, they are accomplished by good means, and wholly directed to the glory of
God. Nay, yet it spreads further, and kindles a desire and zeal for the
salvation of the souls of others, especially of all those that any way depend
upon us: So that the child of God does ever embrace all means and
opportunities for the communicating of his graces and comforts, and the
bringing of others to the same state of happiness with himself.

Let then, I beseech you, every man's conscience go a little along with me; and
secretly, but faithfully answer to these few interrogatories which I shall
propose very briefly and plainly, that every man may easily-vnderstand. Have
thou felt by thine own experience this great work of regeneration and change
wrought upon thy soul? Has the powerful word of God, by the inward, special
and effectual working of his spirit, broken and bruised thy hard and stony
heart? Has it pierced and purged the very closest and most unsearchable
corners thereof? Has it humbled it with the sight of thy sins, and sense of
Gods judgments? Has it filled it with fearful terrors, compunction,
remorse and true sorrow for thy life past? Has it after quieted and refreshed
it with a sure faith in Christ Jesus, and a delight in heavenly things? Has it
mortified thy inward corruptions, and broke the heart of thy sweet sin? Has
it planted a holy moderation in all thy affections; that whereas heretofore
they have been enraged with lust, with immoderate anger, with ambition* with
insatiable desire for the enlargement of thy wealth, possessions and
greatness, and with hatred of Gods dearest servants and their holiness; are
they now inflamed with zeal for Gods honor, truth and service; with a fervent
love unto the Lord and his Saints; with Christian courage, to oppose against
the sins of the time, to defend goodness and good causes, to contemn the
lying slanders and profane scoffs of worthless men? Has it begot in ^hy
will an hunger and thirst after the spiritual food of thy soul, the Word and
Sacraments; so that thou had rather part with any worldly good, then not
enjoy the incomparable benefit of a conscionable and constant ministry? Are
thy thoughts, of which heretofore thou have made no great conscience, but
letten them wander up and down at rondom wickedly, idely and wantonly; are
they now, I say, bounded within a sacred compass, and spent upon holy things,
and the necessary affairs of thy honest and lawful calling? Is thy
understanding informed, and acquainted with the mystery of salvation, which
the world, and the wise men thereof, account nothing but madness and folly?
Is thy memory, which has heretofore been stuffed with trash and toies,
vanities and follies, now capable and greedy of divine knowledge? Are thy
words, which heretofore have been full of profaneness and worldliness, now
directed to glorify God, and to give grace unto the hearers? Nay yet further
besides this inward renouation of the faculties of thy soul; has the power of
grace sanctified all thy outward actions? Do thou now order in every
particular, all the business of thy vocation religiously, conscionably, and by
direction out of the word of God? Art thou inwardly affected, and faithful in
the performance of religious duties? as in hearing the word of God, in
sanctifying the Sabbath, in prayer and the rest. Do thou now hear the word
of God, not only of course and custom, but of zeal and conscience to reform
thy self by it, and to live after it? Do not the week days duties, and
worldly cares drown thy mind on the Sabbath; but that thou do the whole day
entirely, freely and cheerfully attend the worship of God? Do thou exercise
daily with fruit and feeling, prayer, that precious comfort of the faithful
Christian? Thou being converted, do thou labor the conversion of others,
especially of those which are committed any way to thy charge, and for whom
thou must give a more strict account; as if thou be a master of a family, do
thou pray with them, and instruct them in the doctrine of salvation, and ways
of godliness? Do thou now not only stick at, and forbear great and gross
sins, but do thou even hate the garment spotted of the flesh, and al
appearance of evil? Does the tenderness of thy conscience check thee for the
least sins, and make thee fearful to offend, though it be but in a
wandering cogitation? After every fall into infirmities, art thou careful to
renew thy repentance, and learn wisdom and watchfulness to avoid them
afterward? Do thou feel thy self profit; grow and increase in these
fruits and effects of grace? And have thou such a gracious taste of the glory of
God, and of eternal life, that thou art even willing and desirous to meet thy
Savior in the clouds; not so much for to be rid out of the miseries of this
life, as to be freed from the heavy burden of sin which hangs on so fast,
and to enjoy his presence in the heavens for ever? In a word, as thy soul
gives life, spirit, and motion to thy whole body, and every part thereof; does
the spirit of God even so inspire thy soul and body, and all thy actions with
the life of grace? Why then, thou have past the perfections of the formal
hypocrite, and art possessed of the state of true blessedness; thou art then
happy that ever thou wast borne; thy way is certainly the way of life: And I
can assure thee, and I dare boldly pronounce it, that thou art already utterly
out of the reach of all the powers of hell: Satan is chained up, for ever doing
thee any deadly hurt: All the creatures are reconciled unto thee, and at league
with thee: Thou have filled the Angels with joy at thy conversion, they will
for ever guard thee: Thou shall never more be afraid for any evil tidings.
Though the earth be moved, and though the mountains fall into the midst of the
sea, thy heart shall abide strong, unshaken and comfortable. When thou fallest
down upon thy bed of sickness, thou shall find no mortal poison in thy flesh;
no sting in death; no darkness in the grave; no amazement at that great and
fearful day. For all the merits and sufferings of Christ are thine; all the
comforts of Gods children are thine; all the blessings in the book of God are
thine; all the joys of heaven are thine: even all things are thine, and thou
art Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Only stand fast in the faith; quit thy self
like a man, and be strong; gird thy sword upon thy thigh; buckle fast unto thee
the whole armor of God; ride on because of the word of truth; and the Lord thy
God be with thee. Break through for a while with undaunted courage the
bitterness of the worlds malice; the keen razours of empoysoned tongues; the
tears and tediousness of a few and wretched days; for thou art nearer the
price of the high calling, then when thou first beleeuedst: Shine more and more
in faith, in patience, in love, in knowledge, obedience, and all other
Christian graces, until the perfect day, until thou reach the height of
heaven, and the full glory of the Saints of God.

I now proceed more distinctly to other marks of difference betwixt the state
of grace, and formal hypocrisy. Some notes of distinction for my purpose may
be raised out of those places of Scripture, which I proposed, for to acquaint
you with the kinds of perfection, and degrees of goodness; whereof a man as
yet unregenerate is capable, and may be partaker.

In the 8. of Luke, the hearer resembled unto the stony ground, is the formal
hypocrite. He receives the word of God with joy, as does the faithful
Christian, though ^ot in the same measure: But here is the special point and
mark that differenceth the one from the other: The word and faith in the
formal hypocrite have no roots: They are not deeply and soundly rooted and
planted in his understanding, conscience, thoughts, affections, and actions.

Sapientia and Prudentia mentioned by Aristotle Eth. 6. for natural truth, and
civil actions. Sapientia, you know out of the Schools, is a worthy habit
compounded of Intelligentia; which is a natural light and ability of
apprehending and acknowledging speculatiue principles, the foundations and
fountains of all humane knowledge: and of Scientia; which is an habitual and
exact knowledge of all necessary conclusions and deductions by the force of
reason, and labor of discourse thence issuing, and grounded thereupon. But
Prudentia, though it be seated in the understanding; yet it is practical, in
respect of the Object and the end; and is the sovereign and guide of all other
virtues. It does ever amid the many varieties, uncertainties, and passages of
humane actions, wisely, and honestly consult and advise, judge, and resolve;
manage, and execute. Even just so, these two heavenly habits, (...), and (...),
heavenly wisdom, and spiritual prudence, shed into every sanctified
understanding by the fountain of grace, are busied and exercised about
supernatural truths, and matters of eternal life. By the first, the child of
God having the eyes of his mind opened and illightened, does see the great
mystery of salvation, the secrets of the kingdom, the whole counsel, and the
wonders of the law of God: He does know what the hope is of his calling, and
what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints: he comprehends
what is the breadth, and the length, and the depth, and the height. By the
second he is enabled with a judicious sincerity to deliberate, and determine in
cases of conscience; in the perplexities of tentations; in all straites,
ambiguities, and difficulties incident to the consideration and carriage of a
Christian; and with spiritual discretion to guide and conduct all the actions
of grace, and every particular, both in his general and special calling. This
explication premised, I come to tell you, that the word of God does not take
sure and lasting root, does not dwell plentifully in the understanding of the
Formal hypocrite, by these two divine habits.

First, there is a right noble branch of divine knowledge for the most part
utterly ignorant. He knows not that dark and fearful passage, which leads
from the vanities and corruptions of nature, and out of the dominions of
darkness and death, through strange terrors and torments of soul, into the
rich and glorious happiness of the state of grace, and kingdom of Christ. He
knows not the variety and power of tentations; the causes, degrees, the woeful
consequents and recoueries of spiritual desertions, relapses, and decaies of
grace. He has no skill in the nature, symptoms, and remedies of afflicted
consciences: in the secret workings and right uses of afflictions, infirmities,
scandals, and disgraces. He is not acquainted with Satan's transformations into
the glory of an Angel; 2. Cor. 2.11.
with his (...), and (...), as the Apostle calls them: that is, his depths,
his profound plots and contriuances, molded by malice and suttlety in his own
large understanding; furnished with the experience of our corruptions, and the
success of his many tentations for some thousands of years; managed with all
the crafts and policies of the most dark and hidden corners of hell. He is not
acquainted with his (...), as they are called Ephesians. 6. 11: his exquisite
method, in the wily conueiance of his stratagems and insidiations; in ordering
his assaults, and discharging his fiery darts. How sometimes he keeps as it
were a method of nature, in striking at the root, and laboring to stop or
poison the fountain of spiritual life, which is Faith: that so the fruits of
godliness may wither, and the streams of divine grace may dry up. Satan
knows full well that the lively or languishing exercise of other inward
graces, the cold, or zealous performance of all outward duties, depend upon the
weakness or strength of our faith: And therefore if he perceive, that by a free
and vital operation of a strong faith, our zeal, our hope, our patience, our
faithfulness in our calling, and other graces be maintained in their heat,
vigor and excellency, he labors might and maine to weaken, shake, and beat
down our Faith, and that by such means as these:

of the flourishing of the wicked; how imperiously and prosperously they
domineere and revel it in the world; how they spread themselves like a green
Bay tree, and bring their enterprises to pass: while himself lies trampled
upon by their insolences, oppressions and profane censures; while perhaps he
lingers and pines under some heavy cross and long visitation; and for all his
prayers, his groans, his patience, yet finds small comfort, no deliverance,
for ends best known unto his heavenly father; so that he may outwardly even
perish in his troubles. This is a shroud temptation, Psalm. 7^.
and in some measure prevailed against David; it made so tall, and well rooted
a Cedar to stagger: nay, this tempest had near ouerturned him; this blow had
wounded his faith to death, had he not in good time stepped into the Sanctuary
of the Lord, and understood the end of these men; How suddenly they are
destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed: and considered howsoever the godly
be vexed with men or devils for the days of their vanity in this miserable
world; yet it ever goes well with them at the last.

A second means, by which Satan endeavors the weakening

A third weapon, by which he strikes at our faith, I take son with these
rivers of comfort, labors to cast into his mind, even some thoughts of
impossibility of the performance of the promises of salvation, and of the
attainement of that excellent weight of glory: and would gladly make him
think it incredible, that he should ever be crowned with immortality; or be
so gloriously partaker through all eternity of unspeakable comforts above.
This temptation, as I take it, does not much disquiet the formal hypocrite, or
any unregenerate man. For because his persuasion of happiness to come, is
false and misgrounded, and that he has no sound assurance of heaven; Satan is
too wily to suggest unto him doubts and distractions of this nature. But
wheresoever it lights, it is of fearful consequence; and therefore not to be
debated upon by the thoughts, or disputed with Satan; that is not the way to
conquer this temptation; but suddenly, and resolutely to be repeld by the
power of prayer, and out of an holy contempt of so base and lying malice, to be
cast as dung upon the face of the tempter: So that the faithful Christian for all this, may maintain and possess his heart in patience, and unconquerable
comfort out of these two considerations:





and custom, we were often, and most principally obnoxious before our
calling: why then, from th^nce he draws and enforces upon us discomfortable,
and faith-killing conclusions. He presently infers upon such relapses; that we
have deceived our own souls, that our holiness indeed is but hypocrisy,
that our faith is but temporary, and our conversion counterfeit: Otherwise the
grace of God would be sufficient for us, and the power of his sanctifying
spirit, would at the least so far restrain us, bridle and mortify our
corruptions, that we should not break out again, and backslide into a sin
so much loathed and repented of: Otherwise, as our sweet, and master-sinne in
the time of our unregeneration, made the deepest gash, the widest gap into our
consciences; so if we were indeed in the state of grace, we should most
carefully and tenderly close up that wound, and be most vigilan^ and
solicitous in fencing and fortifying that breach before any other. By this
means Satan many times gives a sore blow to our faith, and breeds much
heaviness and discomfort in the soul.

Thus Satan in his temptations, sometimes proceeds by a method, a it were of
nature, in striking at faith, the root and heart of our spiritual life. But
if h^ be not able to fasten his fiery darts upon the shield of faith; why then
he takes a contrary course and method, as it may best fit his advantage, and
more easy insinuation. For he attempts the dulling and diminishing of our
zeal, and forwardness in religion, and other fruits of faith, and inferior
parts of sanctification. And that by such means as these.

One weapon, by which he labors to wound our feruencie, great and dangerous
consumptions of spiritual life. For if worldliness once take possession of
our hearts, it wastes by little and little, our joy in heavenly things, our
comfort in the communion of Saints, our longings for the incomprehensible and
everlasting happiness: it banisheth all thought of the worth of our souls, of
the spiritual state of our conscience, of the vanity and change of this
present life, of the glorious rising again of our bodies, and the immortality
of the second life: and in stead thereof fills us with earthly cares, with
fears, iealousies, grief, hopes, wishes, independance upon the providence of
God, and a thousand platformes for the encreasement and securing of our outward
felicity. And security, it makes us insensible of Gods judgments, of our
falling from our first love, of the danger wherein we stand: It makes us put
far from us the evil day; and to think our mountain so strong, that we
shall never be moved, but continue in our happy state, and die in the nest.



power to transform others into their own fashions and conditions; and to
make them sometimes to condemn their former forwardnes and zeal in the
service of God. For as the feed cast into the earth draws unto it self by
little and little the property of that soil whereunto it is transported, until
at length it becomes like yt which does there naturally grow: so the spirits
and manners of men commonly conform themselves to those with whom they
ordinarily converse. Lamentable then is their case, base their resolution, and
miserable their comfort, who for advantage, faction, foresight and hope of
future gratifications, or any other by-respect, plunge themselves into such
companies, where perhaps they may enjoy many pleasant passages of wit, set, and
artificial disports, and passing the time, direction in their worldly
affairs, combination against the power of religion, and the true professors
thereof: but where they shall find no furtherance in the way to heaven, no
comfort in heavenly things, no encouragement to piety, no counsel in
tentations, no consolation upon their deaths-bed. O how much better were it,
for these few and wretched days, to sort and solac^ themselves amongst the
Saints of God, with whom they might shine as glorious lights together in the
earth, and hereafter in the heavens above the brightness of the sun for
evermore; rather then profanely to sport themselves in Meshech, and for a
season proudly to ruffle it in the tents of Kedar, where there is no light of
grace, no joint expectation of eternity, but darkness of sin, and shadow of
death! Mistake me not in this point: I would not have men go out of the world,
or become Separists. I would rather have them, if they will understand Paul
aright, be made all things to all men, that they might by all means save some:
That is, I would have the children of God not be wanting in any offices of
kindness or piety, but to yield and communicate themselves so far as duty,
charity, humanity, necessity of their general or particular calling upon
good warrant, and just occasion may challenge and exact at their hands. But as
for a free and full communication of the secrets of their soul, of their
dearest affections of their spiritual estate, of their ioyfullest and best
expense of time; I would have that only vouchsafed and conveyed into the
faithful bosom of a true Christian, and confined to grace, as it peculiar and
principal Object. Let their goodness, and good deeds spread without limit;
but their delight and intimatenes, is to be restrained and appropriated to the
Saints that are on the earth, and to the truly excellent, which are only the
godly. Hence it is that Gods children are many times censured for morositie,
vnsociablenes, disdainfulness of spirit, and opposition to good fellowship;
when God knows they can find no taste in the white of an egg, no strength in
a broken staff of reed, no comfort in the men of the world, who have their
portion in this life; and therefore they would not part with their Paradise of
communion of Saints, or comfortable communication with God in their
solitarines, for the company of kings, and a world of carnal contentments.

him off, and utterly cashire him from his hopes and ends. Most miserable and
servile is their life, that thus forsake the strong tower of their salvation,
and claspe their hand of faith about the arm of flesh. For they do not only
bereave themselves of that worthy freedom of spirit, which an honest Heathen
would not exchange for his life: but also as they grow into a habit of
servitude and base engagements unto men; so they grow into a flauerie unto
sin, and bondage unto the corruptions of the time: And the higher they rise
into favor with profane greatness and policy, the deeper they sink into the
miseries of baseness and flattery, and the high displeasure of almighty God:
And at length, if they attain their ends, (for sometimes they die in the
tedious prosecution of some undeserved dignity) they double their discomforts,
and increase their account. For commonly where the pursuit and purchase of any
honor and preferment has been base and indirect; there the discharge and
execution is formal, vaineglorious, and unconscionable.

Thus you see a second method of Satan, whereby he goes about to kill the
fruits of faith; and to cause, if not an utter cessation, yet much weakness and
interruptions in the operations of grace.

Many more such depths, and proceedings he has in his tentations. As for
example:

If he meet with notoriously wicked men; as Drunkards, Swearers, unclean
persons and the like; he tempts them to Atheism, a reprobate sense, contempt
of Gods worship and service, and to the great offense. To defend their leaud
and graceless courses; to glory in their sins, and in their dexterity of
making others drunk with the same iniquity. He stickles and strikes the
bargain betwixt them, and death and hell; and enters as it were bond for the
performance of the covenant. He tempts them to scorning; and by their
scoffings and railings, in some fort, to the despiting of the spirit of grace
in the children of light; which is a soul sign of a feared conscience, and a
fearful preparatiue to sin against the holy Ghost. These are Satan's
standard-bearers* and the^fore he inspires them with extraordinary boldness,
and desperateness in sinning; and teaches them to march furiously in variety
of rebellions against the Majesty of heaven.

If he meet with honest civil men, heelabours to persuade them, that just and
upright dealing with their neighbors, good meanings and intentions in matters
of religion, are the very life of the service of God, and a sufficient way to
heaven: And to conceive sin, and sincerity, to be nothing else but moral
virtues and vices; the power of sanctification, to be nothing but good
education; the practice of godliness, to be nothing but sober and honest
behavior; and the whole mystery of Christianity, to be only a grave and
stayed civility: And the much ado about faithful and conscionable preaching,
to be only the humor of some odd fellows, that would be accounted singular
and seraphicall.

If he meet with formal hypocrites, who besides immunitie from gross sins,
and their civil honesty, are careful and fashionable in the outward duties
of religion, yet short of a sound conversion; he labors might and maine to
settle in them an opinion, that the state of regeneration is nothing but
preciseness and puritanisme; that saving sincerity and a true practice of
holiness, is only a transcendent Idea, consisting in pure abstraction,
conceived in the irregular and stirring heads of some busy and pragmaticall
fellows, shadowed only with a number of fair shows and pretenses, but
really existent and acted no where. And that they may more securely and
obstinately rest upon this persuasion, he furnishes them with a notable art of
misconceiuing and misinterpreting the actions of grace, and of making, by
odious exaggerations, a little hole in the coat of a sound Christian, as wide
as hell. Hence it is that David is many times made sport with, and merrily
iested upon by them, with the false scoffers at their feasts and bankets, and
has things laid to his charge, with much confidence, but without al
conscience, which, God thou know, he never knew. Hence it is, that many
times those actions, in which, for the truth and uprightness of his heart, and
the justness and innocence of his cause, he dare appeal to the tribunal of
God, the impartial searcher of the inmost thoughts, and severe revenger of all
falsehood; yet are racked by vile and base misconstructions, and interpr^ted to
be the works of darkness and deceit. And if they take a godly man but tripping
in some lesser error in his carriage, and that perhaps but forged in their own
wilful misconceit; they thence raise matter, not only of triumph and
insultation, but which is much more fearful, of chearing, applauding, and
confirming themselves in their present wretched state.

But if Satan meet with a man, that by the grace of God is already entered into
the panges of his travel in the new birth, and with sorrow for his sins is
smitten down into the place of dragons, and covered with the shadow of death;
then he eagerly strives to stiffle the new man in the womb; and by presenting
to his view the ugly visage of his many and outrageous transgressions, the
curse of the Law, and the wrath of God; which he yet makes more grizlie and
fierce by his own hellish malice; to plunge him into the bottomless gulf of
irrecouerable horror and desperation. But if by the mercies of God he sink
not, but betime lay hold upon the justice of Christ, and that boundless
compassion, which never knew how to break the bruised reed, or quench the
smoking flax; but holds a broken and contrite heart far more precious, then
a sacrifice of the beasts on a thousand mountains, and then ten thousand
rivers of oil: why then he stands like a great red Dragon in his way, at the
very first entrance into the Kingdom of light, and profession of sincerity,
and casts out of his mouth floods of persecutions, vexations and oppositions;
that so he may ouerwhelme and crush him before he come to any growth or
strength in Christ, and a full comprehension of the mystery of grace. And to
this end he sets on foot, and fire too, and whets with keen razors many a
leaud and profane tongue, to scoff, disgrace and discourage him in his
narrow, but blessed passage to immortality, by reproaches, slanders,
exprobration of his former life; by odious names of Hypocrite, Singularist,
Puritan, a fellow of irregular conscience and stirring humor, of a factious
and contradictious spirit, and such like. But if he also pass these pikes,
and these sharp swords, (for so David calls spiteful tongues, 2. Ti^o. 3.12.
) out of a consideration of that truth in Paul: Every one that will live godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; and that in the calmest time of the
Church: amongst many other, he shall be sure at the least to be continually
scourged and vexed with strife of tongues: for every faithful Christian knows
by good experience, that ever now and then, as he shall stir in a good cause,
stand against the corruptions of the place where he lives, with conscience and
faithfulness discharge his calling; he shall presently have the spirit of
profaneness to sly in his face, with brutish and implacable malice and
insolency: But yet, I say, if he be able with his Lord and Savior to endure
this speaking against of sinners; and to esteem it, as it is indeed, his
crown and comfort: why then Satan casts about another way; and he labors
sometimes to fasten upon him some unwarrantable opinions, thereby scandalously
and vnnecessarliy to disquiet him, to defraud him of an entire fruition of the
comforts of holiness, and to hinder and interrupt him in the prosecution of
his glorious service of God. Sometimes to puff him up with a self-conceit of
his own excellency, seeing himself advanced as far above the common
condition of men, and the richest and happiest worldling, as heaven above
earth, light above darkness, endless happiness above eternal misery: that
so, as the Apothecaries ointment by a dead fly, his good actions and
spiritual graces, may receive stain and infection by privy pride: of the
nature and remedies whereof I have before discoursed. These and many others be
the temptations of a babe in Christ, and fitted to the infancy of regeneration.

But if Satan meet with a strong man in Christ, he tempts him by those two
methods I told you of before, sometimes by wasting his zeal, sometimes by
weakening his faith, and a thousand more. Amid which infinite variety, he is
for the most part constant in one point of policy, and that is this: He
co^ceales his greatest fury, his most desperate assault unto the last: He
reserues his fieriest dart, his deadliest poison, his sharpest sting, his
Gunpouder-plot until he meet us on our deaths bed. Wherefore, beloved in
Christ Jesus, we had need every man to be strongly and soundly prepared and
armed against that great and last encounter with Satan; upon which depends our
everlasting estate, either in the ioies of heaven, or pains of hell. Oh at
that day, (and we little know how near it is) it is not our deep reaches and
vnfathomd policies and proiects, the countenance and patronage of great
personages, our merry and pleasant companions, or the plurality of livings and
preferments, that can yield us any comfort or assistance in that terrible and
fearful combat. Nay, though we now little think upon it, all the worldly
contentments, that we have either indirectly purchased, or unconscionably
imploid, he will then turn unto us into Scorpions, stings and worms of
conscience. Only at that day a good conscience will hold out as armor of
proof; which, as it has bin on earth a continual feast, so their it will be
unto us a great and everlasting Iubilee for evermore.

By this* time you easily perceive, and I am very sensible of the digression I
have made: but I have done it, only to give you a taste of that part of divine
knowledge about the depths of Satan, and spiritual state of sanctified souls
and afflicted consciences; which I take to be Gods child's peculiar, and in
which the formal hypocrite has little skill or exercise. For the deep and
divine ponderations of this nature, upon these points, do not much take up or
trouble his mind and meditations. It is a precious knowledge, abstracted by an
holy experience from the practice and actions of true and sound regeneration;
and therefore it is transcendent to his most happy natural capacity, to the
depth of his worldly wisdom, and to the greatest height of his speculations,
though otherwise never so universal and profound.

Now as concerning other parts of divine knowledge, and other points of
religion; he may be furnished with store of rare and excellent learning, in
Fathers, Schoolmen, Commentaries, Controversies; he may be endewed with
suttletie in disputing and defending the truth of God: yea, and in resolving
cases of conscience too, so far as a formal observation, and Popish Doctors can
lead him. For their resolutions in that kind, are only busied about cases
incident to their Antichristian Hierarchy, about perplexities arising out of
their wilworship and bloody superstition, and determination of some particulars
in the Commandments, which may fall within the capacity of an unregenerate
man: but their profession, I mean the Papacy, cannot possibly reach unto the
heart of godliness, the mystery of regeneration, and the saving power of the
life to come. Nay yet besides this, the formal hypocrite may be made partaker
of some degrees of the spirit of illumination, in understanding, and
interpreting the book of God, for the good of his Church and children. For I
doubt not, but many have much light of judgment, that have little integrity
of conscience; and are inspired with the spirit of illumination for the good of
others, that have no part in the spirit of sanctification and sound conversion
for their own happiness. But yet me thinks there may be conceived some
differences betwixt the child of God, and the formal hypocrite, in the very
speculation and knowledge of Gods truth, and in apprehension of things divine
in the understanding: Which I take to be such as these:

naughty and crooked generation, in the sight and censure of God, the blessed
Angels, and good men; though to the judgment of the world, and eye of
profaneness, his glorious graces ever did and ever will appear to be
nothing but darkness and dissembling. You may conceive this difference thus:
The sun beams, you know, are not only cast and shed into the inferior Orbs
and air; but are first rooted in the sun, and do inwardly and universally
fill with light that fair and glorious body. It is otherwise in the moon: for
howsoever she receive light, for the cheering and comforting other bodies, yet
she remains dark within, and in respect of her self, it serves only to make
her spots more conspicuous. It is just so in the point we have in hand: The
light of divine knowledge in the child of God, does not only shine upon the
souls of others for their instruction and refreshing; but does first fully
illuminate his own, though not to an excellency of degree; for that is
reserved for heaven; yet to a perfection of parts, of which only our mortality
is capable. But in the formal hypocrite, howsoever it may sometimes dispell
ignorance and errors from the minds of others; yet within he is darkness in
the Abstract in respect of saving light, as is every unregenerate man, Ephesians.
5.8. And his light of knowledge in respect of himself, serves only to make
his sins more soul and sinful, his damnation more just, and himself more
inexcusable. For he that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes.

Secondly, the knowledge of divine mysteries in Gods glued unto the fashions of
the world; if he were sensible of it, would tell him that it is many times not
so sweet unto him as his pleasures: His close covetousness or other
vnconscionablenes in his calling, if his conscience were illightned would
inform him, that many times it is not so dear unto him as gold.





I come now to the other habit, which the Apostle calls (...), spiritual
prudence, by which the word and faith take no root in the understanding of the
formal hypocrite.

This habit, I told you, is a spiritual prudence, or a sanctified
understanding in the practical affairs of the soul; by which a regenerate
man is enabled, with a judicious sincerity to deliberate and determine in
cases of conscience, in the perplexities of tentations, in all straites,
ambiguities and difficulties incident to the consideration and carriage of a
Christian; and with spiritual discretion to guide and conduct all the actions
of grace, and every particular, both in his general and special calling.

This wisdom, as I take it, is an attendant upon justifying faith, and only
and inseparably annexed unto saving grace; and therefore the formal
hypocrite, though I place him in the highest perfection, that is attaineable in
the state of unregeneration, is utterly incapable of it, and a mere stranger
unto it, as he is unto the life of God.

By this holy wisdom, David, Psalm. 119. verse. 99. is said to be wiser then
his adversaries; that is, then Saul, and all his politic Statesmen, then his
teachers, then the ancient. If wisdom were lost, me thinks it should be
found amongst Politicians, the Oracles of imperial depthes and secrets of
State; the pillars of commonwealths and kingdoms: amongst profound Doctors
and Rabbis; the fathers of knowledge and learning: amongst the ancient, whose
age is many times crowned with ripeness of judgment, with variety of
experience and observation. And yet by this (...), (...).
spiritual prudence (for the same word is used there by the Septuagints, which
the Apostle has Col. 1.9.) David far surmounted them all; in respect of
which, the flower and quintessence of all their wisdom and policies, was
nothing but glorious folly and profound simplicity. Hence it is that many a
poor soul illiterate and neglected, proudly passed by, and many times
trampled upon with disgrace and vexation, by worldly wisemen; yet living under
a constant and conscionable Ministry, is infinitely more wise then the
greatest clerks, and learnedest doctors, both in giving counsel and advise
in spiritual affairs, and in conducting their own souls, in these strangely
profane and desperate days, through the strait way to heaven.

Hence then you may see a clear difference. The formal hypocrite, so far as
natural wit, goodness of education, civil honesty, moral discretion,
politic wisdom can illighten and lead him, may manage his actions and
affairs with exactness and reputation, gloriously and without exception in
the sight and judgment of the world. Nay, besides, sometimes by an addition of
some inferior, and more general graces of Gods spirit, he may set upon them
such an outward glistering, that they may dazzle the eyes of the best discerning
spirit, and deceive his own heart with a false persuasion, that they are the
true actions of piety, and pleasing unto God. But over and above all these,
(which is never to be found in the unregenerate) there is in the understanding
of the child of God, a more excellent and superior vigor, that inspires his
actions with a high and more heavenly nature, that breathes into them the life
of grace, that guides them with truth and singlenes of heart, and sincerity in
all circumstances, to the glory and acceptance of God, the comfort of his
own conscience, and good of his brethren. There is a far clearer and
brighter eye shining in the soul of every regenerate man, in respect whereof
the fairest lights of all other knowledge and wisdom are Egyptian darkness,
which does ever faithfully descry and discover unto him the strait, though
unbeaten path to immortality, through all the passages and particulars of his
life: It reueales unto him the wisest and most conscionable resolution in all
spiritual debatements; the best and fittest seasons of reproving sins and
winning souls unto God; many obliquities of actions, iniquity of many
circumstances; the right uses of his own afflictions, disgraces and
infirmities, which the formal hypocrite cannot possibly discern, because he
is stark blind on this eye.

Amongst infinite, I will give one instance of the gracious workings, and power
of this divine habit:

Let us imagine an evil report or false slander to be unjustly raised, and
without ground upon the formal hypocrite, though it seldom befall such; for
commonly profane men are more countenanced, better conceived and spoken of by
the greater part, and by great men, then they deserve. Yet if it so fall out;
this or the like is his behavior: He perhaps proclaims and protests his
cleerenesse in the case too ambitiously and impotently; not with that humility
and spiritual discretion: He pleases and applaudeth himself in his
innocence, for this particular, boisterously and with clamor, which perhaps
secretly breeds a more general Pharisaicall self-conceit of the rest of his
ways: He angerly contests with the iniquity, and ingratitude of the world,
for casting such base indignities and aspersions upon goodness and virtue: He
would gladly bear it out bravely, and make others think that he passes it
without wound or passion; but indeed he inwardly chases and frets, and is much
grieved and gauled with worldly sorrow for it: the reason is, his reputation
with men is dearer unto him, then the glory of God; his chiefest good and
comfort in this world, is the worlds good opinion of him. But in all this, he
is so far from working any spiritual good out of it, that he rather
entertaines a secret encouragement to be that indeed, which the world censures
him to be, then for a bare conceald conscience of his innocence, to debar
himself of a full fruition of the present times.

But let us now on the other side, conceive a child of God to be wickedly and
wrongfully slandered: for it is properly his lot and portion in this life, to
be laden with leaud and lying censures, with unjust and odious imputations;
sometimes to have many grievous things, and fearful abominations fathered
upon him, without al sense, honesty or probability, which he never did, he
never knew. And if once ill reports raised falsely upon the godly be on wing,
they fly as swift as the Eagles of the heavens. Devils are speedy Dromedaries
to carry such news: They presently pass through Tauernes and Alehouses,
City and Country, Gath and Ascalon; they run far and wide, as current and
authentical, under the Broad-seale of good fellowship, never more to be
controlled and reuerst, until the matter be brought before that high and
everlasting Judge. But mark, I pray you, the carriage of Gods child in these
cases: he does indeed sweetly and comfortably enjoy the consciousnesse of his
own uprightness; though his adversaries be never so potent, or cunning to
threape him down, yet until he die, as Job speaks, he will not take away his
innocence from himself. When the sharp and empoisoned arrows of bitter
malice and calumniations come thickest upon him, even with hail shot, his
truly noble, and divinely resolved soul, is infinitely satisfied with that in
Job: Chap. 16.19.
Behold now, my witness is in the heaven, and my record is on high. Yet he
does labor to clear himself so far, as the honor of God, the satisfaction
of the godly, and danger of just scandal require.

But the gracious considerations and holy practice, which in these afflictions
of his good name, spiritual prudence principally ministers and suggests unto
him, are such as these:

Shemei, upon the roial person of David; and therefore he gathers, that the Lord
would thereby give him notice, that some other things in him are amiss: That
some secret corruption, by which his blessed Spirit is grieved, is to be
subdued and mortified; yt some grace is to be repaired; some of his ways to be
amended: perhaps his languishing zeal is to be revived and inflamed; his heart
much duld with the contagious profaneness, and formalitie of the times is to
be quickened, and more enlarged for Gods service; repentance and humiliation for
some former sin, not thoroughly repented of, or in part resumed, is to be
renewed. Perhaps the Lord has thereby an holy purpose to reveal unto him, the
omission of some duties in his calling, or some smaller faults, yet scandalous,
whereof before he was not sensible. Or it may be, to prevent some sin to
come, either that with which he is falsely charged, or some other, to which his
frail nature is more inclining. Or lastly, by this experience to prepare him
with courage, and furnish him with wisdom, to comfort others in the like case,
or to glorify his name by patience in some more public and notorious
disgrace and vexation to be endured in this kind. Hereupon the child of God
does presently make a privy search into his soul, does narrowly fifth the
state of his conscience, and after due and impartial examination, feelingly
and faithfully address himself to prayer, practice of these considerations,
and reformation of what he finds amiss.

Secondly, this outward cross upon his good name by

Thirdly, by the mercies of God, for any such wretched who endured the cross,
and such speaking against of sinners, and despised the shame for the joy that
was set before him. He has thereby more weight and degrees added to his
blessedness, more massines, and brightness to his crown of immortality:
Blessed are ye, faith Christ when men revile you, and say all manner of evil
against you for my sake falsely; rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward
in heaven. And therefore in despite of malice and falsehood, he runs on
joyfully in his race; and having the attestation of a clear conscience, the
acclamations of Saints and Angels, he little cares for the barking of dogs by
the way, bu^ follows hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus.

Such as these are the thoughts and behavior, spiritual wisdom acquaints the
child of God with; when his good name is wronged, and wounded with slanders and
false reports.

I conclude the whole point: The knowledge and practical wisdom about
heavenly matters in the formal hypocrite, are dull, cold, plodding, formal,
serviceable, and subordinate to his worldly happiness. His knowledge is (...),
a form of knowledge: Romans 2.20. His practice is (...), a form of godliness:
2. Tim. 3.5. All is form and outwardnesse: they are not deeply and soundly
rooted in them by sanctifying grace; nor inwardly inspired with supernatural
and spiritual life. But divine knowledge in the child of God, is called, the
Spirit of revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. his practical wisdom is spiritual, Colos.
1.9. that is, quick, active, fervent, zealous, stirring; not into
irregularities and exorbitancies, as worldly wisdom many times misconstrues,
but against the corruptions of the times, and working out of all actions,
occasions and occurrents, even out of miseries, slanders and infirmities, some
glory unto God, some good unto his children, some comfort unto his own soul.



The whole and entire work of conscience, as you well know, out of the
Schools, consists in a practical syllogisine: The proposition arises out
of the (...), an habit of practical principles, and general fountains of our
actions. The assumption is properly (...), conscientia, an actual application
of our knowledge to this, or that particular act or object. Whence follows the
immediate, and necessary issue and office of conscience: to testify, in
respect of things simply done, or not done: In respect of things to be done,
either to excite and encourage, or to restrain and bridle: In respect of
things done well, o^ wickedly, to excuse and comfort, or accuse and terrific.
For example: The (...), which is as it were a treasury of rules and lessons
for direction in our actions, proposes the iniquity of a lie even out of
nature. Aristotle condemns it, Eth. 4.7. (...): A lie is stark naught and
discommendable. The sounder Schoolmen demonstrate every lie, though it be
officious, and for a greater good, to be against nature, and indispensable.
Natures purpose is frustrated, and her law transgrest when speech and words,
which she intends to be ever the true messengers of the conceits and
apprehensions of the mind, are abused to falsehood and equivocation. But this
practical principle of not lying, howsoever it be clear in nature, yet it
receives further illustration from the book of God. Therefore the proposition
may be thus framed:

Every liar shall be banished from the holy mountain of the Lord: Psalm. 15.
and shall be barred out of the new Jerusalem for evermore: Revel. 22.15.

The conscience of the liar does assume and tell him; But I have thus and thus
lied for advantage, and greater good: Then it follows:

Therefore I must be banished from the holy mountain of the Lord, and barred
out of the new Jerusalem for evermore. A conclusion of condemnation and terror.

Such is the arguing of conscience for things past: But thus it works about
things to be done:

Let us imagine a man to deliberate with himself whether he should be
Non-resident or no. His habit of practical principles, if he will deal
faithfully with his own soul, especially by the help of the honester
Casists, may yield him matter enough out of nature against Non-residencie, as
might easily appear, if the point were incident. But since the case is clear,
Ezech. 33. he may thus frame his practical syllogism:

The Non-resident must answer for the blood of those souls, which by his
unconscionable and unwarrantable absence, and negligence in his charge have
perished in their sins.

But since I know not how soon I shall come to judgment, my poor soul shall
not appear before my blessed Savior, red with the blood of those souls, for
which his precious blood was shed.

Therefore I will not be Non-resident. You see here a restraint from
Non-residencie, that bloody gangrene, that with remorselesse greedines eats
and deuoures the precious souls of men.

This short explication of the nature of conscience thus premised, you may
easily conceive with me thus much; that

Accordingly as the practical understanding of a man is furnished with
principles and rules for guiding his actions, according to the nature of them,
and sovereignty they hold in the conscience, such and thereafter commonly is
his life and actions.

I except the gross hypocrite; for he sins against the knowledge of his
heart, and light of his conscience: Therefore the sound of fear is already in
his ears; and in his prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him. He
believes not to return out of darkness, for he sees the sword before him.
Affliction and anguish shall make him afraid: They shall prevail against him
as a king ready to the battle. God shall run upon him, even upon his neck; and
against the most thick part of his shield: because he has covered his face
with falsehood, and inwrapped himself in a cloud of hypocrisy.

The point then must be exemplified in other sorts of men.

He is bound with his sins, and covered with iniquities, as a field is hedged
in with bushes, and the path thereof covered with thorns, whereby no man may
travel. It is shut up, and is appointed to be delivered by fire.

his practical principles, the bloody Dictates of the Pope of Rome, that man
of sin, and vicegerent of Satan; which are so far from receiving strength
or warrant, either from nature, or divine truth, that they hold strong
contradiction and eternal opposition to both: and therefore his conscience is
enlarged like Tophet. For it can without scruple, or remorse, nay, with hope of
heaven, and a brighter crown of glory, digest even the sacred blood of kings,
and swallow down with ease the ruins and desolations of whole kingdoms. He
can meritoriously butcher his brother in the streets with prodigious cruelty,
as in that horrible massacre at Par^s. He can be dispensed with, and
discharged from oaths, and truth of speech, the necessary and sovereign
instruments of all justice and society amongst men. He may expect canonization
for blowing up of Parliaments, and tearing in pieces the royal limbs of the
Lords Anointed, and the strong sinews of the worthiest State under heaven: and
after sail toward the Popish Paradise, which is indeed the pit of hell,
through a sea of innocent blood, without any check or counterblast of
conscience.

Thirdly, the civil honest man has his For I may take conscience for the
habit of practical principles, as does Origin, Basil, Damascen, Ierom. Origin
calls conscientia, paedagogus animae sociatus: Basil, natural iudicatorium:
Damascen, lux intellectus nostrit Ierom* (...).
conscience informed Follow peace with all m^n, and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord. Peace and holiness must go together: If otherwise, it
is an holy peace to be at war with the corruptions of the time: and to be at
peace with sin, is to war against God and his own soul. But the merely
civil honest man, by his practical principles, is led no further, but to the
executions of moral honesty; as for instruction in heavenly mysteries and
divine knowledge, he does not much meddle with, care for, or seek after; but
only for company and fashion.

Mat. 13.21. he is called (...), a Temporizer: He is not through, sound,
resolute, and true-hearted for godliness, good causes, and to good men. For many
times, when the honor of God is put as it were in the one scale of the
balance, and his own contentment in the other; he suffers some worldly profit
or pleasure, the gratification or satisfaction of some great man; the purchase
of some Fellowship, Benefice, or spiritual dignity, (for sometimes it proves
perhaps as dear as a purchase) the greedy desire, and pursuit of some
undeserved office or honor; the enioyment of profane company, or coherence
with worldly wise men; the pleasure of some secret and sweet sin, or such
like; I say, he suffers these to weigh down the exceeding weight of heavenly
bliss, the invaluable treasure of a good conscience, and the infinite glory of
God. Which is strangely miserable; since all the worth, wisdom, power,
excellency, and whatsoever other happiness of man, all the highest, and
greatest treasures and glory under the Sun, without the fear and favor of
God, if they were put in the waights with vanity, vanity would weigh them all
down. So thought David, Psalm. 62. The children of men are vanity, (...) The
only men; those that are men indeed.
the chiefemen are lies: to lay them upon a balance, they are altogether
lighter then vanity it self.

Lastly, the child of God, besides the better and more special good ground,
(which is the child of God, to whom in all my Discourse I oppose the stony
ground, which I call the formal hypocrite) is said to be of an honest and good
heart: that is, downright for godliness and good men, without hollownesse,
faintheartednesse, or slinking. He makes Christianity as it were his trade,
he sweates and toiles in it, as the end for which he was created, and placed in
this world: And as he receives the word of God into his honest and good heart;
so there he treasures it up, and keeps it faithfully. The word in the original,
is (...). He keeps it though it be with much difficulty, struggling and
colluctation with his own corruptions, the temptations of Satan, and vanities
of the world; who cunningly conspire and labor jointly to pluck it up, and
wrest it from him: and he brings forth fruit with patience. He yields no
ground, though he meet a a Lion in the way, or a Tyrant in the face. In the
day of trial and encountering with dangers and ungodly oppositions, he shrinkes
not but stands fast, and suffers himself rather to be overflowed, then to be
carried down the stream of the sinful fashions and wicked ways of the
world. He knows full well, howsoever he goes now on his way weeping, yet he
caries precious seed; and therefore the time will come shortly, that he shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him. Crosses,
disgraces and tribulations may beget in the formal hypocrite, fainting and
defection: Romans 5.3.4 5.
but in Gods child they bring forth patience, experience, hope and resolution.
Ever when he enters consultation with himself, whether God must be obaied and
glorified, or man pleased and satisfied; he is quickly resolved out of that in
Isai. 51.12. I, even I, am he, that comfort you. Who art thou, that thou
should fear a mortal man, and the son of man, which shall be made as
grass? And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has spread out the heavens,
and laid the foundations of the earth? He considers the heavy judgment
determined, and reserved for all fearful men, al spiritual cowards, and
saint-hearted in the Christian warfare; who more fear men then God, and for
their favor and countenance, part with the protection of the Almighty, and
the comforts of a good conscience: They shall be punished with unbelievers,
with the abominable, with murderers, and whoremongers, with idolaters, and
hers, in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death: Revel. 21.8.

You may now clearly conceive the point I have in hand; how the word of God,
is not rooted in the conscience of the formal hypocrite. The ordinary
intelligencers to his conscience are examples, custom, opinion, worldly
wisdom, common prejudice against a strict course of sanctification;
precedencie and practice of greater men, for true goodness, many times
ouerprized, and misualued by the worlds flattering censure; the common natural
notions of right and wrong. But if upon some extraordinary good motion, by
guidance of divine rules, he sometimes cross the current of the times, enter a
profession of sincerity, and some correspondence with Gods children, it is but
for a spirt, an essay, like a morning cloud, and as the morning dew. For as
soon as his fervor in religious affairs, and furtherance of good things does
once by the fury of hell, cruelty of profane men, malice of the world,
enkindle and stir up against him, I say not only a fiery trial, but even
some smarting heat of lesser persecution, some railing and slanderous tongue,
which schorches like coals of Juniper, a disconccit and dereliction in his
friends and old acquaintance, disgrace with the world, discountenance of
Greatness, unlikelihood of rising and preferment; if it once raise against him
storms of iealousies, enuies and molestations; why, then he is gone, he slinks
and starts aside like a broken bow. All his former good motions, purposes and
endeauours melt as the winter ice; and go away like the morning dew. For the
formal hypocrite ever when he seeles disturbance in his present security,
interruption of his former contentments, hazard of his temporal felicity, he
begins strongly to suspect himself of too much forwardness, of unseasonable
and preposterous zeal, of distemper, and indiscretion in matters of religion;
and therefore gives back, and falls away into his former plodding course of
formalitie; and that perhaps without any check of conscience: but if any
scruples, and reluctation arise in his heart, out of his worldly wisdom, he
Interprets this yielding to the times to be but an ordinary and pardonable
infirmity; and therefore notwithstanding slatters and deceiues himself with
hope of heaven, which is a strong bar to keep him out of the state of grace,
and unacquainted with the glorious comforts of sound and saving sincerity.

But the sacred light of Gods holy truth, is habituated and incorporated into
the conscience of Gods child, and is the only and constant rule and square, by
which, with all humility, uprightness of heart, a free, entire submission and
obedience unto it, he frames al his thoughts, affections and actions. And in
this light, he walks with a settled constancy and grounded resolution, through
poverty and oppression, contumelies and contempt, slanders and indignities,
good report or ill report. For he has his eye still fastened upon eternity, he
has the crown of glory already in sight, the inestimable pretiousnesse and
everlasting beauty whereof, rauisheth and possesses his truly free and great
heart with such a longing and feruencie, that he is at a point with all that
is under the Sun; that he does not only contemn, patiently endure, and
vanquish al asperities and difficulties; but even with rejoicing entertain and
embrace (if the tyranny of the times so require) the utmost, that malice and
cruelty can inflict upon him. There is no other consideration or creature,
either in heaven or earth, can separate him from the love of God in Christ
Jesus, or from his glorious service in all good conscience.

And as the word of God is planted and rooted in the conscience of Gods child,
for his direction and constancy in the ways of godliness: so is it also
there fastened for his forbearance of sins; by these three properties, which
are not to be found in the formal hypocrite:







extension and intension, both in number and grieuousnesse: a sense and feeling
of them in their true weight, as they are able to sink him down into the
bottom of hell. Much sorrow and anguish, for the stain and guiltiness they
have left behind them, and for that they provoke to just wrath, so loving and
gracious a God. And lastly, a loathing of them, so that he never casts his
eyes back upon them, but with an addition, of a new and particular
detestation. He never enters meditation of the soul and heinous passages of
his former life, but with shame and horror. Every solemn reuiew of his time of
darkness and unregeneration, makes the wound of his remorse to bleed afresh.

By sensiblenes I understand a quick and present apprehension

Habitual tenderness is a gracious temper and disposition of

These properties of tenderness, aptness to smart, easines to bleed at the
apprehension and approach of sin, are peculiar to a conscience illightened,
sanctified, and purged by the blood of Christ; never incident to the best
natural conscience, or furnished with the choysest notions and perfections of
civil honesty and formalitie: for these are never so strait laced, but can
let down at the least without distaste or check, common sins, lesser evils,
the gainefull and honorable errors and obliquities of the time.

Hence it is that all profane and unregenerate men, wanting the curb of a
sober and sanctified conscience, have ever infinite advantage, for getting the
start and precedencie, in compassing the comforts, glory, and preferments of
the world. For they, when the atchieuement of any honor, happiness or high
place is on foot, advise presently with the ordinary informers, and
counselors of their conscience, custom, example, multitude, worldly wisdom,
the sway of the times and such like: but with the word of God and godly
Christians, only so far as they do not cross their ends, and contradict
those plots and contriuances which they have laid for their advancement unto
high rooms. And thus they may pass with reasonable quietness, without grudging
or grieuing of a conscience so guided, through a a thousand corruptions and
indirections, baseness, flatteries, sinful engagements, unwarrantable
courses. Any of which, if it should meet with a conscience once soundly
frighted with horror of former sins, softened and sanctified by the blood of
the Lamb, would not only rub off the skin and gaul it, but make it bleed
to death. But worldly men are at a point, they must and will enjoy the world;
for here they have their portion and heaven. They esteem it their greatest
happiness to be admired and adored above others; and therefore venture upon
whatsoever unlawful and indirect procurements, which may bring them to high
places: rather then they will be defeated and disappointed in the pursuit of
worldly happiness, they will through, whether it be thick or thin, right or
wrong, force or fraud, stain of reputation, or wound of conscience; Simonie or
flattery, friend or foe all is one: though in the mean time they strike their
own poor souls through with many sorrows; though when they are most glorious
in their own conceit, and in the ^ie of the world; in the just censure of God,
Angels, and sound Christians they be most vile and contemptible: and indeed in
this seeming sunshine of worldly prosperity, they treasure up unto themselves
strange fears and astonishments, snares, fire and brimstone, and stormy
tempests against their latter end.

It is otherwise with Gods child in such affairs: He still takes counsel and
direction at the oracle of God; with Cornelius resolution, to hear or forbear
whatsoever is there commanded or forbidden; and so follows the comforts of
this world only so far as it will give him leave, warrant and assistance.
But if he be to enter any corrupt course, or to pass through any unjustifiable
means, for the attainement of his purpose and preferment; there presently
comes into his mind such considerations as these: He conceiues with himself,
that the passage into any place of office, or honor by corruption, is ever
attended with the curse of God; and so no true comfort to be expected in the
enioyment and execution: That the restless humor, and proud spirit of ambition
ever haunts and possesses men of least worth, and worst conscience: That he
which truly fears God never desires height of place for the glory or gain;
but only with a sobor indifferency, thither enclines and caries his
affections and hopes, and that with trembling at the waightinesse of the
charge, where it pleases divine providence by honest and lawful means to
plant or transplant him, for the employment of his talent; and where he may
most glorify God, benefit the Church, and keep a good conscience. He thinks
upon the vanity and misery of all things we enjoy in this world; of that
strict and great account he must very shortly make unto the Lord, and Judge of
all the world; of the length of that eternity, through all which is unavoidably
to be endured an everlasting estate, either in the joys of heaven, or pains
of hell. Out of such thoughts as these springs his truly noble and Christian
resolution; that he had rather want preferment while the world stands, and end
his days in a retired and innocent obscurity, then by casting himself into
the common fashions and corruptions of the world, forfeit the fruit and comfort
of his former integrity, wound his conscience, and serve the time: That he is
far more willing to endure any affliction or disgrace with Gods children,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, and glory of the world for a season.

I now come in the third place, to tell you that the word

And I beseech you mark me in this point. For the thoughts of a man do far
more clearly, and impartially distinguish the power of sanctification from the
state of formality, then words, actions, and all outwardnesse of carriage. For
in these many times is much cunning and enforcement, artificial and fained
behauiours; counterfeit and formal conueiances, disguisements, and
hypocrisies. They are liable to the laws of men, open and obuious to the eye
and judgment of all; and therefore fear of punishment, reproach, and base
reputation, shame, and speech of the world, hope of reward and rising; desire
of maintaining a good opinion for honesty and religion; of holding some
gainful coherence with Gods children; are of great power to restrain them,
and to keep them within good compass and moderation. So that a man's words and
actions, may be fair, ingenuous, and honorable; whose thoughts are base,
profane and abominable. But thoughts are the free, immedi^^^ and invisible
productions of the heart, never taken within the walk of humane justice, by
their natural secrecy exempted from man's most privy search, and all
executions of State. Their aberrations are only censurable by the searcher of
all hearts; no eye pries into these secrets; but that which is ten thousand
times brighter then the Sun: And therefore millions of thoughts, many
thousand forms of imagination spring continually out of the hearts of men,
which without fear or mask, without restraint or reservation do
vndissemblingly resemble and represent the true state and disposition of the
heart: So that from them we may be ever sure to take infallible notice, whether
the heart as yet only work naturally, in framing them, in it own sinful
mould, and feeding them with consent and delight; or else be taught and guided
by a supernatural power, to compose them according to the light of Gods word,
and holy motions of his sanctifying spirit.

Let us then consider what deep root the word of God does take, and what
special sovereignty it does exercise in the thoughts of a sanctified man;
whereby he is clearly differenced from all states of unregeneration; even
that of formal hypocrisy, which I place in a degree above civil honesty, and
in the highest perfection attainable by an unregenerate man. We will then for
our present purpose conceive these differences betwixt the child of God, and
the formal hypocrite in this point of thoughts.



Streams do resemble and express the nature and property of those
fountains whence they spring: so ordinarily, thoughts and imaginations follow
the temper and constitution of the heart, wherein they are molded. I say,
ordinarily; for as we do not pass our judgments of the depth of a river, or
quality of the water, when by suddenness of inundation, or incursion of
neighbor brooks, it is grown into a torrent, and becomne muddie for a while:
so neither are we to censure, or take measure of our thoughts by some uncouth
motions, and extraordinary stirrings, we sometimes feel in them, but according
to the ordinary current, and general sway, they commonly hold and exercise in
our hearts. For sometimes, even the unregenerate may have good purposes and
inclinations toward sincerity, earnest longings for the happiness of the
Saints, and the heauenlinesse of their latter end; some flashes of comfort and
persuasion, though from false grounds, that the spiritual state of their soul
is safe and sound: but such thoughts as these in such men, spend their life in
their birth; as they rise, so they glide and pass away without all fruit, true
comfort, or profit to their own souls. On the otherside, the calmnesse and
serenitie of sanctified thoughts in a good Christian, may sometimes be foully
disquieted and interrupted, either by some sudden eruption of the relikes of
our own sinful nature, by violent invasion of some enticing object from
abroad, or by the malicious, and immediate iniections of Satan. But because
such thoughts as these oppose against the general and settled purpose of Gods
child; he well knows, out of his spiritual wisdom and holy experience, how
to repel and bridle them, how to repent of them, and pray against them, how to
be humbled, and bettered by them, in setting a stronger guard, and more narrow
watch over his heart for afterward, left he be unawares surprised the second
time.

Since therefore the heart of a notorious sinner is hardness by a long custom
in a dissolute course, by the contagious company of leaud and graceless
companions, by the curse of God upon his wilful continuance in sin;
therefore I say, his thoughts are all continually, and resoluedly sin, and
that in a high and horrible degree: Wickedness has so enwoouen it self into
his heart, that within he is very corruption. And whereas amongst all other
comforts of life, sleep does most sweetly feed and refresh nature; yet the
humor of sinning is far more natural unto him, and more dominant in his
affections, Prou. 4.16.
then desire of sleep. For he cannot sleep, except he has done evil; and
his sleep departs, except he cause some to fall. He imagines mischief
upon his bed: Psalm. 36.4. When he is encompassed with the fears and darkness of
the night, an image and representation of his grave, and of the horror of that
great day; when his mind is retired from worldly affairs, the noise and tumult
of men; when it is most active, powerful, and fitted for divine contemplation;
even then are his thoughts as black as hell, and deepest in the works of
darkness; then is he plotting and contriuing mischief: How to compass his
pleasures, and accomplish the lusts of his heart, where to crown himself with
fresh Rose-buds; by what means to set forward the trade of drunkenness, and
to enlarge the number of Satan's reuellers, that with more contentment and
company he may leave some tokens of his pleasures and swaggering in every
place: how to supplant his brother, oppress his neighbor, grieve and disgrace
Gods servants; indeed how to become an absolut^ villain upon earth, and the
foulest fiend in hell.

You see what are the thoughts of the notorious sinners obdurate heart, which
is as full of hardness, as the Moon of light; and therefore enforced, as it
were, to empty and discharge it self of some stonines, Isal. 48.4.
by transfusing an iron sinew into the neck, and a brazen brow into the face.
Neither judgment nor mercy will bend and incline him to grace: no admonition
or ministry of the word, will make him blush at his open and professed impiety:
So that his heart does not only greedily entertain, what lewdness does
ordinarily spring from corruption of nature, and is suggested by others; but
being past all sense, both of shame and sin, becomes one of the devils new
inuentours, and sets the thoughts busily on work for the device of strange
villainies and mischiefs, and for addition of new forms, fashions, and
circumstances of sinning.

No better are the thoughts of the gross hypocrite, another 1. Kings. 21.
In the hearts of Ahab and Iezebel was nothing but blood and murder,
covetousness, oppression, and merciless enclosure; only upon the ugly
visages of these soul fiends, they put a vizard of a fast, formal witnesses,
and legal proceeding. The ordinary thoughts then of the gross hypocrite are
the same, as vile and hellish, as those of the notorious sinner. Nay he doubles
his iniquity, and adds weight ^o the vengeance preparing for him; in that he
strains the utmost vein of his wit, and founds the depth of his damned
policy, to clothe them with fair pretenses, and colorable shifts, as they
pass and present themselves unto the world in words and actions, and in that
he labors to seem a Saint, while he is in truth an incarnat devil.

But the thoughts of the formal hypocrite; for with him I notorious sinner,
and gross hypocrite, for further distinction and illustration) I say his
thoughts, as they come certainly short of true sanctification, so they are
far better then these now mentioned. For we suppose his heart to be seasoned
with goodness of nature and civil honesty, to have tasted of the general
graces of Gods spirit, and in some sort of the powers of the world to come; and
therefore his thoughts are more fair, ingenuous, sober and moderate, then
those soul and hateful ones of the notorious sinner, and gross hypocrite. His
heart will rise, and be affrighted with suggestions of infamous consequence and
markeable horror; as those of Atheism, Cruelty, Drunkenness, Adultery,
Her^sie and such like: but notwithstanding, because it is not softened and
sanctified by special grace, without much scruple or conscience, it will let
the imaginations loose to much idleness and vanity, to many fruitless
conceits, impertinencies and profane wanderings; but especially into the
endless maze of worldly cares and earthlymindednes. For he does in some sort
in his practice approve and justify that wicked and pestilent proverb:
Thoughts are free. They are free indeed, in respect of obnoxiousnes to humane
justice, in respect of discovery and danger from any creature; but the eye and
vengeance of heaven takes first and special notice of them, and holds them
punishable, as the principals, and chief plotters of al transgressions. Words
and actions are as it were sins at second hand, the very first life and
freshest vigor of all ill is immediately received, and inspired into the
thoughts. Hence it is, that Peter advises Simon Magus, to pray God, if it were
possible, that the thought of his heart might be forgiven him: as though there
lay the greatest guilt, and deepest stain before God. By the way before I
pass to the thoughts of Gods child, observe one special mark of difference
in this point, betwixt the true Christian, and formal hypocrite. The formal
hypocrite does ever harbor and maintain in himself* one sweet pleasing
bosom sin or other, as voluptuousnes, worldliness, a greedy pursuit of
temporal felicity, an excessive desire of greatness, and note in the world,
an opposition to sincerity, a delight in good fellowship, or some such like
carnal contentment or secret sin: on which his mind most runs; whereupon the
best and the flower, the feruency and dearenes of his thoughts are spent. Gods
word, honor, and service, checkes of conscience, motions of the spirit,
ministry of the word, admonition of friends, salvation of soul, by an
unreasonable and inconsequent discourse of his sensual reason, are all made
subordinate and serviceable to this Idol: To which with much delight he daily
sacrifices the noblest and immediate works and issues of his soul. As for
the state of his conscience, spiritual affairs, care of heaven, that One
necessary thing; these things take up his thoughts but at reuersion, by
starts, by accident; and when they come into the heart, their entertainment is
very cold and strange, their abode short; and while they stay, they are
apprehended and enjoyed with much weariness and weakness. I conceive this to
be the reason: He has a full taste and present feeling of the pleasures of
his sweet sin; he has sensible and certain possession of worldly
contentments, but no real and sound assurance by saving faith, and his
forsaking all sin, of the joys and comforts above; and therefore does
greedily follow and feed upon the present, with consent of his erring
judgment, delight of heart, the best of his affections, and most of his
thoughts. And as for hereafter, since he is conscious to himself, of an honest
civil life, of a sober formal carriage in the affairs of religion, and that
he is not infamous with any notoriousnesse in the world, but as good as the
best, a few precise fellows of purer strain only excepted, whose pretense
and profession of extraordinary sanctity, is nothing (in his conceit) but
humor and hypocrisy; he therefore, I say, for hereafter, referres himself at
all adventures unto the mercy of God, and to the lot and condition of many
thousands which are in the same case and state with himself. But it is
otherwise with Gods child: For by the power of sanctifying grace, as he has
also mortified all other: so specially he has broke the very heart of the
sweet sin of his unregeneration. And as in a besieged city, where the
greatest and most dangerous breach is made, there the inhabitants concur with
chiefest care, and highest resolution, to fortify and make resistance: even so
since he knows and feels, that before his calling his delightful and darling
sin most fearfully wasted his soul, and wounded his conscience, he makes
sure to employ his thoughts with special edge and indignation, to countermine,
prevent, resist, abominate and abandon all thought of that sin: And now by
the grace of God, sit^ the heart, the fountain, is purged and sanctified, the
stream and heat of their intention and delight is carried another way. For he
has found that rich and inestimable Treasure in the Gospel; and therefore he
sels all that he has; he parts with every pleasure; he casts out of his
conceit whatsoever has been formerly dear and precious unto him, and lets
all his thoughts, with loose raines, greatest ioyfulnesse and oftenest
meditation run after it, and sweetly refresh themselves with the glory and
comfort of it. If a man upon the way should find some precious orient pearl,
hardly could he keep his eyes from gazing upon it; his excess of joy would
eas^ly command and confine the sight to so rare and hopeful an object, until
he meet with some skillful Lapidarie, or come where he might thoroughly be
acquainted with the worth, and fully enjoy the wealth of it. Even so, after a
man by the illightened eye of his soul, and the hand of saving faith, once
seize and lay sure hold upon the pearl of great price, the graces of Gods
spirit and eternal life, the heart is presently so filled with love and
admiration, that for ever after it spends the most, the dearest, and the
noblest thoughts upon it: and they once set on foot, are so cheered and
ravished with the heavenly beauty thereof, that they follow with continual
increase of feruencie and longing, until they come unto the clear vision and
full possession of it, at the right hand of God, in the endless joys of the
world above.

largest heart of the best unregenerate man, can or does possibly comprehend.
The formal hypocrit may have his mind worthily busied in points of deepest
learning, in the mysteries of State, and affairs of kingdoms, in the best and
highest considerations which nature, art, morality, or policy can afford, nay,
he may sometimes entertain into his thoughts with joy, the promises of grace,
the happiness of the Saints, the joys of heaven and the like; though these
have never any root or long residence in him. But that the word of grace should
so emplant it self into the inner man, that the thoughts should never be so
well or welcome to the heart, as when they are wading in the great mystery of
godliness, and with an holy wisdom plotting for the enlargement of Christ's
glorious kingdom in himself and others: That it should make all other
discourses of the mind subordinate and contributarie to such heavenly
meditations; and to this end set bounds and limits to the millions of
imaginations that daily arise, and erect an holy regiment amongst them; I say,
this is the special prerogative of a sanctified man. For he alone, because of
his truth, sincerity and uprightness in the inner parts, makes conscience of
idle, vain, and wandering thoughts, (of which the formal hypocrite, either
takes no notice at all, or not much to heart.) He is as much cast down, vexed
and grieved with their disorder and exorbitancie, as with the errors and
infirmities of his words and actions; and therefore establishes as it were a
gracious government amongst them, to keep out confusion, idleness, and
rebellion. He confines them to a reverent and feeling meditation upon Gods word
and works, to a care of conscionable managing the affairs of his calling;
only sometimes, but sparingly with many cautions, exceptions, and
seasonablenes, letting them out to honest recreations. Whatsoever thought is
wandering without this compass or within it insincere, is sinful: so that if he
take any straggling, without these limits, any enticers to vanities and
impertinencies, any obtruders and disturbers of so happy inward peace; he
presently apprehends them, by the watchful eye of his spiritual wisdom;
examines them by the law of God, arraignes them in the consistory of an
illightened conscience, and so cuts them off in time by the power of grace, and
sword of the spirit; that is, by opposing against them at the first rising in
the heart, by present repentance, prayer, and after-watchfulnesse; he blessedly
rids himself of the miseries, and distraction of profane and troublesome
thoughts. That this is no Idea, I now propose unto you* howsoever it so be to
every unregenerate man, and so when he hears it he conceiues of it; for
little knows he what ado every child of God has with his thoughts; I say
that this is no Idea, or idle abstraction, appears pregnantly and plentifully
in David's practice; who for all the strong enticements, ordinarily incident to
the pleasures of a Court, and natural liberty of Princes, although the cares
and weight of a kingdom lay upon him, and that his Royal innocence was still
haunted and assailed with such indignities and vexations, which might almost
have swayed the blessed and quiet thoughts of a glorious Angel to distraction
and coffeehouse; yet for all this the law of God did still principally take
up his heart, and that day and night. Gods word and works, his statutes and
judgments, were meat and drink unto his mind, and his meditation
continually, as is more then plain in many places of the 119. Psalm. Oh, says
he in the 13. portion, how love I thy law! it is my meditation continually. So
vnexpresseable here was his pang of holy love unto Gods law, that he prefixeth
a particle of zeal, and extraordinary passion; Oh, says he: And where the
heart has once truly and sixedly set it love, there all the thoughts feast
themselves with dearest apprehensions, and with greatest impatiencie of all
other employment. This is the very case then of all Gods servants, they
meditate on the word of God most contentedly and continually, because they love
it far before and above all earthly things; and so dearly do they love it;
because in it with special security are conveyed unto them all the rich
treasures of mercy, remission of sins, spiritual comfort, and eternal life,
and particularly sealed unto them by (...) Spirit of the same word. Solomon
confirms this worthy (...) of his Father, by his testimony, Prou. 12.5. The
thoughts of the just are right, judgment, or justice; for so the word
signifies in the Original; but the subtle devices of the wicked are deceit.
The thoughts of all unregenerate men are commonly, either rooting in the earth,
or drowned in pleasures, or running after preferment, or ranging up and down
idly and profanely, or fruitleslie melancholic; or if sometimes they glance,
or settle themselves upon good things, they are still as a menstruous clout,
and abomination to the Lord: because their consciences are not renewed, their
hearts purged, their persons sanctified and accepted. But the thoughts of every
child of God are ordinarily working, for the maintenance and furthering of Gods
glory and good causes, for procuring true good to their brethren, especially in
spiritual things, for increasing grace in themselves, and their store of
comfort against the day of trial. And if so be (which sometimes befalls the
best) they be crossed by sinful motions in themselves, or suggestions of Satan,
yet by their surprising, and suppressing them at the very first rising and
assault, and by present repentance, they are undoubtedly ever pardoned unto
them in Christ Jesus.

Give me leave, I pray you, to illustrate this variety and difference of
thoughts, which I have now largely laid down unto you; in our selves, for the
nearer pressing of our consciences, and that in the matter of Elections.

Let us imagine a notorious sinner to have a voice and hand in such business.
His very first thoughts would be to have no thought at all of Oath or Statute,
of conscience or honesty, of honor of his College, or good of the Church:
but would resolve out of the profane principles of his vast conscience, and by
the benefit of a large acception of charity, to be indifferent for all
comers. Only in his cho^ce, h^e would have an eye to the maine, that the state
of good-fellowship should take no disparagement or diminution; and therefore he
would most carefully cast about with himself by all means, to defeat and
prevent the purposes, and to stop the passage especially of all Puritanes.
You must know by the way, that these are a very dangerous kind of men, able to
blow up whole Houses, by their too fiery zeal against idleness,
drunkenness, other shameful corruptions, close and politic cariages of many
rotten and unconscionable causes and the like. For by The world is come to that
wretched pass, and height of profaneness, that even honesty and
sanctification, is many times odiouslie branded by the nickname of Puritanisme.
Puritanes in this place, I only understand them, (for even such are so
branded) who make conscience of study, and religious education of Scholars,
who are ready ever, and resolute to uphold goodness in a House, though they
be crushed, disgraced and disoffic'd; who out of a gracious and ingenuous
freedom of Spirit, will be their own men in Elections, and other Collegiate
services; and not suffer their consciences to be led hood-winkt to serve other
men's humors and private ends; who choose rather in a neglected state, sweetly
to enjoy the continual feast and perpetual paradise of a sincere heart, true
and inward comfort, the society of Gods servants, then for many times full
dearly bought favors and offices, to enthrall and violence both their
judgments and affections, to live reseruedly, under a mask, and at a hairs
breadth for all occasions and obseruances, so wearing out a little miserable
time in a glorious and countenanced slavery: In a word, who of the two would
rather save their souls, then prosper in the world. Now such fellows as
these, thinks he with himself, which seem, as it were, by an hypocritical
Monopoly, to have engrost all sincerity, honesty and good conscience, must be
kept out; or if by some dysaster, they creep in amongst us, be curbd and kept
under, else shall not we sway and domineere. Hereupon all the labor of his wit,
and toil of his thoughts would be, to plant a thorn, where a vine should
grow, and to burden these sacred and honorable Mansions, designed only for
gracious and golden wits, with leaden drones, and swarms of worthless and
witless creatures.

the gross hypocrite, therefore I follow the thoughts rising thence) he would
within himself cast a greedy and ravenous eye upon the condition of all the
competitours for the place, and at length conclude, and be sure to seize upon
that party, let his learning or honesty be what it would, where in all
likelihood he might make the richest pray, and suck out the greatest
advantage: Either purchase a great friend, strengthen his faction, gratify his
favorites, receive a present bribe, or else, which is a secret, but a sinful
policy, by weighing circumstances, marking insinuations, and former cariages,
expect the largest after gratification, close and indirect considerations, and
the most liberal New-yeeres gifts, (for in them certainly sometimes lurkes
corruption.) These things thus thought upon, there follows now in him, an
addition to the iniquity of the notorious sinner. He is not content to be thus
stark naught, but he must double his sin by seeming good; it is not enough for
him to be thus cursedly pestilent to the place where he lives, but he must
enlarge the mischief, by putting on a vizard of piety: He therefore in a second
place would beat his brains, how he might varnish over this villainy, with
most probable and fairest pretenses. The bribe must come in upon other terms,
with other circumstances, then the grossness of that vile sin is wont to be
conuaied; he thinks how he may deal openly, and in the eye of the world with
men, without all suspicion, while the matter is carried underhand by subtle,
mediate, and most exercisde Agents in the goodly affairs of abominable
corruption. Lastly, he is much troubled in mind, how for all this he may
continue a good opinion with good men, and give satisfaction to those, whom he
deceiues by his seeming: but by much practice he makes this reasonable easy;
for politic hypocrisy has so many faces, turnings and euasions, that it can
too easily insinuate with, and satisfy vnsuspicious, innocent and charitable
sincerity. He can tell them of some depths in the mystery of government,
which every precise underling cannot comprehend; that some liberty and
dispensation must be given to statute-discretion, against the bare letter, and
strict meaning of the statute; that we live not in Platoes commonwealth, or
Mores Eutopia, but in corrupt times, in the very confluence of all the sins of
former ages; and therefore it is utterly impossible to keep a man's self so
passingly pure from all spice of contagion; that something must needs be
yielded to the times, else there is no living, at least no prospering in the
world. Thus the gross hypocrite is ever as thoughtfull for outward
plaistering, as secret plotting.

Thirdly, let us conceive what would be the inward discourse and workings of
the heart in the formal hypocrite, about disposing his voice in Elections. His
thoughts in these cases perhaps, would not be extremely base, nor grossly
wicked: it may be he would be able to clear even his conscience and inmost
conceit; much more to wash his hands from the hateful and crying sin of
downright briberie. This horriblenes is only for notorious sinners, and
gross hypocrites. Nay, out of some sudden pang of highest resolution, that
ingenuousnesse of nature, or moral honesty can produce, he might take heart
to answer and withstand the suites and importunity of Greatness and great
means: only with this reservation, so that his present happiness be not thereby
mainly hazarded, nor hope of his future preferment certainly cut off. For we
must still hold this principle concerning the formal hypocrite; if he be
brought to a iumpe, he will ever make even Gods holy word, conscience,
religion, desires and entreaties of godly men, and all to yield and stoop to
the worldly comforts he presently enioies, but upon as fair terms, and with
as plausible conueiance as may be. It may be, he will be good in many things,
and outwardly in all; but say the Prophets what they will, he must into the
house of Rimmon, God must be merciful unto him in one thing or other: he is
short of the state of grace, and by consequent, has no sound and real
assurance of heaven above; and therefore he will have some sweetness in the
mean time, he will enjoy some shadow at least of one heaven or other upon
earth. So that if we suppose such an one, to take a view in his thoughts of all that stand for a place, he would resolve for goodness and honesty, so far as the
security and safety of his maine contentments would give him leave, so far as
the light of reason, and glimmerings of general graces were able to lead him:
but because he is still too respective of his own particular, wants the eye of
spiritual discretion, and suffers his conscience to be cooled, and
countermanded by worldly wisdom; he may I grant by constraint occasionally or
by accident, consent and concur upon the worthiest; but ordinarily, for mere
love of religiousnesse, he does not make within his own heart, a free,
unpassionate, impartial, sincere and conscionable choice. For let him
otherwise be never so wise or honest, yet he is a mere stranger to the
mystery of godliness, utterly vnapprehensiue of the singular and supernatural
operations of the life of grace; and therefore cannot discern betwixt resolute
sincerity, and true turbulencie: whereupon it may often come to pass, that by
a promiscuous confusion of these two most different spirits, he may so much as
in him lies, repel far the best, to the vnsatisfiable wrong of the party,
and the invaluable loss of the House which should enjoy him. There is one
point further in deliberations of this nature, in which he would iumpe with
the notorious sinner: In aduising with himself for a fit man, if by the way
his thoughts should be crossed, with a man of known, professed, and practiced
forwardness in religion; he would pass him over with contempt and
indignation; for thus would he think with himself: If such a fellow come in
amongst us, we shall have all molded anew after the strict model of his
irregular conscience; we should be troubled with new tricks and erections, for
the encreasement of study and reformation of manners; he would be still
standing and striving for an Ideall and abstractiue purity in Elections, and
other affairs of the College, so that our former quietness and peace would
be much dissweetned with his tartness, and too much preciseness. Thus would
he be as hot and heady against the power of grace, as the notorious sinner.
For though there be many different degrees of illness, of unregenerate men;
some are far more sober, tolerable, and moderate then others, yet all
commonly agree in this, that they are bitter and implacable Opposites to the
profession and practice of sound and saving sincerity. Gods faithful Ones
ever were, and ever will be Signs and Wonders even in Israel: Isa. 8.18.
Monsters unto the (...) licet in^erpretari, vel (...), vel magnos. [Magnis]
^eddidis Calumus.
great men of the world, as David was, Psalm. 71.7. A scorn, reproach, and
derision to them that are round about them: Psalm. 79.4. They shall ever be
accounted men of an odd fashion, and singular carriage from other men, Wisd.
2.15. precise, humorous, hypocritical and the like. Mistake me not; I
apologize not for any unwarrantable opinion tending to Separation; it is only
sanctification, true and undissembled holiness, without which none shall ever
see the face of God, or glory of heaven, which I stand for, and intend in all
my Discourse. But by the way let me tell you this, in this general and
ioynt-conspiracie of all kinds of natural men, against the spiritual state of
true Christians, and the sovereignty of Gods sanctifying spirit in them; the
mere civil honest man, and formal hypocrite, as I take it, are transported
with more fierceness and rage against them, then the gross hypocrite, and
notorious sinner. This I take to be the reason; The gross hypocrite he sins
against the light of his own conscience, and with the certain knowledge of
his heart; and therefore does not much envy and grudge the righteous man his
excellency above his neighbor, and salvation of his soul: The notorious
sinner in his more sober mood, and cold blood will confess himself to be out
of the way, promise and protest amendment, or at least reserues in his heart a
resolution to repent when he is old: but the mere civil honest man and the
formal hypocrite think their own state to be as good as the best; and
whatsoever is more, and besides that which they find in themselves, to be but
needless precisenes, and affected singularity; and therefore are many times
gauld and grieved, that the truly gracious and conscionable carriage of Gods
servants, does censure and condemn their outwardnes and formalitie in
religion, and make it plainly appear, that their case without sound
conversion and imbracement of sincerity, is the very state of wretchedness and
of death.

But now fourthly and lastly, in Elections the thoughts House. He further
calls to mind out of his experience, that commonly those fellows who thrust
into societies, offices, and high rooms, by shufling and violence, by faction
and preposterous favor; by cunning, or corruption, become pernicious and
dishonorable to the places where they live; they are still thorns in the
sides, and pricks in the eyes of all that love grace and goodness: they either
turn idle, truly factious, or notoriously scandalous, by misspending the
invaluable pretiousnesse of their golden hours, in Tauerns, Alehouses, or
some other course of good-fellowship, to the inexpiable and eternal dishonor
of those Houses, of which they should be ornaments: and when they have done
much hurt and mischief here, they are the only men to bargain for, buy, or
compass by indirect and sinister dealing, Benefices, and spiritual promotions
abroad: of which being possessed, they either by unconscionable and cruel
negligence, and Non-residence in their charge, betray the souls of their
people to wildness and barbarism, to ignorance, profaneness, or popery; or
else by a profane and unhallowed handling of Gods word, by daubing with
untempered mortar, as the Prophet speaks, so strengthen the hands of the
wicked, that they cannot return from their wicked ways and kill the heart of
the righteous, Ezech. 13.22.
and make them sad whom the Lord has not made sad, that the bruised reed is
quite broken, and the smoking flax utterly put out. Now thinks the child of
God with himself out of his spiritual wisdom, if such an one as these
should be chosen by my default and faintheartednesse; I should in some sort
and measure be justly guilty, and answerable before that high and everlasting
Judge, of the many miseries and mischiefs, which ordinarily ensue upon so
unhappy a choice. Hereupon after a mature and impartial suruay of all
circumstances considerable in the party, the statute and whole business; he
singles out him with sincerity and singleness of heart, whom in conscience he
thinks most sufficient; and there he sticks with a truly Christian and
unshaken resolution, pitched by the very power and strength of heaven: and come
what come will, tempests, or fair weather; preferment, or poverty;
threatenings or flattery; policy, or persuasion; private importunities, or
frownings of Greatness; he is at a point, infinitely rather to keep a good
conscience, and save his soul, then to enjoy the present, and gain the whole
world. For he well knows that the day is at hand, even that great and
fearful Day, when the consciousnesse of one gracious action, performed with
uprightness of heart, will breed more comfort, then the glory, riches, and
sovereignty of the whole earth.

To conclude this point: As unregenerate and sanctified thoughts differ much in
their workings even about the same Objects: so there are some, which are Gods
child's peculiar, with which the state of unregeneration is utterly
unacquainted. They are such as these:

I do not hereby exempt the state of vnregene a^ion from all tremblings and
terrors of conscience for sin^e; but only make it a privilege of Gods
ch^ldren, to pass quite through them into the spiritual pleasures, and
paradise of the Kingdom^ of grace, and to be able with an holy amazement and
thankfulness, to look back upon the ska^^es and prints of those former
wounds, of a truly humbled and broken heart, already healed, and ^weethe
closed up with the blood of Christ* whereas in others, they commonly either
work but a half con^^^sion, are expell^d with ou^war^ mirth, or end in despa^re.
print or skarre of these woeful and wounded thoughts, appear in the heart of
the formal hypocrite. This hell upon earth, is only passed through by the
heirs of heaven, while the children of hell have commonly their heaven upon
earth.

2 Secondly, thoughts I mean those blessed stirrings of the har^, unspeakable
and glorious, when the seal of remission of sins, is first set unto the
soul by the Spirit of ad^ption.
composed al of pure comfort, joy, heaven, immortality, the sweet and lovely
issues of the spirit of adoption. These flow only from the fountain of grace,
and spring up in that soul alone, which having newly passed the strange
agonies, and sore pangs of the new birth, is presently bathed in the blood of
Christ, lulled in the bosom of Gods dearest mercies, and secured with the
seal, and secret impression of his eternal love, and sacred spirit, not only
from the rage of hell; but also of an everlasting and royal inheritance above.
O^ the heart of the unregenerate man is far too narrow, base and earthy to
comprehend the unmixed pleasure^, the glorious Sunshine of those blessed and
joyful thoughts, which immediately follow upon the storms of fears and
terror, ordinarily incident to a sound conversion.

3 Thirdly, thoughts of spiritual rauishment, and unutterable rapture, slashes
of eternal light, raised sometimes in the hearts of the Saints, and
occasionally inspired by the Spirit of all and endless comfort; which with
inconceivable amazement and admiration feed upon, and fill themselves with the
ioies of the second life, in such an uncouth ecstasy and excess, as is far
above, and without the compass and conc^it of all worldly comforts, the tongue
of Angels, or heart of man. In this point, I appeal to the conscience of the
true Christian, (for I know full well, that all my Discourse is a parable, and
paradoxe to the profane) whether he has not sometimes, as it were, a sea of
comfort rained upon his heart, in a sweet shower from heaven, and such a
sensible taste of the everlasting pleasures, by the glorious presence of inward
joy and peace, as if he had the one foot in heaven already, and with the one
hand had laid hold upon the crown of life: especially after a zealous heat,
and feeling feruencie in prayer, after an entire, gracious, and profitable
sanctifictation of the Sabbath, at the time of some great and extraordinary
humiliation entertaind, and exercised with fruit and sincerity, when he has
freshly with deepest groans and sighs, and new struglings of spirit, renewed
his repentance upon occasion of relapse into some old, or fall into some new
sin, when the empoisoned arrows of cruel and fiery tongues, pointed with
malice, policy and profaneness come thickest upon him; and yet retyring into
his own innocent heart, he finds no cause of such merciless vexation, but
defense of Gods truth, and profession of holiness. Nay, sometimes upon on the
deaths-bed, to a soul conscious of an upright and unspotted life, the ioies of
heaven present themselves before the time; so longing a sympathy is there
betwixt the life of grace and endless glory. Such like joyful springings, and
heavenly eleuations of heart as these which I have now mentioned, are the true
Christians peculiar; no stranger can meddle with them, no heart can conceive
them, but that which is the Temple of Gods pure and blessed Spirit.



In a body of best and exactest constitution, the senses are quick and nimble,
and sharpliest discern, with greatest life and vigor apprehend their objects,
and are most sensibly affected, or displeased with their conuenience, or
antipathy: Even so in a heart of a true spiritual temper, seasoned and softened
with the dew of grace; the thoughts are active, ready, and addressed with zeal
and contentment, to incline and apply themselves to the condition of the times,
and variety of occasions offered for some holy use, to the bettering of the
soul, and the enlarging of Gods glory. In the time of fasts and sackcloth; if
Gods judgments be threatened out of the Pulpit, or executed from heaven; when
the Church wears her mourning weed, sincerity droupes, and the godly hang down
their heads; in such black and dismal days, they are impatient of all
temporal comfort, they willingly put on sadness, to entertain penitencie,
humiliation and sorrow: but they are clothed with joy and lightsomnesse, when
mercy and salvation are wisely, and seasonably proclaimed out of the book of
life; when religion spreads and prospers, and divine truth has free passage,
when whole States have escaped the bloody Papists Gunpowder, and the royal
breasts of Kings their empoisoned knives, and in such like joyful and happy
times. Thus the thoughts, and inmost affections of Gods child have their
changes, their several seasons and successions, as it pleases the Lord to
offer, or execute mercy or judgment out of his word, or in the world abroad.
But the thoughts of the formal hypocrite, though they suffer indeed many
alterations, and distractions about earthly objects; they ebb and flow with
discontent or comfort, as his outward state is favored or frowned upon by the
world: yet spiritual occurrents, obseruable with devotion and reverence for
the good of the soul, have no great power to work upon them; sacred times, or
days of affliction, are not wont to make any such impression, or to breed
extraordinary stirrings, and motions in them. Let judgments blast, or mercies
bless a kingdom; let Gods word find smooth and even way, or rubs and
opposition; let profaneness be countenanced, or sincerity cherished, he
takes no thought: so he may sleep in a whole skin, and keep entire his
worldly comforts; his thoughts continue heavy, dull and formal. He may
conform and consort with the times in his outward gestures, words and actions;
but ordinarily his thoughts admit no change, save only, so far as his
private temporal felicity is endangered by public judgments, or enlarged
by showers of mercies and blessings from heaven. I cannot enlarge this point at
this time: only I will give one instance in their difference of thoughts upon
the Sabbath day.

The Sabbath day is, as it were, the fair day of the soul, wherein it should
not only repair and furnish it self with new spiritual strength, with
greater store of knowledge, grace and comfort: but also feast with it heavenly
friends, the blessed Saints and Angels, upon those glorious ioies and happy
rest, which never shall have end. Every child of God therefore, which has
already a real interest in that eternal rest, makes not only conscience of
doing his own ways, seeking his own will, Esaias 58.3.
speaking a vain word on that day: but also in some good measure makes it the
very delight of his heart, the love and comfort of his inward thoughts, so that
he may consecrate it as glorious to the Lord. He does not only give quiet and
cessation to his body from worldly business* and works of his calling; but
also empties his head, and disburdens his thoughts of al earthly cares, that so
they may wholly and entirely intend the holy motions of Gods Spirit, and spend
themselves in godly and extraordinary meditations, fitting the feast day of
the soul, and the Lords holy day. This is the desire, longing and endeavor of
his heart, thus to sanctify the Sabbath; and if at any time he be turned awrie
from this uprightness by company, or his own corruptions, he is after much
grieved and vexed with it, repents and prays for more zeal, conscience and
care for the time to come. But the formal hypocrite, howsoever he may on that
day forbear and abstain from his ordinary sins, labors, sports and
idleness; howsoever he may outwardly exercise and execute all duties and
services of religion; though indeed more of custom and for fashion, then with
hearty and true devotion: nay, he may have other thoughts on that day, but
only so far, as the bare solemnity of the time and the greater Presence can
alter them: yet I dare boldly say it, no formal hypocrite, no kind of
unregenerate man can possibly make the Sabbath his delight, as is required,
Isai. 58.13. And which is presupposed to make us capable of the blessings
following in the same place: Then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will
make thee to moun^ upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. He
cannot for his life sequester his thoughts at all, not even on that day, from
worldliness and earthly pleasures, to divine and sacred meditations. Do what
he can, he cannot beat and keep them off from worldly Objects; they will not
leave their former hants, or be restrained from plotting, or pleasing
themselves with weeke-day businesses.

Lord, it is strange that the soul of a man, so noblely furnished with powers
of highest contemplation; being so strongly and sensibly possessed with
consciousnesse, and conceit of it own immortality, and having the restless
and unsatisfied desires of it wide capacity, never filled but with the Majesty
of God himself, and the glory of an immortal crown, should be such a
stranger to heaven, the place of it birth and everlasting abode; that upon that
day, whereon, as upon the golden spot and pearl of the week, the Lord has
stamped his own sacred Seal of institution, and solemn consecration for his
own particular service, and special honor; yet, I say, upon that day it
cannot settle and continue it own thoughts and motions upon those unmixed and
blessed joys, and the way unto them; without which it shall be everlastingly
miserable, and burn hereafter in that fiery lake, whose flames are fed with
infinite rivers of Brimstone, and the endless wrath of God, for ever and ever.

Now I pray you tell me, when we shall have reigned hereafter many millions
of years in heaven, what thoughts will remain of this little inch of time
upon earth? When we have passed through a piece of eternity, where will appear
the minute of this miserable life? and yet our thoughts and affections are so
glued unto the world, as though eternity were upon earth, and time only in
heaven. You are men capable of worthiest and highest eleuations of spirit; I
beseech you, resume this meditation at your leisure; methinks it should be able
to breed thoughts of a far more noble and heavenly temper, then ordinarily
arise and are nourished in the hearts of men.

But to follow my yurpose. Certain it is, not the best vn^egenerate men can
endure an entire and exact sanctification of the Sabbath; it is not a Jubilee
to their hearts, and the joy of their thoughts: for they cannot abide to have
their minds stay long in a feeling meditation upon spiritual affairs, upon
the examination of their former life, the state of the other world, the
sleights and tentations of Satan, the day of death, the tribunal of heaven and
such like. For though the best of them may have a persuasion of their being in
the state of grace, as I have largely proved heretofore: yet since it is wrongly
and falsely grounded, it cannot abide the search and touchstone: Hence it is,
that of all things they love not to be alone. They may please themselves well
enough in solitariness, upon some private business; for the more profound
plotting and contriuing worldly matters; for a more free, but filthy exercise
of the adulteries of the heart, and contemplative fornication; to feed upon
dull and fruitles melancholy; to let their thoughts wildly range and run
riot into a world of imaginations, to diue into the mysteries of nature, or
depths of State: but to be alone only for this purpose, that the mind may more
fully and immediately work upon the spiritual state of the soul, and
impartially inquire into the conscience; they cannot, they will not endure it;
and therefore commonly cast themselves into one knot of goodfellowship or
other, that they may merrily pass away that time; for an hour of which (the
time of grace being once expired) they would give ten thousand worlds, yet
shall never be able to purchase it again. But Gods children when they are
alone have inward comfort and heavenly matter enough to work upon: a pleasing
contentment and satisfaction, arising from an humble and sober remembrance of a
well spent life, does infinitely more refresh them, then all the reuellings and
pleasant devices of merry companions: nay, many times in their seasonable
solitariness, divine graces are more operative, and stirring, and raise
inflamed motions of delight and joy.

God is yet further very much differenced from the formal hypocrite, by his
skill and dexterity in ruling; by his holy wisdom, and godly jealousy in
watching over his thoughts.

The heart in which Gods spirit is not resident, with special grace and
sanctifying power; howsoever the words may be watched over, and the outward
actions reformed, lies commonly still naked and open without special guard or
settled government. For the best natural man is too impatient of restraint and
severity over the power of imagination and freedom of his thoughts; they being
naturally exempted and privileged from all humane and created sovereignty, and
the vnc^ssantnesse of their workings and perpetual presence in the mind would
make the abridgement of their liberty more sensible and distasteful. It may be
out of the natural grounds of civil honesty, and some general apprehension of
the power of the world to come; he may be so far solicitous about his
thoughts, tha^ if any start up of more soul and monstrous shape, enticing him
to some gross and infamous sin, which would disgrace him in the world, or
breed extraordinary horror in his conscience: he presently sets against it,
disclaimes, abandons and expels it. He may be of experience and skill to
conquer and suppress thoughts of heaviness, and melancholy; although in this
point he many times fearfully deceiues himself; taking the holy motions of
Gods spirit enclining him to godly sorrow for his sins; to be melancholicke
thoughts tending toward too much strictnes and unnecessary discomfort: So
grieuing the good spirit, and stopping against himself the very first and
necessary passage to salvation. Thus the formal hypocrite may have sometimes
and in part, a slight misguided and general care and oversight of his
thoughts: But because the depth of his deceitful heart, and the many
corruptions that are daily and hourly hatched in it, were never ripped up and
revealed unto him by the power and light of saving grace, he cannot hold that
hand over his heart as he ought; he does not keep a solemn particular, and
continual watch and ward over his thoughts, which is little enough to keep a
Christian in sound comfort and inward peace; he has no heart with such
anxiety, and care to look unto his heart; he does not so often and seriously
think upon his thoughts, holding it the last and least of a thousand cares.
But every child of God, certainly makes it his chiefest care, and one of his
greatest Christian toiles, to guard his heart, and guide his thoughts. He
follows in some good measure by his practice that holy counsel of Solomon,
Prou. 4.23. Above all watch and ward keep thine heart. The word in the
Original is borrowed from the affairs of war. Let us imagine a city not
only begirt with a strait and dangerous siege of cruel and blood-thirstie
enemies, but also within infested with lurking Commotioners, and traitors to
the State; how much do you think would it stand that city upon, with all
vigilant policy, to stand upon it guard for prevention of danger? It is just
so with the heart; not only Satan is ever waiting opportunity, to throw in
his fiery darts, and sensual Objects from abroad, like false Simons to
insinuate themselves; but also, it feels, to it much vexation, many rebellious
stirrings within it own bowels. The tender conscience of a true Christian is
very sensible of all this danger, and by his own experimental and practical
knowledge he is acquainted with the many breaches, and desolations made in the
soul, both by these open enemies, and secret rebels; and therefore furnishes
himself daily, with much holy wisdom and watchfulness; with experience and
dexterity in this great spiritual affair of guarding and guiding his heart. We
may take a view of this his sanctified and Christian wisdom in governing his
thoughts, in these four points.

place where he lives, or the like: Or whether he come addressed with his own
more fearful immediate Iniections; which he sometimes presents in his own
likeness: As when he casts into the Christians mind distrusts, and doubts
about the truth of heaven, and of divine and heavenly truth, concerning the
certainty, and being of all that majesty and glory above; for such thoughts
as these, are sometimes offered to the most sanctified soul; Lib. de
Conscientia.
Bernard calls the^ terribilia de side, horribilia de diuinitate. But mark here
the carriage of Gods child, he does not wrestle with these hel-bred thoughts,
he sets not his natural reason upon them; for thence perhaps would follow
inclinations to Atheism, desperateness^^ in sinning, and other fearful
consequents: but at the very first approach, abandons and abominates them to the
very pit of hell whence they came; he prays, repents, and is humbled by them,
and thence clearly sees they are none of his; and so in despite of such
devilish malice, walks on comfortably in his way to heaven. If Satan speed
not in this black shape; he at othertimes puts on the glory of an Angel: and
perhaps may bring into his remembrance even good things, but out of their due
time, that he may hinder him of some greater good. As at the preaching of the
word, he may cast into his mind unseasonably godly meditations, that so he may
distract and deprive him of the blessings of a profitable hearer: At the time
of prayer, he may fill his head with holy instructions, that so he may cool
his seruencie, and bereave him of the benefit of so blessed an exercise. With
these, and a thousand more such like vexations in his thoughts, the child of God
is sore troubled and much exercised.

Secondly, another branch of spiritual wisdom in watching new stain, and
laden with more guiltiness. Whereas therefore the sensual sweetness of a man's
beloved sins, has before his calling, got such strong hold and hant in his
affections, that it will be still afterward with baits and allurements,
soliciting even the renewed heart, if not to the iteration of the gross act,
yet at least to enjoy it in thought: it does very much behooue the child of
God, to be wary and watchful in this point. If he remit but a little of his
heat of zeal against sin, and seruencie of his first love, or grow
regardles of his thoughts, it will presently gather power and opportunity for
reentrie. Here then is the toil and trial of Christian wisdom and
watchfulness over the thoughts. If when the soul pleasures of former sins
be represented unto the mind, he has either learned to smother them at their
first stealing into the heart, by opposing against them, a consideration of the
many wounds, and much waste they have formerly made in his soul: Or else by
his growth and strength in grace, be able to look back upon them without
delight, to retain them only for renewing repentance, and to dismiss them
with loathing and detestation. Full sweet is the comfort, and great the
happiness of that Christian, who has his corruptions so far mortified, and
the remission of his sins so surely sealed unto him; that the thoughts of his
former pleasing sins can neither tickle him with delight and new desire, nor
affright him with I mean horror of judgment, not detestation.
horror. For the one, Oh, says blessed Austin in his Confessions, what shall I
return unto my gracious God, that I can now look my sins in the face, and
not be afraid? But here the wisest Christian may be easily plunged over head
and ears into one of Satan's most deceitful depths, except he be very wary:
For in the solitary musings upon his former sins, to this good end, that he
may utterly grow out of love with them, and further loath them; Satan is ever
ready (for both his craft and malice are endless) secretly to add tinder to
the fire of his affection, so to inflame him with fresh love and liking of that
sin, which at that time he most labors, and has ever greatest reason to
abhor. And the tide of affections being once on foot toward an old pleasing
sin; it is a great measure of grace must stop the torrent of them. In
watching therefore over the thoughts, the brightest eye of Spiritual wisdom,
has need to intend this point to descrie this depth.

Thirdly, another special care the child of God has in the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. There are these maine objects,
about which especially, actual concupiscence is sinfully exercised, riches,
pleasures, honors: if he once let his thoughts claspe about any of these with
immoderate desire and delight, he is gone. For so riches will bring forth
covetousness, and covetousness begets usury, oppression, enclosure, buying
and selling offices and dignities, grinding the faces of the poor, and a
thousand more mischiefs: It deuours all natural and honest affections, and
turns them into earth, it makes kindred, friends, acquaintance, contentments
serviceable to it greedy humor: Nay it makes a man to contemn himself body
and soul for this transitory trash. Pleasures inflame lust, and lust so
emasculates all the powers of the soul, that its noblest operations become
brutish: it begets a wanton eye, a lascivious ear, obscene talk, filthy
jests, delight in plays, and hateful pictures, besides many other secret and
fearful abominations not to be conceived without horror, much less to be
named. Honors breed ambition, and ambition bids the soul speak unto a man,
in the language of Neroes mother; Occidar modo imperes: Be some body in the
world while thou staiest here, though I lie in the flames of hell
everlastingly hereafter. Deeply then does it concern every true Christian
with jealousy and trembling, narrowly to watch and observe the first and
secret motions of the heart, lest he should unawares be woefully caught, and
ensnared in that black and accursed chain: the first lincke of which, grows
out of natural corruption, and the last reaches the height of sin, and
depth of hell. We may see four links of it: Iam. 1.14.15. about the breeding
of sin; and other four, Heb. 3. about it growth and perfection. First, an
idle sinful thought begins to draw, as it were, the heart aside from the
presence and consideration of God almighty, to a sight and suruay of the
pleasures of sin. Secondly, it having, as it were, the heart by it self,
puts on a bait, allures and entices, holding a conference and parley with the
will, about the sweetness of pleasures, riches, honors, glory and such like.
Thirdly, the will accepts of the motion, consents, plots and forecasts for the
accomplishment, the affections add heat and strength, the heart travels with
iniquity; and so at length by the help of opportunity, sin is brought
forth. If you look upon the Original in S. James, you will easily gather
these four degrees. Now further by often iteration of the act of sinning with
delight and custom, the heart is hardened; so that no terror of judgment, nor
promise of mercy will enter. Secondly, it becomes an evil heart, and is
wholly turned into sin, it drinks up iniquity like water, and feeds upon
it, as the horsleech on corrupt blood. Thirdly, it grows an unfaithful heart,
and then a man begins to say within himself, there is no God, at least in
respect of providence, and care over the world, and executions of judgment
upon sinners: he bids him depart from him, and says to him; I desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; who is the Almighty, that I should serve him? Or what
profit should I have if I should pray unto him? Fourthly follows an utter
falling away from God, grace, and all goodness, without all sense, check, or
remorse of sin, shame, and his most accursed state; and so immediately from
this height of sin, into the fiercest flamea and lowest pit of hell. For if
the first degree deserve eternal death, what confusion must befall this
Babell? You see in what danger he is that gives way unto his first sinful
motions.

Lastly, a principal employment of holy wisdom in if he find at any time his
heart carried away with transitory delights, carnal and unprofitable thoughts;
or his mind musing impertinently, and gazing upon the painted and vanishing
glory of the world: Especially since there is such plentiful and precious
choice of best meditations, obuious to every Christian, able to fill with
endless contentment all the understandings of men and Angels for ever. As the
incomprehensible gloriousness of God, in the infinite beauty of his own
immediate Majesty, and sacred attributes in his word and works; in his
judgments and mercies; in his Church and Sacraments. The miraculousnesse of
our redemption, and all the comfortable and glorious passages thereof. The
great mystery of godliness, the power of grace, trade of Christianity and
course of sanctification; matter of sweetest contemplation. Concerning our
selves there is to be thought upon all the affairs of our calling, the
particulars, perplexities, and cases of conscience incident unto them. Our
present vileness, and fearful infirmities; the miseries and frailty of this
life; the trains of Satan, the terrors of hell; that great judgment, even at
hand. In our spiritual state, how to preserve our first love, escape relapses,
grow in grace, keep a good conscience, come to heaven. And when the ^ie of our
understanding is dazzled with those higher considerations, or wearied with these
inferior; it might refresh it self with the speculatiue fruition of many
invisible comforts, with variety of heavenly things, concerning the immortality
of our souls, the large promises of everlasting blessedness, the glorious
rising again of our bodies, the joys and rest of Gods saints above, and that
which is the crown and conclusion of all, our own most certain blissful
state of happiness and eternity in the second world. If men had grace and
comfort to enlarge their hearts to such meditations as these; what room would
there be for earthli-mindednes, vanities and impertinencies, much less for
proud, ambitious, covetous, lustful, envious and reuengefull thoughts.

Thus far of the care and conscience of the true Christian, in watching over
and guiding his thoughts; which is a special mark of difference from all
states of unregeneration: for the regenerate only keep the last commandment;
which rectifies the inward motions of the heart.

Now lastly in a fourth place, and in a word; Gods child

The most comfortable and sanctified soul, is never in such perpetual
serenitie, but that it is sometimes as it were ouerclouded with dumps of
heaviness; and inwardly disquieted with it own motions, or the suggestions of
Satan. While this flesh is upon it, it shall be sorrowful; and while it is in
this vale of tears, it must mourn. There is not an heart so sweetly and
resoluedly composed for heaven; but is sometimes dissetled with thoughts of
indignation: And that especially, as appears by David, Psalm. 37. and 73.
When folly is set in great excellency; when men neither of worth, conscience,
or ingenuitie, are advanced to high rooms, domineere in the world, and
imperiously insult over sincerity; when the wicked prosper, and spread
themselves in fresh pleasures and honors like green Bay-trees; when those
have their eyes standing out for fatnes, and more then heart can wish; to whom
pride and insolency are as a chain, and who are covered with profaneness
and cruelty, as with a garment. But here mark the diff^^ence. Discontentfull
discourses in the mind of the formal hypocrite either break out into
desperate conclusions, and fearful horror, although this be but seldom;
(for commonly this kind of unregenerate man lives flourishingly, and dies
fairly in the eye of the world: exemplarie, and irrecouerable despair in this
life, does oftnest befall either the notorious sinner, the mere civil honest
man, or especially the gross hypocri^e;) therefore I would rather say that in
him such discontentfull debatements, are either appeased by some opposite
conceit of stronger worldly comfort; abandoned by entertainment of outward
mirth; diuerted by company, pleasures, and joyful accidents, composed by
worldly wisdom or the like. But heauie-hearted thoughts in Gods child, though
for a while not utterly without some aspersion of distrust, fretting, and
discontent; yet commonly at length being mingled with faith, and managed with
spiritual wisdom; by the grace of God, break out into fairer lightening of
comfort, greater heat of zeal, more lively exercise of faith, gracious
speeches, and many blessed resolutions. I will but only give one instance, and
that in David, a man of singular experience in spiritual affairs.

Look the beginnings of the 62. and 73. Psalms. And you shall find David to
have been in a heavy dumpe, and sore conflict in his own heart with strong
tentations unto impatiencie. He recounts the issue, of the dispute with
himself, in the beginnings of these Psalms. Yet says he in the 73. for all
this God is good unto Israel: even to the pure in heart. In the 62. Yet let
devils and men rage and combine, yet my soul keeps silence unto God, of him
comes my salvation, etc. His many wrongs, vexations and indignities together
with the implacable malice, and impotent insultations of his adversaries, had
no doubt a little before much run in his mind. Let us conceive such as these to
have been his thoughts; and that thus or in the like manner; he communed and
confered with his royal self.

Lord, thinks he with himself; I have with lowest humility, and uprightness
of heart resigned mine own soul; nay, I have vowed and resolved that my
crown and scepter, my court and whole kingdom, shall for ever be serviceable
to my gracious God, and that great majesty above. My mind is never truly
pleased and joyful; but when it is gazing and meditating upon the excellent
beauty of his glorious Being; upon his bottomless goodness, and immeasurable
greatness. His word and sacred laws are better and dearer unto me, then
thousands of gold and silver. His Saints upon earth are only my solace, and
their sincerity the delight of mine heart. For mine innocence, from those
imputations which are charged upon me, I dare appeal unto the strictest
Tribunal of heaven. Why then how comes it to pass, that I am become a
spectacle of disgrace and contempt, to heaven and earth, to men and Angels, to
Gods people, and that which grieves me more, to Gath and Askelon? Saul, for all
the service I have done to hi^* and to the State, hunts me up and down like a
Partridge in the mountains. Dogged Doeg, he has informed against Ahimelech
for releeuing me; and so caused the sacred blood of 85. Priests to be spilt as
water upon the ground. Malice and fury drive me into the wilderness, (for
Lions and Tigers are more mercif^^, then madded and enraged prophanenes:) but
there the barbarous Ziphims have betrayed me to the King. I am railed upon, not
only by base and worthless companions, by fellows of prostituted conscience
and conversation, that were tolerable: but even Princes, and those that sit in
the gate speak against me. Not only drunkards make songs and jest upon me: but
even great men, with authority and imperiousness carry in triumph my
distressed, and forsaken innocence. Nay, and that which is the complement of
misery and discomfort; mine own familiars, with whom I have many times
sweetly and secretly consulted, they have also deceived me, as a brook; and as
the rising of the rivers, they are passed away. But mark now the issue of this
conflict, and inward dispute with himself. Had a notorious sinner bin in these
straits, perhaps he would have burst out into desperate conclusions and
furious attempts, Had a Papist bin here, he would presently have had recourse
unto the Jesuits fellows, which are by definition, refined and sublimated
Friars, composed all of fire, blood and gunpowder, inspired by the powers of
darkness, with a transcendent rage against Gods truth, sworn solemnly in the
blackest consistory of hell, to the death of Kings, desolation of States,
combustion of the whole Christian world, and destruction of infinite souls.
These men would presently have addressed some bloody and prodigious villain with
a kniffe, poison or gunpowder to have killed the King, and to have blown up
Saul, and all his court. Had a formal hypocrite bin in this case, seeing these
crosses and miseries befall him; he perhaps would have presently recoiled from
these courses of opposition, though in a good cause, closed with some great man
in the court, and cast himself into the current of the times. But mark David's
carriage in this point: his noble (...) like a glorious Sun, breaks through
these clouds, and storms of inward troubles, these strong temptations to
impatiencie and discontent; he puts on more strength of faith and patience, and
shines brighter in all spiritual graces, me thinks he reaches the very
meridian of all Christian comfort and high resolution. For as you may see in
the forecited 62. Psalm: He does not only fortify his own heart with
unconquerable confidence in God^ protection; but also with an holy triumph,
insults over the insolences of his adversaries, and already washes his
princely feet in the blood of the wicked. He tells them, they shall be slain
every mothers son of them, and that in fearful and horrible manner: As if a
man should come upon the back of a rotten and tottering wall, and with great
strength and fury push it down: even so, when they were most swelled with
pride and prophanenes, the wrath and vengeance of God, should like a fierce
tempest and whirlewind, seize suddenly upon them, and hurl them out of their
place.

FINIS.

