TWO SERMONS PREACHED AT NORTHAMPTON AT TWO SEVERAL ASSIZES THERE. The one in
the time of the Shrevalty of Sir Erasmus Dryden Baronet. Anno Domini, 1621. The
other in the time of the Shrevalty of Sir Henry Robinson Knight, Anno Domini,
1629.

By Robert Bolton Bachelour in Divinity, late Minister of Broughton in
Northamptonshire, and sometimes Fellow of Brasen-nose College in Oxford.

Published by E. H.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER dwelling in the Blacke-Fryers. 1635.

TO THE READER.
THe ancient Imperial Laws gave to an Overseer of a Will, F. de Administ.
Tutor. li. 1.. 1.
not only a protection over it but an Action for itin case of abuse. If I had
not had this interest in the last will of this Author; yet as a Est ille cujus
fidei legatum vel relictum committitur. Ant. Koberg. in Vocab. ut^iusque Iuris.
Fidei Commissarius to him, and specially entrusted by him for the publishing
these two Assise-Sermons, I durst not but perform this trust to my dear
friend. I need not assure the Reader, that these Sermons are truly his own,
for when he shall observe how they are clothed and apparrelled, he will
quickly discover who was their Father. Besides, there are hundreds of people
yet living who heard him preach them, and can with me sufficiently attestate
their legitimation. But I cannot say so for some other Sermons that are
audaciously vented under his Name. For I must say, that the Book called the
Carnal Professor, printed for R. Dawlman 1634, is none of Master Boltons,
neither Quoad materiam, nor quoad formam, as they say in Schools. I go not
about to question it, or to draw any party into punishment; and therefore I
will not ventilate a question in the Civil Law, whether D. de Dolo l. 2. C.
eode^ tit.
Actio de dolo, does not lie in this case: I only note the injury and protest
against it.

In the former Works of this Author you may observe his Eloquence for GOD: In
this for his Prince: in vindicating the Sovereignty of Kings, as the immediate
Ordinance of GOD against those proud usurpations upon them by that Man of
sin, and in extolling Piety, which is then set in the highest place, when it
wisely rules, and directs in the hearts and ways of righteous Governors.

I will say no more of this Work, nor of the Workman: for neither he nor it
stand in need of my praise, it only contents me that I have lived, to see him
live again, to perform his will, to execute his trust committed to me; though
it might have been better done by another if he had so pleased. The law of
reason and right pardons some aberrations in the Work where there is a
necessity of Doing, and I doubt not but a loving Reader will perform this
right to me, that am content thus to expose my self for his sake. From any
other I expect it not; it being a common humor with men that live at ease, to
censure other men, as too busy though they work for the public; of whom I
may say as Erasmus spoke of the Friars in his time; Erasm. Coll de Fra.
Francise.
They are more then men at their meat, and less then women at their work.
And as I contemn the flouts of the one, so I covet the good will and desires
of the other. Let me enjoy this and I have done.

Middle Temple April 24, 1635. EDW. BAGSHAWE.

AN ASSISE SERMON.
PROVE. 29.2. When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when
the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.


EVen as the Sun in the Spring, by his beams and influence, does revive and
quicken with new beauty of life, as it were, things here below; makes the face
of the earth to flourish a fresh and smile; the birds to fill the air with
much melodious sweetness, and so proportionably all other treatures in their
several kinds, lying within the Sphere of his springing warmth, to enlarge
themselves into exultations and mirth, so a good man graced with Authority,
does marvellously refresh all gracious hearts.

But as a bitter tempestuous storm, does with its unresistable impetuousnesse
and violence, beat down, and tear, deface, and bruise: So a Sh^b^a, or Haman,
unworthily mounted on horseback, and haled by the cords of corruption,
against the hair into some high place, undoes all by his domineering; fastens
the bloody fangs of cruelty and hate upon the face of the fairest virtues; and,
which is an inexpiable villainy, makes the hearts of honest men to bleed. And,
that which is an equal mischief, sets the sons of Belial on foot; and
causes good fellows (as they call them,) I mean brethren in iniquity,
Alehouses hunters, drunkards, and such refuse and riffe raffe of the Devil, to
lift up their heads.

It is incredible to consider what a deal of hurt is done, and mischief many
times wrought insensibly and unobservedly; when a wicked wit and wide
conscience welds the sword of Authority. For it is easy to a man so mounted,
by Legal sleights, and pretense of deeper reach to compass his own ends,
either for promotion of iniquity, or oppression of innocence. For the latter;
there is some truth in that Hyperbolicall speech of a great Moralist. Let any
man present me, says he, with the most excellent and blameless action, I
will oppose it with so vicious and bad intentions, all which shall carry a face
of likelihood. What may he do then, who besides the habitual malice of his
own heart, and wit at will, has power and a pretended mystery of government,
to plague a man with in this kind? Especially since he knows himself backed
with that principle in policy. It is not safe so to reverse transactions of
State, though tainted perhaps with some manifest impressions of miscarriage and
error. Woe therefore to those empoysoned stirrops, by which so many such
servants rise aloft and climb so high; I mean bribery, simony, flattery,
temporizing, base insinuations, and such vile means. But I hope this Gangreu
of going into Offices, Benefices, and high rooms by corruption, is not
unhappily crept into this famous and flourishing State; which if it should, it
will eat so far into the hearts and sinews of the State, that no wit of man
can foresee, into what baseness and degenerations this noble Kingdom would
fall in the next age: It would be the cause that many vines, olive trees, and
sigtrees should wither away in obscurity, and brambles brave it abroad in the
world, wallow and tumble themselves in the pleasures, splendor, and glory of
the times. But let such alone, this is their day: When they have blustered a
while like mighty and boisterous winds, they breath out into naught. Their
breath is in their nostrils, stop but their nose, and they are dead. Their big
words are but as a vain foame, etc. If they be not humbled in their place, and
repent, and turn the edge of their sword the right way, there is a day coming
upon them, wherein they shall eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices.

I have intimated now upon purpose, which way I would go upon this latter part
of the verse: When the wicked bear rule the people mourn: Because I shall not
be able at this time to reach it with a full discourse, I return to the first
branch, wherein I will rest.

When the righteous are in Authority, the people rejoice. In these words we may
behold Magistracy, Authority, Sovereignty, like a precious Diamond set in gold,
I mean resting upon a righteous man, sparkling out, as its proper effect,
amiable, noble and sweetest affection, that ever seaz'd upon the heart of man,
joy, contentment, a pleasant sweetness of mind. Mark therefore three points
in the proposition, First, Authority, secondly, its proper subject, A righteous
man, thirdly, rejoicing, its native and kindly effect.

Soveraignety is sacred in it self; Authority even abstracted, is orient and
illustrious. A ray, and representation of that great Majesty above.

It also ennobles the subject that receives it, with a remarkable splendor,
and a kind of divine character. I have said you are Gods, Psalm. 28.6. That is,
See Sclater, page 8.
first, by Analogy, secondly, Deputation, thirdly, Participation. For you well
know that besides that Imperial Majesty, which is originally and individually
inherent in the person of a Monarchical Sovereign, there are also by
derivation, or deputation, some marks and impressions of that princely
endowment stamped, and shining in the face and presence of every subordinate
Magistrate, which makes them venerable, especially those who give life and
vigor, to the execution of their places, with the nobleness of a free spirit,
and clearenesse of a good conscience.

Lastly, it shining in it proper subject, a rightteous man, the true Sun of
Soveraignety, it dispels sadness of heart, in which all objects of
lightsomenesse are drowned. The spirit of a man is broken, as Solomon says,
Prove. 15.13. As the beauty of a Pearl is dissolved in vinegar, and begets joy
in a world of people, which is one of the richest and royal donation, which
this wide world can afford, nay and that which makes the effect more excellent,
this affection of joy is by warrantable propriety, and true interest, only
peculiar and proper to honest and holy hearts. This jewel is only for such
gracious and golden Cabinets. No wicked or unregenerate man has any true cause
at all to rejoice, laugh, or be merry. I will make it plain in a word, even to
the scorner. Suppose a great man convicted and condemned for treason, going
toward the place of execution, a mile off; and let there a table be furnished
all along with variety of dainties, let him tread upon violets, and roses,
cloth of Arras, cloth of gold, or what you will; all the way, let him be
attended on both sides with most exquisite music, and honorable
entertainments; do you think all this will make him laugh heartily, carrying
this in his heart, that he must loose his head at the miles end? I trow not. As
far less true cause have thou to laugh, whosoever thou art, that go on
impenitently in thy sins, in swearing, drunkenness, bribery, coveteousnesse,
pride, scorning godliness, or any other way of death, as a temporal death is
easier then endless torments, for he is but going to loose his head, and thou
art going toward hell.

Now then I collect in the first place this Doctrine.

Doct.
Doctr. Government is a goodly thing.

I conclude it thus out of the Text by good consequence. Whatsoever is
illustrious in it self, ennobles the subject wherein it resides, and is
attended with such an excellent effect, is a noble, glorious and goodly thing.
See Rawleigh page 151.
But Sovereignty, or Authority, exercised (for so we find it in the Text, and
therefore I call it government) is such and so, therefore it is a goodly thing:
my Doctrine is the conclusion of a Categoricall Syllogism, wherein something
in the Text is the medium; therefore soundly collected.

I proceed to the reasons.

See Whites Sermon at Paul's Cross. page 18.
First reason; It receives the prime honor, and excellency from GODs own
institution. By me Kingsraigne, and Princes decree Justice; By me Princes rule,
and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. Pro. 8.15, 16. There is no power
but of GOD. The powers that be are ordained of GOD, Romans 13.1.

See Moulins book of Faith, page 557, 558. See him also upon Psa. 124. page 709.
So that it is GODs royal, and goodly creature. And if it were visible to our
bodily eyes, it would far out shine the fairest, and most glistering
Imperial Crown, that ever sat upon any Caesar's head. It is so sovereign,
and certainly from GOD, that in case of Antinomy, that is, when Authority
countermands where GOD has commanded; we must refuse the will, but still
reverence the power of a lawful Magistrate.

If the sword of Soveraignety, the exercise, and execution of power be bent
against GOD, we must lay hold upon the Apostles Principle: Whether it be right
in the sight of GOD to obey you rather then GOD judge ye. And good reason, GOD
is a Creator, man a creature, and in his hands are only life and death; but in
GODs, heaven and hell.

Between the Creator and creature, there is no proportion, no comparison.
Philosophy tells us, that between something and nothing, there is an infinite
distance, the two ends, (if I might speak of infinite things,) of which
immeasurable distance can never be brought together, but by an infinite being.
Nothing can produce something of nothing, but an Almighty nature. And therefore
as there is an infinite distance between something and nothing, so there must
also needs be an immeasurable disproportion between the Creating power, and
that something created of nothing. And so by consequence the excellency, power,
bindingnesse and soveraignety of the Creatours Law must needs surpass and
transcend above all degrees of comparison, and measure of proportion that of
the creatures.

You that are conversant in all parts of divine Popery, that Hydra of all
heresies, and other brainelesse exorbitancies about matters of Religion. I say
those that look into Casuists and School Divines, know how many degrees and
kinds of laws they make. First, There is the Law Eternal, resident in the
pure, glorious, infinite mind of GOD, which is that order which GOD before all
ages has set down with himself, for himself to do all things by. 2. Then
the Law of Nature, 3. Then the Law of Nations, Fourthly, then Humane Laws. The
first, is the clear fountain of all excellencies, order, and equity, as pure
as GOD himself: these last passing through the polluted channel of man's
brain, are capable of muddinesse, imperfection, and infirmity. Who doubts
then, but when we spy these last muddy streams to cross the current of the
divine Law, we must have recourse unto the wellhead.

Bellarmine has De laicis, Cap. 11. Par. 5. that every just Civil Law, is
either a conclusion or determination of the divine Moral Law. Iunius as all
along in his Animadversions, so here, he has also nobly conquered and
confounded him. And therefore as we would prefer the keeping of a good
conscience, before the sleeping in a whole skin, and the fear of him, which
can destroy bondy and soul in hell fire, before him that can only kill the
body, let us cleave unto the commandments of GOD, against the contradictions
of the whole world.

Yet notwithstanding the mis employment, and the error in the exercise of it,
Authority is still venerable in the original, and to be reputed GODs creature;
else had Daniel never spoken thus to Nabuchadnezzar, an ungodly King and
scourge of Nations. Dan. 2.37.
Thou (O King) art a King of Kings, for the GOD of heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

And hence it is also, De Civitate Deili. 5.6, 21.
that Austin, that renowned Father tells us. He that gave Soveraignety to
Augustus, gave it also to Nero. He that gave it to the Vespasians, father and
son, sweetest Emperors, gave it also to Domitian that bloody monster. In a
word (says he) he that gave it to Christian Constantine, gave it also to
Julian the Apostata. That infinite wisdom of GOD, which has distinguished
his Angels by degrees; which has given greater and less light and beauty to
heavenly bodies, which has made difference between beasts and birds, created
the Eagle and the Fly, the Cedar and the shrub, and among stones, given the
fairest tincture to the Ruby, and the quickest light to the Diamond, has also
ordained Kings, Dukes or Leaders of the people, Magistrates, Judges, and other
degrees amongst men.

Reason 2.
Secondly, Government is the prop and pillar of all States and Kingdoms, the
cement and soul of humane affairs, the life of society and order, the very
vital spirit whereby so many millions of men, do breath the life of comfort
and peace; and the whole nature of things subsist. Let the heart in a man
surcease from the exercise of its principality and prime motion, and the
wholebody would presently grow pale, bloudles and livelesse. If that glorious
Giant in the sky, should retire his light into himself, and through a
languishing faintness stay his course, and the Moon should wander from her
beaten way, whom GOD has appointed rulers over day and night; the times and
seasons of the year would blend themselves, by dis-ordered and confused
mixture. This goodly frame of the world would dissolve, and fall into confusion
and darkness. Proportionably, take Soveraignety from the face of the earth,
and you turn it into a Cockpit. Men would become cutthroats and Canibals one
unto another. Murder, adulteries, incests, rapes, roberies, perjuries,
witchcrafts, blasphemies, all kinds of villainies, outrages and savage cruelty,
would overflow all Countries. We should have a very hell upon earth, and the
face of it covered with blood, as it was once with water.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, It gives opportunity by GODs blessing, for the free exercise, and
full improvement of all humane abilities, to their utmost worth and excellency.
Trades, traffike, laws, learning, wisdom, valor, policies of State,
religion; all Arts and excellencies thrive and flourish with much happiness
and success, under the wings and warmth of a godly government. Some shadows
of these notable and worthy effects appeared, even in the Heathenish State; as
in that of the Romans; to what a matchless noone tide of earthly glory and
greatness; to what an incredible and uncomparable height of humane felicity
did that people aspire, by managing their mysteries of State, and guiding the
raines of their commanding power, by a fair, ingenious and noble hand, and
that out of the mere illuminations of reason, and principles of natural
policy? But I must tell you by the way, they were notably assisted in this
Imperial rise, by their strict and severe laws, against those two grand
impoysoners of the strongest, See Godwin de To. Leg. page 161.
and most flourishing States, first, Bribery, secondly, baseness in coming to
high rooms. They had many laws De ambitu, and de pecunijs repetundis. If a
Senator were found to have used unlawful means for the attaining of any
Office, he was to suffer ten years banishment, and so proportionably of
bribery. No Kingdom under heaven harboring these two cutthroates, can stand
long without baseness or ruin.

If Government then has such power, and works such wonders in Pagan
Kingdoms, what heavens upon earth, what worlds of happiness, by GODs mercy,
may be comfortably expected, when it is seasoned and sinewed with the truth of
Religion and power of Christianity, which is the chiefest top and wellspring
of all true virtues, even as GOD is of all good things. For all other ornaments
and excellencies of Nature, Art, Policy, are as but a dead and livelesse
carcass, except they be animated and quickened with the true fear of GOD, and
religious forwardness for his glory. Nay, a graceless Magistrate is a
grievous plague, for when he follows the public administration of Justice,
only as a trade, with unquenchable, and unconscionable thirst of gain, and
attaining his own ends, being not in heart persuaded that Justice is GODs own
work, and himself his Agent in this business; the sentence of right, GODs
own verdict, and himself his Minister to deliver it. Formalities of Justice
do but serve to smoother right, and that which was necessarily ordained for
the common good, is through shameful abuse, made the cause of common misery,
which is too manifest by too many woeful experiences.

See Bacons advancement. page 3^.
But now for instance of those happy fruits and excellencies, springing by GODs
blessing out of Government, sanctified by the effectual and powerful Majesty
of true Religion. I will go no further then our own State, since that
peerless Princess Queen Elizabeth, of sweetest and dearest memory, the
happiest instrument of GODs glory of her sex, since the most blessed Virgin:
I say since she rose into the Imperial throne, what a deal of glory and
light, admiration and honor, what miracles of unparalled deliverances and
preservations, have crowned this famous Island. To say nothing of temporal
felicities, for which purpose instance might be given in some of all
professions and stations: as for depth, and variety of learning, gravity and
unswendnesse upon Seats of Justice; height of military valor, largest
comprehensions of State-wisedome, excellency in all other kinds of worth, as
admirable and renowned, as ever trod upon English mould. Only take an
estimate, and scantling of spiritual happiness, more properly incident to
religious governments, by that speech of a great man in our State, 2. lib. page
116. of advancement of learning to the King.
If the choice and best, says he, of those observations upon Texts of
Scripture, which have been made dispersedly in Sermons within this your
Majesty's Island of great Britain, by the space of these forty years and more,
had been set down in a continuance, it had been the best work in Divinity,
which had been written since the Apostles time. And thence conclude that happy
consequent, the crown and excellency of all trully worthy States. How many
blessed souls have been sent to heaven, and what a number of crowned Saints
have been created by such a conscionable ministry in all that time, and of
both temporal and spiritual felicity, from King James his noble pen: Greater
blessings of GOD, says he, greater outward peace and plenty, greater inward
peace with spiritual and celestial treasures, were never heaped upon my grea
Britain, then have been since my great Britain beam, great in the greatest
and chiefest respect of all; to wit since my great Britain has shaken off the
Popes yoke, Against Person. page 282.
etc. You see in short what a goodly thing Government is. Now let us come to
the Uses of this Doctrine; and in the first place it serves for confuration.

Use 1.
First, Confutation and confusion of all opposites to government, especially the
underminers and under*prizers of Regal Authority, the fountain of subordinate
and inferior Magistracy.

Now to nullify the nothingnesse of the phranticke bedlam Anabaptists
Arguments, (they are fitter to be out of the number of men, and driven out of
the border of humane nature, then to be disputed with) for abolishing
Magistracy, under, I know not, what Christian perfection, as a transient
Mosaicall ceremony, would not be worth the while* I rather choose at this time
to deal with the Papist, a more subtle and plausible adversary in the point,
and in that regard more pestilent.

And here in the first place, let me point you to the fountain of those Popish
fulminations and fire works, See S^late^^ Assize Sermon page 30.
which have most unworthily beaten upon, and blasted the Imperial and Regal
Throne of Christendom: and the first mover, as it were, of that bloody Sphere,
See Bellarmine lib. ^. de(...) cap 1 etc. (...) art. Prae^e^ea Prin^ipatus
(...) ris institut usest ^b hominibus, est q de jure gentium.
which the man of sin has turned upon the face of Europe, and torn and rent
it in a rufull manner. It is this.

That the power of Kings, Princes and Magistrates, is not ordained by the
divine Law of GOD, but an humane ordinance. This teaches Bellarmine.

And they all hand over head, And in his book against Barkly, Arnoux upon the
30. Article of the French Confession calls: the power of Magistrates, an humane
law. Greg de Valendisp. 1.^.10. de infidelitate p. 8. art. Si autem. Namut
recte ratiocinatur hic D* Thomas jus Dominij vet prelatoinis introductiiest
jure humano gentium. Bell. lib. 1. de Clericis. cap. 28. art. ad confirmationem.
draw this cunning and cut-throate conclusion, for so it proves in the
consequents out of the empoysoned fountain of In his 22.^. 10. art. 1.
Dominium and prelatio sunt introductae^ ^urchumano and ^.12. art. 2. Dominiu^
introduc^um de jure gentium, quodest est ius humanum.
Aquinas.

Their reasons for this point are as weak as water, and fly but with one wing.

Those of best show are these, which I refute in a word.

First, He that was first King in the world, to wit Nimrod, made himself King
by force, not by the ordinance of GOD. Ergo, etc.

So. The Antecedent is false; before Nimrod, fathers and heads of families were
Kings, Priests, and sovereign Princes of their families. For after the flood
men lived five or six hundred years. Then it was an easy matter for a man to
see fifty, yea a hundred thousand persons of his posterity, over whom he
exercised paternall power, and by consequence, sovereign power; then when
there was no other form of a Realm upon the earth; to which children, their
servants being added, one family alone made a great Commonwealth. Likewise in
Abraham's time, when man's life was much shortened: he was called by the
Hethites, a mighty Prince, Genesis 23.6. and he took out of his family 318.
Soldiers to the war, Genesis 14.14.

Again, how could mankind be maintained, and the world stand for 1656. years,
without Sovereignty and Authority of the Magistrate?

Then to the consequent I say thus much if a strange Prince should invade a
Kingdom; they do well to defend themselves, and if the usurper be slain, he
is justly punished, but if he conquer, and the ancient professors be quite
extinguished, and then the whole State concur upon him, and swear fidelity
to the new King, then we must think that GOD has established such a Prince in
that Kingdom. Then I say that the people ought to yield to the will of GOD,
who for the sins of Kings and of their people, transposeth Kingdoms, and
disposes of the issues of war.

Object. 2.
Secondly, But Saint Peter calls obedience to Kings, an humane ordinance, 1 Pet.
2.13. Ergo, etc.

Sol.
Sol. It is so called not in respect of ^he substance of government and
institution, and Causaliter (as the Schools speak,) but in respect of, first,
the subject wherein it is seated, secondly, or the object whereupon it is
seated, thirdly, to the end to which it is directed, or, fourthly, the several
forms or means by which it is attained.

The question is not, by what means, whether by hereditary succession, or
election, or any other humane form, a Prince comes into his Kingdom, but
whether by the ordinance of GOD we ought to obey him, when he is established. I
hope the Pope is hoisted into his chair of pestilence, by the election of the
Cardinals or worse means, See Azorius 2. col. page 1551
and yet that hinders not our adversaries from holding it a divine ordinance.

Object. 3.
Thirdly, Yea but there is no express commandment set down by GOD to obey
Henry or Lewis, or James, or Charles, or to acknowledge this or that man, more
then another to be King.

Sol. Most besotted and infatuated Sophistry!

By the same reason Bellarmine is not bound to be an honest man, because there
is no particular and express commandment in GODs Book, that R. B. ought to
be an honest man.

Neither is there any special charge from GOD, that Bellarmine must obey Paul
the 8. Saint, yet I hope he holds himself subject unto him, by the Law of GOD,
though no express word faith, this or that King rules by me, yet know
therefore, that that Scripture which faith By me Kings reign, says also, by
me King James reigns, that precept which bids us honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Binds us also to honor King James. For general rules in GODs Book, whether
about precepts, prohibitions, or promises, bind and belong to particular
persons without naming them, and particulars are necessarily, and personally
contained in the universals.

First, Now this false foundation being thus laid in the disgrace and abasement
of secular Sovereignty, as they call it, mark the progress and bloody
gradation.

Secondly, Hence they have proceeded and dared to rob, and bereave Imperial
thrones, and the crowned Majesty of Kings of that native reverence, due
attributions and obligations of State, which divine ordinance, and purest times
appropriated unto them.

Thirdly, They have been heartned to fly even in the face of Majesty, and
with unhallowed hands to decrowne the Princely heads of the LORDS anointed.
That great Abaddon in this streine of rage and pride, See hist. of the Council
of Trent. p. 314.
has set his foot upon the very neck of Emperors, and spurned off their
Crowns with his shoe.

Fourthly, Lastly, they are hardened (prodigious and execrable villainy!) even to
kill, and cut the throats of Kings; upon this bloody staire they now stand;
having lately revealed it in the royal blood of the two last Henry's of France.

I have discovered, and already done with the foundation which they have laid
for a Babell of confusion and blood.

Now for their second affront upon Sovereignty, see a selected Catalogue of
unworthy and base aspersions cast upon Kings Crowns by Cardinal Bellarmine,
Page 131
and purposely collected by his Majesty, toward the latter end of his most
Royal Apology.

Let me also here in a world tell you, how that late famous Casuist Azorius, P.
2. Inst. Mor. lib. 10 in his treatise, de Imperatore Romanorum.
has handled the Emperor in this kind.

This fellow teaches, that the jurisdiction and power of the Emperor, Ibid.
cap. 2. page 1551. sect. propterhec. Et hec sentencia. Et propter hec jura and
decreta.
has its being, existence and dependence, (they are his own words,) from the
Pope of Rome. And upon this occasion tell us de facto, how many Emperors the
Pope has deposed. Sect. hec sententia. Ibid pa. 1155. sect. adea vero omnia.
That the Pope is he who first gives right and power to the Electors to choose
him, and then himself annoints, consecrates, and crowns him so elected.

That the Emperor is but the Popes minister, Cap. 3. sect. Quinto quaeritur.
elected by him for the defense of the Church. So that in another place, he
says, the Pope, if it pleased him, might create two Emperors in the Church
equal in power; Page 2. lib. 3. ca. 29 page 475 sect. Deindeobjicies.
one to govern in the East part of the Church, the other in the West. And
therefore having proposed this question: Whether the power of the Emperor be
from GOD, the Bishop of Rome, or the people: he concludes. But certainly,
says he, by the common consent, Ibid cap. 2.
of most of the Doctors of the Law, Ibid. sect. Propter.
especially Pontifical, it is the received opinions, that the Jurisdiction and
power of the Emperor depends immediately upon the Bishop of Rome, and how
proves he that, think you? even thus.

It was said to Peter (says he) Feed my sheep; not these or other, but
absolutely and simply, my sheep, and therefore all: but the Emperor is a
Sheep, Ergo, etc. And in the same place, he makes also Kings and Princes
amongst the number of sheep; and by consequent concludes their subjection to
the triple Crown.

Now these are strange passages against the Emperor, considering that
Dalingron p. 27. Ad sinem.
Guicciardine the Popes creature in his Digression, now effaced out of the
Original by the Inquisition

Tells us, that aforetimes, the election of the Pope did not stand good without
the confirmation of the Emperor, nay, says he, the Popes in all their Bulls,
privileges and Grants, expressed the date, in these formal words, (such an
one our Lord the Emperor reigning.)

Neither hinders it, says he, that thou say, The Empire has his being from
the Romish Bishop, in respect of those things only which are Spiritual: For
it is contrary; the Bishop of Rome has received the keys of both Kingdoms,
both terrene and celestial; and it is conformable to the Popes own words,
Sixtus the fifth, I mean in his Bull against Henry the third of France. For he
there affirms, that he has obtained supreme power over all the Kings and
Princes of the whole earth, and all people, and Countries, and Nations given
him; not by humane but divine Institution. See Barclay de potestlate Papae cap.
13 pa 101. and cap 3 p 31. See Barclay de potestate Papae, cap. 1 page 6, 7.
They are the words of the Bull. And to the Doctrine of Thomas Bozius, one of
the most execrable flatterers, that ever the Pope had: who teaceth, Omnem vim
Regiam, etc.

Upon this point and principle, Alexander the sixth gave the West Indies to the
Spaniards, and the East Indies, to the Portugals, placing the meridian which
passes by the Azores for their limits.

See Moulins book of Faith page 544 out of Barclaius loco citato col. 2. lib. 2
page 670.
And upon the same ground Pius the fifth deprived Queen Elizabeth of England,
of her Kingdom, and gave it to Philip the second of Spain, as Azorius tells
us.

But of all in this point, for a true Jesuitical strain, Father Binet shall
take it to him, for says he, (mark it well.)

It were better that all Kings were killed, then to reveal a confession: and
he takes his ground from that rotten foundation, so derogatory to Kingly power,
refuted before. Because, says he, the power of Kings is ordained by humane
laws, but Confession by divine law. You have it in Causaubons Epistle to
Front Ducaus the Jesuit. Now here is a sweet piece of work; Eudaemon in
Apol. Garnetti. ca. 13: and Suarez tracta, de panit. speaks to the same
purpose. See Moulins book of Faith, p. 547.
It were better that all the Kings in Christendom had their throats cut, then
that a knavish secret, or a traitorous plot of a Faux, or Ravillacke confessed
to a Sodomiticall shaveling, should be disclosed? Here is a true brat of the
bloody whore, a fellow of the right Ignatian stamp.

Thirdly,

And to this end the Pope does pestilently abuse that noble and glorious Engine
of the Church, Excommunication, which in it native use, ought to be discharged
upon the hairy pate of every wretch, that goes on rebelliously in his sin,
and hates to be reformed; upon the Drunkard, Whore-master, Swearer, Usurer,
Bribetaker, and fellows of such infamous rank, and victoriously to beat
down the Bulwarks of the Devil. But he now makes it serve his turn, to
tumble down into the dust the Imperial Crowns of Orthodox Princes. Whereupon
his Majesty tells them, Page 177.
in his Royal Answer to Cardinal Person, That the sacred heads of Kings, are
more churlishly, uncivilly, and rigorously handled, then the common hoods of
the meanest churles.

For excommunication should vex none in his temporal State. That spiritual
sword, (say our Divines) deprives of spiritual rights, that concern the
Kingdom of heaven, deprives none of his civil rights, which he has as a
member of civil society.

See Sclaters Assize Sermon page 27. Tilen Synt p. 2. p. 287 art. 26
And that learned and famous Spalatensis, a man thoroughly verst in Popish
Doctrine, says; For civil and humane commerce, no excommunication can hinder
it; and our Ecclesiastical Constitutions run in the same strain. The
excommunicated person shall not be excluded from civil negotiations, See Resor
Leg. Ecclesiast de excommunicatione, cap. 10. fol. 82.
and usual business, by which things necessary to humane life are supplied.

Now, shall not a private person be hurt in his outward estate by
excommunication, and shall a King loose all? Here is a pure Popish mercy indeed.

I need not trouble you with any Popish Authors for proof of the point: this
traitorous tenent of deposing Princes, is everywhere current in their
Schools: they are so far from being ashamed of it, that every shaveling
insults in the Catalogue of dejected Crowns: the Popes practice must now prove
the principle, and his fact, his right.

To this very purpose Azorius tell us p. 2. Inst. mor. lib. 10. cap. 2. Sect.
Hac sententia.] That Gregory the seventh deposed from the Empire, Henry the
fourth. Alexander the third, Frederick the first. Innocent the third, Otho the
fifth. Innocent the fourth, Frederick the second. Clement the sixth, I have
corrected Azor. by Bellarm. See in the same sense Gregorius de Val lom 3.
lisput. 1 q. 12. pa. 2. Sect. Quinto prohatus. And Bell. lib 5. de Romans Pont.
6.8.
Lewis the fourth.

I will only here justify that which a little before I said of Aquinas, where
I called him the fountain of much Popery and rebellion; I say again of
rebellion also. For all the School spiders, See advancement of learning, fol.
18.
(their works are like spiders-webs; they also suck, feed upon and vomit
venom,) have sucked a great deal of poison in this point, from his position
22. q. 12. art. 2. which is this.

As soon as a Prince is denounced excommunicate, for Apostasy, ipso facto,
his subjects are freed from his Sovereignty, and absolved from the Oath of
allegiance, by which they were bound unto him.

Now his Scholars Bannes, and Valentia tells us, See Blackwels examination
page 3, 4.
that not only total Apostasy, but partial also, as heresy, is here meant;
so that any Protestant Prince in their interpretation is here concluded.
Whatsoever Gregory prete^deth to the contrary, professing here that he treads
in the steps of the Saints and his holy predecessors, yet it is true that
Sigibert says, that this was the first Pope that ever presumed to depose any
Emperor. This Pope excommunicated Henry the 4. Anno 1076. See Field li. 5. pa
348. K. Iam. Ans. to Card. Person


But mark, I pray you, the sinew of this man's Assertion. He first brings
against himself the authority of Ambrose, telling us, that Christian Soldiers
obeyed even Julian the Apostate: he might have added also an excellent speech
of Austin to the same purpose in Psalm. 124. quoted by me before; He alleges
other good reasons besides; but when he comes to resolve and define, he
overthrowes all with a Sed contra Gregorius septimus.] Gregory the seventh is
of another mind: and he quotes him out of the puddle of the Popish Canon Law,
Decret. Par. 2. cap. 15. q. 6. cap. Nos Sanctorum.]

And who I pray you, was this Gregory the seventh? it was Hildebrand, the
scourge of Emperors, the firebrand of war, the scorn of his age. So that a
base Pope, being a party, and in his own cause, setting his foot upon the
neck of Henry the fourth, must contervaile and overweigh the authority of GODs
Word, two of the worthiest Fathers, that ever former times enjoyed, Reason,
Conscience, Nature, grounds of common sense, every thing, any thing; for he is
a Pope forsooth, and therefore an infallible Vicar upon earth.

Peronius, See the Kings answer to Person, p. 212, 213. and 126. See also
Mouline book of Faith, p. 548.
and other Jesuits is ridiculous. That they kill not Kings in Esse: but first
they un-king a King, and then kill a King, when he is not a King but a private
person; upon this very point King James breaks out most justly out of a Royal
indignation of his noble spirit, O hell hounds, Page 127.
O diabolical wretches, O infernal monsters!

And tells them, that in comparison of their religion and holiness, all the
impiety that ever was practiced among the Infidels, and all the barbarous
cruelty that ever was perpetrated among the Cannibals, may pass henceforth in
the Christian world, for pure clemency and humanity.

It is not enough for that man of sin, and stigmaticall strumpet, to be
drunk with the blood, (for she is said, Rev. 17.4. and 6. both to bearrayed in
scarlet, and to be drunk with blood) of the dear and precious souls of many
thousands of her own children, who being by her conceived, and brought forth
in spiritual adultery, and after nursed up, and nuzled in ignorance and
superstition, have lived and dyed in Popish darkness. But she is also
thicke-cloathed with the crimson and crying blood of infinite Martyrs of Jesus;
nay, and now in her dotage, being grown a deformed Hag, and left by most of
her lovers, she labors to repair the decayednesse and ruin of her painted
beauty with the richness of attire, so that she is not now content only with
garments of baser and inferior dye, but of late, is new clad, even with a robe
of blood Royal, deeply, and double*dyed in the sacred blood of Kings.

In displaying this whore in her bloody colors, I might tell you of those Seas
of blood, which she has furiously spilt in her drunken humor, and powered upon
the face of Europe, almost all in our remembrance.

I might, I say, enlarge those points, but I will at this time only hold me to
the present, and deliver my self in a word.

In the first place that they kill Kings; it is clear in the eye of all
Christendom: I will go no further then the presentage, and the fresh bleeding
memory of such doleful acts. Two of the last Kings of France, Henry the third
and the fourth, fell from their Imperial Thrones by the bloody knives of two
Popish villains.

See Moulins book of Faith, pa. 544, 545. Kings Answer to Perron, page 284. and
pa. 4.
Sixtus the fifth excommunicated and deposed Henry the third, and then James
Clement Iacobin committed that horrible Parricide upon his Royal person.

Ravillacke was the other Assasin, who rendered this reason for his monstrous
and horrible attempt, That King Henry had a design to war with GOD, because
he had a design to take arms against his Holiness, who is God.

Now besides how greatly did they thirst after the virgin blood of the late
Princely Elizabeth, with a prodigious variety of murderous complotments: had
not the silver line of her much honored life, been hid in the endless maze
of GODs bottomless mercy, those bloody Romish hunters, had many and many a
time laid her honor in the dust.

Nay, but for a miracle of the same infinite mercy, they had torn King James
in pieces, his noble Queen, the Royal limbs of those two sweet and orient
Princes, and that princely star that now shines so fair in Bohemia, by their
powder-mine.

There was no want at all of Popish malice, purpose, utmost endeavor, to have
spilt all this Royal blood, as water upon the ground, and therefore, I also
take all these noble Princes, as direct and proper Instances for Popish
Kingkilling.

Yea, Object.
but those (may some say) were but only some discontented persons, which out
of some desperate pang acted these bloody Assasinates, Profession it self, and
Popish religion is not to be charged with such exorbitant outrages.

Nay, Sol.
but they have mard all for that; and left no room for any such reply.

2. And therefore I must tell you in the second place, that their learnedest
Professors and greatest Doctors, blurre their books with these bloody lines,
and teach this most abhorred Trade of King-killing, See the Kings Answer to
Perron page 5. and Moulins book of Faith p. 546.
and murdering Princes.

Bellarmine, Becanus, Suarez, Eudaemon, Ioannes, with other like monsters, etc.
are such bloody Doctors of the scarlet Whore.

But above all, methinks Francis de Verona in his Apology for John Chastell.
Francis de Verrona, and Mariana; Mariana de Rege and Regis Institutione, li.
1. cap 6.
are the most merciless Masters of this execrable Art, as I shall show you in
another Treatise.

Yea, but yet for all this, these are but private Doctors, and may err.

3. Well therefore, Object.
in the third place, (for I charged them with that also,) I must tell you, that
King-killing is approved and applauded by their transcendent Doctor, which is
virtually and eminently all the Popish Doctors in the world, ever assisted
with the unfallible spirit of deceiving, and being deceived, the Pope himself,
Sixtus the fifth, gave thanks unto God in open Consistory, for the horrible
assasinate perpetrated by James Clement, upon Henry the third of France.

Object.
But was not that Oration published by the Protestants, purposely to cast such a
bloody aspersion upon his holiness.

I tell you no, it was put out by the Papists, and printed at Paris, See
Moulins of Faith 546. See the Popes approbation of King-killing further proved
by K. James in his Answer to Person, page 122, 123.
by Nicholas Nivelle, and Rollin Thierry, with approbation of their Doctors,
Boucher, de Creil, and Ancelin, and do you think he would not have approved
Faux his fireworke, if it had blown up the Parliament? if not why suffers he
Garnet and Oldcorne, powder-miners, both by books and pictures saleable under
his nose in Rome, to be enrolled in the Canon of holy Martyrs? but the old Fox
is wily enough, not so directly, and heartily, to commend a mischief until it
be done.

The Powder Plot was of the nature of those Acts, Quae nunquam laudantur nisi
per-acta: as Tacitus speaks. You see then at length, by what degrees these
Romish Locusts are fallen soul upon Government, upon all Imperial, Regal and
Princely power. So that at this day, to the inexpiable shame and dis honor of
the whole Christian world, they teach, act, and approve, the bloody killing of
crowned Potentates.

Which things since they are thus; you are an honorable, wise and worthy
Auditory; I say no more but this. Me-thinkes it is an astonishment beyond the
comprehensions of nature, reason, Religion, Policies of State, that such an
intolerable generation, so odious, both to heaven and earth, for abominable
Idolatry, so visibly infamous both to this and the other world, with many
capital characters of blood, so endless and implacable in their ragefull
designements against the crowned Majesty of the Kings Throne, so prodigious in
their plots, that they have cast an inexpiable and everlasting aspersion upon
the innocence of Christian Religion, such furious Assasins and Incendiaries,
for murdering of Princes, butcheries of people, and fiering of States: so
enraged, even like Woolves in the evening to swallow us up quick if the time
did serve; I say, that such, in so Orthodox a Church and noble a State, should
by allowance, toleration, connivence, or remissness, be suffered to receive
increasement and multiplication, both in number and insolency, to the great
dis-honour of GOD Almighty, the continual vexation of GODs Children and good
subjects, and the most certain hazard of the whole Estate, and the peaceable
succession of the Kings posterity.

And the more strange it is for these three reasons.

First, What conceit do you think out of the congruity of Popish principles,
is it likely they hold of this forbearance, and what thanks do they return
to the State? undoubtedly, to think that it is infatuated for their sakes, and
that the hands of Justice are manacled by GODs overruling providence; that it
cannot be executed so fully and freely, upon such a loving, holy, and unbloody
generation.

Secondly, They daily do their utmost at home, and a broad, to cross King
James his princely Admonition unto them, in his first speech in the Parliament;
wherein he admonished the Papists that, they would not so far presume upon
his lenity, as thereupon to think it lawful for them, to increase their
number and strength in his Kingdom, whereby if not in his time, yet at least
in time of his Posterity, they might be in hope to erect their religion again.

Thirdly, If the day should come they have so long looked for, (but I hope in
the LORD, all their eyes shall drop out of their holes with confusion and
rottenness, before they see that day.) They would questionless lay hold upon
Veronensis woolvish and bloody If public means be wanting of making away
heretics by the ordinary Magistrate, he gives allowance and leave to every
private man to murder the heretic as he meets him, Franciscas de Verone.
Constantinus in Apology for John Chastell. History of the Counsel of Trent p.
^48.
conclusion; especially being animated thereunto by the example of the
Massacre: Resolution of Pope Vrbane, Cau. 23.9. 5. Can. Excommunicatorum.] We
esteem them, (says he,) not to be murderers, who being possessed with zeal
of their mother, the Catholic Church, against those that are excommunicated,
shall happen to kill any of them: and by the edge of their own Popish blood
thirstinesse, really eneagerd, by fained conceits of their pretended
persecution. Decree of the Parliament of Paris: That it should be lawful to
slay all the Hugonots; which by public order was read every Sunday in every
Parish. And therefore to tell you in one word, the end why at this time I have
stood so long upon this point. It is to ask you this question, at close,
whether it be not now true and honorable mercy, (for GOD forbid, that I should
persuade any cruel thing,) nay, and the contrary, extreme cruelty to the
State, to execute exactly, just and holy laws upon such a generation: and let
every one be judge that hears me this day, if he be not a party in that bloody
faction, or hanker that way. And yet one word more, and I have done. I know
Parsons in his miserable shifting book about Equivocation, against Doctor
Morton.

Cardinal Perronius, Beltarmine in his Apology against the Kings Monitory
Preface, See the Kings Answer, p. 273. See Eliensis his answer to it page 299.
and others upon whose foreheads the whore of Rome has stamped her mark of
Popish impudency; charge the Protestants, and Reformed Churches, with these
bloody passages: but in so doing, they deal with us as an impudent strumpet
with an honest woman; See how we are cleared, Anticoton pa 63. Answer to
certain scandalous papers pault.
and as Verres dealt with Tully; Verres himself was a very notorious these,
and knew that Tully had much against him in that kind; and therefore, he very
knavishly and impudently calls Tully, a true man, and that noble Orator these
first: Eliensis in his answer to Bell. Apolog. p. 299. Answer to Perron page
279.
It is just so in this case.

But above all, hear King James in the point: we glory, (and well we may,)
that our Religion affords no rules of rebellion; nor allows and grants any
dipensation to subjects for the oath of their Allegiance; and that, none of
our Churches give entertainment unto such monstrous, and abominable principles
of disloyalty.

And as concerning Iunius Brutus, Ibid. pa. 277.
whom they object: his Majesty answers: That he is an Author unknown, and
perhaps of purpose patched up by some Romanist, with a trick of wily deceit,
to draw the reformed Religion into hatred with Christian Princes.

If we were in the same predicament with the Papists this way: how comes it to
pass; that our English Popelings have made so many bloody assaults against the
sacred persons of Queen Elizabeth and King James; and the Protestants of
France having far better opportunity, and more power, have never stird
rebelliously against their Kings: Kings Answer to Perron page ^73.
of whom King James thus speaks: I could never yet learn by any good and true
intelligence, that in France those of the Religion took arms at any time
against their King, much less then, offered they, to butcher or blow him up
with gunpowder.

I have thus far discovered in the first Use the most pestilent opposites and
cut-throates of Government and Kingly Majesty, at this day in Christendom. I
now come to a second Use.

Use 2.
If Government be such a goodly thing, as has been proved before; then all
that hear me this day, and every mothers child in this Land, I say, we are all
bound to bless GOD upon our knees, and to put it as a sweet perfume into our
daily sacrifice of thankesgiving, for being bred and brought up under so
blessed and happy a Government, in the Sunshine of the Gospel, and under the
wings of JEHOVAH.

What staid or restrained the Omnipotent arm of GOD, from creating any of us,
and planting us upon earth, in the unhappy days of Queen Mary, when we might
either have been damned or burned, or in the bloody times of Lancaster, and
York; or when the mists of Popery, and insolent domineering of that man of
sin, enthrald under the most grievous yoke of miserable bondage, both the
Crown and consciences of this Kingdom: or under some Pagan, Turkish, or
Tyrannical Government, or neighboring Popish Country; or (which also had not
been so comfortable,) in the persecuted, or Schismatic parts of the Church?
it was nothing but GODs own mere mercy, respiting and remitting our being
upon earth, to better and more blessed times and place: It was that and that
alone, which ordered and appointed our lot of living here, in that golden knot
of time, as it were, and the very Diamond of the ring, of that happier
revolution, since CHRIST'S days, I mean in the most orient and comfortable
breaking out of GODs holy truth, from under the clouds of Antichristian
darkness: and in this little nooke of the world, where the Gospel shines
with such glory, truth and peace, and under the kindly warmth and influence of
two the most glorious Queen Elizabeth. King James.
Stars that ever moved, or gave light in Englands Hemisphere.

What beasts are they then, that daily do their utmost to bereave and rob us,
both of GODs blessing, and this warm Sun: and hale down all they can with
strong cart-ropes of iniquity, the vengeance of GOD upon the face of this noble
and famous Kingdom? and such are all the wicked amongst us, and those that
hate to be reformed; Ale-house-hunters, pot-companions, good-fellowes
drunkards, are the most pestilent, and cursed canker-wormes, that gnaw at the
very-heart, and sinew of the glory and strength of the State. And like
audacious and outrageous Giants even wrestle with heaven; and by pouring in of
strong drink, labor might and maine, to pull down the full viols of GODs
fiercest wrath See Isa. 28.1, 2, 3.
upon our heads. And therefore if there be any Justice of Peace, which is a
secret supporter of any rotten Alehouse, he is a great plague to the place
where he dwells, whether it be Town or City.

The cruel Usurer is the cut-throate of the Country where he kennels. See what
a deal of compassionlesse miseries and confusion, a company of such
caterpillars brought upon the infant Replantation of the new returned Jews,
Neh. 5. 2, 7. The swearer, and tearer of GODs glorious Name by his blasphemous
breath, gives wings to the flying book of GODs curse, Zach. 5.2, 3.
and is able to blast the beauty of the most fruitful Land, and flourishing
prosperity, Because of swearing, faith Ier. cap. 13.10. The Land mourns, the
pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up.

See Nah. 13.17, 18.
The prophaner also of GODs holy and glorious Sabbath, is an incendiary; If you
will not hearken to me, says GOD, Ier. 17.27. to hallow the Sabath day, then
will I kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, and it shall devour the
Palaces thereof, and it shall not be quenched. Blessed be GOD therefore, that
has put yet into the heart of my Lords the Judges, to be such an honorable
president to the whole Country, of forbearing the Sabbath. I am persuaded they
may justly make men of inferior rank foully ashamed.

Ignorant, dissolute, and disordered Ministers, cause GOD to cry aloud for the
destroyer, All ye beasts of the field, says GOD, Isa. 56.9. come to devour,
yea all ye beasts in the forest, his watchmen are blind.

The Bribe-taker, or man of gifts, (as he is called originally in the fourth
verse of this present Chapter,) shakes the very Pillars, and master Timber of
the Kingdom: but he that receives gifts overthrowes it; ordinarily, baseness
in coming to high places, and bribery, are sworn brethren.

Neither must you conceive, as father Austin excellently admonishes in Psalm
25. page 144. That only money, gold and silver, or presents, as they call
them, are bribes; but the guilt of bribery also may be justly imputed, even to
any exorbitant affection, which swayes a man aside, from the impartial
execution of Justice: as love, fear, hatred, etc. desire of praise, and
applause, for that is Austins instance in the fore cited place: For example,
the party has great, and many friends, and therefore if thou lean a little
that way, thou shall be honored with many thankful acknowledgements, and
flattering entertainements: or on the other side, the party is poor, and if
thou be impartial, it will lightheavy on his side; and then the Country will
be ready to censure thee, as no friend to the poor.

Now in these cases, if for such respects, thou incline either to the right
hand, or to the left hand; thou pervertest Justice, and justly encurres the
censure of a corrupt Judge.

For hear GODs charge in the case, Levit. 19.15. Ye shall not do unjustly in
Judgment: Thou shall not savor the person of the poor, nor honor the person
of the mighty: but thou shall judge thy neighbor justly.

Pilate perhaps could wash his hands of bribes, but not of Christ's blood. That
cry of the Jews, if thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend;
striking cold unto his heart, and swaying him awry, was equivalent to a bribe,
and shall cause him to be condemned, not only as a cruel, but also as a
corrupt Judge. The Judges of Israel who sentenced Naboth to death, were not
corrupted with down right bribes, for any thing we know, but there was
something equivalent: Izabel ruled the roast at the Court, and was potent
either to advance, or deject them, which brought them to the bent of her bloody
mandate, and Naboths blood upon their own heads.

Mockers and misusers of the faithful Ministers, (you would little think it)
draw GODs flaming wrath upon a people without remedy, see 2 Cro. 36.16.

Spiritual cowards, and those who having given their names to Religion, are
fallen away from their first love, are the special men to remoove our Candle
stick, See Rev. ^ 5.
and put out the glory of Israel.

Scornful persecutors of GODs people, as though they were the very filth of
the world, and the of*scouring of all things, the plagues of the times, and the
troublers of Israel, whereas in truth the world is not worthy of them, they are
the very chariot and horsemen of Israel; they are the only jewels, stars,
Suns, Saints, Angels of the earth: for their sakes, and safety alone, the Sun
holds out his glorious unwearied course; the earth springs, and is over-spred
with such beauty and sweetness; the air inspires her lively and refreshing
breath; that great and restless body of the Sea, keeps within her bounds;
States and Kingdoms turn not into confusions of blood, in a word, the world
stands. If their number were once made up, this goodly frame would flame about
our ears. I speak not for any whited Tombs, supercilious Pharisees; but I
say, such are very pestilent instruments to betray and expose a Kingdom to the
ambitious rage of foreign Nations, and fury of their enemies, whether they
vex and persecute GODs people by fire, faggot, sword, power, purse, policy in
their hearts and affections, by their tongues, nay, brow-beating, a contracted
forehead, a sour coutenance, and fleering face, and other scornful gestures,
See Ezech. 2^.6, 7.
are persecutions in GODs interpretation, and shall be paid home
proportionably. The merciless incloser, besides beating the poor to pieces,
and grinding their faces, plucking off their skins from of them, their flesh
from off their bones, breaking their bones, and chopping them in pieces, as for
the Pot, as it is, Mica. 3.2, 3. He also robs the King of his honor, and the
State of its strength, For in the multitude of people is the Kings honor, but
in the want of people is the destruction of the Prince, Pro. 14.28.

But above all the shedder of blood, fetch the very live* blood out of the
heart of the State, and does impresse such a bloody stain upon the face of the
Kingdom, that cannot be razed out, but by his blood that shed it. For blood,
says GOD himself, it defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the
blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it, Numb. 35.33.

For your sakes my honorable Lords, have I purposely instanced in some of the
common, and crying sins of the Country, hoping in the LORD, you will help us
all you can. But know also, that all sorts of sinners, and haters to be
reformed, are the Devils cursed Enginers, to undermine, and ruin the State;
and inkindlers of that fiery indignation in the bosom of GOD, which if it once
begin, will burn unto the bottom of hell, Hos. 4.1.

FINIS.
THE SECOND ASSISE SERMON.
PROVE. 29.2. When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when
the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.


I Have heretofore upon the same solemn occasion, observed from the first
point, this Doctrine, Government is a goodly thing, I proved it, and applied
it. Only give me leave, before I fall upon the second point, to add a word or
two to the first Use of the former Doctrine, which fell directly, and with full
edge upon the Papists, the most pestilent opposites and cut-throates of
Government, and Kingly Majesty, at this day in the whole Christian world. For
they teach (as I then showed at large,) that the power of Kings, Princes and
Magistrates, is not ordained by the divine Law of GOD, but an humane ordinance;
out of which fountain have issued all those Popish fulminations, and
fireworks, which have most unworthily at one time or other, beaten upon, and
blasted all the Imperial, and Regal Thrones of Christendom. Nay, a fellow in
the Counsel of trent, did fiercely labor to confute that passage of de
Ferrieres Oration: That Kings were given by GOD; as heretical, and condemned
by the Extravagant of Boniface the eight; Vnam sanctam] if he did not
distinguish, See Hist. of the Coun of Trent page 275. and, Spalat. pa. ^25.
that they are for GOD, but by mediation of his Vicar. Thus it was in that
Conventiele of scarlet Fathers. The Romish Locusts did very furiously, Ibid p^.
766.
as appears, obtrude 13. Articles for the reformation of Princes; all p^ring
from Imperial Crowns, to patch up the most unjust usurpations of their
shavelings. I will trouble you with one or two, As you may see Ibid. p. 769,
770.
that you may take notice how justly King James out of a pang of Royal
indignation, after a survay of that most grievous yoke of miserable bondage, to
which the Crowns of Christian Kings, are made to stoop by that man of sin.
That GOD in whose hands the heart of Kings are poysed, and at his pleasure
turned, as the watercourse, that mighty GOD alone, in his good time, is able
to rouse them out of so deep a slumber, and to take order (their drowsy fits
once over and shaken off with heroical spirits, Against (...) page 289.
) that Popes hereafter shall play no more upon their Princely patience, nor
presume to put bits and snafles in their noble mouths, to the binding up of
their mighty power with weak cords of scruples, like mighty Bulls led about by
little children with a small twisted thread. Thus speaks his Majesty in his
Answer to the French Cardinal; for which book, and that other premonition to
all Christian Princes especially; the ages to come shall call him blessed: I
say, the child unborne, shall bless King James his golden pen, which has
given such a blow to that beast of Rome, that howsoever they may have some
lightning before their small ruin, by the mercies of GOD, he shall never be
able to stand upright upon his four legs again.

One of the Articles is this, that the Ecclesiastikes shall not be forced to
pay taxes, gabels, tiths, passages, subsidies, though in the name of gift or
loan, either in respect of the Church goods, or of their Patrimoniall, etc.

Another is this, Hist. of the Counsel of Trent. p. 77^.
that neither the Emperor, Kings, or any Prince whatsover, shall make Edicts,
or Constitutions in what manner soever, concerning Ecclesiastical causes, or
persons, nor meddle with their persons, Causes, Jurisdictions, or Tribunals,
etc.

The rest also sound the same way, and all tend to the Ibid. p. 237.
shaving of Imperial Crown; but these two are sufficient to represent to the
weakest understanding, the unsufferable indignity and villainy offered to Regal
Sovereignty, by these Antichristians, since in those Kingdoms where the Pope
does tyrannise, and domineere, almost the Kings Premonit. p. 21.
third part of subjects and Territories is Churchmen and Church Livings.

Porro u^esse Romano Pontifici omni humane creature, declara^us, dicimus,
definimus and pronunciamus, omninoesse de necessitate salutis Extra. cap. vnam,
sanctam de major: and Obel. See also B^ll. de Eccl milit. lib. 3. ca. 2. sect.
Nostra autem sentencia, page 195.
Nay, more then this, from the ground of that fellows reply, to the forenamed
passage of de Ferrieres Oration, concerning the Articles for the reformation of
Princes, I do not see how any true Papist, either Ecclesiasticke, or Laicke,
can possibly be a true subject, to any monarchical Sovereign: my reason is
this at this time, Boniface the eight, guided (as they dream, and damnably
lie,) by an infallible spirit, pronounces peremptorily in the forecited
Extravag* unam sanctam] that it is altogether of the necessity of salvation to
be subject to the Pope of Rome. How then is it possible, that any one of those
mighty swarms of stinging Against P^^son, page 255.
Locusts, and busy waspes, which lie at ease in the bowels of this Kingdom,
ready and addressed, when time serves, to cut the very heart strings of it,
should be a sound subject to King Charles, since upon pain of damnation, and as
they would be saved in the Romish Church, they must be absolutely subject to a
foreign, Antichristian, and sometimes Sodomiticall, and Atheistical Priest,
of whom, (as they Hist. of the Council page 775. See Mortons dissert. adversus
Bell pa. 84.
say) he immediately holds his Crown, and who may for many causes, depose, and
butcher him? Bellarmine names six, De officio Chr. Principis. One of them is;
If he offer injury to the Pope, who many times will complain without cause; so
that if King Charles perhaps should refuse to kiss his cursed toe, (a thousand
times more worthy to trample upon his triple Crown) he might lie open to the
bloody stroke of some Clement, or Ravillac: Nay, and had not CHRIST JESUS given
this power to that holy father, says the Glossator upon the forenamed
Extravagant, (prodigious blasphemy!) he should have been undiscreet. Nam non
videretur Dijs discretus suisse, (ut cum reverentia loquar) nisi unicum post se
talem vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset.
These are the words; for he would not seem to have been discreet to the
Gods, (that I may speak with reverence,) unless he had left one only such
Vicar behind himself, who could have done all these things.

Besides, the Romish Locusts falling foul upon Government, upon all Imperial,
Royal, and Princely power; by debasing the original of it, by disroabing it
of that native reverence, due attributions, and obligations of State, which
divine ordination, and purest times appropriated unto it; by teaching, acting,
and approving the bloody killing of crowned Potentates, as appears before.
There is another monstrous engine of Popish imposture, hammerd in the heads of
those hellish firebrands, which if it were generally entertained, were able in
short time, to cut in pieces and dissolve the sinews, and ciment of all humane
society, I mean Equivocation, and mental reservation. Many cunning shifts and
evasions have they coined from time to time, to cosen the State, and delude
the Magistrate, in their oaths and answers before our just Tribunals. They have
vainly labored to dawbe over, and still their consciences against their lies
and perjuries, sometimes, first, by the supposed benefit of popish
dispensation. 2. Sometimes by a wicked conceit of our Magistrates incompetency.
3. Or pretended unauthenticalnesse of our Bibles in English, upon which they
swear. Fourthly, but at this day, they rest most upon this last Jesuitical
strategem, which was wont to be confined to Courts of Justice and more public
cases; but now the Popish Casuists, by their Conclusions, begin to convey this
damnable Doctrine, and accursed poison of mental reservation, into the common
passages of ordinary negotiations, and conversation amongst men.

Now I come to the next point, the subject of Soveraignety, a righteous man,
whence I briefly, and plainly ground this point.

Doct.
Those that rule should be righteous: or thus; men in Authority should be
righteous men.

That you may understand a right, what I mean by righteous, take notice of a
double righteousness, first, imputed; second, inherent. Inherent twofold,
first, moral; second, religious.

By imputed, I mean the glorious justice of JESUS CHRIST, purchased by his
blood, and obedience, and imputed as his own, most sure for ever to a truly
humbled sinner, wherewith being richly and completely arrayed from top to toe,
as with a Royal and everlasting Robe, he stands thereby acquit, justified and
accepted at the strictest Tribunal of the ever-living GOD world without end,
and so ipso facto, (as they say) becomes ever after favorite to the mighty
LORD of heaven and earth; one of his jewels, as the apple of his own eye, the
dearly beloved of his soul, a Royal Diadem in his hand, (for so are GODs
Children, though vilified by the world, yet styled in the World.)

This righteousness is required in Rulers, and such as are placed above their
brethren, to wit, that themselves be reconciled unto GOD in JESUS CHRIST: For
sense of this alone is able to beget that right noble, and well-composed temper
of spirit, those high and unshaken resolutions, which only are fit to make a
Magistrate, and create earthly Gods, as Judges are called, Psalm. 82.1.6.
Without this righteousness, assuredly whatsoever fair pretexts and
representations to the contrary, may dazzle and deceive the worlds eye, yet all
is rotten at the heart-roote. And the executions of their places, though they
may carry things smoothly and palliate with much art and policy, yet
questionless, in case of strong temptation, great advantage, rising, and
enriching themselves, gratification of some great one, hazard of temporal
happiness, etc. will be exorbitant and yielding and at the best, but formal.
The cry of that happy soul, which leanes, and has taken up his everlasting
resting place, upon the rock of eternity, is constant, and still the same in
all cases and causes. Vt fiat iustitia, ruat coelum.
Let right be done, and a good conscience discharged, and then come what come
will. Let me not only loose my place and the favor of the times, but let even
the heavens fall, and they will, all is one to me; by the mercy of GOD I shall
stand upright under the ruins, and rejoice in the testimony of a good
conscience, amidst the confusions both of heaven and earth. But to speak in
Scripture phrase, (for the other was the speech, even of an honest heathen.)
Ever, when standing on the better side, and keeping a good conscience,
threatens danger and disgrace, he grows into Hesters happy resolution: well,
whatsoever comes of me, I will take GODs part, and if I perish, I perish. But
not to perish so, is to perish everlastingly: and so to perish, is to be
eternally saved.

But now on the other side, he which has not made his peace with GOD, nor has
any part upon good ground, in the Person, Passion, and promises of CHRIST, will
most certainly, especially in stormy times, and such trials which search
whether he be steel to the back or no, manifest and make plain by his
practice, that in the height of his counterfeit courage, his heart did hold in
earnest that pestilent principle; It is better to sleep in a whole skin, then
with a good conscience. If he be put unto it indeed, (for alas) no heavenly
strength as yet, does steel his spirit, he will warpe, winde-out one way or
other, and shrink in the wetting.

Again, it is a cause of great comfort, and matter of much joy to have a
favorite to the highest Majesty, and one whom GOD accepts graciously in his
Son, to sit in a high place, and bear sway over others. It is a goodly
sight, right pleasing unto GOD, applauded of Angels, amiable and admirable in
the eyes of all good men. And thrice happy is that people, which breathes under
the influence of such a blessed Authority, and all those who are judged,
ordered and overruled by him, be he Judge, Justice of Peace, Minister or
Magistrate in any kind, whom GOD ownes for his servant, who entered into his
office, Benefice, Bishopric, or any other public employment, in GODs Name,
and not by bribery, symony, flattery, temporizing, or any other base and
unblessed means; and afterward in every passage of his place, aims
principally at GODs glory, and not at his own particular, to advance the
Kingdom of CHRIST and not his kindred and outward estate.

And it is the better with them, and they are the more blessed, besides many
other, in these two respects.

First, He that grows into familiarity with GOD, by the favor of JESUS
CHRIST; besides an universal and impartial integrity in the managing and
discharge of the particulars in his public calling, may comfortably, and with
a good conscience press daily to the Throne of grace, and bring down
abundance of blessings, both upon himself, and those that are under him. He
does not only watch over his own heart, but also wrestle with GOD continually
by prayer, for himself, that he may not disparage the Majesty of his place, by
any personal lightness, or make his person odious, by partiality in his
public deportment; that he may neither poison his people by any scandalous
example, or plague them by private revenge; that he neither lessen his
Authority, or loose good men's love by serving the time, or servile yielding, or
swell over the banks of patience and moderation, with selfe-wild sowrenesse,
and unseasonable severity. In a word, that he may do just so as GOD would have
him; and therefore begs not only general ability, to weld aright the great
body of his public charge, but also, special direction, and resolution in
every several affair which passes his hand, that it be ever carried fair,
and never crookned to his own ends: For his people, that he may ever prefer
his peoples spiritual welfare, before the wealth of the whole world.

Now, whether do you think, were it more happy, and comfortable living under
that Minister, Magistrate, or man of Authority whatsoever, who thus acquaints
himself with GOD, and walks with him as with his friend, or under that fellow
who is an alient, and mere stranger to any such precise mystery and might of
prayer, who never thought with comfort of coming to this place, it being
empoysoned unto him, (as he knows full-well himself, though he tell no body,)
with baseness or indirection, never aimed so much in the discharge of it, at
GODs glory, and the good of his people, as at his own particular; his rising,
enriching or revenging; is so far from discharging Samuels duty, in constant
praying for those committed to his charge, that he prays not even in his own
family constantly, not in private to any purpose, was never feelingly humbled
for his own sins, or the abominations of the Kingdom in any day of
humiliation. Give me an Angel upon earth, and an incarnate Devil, a fair
cool shadow under a goodly tree, in a sweltring heat, and a scurvy
thorny-bush, to which the poor sheep never flies for succor in a storm, but
loses some of her fleece, a shower of rain in a great drought upon the new
Moone-grasse, and the scorching Sun upon a dry parched heath, an Obadiah, and
a Shebna, GODs dearling, and the Devils drudge, and you have made the
difference.

Secondly, Consider the difference of the Kings eye, I mean in respect of
anger, and amiablenesse, cast upon a desperate Traitor and his nearest
Favorite; proportionably, but with infinite more loathing or liking, the aspect
of GODs pure eye is diuersified, looking upon an enemy to the power of
Godliness and profession of the Saints, and that happy one who has made his
peace with him, and is clothed with the righteousness of his Son: that
glorious eye of his, which is ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, and
cannot look on iniquity, does cast down a direct perpendicular raye, as it
were, upon every wicked man, without any diversion or retraction (that I may so
speak) of its fierce edge, and fiery pointednesse; and therefore sees him in
his colors, a very vile, sinful, cursed, loathsome beast, (though he seem
to himself, and the great of the world, a brave and jolly fellow) abhorred of
GOD and man, heaven and earth, and by consequent as an object of infinite
indignation and hatred. But he ever looks upon his own Child, through the
meritorious sufferings and satisfactions of the Son of his love, in whom all
his discontents against him are done away and drowned for ever; and so beholds
him such, and so lovely, as the blood and righteousness of JESUS CHRIST has
made him. Even as to a man looking through a red glass, all the world appears
red and orient in his eye. So to the eye of GOD the Father, looking from his
throne of mercy upon a godly man, through the bleeding wounds of his blessed
Savior, he is rendered, and represented right fair, and ruddy, deeeply
impressioned with an heavenly dye of acceptance and grace. Now tell me,
whether a people be liker to prosper under him, upon whom the mighty LORD of
heaven looks amiably, or angrily?

2. By moral righteousness, I mean all those perfections and possibilities
of civil honesty, and upright dealing, attaineable by the light of natural
understanding, general notions of right and wrong, and practice of moral
precepts, enlarged, improoved, and husbanded to the height; hereby many ancient
Heathens went far, and did many admirable and excellent things, even such,
and so worthy, that may justly make the best of our mere civil honest men
hang down their heads, and be horribly ashamed.

For instance.

Fabricius, that famous Roman, was so precise, that (as it is reported of him)
it was easier to turn the Sun from his course, then to draw Fabricius from
just and honest dealing. King Pyrrhus could with no gold or gifts, no not with
promise of the fourth part of his Kingdom, possibly corrupt this man; And yet
how many miserable men in this very midday of the Gospel will be easily drawn
by a secret bribe, office, honor, preferment, some earthly favor, to do
villanously, to betray a good cause, a good man, and a good conscience to shame
himself for ever, grow odious to GOD and man, and go to hell.

In these dissolute and formal times, would it not be deemed to draw toward
too much strictness, if a Minister should press this duty upon Lawyers; that
every time before they go out of their doors to plead at the Bar, they
should prostrate themselves in private, and besides other passages, pray unto
GOD, that he would so guide their tongues that day, that they may speak
nothing but advisedly, and to the purpose. And yet Pericles that famous Orator
of Greece, who for the excellency of his eloquency, and mightiness of his
speech, was said to thunder, and lighten at the Bar, out of the very
principles of nature, and natural sense of of a Deity, ever before he went to
plead a cause, (as Plutarch tells us in his life) entreated his GODs, that not
a word should fall from him besides his purpose; which he practiced no doubt,
out of conscience of Platoes principle in Tim. See Hooker pa. 63.
That in all things we go about, GODs help by prayer is to be craved. In the
administration and execution of Justice, many of them, though led only and
enlightened by the conduct of reason, were extraordinarily exact, and of
admirable integrity.

See sir Walter Rauleigh lib. 2. page 549. Tit. A. and C. ad Leg. Full.
Repetund. Carrion. Chron. page 89.
Zaleneus made a law that every adulterer should loose his eyes, his son was
first taken in the fact; least that law should be violated, he was content to
part with one of his own eyes, and his son was punished with the loss of
another.

Cambyses King of Persia, having detected the corruption of a Judge in his
Kingdom, commands him to be put to death, his skin to be plucked off, and
spread upon the Judgment Seat as a Carpet, his son to sit in the fathers
throne so adorned, that he and all posterity might fear for ever to pervert
Justice, and to deal untruly in judgment.

Mount. Essa. page 479.
The Egyptian Kings solemnly and usually presented this oath to their Judges:
Not to swarve from their consciences, what command soever they should receive
from themselves to the contrary.

The Roman laws, called the laws of the twelve Tables, See Vol. lib. 2. page
668. Aemilius Paulus his love to the public, and Hannibals also D.p. 570. And
also that of Canutus, See Drexel Infernus Rogus Epi. Dedicur.
so often magnified by Tully, appoints, That if a Judge, or any other in
Authority, for that purpose, should take money in the point of administering
Justice, he should die for it. If any should bear false witness, he should
be thrown down from the Tarpeian rock.

Thus you hear in a few particulars, that Moral righteousness, guided only
by the light of natural conscience goes far, and yet it comes far short of
that righteousness required by my Text, and in Christian rules, it is many
ways defective

First, There wants a right root, Faith in JESUS CHRIST, and therefore all its
productions, famous achievements, and excellencies were styled by the Fathers,
but beautiful abominations, having no better grounds, then self-love, vain
glory, rules of policy, natural notions at the best; they all withered and
came to nothing.

Secondly, There wants special grace, as the soul and life, to quicken and
sanctify it in every passage, and particular circumstance, to Christianize it,
that I may so speak, and crown it.

Thirdly, There wants supernatural principles, and divine light to irradiate,
enlarge, and fortify it.

Fourthly, There wants the right end, GODs glory. Liberty, and immortal fame,
(says Austin,) were the aim in the Actors of those admirable things amongst
the Romans. Add then these, and we have,

Thirdly, religious righteousness, which ever strikes the stroke, does the
deed, and goes through stitch indeed, in all comfortable Christian government.
It only steeres aright in all public employments, stands upright in all
storms, and is steel to the back. Either there must be an addition of
Religion to reason, piety to policy, counsel out of GODs Book, to the light
of natural conscience, sanctified righteousness to civil honesty: or as tho
preferred party himself though otherwise of never so good parts, never so
universally and excellently enriched with all endowments of all kinds,
natural, moral, politic, learned, is but as a dead man, a rotten carrion
stuck over with flowers; so certainly with whatsoever outward flourishes and
formalities he may seem to dazzle the eyes of underlings; he will poison his
place, by preferring his own particular and private ends, by putting sometimes
hateful business into good language, for his own advantage and further
advancement, and ever by temporizing, rather then hazard his temporal
happiness. Hear what judicious Master Hooker did happily let fall from his
pen to this purpose. So natural (says he,) is the union of Religion with
Justice, that we may boldly deem there is neither, where both are not. For how
should they be unfainedly just, whom Religion does not cause to be such, or
they religious which are not found such by the proof of their just actions? If
they which employ their labor and travail about the public administration
of Justice, follow it only as a trade, with unquenchable and unconscionable
thirst of gain, being not in heart persuaded, that Justice is GODs own work,
and themselves his Agent in this business; the sentence of right, GODs own
verdict, and themselves his Priests to deliver it, formalities of Justice do
but serve to smoother right, and that which was necessarily ordained for the
common good, is through shameful abuse, made the cause of common misery. It is
no peculiar conceit, Note.
but a matter of sound consequence, that all duties are by so much the better
performed, by how much the men are more religious, from whose abilities the
same proceed.

This explication thus premised, I come to confirm the point, first by
Scripture.

And first take notice of GODs own words to King David, 2 Samuel 23.3. The GOD
of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me: He that rules over men must
be just, ruling in the fear of GOD. And why a Rock? upon purpose to intimate,
and give assurance of an all sufficiency, and omnipotent arm, for protection
in such cases: And why so? because all that set themselves to govern
graciously and as GOD would have them, shall be sure to be mightily set against
by all the powers of darkness, all the Devils in hell, and all their wicked
instruments upon earth. Magistrates that are no medlers, as they say, but only
seek themselves, and a name, and an honor in their places, need no Rock.
The Governor of a Corporation, who will suffer himself to be entreated, for
the erecting and supporting of those bloody dens of swinish drunkards, schools
of misrule, and nurceries for the gallows, resolves to take no notice of those
sons of Belial, who belch out their blasphemies in the street, against that
blessed law provided in such a case, is willing to be accessory to all those
sins through his whole year, which out of cowardlinesse or connivency, he
left unpunished; I say such a one is like enough to sleep in a whole skin,
he needs no Rock.

The negligent and unconscionable Minister, which never goes about to stir
the Devil in the ignorant, profane, and those that hate to be reformed, but
is well enough content, that so he may rise and jovialize it in the mean time,
to treasure up the bloody cries of so many murdered souls against the day of
wrath, he shall not have so much as a drunkard to open his mouth, or wag his
finger against him, he needs no Rock.

The idol Justice, that only hunts after plausiblenesse and popularity, and
for the good word of all the good-fellowes about him, to serve his own turn
for some intents when the time serves, and for that purpose upholds as much as
he can for shame, or dare for law, all profane sports, rotten Alehouses, I
say, there where the Justice of Peace is mild, and the drunkard merry, as they
say, there is mischief enough, he needs no Rock.

But now that man of Authority, who in love to the LORD JESUS and out of the
Lion-like boldness of a good conscience, dare and will draw the sword of
Justice against the proudest Nimrod, if need require, sets his breast from the
beginning to the end of his year, with impartiality and resolution against all
the floods of Belial, bends himself with such an universal sincere severity
against all sin, that he is now become the drunkards song, etc. That man of
GOD which being sensible of the horrible sin of killing souls, dares not but
discover unto his people, the damnablenesse of their state, all kinds of
hypocrisy, all sorts of unregeneration, the whole counsel of GOD, and so
dwell upon their bosom sins with terror, and truth, and still beat upon
those bars, with the hammer of the Word, which keeps them from CHRIST,
until the Devil be driven out of them. (Which you know, what a world of
ungodly opposition, bedlam rage and railing it will raise against a faithful
Minister.)

The Justice of Peace which resolves to be serious and real to do his Country
good indeed, and to discharge a good conscience undauntedly without all fear
or faction, and looks upon blasphemers, drunkards, whore-masters, railers
against Religion, etc. as the North wind upon rain, etc.

I say such as these, and in a word, all who deal uprightly, and rule in the
fear of GOD, have need of a Rock, against the rage of all ungodly
oppositions. And such a Rock will the GOD of Israel be unto them all; that set
against them, shall set their shoulders against a Rock; all their cunning and
close projects, and open base practices of all profane opposites and
underminers; the plausible, politic tyrannise of those that sit in the gate,
all the scurrill, dunghill rimes and railings of deboist Bilial drunken
jesters. All that man or Devil can any ways do against them, shall all be
but like so many proud and swelling waves, which dash themselves against a
strong impregnable rock, which the more boisterously they beat against it,
the more desperately are they dissolved, and broken into a vain son or froth.

The ever glorious Princess of sweetest, and dearest memory, Queen Elizabeth,
is a most memorable, and matchless instance of protection in this kind. The
mighty arm of GOD was as a Rock of brass, to beat back from her sacred and
Royal person, See Ra^ot lib. 2. page 432.
defending the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, such variety of murderous complotments,
as no age, or story can possibly parallel. Whereas on the other side, that
knife, that could but strik out the teeth of Henry the fourth, while he stuck
to the truth of GOD and true Religion; upon the pulling down the Pyramid for
their gratification, and admitting again those bloody firebrands and
cutthroats of Christendom, the Jesuits, had power to take away his life.

Secondly, consider that counsel given to great ones, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, serve
the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Risse the Son least he be
angry.

Here Princes, Judges, and all that bear Authority, are charged to lay hold
both upon imputed and inherent righteousness.

Kiss the Sonne] entertain and embrace JESUS CHRIST, blessed for ever,
bleeding upon the Cross for your sins and sakes, and sweetly, and amiably
offering himself to all broken hearts, in the arms of your faith, love, and
everlasting affection.

And serve the LORD in feare] Let the fear of GOD be ever before your eyes in
all places, at all times, about all affairs, and thereupon; neither think,
nor speak, nor do, neither judge nor plead, nor being in verdict, etc. But
so, as you would be content, when it is new done, to go immediately to give an
account of it, before the high and everlasting Judge, otherwise this Son whom
you should Kiss, and to whom all Judgment is committed, John 5.22. will be
angry, and if once a fire be kindled in his anger, against an impenitent
wretch, that hates to be reformed, it will burn unto the bottom of hell, and
set on fire the foundations of the mountains. And howsoever you may carry
things fair to the worlds eye in the mean time, yet assure your selves very
shortly, (for that day hasteneth apace,) all the judgments, pleadings,
sentences, verdicts, which have passed against JESUS CHRIST, the truth, any
good cause, or a good conscience, they shall all be reversed and repealed
before that last, and highest Tribunal, in the face of heaven and earth,
before Angels, men, and Devils; and there, and then you shall be horribly,
universally, and everlastingly shamed: be then advised before hand, and in the
Name of GOD, take heed what ye do.

Thirdly, for our purpose, let us ponder well those properties, which the
Scriptures require in a man of place, Exodus 18.21. Deu. 1.13. They are seven in
all, four in the first, three in the second place. I name them not in their
order; you shall find them all in the Text, Magistrates should be,

First, Able men, apt to fill the place with some competency of parts and
equallity of worth, to answer and sustain, the heat and burden of it, with a
fit sufficiency of endowments, ability, activenesse, and industry. There ever
ought to be a convenient correspondency between the importance of the place,
and the capacity of the party. It is a thousand pitties to see in a Church, and
Commonweal, many places full, and yet so few filled, when there is no
proportion, nay a vast distance between the height, or rather the weight of
the place, and the weakness, worthlesnesse, if not the notorious wikednesse,
of that unworthy person, who either by a golden violence, or temporising
baseness, has most impudently thrust himielfe into it.

Secondly, Wise, sapient men, Such as are skil-full in the Theory, nature,
mystery and meaning of the place, and Office into which they are to be
preferred. A man can never happily execute, and successefully, any function,
office, or Art, which is not learned in the speculative part, before he descend
unto the practicke. Is it fit think you, for a man to plead at the Bar,
before he has well studied, and profitably passed through the course of the
Common Law? If a Physician should fall to practice, before he be skilled in
Hypocrates and Galen, in the natures, causes, signs, symptoms, prognostics,
and remedies of diseases, he is like enough to kill all before him.
Proportionable miseries and mischief, may be expected, and ensue, when
important places are pressed into, and undertaken without habitual
understanding, and speculative skill what belongs unto them. It is a pitiful
thing, when a man will needs thrust into public employments, only for the
gain and honor, and depend upon others for the discharge of them, or else do
them beastlily.

Thirdly, Prudent, So fitly rendered by Iunius, approved also by Vatablus, that
great Professor of the Hebrew tongue. They must not only be Sapient, if I may
so speak, and it cannot possibly be otherwise expressed in the English tongue,
but also Prudent, endowed with a practical dexterity and discretion, to order
wisely all the particulars in the execution of their place. This prudence,
which is, as the Moralists speak, the general Queen, superintendent, and
guide of all other virtues, Auriga virtutum, without which there is nothing
good, beautiful, fit and decent, being sanctified especially, will enable
them, by comparing one thing with another, by well weighing all accidents,
circumstances, appurtinances, times, persons, places, etc. to guide and manage
all the several passag^ ^f their public charges, with wisdom, equity, and
impartiality. It consists principally, in three things, which are all of one
rank; to consult, and deliberate well, to judge and resolve well; to conduct
and execute well. It has a chief stroke in affairs of judicature to moderate
rigor with equity.

That you may more clearly apprehend the necessity of adding this, to the
former requisite in a good Magistrate, take an instance or two.

It is not enough for a Minister of GOD to be a good Scholar, and preach
general truths, (though I confess a great deal of learning is required in
every Minister of our times) I say besides his speculative Divinity and ability
to preach, he must exercise a prudent zeal to wind himself by the Word, into
the consciences and affections of men, to convince, and cast them down, and so
conduct them through the pangs of the new birth into the holy path; he must
labor to add to the excellency of learning, the art of converting, else woe
unto the people that are under him.

It is not enough for a Justice of Peace, to have a good revenew and rich
attire, and to present himself solemnly upon the Bench every Sessions and
Assize: but he must be skillful in the duties of his office and Statutes, so
far as they concern it: other wise he will sit but as an Idol, or cipher
upon that Tribunal, which requires a great deal of understanding, and action.
Nay, and not only so, knowledge in the duties of his place, though never so
univer^^^l and exact, will not serve the turn, except he be also active, and
employed. Being thus furnished with speculative abilities, and wisdom for that
purpose, he must take to heart the good of the Country, out of conscience;
labor, and pray for an holy dexterity, to discover and dive into the depth of
the Devils Agents, their combinations, haunts, and hypocrisies, to search
businesses that are brought before him to the bottom, and that with gravity
and in earnest; out of a spiritual prudence to take all advantages, and fit
opportunities, to suppress the floods of Belial, to disgrace a graceless, and
honor an honest man; otherwise he will be so far from being a good Patriot,
that he may prove a very plague to the Country. There is not a more notorious
villainy, there can be no greater wrong and greater indignity offered to an
ingenious and free people, then to have a Magistrate set over them, which
adding craft to his power and skill, welds them all three to work his own
ends, and practice his private revenge from time to time upon his supposed
opposites.

Fourthly, Men of of truth, Let them be truehearted Nathaniels in their private
and personal conversation: let them prize and prefer the truth, in all
causes that are brought unto them, and all matters they meddle with, before gold
or friend, favorite, or richest favor.

There is a truth in things when they are conformable to the divine Idea. There
is a truth in the mind, when there is an adequation between the conceit, and
the thing apprehended out of the understanding. There is a truth in the tongue,
when there is an agreement between the speech, and the thought. There is a
truth in the action, when there is a correspondency between a man's word, and
deed; let me add a fist, fittest for the present, to make you completely true.
There is also a truth, (let them consider of it seriously whom it nearly
concerns,) when the verdict answers exactly, and punctually to the evidence,
and the Sentence to the true meaning of the Law.

Fifthly, Haters of covetousness, For assuredly if these Kite-footed
corruptions domineere in the Magistrate, all is mard; then must his high place,
honor, friends, favorites, servants, dependants, officers, all occasions,
circumstances, advantages, wit, policy, nay, religion, conscience and all, be
made to serve and feed this unsatiable daughter of the horse-leach.
Sacrilege, that monstrous incongruity of Laymens taking Titnes, and not
preaching to the people, Isa. 59.14.
Symony, bribery, turning of judgment away backward, temporising, betraying
the truth and good causes, selling of offices, benefices, Justice, silence,
sharking of under officers, etc. are the filthy vermin, that breed only in
this Burrow. Excellent then was the counsel of Praees ut de subditis crescas?
nequaquamsed ut ipsi de te.
Bernard to Eugenius; So rule that the people may prosper and grow rich under
thee, and not thou wealthy by them.

Sixthly, Such as fear GOD; Here is the life and crown, which gives a
spiritual being and gracious beauty to all the rest, which were it possible, a
man could possess in perfection, yet without this, they would be but as matter
without form, a body without a soul, a soul without JESUS CHRIST. Nay in
this case the greater sufficiency would prove, but as a sharper sword in a
madder hand, ever the greater man without grace, the greater beast, as a good
Divine concludes from that Psalm. 49.20. Man that is in honor, and
understands not, is like the beasts that perish. If the fear of GOD be not
planted in the heart, to season and sanctify the other several endowments.
They will all degenerate; wisdom into craft; power into private revenge;
valor into violence; prudence into plotting for his own ends; courage into
fool hardiness, to uphold a faction; policy into putting fair pretenses
upon soul businesses; all his abilities and sufficiencies, into setting
foreward, and securing his own temporal happiness. If this holds him not in,
and serves him as a load-starre to steer still aright, we cannot look for an
universal uprightness, and constancy of just dealing in any man of place; but
sometimes at least, especially in time of some great trial, and when he is put
to it indeed, he will slinke and fall off. A great man, his friend, his enemy;
his fear, cowardlinesse; affection, faction; covetousness, malice, or
something will ever and anon transport inordinately, and sway him away. So that
he will be in great danger of turning judgment into gall, and righteousness
into hemlocke.

Seventhly, Men well known, And that two ways principally, for the present
purpose. 1. To be honest in their personal conversation; if there be but any
one sin that corrupts their conscience, stains their life or disgraces their
calling, to which they give allowance in themselves, it will not only hinder
and discourage them from drawing the sword against that, but also the sense of
its guiltiness, will put such an universal faintness in the arm of Justice,
that they will be much disabled from a resolute execution of their place, and
cordial punishment of sin. 2. To rule well their own house. 1 Timothy 3.5.
If a man, says the Apostle, knows not how to rule his own house, how shall
he take care of the Church of GOD? or indeed any public charge at all? Is it
fit, think you, for one to be a Justice of Peace, who is a swearer himself?
etc. and harbors under his roof drunkards, swearers, scorners of Religion,
Papists, etc. Is such a man fit or like to execute with any heart or resolution
those excellent acts against swearing, drunkenness, Recusancy, etc. upon
offenders abroad? Is it fit for a man to undertake any Ministerial charge, who
is an haunter of Alehouses, a fashion-monger, an idle fellow himself, and a
patron of good-fellowes, and if he has a family, had never any care to pray
evening and morning, sing Psalms, etc? Is such a companion like to lift up his
voice like a Trumpet, against the sins of the time, and stand at swords point
against the several corruptions, all the sinful prophanations of his Parish,
himself being a notorious delinquent?

A Magistrate thus endowed, as the Scripture appoints, is a man after GODs own
heart, and a star in his right hand; he that wants any of these is but a
blazing Comet, how high soever he seems to soar.

2. By Reasons,

The first, may be taken from the maine, and principal end of all government,
Regal, or subordinate. To wit, the advancement of the Kingdom of JESUS
CHRIST, and the cherishing of his Children. For let men of the world which have
their portion only in this life, think, and say what they list, it is for the
sakes, and safety of the Saints alone, whom they look upon so disdainefully,
themselves being extremely contemptible, and would if they might have leave,
trample them into the dust with the feet of pride and malice, who ordinarily
become the drunkards song, a byword to men, viler then the earth, and Music
at the tables of graceless great ones. I say, it is only for them, that the
mighty LORD of heaven, not only supports and preserves, all the States, and
Monarchies, all the Commonweales, and Kingdoms of the earth, but even the world
it self. Assuredly, when the last of these Elected ones, whom GOD has
everlastingly loved from before all worlds, shall be called, converted, and
fitted for heaven, the world shall stand no longer, but the heavens shall
shrivell together like a scrole, and pass away with a noise, the whole frame
of this inferior world, shall be turned into a ball of fire, the Imperial
Crowns of the greatest Monarchs upon earth, shall flame about their ears; you
that carry now all before you, and wallow impenitently in the glory, pleasure,
applause, and wealth of the world, shall tire the rocks and mountains with
bootlesse cries, and entreaties to fall upon you, the Trumpet will sound, and
we shall all come to the Judgment of that great, and last day.

This serviceablenesse, and subordination of all Imperial, Regal, and
inferior power whatsoever to the Kingdom of CHRIST, King James of famous
memory, clearly intimates, and acknowledges in his Royal remonstrance, when
he speaks thus: To that GOD, that King of Kings I devote my Scepter, at his
feeete in all humbleness of spirit, I lay down my Crown, to whose service,
as a most humble homager, and vassal, I consecrate all the glory, honor,
splendour, and luster of my earthly Kingdom. And what will become of all the
power and policy, that opposes the people of GOD, we may see in the second of
Daniel, ver. 34, 35, 44, 45. Those four strongest Monarchies, and mightiest
States, that ever the Sun saw, shaddowed by Nabuchadnezars great Image,
setting themselves against the servants of GOD, were beaten upon, and blasted
by the curse of divine wrath, and so sunk in their several times, into the
jaws of ruin, and irrecoverable desolation. They blustered a while like
mighty winds with much threatening, and impetuous rage, but presently breathed
out into naught, and vanished for ever. That stone, says the Text, which was
cut out without hands, smote the Image upon his feet, that were of iron, and
clay, and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, clay, the brass, and
silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and become like the chafe of
the Summer threshing flower, and the wind carried them away, that no place was
found for them. And so let all the implacable enemies of JESUS CHRIST perish to
the worlds end. Selah.

Thus you see what is the maine end of Magistracy: which necessarily requires
righteousness in Rulers. For

A wicked Magistrate or Minister entering into this place, not by GODS door,
but by the Devils window, as they say, which is ordinary with men of ill
conscience; if they be of a meddling and malignant humor, sense of his
guiltiness in coming in basely, and at a backe-doore, enraging him, or the
curse of GOD for his Symony or bribery justly hardening his heart; it is his
wont to vex and fall soul upon honest men, to stand for rotten causes, to
take the worse part without repentance all the days of his domineering. But if
he be of a duller, and more unactive spirit, and given to the world; he is
resolved to meddle as little as he may, to live reservedly, make a show, grow
rich, and there is an end; of what temper soever they be, if they fear not
GOD, they are so far from seeking his Kingdom, and righteousness in the
first place, that it is least, and lowest in their thoughts. Nay, does not
every spiritual eye see, that they are upon the matter close Agents, or
public acto urs against the power, and holy preciseness of it? Their seeking
is themselves, their serving, is the time, their heaven is their high place.
But now give me a godly man indeed, and as he would rather lie in the dust, all
the days of his life, and dye in obscurity, then be advanced by any wicked, or
unworthy means: So being pulled into any place of public employment, his
holiest and highest desire, and ambition is, to be as a refreshing comfortable
shower in a great drought, to every honest man: but as a terrible tempest upon
the face of every son of Belial, and hairy-pate of every one that hates to be
reformed, to stand no longer in his slipery place, then he may continue an
upright industrious instrument to advance GODs glory, promote good causes,
protect good men, ever most willing, rather to part with the highest promotion
in the world, were it crowned with the riches and revenewes of all the
Kingdoms upon earth, then with a good conscience. It was aright noble and
worthy answer, and exemplary of Benevolus to Iustina an Arrian Empres, Dike of
Cons. page 140.
offering him preferment to be an instrument in some vile service; what, says
he, do ye promising me a higher place for a reward of iniquity? Take this away,
and welcome, which I have already, so that I may keep a good conscience: and
thereupon threw at her feet his girdle, the ensign of his honor. Thus
undoubtedly will a good conscience trample under foot the highest preferment,
to preserve its own integrity.

Secondly, The righteous man only will be thoroughly, and universally resolute,
for he knows full well, and feels, that he cannot possibly have any higher
preferment then JESUS CHRIST, whom he already happily possesses in the arms
of his faith, nor any greater cross then a wounded conscience, and therefore
he dare by no means either hurt the one, or hazard the other. Hence it was
that Moses casting the eye of his faith upon the recompense of reward, refused
to be a favorite in Pharohs Court, and that Joseph did so invincibly withstand
the impure, and impudent solicitations of his wicked, and wanton Mistress; he
clearly foresaw what horror was like to scaze upon his heart, by so sinning
against his GOD. Now the reason that the righteous man is so resolute; is the
sense of his reconcilement to GOD, and the clearenesse of his conscience: and
the cause that every wicked man is a coward, and will so conform to the
current of the time, is his ill conscience. The wicked flee, says Solomon,
when no man pursues; but the righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. The
word in the original signifies a young Lion, which as a Lion fears neither
man nor beast, great nor small, he turns not away for any. Prove. 30. But as
young, by the fresh and furious boiling of his abundant, native heat, is more
audacious, and undaunted for any adventure then other Lions, so lion-like bold,
should every Magistrate be, for he must pull the prey out of the Lions mouth,
and rescue the oppressed from the man that is too mighty for him, he must not
be afraid either of mortal, or immortal adversaries, he must not fear the
face of man, or frowns of greatness, the loss of preferment, present or
promised: he must hold to the death, such principles as these: Let Justice be
done, and let the heavens fall; if I perish, I perish; Should such a man as I
flee, and be faint-hearted? livelihood, liberty, life, and all for a good
conscience, etc. And so bold can a Ruler never be, unless he be righteous, and
reconciled unto GOD. It is the comfort of a good conscience alone, which is
able by a secret, and sacred influence, not only to fill the body with marrow,
and fatness, inspire the affections with a calm, and composed sweetness, but
also begets in the spirit, that strong, and heavenly vigor, which inkindles,
and keeps in life all such true courage, and noble resolution. There may be a
brazenface, and much foole-hardinesse without grace, but never a brave mind
indeed, and spirit of steel. A wicked man advanced, and hoisted into some high
place, may look big, domineere, and give foul words, Nay, to be plausible,
and please he may do many good things, stand to it stoutly a good while; but
bring him once to a strong temptation, or trial, put him upon the push of the
Pikes, and he will presently pull in the horns, and start a side like a broken
bow. He that is a slave to his lusts, and slavishly serves the time, will be
sure to hide his head at the rising of every storm, and ever turn true
coward, when his temporary happiness is hazarded. And cowards as a worthy
Divine has characterized them, are slaves to their superiors, fellow-fooles
to their equals, tyrants to their inferiors, and windmills to popular breath,
not being able to any of these to say so much as, No.

Thirdly, unrighteous Rulers are the only men to ruin a Kingdom: wicked
Magistrates, and Ministers, are able in a short time to dissolve the sinews of
the strongest State in Christendom, and to bring the most flourishing Church
of the world into confusion; Many ways, is the measure of a peoples rebellion,
made up and full; ripe, and ready for the Sicle of GODs vengeance, and beesome
of utter destruction; by many abominations is the LORDS indignation set on fire
against a Nation, but I know not whether by any more, set Idolatry aside, then
by perverting of Justice: when judgment is turned away backward, and Justice
stands a far off, when truth is fallen in the street. (Alas for pity!
where so many pass by, and not put to their helping-hand,) and equity cannot
enter. O the LORD the righteous Judge of all the world, is extremely angry,
when judgment goes not forth, and Justice is turned into gall, when those that
sit in his place, either judge not at all, or judge unjustly, punishing the
innocent, which should be cleared, and clearing the guilty who should be
punished. When private men do wrong, the sin is their own, it is their
personal offense, and they must answer it with their heads; but if private
men's enormities and abominations pass unpunished, be borne with, or boulstred
out by authority; if the wicked be justified, and the just condemned, if
execution be not done upon Achans, if he be saved, whom GOD has appointed to
dye, if public power be villanously abused to private revenge, profit, or
pleasuring of great ones, if good Laws be not executed for the protection of
the innocent, and punishing of the wicked. In a word, if public Tribunals,
and seats of Justice, be any ways corrupted, if Justice that glorious ciment
of all societies be neglected or perverted, if truth fall in the street, and
equity grow lame, I say then the offense grows public, even the sin of the
whole Kingdom, and causes GOD to enter into judgment, not with the Elders of
his people, and Princes alone, but with the whole Land, even with the State in
general. Hear the Prophets of old, expressing GODS mind herein. Esayah,
59.14, 15, 16, 17. Let us take notice, and tremble, Judgment is turned away
backward, and Justice stands a far off; for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter. Nay, truth fails, and be that departs from evil
makes himself a prey, and the LORD saw it, and it displeased him, that there
was no judgment. And he saw there was no man, and wondered that there was no
Intercessour. Therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and
righteousness, it sustained him. For he put on righteousness as a
brestplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head, and he put on the garment
of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal, as a cloak. Ier. 5.27,
28, 29, 30, 31. As a cage is full of birds, so is their houses full of deceit:
He means wealth hoarded up by dishonest gain, therefore they are become
great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine, yea, they overpasse the
deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause of the fatherless, yet they
prosper, and the right of the needy, they do not judge.

Shall I not visit these things, says the LORD? Shall not my soul be avenged
on such a nation as this? as if he had said, I will be most certainly, and
severely revenged of it. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the
Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, and my people love to have it so. And what will you do in the end
thereof? Mich. 3.9, 10, 11, 12. Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house
of Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and
pervert all equity. They build up Ston with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.
The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire; and
the Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will they leave upon the LORD, and
say, is not the LORD amongst us? None evil can come upon us. Therefore shall
Sion for your sake be plowed up as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps,
and the mountains of the house as the high places of the forest.

Unrighteous Ministers also, as well as wicked Magistrates do a great deal of
mischief to a State, and hasten captivity. Their unjust dealings in their
place, are by so much the more pestilent, by how much the condition of their
calling is of its own nature most excellent, Degeneratio optimi pessima.

See the perniciousnesse of their unrighteous ruling in two or three passages.

First, when they take temporary things from their people, but make no
conscience, take no care to give them spiritual. The blood of those souls
which perish under the unconscionable, and cruel negligence of an unfaithful
Pastor, pierces the heavens with a more horrible cry, then the lowdest
thunder, able to pull down plagues, and dreadful judgments upon a whole
Land, especially, where such bloody sloth is pleaded for, and not punished. O
but will some say, when the Sermon is done: these are great words indeed,
swelling phrases, etc. Projicit ampullas and sesqui pedalia verba. No, no, that
is not it, it is the true, and piercing sense of these honest words meeting
with your galled, and guilty consciences, which makes you rage, and stamp, and
rail. I assure you if we were able to compose words of thunder and lightnings,
they would be too weak to awake a great number out of their cursed cruelty of
horred bloodshed in this kind.

Secondly, When Ministers like those dawbers with untempered mortar, and
pillow-sowers under men's elbowes. Ezech. 13. make the heart of the righteous
sad, whom GOD has not made sad, and strengthen the hands of the wicked, that
he should not turn from his wicked way, by promising him life. As it is in the
last verse but one of that Chapter.

Thirdly, By tampering with our Articles of Religion, (as sound and orthodoxe,
for any thing I know, as any, since the Apostles times, which make our Church
as happy at this day, as any under the cope of heaven. If we be so happy as to
hold them in that purity, and true sense, as we received them of our
predecessors, and as they came streaming down to us in the blood of our
glorious Martyrs) by laboring to put false glosses upon them, and talking of
some reconcilement of our Church to the Romish Synagogue, which is as
impossible, as to reconcile CHRIST unto Antichrist. Besides the concurrent
judgment of those uncomparable, and renowned Divines in Queen Elizabeth's
time, our present orthodoxe Divines, and Doctors, apprehend aright and
acknowledge the infinite antipathy and utter impossibility, speaking thus; Roma
is irreconciliabilis, says the Bishop of Exceter: Light and darkness may
meet, says another, in the twilight, but midday and midnight can never
possibly come together; and such is Popery, and Protestancy. The truth is,
says Doctor Worship, such is the antipathy between a Protestant and a
Papist, as there is between the two birds in Plutarch, the Siskin, and the
Muskin, which will fight eagerly alive, and being dead, if you mix their blood
it will run apart, and dissociate. They are like the two poles of heaven,
says another, which stand for ever directly, and diametrically opposite.

If any by the way, marvel why I meet with Ministers, let them know,

First, That many of my Breethren are in mine eye, and a worthy part of this
great Auditory.

Secondly, That the Civil Magistrate may see, whereas we preach impartiallity
to them, we are not partial toward our own Tribe. As we desire to deal
faithfully with them, so we spare not our own Coat. And that all the world may
know, that we approve no Ministry in this Church, but that which is honest,
orthodoxe, and painful.

Thirdly, Ministers lie directly within the verge of my Text. For we are called
Rectours, Rulers, and our Personages, Rectories.

See Case lib. 3. ^ap. 3. page 215.
Even honest Politicians require righteousness in Rulers, for many reasons. 1.
Because they are as it were, earthly Gods, and represent the person of GOD
himself in their places of Authority, and upon their just Tribunals. 2. For
the eminency of their honor, which is due not to the man, but to his virtue.
3. For imitation to those who shall succeed them in their places, who will
look back upon them, as paternes, and presidents, for themselves to follow.
4. For fear of scandal and giving offense, which inferiors will be very apt,
and eager to take. 5. For the universal good of those they govern, which is
the end of all Authority over others.

This point thus proved by Scriptures, and Reasons, I come to the Use of it,
which may be threefold.

1. For Reprofe. 2. Instruction. 3. Exhortation. The time runs away so fast,
that I can but only name the two first, because I desire to insist the longer,
and enlarge my self the more upon the last.

First, Reprofe to all unrighteous Rulers, Ministers, Magistrates, or
whatsoever they be. Many now a days run a madding after promotions, and
serve themselves, Vijs and modis, into Offices, Benefices, preferments, high
rooms, and being most unworthily advanced, they hold in a special happiness
to have an hand over men, far worthyer then themselves. Let them alone, this
is their day, a day of domineering, and of their fools Paradise, and serving
themselves sensually, but assuredly without speedy repentance, turning on the
better side, taking GODS Childrens part, There is a day a coming upon them, it
is near, Zeph. 1.14.15
it is near, it hasteneth greatly, says the Prophet, when the mighty man
shall cry bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and
distress, a day of wastnesse, and desolation, a day of darkness, and
gloominesse, a day of clouds, and thick darkness; (they are the words of the
holy Ghost,) which no earthly glory, no glittering of outward pomp, no shining
heaps of gold and silver, not the Prince of all the lights in heaven, nor the
whole starry Firmament shall ever be able to enlighten, or refresh; though they
swell never so big with pride, and disdain, look they never so high, should
they exalt themselves as the Eagle, and set their nest among the stars, they
shall certainly down with a vengeance, GOD shall suddenly shoot at them with
a swift arrow, it is already in the Bow; even a Bow of steel shall send forth
an arrow, that shall strike them through, shive off their gall, as Job speaks,
throw them down into the dust. Their pride, and their power shall be
overthrown in the turning of an hand, then must they lay down their cold
carkases among the stones of the pit, at the roots of the rock, and their
poor sinful souls, must presently be presented at that last, and stricktest
Tribunal, where never bribe, or big look, gold or greatness, bears any
sway. O then they will gnash the teeth, and roar, and wish that they had lain
in the dust all the days of their life, and never known what preferment had
meant, when they shall find by woeful experience, but too late, that to mighty
men there are mighty torments prepared, and that they shall be horribly
plagued, proportionably to the pestilent abuse of their high places, and those
public employments, into which they have corruptly thrust themselves without
clear entrance, and due calling. Then will they tremble, Isa. 51.20. Isa.
33.14.
take on as wild Bulls in a net, as Isaiah speaks, full of the fury of the
LORD, and cry out with those sinners in Zion, Who amongst us shall dwell in
everlasting fire? who amongst us shall dwell in everlasting burnings? The day
of recompense is now come upon them. They have had their heaven in this world,
and therefore they must now have their hell in another. They have domineered
for a while upon earth, done what they list, and had what they would, yet now
must they down into a land of darkness, of horror, and confusion, whence
they shall never rise up again. Only repent, and you may prevent all this;
but do it to day, we little know what sad news the evening may bring. If thou
die in an impenitent estate, thou art damned everlastingly: and in this passage
I value all men alike, of what cloth soever his coat be made. He that lays
his foundation with fireworke, must look to be blown up at last, he that does
not confess his sins, forsake them, enter into the narrow way, lead a new
life, stand on CHRIST'S side, love the Brotherhood, he can never be saved. I
know not how my words be taken or mistaken, yet sure I am, before any man can
deny this to be true, or say any thing against that I have said, he must turn
Atheist, and prove Scripture is false, and that there is no GOD, no heaven, no
hell, which would be a brainelesse and bootelesse task of the most desperate,
and prodigious incarnate Devil upon earth.

Secondly, 2 Use
For Instruction, to teach us, whenever we have any power to dispose of any
place, or preferment, to bestow any office and Benefice, etc. and whenever we
are called to give our voices in the election of any Magistrate or other man to
be publickely employed for the good of the Country any way, let us ever be sure
to cast our eye upon the worthiest, and without all fear or favor, or
faction, impartially, and resolutely, to pitch upon him, who, as we are
persuaded in our consciences is most able, and is best furnished with those
properties, which GODs Spirit requires in a Ruler mentioned before. And let
friend, kinsman, neighbor, favorite, money, letters, Landlord, Lord, or any
man alive, say what they will; (if the Landlord, or, Lord, or whosoever take
the right way, and stand for the best, stick to him, and welcome; and bless
GOD for so good a guide.) Let the current of the times run never so
boistrously a contrary course, let the event, and success, be for thee, or
against thee, as GOD would have it, etc. thou shall have more honor, and
comfort, in doing as the holy Ghost directs, and as an honest man should, then
if thy voice were able to purchase for thee, the riches of both the Indies, or
advance thee as high as heaven.

And furthermore consider, if thou should have thy hand in the preferment of
any wicked, and unworthy man to a place, whether thou have not thy hand also in
some sort, in all the miseries, and mischiefs which may fall out and follow
upon his ill discharge of the place.

Do you not think, (for the purpose) if a Patron should prefer corruptly
to a living, an idle, dissolute Minister, a selfe-preacher, temporizer, enemy
to GODs people, etc. that he should not in some measure be accessory to the
blood of all those souls, which should perish by the default, and under the
cruel hand of such a negligent unconscionable fellow?

Use 3.
Thirdly, For Exhortation to all Rulers, and whosoever take into their hand the
raines of Government over others in any kind, that they would be righteous;
that they would first, furnish themselves, with Imputed, 2. Moral. 3.
Religious righteousness, with those sevenfold forementioned endowements in a
good Magistrate. That they may behave themselves, as GOD would have them, which
that they may comfortably, and conscionably do, let them take good counsel,
and amongst many other directions, do, as I now advise: Let them 1. Get JESUS
CHRIST, 2. Enter into their places purely in GODs name. 3. Be illightned,
directed, and quickened to a through, and constant discharge of them, principally
by the divine light, and heavenly motions of GODs holy truth. 4. Keep ever a
clear conscience, both in respect of their personal walking, and right
managing all the particulars of their public charge. 5. Have an eye still
upon that last, and dreadful Tribunal, at which they must shortly give a
strict account for all things done in the flesh.

But here before I enter upon the particulars, give me leave to prevent an
exception, remove a scruple, which may perhaps arise already in some men's
hearts, and so dull their attention, and blunt the impression of the ensuing
points. What? may some say, here is nothing but JESUS CHRIST, pure preferment,
holy truth, divine light, I know not how many kinds of righteousness, clear
conscience, sad fore-thoughts of the last day, etc. All (for any thing I see)
tending wholly to Puritanisme; I think he would have us all so A derivative
from (...) from whence comes (...) n my (...) extitis re^dred (...) the
septuagints. Ioh. 4.17.
righteous, that we should turn Puritans, etc.

Before I speak to the point, let me tell you, that I am right glad, that I
have now in mine eye, such an honorable, noble, judicious, and understanding
Auditory, who I know will do me right, were there now before me a number of
drunkards, whore-masters, deboist swaggerers, scorners of Religion, sensual
Epicures, Stigmaticall scurrill jesters; O how would they take on, stamp, and
play the Bedlams! how they would rage, rail, and cavil: though by the mercy
of GOD, they should be no more able to overthrow by any sound reason what I
say, then to remove the mightiest rock, when they are reeling drunk, either
with wine or malice. Now upon this occasion let me acquaint you with the truth,
about this unhappy imputation, ordinarily laid by Protestants at large upon the
power of godliness. Now a days, See Nazian, page 552. and 308.
every boisterous Nimrod, impure drunkard, and selfe-guilty wretch, is ready
with great rage to fly in the face of every professor, with the imputation of
puritanisme; if he does but look toward Religion, labor to keep a good
conscience in all things, he is presently a Puritan, and through this name,
many times by a malicious equivocation, they strike at the very heart of grace,
As M. G. well said See Boys. post page 579.
and power of godliness, at GODs best Servants, and the Kings best subjects.
For there is none of them all, but in their sense, with all their hearts, they
would be the stricktest Puritanes in a Country upon their beds of death; I
mean, that their consciences should be enlightened, and they not sealed up with
the spirit of slumber, like drunken Naball, for a day of vengeance. But let
none here out of humor, malice, faction, or mistake, strain, and wrest, for I
mean not,

First, the natural Puritan intimated. Prove. 30. 12. There is a generation,
etc. You shall find many of these, especially among the common and ignorant
people; charge them with sin in general, and they will confess, and yield:
but descend to particulars, and you can fasten nothing upon them, they are true
Iusticiaries; press one of these with the first Commandment, and how he
stands in his carriage toward it, oh he is infinitely free, he never served
any GOD, but one, etc. with the second, Images, I never worshipped any Images
in my life, I defy them, etc. They are excellently laid out in their colors,
and to the life, by that reverend man of GOD, page 343, etc.
Master Dent in his Plain man's Pathway to heaven.

They are a kind of people who yet lie in the darkness of their natural
ignorance, and dung of their own corruption, and yet with their own
testimony, confirm themselves in a great opinion of their own integrity.

Secondly, I mean not the moral Puritan, who thinks himself as safe for
salvation by the power of civil honesty, as if he were already a Saint in
heaven; whereas it is clear. Heb. 12.14. without addition of holiness to
civil honesty, and conscionable dealing with our Brethren, none shall ever see
the LORD.

Thirdly, I mean not the superstitious Puritan, who out of a furious
self-love to his own will worship, and senseless doting upon old Popish
customs, thinks himself to be the only holy devoid man, and all forward
professors profane. You shall hear a knot of such fellows speak. Esa.
65.5. Come not near to me, for I am holyer then thou.

Fourthly, I mean not the Pharisaicall Puritan, characterized to the life,
Luke 18.11, 12. Who being passingly proud of the godly flourish of outside
Christianity, thinks himself to be in the only true spiritual temper, and
whatsoever is short of him, to be profaneness, and whatsoever to be above him
to be preciseness.

Now these kinds are true Puritanes indeed: for they think themselves to be
the only men, and all others hypocrites; whereas poor souls, they were yet
never acquainted with the great mystery of grace, but are mere strangers to
that glorious work of conversion, pangs of the new birth, wrestling with
inward corruptions, breaking their hearts, and pouring out their souls every
day before GOD in secret, open heartedness, and bountiful doles to distressed
Christians, and the poor members of CHRIST, self denial, heavenly
mindedness, walking with GOD, etc.

Fifthly, I mean not the true Catharists, pestilent heretics about the year
of our LORD 253.

See Hos^cent. 3. lib. 3. cap 8. page 163. etc. See Epiphapa. page 222. See
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles lib. 6. cap. 42. page 79. See Hos. Cent. 4. lib. 2. ca. 25.
page 173. etc. See Hos. Cent. 4. ibid. page 17.
They were also called Novatians, of Novatus their Author, but Cathari, from
their opinions, and profession, who wickedly denied to the relapsed, reception
into the Church upon repentance, etc. and called themselves pure.

Sixthly, I mean not the African Donatists, about the year of our LORD 331.
who were also called, Circumcelliones, Circuitores, Paermeniani, Montanistae,
Montenses.

Seventhly, Not the furious Anabaptists, of our times, who are as like the
ancient Donatists, as if they had spit them out of their mouth.

Eighthly, Not the giddy Separist.

Ninthly, Nor the unwarrantable Opinionist, qua talis, as ungroundedly
disopinionated; I speak thus, because I am persuaded, good men may differ in
things indifferent without prejudice of salvation, or just cause of breach of
charity, or Disunion of affections. If I see the power of grace soundly appear
in a man's whole carriage and a constant partaking with GOD, good causes, and
good men, he shall for my part, be ever right dear unto my heart, though he
differ from me in some indifferent things.

By Puritanes, (...).
then I mean only such, as JESUS CHRIST his own mouth styles so, John
13.10. and 15.3. The same word is used here, but in a more blessed sense, that
Eusebius has to describe equivocally, the cursed Sect of the Novatians. You
are all pure, or clean, says CHRIST, by the word which I have spoken unto
you; I mean then only CHRIST (...), whom the powerful work of the Word has
regenerated, and possessed with purity of heart, (...), etc.
holiness of affections, and unspottednesse of life, to whom he promises
blessedness, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart: And to whom alone his
beloved Apostle promises the blessed vision of GOD in glory, 1 John 3.3.

Now that the name of Puritanes (which is, as you may conceive by that which
has been said, a very equivocall term) is put upon such as these in
contempt, See Disc. of True Happiness, page 193.
and reproach; is more then manifest by a thousand experiences, and by the
testimony of a great Doctor at Saint Paul's Cross. And yet I date say, the
greatest opposites to these derided ways of purity, if he dye not like drunken
Nabal, would upon his bed of death, give ten thousand worlds, And I prove it
out of Bish. (...). in Abraham's Trial, page 72.
to have lived as one of them. And through the name of Puritan, by a malicious
equivocation, they strike at the very heart of grace, and the power of
godliness.

Puritanos, Puritanos, inclamant vociseratur, at per puritanorum latera
orthodoxam vu^nerant veritatem.
Secondly, I add, through the sides of this Nickname, they have labored to
wound, and lay wast the truth of our blessed Religion, as pure as any since the
Apostles time, etc. Hear what I heard Doctor Abbots Professor there complain
of, at Oxford Act.

What Doctor Hackwell says of Carrier. Thus those whom we call Papists, he
calls temperate Protestants, and those whom we call Protestants, he calls State
Puritanes, Epist. Dedicator.

He concludes it by good consequent, that by Carriers assertion, Harlwell
against Carrier. page 104.
our greatest Bishops, our wisest Counselors, our gravest Judges, and our
Sovereign himself, must be accounted the great masters of Schisms.

And now I come to tender my counsel to men in Authority, and all those who
are, or may be hereafter put into any place, preferment, or public employment
over their brethren, that they may govern righteously, and make the people
rejoice.

In the first place, let them be sure to get possession of JESUS CHRIST, and
assurance upon good ground, that the all-sufficient GOD is their own. Else
say, or do what ye will, men will be ambitious, covetous, sensual, they will
hunt after preferments, profits, honors, precedence, or whatsoever will add
to their outward happiness. But plant once the eye of faith in the face of the
soul, which will utterly darken with its heavenly brightness, the eyes of
sense, and carnal reason, as the presence of the Sun obscures the stars,
and then, and then alone, and never before, we shall be able to look upon the
world, set out in the gandiest manner, with all her baits, and bables of
riches, honors, favors, greatness, pleasures, etc. as upon an unsavory
rotten carrion. For all true Converts desire, and endeavor, and have in some
good measure the world crucified to them, as they are to the world, JESUS
CHRIST embraced in the arms of their faith, so fills, and satisfies the soul,
that so they may please him, they are at a point for any worldly preferment,
except it comes fairly by good means, and his allowance.

Here then it will be very seasonable to give some light for trial, whether
you have JESUS CHRIST already or no, if not how to get him: for both which
purposes, know that, that blessed LORD of life, is brought into the soul by
such saving works of the Spirit, such degrees, and acts as those, described in
my book of Comforting afflicted consciences.

Secondly, Let them enter into their Offices, Benefices, preferments, high
rooms, in GODs name, I mean not by money, or any wicked means; not by
Symony, bribery, flattery, temporising; not by any tricks, overreaching,
undermining, supplanting competitours, employment in any vile service; not by
any baseness or iniquity at all, no, not so much as by ambitious seeking.

Neither am I now upon a precise point, except the prodigious iniquity of the
times in this kind represent it so, through the false glass of commonnesse and
custom, to the covetous and carnal eye; be but honest Heathens, but ingenious
Turks, and that is not much I require of those who profess Christianity, and
you will be on my side ^ witness,

See Peter Mar. Common places, page 2^7. Just intan. Just. and Pacius Annot at
p. 4^3.
That famous Iulian-law De ambitu, amongst the ancient Romans, whereby it was
enacted, that if any man should attain honor, or magistracy by money, he
should both be punished with a great pecuniary mulct, and also made infamous.

That right noble carriage of mighty Tamerlane, a Scythian, and commander of
the Tarrars, who is reported in the Turkish Story, never to have bestowed his
preferments upon such as ambitiously sought them, (as deeming them in so doing,
unworthy thereof,) but upon such as whose modesty or desert, he thought worthy
of those his great favors.

We are come unto a strange pass, that it should be holden a Puritanicall
point, to condemn all corrupt coming into places of preferment, and public
charge, since even politic Pagans, and barbarous Nations, out of light of
reason, and ordinary notions of nature, did abhor it. And no marvel, for
besides motives of piety, and the fear of GOD, which they wanted, even grounds
of policy, give us to understand, that this base, and accursed course, was able
to become the bane, and breake-necke of the strongest States upon earth in
short time. I leave it to your wisdoms to weigh well in your own bosoms,
what strange degenerations from worth, and honor; what fearful Apostasy
from orthodoxenesse, and zeal, it may bring upon a Commonweal in few years.

If the world once take notice, Reason 1.
that money does the deed; men to make way for preferment, will seek more to
get money then merit.

Those who should rise into high rooms in the Commonwealth, will labor
rather to furnish themselves with heavy purses, then noble parts. Ministers
will study more to become pragmaticall Traders about Benefices, and other
Ecclesiastical promotions, then complete Divines, and powerful Preachers; and
having learned the Trade, they would heap living upon living, cry down
preaching, plunge into the world, and secular employments, gather a hoard,
hoping thereby at length, to be hoisted into some higher place, etc. which you
know were a very horrible thing, would mar all, and undo us quite.

Again, Reason 2.
it is a common saying in this case: what we buy by gross, we must sell by
retaile. He that buyeth, says Mornay,, is shrowdly provoked, nay is after a
sort openly dispensed withal, to sell again. And what woeful work and
intolerable misery, that brings upon a people, you may easily guess.

These two Reasons I have insinuated unto me, in the French Story, where the
Author gives this excellent eulogy of Lewis the ninth. Page 153.


The Realm was corrupted with the unjustice, and extortion of former reigns,
by the sale of Offices: being most certain that what we buy in gross, we must
sell by retaile. He did therefore expressly prohibit these sales, and supplied
such places as were void, according to the merit of persons, after due
examination; to draw good men, and of understanding, to apply themselves to
study; otherwise they would have been shrowdly tempted, rather to have stored
themselves with money then merit, with gold then goodness. Wise, and gracious
then, is the counsel, which the forenamed noble and learned * page 135.
Mornay gave unto another French King, in his Meditation upon Psalm, 101.

The Princes eye, says he, and care should be upon the best sort of people, to
set them in offices, and bestow charges upon them. He should take this course.
Those that shall affect such places, he should always suspect them, their
persons, and practices; for certain it is, that he that very earnestly aims
at an office, or living, has laid his plot already; and without doubt, he
desires it for the profit, and not for the charge.

Sermon 5. before King Edwad the 6.
Hear also what old reverend Latimer said to this purpose, in Edward the sixts
time, and the Saint.

GOD defend, says he, that ever any such enormity (take notice, he takes it
for an enormous sin,) should be in England, that civil offices should be
bought, and sold, whereas men should have them given for their worthiness. And
a little after, the holy Scripture qualifieth the Officers, and shows what
manner of men they should be, men of courage, wise, fearing GOD, etc. Oh, if
Latimer had lived in our times! I am sure, if he had, he would have been a
great honor, and ornament to our Church.

Nay, Anno 12. R. 2. cap. 2.
hear your own Law, and Fer legem quam ipse tuleris. The title is, None shall
obtain offices by suite, or for reward, but upon desert. The Chancelour,
Treasurer, or Keeper of the privy Seal, Steward of the Kings house, the Kings
Chamberlane, Clarke of the Roles, the Justices of the one Bench, and of the
other, Barons. of the Exchequer, and all other that shall be called to ordain,
name, or make Justices of Peace, etc. nor other officer or Minister of the
King, shall be straightly sworn, for any gift, nor brocage, savor nor
affection; nor that any which pursues by himself, or by other privily, or
openly, to be in any manner of office, shall be put in the same office, or any
other; but that they make all such officers, and Ministers of the best, and
lawfullest men, and most sufficient to their judgment and knowledge.

Now blessed be GOD for this blessed law, holding such a comfortable conformity
to GODS holy Word; complying so exactly, with the grave counsels of all truly
learned, and godly Divines, the ancient uprightness of moral Puritanes,
reason, honesty, common sense, rules of natural equity, and necessity of
holding up States, Kingdoms, and humane society, for the contrary overthrowes
them all, and crossing directly the mighty torrent of the times corruptions.

You see here, as in the former passages, not only the viler, and baser, and
more gross ways, of getting into places of preferment, and rising, as by
gifts, brocage, affection, favor, etc. are forbidden, and condemned, but even
ambitious seeking also.

For howsoever it may seem a strange paradoxe, compared with the strong
corruptions of the times, yet notwithstanding it is a true principle in godly
policy; that he which ambitiously seeks a place, even in so doing, makes
himself most unworthy of it.

An excellent Interpretour of Ioshuah, intimating that GODS extraordinary
earnestness, and iteration of encouragements to Ioshuah, employed his
lothnesse, and backwardness, to be advanced into Moses room, though he was a
man of invincible spirit, and incomparable wisdom, lets fall upon
consideration thereof this conclusion; Qui Magistratum ambiunt eorum unt
indignissimi.
That none are less worthy of advancement, then those who hunt most eagerly
after it; that those who ambitiously seek an office, or honor, do ipso
facto, by that very Act discover their extreme unworthiness, and that of all
other men, they deserve it not. Nay, the very light of sounder reason led
Tamerlane to a right conceit herein as I told you before. And Mornay tells
Henry the fourth of France, that such have laid their ^^^t already, and most
certainly seek the place, for their own profit, not for the public good.
Excellently then does our Law, exclude such fellows, not only from that
office, they so greedily gape after, but also from all other. It is great
pity, so goodly a body should want a soul.

And it must needs be so, by that observation from men of best conscience,
greatest worth, and deepest understanding, and noblest parts, if truly
sanctified unto them are most unambitious, loath to rise, and fearful ever to
enter upon, and undertake any public charge. A modest under-valuing of
themselves, an ordinary attendant upon true worth, sensiblenes of the burden,
doubtfulnes of a through discharge of the place, fearfulness of being
ensnared, and overcome by temptations, a right apprehension and fore-conceit of
the great account, etc. easily take them off from too much forwardness, cool
their courage for over eager pursuit, and quite extinguish all ambitious heat;
nay, many times thereupon, they draw back, and retire. A rare thing in this
age, but former times afford many examples.

It is reported of father Austin, a man of more incomparable learning then
thousands that think themselves worthy of a Bishopric, that he would run
from those Cities which wanted Bishops, least they should lay hold upon him.

Nazianzen having all the voices heaped upon him, stoutly refused the
advancement, and at the length, says the story, very hardly after many
entreaties, and persuasions of the Emperor yeeled.

Great Basil was hald into the Bishoprike with much ado: See the Argument
before Chrysostom. De incerdot^o.
Chrysostom hid himself, and desired to be excused. And this their practice
is answerable to the principle intimated before; That men of honesty, and
sufficiency are more sensible of the burden, careful of the charge, and
apprehensive of the account, then affected with the honor, or in love with
standing in a slippery place.

These Fathers that feared these great charges, were resolved to preach every
day, twice a day sometime thrice a day; and they did take to heart aforehand
that account, they must give for the souls committed to their charge: the
terror of that commination, says Chrysostom, Heb. 13.17. For they watch over
your souls, as they that must give account, makes me quake and tremble. From
such grounds as these, men of innocence, and true worth, especially enjoying
the comforts of a good conscience, and communion with JESUS CHRIST, are well
enough content to continue in a private estate, and would not willingly stir,
except by a direct and comfortable calling, GOD would have them to do him
service, in a more public employment, and higher place; and they ordinarily
undertake them with much fear, selfe-distrust, and extraordinary prayer. Full
little do you know, who in the meanetime stop the cries of your guilty
consciences with gold, good-fellowship or great place, what the pleasures of an
appeased conscience are; had you ever truly tasted their sweetness, and
soundly smarted with the anguish of a troubled one in conversion, I dare say
you would not by your good wills wound it for a Kingdom, for a world. A good
conscience (says one well) is of the same mind with the trees in Iothams
Parable Judges 9. It will not with the Olive loose its fatness, nor with the
Fig Tree loose his sweetness, nor with the Vine, its wine of cheerfulness,
to have the fattest, and sweetest preferments, and pleasures of the world: no
though it were to reign and domineere over all the trees in the forests.
Only the Bramble as you know, the most base, and contemptible, a dry saplesse
kexe and weed, will needs up into a high room. Weak, and worthless men,
ordinarily are the only men, old excellent, as they say, most active, and
pragmaticall to serve themselves by bribes, and base tricks into benefices,
Offices, and other undeserved places of preferment. For they want honest wit to
conceive and foresee the weight of the charge, and conscience to discharge it
faithfully, their only aim, and aspiration out of an ambitious itching
humor, is to advance their own particular private ends, and although they be
many times as empty of all true worth, as the vainest Idol, yet they desire to
sit aloft, and be adored above others. Though they may take some directions,
and motives from the grounds of reason, and light of natural conscience, to
deal honestly and ingeniously in their places, yet for a through universal,
unshaken stoutnesse and integrity in the discharge of them; let them
principally be enlightened, guided, quickened, by the supernatural principles of
divine truth, and dictates of a conscience sprinkled with the blood of CHRIST,
and sanctified by special grace.

The ordinary temptations to which the profession of Lawyers is sometime
subject, are such as these.

Just as advocatus injustus ciuisas nullo mo lo suscipit. Greg. Hom. 8. in
Ezechi.
First, Patronage of bad causes, which they know out of their Legal skill, and
in their own consciences are rotten at the root, and will prove naught at the
last. 2. Pleading against the right. 3. Mercenary silence. 4. Wire-drawing
their Clients suites for their own advantage, using causes, as unconscionable
Surgeons do sore legs, hold them long in hand, not for the difficulty, but for
the gain of the cure. 5. Taking unreasonable fees. 6. Tampering about their
Law buisinesse upon the LORDS day. 7. Receiving the fee, and not speaking in
the Clients cause. The last of which, I could never yet believe of any: because
in my conceit, for any thing I know, he might as well take their swiftest
horse, and keenest sword, and lie by the highways for a rich usurer, or
wealthy clothier: what? to sell so much as in them lies, to a poor man the
ruin of his livelihood, for his own piece of gold! where is the valuable
consideration so much talked of? nay unvaluable is the wrong, whereas if they
had not trusted in him, he might perhaps have prevented the mischief.

But for my purpose to instance in two of them, pleading for a bad, and against
a good cause, are both upon the matter, and in plain English, lying against
the truth.

Now if any palliate and pretend, that an officious lie, especially accompanied
with so much gain, is no such great matter. Let them look then upon the light
of sounder reason, which enforced the very heathen Philosopher Aristotle, to
affirm that a lie is (...), evil per se, in it own nature, and therefore no
consideration, circumstance, or Religion can possibly legitimate it; but it is
still a base and loathsome vice. But principally let them cast their eye upon
GODs blessed Book, and tremble and be for ever frighted from all false dealing
in this kind, by such places as these. Isa. 5.20. Woe unto them that call evil
good, and good evil, etc. Rev. 21.8. All Liars shall have their part in the
Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Judges may be accessory to bloodshed two ways, especially if they do it
knowingly, and swayed away by by-respects. 1. By condemning the innocent, which
is clear, and 2. By letting the guilty escape, which appears by GODs own
words, 1 Kings 20.42. Because thou have saved him whom I appointed to dye, thy
life shall be for his life, etc. And by that Advocates speech to a Judge in
Germany, aggravating the fault of a murderer, that had killed six men, No my
Lord, says he, he has killed but one, you are guilty of the blood of the
other five, because you let him escape upon the first murder. Now in this case
let them take a curb, and restraint from consideration, that the very
heathens, to shadow out their torment, did feign hellish furies to follow such
heinous offenders with burning firebrands, etc. But especially let the Book of
GOD beat them off, from any tainture that way. Amongst many others, that
place, Numb. 35.33. is able to pierce an heart of adamant, where the Spirit of
GOD tell us, that besides personal guilt, blood involves, even the whole
Kingdom in the stain and mischief: for blood, says he, defiles the Land,
and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the
blood of him that shed it. I intend nothing in these last passages, to the
prejudice, or offense of any. For my part I honor the reverent Judges, and
worthy Lawyers of this Land, at this day, as one of the noblest limbs of the
State. And I cannot but look upon the Lords my Judges, with more then ordinary
respect, for Justice Nicols sake, my worthy Patron, that reverend and renowned
Judge, whom I honor in the dust. And yet for all this, I must tell you the
truth, deal plainly I must and will, from this place, in this place, though I
should dye in it.

Me thinks the very providence of reasonable men should move you that are
Magistrates, in this and other corporations, to relieve your poor with the
forfeitures of oaths, and Alehouses: But when you have besides GODs blessed
Law, so mighty against drun^ards, blasphemers. And that King Charles also has
so graciously confirmed those blesed Acts provided in that case, to sharpen the
sword, and strengthen the arm of Authority for that purpose, you ought to be
extraordinarily vigilant, active, and conscionable in the execution of them,
otherwise assure your selves, you rob GOD of his honor, the King of his
service, and the poor of their alms, and your selves of good consciences. And
this fourefold cord without repentance, and quickening, is able to bind the
curse of GOD fearfully to the consciences of t^ose which should be faulty this
way. I charge none in this point, but only them, whose consciences if they
will give them leave to speak out, man justly accuse; if any of your hearts
should condemn you, GOD is greater then your hearts, and will pay you home: be
not deceived, nor flat your selves with any ungrounded self conceit. It is a
principle, even in moral policy, that an ill executour of the Laws is worse
in a State, then a great breaker of them. Not to punish an offense, Calvina.
lib 2. page 249.
being under your charge, and in your power, is ^o commit it.

We that are Ministers, and called Rectours, are bound, and may b^ stirred up
by the grounds of common equity to feed the flock, if we take the fleece; to
give spiritual things, where we have temporal.

But that dreadful charge of Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.1. is able to trouble,
and affright ever a Chrysostom, a Calvin, who preached every day, and such
others illustrious lights, and earthly Angels, for powerful, and plentiful
preaching; what terror and trembling then should it put into the hearts, (if
they be not turned into rocks,) of silken, seldom, negligent, and
no-Preachers? I charge thee before GOD, says Paul, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his Kingdom.
Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort,
with all long suffering, and Doctrine. When I seriously ponder the everall
effectual enforcements of this terrible obtestation, me thinks Ministers
should do nothing but study, preach, and pray.

FINIS.

