SOME GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR A COMFORTABLE WALKING with God:

DELIVERED IN THE LECTVRE AT KETTERING IN NORTHhamptonshire, with enlargement:

By Robert Bolton, Bachelor in Divinity, and Preacherof Gods Word at Broughton
in the same County.

The second Edition: corrected and amended; with a Table thereunto annexed.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edmund Weauer, and are to be sold
at his shop at the great North door of Paul's Church. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRVLY NOBLE, EDWARD Lord Mountague of Boughton, a
fruitful increase of all heavenly graces; and all watchful preparation for
the Glory that shall be revealed.
Much Honored and Noble Lord;
ALthough the eminency of your other personal worth, great Wisdom, and noble
parts, a sufficient attractiue to every honest heart, by reason of the
particular interest it has in the common state of goodness; or your special
bounty to my self, which ought to stir up an ingenuous mind, to apprehend any
opportunity of due and deserved acknowledgement; or your public deportment in
the face of our Country, so worthy, and Honorable; and managed with such true
honesty, grave moderation, and nobleness of spirit, which cannot but draw from
every heart truly sound to our great Lord in Heaven, and His Royal Deputy our
highest Sovereign upon earth, a great deal of reverence and love; I say,
though any of these severally, might exact from me, a more exact and able
demonstration of the thankful devotions of my heart: yet my Lord, (and you
may believe me) there is another thing besides all these, which was the
strongest, and most predominant motive to quicken me to this Duty, and
Dedication; even your sincere and invincible affection to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, His faithful Ministers, and most precious Ways. And this, to tell you
the truth, is far the fairest, and most orient flower in the Garland of all
your goodness; and incomparably above all your Greatness, were you advanced
even to desert; nay, to the highest top of all earthly felicities, and mortal
honor. For howsoever, the world ever beside it self in point of faluation,
and stark blind in the right apprehension of Heavenly things, does ^ote upon
gilded miseries, stinging vanities, golden setters; and wickedly deemes Haec
iustorum simplicitas deridetur: quia ab h^ius mundi sapientibus, puritatis
virtus, ^atuitas c^editur. Greg. in ^ap. 12. Job cap. 16.
pursuit of purity, the height of folly: yet I can assure you in the Word of
life and truth; the richest, and rarest con^luence of all humane happinesses;
the most exquisite excellency, and variety of the greatest worldly pomp and
splendor, that ever the Sun saw, since the first moment of its creation, or
shall look upon while it shines in Heaven, is but dust in the balance, to one
grain of grace; it is but Et quid diuitiae, per^untes and transitoriae
facultates, nisi (...) aeter na diligentibus sunt ^ Greg. in 1 Reg. cap. 2.
dung to an humble mind, sauingly illightened with a forecast, but of the
least glimpse of that incomprehensible, endless glory which shall shortly be
revealed: It is all in the true valuation, but as a vain Non debet pro magno
habe^i honor humanus; quia nullius est ponderis fumus. August, de Ci^it. Dei,
lib. 5. cap. 17.
smoke; which does not only vanish, as it rises, and utterly loses it
self at the highest; but also draws tears from a man's eyes; nay, at last,
wrings the very heart strings of every impenitent soul, with that extremest
everlasting horror, which would burst ten thousand hearts, seriously and
sensibly to think upon beforehand. It is not only vanity, but also vexation
of spirit. Let worldly wisdom say what it will, and hold them melancholic,
and Cum coeperit Deo quisque vi^ere, mundum contemnere, iniurias suas nolle
vlcisci, nolle hic diultias, non hic quaerere foelicitatem terrenam, contemnere
omnia, Dominum solum cogitare, viam Christi non deserere; non solum a Paganis
dicitur insanus; sed quod magis dolendum est; quia and intus multi dormiunt,
and vigilare nolunt, a suis, a Christianis audiunt -- Dictum est and de ipso
Domino, quod insaniret. August. in Psalm. 84.
mad, who by the help of the holy Ghost hold a constant counter-motion to
the course of the world, and corruptions of the time, that they may keep a good
conscience, the richest treasure, and dearest Jewel that ever the heart of man
was acquainted with; who infinitely desire, rather to be religious, then rich;
to be good, then great; to enjoy the favor of God, then the sovereignty, and
pleasures of all the kingdoms of the earth: yet assuredly, when all is said,
and truly summed up; it is only the true fear of Gods blessed Name; a
zealous forwardness for his glory, goodness, and good causes; at this day,
unhappily, and to the ruin of infinite souls, called by the world,
pragmaticalnesse, and, Too much preciseness, which can truly beautify, and
adorn both all other personal sufficiencies; and indeed sanctify and bless
all public employments and services of State. For the first: A Professor even
something Popish, does yet truly teach, that Nobilitas Heroica est eminentia
quaedam notabilis, etc. -- per quam homo fi^ per adoptionem Filius Dei, fit
Sponsa Christi, sit Templum Spiritus Sancti: sine qua, nobilitates caet^rae
nihil sunt, nhiil proficiunt. Gers. Tractat. De nobilitate.
Heroical nobility is an illustrious eminency shining in a man by the
heavenly infusions of supernatural grace, whereby he is made by adoption the
son of God, the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost; without
which, all other Nobilities are nothing; not worth a button. Suppose a fair
and goodly horse to the eye, as exquisitely featured, colored, paced, as that
fained by Bartas, to be managed by Cain; yet if he wa^ted mettle, he were worth
nothing to a man of spirit. Give me the most magnificent glorious Worldling,
that ever trod upon earthly mould; richly crowned with all the ornaments, and
excellencies of nature, art, policy, preferment, or what heart can wish
besides; yet without the life of grace to animate and ennoble them, he were to
the eye of heavenly Wisdom, but as a rotten carcass stuck over with flowers,
magnified dung, gilded rottenness, golden damnation. And that which is more
dreadful; when the sun of his short Summers day is set, the hot gleame of
transitory prosperity past, and the bitter tempestuous winters night of death
approaches; from which all the Gold and Pearl of East and West can no more
deliver him, then can an handful of dust; I say, then shall be powered upon
his head, that terrible shower of snares, fire and Psalm. 11. 6.
brimstone, and an horrible tempest. His soul sinkes immediately in a moment
into the depth of remediless misery, and is desperately plunged for ever into
the bottom of the burning Lake. His body descends into the grave, as into a
dungeon of rottenness and horror, arrested, as it were, by the second death,
in the devils name, and at length haled and dragged unto the terror of that
great and last Day; where no creature can rescue him, no mountain cover him,
from that unquenchable wrath, and neuer-dying Worm, which shall ever
lastingly, day and night feed upon his soul and flesh. Whereas now, on the
other side, that poor neglected One, who has in truth given his name unto
Christ and his gainefull service, perhaps by the World most disdainfully and
contemptuously trampled upon even into the dust, with the feet of cruelty and
pride; at least most certainly, ever made extremely vile, and contemptible by
the villainy of Cum coeperit homo Christianus cogitare proficere, incipit pati
linguas aduersa^tium. Quicunque illas nondum passus est, nondum proficit:
quicunque illas non patitut, nec conatur proficere. August. in Psalm. 119.
tongues, and Heb. 11. 36, 38.
cruel mockings; yet is such an One as the World is not worthy of: in the
mean time, in the meaning of the holy Ghost, Isa. 6. 2, 3.
a Crown of glory in the hand of Jehovah, as beautiful and amiable, as the
blood of Christ and his righteous roabe can make him; crowned full gloriously
with Ezech. 16. 14. zech. 13. 11.
Gods own comeliness which he has put upon him; designed from all eternity
in due time, (for so his sanctification now assures him) to wear an
everlasting Crown of bliss. And when his pilgrimage is past, death is to him
the day-breake of eternal brightness. Upon his last Bed, his blessed soul
shall find that fresh-bleeding Fountain for sin and for uncleanness set
wide open unto it, by the hand of Faith, ready now at its departure, to raze
out the last sinful stain: It may confidently, in the Name of Christ cast it
self into the open arms, enlarged bowels, and dearest embracements of the
Father of all mercies: It may feel the glorious presence of the sweetest
Comforter, presenting unto it a foretaste of Heavenly joys: It shall have the
last sweetness, and triumphant truth of all the promises of life, able to
confront and confound the utmost rage, and very Powder Plot of all the powers
of darkness, made good unto it: A mighty guard of blessed Angels shall attend
upon it; waiting with longing and joy to bear it triumphantly into the bosom
of Abraham. His body shall go into the grave, as into a chamber of rest, and
bed of Down, sweetly perfumed unto it, by the sacred body of the Son of God
lying in the Grave; locked there full fast with the bars of the earth, and
fenced with the omnipotent Arm of God, as a rich Jewel in a Casket of gold,
until the Resurrection of the just. And then, after their ioyfullest meeting,
and glorious reunion, they shall both be for ever filled with all those
unmixed pleasures, blessed immortalities, and crowned joys, which the dwelling
place of God, the glory of Heaven, and the inexhausted fountain of all bliss,
Jehovah himself blessed for ever, can afford. Now let the scornefullest
opposite to the power of godliness, tell me in cold blood; whether that
honorable wretch; or this honest man be more truly noble and happy? For the
second: So natural, says Lib. 5. Sect. 1.
Hooker, is the union of Religion with justice, that we may boldly deem, there
is neither, where both are not. For how should they be unfeignedly just, whom
Religion does not cause to be such; or they religious, which are not found such
by the proof of their just actions? If they, which employ their labor and
travail about the public administration of Justice, follow it only as a
Trade, with vnquench able and unconscionable thirst of gain, being (...) in
heart persuaded that Justice is Gods own Work, and themselves his Agents in
the business, the sentence of right, Gods own verdict, and themselves his
Priests to deliver it; for malities of justice do but serve to smother right,
and that which was necessarily ordained for the common good, is through
shameful abuse, made the cause of common misery. Full well did this learned
man perceive, and rightly apprehend, that the purity and power of Religion
alone, does truly honor all Honors, dignifie all dignities, actuate with
acceptance and life all moral virtues and endowments of art, sweeten all
government, strengthen all States, settle fast all Imperial Crowns upon
Princes heads: That it is no humorous conceit, but a matter of sound
consequence, that all, either personal duties, or employments of State, are by
so much the better performed, by how much the men are more religious, from
whose abilities the same proceed: That when Heaven is made too much to stoop
to Earth; Piety to Policy; Public good, to private ends; there authority is
embittered, inferiors plagued, and too often, Law and Justice turned into
Wormwood and rapine. He truly intimates, what a deal of hurt is done; what a
world of mischief is many times wrought, insensibly and vnobseruedly; when a
wicked wit, and wide conscience weld the sword of authority. For it is easy,
and ordinary for a man so mounted, by legal sleights; putting foul businesses
into fair language; and by a dissembled pretense of deeper reach, to compass
his own ends; either for promotion of iniquity; or oppression of innocence:
especially, since he knows himself backed with that Principle in Policy: It is
not safe to question or reuerse transactions of State, though tainted perhaps
with some impressions of miscarriage and error: And that it is holden a
Solaecisme in State-wisdome, and unseemly, for private innocence to contest
too busily with passages of public Tribunals. These things I thus discourse,
and declare unto your Lordship, to represent unto you the vanity of that
honor, which is not directly and sincerely subordinate to the Honor of God:
(at the best, it is but a breath, and yet not able to blow so much, as one cold
blast upon ungodly great Ones, when being suddenly carried from their stately
and sumptuous dwellings, they shall be cast into unquenchable flames.) To let
you see the excellency, and worth of those happy ways, to which it has
pleased the Lord of Heaven, out of his special mercy, to bend the eye of your
Noble mind: and that you may know what it is alone has had power, and the
prerogative, (and shall for ever, in whomsoever takes Gods part) to make you,
both more truly Honorable in your Self, and more faithfully serviceable to
our King and State; both to cast a Diuiner luster upon your personal virtues,
and to make your managing of public businesses (many times most unworthily
swayed awry, by that foul fiend, Faction, partiality and private ends)
worthy, conscionable and just. For which, every honest eye in our country that
looks upon you, blesses you; and shall mourn most bitterly for your absence
from amongst us, when you shall be gloriously gathered to your Fathers. So let
all that truly love the Lord Jesus, His blessed Gospel, and Servants, be as
the Sun, when he goes forth in his might, and at last full sweetly set in
the boundless Ocean of immortal bliss. In these ways of life, my Noble
Lord, which in the sense and censure of Truth it self, are Prou. 3. 17.
ways of pleasure, and paths of sweetest peace; it is the infinite desire of
my heart, and drift of this Treatise I now offer into your Honors hands; that
you would still advance forward, and do more nobly still. That you would
improoue to the utmost, the height of your excellent Understanding to a
further, and more full comprehension of the Mystery of Christ; which though it
be a Sealed Book, to the sharpest sight of the most piercing humane wisdom;
yet reueales to every truly humble, spiritual eye, the rich and Royal
treasures of all true sweetness, contentment and peace. That you would hold it
your greatest honor and happiness, as it is indeed, to grow still in
fruitfulness C^los. 1. 1^.
in every good Work; in Romans 12. 11.
feruency in spirit, in 1. Job. 3. 3.
purity, in Phil. 3. 20. Colos. 3. 2.
Heauenly-mindednesse, in Ephesians. 5. 15.
precise walking, etc. with singular watchfulness, and the more punctual, and
frequent search and perusal of your spiritual state; both because the depths
and delusions of Satan are most intricate and infinite: and because Not many
noble, etc. 1. Cor. 1. 25. That you would hold on in that valiantness for the
Truth, and all good causes; which ordinarily gathers vigor and puissance
proportionably to the swelling fury of all adversary, either mortal, or
infernal powers: Ever patiently passing by with generous magnanimity, and
brave contempt, all the vile Job 30. 8, 9. Psalm. 35. 15, 16. and 69. 12. I am
vero illud quale, quam sanctum, quod si quis ex Nobilibus ad Deum conuerti
coeperit, statim h^norem nobilitatis amittit: aut quantus in Christiano populo
honor Christi est, vbi religio ignobilem facit? Statim enim vt quis melior esse
tentauerit, de e^ioris abiectione calcatur, ac per hoc omnes quodammodo mali
esse coguntur, ne vises habeantur. Ita seculum totum iniquitatibus plenum est,
vt aut mali sint, qui sunt in illo, aut qui boni sunt, multotum persecutione
crucientur. Si honoratior quispiam religioni se applicue^it, illico honoratus
esse defistit -- Si fuerit splendidissimus, fit vilissimus. Si fuerit totus
honoris, fit totus iniuriae -- Si bonus est quispiam, quasi malus spernitur: Si
est malu^, quasi bonus honoratur. Nihil itaque mirum, si deteriora quotid^e
patimur, qui deteriores quotidie fumus. Saluianus. De ver^ iudicio and prouid^
tia Dei. Lib 4. page 128, 129.
raylings and contradictions of Satan's Reuellers, and Popish insolency; (For
vainly to affect the acclamations, and applause of worthless men: or to be
dejected vnmanlily with their unjust accusations and anger; are both equally
ignoble, and most unworthy a man of Honor, and virtuous Animae sorti^ and
constantis est, posse ob^uctari his qui auellere moliuntur, and nihil facere vt
hominibus placeat: sed oculum suum intendere ad illum insopitum oculum, and ab
eo solum gloriam expectare -- nulliusque pili facere humanam laudem, vel
conuitia, sed transire vt vmbras and somnia. (...). Chrysostom. in c. 6. G^. Hom.
^3.
resolution. Yours shall be the Crown and comfort, when all Popery and
profaneness shall lie buried in the dust, and dungeon of Hell. In a word, the
thirsty longing of my heart, and heartiest prayer shall ever be; That you may
shine every day, more and more gloriously in all personal sanctity,
plantation of godliness in your own Family, and where you have any thing to
do; and in an holy zeal for setting forward the affairs of God, when, and
wheresoever you have any power or Calling. That when the last period of your
mortal abode in this Vale of tears, which draws on apace, shall present it
self: You may look death in the face without dread; the grave without fear;
the Lord Jesus with comfort; and Jehovah blessed for ever, with everlasting
Joy. Thus let all the saving blessings of our most bountiful heavenly Father,
through Jesus Christ, by the Holy Ghost, be plentifully and for ever upon your
Honorable Self, and all your sweet and Noble Children.

Your Honors most truly in all services for the salvation of your Soul,
ROBERT BOLTON.

A Table of the general heads as they lie in order in the Book.
Servants of God singular from others in Sanctity, Purity, etc. page 2 Gods
free grace the (...) of all our good. p. 9 His wonderful mercies to us, our
horrible ingratitude. p. 12 Personal goodness brings comfort and blessings
upon posterity. p. 18 True saving grace never lost. p. 22 C^tions and means
of perseverance. 25. 27 Gods servants must no^ s^ue the times. p. 28 Every
Christians duty to walk with God. p. 29. The reasons. 30 To the performing of
this there are
1. General preparatiues. 1. Abandon resoluedly thy beloved sin: See 1. What
it is. 35 2. What thine is. 36 3. Thine own imposture in exchanging it. 38
2. Hat^ Hypocrisy. 43. Many here guilty, mere pretenders to Religion. ibid.
Particular calling not to be left. 48
3. Build thy resolutions on that mai^ principle. Selfe-d^iall. 51 4. Live the
life of faith (...) in all (...). 53 5. Settle in thine heart a right conceit
of the substance, power and materials of Christianity. 157 6. Fortify thy
Spirit against the canker of worldly-mindednesse. 60 7. Be infinitely ravished
with the love of God. The motives. 61 8. Prize inualuably the fruition of Gods
pleased face. 62 9. Watch over thy heart and keep it in a spiritual temper.
63 10. Meditate on thy future bliss. 64

^. 1. Obser^e (...) duties, and our ^ ^ Carriage after them. 69
^ 3. Use well thy solitari^ seasons of Meditation. 71 4. And thy company. 73.
Here Danger of prop^ company. 74 How to converse with friends unconverted. 86
5. Continually ply thy heart by 1. Captiuating it to grace. 88 2. Watchful
guard over it. 9^ 3* (...) it toward Heaven. 9^
6. Labor to repress thy raging passions: as Anger, the (...), Moral. 95
Religious. 100
fear: the Vanity, tyra^y of it. 104 (...). 10^

7. Order religiously thy tongue by Christian reproof: A duty. 112 Here (...)
it. 114. who dogs and (...). 115 Direction i^ it. 118 Extremes fainthearted
silence. 119 (...) Zeal. 119
Reasons e^orcing it. 120
Holding silence 1. From uncharitable (...), differenced from the censures of
holy men. 130 2. S^dering false accusing. 137 3. Unsavory communication.
Hereof Hea^enly discourse. 146


8. Manage consc^bly e^ry action thou undertake. (Circumstances requisite i^
a comfortable action) ^b. particularly. 149 1. Thy Recreations: See they be not
Costly. 154 Cruel. 155 Wasting of time most precious. 157 Incr^aching upon
heavenly comforts. 168
(Differences between joy spiritual, and carnal) 170
2. Visitations of great Ones unsanctified Dangerous. 181 Herein cautions. 185
3. Natural actions, thus against Gluttony. 195 Drunkenness. 200 Excessive
sleep. 205
4. Civil affairs. General. Here Do as thou would be done by. 207
Abhor wrongful and unconscionable dealing. 210 Desire not, delight not
immoderately in any earthly thing. For This is thy bosom sins parent. 225
Thou will find thy self insatiable, vnsatisfiable. 219

Particular for Marriage. 1. Enter upon it conveniently. 234 2. Use it
comfortably: here are duties Common to both. 237 Peculiar to the Husband. 244
Wife. 250


5. Works of mercy as well Spiritual, as 257 Corporal. Motives to
almsdeeds. 261
(Gods children often falsely charged with co^etousnesse, worldliness,
occasions of this imputation. 276 Earthly mindedness infinitely vnbecomming an
heir of heaven. 289)
6. Spirituallestate: where carefully avoid two extremes: 1. Self-admiration,
proud o^er-prizing of our own graces. 294 Here, 1. The mystery of
selfe-deceit opened. 299 2. Work of Grace in the true Convert. 308 3.
Sanctified men may be assured of their spiritual safety. 317. and how. 4.
Sound persuasion distinguished from delusion. 329 5. Preservatives against
ouerweening. 341
2. Dejected, distrustful undervaluing of Gods mercies, our graces, the
promises of life. Here Against the heavy, sad, pensive walking of some Saints.
354 Real causes and motives of their joy. 359 Conceits, and occasions of
discomforts, removed. 380




FINIS.
SOME GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR A COMFORTABLE WALking with God.
GENESIS 6. 8, 9. 8.But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. 9.These are the
generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and
Noah walked with God.
IN this dreadful and dismal story of the old Worlds degeneration and
destruction, falling away, and final ruin, here stands in my Text a right
orient and illustrious Star, shining full fair with Cogita hic obsecro,
quantae virtutis fuerit ille iustus, quomodo in tanta multitudine, quae multo
impetu in malum tuebat, solus ipse diuersa ambulauit via, virtutem malitiae
praeferens. Neque enim aliorum consensus, and tanta frequentia reddebat eum
segniorem ad virtutis iter: sed iam prius implebat, quod beatus Moses olim
dicturus erat: Ne sis cum multis in malitia. Et quod magis admirabile, multos
habebat, imo omnes, qui ad malum, and ad praua opera inhortabantur, and nullus
erat, qui ad bonu^ induceret, Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in c. 6. Genesis
singularity of heavenly light, spiritual goodness, and Gods sincerer service,
in the darkest midnight of Satan's universal reign, and amidst the horriblest
hell of the strangest confusions, idolatrous corruptions, cruelties, Feruente
impietate contra primam tabulam, secuta est corruption, de qua Moses in hoc cap.
quod se primum polluerunt libidinibus, deinde orbem terraru^ repleuerunt
tyrannide, sanguine, and iniurijs. Lu^.
oppressions and lust, that ever the earth bore. Noah I mean, a very precious
Man, and Preacher of Righteousness, to whose Family alone, the true worship of
God was confinde, when all the world besides lay drowned in Idolatry and
Paganism, ready to be swallowed up into an universal grave of Waters, which
was already fashioned in the clouds by the angry, irresistable hand of the
all-powerfull God, who was now so implacably, but most justly provoked by those
rebellious and cruel generations, that He would not suffer His Spirit to
strive any more with them; but inexorably resolved to open the windows or
floudgates of heaven, giving extraordinary strength of influence to the Stars,
abundance to the Fountains of the great deep, commanding them to cast out the
whole treasure, and heap of their waters; and taking away the retentiue power
from the clouds, that they might power down immeasurably; for the burying of
all living creatures which breathed in the air: Noah and his family excepted.
From whence by the way, before I break into my text, take this Note.

Doctr. The servants of God are men of singularity: I mean it not in respect
of any fantasticalnesse of opinion, furiousness of zeal, or turbulencie of
faction, truly so called: but in respect of abstinence from sin, purity of
heart, and holiness of life.

Reasons: 1. Gods holy Word exacts and expects from all that are newborn, and
heirs of Heaven, an excellency above Quam multos Philosophorum and audiuimus,
and legimus, and ipsi vidimus castos, patientes, modestos, liberales,
abs^inentes, benignos, and honores mundi simul and delicias respuentes, and
amatores ^ustitiae, non minus quam scientiae! - Quod si etiam sine Deo homines
ostendunt quales a Deo facti sunt: vide quid Christiani facere possunt, quorum
in melius per Christum natura and vita instructa est, and qui diuinae queque
gratiae iuuantur auxilio* August. Epist. 142.
ordinary, Pro. 12. 26. Matthew. 5. 20. and 47. Being taken forth as the precious
from the vile, Ierem. 15. 19. by the power of the Ministry, they must not
only go beyond the hiest Quae non tormenta patiemur, qui eum iubeamur
iustici^ superare Ph^risaos. Gentilibus quoque inferiores iaceamus? Quemadmodum
igitur, responde quaeso, videbimus regnum futurum? Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in cap.
5. Matthew. As for those virtues that belong unto moral righteousness, and
honesty of life, we d^c not mention them, because they are not proper unto
Christian m^n, as they are Christian, but do concern them (...) me^, Hooket
lib. 3. of Ecclesiast. Polity.
civil perfections of the exactest moral Puritan amongst the most honest
Heathens, Heb. 12. 14. but also exceed the righteousness, and all the outward
religious conformities of the deuoutest Pharisees, whose sufficiencies, Luke 18.
11, 12. many thousands in these times come short of, and yet hope to be saved:
or they can in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But lest any be
proudly puffed up with sense of this singularity, and excellency above his
neighbor; let him know, that humility is ever one of the fairest flowers in
the whole garland of his supernatural and divine worth; and that
selfe-conceitednesse would impoyson even Angelical perfection.

2. They must upon necessity differ from a world of wicked men; by a sincere
singularity of abstinence from the Ephesians. 2. 2.
course of this world; the 1. Pet. 4. 2.
lusts of men; the Romans 12. 2.
corruptions of the times; Prou. 4. 14, 15. Ephesians. 5. 11.
familiarity with graceless companions; the Coloss. 4. 6. Sicut qui Diabolum
sequitur, Sanctorum collegium affectu, and opere aspernatur: ita qui Deo
perfect adhaeserit, impiorum consortium nequaquam admittit. Gregor. in Psalm. 6.
worldlings language, profane sports; all wicked ways of thriuing, rising,
and growing great in the world, etc.

3. They make conscience of those duties and divine commands, which the
greatest part of men, even in the noonetide of the Gospel, are so far from
taking to heart, that their hearts rise against them. As, to be hot in
Religion, Reu. 3. 16. To be zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. To walk (...)
precisely, Ephesians. 5. 15. To be fervent in spirit, Romans 12. 11. To strive to
enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13. 24. To pluck out their right eyes; that
is, to abandon their bosom delights, Matthew. 5. 29. To make the Sabbath a
delight, Isa. 58. 13. To love the Brotherhood, 1. Pet. 2. 17. With an holy
violence, to lay hold upon the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 11. 12.

4. Experience, and examples of all ages, from the creation downward clearly
prove the point. At this time, as you see, the Saints of God were all
harbored under one roof, and yet not all sound there. Survey the ages
afterward: The time of Abraham; who was as a brand taken out of the fire of the
Chaldeans: The time of Elijah, when none appeared to that blessed man of God:
The time of Esaiah, who cried, chap. 53. 1. Who has believed our report? The
time of Manasseh, who built altars for all the host of Heaven, in the two
Courts of the House of the Lord: The time of Antiochus, when he commanded the
Sanctuary, and holy people to be polluted with Swines-flesh, and unclean
beasts to be sacrificed, the abomination of desolation to be set up upon the
Altar: That darksome time, when the glorious Day Star, Christ Jesus himself,
came down from Heaven to illighten the earth: The time of Antichrist, when all
the world wondered after the Beast: Our times, wherein, of six parts of the
earth, scarce one of the least is Christian. And what a deal of Christendom
is still ouer-growne with Popery, and other exorbitant distempers in point of
Religion? And where the Truth of Christ is purely, and powerfully taught, how
few give their names unto it? And of those who profess, how many are
false-hearted or merely formal?

5. Me thinks worldly wisdom should rather wonder that any one is won unto
God; then cry out, and complain; Is it possible, there should be so few? Since
all the powers of darkness, and every devil in hell oppose might and maine
the plantation of grace in any soul: since there are moc snares upon earth, to
keep us still in the invisible chains of darkness and sin, then there are
stars in heaven: since every inch, every little artery of our bodies, if it
could, would swell with hellish venom to the bigness of the greatest Goliath,
the mightiest Giant, that it might make resistance to the sanctifying work of
the holy Ghost: since our souls naturally would rather die, and put off their
immortality and everlasting being, then put on the Lord Jesus: In a word, since
the new creation of a man is holden a greater work of wonder, then the
creation of the world.

6. Lastly, let us set aside in any Country, City, Town, Family: First, all
Atheists, Papists, and distempered exorbirants, from the blessed Truth of
doctrine taught in our Church: Secondly, all Whoremongers, Drunkards, Swearers,
Liars, G^at. 5. 21.
Reuellers, Worldlings, Usurers, and fellows of such infamous rank: Thirdly,
all merely civil men, who come short of Cato, Fabricius, and other honest
Heathens, and wanting holiness, shall never see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.
Fourthly, all gross Hypocrites, whose outsides are painted with superficial
flourishes of holiness and honesty, but their inward parts filled with
rottenness and lust; who have their hands in godly exercises, when their
hearts are in hell. Fifthly, all formal Hypocrites, who are deluded in point of
Salvation, as were the foolish Virgins, and that proud Pharise, Luke 18. 11.
Sixthly, all final back-sliders, of which some turn sensual Epicures, and
plunge themselves into worldly pleasures, with far more rage and greediness,
by reason of former restraint by a temporary profession; others become
scurrill deriders of the holyway; some, bloody goads in the sides of those with
whom they have formerly walked into the house of God, as friends. Seventhly,
all unsound Professors for the present, of which you would little think, what
a number there is: I say, let these and all other strangers to the purity and
power of godliness be set apart, and tell me how many true-hearted Nathaneels
we are like to Non possumus negare plures esse malos, and tam plures, vt inter
cos prorsus non apparentgrana in area. Nam quisquis aream videt, potest putare,
quod pales sola sit, August* in Psalm. 47. p. 528.
find?

Uses: 1. Try then the truth of thy spiritual state by this mark of a sober
and sincere singularity. If thou still hold correspondence with the world,
and conformity to the fashions thereof; if still thou swimmest down the
current of the times, and shiftest thy sails to the sitting of every Wind; if
thine heart hanker still after the tastlesse fooleries of goodfellowship, and
follow the multitude to do ill; if thou be carried with the swinge and sway of
the place where thou live, to uphold by a boisterous combination, lewdness
and vanity, to profane the Lords day, to scorn Profession, oppose the
Ministry, and walk in the broad Way; In a word, if thou do as the most Si
tur bam imitari volueritis, inter paucos angustam viam ambulantes non eritis,
August. de Temp. Sermon. 64.
do; thou art utterly undone for ever. But if with a merciful violence thou
be pulled out of the world, by the power of the Word, and happily weaned from
the sensual, insensible poison of all bitter-sweet pleasures; and fellowship
with unfruitful works of darkness; If by standing on Gods side, and hatred
of all false ways, thou art become the Drunkards song, as David was, and a
byword amongst the sons of Belial, as was Job; If the world lowre and look
sour upon thee for thy looking toward Heaven, and thy good fellow companions
abandon Thee, as too precise; If thy life be not like other men's, and thy ways
of another fashion, as the Epicures of those times charged the righteous man,
when the book of Wisdom was written; In a word, if thou walk in the
narrow way, and be one of that little flock, which lives amongst Wolves, Luke
10 3. Isa. 11. 6, 7.
and therefore must needs be little; so that by all the Leopards, Lions, and
Bears about thee, I mean all sorts of unregenerate men, thou art hunted for
thy holiness, as a Partridge on the mountains, at least by the poison and
persecution of the tongue; I say, then thou art certainly in the hie way to
Heaven.

2. If the Saints of God be men of singularity, in the sense I have said;
then away with those base, and brainelesse cauils, against those who are wise
unto salvation: What? are you wiser then your forefathers? then all the Cum
vndique mal^ pe^strepant, and dicant, Quare sic viuis? Tu solus Christianus es*
Quare non sacis quod faciunt and alii, etc? Et tu dicis, Christianus sum, vt
repellas istos nescio quo^: sed aduersarius premit, vrget, quod peius est
exemplo Christianorum suffocat Christianos. Sudatur, astuatur, tribulatur anima
Christiana, etc. Ideo vide quid dicat. Respondet enim, Quid mihi prodest, quia
modo mihi facio remedia, and luc^or paucos dies? Exeo hinc de isto seculo, and
vado ad Dominum meum, and mittet me in ignem, quia praeposui paucos dies vitae
futurae, mit^et me in gehennas -- Et hoc forte non in platea tibi dicit amicus,
sed in domo vxor, aut forte maritus vxori fideli, bonae and sanctae deceptor
ipsius, Si mulier marito, Eua est illi: Si vir vxori, Diabolus est illi. Aut
ipsa tibi (...) est, aut ru illi serpens es. Aug. in Psalm 93. p. 201.
Town? then such and such learned men? then your own Parents? Are you wiser
then your Head, may the Husband say, etc. Non igitur dubium est, quin generatio
praua infensissi^ cum odetit, and vary exercuerit, insultantes ei: Number t^
solus sapis? Number solus tu Deo places? Number nos reliqui omnes erramus? omnes damn
abimur? Tu solus non erras? Solus non damnabe^is? Haec magna virtus fuit. Nobis
enim hodie impossible esse videtur, vt vnus se opponat toti orbi tetrarum,
reliquos omnes damnet, tanquam malos, qui tamen Ecclesiam, verbum and cultum
Dei iactant, se autem solum statuat Dei filium, and Deo acceptum esse,
Lutherus. Neque paru^m est despicere irridentes and oppr^ bantes, and salibus
incessentes: at iustus ille non tantum december and viginti, and centum homines,
sed and omnem hominum naturam and tot myriades despexit. Verisimi^e enim omnes
illos ridere, reprehendere, subsannare, and debacchari: and forte etiam, si
possibile fuisset, dilacerare voluisse. Chrysostom. Hom. 23 in cap. 6. Genesis Tam
domestica illi erat strenuitas, vt viam diuersam a vulgati, quam omnis
multitudo ina^bulabat, iret: and neque timeret, neque suspicaretur aliquid
tale, quale verisimile est, ignauis accidere: qui si qu^ndo viderint, multos
simul con^pirate, hoc velamen, and hanc occasionem suae ignauiae pretexunt, ac
dicunt: Quid ego no^um, and singular post illos omnes facturus essem
aduersarius tantae multitudinis, and cum tanto populo bellam susceptu^us?
Numquid illis omnibus ego admirabilior essem? Quae vtilit^s foret tantarum
inimicitiarum? Quod commodum tanti odij? Nihil talium cogitabat, neque in
^nimum (...), Id^m ibid. Hom. 22.
Nay further, to Noah it might have been said by the wretches of those times,
Art thou wiser then all the world? (He out of the height of his heroical
resolution, easily endured and digested the affronts and indignities of this
kind from millions of men.) But take thou these spiteful taunts, and bind
them in the mean time, as a Crown unto thee, and advance forward in thine
holy singularity with all sweet content and vndauntednesse of spirit, toward
that glorious immortal Crown above; and let those miserable men, whose eyes
are hood-winkt by Satan, and so blinded with earthly dust, that they cannot
possibly discern the invisible excellencies and true nobleness of the
neglected Saints, follow the folly of their worldly wisdom, and sway of the
greater part, to endless woe; and then give losers leave to talk.

3. Let every one, who in sincerity of heart seeks to be saved, ever hold it
a special happiness, and his hiest honor, To walk with God, is a precious
praise, though xone d^e it but my self, and to walk with man, with the world,
with a Town or Parish, in wicked ways, is a deadly sia, though millions do
it, B. Babington upon Genesis 6. verse. 8.
to be singled out from the universal pestilent contagion of common
prophanenes, and the sinful courses of the greatest part; and to be censured
as singular in that respect. Neither is this a singular thing, that I now
suggest; but it has been the portion of the Saints in all ages, to be trod
upon with the feet of imperious contempt, as a number of odd despised
underlings, whereas indeed they are Gods Jewels, and the only excellent upon
earth. Behold, says Isaiah, chap. 8. 18. I and the Children whom the Lord has
given me, and for signs and wonders in Israel, I am as a monster unto many,
says David, Psalm. 71. 7. I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me, says
Jeremy, chap. 20. 7. We are made, says Paul, a spectacle unto the world, and
to Angels, and to men, 1. Cor. 4. 9. We are made as the filth of the world, the
off-scowring of all things, v. 13. In Sunt multi male viuentes Christiani,
inter quos qui voluerit been viuere, and inter ebriosos sobrius esse, and inter
fornicatores castus esse, and inter consultatores Mathematicorum Deum
sinceriter colere, and nihil tale requirere, and inter spectatores nugacium
theatrorum noluerit ire nisi ad ecclesiam, patitur insultores ipsos
Christianos, and patitur verba aspe^a, and dicunt, Tu magnus, tu iustus, tu es
Helias, tu es Petrus, tu do coelo venisti: insultant quo cunque se verterit,
audit hinc atque inde verbum asperum. Quod si time^, recedit a via Christi Dei.
-- Quando audit verba aspera, vnde sibi habet facere solatium, vt non curet
verba aspera, etc. Dicat, Qualia verba audio, seruus peccator? Dominus men's
audiuit, Daemonium habet. August. in Psalm. 90.
Austins time, those that made conscience of their ways, durst not plunge into
the corruptions of the times, and play the good fellows, were scornefully
pointed at, not only by Pagans, but even by unreformed Professors, Professors
at large, as we call them, as fellows that affected a preciseness and purity
above ordinary and others: They would thus insult and scoffingly fly in the
face of such an holy one: You are a great man, sure, you are a just man, you
are an Elias, you are a Peter, you come from Heaven, etc. In Si simplex
aliquis, si castus, aut frugalis in Collegio aliquo vel conuentu, latam and
lubricam perditorum viam non sectetur, fabula, and ridiculum caetetis
efficitur. Insolens quoque, and singularis, insanus aut Hypocrita continuo
appellatur. Vnde and multi, qui ad bonam frugem deuenirent, si cum modestis and
bonis degerent; hac ratione abstracti per malorum consortia ad malum trahuntur,
dum talia inter suos contubernales nomina subire verentur. Nicolaus d^
Clymenges, de vitijs Minist. Eccl. apud Joan. de Gersonno. Tom. 2.
aftertimes, if a man were but merely civil, ingenuous, chaste, temperate,
he was made a byword and laughing stock to those about him. They presently
said; He was proud, singular, beside himself, Hypocrite, etc. Thus it was, is
at this time, and will be to the worlds end, that every stigmaticall
Whoremonger, beastly Drunkard, ignorant Lozell, scoffing Ismael, and
Selfe-guilty wretch will have a bitter gird, a dry blow, as they say, a
scurrill gibe, to throw like the Mad-mans firebrand into the face of Gods
people, as though they were a company of odd humorous fellows, and a
contemptible generation. This, I say, ever was, and ever will be the worlds
opinion of the ways of God. The children of darkness ever harbor such
conceits, and peremptorily pass such censures upon the children of light.

It is strange! men are content to be singular in any thing, save in the
service of God, and salvation of their souls. They desire, and labor too, to
be singularly rich, and the wealthiest in a Town; to be singularly proud, and
in fashion by themselves; to be the strongest in the company to power in strong
drink. They would with all their hearts be in honor alone, and adored above
others. They would dwell alone, and not suffer a poor man's house to be within
sight. They affect singularity in wit, learning, wisdom, valor, worldly
reputation, and in all other earthly precedencies; but they can by no means
endure alonenesse, and singularity in zeal, and the Lords service. In matters
of Religion, they are resolved to do as the most do, tho in so doing they
certainly damn their own souls, Math. 7. 13. Basest cowardlinesse, and
fearfulness fit for such a doom! Revel. 21. 8. They are afraid of taking
Gods part too much; of fighting too valiantly under the Colors of Christ; of
being too busy about the salvation of their souls; lest they should be
accounted too precise, fellows of an odd humor, and engrossers of more grace
than ordinary. It is one of Satan's dreadful depths, as wide as hell, and
brimme-full with the blood of infinite souls: To make men ambitious, and
covetous of singularity in all other things; but in godliness, and Gods
services; not to suffer it in themselves, and to persecute it in others.

Now in this Story of Noah, so highly honored with singularity of freedom
from the sinful contagion of those desperate times, and happily exempted from
that most general, and greatest Judgment upon earth that ever the Sun saw,
an universal drowning; gloriously mounting up upon the wings of salvation and
safety, both of soul and body, when a world of Giant-like Rebels sunk to the
bottom of that new Sea, as a stone, or lead, I consider,

1. The cause of such a singular blessed preservation; which was the free grace
and favor of God: But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, verse. 8.

2. The renown, and honor of Noah's name: in that he stands here as the
Father of the Pereunte mundo, vnus Noe^ seruatur, quasi stirp^ incorrupta, vt
noui mundi sit origo, and nouorum ho minu^ seminarium, Ambros.
new world, holy seed, and progenitors of Jesus Christ: These are the
generations of Noah, verse 9.

3. The description of Noah's 1. Personal goodness: 2. Preservation: 3.
Posterity. These two latter follow. His personal description stands in the
end of verse 9. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah
walked with God. Where we find him honored with three noble Attributes,
which make up the Character of a complete Christian: 1. Honesty. 2.
Uprightness. 3. Piety. And they receive much excellency and luster from a
circumstance of time: In his generations: Atque hae virtutes Noachi
circumstantia temporum, personarumque amplificantur, cum ita fuisse dicitur,
non aetate vna, sed multis, non conuersatione cum bonis, sed cum hominibus
corruptissimis, and seculo corruptissimo. Iun. in A^. c. 6. Genesis
which were many and mainly corrupt.

Without any further unfolding my Texts coherence and dependence upon either
precedent or following parts, (for Historical passages are plainer, and do
not ever exact the length and labor of such an exact resolution, as other
Scriptures do,) I collect from the first point, wherein I find Gods free
grace to be the prime and principal cause of Noah's preservation, this Note:

Doct. The free grace and favor of God is the first moouer and fountain of
all our good. Consider for this purpose such places as these, Ier. 31. 3. Hos.
14. 4. Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. Ioh. 3. 16. Ios. 24. 2, 3. Ephesians. 1.
5.

And it must needs be so. For it is utterly impossible that any finite cause,
created power, or any thing out of Himself, should primarily move and incline
the eternal, immutable, increated, omnipotent will of God. The true original
and prime motive of all gracious, bountiful expressions and effusions of love
upon His Elect, is His (...). His merum beneplacitum: The good pleasure of His
will. And therefore to hold, that election to life is made upon foresight of
faith, good works, the right use of free will, or any created motive, is not
only Sicut Deo nihil potest esse causa vt incipiat velle: ita and ipsi Deo
nihil potest esse causa vt ab aeterno aliquid velit, sicut nihil potest ei esse
causa, vt ab aeterno sit, Driedo Tom. 3 lib. de concor lib. Arb. and praedest.
diui. cap. 3. Non enim Deus monetur abaliqua re ad extra, ad aliquid agendum;
alioquin ipsius voluntas ab alio in volendo dependeret, quod repugnans est.
Rubeus in 1. Sent. did. 40. Diuinae voluntatis non solum nulla est causa
finalis, and moriua per mo^ obiecti; sed etiam nullum est obiectum creaturae,
quod possit Deo esse ratio volendi aliud, sed sola sua bonitas, Vasq^z (...) 1.
p. disp. 91. q. 23. Art. 5. cap. 1.
false, and wicked; but also an ignorant and absurd Tenent. To say no more at
this time, it robs God of his All-sufficiencie, making Him go out of Himself,
looking to this or that in the creature, upon which His will may be determined
to elect. The Schoolmen tho otherwise a rotten generation of Divines, yet are
right in this.

1. That distinction which I learn from my That most worthy, wise, holy, and
learned Minister ^of God, John Ran dall, Ser. 2. upon Romans 8. page 44.
Master, in his heavenly Sermons published since his death, does lead unto
aright, and truly inlighten this Head-spring of all our good. 1. Some actions
of Gods love unto us, says he, are so in Christ, that they are wholly
suspended on Him, and His merits are the only procuring cause of them: For
example, Forgiveness of sins, is an action of Gods love unto us, and yet
this wholly depends upon Christ, and his merits; so that His precious Blood
must either procure this mercy for us from God, else they will never be
forgiven; and this, and the like love of God, is both in Christ, and for
Christ. 2. There are some other actions of Gods love, which arise merely and
only out of the absolute will of God, without any concurrence of Christ's
merits; As the eternal purpose of God, whereby He has determined to choose
some men to salvation; this is an action of Gods love merely rising out of His
absolute will, without Christ's merits. For Christ is a Mediator, and all his
merits are the effects of his love, not the cause of it. And yet this love,
though it be not for Christ, yet is it in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 11. According to
the eternal purpose, which he wrought in Christ Jesus our Lord: that is, in
regard of the execution of it; for even this eternal purpose, and all the
actions of Gods love, which arise from his absolute Will, are effected, and
brought to pass in and through Christ.

3. We may take an estimate of the absolute, and infinite frankenesse of this
inconceivable love of God to his, which reaches from everlasting, to
everlasting, by looking upon that goodly, fair, sweet, amiable creature
described, Ezechiel 16. In the beginning of the Chapter, she lies most filthy
and foul, tumbling in her own blood, pitied by no eye, abhorred of all;
which loathsomeness should rather have begot loathing, then love: auersion and
hate, then affection, and liking: yet God Himself does there profess, out of
a melting pang, and ouer-flowing abundance of His free grace, that, that time
was unto Him the time of love: He spread his skirt over her, and covered her
nakedness. In a word; after she was dressed, and adorned with Gods most
skillful merciful hand, she became a most lovely thing: First, washed with
water, cleansed from blood, anointed with oil; then clothed with broidered
work, shod with Badgers skin, girded about with fine linen, covered with
silk, decked with ornaments of silver and gold; with bracelets upon her hands,
a chain on her neck, a jewel on her forehead, earerings in her ears, and a
beautiful Crown upon her head; fed with fine flower, honey and oil; so
that she became exceeding beautiful, and renowned through the whole World, for
her perfect comeliness, even mine own comeliness, which I put upon her,
says the Lord God.

Uses: 1. All praise then is due unto Iehoua, the Author of all our good, the
Fountain of all our bliss, the Wellspring of immortality and life, whereby
we live, and move, and have our being; our natural being, the being of our
outward state; our gracious being, the euerlastingnesse of our glorious state.
Were the holiest heart upon earth enlarged, to the vast comprehension of this
great Worlds wideness; nay, made capable of all the glorious and magnificent
Hallelu-iahs, and hearty praises offered to Iehoua, both by all the militant,
and Triumphant Church; yet would it come infinitely short of sufficiently
magnifying, admiring, and adoring the inexplicable mystery, and bottomless
depth of this free, independent mercy, and love of God, the Fountain, and
first Moouer of all our good! We may, and are bound, to bless God for all the
means, instruments, and second causes, whereby it pleases God to confer,
and convey good things unto us: but we must rest principally, with lowliest
thoughts of most humble and heartiest praisefulnesse, at the Wellhead of all
our welfare, Iehoua, blessed for ever. We receive a great deal of comfort,
and refreshment from the Moon and Stars; but we must chiefly thank the
Sun: from the greater Rivers also; but the maine Sea is the Fountain.
Angels, Ministers, and Men may pleasure us; but Iehoua is the principal. Let
us then imitate those Lights of Heaven, and Rivers of the Earth; do all the
good we can with those good things God has given us by his instruments; and
then reflect back toward, and return all the glory and praise unto the Sun
of righteousness, and Sea of our salvation. The beams of the Moon and
Stars return as farre-backe to glorify the face of the Sun, which gave
them their beauty, as they can possibly, until they be reflected, or determine
by necessary expiration, the Suns eiaculatorie power being finite: Let us
semblably ever send back to Gods own glorious Self, the honor of all His
gifts, by a fruitful improouement of them, in setting forth His glory, and by
continual fervent eiaculations of praise, to the utmost possibility of our
gracious hearts.

And here I cannot hold, but must needs most justly complain of the hateful,
intolerable unthankfulness of us in this Kingdom, the happiest people under
the Cope of Heaven, had we hearts enlarged to conceive aright of Gods
extraordinary love, and such miraculous mercies, as never Nation enjoyed! Walk
over the World: Peruse the whole face of the Earth, from East to West, from
North to South, I speak not thus, to beget security, which is ready to blow
us up; but to stir to thankfulness, wherein, I know, we are woefully wanting.
I tell you not here, how we behave our selves toward God, which is most
wretchedly; but how his blessed Majesty bears himself toward us, which is
most bountifully.
which is above one and twenty thousand miles about both ways; and from one
side of Heaven to another; thou shall not find such another illightned Goshen,
as this Island, wherein we dwell. Of six parts of the Earth, five are not
Christian; and in Christendom, what other part is so free from the reign of
Popery, the rage of Schism, or the destroying Sword? Or where besides does the
Gospel shine with such glory, truth and peace? Or in what nooke of the World
are there so many faithful Souls, who cry unto God day and night, against the
abominations of the times; for the preservation of the Gospel; that Gods Name
may be gloriously hallowed, His Kingdom come, His will be done in every
place, and themselves serve him with truth of heart? And yet we are too ready,
if we have not the height of our desires, and our wills to the full, in stead of
patience, tears, and prayers, which best become the Saints; to embitter all
other blessings, and to discover most horrible unthankfulness for them, by
repining, grumbling, and discontent; I am sure, by not rejoicing (as we ought)
in every good thing, which the Lord our God has given unto us; and by not
improouing the extraordinarinesse of His mercies, to our more glorious service
of Him, and more humbly and precisely walking before Him. Give me leave
therefore in short, to revive and refresh your memories, with representation of
some general heads only of those innumerable special favors, with which
Gods merciful hand has crowned this Kingdom, for the stirring up, and
enlarging our hearts, to the entertainment and exercise of this most
necessary, and most neglected duty of praising Iehoua. And here, we of this
Nation may a great deal more justly, and rightly say, then the French
Chronicler, in the Preface to his Story, That we have lived in a time of
Miracles: our Posterity will hardly believe the wonders done in our days. Was
it not a miraculous mercy, that such a glorious noone tide of the Gospel, as
we have enjoyed all our life long, should spring out of the darkest midnight
of damned Popery, which unhappily seized upon the face of this Kingdom, in the
time of Queen Marie; especially watched extraordinarily, and most strongly
guarded by all the policy of hell, and power of the Pepe? that the blood of
those blessed Martyrs should bring forth since, such a world of Gods sincere
worship, and so many thousands of gracious Souls, who are already crowned
with everlasting bliss? That Queen Elizabeth, that matchless Princess, and
Pearl of the World, should in those fiery times be preserved in safety, as
a sweet harmless Lamb, amidst so many merciless Romish Wolves, who
implacably thirsted for her precious life? Was it not a wonder, that the sacred
hand of that selfsame crowned blessed Lady, next under Gods Almighty One,
should in despite of all the Powers of Darkness, and Popish rage, raise our
true Religion, as it were by miracle from the dead, a thing which the World so
little hoped to see; that even they, which beheld it done, scarcely believed
their own senses at the first beholding? That afterward, the Silver line of
her much-honoured life should be hid in the endless maze of Gods bottomless
mercies, from the fierce assaults of so many Popish Bulls, such a prodigious
variety of murdrous complotments against her sacred Person; and all those
desperate Assasins of Rome, who all her life long hunted full greedily after
her Virgin blood? The excellency of Gods prouulence and power for the Gospel,
was extraor^ly improoued in the m^ra* ^lous preservation of that ^essed Lady
from so many attempts, so many enemies, so many mischiefs, P^iols, (...),
Persons, Threatenings, Insurrections, Inu^sions. Curses, Excommunicatious, and
all the utmost malice of Hell and Pope.
And was not our deliverance in Eighty eight a Miracle, when the Sea fought
for us, and her proud waves enlarged themselves, to swallow up quick their
prouder burden? There was a day, as many of us may remember, which the Papists
called, The long-lookt-for Day; the Day which should pay for all: They meant
the Day, when Queen Elizabeth should die. About which, their false prophets
were so confident and hopeful, that they expected upon the blood of that Day,
to have built their Idolatrous Babel again: For they would needs foretell,
that it would be a bloody Day. Answer to the Libel of Engl^ust. page 176. and
185.
By the uncertainty of the next Heir (said one of them in the late Queens
days) our Country is in the most dreadful, and desperate case; in the
greatest misery, and most dangerous terms, that ever it was since, or before
the Conquest; and far worse then any Country of Christendom, by the
certainty of most bloody, civil, and foreign wars: all our wealth and
felicity whatsoever, depending upon a few uncertain days of Queen
Elizabeth's life. Clouds of blood (says Non vos late^ modo grauis, and senecta
Principis aetas, cuius sepulchrum, veluti totius regni voraginem and naufragium
ferme sub oculis contemplamini. -- Caeterum insuper aduertente^ cogitationes ad
Reipub licae membra tam varijs concilijs distracta, ingentes moles tempestatum
and turbationu^, cruentorum imbrium conglomeratas nubes vestris impendere
ceruicibus despicietis. -- Vndequaque proh dolor, Anglia in praedam expetitur
and expectatur. Westonus de triplici hominis offici^ in peroratione ad
Academicos.
another) hang in the Air, which at the death of Queen Elizabeth will
dissolve, and rain down upon England, which then is expected as a prey to the
ambition of neighbour-Nations. I am sure, the false prophet spoke to this
sense. And what comes of all this, when the Day came? God, even wrought a
miracle of mercy for the comfort of this Kingdom, and further confusion of
such tellers, and foretellers of lies: For the Sun set, and no night
followed: the same merciful hand at the same time crowned Queen Elizabeth
with immortal glory, and set the earthly Crown of this Kingdom upon King
James his head, without sheading so much, as one drop of blood. And was it not
a miraculous mercy to have such a King, after such a Queen? who has already,
next under that mighty God, by whom Kings reign, continued the Gospel unto
us, and preserved us from the destroying Sword now full twenty years: And what
do you think, were twenty years Peace, and the enioyment of the Gospel,
worth, were it to be bought? Who has ennobled this Kingdom for ever, by his
excellent Writings, in the cause of Religion against Antichrist, which would
have created a great deal of honor to a private man, minding nothing else:
How illustrious then do they make our King? The child unborn will bless King
James, for his premonition to all the Princes, and free States of Christendom;
and that Royal Remonstrance, against the rotten, and pestilent Oration of the
French Cardinal, to the utter, and triumphant overthrow of it; penned in that
style, that none can possibly reach, but a learned King: his Golden pen has
given such a blow to that beast of Rome, that he will never be able to stand
upon his four legs again: he has shot out of his Royal bow such keen
arrows, taken out of the quiver of Gods Book, which will hang in the sides of
that skarlet Whore, and make her la^e as long as she lives. Did he not seal
us an Instrument of his hand, as it were, to testify his invincible cleaving
to the Truth, which he has so excellently, and unanswerably defended with his
Pen, the same day he gave the Noble Princess, a second Elizabeth, to the
Palatine? Has he not most happily and seasonably stopped the hasty torrent of
the Arminian Sect, and the domineering rage of bloody Duels, etc? And was not
the discovery and deliverance from the Powder Plot, that great astonishment of
Men and Angels, one of the most vnparalelled and merciful Miracles, that ever
the Church of God tasted? Is it not admirable in the eyes of all Christendom,
that the only Daughter of our King, unworthily hunted up and down like a
Partridge in the Mountains, should with such Heroical height of spirit pass
through so many insupportable dangers, difficulties, and indignities, impossible
to be forced upon Ladies by generous spirits, and as impossible to be borne
and overcome, but by an invincible spirit; and that She and all her Royal
little Ones should be still safe in the golden Cabinet of Gods sweetest
providence? And to crown all with a wonder of greatest astonishment, do not
we all, that are the Kings faithfullest Subjects, almost fear still, lest we
be in a dream, that Prince Charles, the Flower of Christendom, should return
home so! To say no more: Away then with all sour, melancholic, causeless,
sinful discontent. And, Praise ye the Lord, sing unto the Lord a new song, and
his praise Psalm. 149. ^. 1. 2. 4, 5.
in the congregation of the Saints. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him:
let the children of Zion be joyful in their King. For the Lord takes pleasure
in his people: He will beautify the meek with salvation. Let the Saints be
joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. In a word, let us of
this Island, as we have just cause, above all the Nations of the earth, and
above all Ages of the Church, from the very first creation of it, praise Iehoua
most heartily, infinitely, and for ever.

2. Never hit any in the teeth with deformity of body, dullness of conceit,
weakness of wit, poorness in outward state, baseness of birth, etc. For who
makes thee to differ from 1. Cor. 4. 7.
another? Either,

In natural gifts, as comelines of body, beauty, feature, stature, wit,
strength, etc. See Job 10. 10, 11. Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15.

In civil endowments, or any artificial skill; until it come even unto
matters of Husbandry: See Esaias 28. 26.

In outward things, see Psalm. 127. More particularly, in preferment, and
promotion, see Psalm. 75. 6, 7. In children, 1. Sam. 1. 27. Psalm. 127. 3. In a
good wife, see Prou. 19. 14.

In spiritual things, see Ezech. 16. Isa. 43. 25. Romans 11. 5. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
Phil. 1. 29. Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 2. 10.
In any thing thou can name. We are all framed of the same mold, hewed out of
the same Rock, made as it were, of the same cloth, the sheares, as they say,
only going between; it is therefore only the free love and grace of God,
which makes all the difference.

Whereupon, it was an excellent speech of the last French King, as his
Chronicler reports: When I was borne, there were In the History of his life
and death, page 93.
a thousand other souls more borne: what have I done unto God, more then they?
It is his mere grace and mercy, which does often bind me more unto his
justice: for the faults of great men are never small.

Let none then, I say, ouer-looke, disdain, or brow-beate their brethren, by
reason of any extraordinarinesse of gifts, eminency of parts, singularity of
Gods special favor, or indulgence toward him in any good thing, which he
denies to others. Especially, thy self being vouchsafed the mercy of
conversion; never insolently and imperiously insult over those poor souls,
who are beside themselves in matter of salvation, who like miserable drudges,
damn themselves in the Devils slavery, and suffer their corrupt nature to
carry them to any villainy, lust, or lewd course. Alas! our hearts should
bleed within us, to behold so many about us, to imbrew their cruel hands in
the blood of their own souls, by their ignorance, worldliness, drunkenness,
lust, lying, scoffing at profession, hating to be reformed, etc. What heart,
except it be hewed out of the hardest rock, or has sucked the breasts of
merciless Tigers, but would yerne, and weep, to see a man made of the same
mold with himself, wilfully, as it were, against the Ministry of the Word, a
thousand warnings, and Gods many compassionate inuitations, to cast himself
body and soul into the endless, easelesse, and remediless miseries of Hell?
And the rather should we pity, and pray for such an one, who follows the
swinge of his own heart, to his own everlasting perdition, because, as I said
before, there went but the sheares between the matter whereof we were all
made; only the free mercy, goodness and grace of God makes the difference. If
he should give us over to the unbridled current of our corrupt nature, we
might be as bad, and run riot into a world of wickedness, as well as he: if
the same God visit him in mercy, he might become every way as good or better,
then we.

3. If the free love of God, be the fountain of all our good; away then with
that fained foresight of faith, right use of free will, good works, which
should move God to elect before all eternity; and that Luciferian
selfe-conceite of present merit, These. 2. 4.
fit monstrous brood of that Beast of Rome, who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God. For works meritorious foreseen, are equally
opposite to Grace, as works meritorious really existing. Here you must call to
mind those eight considerations, which I opposed against that wicked Tenent of
Merit, which does justly merit never to taste of Gods free mercy.

From the second point in these words; These are the generations of Noah]
whereas the fame and memorial of all the Families upon Earth besides, lay
buried and rotting in the gulf of everlasting oblivion, as their bodies in the
universal grave of Waters; the family of Noah, a righteous and holy man, is
not only preserved in safety from the general Deluge; but his generations
registered and renowned in the Book of God, and conveyed along toward the Lord
Jesus, as his Progenitors and precedent Royal Line; I observe this point:

Doct. Personal goodness is a good means to bring safety, honor, and many
comfortable blessings upon posterity: see Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Exodus 20. 6. Psalm. 37.
26. Prou. 20. 7. and 11. 21. Psalm. 112. 1, 3. Act. 2. 39.

Reas. 1. Parents professing Religion in truth, make conscience of praying for
their children, before they have them, as did Genesis 25. 21.
Isaac, 1. Sam. 1. 10.
Hannah: When they are quick in the womb, as did Genesis 25. 22.
Rebeckah: When they are borne, as did Luke 1. 64.
Zachariah: In the whole course of their life, as did Job 1. 5.
Job: At their death, as did Genesis 27. 4.
Isaac. And prayers, we know, are for the purchasing of all favor at the
hands of God, either for our selves, or others, the most undoubted sovereign
means we can possibly use.

2. Godly Parents do infinitely more desire to see the true fear of God
planted in their childrens hearts, then, if it were possible, the Imperial
Diadem of the whole Earth set upon their heads. And therefore their principal
care is, and the Crown of their greatest joy would be, by good example,
religious education, daily instruction, loving admonitions, seasonable
reproves, restraint from wicked company, the corruptions of the times, etc. by
all dearest means, and utmost endeauours, to leave them gracious, when they
go out of this world. And Godliness, says Paul, has the promise 1. Tim. 4.
8.
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. It gives right and full
interest to all the true honor, blessings and comforts which are to be had in
Heaven, or in Earth.

3. Children are ordinarily apt, out of a kindly instinct of natural
louingnesse, from many and strongest motives, to imitate, and follow their
Parents, either in baseness, or better carriage, to Heaven, or Hell.

4. A father that truly fears God, dare not for his heart heap up riches, or
purchase high rooms for his children, by wrong-doing, or any wicked ways of
getting; whereupon, both he and his fare far the better, and happily decline
the flaming edge of those many fearful curses denounced in Gods Book, against
all unconscionable dealers. Such as that, Ecclesiast. 5. 13, 14. There is a
sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept for the
owners thereof to their hurt. But those riches perish by evil travel, and he
begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand. And Habac. 2. 9, 10. Woe
to him that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his
nest on hie, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have
consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned
against thy soul.

Uses: 1. Would thou then have thy little babes thou love so dearly,
blessed upon earth, truly noble, Gods favorites, meet thee in heaven? Be holy
thy Self. Men are very careful and curious to have their seed-corne, and
breed of cattle choice, and generous; and will they not endeavor to nurture,
manage, and conduct the immortal souls of their children with grace, by godly
education, to the highest advancement of which those noble natures are capable,
everlasting bliss, fruition of all heavenly joys, world without end?

2. This may also serve to reprove, and correct those covetous Bedlams, that
labor more to have their children great, than good; rich, than religious. It
is a madness of that kind, which wants terms to express it: That a Man
should go to Hell himself, and fit his children to follow him, in seeking to
establish his house, and raise his posterity, by Sacrilege, Simony, Bribery,
Usury, Oppression, Depopulation, or any other course of cruelty, and wrong. For
so they lay their Quae namque dic ot^ aliena rapere necessitas? -- Paupertas
inquis hoc facit, and inopia necessariorum. Atqui propterea non debe^ rapinam
exercere. Nam tales diuiti^ incertae sunt: T^ vero tales congregans, non alite^
facis, quam si qui^ rogatus cur in arenam aedificij sui fundamentaiaciat,
respondeat, Propter frigoris, ac pluuiae metum. At ob idipsum non debebat
fundamentum in arenam loca^i. Nam ita ventus, ac nimbi mox illud subuertunt.
Itaque si ditescere voles, neminem circum^enias. Si liberis tuis voles diuitias
tradere, iustas acquire. Illae quippe manent, ac firmae persistunt. Quae vero
tales non sunt, confestim pereunt, ac corrumpuntur. Si vero omnino ditescere
cupis, (res enim ista necessaria non est) quibus tandem diuitijs magis frui
voles? An vitae longioris? At qui (...) d. tescunt, modico plerumque ^empore
durant. Nam saepenumero rapinae and imposturae poenas da^t, mortem videlicet
immaturam, idque ita, vt possessis, nisi breui momento frui non liceat, and
abeuntes (...) sottiantur. Fit vere and hoc saepe, vt ex delicijs, laboribus
and curis aegritudines sibijpsis consciscant and per^ant, Chrysostom. Ser. 2. in
1. ad Ephesians.
foundation in fire-workes, which is able to blow up themselves and their
posterity, body and soul, root and branch.

3. Let this fill the heart of the dying Christian with sweetest peace. For
whereas the bloody knife of profane men's unconscionable and cruel negligence
in training up their children religiously, does stick full deep in their
souls; and leaving this life, they bequeath unto them the curse of God,
together with their ill gotten goods: he happily finds his conscience, by reason
of his former thirsty desire and sincere endeavor to do his children good
spiritually, freed from the horror of such bloud-guiltinesse, and leaves them
to that comfortable outward estate, which no injury or usury has impoysoned,
and to that neuer-failing providence of our heavenly Father, which then is wont
to work most graciously, and bountifully for us, when we, renouncing the arm
of flesh, the favor of man, riches of iniquity, and all such broken staves of
reed, depend most upon it. If we will needs be our own caruers for things
of this life, either by right or wrong, fraud or fair dealing, all is one, so
that we may thrive and grow great in the world; then are we justly cast off
from all merciful care over us, and exposed to ruin and curse. But if we
rest sincerely for our selves and ours upon the all-powerfull Providence, it
will never fail, nor forsake us, but ever exercise, and improoue its
sweetness and wisdom, for our true and everlasting good.

In the third Point, a description of Noah's spiritual state, which is the
complete Character of a true Christian; consisting of three Attributes: 1.
(...) sonat vi^um probum, aequum, iustum, ac bonum, aequi videlicet ac iusti
studiosum.
Justness. 2. (...) significat hominem integrum, simplicem, candidum, ac
sincerum, non versutum in quo nullus dolus deprehenditur, sed omnia and factis,
and ore, and cord interse consonant. Musc. Nec (...) sonat perfectum, vt
noster interpres vertit, sed integrum, sincerum, non fucatum. Merc. in hunc
locum, (...) Som^times i^ the same that, non fraudulentus confilijs, non
varius, sed simplex, apud Pagn. (...) non perfectionem absolutae sanctitaris,
sed sinceritatem cordis and pietatis significat, qua^ solam Deus a nobis nunc
exigit: sicut dicitur, 1. Tim. 1. 5. Finis mandati est, etc. (...).
Sincerity. 3. Piety. I collect from the first this note:

Doct. Every truly religious Man, is also a righteous, and true-dealing man.
From the second, this:

Doct. Sincerity is the sinew, and Touchstone of true Christianity.

But these two, I have so often pressed in the course of my Ministry, that I
will p^sse by them at this time.

Look what kind of honesty to men that is, which is not accompanied with
Religion toward God; the same is that Religion toward God, which is not
attended with honesty to men. Unhonest religion, irreligious honesty,
insincere religion and honesty, are all in one predicament, as they say, and
all out of the right path. If thou have respect only to the commandments of
the first Table, and outward performance of religious services; but neglect
duties of the second, and conscionable carriage to thy brethren; Thou art but a
Pharise, and formal Professor: If thou dealest justly with thy neighbor, and
yet be a stranger to the mystery of godliness, can not pray, sanctify the
Lords Day, submit to a sincere and searching Ministry, etc. which the first
Table enioynes; Thou art but a mere civil man: If thou put on a flourish, and
outward face only, of obedience and conformity to both, and yet be
true-hearted in neither, as did the Pharisees, Math. 23. 14, 23. thou art but a
gross Hypocrite. Bear thy self holily toward God, honestly toward Man, and
true-heartedly toward both, or thou art no Body in Christ's Kingdom, but still
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Put on righteousness, and
true Ephesians. 4. 24.
holiness in this life, or thou shall never put on a Crown of glory in the
life to come.

In His generations] which were many, and mainely corrupt. In that then Noah
stood out, and stuck unto God through so many Non a verisimilitudine abhorret
aetatis dixisse Mo^en plurali numero, quo melius exprimeret, quam strenuus, and
inuictus athleta fuerit Noa^h. quem tot saecula non mutarunt, Cal^* in cap. 6.
Genesis v. 9.
ages; and against so Mirabile fuit constantiae exemplum, quod vndique scelerum
soe^ore circundatus, contagionem inde nullam contraxit, (...)*
wicked a world; we may learn,

Doct. That constancy is ever an inseparable Attendant upon true
Christianity. But because a double constancy is here employed: 1. One in
respect of continuance of time: 2. Another in respect of opposition to the
corruptions of the times; I may observe two points.

Doct. 1. Grace once truly rooted in the heart, can never be removed. See for
this purpose, Romans 11. 29. Mat. 24. 24. 1. Ioh. 2. 19, 27. Ioh. 10. 28. Romans 8.
35. Luke 22. 32. 2. Cor. 1. 21, 22. Ephesians. 4. 30, etc.

Reasons may be taken, from

1. The dearness, strength, constancy, inuiolablenesse of God the Fathers
love unto His Children. It is dearer then a Mothers to her sweetest Babe, Isa.
49. 15. It is stronger then the mountains, Esa. 54. 10. It is as constant as
the courses of the Sun and Moon and Stars; of the day and of the night,
Ier. 31. 35, 36. and 33. 20, 21. It is as sure, as God Himself, Psalm. 89. 35,
etc.

2. Christ's triumphant session and intercession at His Fathers right hand.
Which may for ever, with sweetest peace, and freedom from slavish trembling,
assure us of our rootednesse in Christ, constancy in grace, and everlasting
abode with him in the other World. He that will rent us from Christ's mystical
Body, being once implanted into Him by a lively fruitful Faith, and blessedly
knit unto Him by His Spirit, as fast as the sinews of His precious Body are
knit unto His bones, His flesh to his sinews, and his skin to His flesh;
must pull Him out of heaven, and remove Him from the right hand of His Father.
What so furious or infernal power can or dare lay a finger on us in this
kind! He has taken the poisoning power out of every thing, that should hurt
us, or hale us back to hell. He has conquered, captiuated, carried in
triumph, and chained up for ever all the enemies of our souls, and enuiers of
our salvation. They may exercise us in the mean time for our good; but they
shall never be able to execute their malicious wills, or any mortal hurt upon
us, either here, or in the next life.

3. The irreuocable obsignation of the blessed Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and 4.
30. And who or what, can or dare, reuerse the Deed, or break up the Seal of
the holy Ghost?

Here then, as you see, the blessed Trinity is the immovable ground of our
going on in grace.

4. The lasting and immortal power of the Word, once rooted in a good and
honest heart, Luke 8. 15. 1. Pet. 1. ^3.

5. The certainety and sweetness of promises to this purpose, Ier. 32. 39, 40.
Zech. 10. 12. Ioh. 8. 12. 2. Sam. 7. 14, 15. Psalm. 89. 31, etc.

6. The force and might of Faith, 1. Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5.

7. The efficacy of Christ's Prayer, Luke 22. 32. Ioh. 17. 15, 20. Romans 8. 34.

8. The durable vigor of saving graces, Ioh. 4. 14. Romans 11. 29.

9. The inabilitie, nay, impossibility of all causes, or creatures to pluck
out of Gods hand, Ioh. 10. 29. or to draw any of His to a total or final
falling away.

1. It is not the Devil himself can do it, 1. John 5. 18. 2. It is not the
world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. Ioh. 16. 33. 3. It is not the concurrent fury, and united
forces of all the powers of darkness, Math. 16. 18. 4. It is not sin, 2.
Sam. 7. 14, 15. Psalm. 89. 31, etc. 5. It is not weakness of Faith, and other
graces, Mat. 12. 20. Esa. 42. 3. 6. It is not the imposture of false prophets,
Matthew. 24. 24. 7. It is no creature, or created power, Romans 8. 38, 39.
Uses: 1. This Point thus confirmed, does confound that forlorn Tenent of the
Popish Doctors, which tells us that a justified and sanctified Man may fall
finally and totally from grace. In which I have heretofore upon other occasion
in your-hearing, punctually refuted those which I conceived Bellarmines best
Arguments. I will not then trouble you now with his Sophistry again.

2. This sweet and precious Truth may crown the hearts of all those that are
truly Christ's, with joy unspeakable and glorious. Let new Conuerts and Babes
in Christ, who are wont to be very fearful and much troubled, lest they
should not hold out, because upon their first entrance into the ways of
Christianity, they are cunningly and concurrently encountered with so many
oppositions: From the Devil, which then rages extraordinarily: From the
World, which then tendereth more and more alluring baits: From the Flesh, which
naturally is very impatient of any spiritual snaffle: From carnal Friends,
who cannot endure their forwardness: From their old Companions, who cry out,
They are turning Puritanes: From the Times, which lowre and look four upon
their zeal: Sometimes from the Father which begat them; from the Mother which
gave them suck; from the Wife which lies in their bosom; from a world of
enemies to grace: I say, in such a case let them graspe in the arms of their
Faith, the proofs and promises in the present Point, and ride on, because of
the Word of Truth. Let them sweetly, with full assurance, and unconquerable
resolution, repose upon that everlasting encouragement, for the finishing of
their spiritual building, which Zerubbabel received from the mouth of God
Himself, for success of the material, a Type of this: Not by might and
power, but by my Spirit, Zech. 4. 6, 7.
says the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel
thou shall become a plain, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof
with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it.

And that they may more comfortably and constantly go on, let them cast their
eyes betime upon these and the like cautions, at their very first giving their
names unto Christ.

1. Propose such interrogatories as these to thine own heart: Art thou content
to abandon thy bosom sin; the sensual froth of former Delicatus es,
Christian, si and in seculo voluptatem concupiscis, immo nimium stultus, si
hoc existimas voluptatem, Tertul. de spectas. cap. 28.
pleasures, hereafter to delight in God, as thy chiefest joy? Can thou take
up thy cross, and follow Christ His Truth and holy tracke, amidst the many
bypath that lead to hell, and different opinions of multitudes of men? Art
thou willing to suffer adversity, disgrace, and discountenance with the
righteous, and contemned godly Ones? Can thou endure to have things laid unto
thy charge, thou never did, thoughtst, or dreamdst on? To become the
Drunkards song; a Byword to those that are vil^r then the earth; music at
the feasts of those that sit in the gate, etc? In a word, for Christ's sake to
deny thy self, thy worldly wisdom, natural wit, carnal friends, old
companions, pleasures, profits, preferments, ease, excellency of learning,
acceptance with the world, outward state, liberty, life, or what else thou
can name dearest unto flesh and blood? If thine heart answer not
affirmatively, (I mean, out of the resolution of a well-aduised regenerate
judgment; for I know, the flesh will grumble and reclaim:) thou will
certainly f^ll away, or end in formality.

2. Look to thy repentance; that it be sincere, universal, constant; from the
heart-roote, for all known sins, to thy dying day. 1. If some worldly cross
be the continued principal motive: 2. Or the humor of melancholy: 3. If it
be confusedly only for sin, and in general: 4. Or for some one special
notorious sin only: 5. Or for some lesser sins, with neglect of greater,
as for tything Mint, etc. 6. If it be only legal: 7. But for some sins, of
what kind soever; leaving but so much as one known sin not taken to heart:
8. Or but for a time: All will come to naught. A foundation of godly sorrow,
leasurely, advisedly, and sincerely laid at first, will be for ever after a
comfortable encouragement to Faith, spiritual joy, well-doing, and walking
with God.

3. Take the touchstone of fruitful, powerful, and special marks, to
discern and difference justifying saving Faith, from all false and
insufficient faiths. For a temporary may go far.

4. Let knowledge and affection, like two individual twins, grow up together
in thee; and mutually transfuse spiritual vigor into each other. Presume not
upon any knowledge, without an humble inflamed affection; neither build too
much upon the heat of zeal, without the light of knowledge: Either of these
may be single in some, and that in singularity, who after may fall away
shamefully.

5. Above all, look unto thy heart. If thy change were Angelical, in words,
actions, and all outward carriage, and yet thy thoughts still the same and
reserved: thou art but a gilded Tomb, and cannot be Ier. 4. 14.
saved. Let a man take a Wolf, beat him black and blue, break his bones,
knock out his teeth, cut away his claws, put upon him a Sheep skin, yet
still he retains his Woluish nature: Let a man become never so harmless
outwardly, yet without a new heart, all is naught.

6. Incorporate thy self into the company of Gods people, by all engagements
and obligations of a profitable, intimate, and comfortable fellowship in the
Gospel. There is a secret tie unto constancy in the communion of Saints. He
is not like to walk long, that walks alone, especially, if he might enjoy
good company. Shunning society with the godly, is too shrowde a sign of a
temporary.

7. Consider well, (for the contrary is a notable discovery of counterfeits)
that thy calling to grace must settle thee more surely in thine honest
particular calling; and make thee therein more faithful, conscionable, and
painful.

Let Christians also of longer standing, and more strength, in their assaults
about perseverance, have recourse unto this Tower of Truth, and labor to
prevent that which they fear:

1. By constancy, in a careful use of all the means; the Word, Prayer,
Conference, Meditation, Sacraments, etc. To which, let them preserve appetite:
and practice that they hear, without omission or delay. He that gives way to
a heartlesse neglect, or customarie hardness of heart, in the use of the
Ordinances, may justly suspect his neerenesse to some fearful sin, or
fierce temptation; to some heavy judgment, or dangerous Apostacy.

2. As Soon as they discover any spiritual weakness, or decay; assault, or
temptation; let them complain betime unto the Throne of Grace, and mightily
oppose with the feruentest prayers of extraordinary private humiliation.

3. Let them keep perfection still in their eye, and aim; and toward the
attainment thereof, acquire and acquaint themselves with Rules of holy life,
daily directions, courses of most mortified men, etc.

4. Let them watchfully decline all occasions of falling back: Spiritual
pride, known Hypocrisy, desire to be rich, vnder-valuing and declining the
most searching means, form, and perfunctorinesse in religious duties,
discontinuance of intimatenesse with the godly, neglect of distractions upon
the Lords Day, etc.

5. Let them consider that all is lost which is past, if they fall off, 2. Ioh.
8.

This former Point of constancy in grace, did arise from consideration of
blessed Noah's continuance in goodness through so many ages: Now in that he
did not conform to the iniquities of the times, but did stand unstained,
amidst the wickedst generations that ever dwelt upon earth; I collect the
necessity of another constancy, and that is in respect of opposition to the
corruptions of times.

Doct. The servant of God must not serve the times. Or thus: The true Christian
ought to stand at staves end with the corruptions of the time.

Reason. He is bound unto it by his Baptism. Of such as profaned themselves,
being Christians, with irreligious delight in the Ensigns of Idolatry,
heathenish spectacles, shows and stage plays, Lib. de spectat. cap. 24*
Tertullian, to strike them the more deep, claims the promise which they
made in Baptism. He is not of the world, Ioh. 15. 19. His life is hid with
Christ in God, Colos. 3. 3. There is a secret heavenly vigor infused into
every gracious Soul, by the sanctifying Spirit, which deads it to the world,
and makes it delight in God. He ought to shine in the world, as a light in the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation, Phil. 2. 15. Light and darkness cannot
endure one another; neither the power of Grace, those works of darkness in
which the world lies drowned. He is by no means to be conformed to this
world, Romans 12. 2. nor to run with the wicked to the same excess of riot, 1.
Pet. 4. 4. He is now newborn, and become a Child of Eternity; whereby his
heart is fal^e in love with new and everlasting delights; and the eye of his
soul turned from the dung of this world, toward the glory of the second Life.
As the worldling cannot relish the sweet joys of gracious exercises: so
neither can the Christian, the frothy pleasures of good-fellowship. You can as
hardly draw the sound Professor to a Conuenticle of swaggering companions; as a
good fellow to a day of humiliation.

Uses: 1. Howsoever then, thou may seem to stand on Gods side, by an
artificial acting of some affected forms in Religion, by countenancing the
Ministry, if thou be a great Man, and outwardly conforming to the
Ordinances; yet, if in thy practice thou be plunged into the corruptions of
the present, and thine heart hanker still, and hunt in secret after youthful
delights, the lusts of men, most applauded fashions of the greater part, thou
art not a Christian in truth, but a true counterfeite. Assure thy self, if
thou swim down the current, and sail with the tide of the time, thou may
justly look every moment, to fall upon the sudden, perhaps Psalm, 11. 6.
in the height of thy temporal happiness, and hottest gleame of thy worldly
glory, into the irrecouerable and everlasting Lake of brimstone and fire, etc.

2. Let every one, who has given his name unto Christ, ever hold it his Crown
and comfort, to hold a strong and unconquerable counter-motion to the courses
of the world. Let him still discover the true nobleness of his Christian
spirit, and of a mind spiritually generous by gathering vigor, and growing
invincible, from the very oppositions of the wicked, and villainies of the time.
See Psalm. 119. 126, 127. 1. King. 19. 14. 1. These. 2. 2.

It was the saying of a moral Heathen; That to do well, where was no danger,
was a common thing; but to do well, where was both peril and opposition, was
the peculiar office of a man of virtue: much more, say I, of a man of God.

And Noah Q. d. Noah ita sancte and pie vixit, quasi Deum semper praesentem
prae oculis haberet, and reuereretur, ideoque in omni opere cautissimus,
modestissimus, religiosissimus, semper incedebat, eratque Deo, Deique voluntati
per omnia consentiens, perinde vt homo cum homine amico, vel Domino suo, vbique
and indiuulse inambulans, illi per omnia consentit, illi in omnibus se
conformat.
walked with God.] Walking with God, is the top and flower of all Noah's
excellencies, and spiritual felicities upon earth. Whence note,

Doct. That walking with God, is the Crown of the Christians character.

It is the duty and property of every true Christian, to walk with his God.

By walking with God, I mean, a sincere endeavor, punctually and percisely to
manage, conduct, and dispose all our affairs, thoughts, words and deeds; all
our behauiours, courses, carriage, and whole conversation, in reverence and
fear, with humility and singleness of heart, as in the sight of an invisible
God, under the perpetual Opus est ergo, vt hic timor mentes obsideat, opus
est, vt ille, qui peccare non vult, praesentem sibi cogitet, non in publico
solum; sed etiam in domo; non in domo solum, sed and in cubiculo, in ^octe, in
lectulo, in cord suo, August. Tom. 10. Hom. 27.
presence of his All-seeing, glorious, pure eye; and by a comfortable
consequent, to enjoy by the assistance and exercise of Faith, an unutterable
sweet communion, and humble familiarity with his holy Majesty: In a word, to
live in Heaven upon earth.

Proofs. Gods Covenant and commandment to Abraeham, and in him, to all the
faithful unto the Worlds end, requires it, Genesis 17. 1.

The practice and protestations of the Saints and servants of God, seal unto
it. Enochs walking with God, chap. 5. was an happy preparatiue to his
extraordinary translating to glory.

The Lord, before whom I walk, says Abraham, chap. 24. 40. will do thus and
thus.

I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living, says David, Psalm.
116. 9.

O Lord God of Israel, says Solomon, 2. Chron. 6. 14. There is no God like
thee in the Heaven, nor in the Earth; which keep covenant, and show mercy
unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts.

I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, says Hezechiah,
2. King. 20. 3.

And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward men, says Paul, Acts 24. 16. which sounds the
same way.

Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold in the World, worth
one days society with Jesus Christ, and his holy Spirit, The life of
Galearius. chap. 28.
said that Noble Marquess of Vico, well skilled and experienced in an heavenly
conuersing with his God.

Reas. 1. And it must needs be so: For howsoever natural men and worldlings,
out of their obnoxiousnesse, and secret terrors, slauishly retire, do not
willingly, neither dare they draw near to that God, which to them is a
consuming Heb. 12. 29.
fire; yet all those, who have truly tasted how gracious and glorious he is,
shall find their hearts, out of a secret sense of Gods love unto them first,
kindlily inflamed with infinite desire to live under the comfortable influence
of his pleased countenance, to enjoy his holy Majesty with constant peace, and
an humble spiritual access and acquaintance continually. His spirit of
Prayer, infinite love, exercise of repentance, temptations and troubles from
Satan; pressures and oppressions from the World, loss of inward peace,
faintness of Faith, want of spiritual strength, assault of some special
sin, sweetness of meditation, daily favors showred down upon him without
number, and above measure; sorethought of the great and last Account, motions
of the blessed Spirit, spiritual desertion, etc. but above all, the
inexplicable bless^dnesse, goodness, and excellency of that highest Majesty
it self, drives him to his God many times a day.

2. All Gods loves unto us; His loving kindnesses, protections, preseruations,
bounty, patience, divine illuminations, spiritual blessings: in a word, every
link of that golden chain of Mercy, Grace and Glory, far thicker set with
sweetest blessings in all kinds, then the Heaven with Stars, which our happy
Souls have, do, or shall enjoy from the first springing of it up (if
everlasting could have any beginning) out of the adored Fountain of his free
Grace, to the last moment of eternity in highest heavenly bliss, (if
eternity could possibly ever determine) should be so many keen spurs,
deepest obl^gations, strongest chains, to draw our hearts most greedily to
this infinite delight in him, and thus with an humble familiarity to converse
with his holy Majesty.

3. Consciousnesse of our former walking comfortably with God, sanctified by
the life of Faith, will mightily and incredibly support our spirits and courage
in the times of confusions and fear. The Si ei qui voluptatibus se dedide^it,
hac vita sit excede^dum, p^ae horrore quodam and metu vel ante constitutum
obeat mortem. Item si futuram aegritudinem suspicetur, si contumeliam, si
paupertatem, seu aliud istiusmodi quippiam ex inspera^o affuturum praeuiderit,
perit illico and consumitur. Chrysostom sermon. contra Gu^am and caeteras corporis
voluptates
hearts of sensual worldlings, for want of reconcilement, and acquaintance
with God in calm and comfortable times, sink and tremble in the Day of
distress, and Gods dreadful visitations, as the heart of a woman in her
pangs, and fall asunder in their breasts like drops of water. But that happy
Contra vero qui Spiritu vixerit, nulla e^it simili calamitate obstrictus, sed
sine timore, moestitia, discrimine e^it, and quauis rerum mobilitate superior:
neque ^o victor euad^t, quod ^il si: auersi perpessus: sed quod maiu^ vtique
est, aduersos omnes fortunae casus contemnere, Chryfost. ibid.
One, who in his prosperity has made God his portion, and walked humbly in his
presence, shall in the time of trouble stand like a strong immovable
mountain, impregnable against the rage of wind and weather, against the cruel
incursions of all adversary power: when the wicked shall tire the Mountains
with bootelesse cries to cover them; he shall be able to say with David, The
Lord is my refuge and my strength, etc. therefore Psalm. 46. 2.
will I not fear, though the earth be moved, and the Mountains fall into the
midst of the Sea. He shall by the mercies of God, and humble dependence upon
his omnipotent Arm, encounter, and entertain the terrors even of the evil
day, of the hour of temptation, of the King of fear, and last Judgment, with
confidence and peace.

4. Thy walking with God, will make thee extraordinarily powerful, and
mightily prevail in prayer; one of the greatest blessings, and sweetest
comforts, which can be named, or enjoyed in this life. As the Kings Favorite,
who stands still in his presence, and under the immediate, and gracious
influence of his Royal eye, does far sooner, and much more easily obtain
both his own and friends suites, then those who are more estranged from the
Court: So it is in this case.

5. But above all, that which should most quicken, and keen us to this duty,
is that particular interest we have by Jesus Christ, in Iehoua himself,
blessed for ever. A mystery, which if I should offer to open and enlarge, I
should be endless, and yet come infinitely short.

Oh then, let us infinitely love, and learn exactly the most sweet and
heavenly Art of walking with God! For a more comfortable illightning, and
guiding us wherein, before I come to give some general instructions, give me
leave to premise these quickening preparatiues.

1. Look that thou lie not in any one known sin against thy conscience,
hating to be reformed: do not cherish, allow, or go on in any lust,
corruption, or lewd way in thine heart, life, or calling: suffer not any work
of darkness, or service of Satan to reign, and domineere in thee. For if so,
thou art so far from ability, or possibility of walking with God, or
delighting in him, that thou wearest the Devils brand, and art yet most
certainly one of his. See and search the true meaning of such places, as
these; Mistake not the place. I know from hence, the Pelagians, (...),
Caelesti^s, Donatists, Anabaptists, Libertines dream^ of, I know not what,
Ph^risaicall, fantastical, and Vt^i an perfection. But it is true which
Austin says, Qui ambulant in vijs Domini, non operantur peccatum; and tamen
non sunt sine peccato: In Psalm. 118. C^nc. 2. Non peccare, v. 6. idem est ac
puri^icare se, v. 4. sieve, peccato repugnando, puritati st^dere, Beza.
1. Ioh. 3. 3. 6, 8, 9. James 2. 10. Ezech. 18. 21. Psalm. 66. 18. and 119. 6,
101. Ezech. 18. 30. Matthew. 18. 8, 9. 2. Cor. 7. 1.

Suitable hereunto is the concurrent judgment, and doctrine of our best
Divines, and worthiest Writers, graciously instructed unto the Kingdom of
Heaven. These are their several assertions to the same sense, in their own
words:

1. A man can have no peace in his conscience, that favors and retains any
one sin in himself against his conscience.

2. A man is in a damnable state, whatsoever good deeds seem to be in him, if
he yield not to the work of the holy Ghost, for the leaving but of any one
known sin, which fights against peace of conscience.

3. So long as the power of mortification destroys thy sinful affections,
and so long as thou art unfeignedly displeased with all sin, and do
mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, thy case is the case of salvation.

4. A good conscience stands not with a purpose of sinning; no, not with an
irresolution against sin.

5. The rich and precious box of a good conscience is polluted, and made
impure, if but one dead Fly be suffered in it. (He means, any one known
sin, lain and delighted in impenitently.)

6. Where there is but any one sin nourished and fostered, all other our
graces are not only blemished, but abolished, they are no graces.

7. Most true is that saying of Aquinas; That all sins are coupled together,
though not in regard of conversion to temporal good; for some look to the
good of gain, some of glory, some of pleasure, etc. yet in regard of auersion
from eternal Good, that is God; So that he that looks but toward one sin,
is as much auerted, and turned back from God, as if he looked to all. In which
respect Saint James says, He that offends in one, is guilty of all.

8. Every Christian should carry in his heart, a constant and resolute purpose,
not to sin in anything: for faith, and the purpose of sinning can never stand
together.

Thou see then, if Satan keep possession, but by one reigning sin, it In
anima in qua peccatum regnauerit, non potest Dei regnate Regnum. Quae enim
participatio iustitiae and iniquitati? Quae communicatio luci ad tenebras? Qui
consensus Christo, and Belial? Et putamus nos Regnum Dei consequi, si a
for^catione, idololatria, and ven^sicijs immunes simus. Ecce inimi^itiae,
contentio, ita, rixa, dissentio, ebrietas quoque and caetera, quae parua
arbitramur, excludunt nos a Regno Dei. Nec refert vno quis a beatitudine
excludatur, an pluribus: cum omnia similiter excludant, Hieron. tom. 9. Com. in
cap. 5. ad Galat. ad ve^ba illa, Manifesta sunt opera carnis.] Austin having
named sacrilege, murder, false witness bearing, thest, rapine, pride, ent^r,
coue^usnesse, ange^; ^runkennesse, says; Ex quibu^cunque qui in se vnum habere
cognoscit, and poenitentiam non egerit, sine reinedio in gehennae igne ardebit,
Tom 9 page 14^8. ( Through the whole Treatise, I still quote Austin in octau^,
printed (...), 1573) Sicut ad corporis sanitatem, n^n est s^is, vt peste quis,
vel pleuritide c^reat, sed ab omnibus in vniuersum morbis immunem esse opor^er:
sic ad animae sanitatem requiritur, sordium ac vitiorum omnium in vniueisum
abdicatio, Spin. de just. Christ. Vbi regnat in cord propositum peccandi, ibi
^ducia misericordiae exulat. Sicut miles, si toto corpore fuerit armis
vestitus, and vnam partem habuerit nudam; nihil ei prodest, quod totus fuerit
ferro vestitus, si per illam vnam partem cum ^gitta percusser^t, sed sic cadit
quemadmodum si totus fuisser nudus: Sic and Christianus, quamuis omnem
iustitiam fecerit, in vno peccauerit, similiter peccator statuitur, quemadmodum
si semper peccasse^. Sicut ait Iacobus, Si omnem legem adimpleas and in vno
transgrediaris, similiter praeuaticatores Legis, Chrysostom. tom 2. in cap. Matthew.
20. Hom. 35. Tam vno morbo aliquis moritur, quam alius multis. Zanch. in cap 3.
ad C^loss.
will be thine everlasting ruin. Thou shall then be so far from ever
enjoying any humble holy acquaintance with our God, that thou art gone body and
soul for ever. One breach in the walls of a City, exposes it to the
surprise of the enemy: one leake in a ship neglected, will sink it at length
into the bottom of the Sea: the stab of a penknife to the heart, will as well
speed a man, as all the daggers that killed Caesar in the Senate House: If thou
hedge thy Close as high as the middle Region of the Air in all other places,
and leave but one gap, all thy grass will be gone: If the Fowler catch the
bird, either by the head, or the foot, or the wing, she is sure his own. It
is so in the present case: If thou live, and lie with allowance and delight, in
any one known sin, without particular remorse, or resolution to part with
it; thou as yet carriest the Devils brand, he has thereby marked thee out for
his own. As obedience is universal and Catholic, if sincere; so repentance,
if true, is also general. It s^rips us stark naked, as a worthy Divine says
well, of all the garments of the old Adam, and leaves not so much as the shirt
behind: in this rotten building, it leaves not a stone upon a stone. As the
flood drowned Noah's own friends and servants: so must the flood of repenting
tears drown our sweetest, and most profitable sins.

The premonition therefore I tender in the first place, is this: Thou can
never possibly be fitly qualified, either for the right understanding, or
saving practice of this sacred and sweetest Art, of walking with God; except
thou resolve, to stand for ever sincerely at the swords point against all
sin. Even thy bosom sin must be abandoned, if thou look for any blessing
in this kind: Thou must put off the shirt from thy sinful soul; for as the
shirt is to the body, so is the beloved sin to the soul; it sticks closest
and nearest, and is done off with most ado.

And because this darling-pleasure, minion-delight, Peccatum in delicijs, as
the Fathers call it, is Satan's strongest Hold, his Tower of greatest confidence
and security, when he is driven out elsewhere, and so by consequent most
powerful and peremptory to keep a man's heart estranged with largest
distance, and incompatible auersion from all holy acquaintance with God; I will
in short labor to illighten, and dis-intangle any one, who unfeignedly desires
an utter divorce from this bosome-deuill; by telling him, first, what it is:
secondly, what his is: thirdly, how he may be deceived about it.

1. As in every man, there is one element, one humor, and ordinarily one
passion predominant; so also one Quemadmodum nemo tam perditus, aut flagitiosus
inuenitur, quin ab aliquo vitio magis qnam a caeteris, abhorreat: sic nemo
tantae sanctitatis est, quin ad vnum aliquod peccatum, quam ad caetera
propensior sit, Cartw in Prou. page 1262. Much more then in his state of
nature. The flesh in every one has some special darling-sinne, wherein she
most delight; which is as her right eye, in regard of pleasure* or as her
righthand, in regard of profit, etc. Dyke, Of repentance* chap. 15.
work of darkness, and way of death. And it is that which his corrupt, and
original crookedness, upon the first elective suruay, and prospect over the
fools Paradise of worldly pleasures, fleshly lusts and vanities of this life,
by a secret sensual inclination, and bewitching infusion of Satan, singles
out, and makes special choice of, to follow and feed upon, with greatest
delight, and predominant sweetness: afterward, by custom and continuance,
grows so powerful, and attractiue, that it extraordinarily endeares, and
draws unto it the heat of all his desires, and strongest workings of his
heart, with much affectionate impatiencie, and headlongnesse: and at the
height, by an irresistable tyranny, it makes all occasions and occurrences,
friends and followers, the deepest reach of policy, and utmost proiects of
wit, Religion, conscience, credit with the world, the universal possibility
of body, soul, outward state, serviceable, and contributarie unto it, as the
Captain, and commanding sin; as to the Devils viceroy, domineering in the
wasted conscience. In some, it is worldliness, wantonness, ambition,
opposicion to godliness, usury, pride, revenge, or the like: In others, it
may be drunkenness, the swaggering vanity of good fellowship, gluttony,
pleasures of Playhouse hanting, gaming, scurrill jesting, etc. obstinate
insatiablenesse in allowed recreations, idleness, or such like.

2. Thou may discover it by such marks as these:

1. It is that, which thy truest friends, thine own conscience, and the finger
of God in the Ministry, many times finds out, meets with, and chiefly
checks thee for.

2. It is that, which if it break out into act, and be visible to the eye of
the world, thine enemies most eagerly observe, and object, as matter of their
most insultation, and thy greatest disgrace.

3. That which thou art lothest to leave, art oftenest tempted unto, have least
power to resist, and which most hinders the resignation and submission of soul
and body, of all thy courses and carriage, heartily and vnreseruedly to the
Word and will of God.

4. It is that which God oftnest corrects in thee, even in the interpretation,
and guilty acknowledgement of thy selfe-accusing heart. It may be, at several
times thou have bin afflicted with some heavy cross in thine outward state,
loss of a child, some fits and pangs of bodily pain, terrors and troubles of
mind, or some such proportionable visitations: now in all these, and like
afflictions, upon the first smarting apprehension, thy conscience, if any whit
awaked, on its own accord seized upon that sin we now seek for, as the
principal Achan and author of all thy misery.

5. If ever thou wast so sick, as out of extremity to receive sentence of
death against thy self, and despair of recovery; if thy conscience was
stirring, this sin afrighted thee most, and gave the deadliest blow to drive
thee to final despair. And if thou should die in it without repentance,
which God forbid, it would infuse most hellish vigor, and venom, into the
neuer-dying worm, which would thereby more mightily gnaw upon thy conscience,
through all eternity. If ever the sword of the Spirit shall cleave it from thy
bosom, which is infinitely to be desired, and strike through thy sensual
heart with true remorse, it will cost thee the bitterest tears, most sighs,
and deepest groans.

6. It is that, which thou art lothest, and would least be acknowne of. If it
were possible, thou could be well content, that no John Baptist should ever
hear of thy Herodias. And therefore thou bear thy brains, and improouest
thy wit, to devise (if it be capable of dawbing) distinctions, euasions,
excuses, extenuations, whole cart-loades of fig-leaues, to color and cloak
this soul Fiend, though favorite to thy bewitched soul.

7. That, which thou art in a bodily fear, the Minister will meddle and meet
with, when thou art going toward a conscionable, and searching Sermon. For
thou think with thy self, If this day he disclose my bosom, I shall both
be disgraced amongst my neighbors that know it, and cast also into dumps, and
melancholy by his denouncing of terror against it.

8. Thoughts, plots, and proiects, about it, a thousand to one, ordinarily
seize upon thine heart, with first and most acceptable entertainment at thy
very first waking; if they have not broken off thy sleep, and troubled thee in
thy dreams.

9. The cares, pleasures, and appurtenances of it, are wont to thrust, and
throng upon thee on the Lords Day, with extraordinary eagerness, importunity,
and vnresistablenesse. For the Devil that desires to have thy mind most
distracted upon that Day, makes choice of the fittest, and pleasingest baits,
to draw away and detain thy heart, and the most alluring objects, for
diuersion.

10. In the darkness, and discomforts of the night, if thou be sudde^ly
awakened with some dreadful thunder, lightning, or terrible tempest, the guilt
and accusations of thy beloved sin is wont to come into thy mind in the
first place, and with greatest terror.

Thirdly, a man may be deceived, in conceiving, that he is utterly divorced,
and quite delivered from his bosom sin, and yet it be but a mere exchange,
or some other mistake. This gross, affected selfe-imposture, may be seen in
such cases as these:

1. He may change only the outward and visible form of it. For instance:
Whereas the same sin of covetousness does utter and express it self by
usury, simony, sacrilege, bribery, grinding poor men's faces, crushing, and
unmercifully keeping under the poorer of the same trade, stealing,
ouer-reaching by tricks of wit, all manner of wrong-doing, all kinds of
oppression, detaining ill-gotten goods without restitution, etc. he may
insensibly glide out of one gulf of griping cruelty, into another; he may
fall from one of these, being a more notorious, and cursed trade of hoarding,
to some other of them less observed, and odious in the world, and yet still
abide in the chambers of death, and under the tyranny of a reigning sin. The
soul sin of uncleanness does actuate it self by fornication, adultery,
selfe-pollution, brutish, and immoderate abuse of marriage, and such other
abborred impurities. Now, he may pass from one of these pollutions, more
crying and abominable, to some other of them, not affrighting the conscience
with such grislinesse and horror, and yet still lie in the impenitent and
damnable shares of lust.

2. He may surcease, and refrain from the outward gross acts of such hateful
villainies; and yet his inward parts be still defiled with insatiable sensual
hankerings after them, delightful reuoluing them in his mind, and
contemplative commission of them. For instance: He may hold his hand both from
the crying violence of oppressions and wrong, and the closer conueiances of
cunning and fraud; and yet covetousness may still reign in him, by the
earthly exercise of the heart. He may forbear the external acts of
uncleanness, and ye^ lie and languish abominably in speculatiue wantonness,
and adulteries of the thought; the visible executions of revenge, and yet
nourish in his distempered affections, the hellish Vipers of heart-burning
hatred, and spite; all indirect ambitious climing into high rooms, and yet be
passingly proud, and over greedy of precedencie.

3. Nay, he may change the kind of his bosom sin, in respect of matter,
form, object, every way; and yet upon the matter, it is but the exchange of
one foul fiend for another. For instance: wantonness may be his sweet sin
in youth, and worldliness in old age: reuelling in his younger years;
downright drunkenness in his declining time: prodigality may sway in some
part of his life; pinching in some other: Hypocrisy may reign at one time;
Apostacy at another: furious zeal for one while; profane irreligiousnesse
for another.

4. When the blasting frosts and feebleness of old age, have with a sott^sh
deadness and listlesnesse emasculated and wasted the ambitious vigor of his
mind, and the boisterous heat of his affections, have dried and drunk up the
milk in his breasts, and marrow in his bones; his darling sin may then at
length bid him adieu, without any penitent discharge, and he may say unto it, I
have no more pleasure in thee. Whereupon he may falsely conclude a
mortification, and final conquest over it; a secure deliverance from the guilt
and curse of it.

5. He may unsoundly please himself with an vnuoluntary, and enforced
cessation from it; when there is no want of good will, as they say; but only,
of matter, means, opportunity, entisement, company, provocation, or something
for the full and free acting and enioyment of it. So want of money may
restrain a man, but full sore against his will, from strange apparel, gaming,
Alehouse haunting, buying of Benefices, Offices, high rooms, etc.

6. He may for a time pull his neck out of this strongest yoke of Satan,
only out of melancholicke pang of slavish terror, serious forethought of
death, and lying everlastingly in Hell, true apprehension of the impossibility
of being saved without abandoning it; upon some desperate horror of bringing
again his beloved sin in his bosom to the Communion, after so many
causefull prouocations of Divine Justice; observation of some remarkable
vengeance seized upon his fellow-delinquents; or sensible smart of some
terrible blow from Gods visiting hand in one kind or other: I say, upon some
such occasion, he may for a time forbear his bloody oaths, usury,
drunkenness, gaming, Playhouse haunting, selfe-polluting, walking in the
black and dark night after the strange Woman, or what other sin soever does
reign in him, and retain him strongliest in the devils slavery. But because
it is not the work of the Word, humbling him soundly under Gods mighty hand,
planting faith, and infusing mortifying power, he is not able to hold out long;
but the unclean spirit returns, and rules in him again far more
imperiously, and sensually, out of indignation of its discontinuance, and
proportionally to the parties new-collected strength, and eagerness, to
recommit it, after his extraordinary, and impatient forbearance. I know, it is
not impossible, but that a man, after his conversion, by the sudden surprizall
of some violent temptation, and cunning train of Satan, may be haled back to
commit his sweet sin again; especially if it be of some nature, (though it
be a very heavy case, and to be lamented, if it were possible, with tears of
blood:) yet he never does, nor can return to wallow in it again, or allow
it. After such a dreadful relapse, his heart bleeds afresh with extraordinary
bitterness of penitent remorse, he abhors himself in dust and ashes, as
exceedingly vile, cries more mightily unto God in a day of humiliation, for the
return of his pleased countenance, repaires and fortifies the breach with
stronger resolution, and more invincible watchfulness, against future
assaults, and all assayes of re-entry. But now the temporary I talk of, after
his formal enforced forbearance, engulphs himself again, with more
greediness, into the pleasures and sensuality of his bosom sin, lies, and
delights in it again, as the very life of his life, and hardens himself more
obstinately in it, as a thing impossible to leave, and live with any comfort.
Upon his return, the unclean spirit r^ges more then before. Mat. 12. 45.


Thus to lend thee some light, for a more full discovery, and through
disintanglement out of its pleasing snares; I have intimated briefly what a
beloved sin is; what thine may be; and how thou may be deceived about
it. For if thou would truly taste how gracious, and glorious the Lord is in
a sweet communion with His blessed Majesty; if thou would be intimately
acquainted with the mystery of Christ, wherein are hid infinite heavenly
treasures, and such pleasures, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
neither 1. Cor. 2. 9.
has entered into the heart of man; if thou would ever be fitly qualified
to walk humbly with thy God in the way which is called Holy; as thou must fall
out for ever with all finne, so must thou principally and impartially improoue
all thy spiritual forces, and aid from heaven, utterly to demolish and beat
to the ground the devils Castle; to dethrone and depose from its hellish
tyranny over thee, that grand impoisoner of thy soul, and strongest bar to
keep out grace, all acquaintance, and sweetest intercourse with God; thy
bosom sin.

Take notice by the way, that since we concurrently, and constantly teach, that
justifying Faith does purify the heart from the reign and allowance of any
lust, or lewd course, and plants by the power of the holy Ghost, a sincere
universal new obedience, and regular respect to all Gods commandments, to all
good works of Justice, Mercy, and Truth; and that we neither do nor dare
give any comfort to any man of his being justified and assured of Gods love,
that goes on impenitently in any one known sin against his conscience,
hating to be reformed; I say, since it is thus, take notice how unworthily, and
wrongfully, the Antichristian Doctors, having received foreheads from the Whore
of Babylon, deal with us in this point. Hear them speak:

So that their justification, (meaning ours) says P. 1. page 537.
Fitzh^rbert, may according to their opinion, stand with all wickedness.

These words, says Sect. 38.
Arnoux, (meaning of the French Confession) are set down to assure the
wickedst man that is, of the righteousness of the Son of God.

By the application of Christ's satisfaction by faith, says In his
consultation, Reas. 9. pa. 163. As it is translated in to English by W. I. 1618.
Lessius, he (meaning the Protestant) is reputed just before God, though he
find no change of will at all within.

The skarlet Fathers in the Trentish Conuenticle, Mist. of the Council of
Trent, lib. 2. page 190.
say, that Luther from justification by faith alone, collected, not only that
good works are not necessary, but also that a dissolute liberty in observing
the Law of God, and of the Church, will serve the turn.

Bellar. Videntur omnino existimare posse hominem salua^i, etiamsi nulla bona
opera faciat, nec mandata diuina custodiat, De iustif. lib. 1. c. 1. Sect.
Caeterum.
also comes in, with his videntur. They seem, says he, altogether to think,
that a man may be saved, although he do no good works, nor observe Gods
Commandments. Which he there only seems and assayes to prove, but indeed
plays the calumniating Sophister.

The justifying faith of the Adversaries, says Fides illa specialis, quam
aduersarij singuat esse fidem iustificantem, tollit e medio orationem,
sacramenta, opera bona, and quicquid aliud ad salutem nostram Deus instituit,
De iustif. lib. 1. cap. 10.
he in another place, takes clearly away Prayer, Sacraments, Good works, and
whatsoever God has instituted for our salvation.

The Protestants, says Hanc certitudinem adesse volunt, non solum sine vilo
respectu, necessitate, consequentia, praesenti^, aut conuenientia bonorum
operum, sed etiam praesentibus quibuscunque ^eccatis, de iustif. lib 9. ca. 3.
Stapleton, will have certainty of grace to be in a man, not only without any
respect, necessity, consequence, presence, or conueniencie of good works, but
also whatsoever sins being present.

The In cap 2. to the Romans Sect. 3.
Rhemists also most slanderously affirm, that we condemn Good works, as
unclean, sinful, hypocritical.

Arnoldus nobis affingit nos docere; omnes homines teneri credere se ad vitam
aeternam esse electos: nos iubere omnes sceleratos esse securos, vt qui nullis
flagitijs possint excidere a salute. Apagetam abominandam doctrinam,
pu^idissimam calumniam, mendacium sesquipedale. Hear (...) we hold* Immo vero
docemus, eum qui non vult in Christum credere, nec resipiscere, teneri credere
salutem Christi morte partam, ad se non pertinere. Dicimus, dicere; Sum
electus, ergo mihi licet esse improbo, sermo est reprobi, qui ideo vult mal^s
ess^, quia Deus bonus est, M^lin. Anat. Ar^is, cap. 24. Sect. 40.
Arnoldus also swells with malicious Popish poison, and the rancour of a
slanderous spirit, when he fathers upon us such falsehoods as these: as though
we should teach, that all men are bound to believe, that they are elected to
eternal life: that we bid all wicked men be secure, as those who can fall from
salvation by no villainies.

Now the Lord rebuke thee, Satan, who ^ittest with such extreme malice and
falsehood in the foul mouths of the Popish Proctours, and Rabshakehs of Rome,
that they should with such prodigious lies and villainous slanders, revile the
Lords Champions, and traduce the glorious heavenly truth of our most holy and
righteous Religion.

But to my purpose, and to conclude the point; Thou must either with a resolute
and everlasting divorce abandon, and abominate thy bosom sin, thy darling
delight, to the pit of hell, whence it has formerly received much enraged
sensual poison, to the woeful wasting of thy conscience, and the stronger, and
longer barring thee from grace; or else thou must continue an everlasting
stranger from all communion and conuersing with God; thou shall never be able
to meet him in his Ordinances with true reverence and delight, or look him in
the face with comfort at the last day.

II. Scorn with an infinite, and triumphant disdain, to We may justly, and
upon good ground, be frighted, and invited from si^ne, to the service of God,
both by consideration of hell fire, and intuition of an immortal Crown, as by
inferior and subordinate motives: but the principal and most predominant
attractiue of our hea^ts to good, ought to be the Sovereign Good, God blessed
for ever, See (...). Mart. upon cha 1. of Judges, Fines minus principales non
tolluntur a principali, Keck. cap. de fine.
serve the mighty Lord of heaven and earth, seruilely, slauishly, or formally;
for by-respects, private ends, or any thing, save his own sweet, gracious,
glorious Self. Hate hypocrisy from the very heart-roote: Which foul fiend
painting her self more vnobseruedly in the warm Sun, and shining prosperity
of the Gospels flourishing estate with an outward gilt, and superficial
tincture, does with greater variety, and stronger imposture, deceive both men's
own souls, and others, in the glorious noone-tide thereof: Nay this great
Agent for the Prince of darkness, is so politic and pragmatical, that he
preuailes too much many times, even in the declination of that glorious Sun,
in the disacceptation and dampe of profession and forwardness. For though at
this day, Professors of the gracious Way be in greatest disgrace with the
most; and a drunkard, a swaggering Good Fellow, an Usurer, a son or daughter
of Belial, shall find more favor, applause, and approbation with the world,
then a man which makes conscience of his ways; so that it may seem the
greatest madness that may be, to make profession of Religion hypocritically:
yet even in these times there are some causes, in which the devil takes
occasion to cause some to play the Hypocrites notoriously.

1. Some there may be, who being weak and worthless, Simon Magus having been
famous by his Magical miracles, now vanishing before the light of the Gospel*
conformes to the outward worship of God, in receiving the Sacrament, and
^resseth into the company of the Apostles, that he might continue the applause,
and admiration of himself, by a new way, the form^r failing, even by the
miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, which he wickedly offers to buy for money.
yet vainglorious, and ouer-greedy of reputation, finding, that they find no
such acceptance and applause with worldlings, by reason of their
worthlesnesse, and that natural men entertain them not with that estimation
and account proportionable to their proud expectation; and conceiving also,
that by their association, and siding with the Saints, (who in preciousnesse of
regard, and dearness of love, ever infinitely prefer the poorest Christian
before the proudest Nimrod) (for one Lark is worth a thousand Kites) they
shall be prized above vulgar esteem, and ordinary valuation, purposely put on
a vizour of outward conformity to the courses of Christianity, that thereby
they may procure and purchase some special credit, and remarkable respect, and
with some at least, be accounted some body in the world.

2. Others there are, who seeing they cannot so easily and Judas carrying the
bag, for the disb^sment of money for necessaries, and to the poor, did by
secret purl^yning to himself, f^de his co^tous humor, and that f^re more
easily, and vnobseruedly, in the company of Christ and his Apostles, and under
the color of a religious conformity, Ioh. 12. 6. and 13. 29.
excessiuely satisfy and glut their greedy humors, by their commerce,
dealings, and mutual negotiations with natural men; for such are well able
with equal cunning, to counter-mine against their crafty and coozening
underminings; their consciences will serve them to encouhter and retalliate
their inconsionableness, with like ouer-reaching retributions of
circumuention and wrong; they can well enough sound and fathom with the
crooked line of their own deceitful hearts, the invisible depths of their
Machiuellian proiects and plots and knaue^y; I say, others there are, who upon
such occasion, that they may thrive in the world, and grow in wealth more
easily, and vnobseruedly, put on a cloak of outward profession, and in policy
only and hypocrisy draw toward the better side; mix and join themselves
with Gods children, hang upon, and adhere unto true Christians; because they
pitch upon them, make special choice of, and single out such upon purpose, as
those, from whom, by reason of the singleness and simplicity of their hearts,
vnsuspiciousnesse of their charity, the equity, and conscionablenesse of
their dealings, in these coozening, supplanting, and undermining days, they
may most fairly and easily suck out the greatest advantage, and prey upon
most plentifully, with the devouring teeth of covetousness and craft, gilded
over only with a veil of seeming, and vernish of hypocrisy.

3. Some there may be, whom only the very terrors, and sting of slavish
fear, and forethought of the wrath and torment to come, may drive, and
restrain from the execution of grosser villainies, excite and enchaine to the
outward exercises of holy duties, and many actual religious conformities. For
instance, some may repair to the House of God upon the Lords Day, not for any
such great love unto Gods Truth or conscionable Ministry; but for fear, that
being then alone, or walking idly abroad, their guilty consciences should
work more fearfully and fiercely upon them; and that thoughts of their
sins, death, hell, damnation, and other such terrible considerations would
come into their minds, with affrighting griesly forms, and apparitions of
horror. Some, it may be, for fear they should be justly censured, and marked
out by men acquainted and experienced in the mystery of grace, and ways of
God, with the odious deserved brand of Prayerlesse, and Atheistical Psalm. 14.
4.
wretches; or lest they should be seized upon with some remarkable judgment,
in their own persons, families, or goods, by fire, robbery, tempest, ill
success, death, horror, despair, or other fearful accident, dare not for
their lives, but continue a course and formal task of Prayer Evening and
Morning in their houses. Some also, in times of trouble and terror especially,
as of extraordinary thunders, impetuous tempests, dreadful apparitions in the
air, etc. fly into the company and communion of Christians, driven thither by
the fearfulness of their spirits, and hope to receive protection of their
guiltiness, and preservation from wrath, by the prayers, presence, and
acceptance of such holy Ones. We see in men's carriages to humane laws, that
even fear of them restraines many from many lawless outrages, and constraines
to many civil conformities, against which their sensual hearts and humors
do infinitely rise and reclaim, with much distaste and auersion. Do you not
think, that many drunkards would as well live in murder, and upon the spoil,
as in their present abominable swinishnesse; did they not hold it a more
horrible thing to be hanged, than to pay five shillings, or sit in the stocks?
Would not many at Sermon time, rather be in the Alehouse, than in the House of
God, were not the constitutions of men a curb unto their corruptions? Would
not some desperate wretches as well strike through at once, and quite dispatch
those they hate, as kill them all the year long, with their cruel thoughts
and bloody malice; were not thought free, and actual murder death by the
laws of men? Would not many malicious Papists, think you, as well speak
traitorously of the King, as tear Gods glorious name with their oaths, and
blasphemous tongues; were they not terrified with fear of Tyburne? It may be
so proportionably in men's behauiours toward divine Laws, the holy Statutes of
Heaven, and that highest Tribunal. But as in the former we ought to be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience Romans 13. 5.
sake: so in the latter much more, not only for terror of Gods Judgments;
but also for love of His Truth.

A worthy Divine sums up all I would say in this point, thus: Sometimes,
says he, the fear of Gods Judgments, as of the rack of an accusing
conscience, of the torments of hell* fire, etc. holds men in a slavish
obedience.

I fear me, there are too many abroad in the world, especially great Ones, who
by forbearance of other gross sins, to which their sensual affections are
not so endeared, outward performance of some holy duties, formal presence at
religious exercises, countenancing, and patronage of godly Ministers and good
men, hope to make amends, as it were, and to purchase protection and
dispensation, for the vengeance due unto the sinful pleasures of some bosom
and beloved lust wherein they secretly lie. And therefore their outside
conformity in other things, is caused by fear of being horribly and
remarkably plagued for that close darlingdelight.

4 Others there are, who by reason of awefulnesse, unto David's salse
backsliding friend, Psalm. 55. 13, 14. Iehu, Ioash, etc. were temporary men, of
this inconstant temper. An awefull reuerenc* to that holy Priest, 2. Chro. 24.
2. was the ground of Ioash his goodness, not a good conscience. He did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, for ae while, and yet his heart was
not upright. For when Iehoiada was dead, he fell to Idolatry, ver. 17, 18.
correspondence with, dependence upon, gainful expectation from some gracious
great One, Christian friend, reverend Pastor, Patron, Landlord, or
Governor, religious rich kindred, etc, or other such by-respects, conform to
the outward forms of Religion, and live ^seruedly under the Canopie of a
counterfeite profession. The false and hollow hearts of men, harbor many
times, many private ends in their outward services of God, and howsoever they
openly pretend Religion, yet they secretly intend, and plot the satisfaction of
their humor, and serving of their own turns, by an artificial, enforced,
temporary taking part with the better part. Such servile Professors as these,
ordinarily in the mean time stand at a stay in an external conformity to
Christian courses; for no spirituall*life warmes their affections, no root of
grace grows in their hearts: Formalitie in this kind, is ever void of all
vital vigor, vegetation, and actiuitie; constant only in an heartlesse
plodding course and coldness; and many times, at length, when the motive of
their religious representations and shows is removed, and the end compassed,
for which they counterfeited, they put off their vizours, and appear again
plain carnal men, and downright good-fellowes, as they were before. The
Play being done, they are Rogues again*

5. Some there may be, who out of a greedy pursuit of a general applause from
all sorts of men* and ambitious hunting after a promi^uous reputation, and
equal acceptance, both with Professors of Religion, and men of this world,
put on a show of religious deportment, at least, in the company of such as are
ready and forward to commend their co^formitie and forwardness that way, and
by relation abroad, to enrole their names amongst the number of those who are
noted to be on the best side. In a word, such fellows as these, out of a base
and unblessed ambition to be well spoken of by all, though a woe waits upon
such, Luke 6. 26. furnish themselves, both with a form of profession to
content Christians, and flourishes of good-fellowship to please the profane.

6. Others there are, who may gloriously pretend, and protest with great
bravery and confidence, their assent and assistance to the best and holiest
courses; put on a temporary counterfeite profession, and fashionable conformity
to the communion of Saints; that thereby they may pass more fairly and
plausibly, out of one calling into another: from a baser, lower, more
neglected, and toilesome Trade, into some other of more liberty, acceptance
and ease: or else break out of all Callings; and so, by the unhallowed mystery
of a sacred coozening, if I may so call it, live upon their profession; and by
amusing the tender consciences of weak Christians, with the controuling and
countermanding tyrannies, as it were, of an affected furious zeal, suck out
of them no small advantage, and prey too plentifully upon the people of God.
Such as these, are ready to pretend, and intimate, that such base, earthly, and
worldly employment, and spending of their time, is disgraceful, and derogatory
to the providence of God, and their Christian liberty: that with unworthy
detainments, and auocations, it interrupts them in the pursuit of their
general Calling; disables and hinders them in the discharge of holy duties.
But let them know, that Christianity, if sound and true, does not nullify, but
sanctify our particular Callings. Thou ought to continue with
conscionablenesse and constancy in that personal Calling, wherein thy calling
to grace did find the^, if it be warrantable and lawful. See 1. Cor. 7. 20.
(...), Hoc est, non fastidiat conditionem humilem, non affectet altiorem, non
temere ab vna ad aliam tranfiliat. Par.
No comfortable change of a Calling, but in case of 1. private necessity, or 2.
common Good: and that truly so, not hypocritically pretended, or for
by-respects.

If any man then, upon giving his name to Religion, shall grow into neglect,
distaste, or dereliction of his honest particular Calling; we may ever
strongly suspect him of hollownesse and hypocrisy. It is the confident
conclusion of a very learned and holy Divine:

Though a man be endued with excellent gifts, and be able Perkins of
Callings, page 734.
to speak well, conceive Prayer, and with some reverence to hear the Word,
and receive the Sacraments, yet if he practice not the duties of godliness
within his own Calling, all is but hypocrisy.

1. What son or daughter of Adam can challenge and plead exemption from that
common charge laid upon them by the Lord of Heaven: In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat Genesis 3. 1^.
bread, till thou return unto the ground; Either by travail of body, or toil
of mind, or both?

2. Diligence in a civil Calling, is necessary for a comfortable provision of
earthly necessaries.

3. He is a cursed Drone, a child of idleness and sloth, the very Tennis-ball
of temptation, most unworthy the blessings and benefits of humane society; who
does not one way or other cooperate, as it were, and contribute to the common
Good, with his best endeauours in some honest particular Calling.

4. A seasonable employment in a civil Calling, is a Sovereign preservative,
and curb for prevention of infinite swarms of idle, melancholic, and
exorbitant thoughts; and for restraint from many wicked and unwarrantable
medlings and miscarriages.

5. An honest Calling, is a School of Christianity. In which a man performing
duties for the Lords sake, may daily profit in the practice and increase of
many heavenly graces; Faith, Obedience, Patience, Meekness, Constancy,
Truth, Fidelity, Invocation, Thanksgiving, experience of Gods providence, etc.

A true Convert therefore is so far from casting off his personal Calling;
that after his calling to Christianity, he is wont to discharge the duties
thereof with far more care and conscience, though with a better mind, more
moderate affections, and for a blesseder end.

7. Some there may be, who seeing the iniquity of these last, and worst times,
lying in weight for the surprise and suppression of forwardness and zeal; and
that they may gain, or grow into credit with the world by some special
service against the forwarder sort, serve themselves, Such Machiuellian
counterfeit, are called (...), False Brethren, 2. Cor. 11. 26. (...), Gal. 2 4.
Irreptitij. qui seclam i^sinuarunt. Qui per f^audem, and pietatis si^ula ionem,
in album fidelium irrepserant, Bez.
in the mean time (plausiblenesse of profession taking away the sense of their
intrusion) into the company and communion of the most noted religious people;
that at length they may do them the more mischief, and drive to the head the
bitterness of their lurking malice, with a more desperate and deadly sting.
These are men of great imposture and cunning in their carriage. They inform
themselves thoroughly, and exactly, in the ways and zealous behavior of
Profession; and so with great satisfaction and contentment, apply and
accommodate themselves for a time to their desires and devotions. But if once
they pry into a point of seeming advantage, which by their wresting and
outfacing, may create matter of molestation, and spy their supposed season, to
win by betraying; they turn Turks and traitors to those which are true of
heart, to serve their own turns.

8. Many there are, who out of a fond and groundless So deluled were the
foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. these, Mat. 7. Luk 13. 26. and many thousands at
(...) day, who having a form of godliness, deni^ the power thereof. They do
not only not allow'it. and (...) it, but deny and (...) it, as more then
needs, and pressed upon them only by such as are too precise.
conceit, that only an outward conformity to the Word, Sacraments, and other
religious exercises, will serve their turn for salvation, give their names to
profession, and so walk on plodding in the comfortless vnzealous forms of a
frozen outside Christianity, many times even unto their dying day. These men
mar, and vnsanctifie themselves, by making moderation in Religion a Saint:
and undo their souls, by adoring discretion as an Idol. Moderation and
discretion truly so called, and rightly defined by the rules of God, are
blessed and beautifying ornaments to the best and most zealous Christians; but
being tempered with their coldness, and edged with their eagerness against
forwardness, and ferue^cy in spirit, which the Apostle enioynes, (...) ^er
(...) spitit^ s^thing (...) Ti^, verbum factum a sono literae z. Eustath. Vult
vt nos, qui sub lege Spiritus viuimus* nihil remissum, (...) ^epidum (...), in
nobis: sed cum feruore Spiritus, and calore fidei cunct a peragamus, Origin.
Romans 12. 11. become the very desperate cut-throates to the power of
godliness, and pestilent consumption of the spirits, heart, and life of true
zeal. These fellows are most insolent, and confident in their Pharisaicall
brags, spiritual security, and hopes for Heaven. They admire, and applaude
with much selfe-estimation of there singular skill, and rare felicity, in
pitching just upon the golden mean, as they conceive, between profaneness
and preciseness; infamous notoriousnesse, and persecuted strictness. But that
Proverb, in the mean time falls pat upon their pates: There is a generation
that are pure in Prou. 30. 10.
their own eyes: and yet is not washed from their filthiness: And at length
most certainly, the just execution of that terrible commination, Revel. 3. 16.
will crush their hearts with everlasting horror, confusion and woe.

But I should be endless in the discovery of this hidden and hellish gulf of
hypocrisy, wherein thousands are swallowed up, even in this glorious Midday
of the Gospel. For a man may as soon find out the way of an Eagle in the Air,
the way of a Serpent upon a Rock, the way of a Ship in the midst of the Sea,
and the way of a man with a maid, as to tracke the cunning and crooked
footsteps of this foul fiend in the false hearts of Satan's followers. Only
take notice, that thou can never possibly delight in God, or ever comfortably
come near him, if thou give any entertainment unto it, in what form soever it
represent it self, or whatsoever vizor it offers unto thee, though never so
fairly varnished, and gilded over with the Devils angelical glory.

III. Build, and erect all thy resolutions and conclusions for Heaven and Gods
service, upon that strong and purest pillar, that maine, and most precious
Taught by the Lord Jesus himself, Luk 14. 26, etc. as a fundamental Rule of
Christianity. Aduersus parents, aduersus liberos, aduersus naturalem
cognationem, contra vniuersum Orbem terrarum, contra ipsam etiam animam pugnam
indicit, atque aciem esse instruendam ostendit, Chrysostom. in cap. 10. Mat. Hom.
36. Paul calls is, The very spirit of our service of God: without which all our
other Religion, be i^ never so glorious and goodly, is no more lively, nay, is
as very a carcass, as the body of a man, destitute of that soul, which makes
it reasonable, and differing from all other bodies. It was ^gured by the
Holacaust of the Law, which signified the sacrifice of the flesh, the
crucifying of the old Adam, Romans 12. 1. See also Coloss. 3. 5. Mat. 5. 29, 30.
Principle of Christianity, Self-denial. No walking with God, no sweet
communion, and sound peace at his Mercy-Seate, except for his sake, and keeping
a good conscience, thou be content to deny thy self, thy worldly wisdom,
natural wit, carnal reason, acceptance with the world, excellency of
learning, favor of great Ones, credit and applause with the most; thy
passions, profit, pleasures, preferment, nearest friends, ease, liberty, life,
every thing, any thing. And fear no loss; for all things else are nothing, to
the least comfortable glimpse of Gods pleased face.

From this Principle sprung all those noble resolutions, and replies of Gods
worthiest Saints and Soldiers: That of Hester for the preservation of the
people of God: Well, says she, I will go in unto the King, which is not
according to the law, Hest. 4. 16.
and if I perish, I perish. That of Micaiah, solicited strongly by the
messenger to temporize, in managing his Ministry with sutablenesse, and
conformity to the Kings pleasure, and plausiblenesse of the false prophets: As
the Lord lives, what the 1. King. 22. 14.
Lord says unto me, that will I speak. That of Nehemiah; Should such a man
as I flee? As if he should have said; Tell Neh 6. 11.
not me of fleeing, my resolution was pitched long ago, if need require, to
lay down my life, and lose my blood in the Lords battles. That of Paul, when
his friends were weeping, and wailing about him: What mean you to weep, said
he, Act. 21. 13.
and to break mine heart? For I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to
die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. That of Jerome: If my father
stood weeping on his knees before me, and my mother hanging on my neck behind
me, and all my brethren, sisters, children, kinsfolk, howling on every side,
to retain me in sinful life with them; I would fling my mother to the ground,
despise all my kindred, run over my father, and tread him under my feet, thereby
to run to Christ when he calls me. That of Luther, dealt with, earnestly,
and eagerly, not to venture himself amongst a number of perfidious, and
bloodthirstie Papists: As touching me (says he) since I am sent for, I Fox in
the Story of Marti^ Luther, page 849.
am resolved, and certainly determined to enter Worms in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ; yea, although I knew there were so many Devils to resist me, as
there are tiles to cover the houses in Worms. That of a most renowned Italian
Marquess, Galeacius Carracciolus, tempted by a Jesuit with a great sum of
money, to return from Gods Blessing at Geneua, to the warm Sun in Italy:
Let their money perish with them, who See the Story of his life, page ^7.
esteem all the Gold in the world, worth one days society with Jesus Christ,
and his holy Spirit. That of George Carpenter, Martyr: My wife and my children
are so dearly beloved unto Fox, page 884.
me, that they cannot be bought from me, for all the riches and possessions
of the Duke of Bauaria: but for the love of my Lord God, I will willingly
forsake them. That of Kilian, a Dutch Schoolmasters, to such as asked him, if
he loved not his wife and children; Yes, said he, If the world were Gold, and
were mine to dispose of, I would give it to live with them, though it were but
in prison; yet my soul and Christ are dearer to me then all.

IV. Exercise thy self continually, and be excellent in that only Heaven
upon Earth, and sweetest Sanctuary to Hab. 2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gal. 3, 11. Heb.
10. 38. Gal. 2. 20.
an hunted soul, the Life of faith. Which to live in some good measure, is the
duty and property of every living member of Christ Jesus. Love therefore, and
labor to live by the power of faith, the life of salvation, sanctification,
preservation. 1. Of salvation, thus: Let thy truely-humbled soul, grieved and
groaning under the burden of sin, throw it self into the meritorious, and
merciful arms of Jesus Christ, wounded, broken, and bleeding upon the Cross;
and there let it hold, and hide it self for ever in full assurance of eternal
life, by virtue of that promise, Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son,
has everlasting life. For having thus laid hold upon him, He by his Spirit
does communicate first himself unto thee; then both the merit of his death for
remission of thy sins; and of his active obedience for thy right to salvation
and happiness; and withal, the power of his Spirit, to quicken thee to the
life of grace in this World, and to raise up thy body to the life of glory at
the last day. 2. Of sanctification: If thou keep thy faith, the fountain,
root and heart, as it were, from which all thine other graces spring, in life
and vigor, thou shall pray more comfortably, be more courageously patient,
hear the Word more fruitfully, receive the Sacraments more joyfully, pass the
Sabbaths more delightfully, confer more cheerfully, meditate more heavenly,
walk in all the ways of new obedience with more strength, and conquest over
corruptions. For ordinarily, every Christian shall find the exercise of other
graces to be comfortable, or cold, according to the liveliness, or
languishing of his faith. 3. Of preservation, both temporal and spiritual.

In crosses, afflictions, and all Gods outward angry visitations, by the power
of such promises, as those, Psalm. 89. 33. and 50. 15. Heb. 12. 7, 8, 11. 1.
These. 3. 3. Act. 14. 22. Luke 9. 23. Isai. 63. 9.

In the course and carriage of thy particular Calling: the duties and works
whereof, if thou discharge with conscience, diligence, and prayer, thou may
go on with comfort, contentment, and freedom from that torturing and racking
thoughtfulness; from those restless and cursed carkings of carnal worldlings,
wherein they basely languish, and lose their souls; and leave the success,
issue, and event of all thy labors and undertakings unto the Lord, whatsoever
it may be, resting sweetly, and ever relying upon that gracious promise, Heb.
13. 5. I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee.

In ordering and guiding the affairs of thy family, depend by faith upon Gods
blessing, the strength and sinew of all sound comfort, and true contentation
that way. See Psalm. 127.

In the loss of outward things for thy love, and service unto God; by
believing that Man of God, 2. Chron. 25. 9. The Lord is able to give thee much
more then this.

Nay, in the loss of all earthly things in every kind: see Habac. 3. 17, 18.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines:
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the
stalles: yet I will rejoice in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation.
Consider also for this purpose, Jobs patient blessing of God upon the surprise
and concurrence of an universal misery, Job 1. 21.

In pangs of the New Birth, spiritual infancy, weaknesses of faith, prayer,
godly sorrow, and other graces; by those cordial refreshing promises, Reu. 21.
6. Math. 5. 6. Isa. 42. 3. and 40. 11. and 57. 15.

In oppositions against the raising or restoration of spiritual buildings by
the Ministry of the Word: or in temptations against a man's personal
progress, and holding out against Gods ways unto the end; by renouncing our
own strength, disclaiming the arm of flesh, and crying in every encounter:
Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says Zech. 4. 6, 7.
the Lord of Hoasts, What art thou, O great mountain, etc?

In languishings and tremblings after relapse into some old, or fall into some
new sin; by such precious places as these: 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Luke 17. 4. 1. Sam.
12. 20. 1. John 1. 9. From this last place a reverend Divine collects this
comfort: If we see our unworthiness, and with broken hearts acknowledge it,
God is faithful and just to forgive it, be it never so great. But this is a
jewel fit only for the ear of a sincere Christian, when out of the
fearfulness of his distrustful spirit, he puts off all comfort, though
truly humbled, after ensnarement in some more special affrighting sin. Let
no swine trample upon it.

In all kinds of temptations, by the power of that promise, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
Nay, even amidst variety of them by obeying that precept, Iam. 1. 2. My
brethren, count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations.

In spiritual desertion, by refreshing, and resting thy sinking soul, in the
mean time until the Lord return, upon that surest Rock, Isa. 30. 18.
Blessed are all they that wait for him. Most blessed, dear, and sweetest
Sanctuary! If the Christian die in that waiting state, he shall be certainly
saved: For the holy Ghost pronounces him blessed.

In the deep, and almost despairing apprehensions of thine extreme vileness,
and, as it were, nothingnesse in grace, by apprehending that most merciful
promise from Gods own mouth, Isa. 43. 25.

In thy perplexed and troubled thoughts about return after backsliding; by
those comfortable encouragements, Ier. 3. 1, 12, 13, 14, 22. Hos. 14. 1, 2, 4.

In doubts of losing the love of God, and life of Grace; by consideration of
those passages in Gods Book, where it appears, that the love of God unto his
child, in respect of tenderness, and constancy, is infinitely dearer then that
of a most loving mother to her little one, Isai. 49. 15. stronger then the
stony Mountains, and Rocks of flint, Isa. 54. 10. as constant as the courses
of the Sun, and of the Moon, and of the Stars, and of the day, and of the
night, Ier. 31. 36. and 33. 20. nay, as sure, as God himself, Psalm. 89. 33,
34, 35.

In the Hail* storms of slanderous arrows, and empoysoned darts of disgrace,
by cleaving to most glorious promises, 1. Pet. 4. 14. Mat. 5. 11.

In the valley of the shadow of death; by an assurance of Gods merciful
omnipotent presence, Psalm. 23. 4.

In the extremity and depth of such desperate distresses, and perplexities;
wherein in thy present feeling, thou can see, and find no possibility of
help from Heaven or Earth, God or Man; but art both helpelesse and hopeless,
as the Church complains, Lam. 3. 18. by such like places as those, Isai. 33.
9, 10. 2. Chron. 20. 12. Genesis 22. 14. Exodus 14. 13. Psalm. 78. 65.

In every thing, or any thing that shall, or can possibly befall thee;
prosperity, or poverty; cross, or comfort; calmnesse of conscience, or
tempests of terror; life or death, etc. by extracting abundance of
unconquerable patience, and peace of soul, from those three heavenly golden
conduits of sweetest comfort, Romans 8. ver. 18, 28, 32.

Thus in any trouble of soul, body, good name, outward state, present, or to
come; thou may by the sovereign power of faith working upon the Word, not
only draw out the sting, and expel the poison of it; but also create a great
deal of comfort to thy truly-humbled soul, and maintain it in despite of all
mortal or infernal opposition, in a constant spiritual gladness. For all
those promises, whereupon thy heavy heart in such cases may repose, and refresh
it self, have their being from the blessed name Iehoua: see, Exo. 6. 3. and
therefore are as sure, as God himself: they are sealed with the bloody
sufferings of his only Son, and therefore as true, as truth it self: and,
if thou be in Christ, are all as certainly thine, as the heart in thy body, or
blood that runs in thy veins. Nay, and a little more for thy comfort, the
glory of Gods truth is mightily advanced, and himself extraordinarily pleased,
by thy more resolute, steadfast, and triumphant cleaving unto them. What a
blessed, sweet, and heavenly life then is the life of faith?

V. Apprehend in thy mind, and settle in thine heart, a true estimate, and
right conceit of the substance and power, marrow, and materials of
Christianity. Which does not consist, as too many suppose,

In outward shows, profession, talking: in holding strict points, defending
precise opinions, contesting against the corruptions of the times: in the work
wrought, external forms of religious exercises, set-taskes of hearing,
reading, conference, and the like: in some solemn outward extraordinary
abstinences and forbearances, censuring others, etc. But, Humilitas in
conuersatione, stabilitas in fide, verecundia in verbis, in factis iustitia, in
operibus misericordia, in moribus disciplina, iniuriam facere non nosse, and
factam tolerare posse, cum fratribus pacem tenere, Deum toto cord diligere,
amare in illo quod Pater est, timere quod Deus est, Christo nihil omnino
praeponere, quia nec nob^s ille quicquam praeposuit, charitati eius
inseparabilite^ adhaerere -- Quando de eius nomine, and honor certamen est,
exhibere in sermon constantiam, qua confitemur: in quaestione fiduciam, qua
congredimur: in morte patiemiam, qua coronamur. Hoc est cohaeredem Christi
velle esse, hoc est praeceptum De^facere, hoc est voluntatem Patris adimple^e,
Cyprian. de orat. Domin.
in righteousness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost: in meekness,
tender-heartednesse, love: in patience, humility, contentedness: in
mortification of sin, moderation of passion, holy guidance of the tongue: in
works of mercy, justice, and truth: in fidelity, painfulnesse in our
Callings, conscionable conuersing with men: in reverence unto superiors, love
of our enemies, an open-hearted real fruitful affectionatenesse, and bounty
to Gods people: in heauenlymindednesse, self-denial, the life of faith: in
dis-esteeme of earthly things, contempt of the world, resolute hatred of sin:
in approouing our hearts in Gods presence, a sweet communion with him,
comfortable longing for the coming of the Lord Jesus, etc.

Yet mistake me not; thou must make a show, profess and talk, if thou
would have Christ Jesus to own thee at that last and dreadful Day, Mark.
8. 38.

It is therefore an idle and brainelesse cavil of some lewd ignorant Lozels,
to say; We can by no means endure these shows; Cannot a man be religious to
himself, except he hang out his flag, and let all the world know it? For where
the power of Religion is, there will be the show also. Painted fire shines
not, ascends not, heates not: but true fire is ever inseparably attended with
these properties. We cannot put a Candle in a Lantern, but the light will
show it self through the horns: if true grace be planted in the heart, it
will shine forth in our words, gestures, actions, all carriages, and our whole
conversation. He that will take shows from the substance of Religion, let him
take brightness from the Sun, glistering from Gold, breathing from a
liue-body. Show and profession of Christ before men, is commanded, as well as
the substance and soundness of heart, Romans 10. 9, 10.

Thou must be a patron, and in some good measure, a practiser of precise
points, if ever thou will have true peace and assurance of walking in the
narrow path, that leads unto life: as, of walking precisely, Ephesians. 5. 15.
Being fervent in spirit, Romans 12. 11. Striving to enter in at the strait gate,
Luke 13. 24. Self-denial, 14. 26. Surpassing the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5. 20. Laying violent hands and hold upon the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 11. 12. In a word: of the way which is called holy,
and yet so spoken against every where, Act. 28. 22. For I mean only that
preciseness, which is commended unto us, and commanded by the blessed Spirit
in Gods pure and holy Word. I know, all passages of sanctification are too
precise; and paradoxes, intolerable and burdensome to flesh and blood, and in
the interpretation of worldly wisdom, which notwithstanding are easy and
sweet to mortified men.

Thou must stand at the staves end, against the sins of the times, and like
the Eagle, prune up thy self against a storm, or else thou art a temporizer.

Outward exercises of Religion, are as it were the body, without which, the
soul of Christianity has no existence.

Thou must be content to abridge, and confine thy Christian liberty at any
time, according to opportunities, and exigents, for the enlargement of Gods
glory, the building up of thy brother, and snaffling thine own rebellious
nature.

Thou may, and must judge by the fruits. It is Christ's Rule, Matthew. 7 16. If
therefore thou see the abominable and unsavory fruits of lying, swearing,
drunkenness, Sabbathbreaking, usury, scoffing at Religion, etc. hanging out in
the fight of the Sun; thou may justly censure the tree to be rotten, and
for the present, fuel for the fire of Hell. Thou may judge no man rashly,
nor of his final estate: (If we see a malefactor cast, and condemned for some
grievous crime, yet reprieued unto the next Assize; no man can say, he shall be
certainly hanged, because a pardon may be procured, and come from the King in
the mean time: it is so in the present case.) But thou may call a spade, a
spade; a drunkard, a drunkard; an usurer, an usurer. Otherwise, if thou dawbe
and dissemble, how shall thou ever be able to escape liablenesse to that
abomination, Prou. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just: even they both are abomination to the Lord? And to the
sting of that woe, Isai. 5. 20. Woe unto them that call evil, good; and good
evil; that put darkness for light; and light for darkness; that put bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Yet know, that speaking the evil thou
certainly know by another, must be seasonable, charitable and discreet:
not out of humor, spleen, imperiousness, at thy pleasure; but for Gods
honor, the good of the party, thine own discharge, upon a warrantable
calling, etc. according to those Rules I shall hereafter deliver for guiding
the tongue.

My meaning then in this point is; that those greater matters be dearliest
prized, and principally plied proportionably to their worth and weight: and yet
these lesser things not Math. ^3. 23.
neglected. It is too true, that those who are more fierce, and forward about
the ceremonials, and circumstantials, then truly hot and zealous in the
essentials, and substantials of Christianity, prove too often
vaine-gloriously, and proudly mounted upon that foul hellish fiend,
Hypocrisy, and posting apace toward some fearful Apostasy, or
Anabaptisticall frenzy.

VI. Let thy spirit, mindful of its own heavenly birth, immortal nature, and
everlasting home, ever generously fortify it self with victorious resolution
against worldliness, the canker and cut-throate of all heauenly-mindednes, and
hearty conversation above. Of all the foul fiends, that haunt the hearts of
carnal men, there is none that holds a stronger opposition, and counter-motion
to walking with God, then covetousness. Ambition, sensuality, and other ways
of death, cut off their slaves with an accursed disacquaintance, and
estrangement far enough from all comfortable access unto the Throne of
Grace: but affections nailed and glued to the Earth, have this pestilent
precedence, that they hold the remotest point of declination, from the warmth
and influence of any sweet communion with the Sun of righteousness, and
Gods glorious face. All earthly-minded men ordinarily, howsoever they may be
outwardly restrained and reserved, are secret deriders of the power of
godliness, holy strictness of the Saints, and mysteries of Grace. And the
Pharisees also, says Luke, chap. 16. 14. who were covetous, heard all these
things: and they derided him: even mocked, and made themselves merry with the
searching, and heartpiercing Sermons of the Son of God. Their hearts, and
hopes are wholly anchored upon the Earth, and locked up in their chests: and
therefore they dream of no other heaven, then their golden hoards, heaps of
wealth, and present temporal happiness. Whereas notwithstanding, one
refreshing glimpse shining, and shed into our hearts from Gods pleased face,
and well-grounded assurance of being His, is infinitely more worth then all the
Gold that ever the Sun made, or shall make while it stands in Heaven.

VII. Let thy holy affections be ever thoroughly warmed, and ravished Si amator
Dei esse vis, ^yncerissimis medullis, ca^que ^ijs ipsum d^lige ipsum a^a, illi
fl^gra, illi inhia, qu^ (...) nihil inuenis, quo melius, quo l^tius, quo
diuturnius, Aug. in Psalm. 85. Coelum and terra, and omnia quae in eis sunt, non
cessant mihi dicere, ^t amem Dominum meum! Tom. 9 page 1003.
extraordinarily with the love of God. To which, there are infinite inflaming
motives and Obligations.

1 He being absolutely considered, is immeasurably lovely. The most attractiue
objects of insatiable love, and al amiable excellencies, are eminently and
transcendently triumphant in him eternally; Beauty, Glory, Worth, Wisdom,
Greatness, Goodness, Holiness, Purity, any thing, every thing that is any
ways admirable and loueworthy.

2. Or consider Him in relation to thy self; and should thou every moment
through an interminable time, lay down ten thousand lives for His sake, thou
could never come near the requital of the least inch of His infinite love
toward thee, which reaches from everlasting, to everlasting. 1. He bore thee
in the bosom of this His free love from all eternity, and that so dearly,
that from the same eternity, He decreed that His own dear Son should die
for thee. 2. He brought thee out of the abhorred state of being nothing, into
the rank of his reasonable and noblest creatures. 3. He bought thee again,
when thou had wilfully lost thy self, with the hearts-blood of His only
Son. 4. He preserues thee every day from a thousand dangers, a thousand
deaths, which might seize upon thee, both from within, and from without. 5* He
will shortly crown thee with everlasting life, fullness of joy, and pleasures
at his right hand for evermore.

3. Thirdly, confider the unquenchable impatiencie of Christ's inflamed love
unto thee, now washed with His Blood, and beautified with His grace, Cant. 4.
9. Thou have ravished my heart, says He to the Church, and by consequent to
every true Christian, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my heart with
one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. Now love is of that alluring
nature, that many times it will draw love from a man, when there is no lovely
part in the party loving. What a deal of love then does the Sovereign Lord
of all goodness, the wellspring of all beauty, excellency, and sweetness
exact at our hands? especially since we are his mere creatures, in respect
both of our natural being, outward state, gracious state, and state of glory?
See how His spiritual amiablenesse is shadowed by outward beauties, Cant. 5.
10.

VIII. Prize the fruition of Gods pleased face, a nearer communion and
acquaintance with His blessed Majesty, the love and light of His countenance;
and thereupon a free and frequent access, with an humble boldness, unto the
throne of Grace, at a far higher and more invaluable rate, than heaven and
earth; as a very real fruitful fore-taste of eternal joys. For to say no
more at this time; If thou hold an holy familiarity with thy God, and He look
pleasedly upon thee, thou shall graspe Jesus Christ more sweetly and feelingly
in the arms of thy Faith; partake more plentifully of the joyful freedom,
presence, and communication of His comforting Spirit; be guarded more strongly
and narrowly by His glorious Angels; suck more sweetness and heavenly Manna
out of the Ministry, and other His blessed Ordinances; walk in safety
amongst the creatures, like an unconquerable Lion: Thou shall be in a league
with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace
with thee: when thou go, thy gate shall not be strait; and when thou
runnest, thou shall not fall: when thou sleep, thy sleep shall be sweet;
thou shall dwell safely, and none shall make thee afraid: Thou shall never more
be afraid of any evil tidings, or of destruction when it comes: when thou
passest through the waters, thy God shall be with thee; and through rivers, they
shall not ouerflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, etc. And if at any time thou
be seized upon with any cross or calamity from any of the creatures; any
trouble or temptation, from man or Devil; any lowering or cruelty from the
iniquity of the times, or persecuters of the Truth; yet the refreshing beams
of Gods pleased face shining upon thy heart, through the darkness of such
discomforts, will sweetly mitigate, revive, and infinitely make amends for all.
The poison and curse of them shall never come near thy soul. The Lord in the
mean time, like an Eagle flutttering about her nest, will Deuteronomy. 32. 11.
most tenderly defend and protect thee, Esa. 31. 5. and at length most
certainly come like a young Lion roaring on his prey for thy rescue and glorious
enlargement, Isa. 31. 4.

IX. Labor by a constant watch to keep thy heart in a spiritual temper
still, and still sweetly content, and fruitfully conversant in the Mystery of
Christ, and Secrets of His Kingdom, (...) Ephesians. 3. 4.
which thou shall more easily do; If thou first rejoice in God, his Word and
Graces, as thy chiefest joy, and greatest advantage. 2. By all earthly things,
be drawn to the love of heavenly. For though God has appointed but one
Sabbath in seven days for his more solemn public worship, yet to a
Christian, every day is sanctified to be a rest from all the deeds of the
flesh, wherein he is to walk with his God, and show forth the religious
keeping of his heart and good conscience, in every action of his whole life; so
making every passage of his particular Calling, a part of Christian obedience,
and duty unto God. 3. Let the nobleness of thine enlarged Spirit, as
infinitely disdain to be any ways, upon any terms, in bondage to the
corruptions of the times; so find a far sweeter relish, and take
incomparably more contentment in the services of thy Lord, and his holy
Ordinances, then in all his outward benefits, and favors of this life. For as
the best of these abused, will most certainly at the Bar of God, turn
scourges and Scorpions to the worldling; conscience; and in the mean time,
there is no Quid v^sper vc hat (...)*
man so assured of his honor, of his riches, health, or life; but that he may
be deprived of either, or all, the very next hour, or day to come; so the
other will prove unto the Christian, having been conscionably and constantly
exercised in them, as a rich stock, to bring in comfort, patience, and inward
peace, in his most need and greatest extremity. 4. As Soon as thou discouerest
any spiritual weakness or decay, any extraordinary assault, temptation,
deadness, etc. complain betime, cry mightily unto God, give him no rest;
neither give over seeking, until he return unto thy soul, with power, and
life again. If ordinary means will not prevail, press upon him with
extraordinary: if then he do not revive thee with woonted quickening vigor,
wait with a patient wakefull longing of all the powers of thy soul; and then
all this while thy soul is still in its true spiritual temper, and a most
blessed state. See Isa. 30. 18. 5. Decline watchfully all occasions of falling
from thy first love, feruencie, and heauenly-mindednesse: as spiritual pride,
known hypocrisy, desire to be rich, discontinuance of thine intimatenesse
with the godly, neglect of thy particular Calling, or daily watch over thy
heart; ungodly company, form in religious duties, coldness and customarinesse
in the use of the means, etc. 6. Suffer not thine affections to be chained
down, and set too much upon those things which the common sort and greatest
part of men seek after insatiably, and slauishly sink under; praise, profit,
credit, acceptance with the world, favor of great Ones; mirth, pleasures,
ease, fear, sorrow, earthly contentment, preferment, wealth, long life, or any
worldly thing: but debase, and dis-esteeme all other delights in respect of
doing Gods will; which should ever be unto thee meat and drink, thy chiefest
and choicest recreation, and only Paradise upon earth.

X. Let thy soul full Anima quae amat, ascendit frequenter, and currit
familiariter per plate as coelestis Jerusalem, visi^ando Patriarchas and
Prophetas, saluando Apostolos, admirando exerci^us Martyrum, and Confessorum,
etc. Aug. Tom. 9. page 1003.
often so are aloft upon the wings of faith, unto the glory of the Empyrean
Heaven, where God dwells, and bathe it self beforehand with many a sweet
meditation in that everlasting bliss above. Oh think with thy self, (though
it far pass the reach of any mortal thought) what an infinite inexplicable
sweetness it will be, to look for ever upon the glorious Body of Jesus
Christ, shining with incomprehensible beauty; and to consider, that even every
vein of that blessed Body bled to bring thee to heaven: and that it being
with such excess of glory hypostatically united unto the second person in the
Trinity, has honored and advanced thy nature, in that respect, far above the
brightest Cherub! To say nothing of the beauty and brightness of that
euer-blessed Place, that vnapprochable Light, which besets Gods dreadful
Throne, the walking arm in arm with the Angels of God, that everlasting
joyful communion, and conuersing with the dearest Christian friends, and all
the crowned Saints, and innumerable felicities more, which infinitely surpass
in excellency and sweetness, the comprehension of the largest heart, and
expression of any Angels tongue: contemplate principally the Fountain of all
thy bliss; how the mighty JEHOVAH, God blessed for ever, will power out of
Himself, by the influence of Beatificall Vision, as they call it, perpetual
rivers of unutterable joys, and pleasures upon thy glorified Body and Soul,
through all eternity; even as the Sun powers out his beams and shining every
day af^esh upon the world, without emptiness or end: and with such variety,
(for he is infinite) that they shall be unto thee, as fresh, as new, as
sweet, as rauishing, millions of years after thou have dwelt in those
Mansions of rest, as they were, the very first moment thou enteredst that
blisfull Place. Such fixed considerations as these, of things above, will serve
as notable helps to draw and keep thy heart Heauen-ward, and may mightily
move thee to delight in God, and to hold it the sweetest life upon earth, to
walk with him in the ways of Purity and Peace. Methinkes, if a man do but
once a day seriously and solemnly thus cast up the eye of his Faith, upon that
neuer-fading Crown of Life, which after an inch of time, shall eternally rest
upon his head, the goodly splendor thereof, and beams of that incomparable
joy, should be able to dispell those mists of fading vanities, and hurtful
fumes of honors, riches, and earthly pleasures, which this great dunghill of
the World, heated by the fire of inordinate lust, does euaporate, and interpose
between the sight of the soul and celestial Bliss: So that he might with
more affectionate freedom, and contempt of earth, have his conversation above;
and turn the current of all his delights, love, and longings, with more
resolution and constancy toward his heavenly home.

These Preparatiues thus premised, I proceed to some general directions for a
more comfortable walking in the way that is called Holy.

1. First, and before all other things, have a special eye Man. 6 33.
and attendance to a sincere, constant, and fruitful performance of holy
duties, Gods services. And to say nothing punctually and particularly at this
time, of private Nec solum vobis sufficiat quod in Ecclesia diuinas lectiones
auditis, sed etiam ^n domibus vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes
requi^ite (...)* August. de (...), (...) 5^.
reading the Scriptures, public hearing the Word, personal Prayer, and with
thy yoke fellow, if thou live in that estate, singing of Psalms, Meditation,
Conference, days of humiliation, etc. of which thou must proportionably make
conscience in their due place, observing also in them the ensuing Cautions: for
a known gross, customary neglect of any holy duty, religious exercise,
divine Ordinance, in its season, may bring a dampe upon the rest, and a
consumption upon the whole body of Christianity; I say, to leave these and
the like, in their courses and turns to be performed also with all good
conscience and following Cautions, I only at this time purposely advise, for
the better sanctifying thy self and all about thee, to a more comfortable and
successful managing of all affairs, businesses, and vnder-takings, either
spiritual or civil; that thou being Master of a Family, for I single out
such an one for instance, be ever sure to glorify God amidst thy people, by
Ante omnes actus seculi, debemus actus habere pietatis, qui nos quiescentes, et
dormientes in lectulis custodiuit. Quis enim nisi Deus dormientem custodit
hominem? qui ita resolutus in somnum, et oblitus sui vigoris humani, a se
alienus efficitur, vt nesciat quid ipse sit, vbinam demoretur, adesse sibi
certe ipse non possit. Necessarius igitur Deus adest dormientibus, quia
dormientes sibi adesse non possunt, et a noctu^ nis insidijs genus hominum ipse
custodiat; quia id temporis ad custodiendum alter nemo peruigilat. Debeo ergo
illi gratiam, qui vt ego securus dormiam, ille peruigilat. Ipse enim nos
Deusituros cubitum quodam gremio quietis suscipit; et Thesauro pacis recondito
seruat; et caliginum quadam tuitione in lucem defendit, etc. Ambr. Lib. S^rm.
Sermon. 43.
Morning and Sed and cum v^spera diem claudit, ipsi debemus per psalterium
laudem dicere, and gloriam eius modulata suauitat^ concinere. -- Hoe autem vt
faciamus, fratres, non solum doce^ur ratione; sed etiam admonemur exemplis.
Nonne enim videmus minutissimas aues, cum illucescentem diem aurora producit,
in quibusdam nidorum cubiculis varia dulcedine personare, and id studiose agere
priusquam procedant, vt Creatorem suum, quia loquela non possunt, suauitate
demulceant? Et quemadmodum vnaquaeque earum, quoniam confessione nequit*
modulis prodat obsequium; ita vt videatur sibi deuotius gratias agere, quae
dulcius personauit; hoe etiam pacto diei cursu similiter facere? Quid ergo sibi
vult ista certis temporibus disposita cantilena, et iugis intentio; nisi
gratiarum quaedam sit immoderata confessio? Pastori enim suo aui^ i^noxia, quia
sermon non potest, suauitate blanditur. Habent enim et aues Pastorem suum;
sicut ait Dominus, Respicite volatilia coeli, quoniam non nent, neque me^unt;
et Pater vester qui est in coelis pascit illa. At quibus tandem cibis pascuntur
aues? vilissi nis scilicet and terrenis. Aues ergo propter viles esca^ gratias
agunt; ^u pretiosissimis epulis pasce^is, and ingratus es? Quis igitur non
erubescat sensum hominis habens, sine Psalmorum celebritate diem claudere; cum
ipsae aues ad gratificandum Psalterij suauitate persultent; and eius gloriam,
non versuum dulcedine personare, cuius laudem volucres modulata cantilena
pronunciant* Imitare ergo, frater, minutissim as aue^ mane, and vespere
Creatori g^atias referendo. Et si es deuotior, imitare Lusciniam, cui quum ad
dicendas lauds dies sola non sufficit; nocturna spacia peruigili cantilena
decurrit, etc. Idem ibid. Aue^ cum eunt cubitum, quasi peracto laetae munere
aethera cantu mulcere consuerunt, vt decursi vel adoriendi noct^rni iuxta ac
di^rni temporis lauds suo referant Creatori. Magnum incentiuum excitandae
nobis deuotionis: Quis enim sensum hominis gerens, non erubescat sine Psalmorum
celebritate diem claudere, cum etiam minutissimae aues solenni deuotione, and
dulci carmine ortus dierum ac noctium prosequantur? Idem Hexam. lib. 5. ca. 12.
Ad omne opus quodcunque inchoaueris facere, primum inuoca Deum, and gratias ei
age, and cum consummaueris illud, similiter fac, August. Tom. 4* p^r. 2. page
540.
Evening sacrifice of Prayers and praises to his heavenly Highness.

In the discharge of which maine duty of Christianity utterly neglected by
the most, and empoysoned to many, by their resting only in the work wrought,
take heed of growing into form, customarinesse, Non ergo de labijs tantummodo
tua procedat oration: Animo totus intend, intra in recessum pectoris tui, totus
ingredere. Non te perfunctorium videat ille, cui te placere desideras. Videat
quia ex cord oras, vt te ex cord orantem dignetur audire, Ambr. de Sacra.
lib. 6. cap. 3.
perfunctorinesse, which will most certainly draw the very lifeblood and
breathing out of those holy businesses; being ever the canker and cutthroate of
all true godliness, and gracious acceptance with God. Labor therefore by a
reverent recollecting all the powers of thy soul, and fresh renewing and
strengthening thy watch at every several time, to preserve heart and spirit in
those daily devotions, and family duties. Which thou shall the better do, if
thou look to, 1. A right disposition before: 2. A spiritual behavior in the
doing: 3. An holy carriage afterward.

1. For the first: 1. Come not before God with any sin lying upon thy
conscience unrepented of, or delighted in, see Psalm. 66. 18. 2. Neither with
passion, wrath, or heartburning against Cum omni tempore, quantu^ fleri potest,
Christianus vir iracundiam debeat temperate; maxim vero quando ad orationem
accedit; ne perturbet animum suum indignatio; ne irae quidam furor impediat
orationem. Magis placido accede pectore. Quid enim irasceris? Seruus peccauit.
Tu accedis ad orationem; vt tua tibi delicta donentur, and alij indignaris?
Ambr. de Sacr. l. 6. c. 4. Duobus modis oration impeditur, ne impetrare quisque
possit, quod postulat: nempe si adhuc homo mala committit; aut si peccanti in
se ex toto cord non dimittit, Bern. De modo been viuen. Ser. 49.
any. 3. Stir up and quicken the actiuenesse, and particular apprehensions of
thy O homo, faciem tuam non audebas ad coelum attollere; oculos tuos in terra^
dirigebas; and subito accepisti gratiam Christi; omnia tibi peccata dimissa
sunt. -- Ideo praesume, non de operatione tua, sed de Christi gratia. Gratia
enim saluati estis, Apostolus ait. Non ergo hic arrogantia est, sed fides,
Ambr. de Sacr. lib 5. cap. 4. In expos. Orat. Domin.
Faith, about the things desired and deprecated. In a word, in the Apostles
words, for that is my meaning; 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Lift up holy hands without wrath and doubting. Bring, 1. Resolution against
all sin, in respect of God: 2. Peace and appeased passions, in respect of
men: 3. Assurance to be heard, in respect of thy self. Or thus: Before thou
fall upon thy knees, shake off three empoysoning and heavy hindrances, which
will clog and clip the wings of thy prayers, that they will never be able to
ascend up unto Heaven: sin, anger, distrust: And possess thy heart of three
excellent helps, and inflaming furtherances: 1. A right apprehension of Gods
dreadfulnesse, purity, power, etc. 2. A true sense of thy own vileness,
abominablenesse, nothingnesse, etc. 3. A hearty suruay of the infiniteness,
and vnexpressablenesse of Gods bounty, blessings, and many compassionate
forbearances toward thee.

2. For the second, 1. Repel with an undaunted spirit, and resolute contempt,
Satan's blasphemous Solet nequissimu^ hostis tam fordidas nonnunquam and impias
cogitationes inserere menti, vt qui tentatur, dum su^m illud putat esse quod
cogitat, dete^orem se per spiritum immundum proposito suo arbitretur effectum:
multoque purio^em ammam habuisse se credat, cum adh^c res seculi amare^. Vult
enim ijs, quibus ^nuidet, callidissimus (...) horrorem proposi^i ex
desperatione facere sanctitaris vt eos obsidente tristitia, etsi a proposito
non re^ocat, certe re^ineat a profectu, August. epist. 142.
iniections, if he be busy that way (and he is ordinarily most spiteful
against the best businesses,) and the rather, because if they be heartily
abominated and abandoned with heart-rising and loathing, they are put upon the
Devils score, and are only thy crosses, not thy In illis cogitationibus, quae
repugnanti, and inuito animo suggeruntur, quibus men's cum horrore quodam
renititur ac res^it, -- non est peccatum sine consensu mentis, Idem ibid.
Onero^as cogitationes in anima iusti ^las accipe, quibus resistere vult, and
tamen non potest, sed velit, nolit, irruit in oculos mentis muscarum Aegypti
pestilentia, and perstrepunt ranae in penetralibus cordis eius. Cogitat homo
plerunque terribilia de ^ide, horribilia de diuinitate, and per phantas^ata
corporearum imaginum trans^otatus, illa sentit, quae vel in confessione euomere
peccator oneratus exhorret: and quanto districtius non exhibet membra sua, arma
iniquitatis peccato, tanto strictius huiusmodi spiritu quatitur and pulsatur.
Cum enim ille insatiabilis homicida, ab exteriori sensualitate se videt
exclusum, interiori collectis viribus agg^editur. Sed spiritualis homo qui
omnia iudicat, illius astutias non ignorant. Rep^imit quod potest: quod autem
non potest reprimere, tolerat: quia etsi latratum canis sustinet, morsum non
timet. Latrat enim cum suggerit: tunc vero mordet, cum ad consensum pe^trahit:
sed cum non ingerit, quod suggessit, tunc non vulnerat, sed coronat; qui etsi
^entientem cruciat, non obligat non consentientem, Bern. lib. de Consc. cap. de
multip. variet. cogitat.
sins. 2. Watch over the World with all care and timely opposition, that if
it be possible, not an earthly Quando enim orans cogitat de vxore, de filijs,
de mancipijs, de domo, de possessionibus, depecoribus, de militia, de lucro, de
capsis, et alijs, quae sunt innumerabilia, quae super cor incaute orantis
ascendunt: nonne tibi videtur haec synagoga malorum? Ch^ysost. ^om. 13 in cap.
6. Mat. Plerunque negotiator veni^ns ad orationem; aut auarus de pecunia
cogitat; alter de lucro; alter de honor; alter de cupiditate; et p^tat quod
eum Deus possit audire? Ambro. lib. 6. De sacram. cap. 5. Cogitatio omnis
secularis et carnalis absced at, nec quicquam tunc animus, quam id solum
cog^tet, quod precatur. -- Quae autem segnitia est alienati et capi ineptis
cogitationibus et prophanis, cum Dominum deprecaris: quasi fit aliud, quod
magis deb^as cogitate, quam quoth cum Deo loquaris. Quomodo te audiri a Deo
postulas; cum te ipse no^ audias? Vis esse Deum memorem tui, quando tu ipse
memor ^ui non sis? Cyprian. de (...) Dominic^.
thought may creep into thy heart all the while. 3. Strive to hold thy heart
in heat, as well in confession as deprecation; in deprecation as petition; in
intercession as for personal blessings; as well for purity of heart, as
pardon of sin, thorowout; though there may be difference of heat, and
crying unto God, according to the necessity and neerenesse of the passage in
the prayer, to our particular, or the more universal good desire. Prayer is
the creature of the holy Ghost, every part whereof, we should heartily wish,
and earnestly wrestle, that He would proportionably animate as it were, and
thoroughly enlyue, even as the soul does the body.

For the third, with all intention and watchfulness, pursue and press after
the things prayed for, by a timely apprehension, fruitful exercise, and utmost
improuement of all occasions, ordinances, helps, and heavenly offers, which
may any ways concur to the compassing of them. For instance: Thou prayest
for knowledge: walk then, when thou have done, with a constant endeavor, in
the strength of this prayer, through all the means, reading, hearing,
conferring, practicing (for even that also is a means to increase knowledge,
Ioh. 7. 17. especially experimental) catechizing, etc. for the storing of thy
understanding with all sacred illuminations and holy senses of Gods saving
Word. Let no opportunity pass, be violent in catching all occasions, for the
enriching thy brain with such heavenly stuff, and hoarding up in thine heart
such hidden treasures. If thou cryest after knowledge, says Solomon, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding, Chap. 2. 3. there is the prayer; If
thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hidden treasures,
verse. 4. there is the endeavor: Then shall thou understand the fear of the
Lord, and find the knowledge of God, verse. 5. there is the blessing: see Psalm.
27. 4. Again, thou prayest to be preserved out of ill company: thou do
well: but when thou have done, do thou make conscience of that counsel of
Solomon, Prou. 4. 14, 15. and by the power and impression thereof, confront and
oppose the cunning inticements, and cursed importunities of thine old
companions, and brethren in iniquity? Enter not, says Solomon, into the path
of the wicked; and Prou. 4. 14, 15.
go not in the way of wicked men. Avoid it, pass not by it; turn from it,
and pass away, etc. He that makes Prayer the end of Prayer, prays only to
pray, and rests in his prayer, thinking when that holy duty is done, that there
is no more to be done, prays to no purpose. There must be good doings, as
well as good duties. He that does not earnestly, and in good sadness
afterward set himself against sins deprecated, and pursue with zeal and
conscience the graces and good things petitioned, his prayer is not worth a
button.

II. Decline idleness, the very rust and canker of the soul, the Devils
cushion, pillow, chief reposall; his very tide-time of temptation, as it were,
wherein he carries with much ease, and without all contradiction, the currnet
of our corrupt affections, to any cursed sin. And be diligent with conscience
and faithfulness, in some lawful, honest, particular Calling (a good
testimony, if other saving marks concur of truth, and true heartedness, in
thy general Calling of Christianity) not so much to gather gold, and engrosse
wealth, as for necessary and moderate provision for family and posterity: and
in conscience and obedience to that common charge, laid upon all the sons and
daughters of Adam to the Worlds end; In the sweat of thy face shall thou Genesis
3. 19.
eat bread, till thou return unto the ground. 1. But ever go about the
affairs of thy Calling with a heavenly mind, seasoned, and sanctified with
habitual prayer, eiaculatory eleuations, willingness, if God so please, to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ; pregnant with heavenly matter and
meditation, picked out of the passages of thy present business. For instance;
Let the Husbandman in Seedtime, collect this sacred Soliloquie, and heavenly
thought; If I now take not the season, I shall have no harvest, but starve in
winter. So proportionably; if I gather not Grace in this Sunshine of the
Gospel, and day of my visitation, I shall find nothing but horror upon my bed
of death, and burn in Hell for ever hereafter, etc. 2. In all the civil
businesses of thy personal Calling, let thy eye and aim be upon Gods glory,
as the prime and principal end of all thy actions, 1. Cor. 10. 31. and in them
seek and serve that glorious end of Gods honor, not so much in procuring
thine own, as the good of Church, Commonwealth, Neighbors and Family, etc.
3. By earthly employments, do not become an earth-worme. In using the world,
grow not a worldling, and such an one as finds more sweetness and pleasure in
worldly dealings, and the coming in of thy Profits, then in thy heavenly
traffic and treasures through the practice and trade of Christianity.

III. In thy solitary seasons: 1. Single out some special profitable choice
matter to meditate on all the while; thereby both to prevent the ordinary
intrusion of many vain, foolish, noy some thoughts, impertinent wanderings, and
woeful trifling out thy precious time; and also to keep thy spirits, and the
powers of thy soul aworke, lest as milstones wanting grist, grate and grind
one another, they waste themselves in a fruitless barren melancholy. When
can thou be alone, and not have just cause, either to busy thy mind about
some lawful affairs of thy Calling; or wrestle with some corruption, which
troubles the peace of thy conscience, or break out into the praises of God, or
some other holy passages of heavenly meditation, whereof there is so great
variety and store? 2. Watch and withstand, with all godly iealosie and care,
two dangerous evils: 1. Thoughts of pleasures Nec ex (...) vita nostra, nec ex
praesenti delectari debemus. Hoc enim monet Apostolus, Romans 6. 21. Quem ergo
fructum, etc? Reuocat a recordandis, cum delectatione praeteritis, and cum
quadam concupiscentia fruendis, ne redeamus cord in Aegyptum, Aug. in Psalm. 57.
from thy youthful sins, and unregenerate time, which at such times are
ready to make re-entry, and very eager, being aided by the Devils cunning and
hearts-corruption, to re-infect and pollute thy soul again with sensual
filth, and renewed guiltiness. And in this point, take heed lest the Devil
delude thee in the glory of an Angel, or by the flashes of his counterfeite
light, cast into thy heart his secret wildfire, and sparks of lust. For in
thy solitary musing, thou may resume into thy memory, the Recordati volo
transactas foeditates meas, and carnales corruptiones animae meae, non quod ea^
amem, sed vt amem Te, Deu^ meus, Idem confess. lib. 2. cap. 1.
abominations of thy former life, especially of that sin, which was thy
miniondelight, and darling-pleasure, upon purpose to bewail and detest them;
and yet without a very vigilant eye, the Devil in sinuating some secret
ticklings of woonted sinful sweetness; that which was intended for an
exercise and increase of repentance, may cursedly end in the iteration and
re-inioyment of old filthy pleasures. 2. Take heed also at such times of acting
any new sins, upon sensual suppositions, and imaginary plots: as of
worldliness, lust, speculatiue wantonness, ambition, revenge, dishonouring
Gods providence by an unnecessary distrustful forecasting of fearful
accidents upon thy self, family, goods, posterity, the State, etc. Some
sons of Belial there are, who make no bones, as they say, of acting all
manner of uncleanness (horrible impuritie in the inward parts!) by the mere
work of imagination. When they cannot compass and attain the real
accomplishment of their furious and filthy proiects in outward acts, and upon
objects abroad, their abominable desires rebounding as it were, with an
impetuous and unsatisfied rage upon their heated and enuenomed passions, act
and execute any kind of villainy, upon the invisible forge of a cursed Alius
iuri se luxuriae subdit, atque ante mentis oculos schemata turpium
perpetrationum fingit: and cum effectus non tribuitur operis, hoc crebrius
agitur intention cogitationis. Alius i^ae se Domino strauit, and quid in
cord, nisi ^urgia etiam quae desunt peragit? Intra semeripsum contumelias
profer^, and recipit; recept^ autem durius respondet; and cum qui obuiet nullus
^ssit, magnis clamoribus ^ixas in cord componit. -- Alius se tyrannidi
superbiae subijcit, -- Honorum sublimium insulas appetit, exaltari successibus
exquirit, totumque quod esse desiderat, sibi apud semeripsum in cogitationibus
depingit; iam quasi tribunali prasidet; iam sibi parere obsequia subiectorum
videt; iam caeteris eminet, iam alijs mala irrogat, alijs, quae irrogauerint,
recompensat. Iam apud semetipsum stipatus cune^ ad publicum procedit; iam
quibus obsequijs fulciatur, conspicit; qui tamen haec cogitans solus re petit;
iam alia conculcat, alia subleuat, iam de conculcatis satisfacit odijs, iam de
subleuatis recipit fauo^ (...)* Greg. Moral. lib. 4. cap. ^8.
contemplation. It is strange to consider, how many, who carry a counterfeit
heaven in their outward behavior, should harbor such execrable hells in their
hearts! 3. Let not pass such a golden opportunity for thy spiritual good,
without some sweet comfortable conference with thy God in secret. Call and cry
out toward Heaven for some special Graces, by which thou may be most
enabled to glorify God most, and to keep in thy breast a cheerful and
heavenly spirit, as for precious and incomparable jewels to be purchased with
the loss of ten thousand Worlds, but not to be parted with for as many Worlds
as thou have hairs upon thy head. Beg with greatest earnestness, and
extraordinary intention of spirit, mortifying grace, and spiritual strength,
for the crushing and conquering of those special lusts, and unruly passions
that most hant thee, and hurt the peace of thy conscience. Let a sorrowful
suruay of all thy sins draw from thee some hearty groan, and fervent
eiaculations for mercy and pardon: or a summary view of Gods blessings and
favors toward thee, fill thy heart with many joyful, lowly, and most
thankful thoughts, etc. Thus, or in the like manner, let some part of thy
solitary time be sure to be seasoned with holy musings, and talk with God.

IV. Concerning company, I advise,

I. That thou never cast thy self into wicked company, or press amongst the
profane, especially upon choice, voluntarily and delightfully; and abide no
longer with them at any time, upon any occasion, then thou have sound warrant,
and a calling thereunto. It is uncomely, and incompatible with good conscience;
it is not for the honor or comfort of Gods children, to keep company, or
familiarly converse with graceless Vide quam iusti, quam integri esse debeamus
and sancti, quibus postquam male conuersari non licet, sed nec male
conuersantes agnoscere, August. Tom. 9. page 1117. Sicut qui Diabolum sequitur,
sanctorum collegium affectu and opere aspernatur: ita quia Deo perfect
adhaeserit, impiorum consortium nequaquam admitrit, Gregor in Psalm. 6. Melius
est habere malorum odium, quam consortium, Bern. lib. De modo been viuendi,
Sermon. 60.
men.

In which point to prevent, misconceits and mistakings, consider there is a
double fellowship:

1. Common, I have a ground of this distinction, from a most learned, holy and
reverend Divine, who speaks thus: In this place, says he, we be admonished to
beware, lest at any time we join our selves to those that are foolish and
ungodly. Not that it is altog^ther unlawful to have any dealing with them: but
that we may not come too near unto them: For to eat and drink with them, to
dwell in the same town by them, and such other common duties, be not
unlawful. But to join in marriage with them, to make them privy to our
counsels, or to use them as more near and special friends, this is unlawful,
and this is here forbidden, Greenham, Medit. upon verse. 7. of Prou. 14. Nay,
the very Philosopher intimates it in his since: There is (says he) a twofold
conuersing: 1. General and common, whereunto the times, affairs, the voyages
and encounters do daily lead, without our choice or voluntary consents. 2.
Special, in affected and desired company, wherein there is conference,
communication, priuity and familiarity.
cold, and more general. In treading, bargayning, buying, selling, saluting,
eating and drinking together; and in other passages of humanity, and
intercourse of civil society; to which charity, nature, necessity, or the
exigents of our general, or particular calling do warrantably lead us.

2. Special, dear, intimate: In consultations and counsels about matters of
special secrecy, greatest weight, and highest consequence. In spiritual
refreshments, religious conferences, prayer, marriage, all manner of nearest
engagements. In a free vnreserued communication of their souls, mutual
exchange of the thoughts of their hearts, faithful revelations of the
spiritual state of their consciences one unto another, and in such like
blissful pangs and passages of Christian love, and ardent sanctified
affection.

The former of these the Christian must of necessity entertain, and exercise
sometimes with the men of this world; except he will go out of the world, 1.
Cor. 5. 10. But the second fellowship is the Saints peculiar The Christian is
bound out by the Book of God, the Law of heaven, upon his allegiance to his
Lord and Sovereign, and by the common Charter of Gods children, from
conuersing with delightful intimatenesse, and from the exchange and exercise
of those special passages of dearest acquaintance with profane men, children
of darkness, and enemies of God. For these and the like reasons,

1. He thereby incurres a double hazard: The one, of infection with sin: the
other, of infliction of punishment. He entangleth himself with access^riues to
their sins, danger of infection, ^ablenesse to scandal, punishment and shame.


1. He that touches Pitch, says the Wise man, shall be defiled therewith; and
he that has fellowship with a proud man, shall be like unto him. Can a man
take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Can a man go upon hot
coals, and his feet not be burnt? Prou. 6. 27, 28. Neither can any familiarly
and intimately converse with a profane man, but he shall be corrupted.

There is a strange attractiue, and imperious power in ill company, to empoyson
and pervert even the best dispositions:

1. By holding familiar correspondence with lewd companions, there first
steals upon a man a secret and insensible dislike of his former sober courses:
He begins within himself to censure, and renounce his former ways of
innocence, and harmless conversation; as too restrayning and distasteful to
the ordinary liberty of youth, and common frailty of flesh and blood; and as
too much dissweetned, and straightened with unnecessary strictness and
abridgement.

2. Secondly, there slyly insinuates into his heart a pleasing approbation, and
delightful assent to the sensual courses, and sinful pleasures of his lewd
companions.

3. Thirdly, there follows a resolved, and habitual change of affections and
conversation, a transformation into the manners and conditions of those with
whom he does so familiarly converse.

4. Fourthly, he grows ill-affected, and disconceited toward good men and
godly exercises, because in their profane, boisterous, and furious
conuenticles of good-fellowship, he hears them daily rayled upon, iested at,
belyed, and slandered; and not a man amongst them to take their parts, and to
stand on Gods side. And therefore by little and little, he himself is also
transformed into a scoffing Ishmael, a breathing-Deuill, and so becomes at
last, as much the child of hell, as any of that graceless company and damned
crew. Thus, and by such steps and degrees as these, many, many times especially
in the Uniuersities, and Innes of Court, of good nature, honest disposition,
and perhaps religious education, are by little and little caught and fearfully
corrupted, and at length brought to horrible and utter confusion both of
reputation and outward state, both of soul and body, by the infectious
villainies of lewd and naughty companions.

But ordinarily Gods children are not in such danger from notorious sinners,
and from men of such desperate and reprobate conversation. For who in his right
wits will run upon a man which he clearly sees has the plague sore running
upon him? What Christian in his right mind spiritually, having any fear of
God in his heart, life in his soul, or tenderness in his conscience, will
delightfully thrust himself into the company of swearers, drunkards, scorners,
filthy talkers, profane iesters, or any fellows of such infamous rank?
especially since the soul is a thousand times more capable of the contagion of
sin, then the body of any infectious disease?

The hurt which the Christian does take in this regard, is most from merely
civil men, as such as only profess in 1. Tim. 3. 5.
form; who being more tolerable and plausible comp anons, and yet
disacquainted with the great Mystery of Godliness, unseasoned with the power
of inward sanctification, and unpracticed in the ways of sincerity, do
secretly and insensibly infuse, if not a notorious infection with some
scandalous sin; yet many times a fearful defection from zeal,
forwardness, and feruencie in the ways and services of God. Throw a blazing
firebrand into the snow, or rain, and its brightness and heat will be
quickly put out and quenched: let a Christian but for a while abandon his holy
conference, and comfortable communion with Gods children, and plunge himself
into the company of those who are but cold and careless, lazy and lukewarm
Professors; and he shall in very short time find his zeal to be very much
cooled, his forwardness abated, the tenderness of his conscience too much
qualified with worldly wisdom; much dullness of heart, deadness of spirit,
drowzinesse, and heartlesnesse in his affections to holy things, and an
universal decay of his graces insensibly to grow upon him.

In this respect many Christians do themselves much wrong, and afflict their
souls with many unnecessary spiritual miseries. For they do sometimes
unadvisedly, by reason of kindred, for old acquaintance, advantage, and carnal
contentment, because of the worldly wisdom, immunity from gross sins, and
other good parts of the parties, hold a too near, intimate, and delightful
correspondence with such as are but only civil men, or Pharisees at the best,
with whom spending most of their time, and they wanting both heart and skill to
uphold any holy conferences, or to afford any reciprocal or mutual help, in
the feeling passages of sanctification, are occasions to put Gods Children out
of use and ure with the language of Canaan, from the embracement of many
joyful considerations, and exercise of those comfortable Meditations, and holy
conversation above, which Christian company would occasionally and seasonably
put into them, and keep fresh and working in their minds; and by consequent,
bereave them thereby of much zeal, comfort, feelings of Gods favor, joyful
springings of heart, boldness in their ways, cheerfulness in the exercises
of Religion, and that comfortable fruition of other prerogatives of
Christianity; which many other of their brethren do, and they, by the benefit
of religious companions, and delightful conuersing with the Saints, might
plentifully enjoy.

Apprehend this passage aright: I say, a Christian may be much worsened and
weakened in his graces, by companying too much, and conuersing delightfully
with the mere civil man, or Whited Tombs: For he may spend with such men
whole weeks, nay, months and years, and have not one word of sanctified
discourse, and holy talk ministered unto him. Scarce a word to be had from
them of the Word of God, and way to heaven; no conference of the secrets of
Sanctification, of perplexities of conscience, of their everlasting abode
together in the Mansions of heaven. Motions that way would be very irksome
and tedious unto them: such talk would quickly beget silence, melancholy,
sadness, and a desire to break off company. Now the Christian by this means,
neither having his tongue exercised, nor his ears much acquainted with
edifying Christian discourse, grows neglectiue of storing his memory with holy
things, vnzealous, and cold in the apprehensions of heaven, dull and heartlesse
to godly duties.

If thus; what infection then from notorious and lewd companions? But above
all, in this point the fellowship of the Papist is most pernicious; for by him
a man is in danger both of having his understanding and judgment corrupted
with heresy; and his life and conversation infected with impiety. There are
two steps and passages, as it were, out of the state of profaneness, into the
Paradise of Christianity. 1. Illumination of the understanding with saving
knowledge. 2. Sanctification of the heart with special grace. Now the Papist
labors to pervert and impoyson both. For commonly you shall find the Papist
to be stigmatized, and branded with a double mark: He receives one
immediately from the Beast, a brand of Idolatry: And Satan commonly fastens
upon him another special mark, some notorious and scandalous sin in his
conversation; as swearing, lying, uncleanness, the vanities of
good-fellowship, Sabbath-breaking, or such like. For we must know, that
Antichristianisme cannot produce sanctification; and therefore you shall
commonly find every Papist to lie in some reigning sin; howsoever formal
devotion is the highest perfection attainable in that Antichristian state. By
Popish company then a man is in danger of corruption, both in his
understanding, and conversation: By the lewd, which yet make profession of Gods
Truth, of infection with notoriousnesse in conditions: By mere civil honest
men, and formal Professors, of defection from zeal, and forwardness at the
least.

2. As the Christian incurres by the company of profane men, evident hazard,
either of infection with their sins, if they be notorious; or defection from
zeal, and forwardness, if they be something more tolerable and formal: so he
is every hour which he is in their company, without a warrantable calling,
and just dispensation out of the Word, and from a good conscience, in great
danger of being inuolued within the flames of the just confusions, and inwrapt
within the compass of those outward curses and plagues which Gods indignation
inkindles and inflicts upon wicked men. All profane men, being unreconciled to
God, are every moment liable to all those miseries and fearful judgments,
which either man or devil, any of Gods creatures, or his own immediate hand
can bring upon them: They are only respited and reserved by Gods mercy, and
deferred only unto those opportunities and seasons, which seem best and
fittest to his holy Wisdom. Now, if when they light upon them (as they may
justly at any time) any of Gods Children be found amongst them vnwarrantably
and delightfully, it is righteous with God, that he receive his portion amongst
them at that time, and be fearfully infolded within the fury of the greatest
temporal visitation. It is righteous with God, that if his own Child will
needs be vnwarrantably See 2. Chr. 20. 37.
familiar with his enemy, that he also be partaker of any temporal plague,
especially with his enemy, even to the loss sometimes of his natural life.
Take then I beseech you the holy counsel of the blessed Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 7.
Be not therefore companions with them: And let his reason fright you out of
their company: Let no man deceive you (says he) with vain Carnal men will be
ready to reply and oppose this preciseness with varieti^ of vain words, that
(...) should be so strictly censured and condemned, that we may not now and
then be merry with good fellows, as they call them: And therefore says the
Apostle, Let no man deceive you, etc.
words: for, for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. [For such things] to wit, fornication, uncleanness,
covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking, jesting, and such like. Take heed
therefore of conuersing with the practisers of these uncomely things.

2. Secondly, there must very shortly be an everlasting separation between
the Christian and profane men: at the farthest, they must part upon their
deathbeds, and never see one another again unto the day of Judgment: and
then they must shake hands for world without end. For there is set betwixt
them, by Gods immutable and irreuocable Decree, a vast and immeasurable gulf,
which stands as fast and vnremooueable, as God Almighty in his Throne of
Majesty; so that they can never possibly meet. Between us Luke 16. 26.
and you, says Abraham to the rich man in hell, there is a great gulf fixed,
so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they
pass to us, that would come from thence. If it be so then, that after an inch
of time, there must be betwixt them an endless divorce, and an impassable
distance through all eternity; it is best for the Christian to begin this
separation and disacquaintance in time, and not to repose his special love,
the sweetest and noblest of all his affections, upon an object where it must
not eternally rest, nor intimately converse with him, whose company he shall
not have hereafter in heaven everlastingly. Let him ever only afford the
dearest pangs of his kindest affection unto Gods Children, and convey the
swetest meltings of his heart, and the most passionate embracements of his
soul into their bosoms alone: for he shall be sure to meet them in heaven,
and there the lesser streams of their former Christian love shall grow into a
mighty torrent, and falling into the great and universal confluence of the
united zeales and Seraphicall feruours of all the Saints and Angels, run with
a sweet and everlasting current, into the bottomless and boundless Sea of
all love and lovely excellencies, God himself, blessed for ever.

3. Thirdly, a good man conuersing with those which be graceless, does very
foully distaine and obscure, if not quite lose his Christian reputation and
credit with good men; for a man is still reputed to be of their humor and
conditions, with whom he does ordinarily and intimately converse. All flesh,
says the Wise man, consorteth according to kind, and a man will clean to his
like. What fellowship has the Wolf with the Lamb? so the sinner with the
godly. Now it is a most disgraceful and discomfortable thing, to be justly
cast out of the conceits and good opinions of judicious and understanding
Christians. I would have a Christian never much trouble himself, or labor
with too much curiosity and intrusion, too anxiously, vexingly, and
sollicitously to give the world satisfaction, for the unjust censures, and
disconceites of witless and worthless profaneness; (only he may thence take
occasion to examine his heart more narrowly, to walk more warily, to live more
holily, and pray more heartily.) Let profane men rage, and swell, and burst,
in despite of gall, I would have him sweetly and calmely to enjoy those
blessed comforts, which Gods compassionate hand has put into his heart. But
methinks, he should much take to heart, and be very sorry for the just dislike
and disconceit of true Christians, or for any scandal taken upon good ground,
from unadvisedness and aberration in his carriage and conversation. As the
Christian then desires to be dearly esteemed of the godly, and tenders the
preservation of his good name with good men; which is rather to be chosen than
great riches, Prou. 22. 1. than precious Ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. and makes the
bones fat, Prou. 15. 30. which indeed is the most inestimable Jewel he
possesses in this life, next unto his own Crown of Christianity: I say, as
he would maintain and uphold a good opinion and conceit of him, in the hearts
and consciences of Christians, let him fly the company of profane men: for
there is no reason he should be reputed Gods friend, who conuerses familiarly
with his professed enemies.

4. No profane man can heartily, and directly love, and affect a Christian for
his zeal and spiritual graces; nay, naturally and ordinarily he disconceits
and hates all holy impressions, wrought upon him by Gods sanctifying Spirit: 1.
Partly by reason of that everlasting unreconcilable, and implacable enmity
and antipathy between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent;
between light and darkness; Christ and Belial; Grace and profaneness: 2.
Partly also, because every unregenerate man, though furnished with the best
perfections and excellencies attaine^ble in that state, thinks, that his
lukewarmenesse, and formalitie is censured and condemned by the zeal and
forwardness of the true Christian; and that if those gracious endowments and
holy strictness be real, and necessarily required, they plainly proclaim
the damnablenesse of his estate, which he securely reposes upon, as sufficient
for salvation. David, a man after Gods own heart, and of a sweet and loving
disposition, yet was most heavily pressed and pursued with much causeless spite,
and this hatred even for his goodness: They that hate me without a cause,
says he, are more then the hairs of my head: They that would destroy me, and
are mine enemies falsely, are mighty; so that I restored that which I took
not, Psalm. 69. 4. And in another place says he; They that hate me wrong
fully, are many: they also that reward evil for good, are mine adversaries,
because I follow Omnis mal^ ideo presequitur bonum, quia non illi consentit
bonus ad malum, August. in Psalm. 128.
goodness. But yet understand this further in the point. The expression and
exercise of this hatred of the forwardness and zeal in the Christian, which
naturally and ordinarily lurkes in the heart of every profane man, may be
sometimes restrained for advantage, and in policy; by accident, and for
by*respects. The sting and fury of it may be weakened, and lessened by the
ingenuousnesse of the unregenerate man, or by other good natural and moral
parts in the Christian. Nay, I do not see, but that sometimes it may be, as
it were, quite dashed, and confounded by the extraordinary innocence, and
heroical height of spiritual excellencies in a good man: As Moralists say of
virtue, that though it be ordinarily attended by envy, as the body with a
shadow, yet it may grow so incomparable and glorious, that envy is glad to hide
its head, and fly away like a weak mist from the Sun shining in his
strength. As Soon as virtue, say they, is grown out of ignorance* she enters
by and by into envy, till mounting aloft, as the Sun being vertical abateth
all shadows; so she in the top, and height of perfection, all envy. Why may
it not be so in zeal and piety, that though it be ordinarily persecuted with
extreme hatred; yet sometimes it may attain that extraordinarinesse,
incomparablenesse and excellency, that hatred may even hate it self, for
opposing such unreprovable sanctity? But to my purpose: If it be so, that a
profane man cannot possibly love a Christian heartily for his Christianity
and Grace, but rather maliciously and mortally hate him; what heart can a
Christian have to converse intimately and delightfully with a profane man? Who
would ever vouchsafe his company, and afford the best of his time, and dearest
of his affections, to a fellow, which disdaines and despises the most precious
Jewel he bears about him, I mean, his religious zeal; and labors
powerfully, though insensibly, to dim the brightness, and distaine the glory
of it; either by the contagion of his notoriousnesse, or at least, by his
formalitie, coldness, and vnzealousnesse?

5. Fifthly, no Christian ought to enter league, or entertain fellowship with
the enemies of God. It is absurd, that a member of Christ should exercise
familiarity, and intimate passages of love with a limb of Satan. What earthly
Prince could endure with patience, to have one of his nearest servants, and of
chiefest trust, to be conversant continually amongst professed Rebels, and open
Traitors to his Crown and dignity; or to converse intimately with his
deadliest enemy? Would any great Man in the State, retain any as a special
favorite, who should be inward with his greatest counter-factionist? What
ingenuous child would delightfully digest that company, wherein he should
hear his father in a foul and shameful manner disgraced and rayled upon? How
then should Almighty God hold him his friend, who is familiar with strangers to
the life of God, and enemies to his Grace? How can that man look for the
prerogatives, and protections of a child of God, who haunts such company with
delight, where he hears daily his Almighty Father foulely, and shamefully
dishonored, perhaps, with oaths and blasphemies, with obscenities and
raylings; at least, with many idle and profane speeches?

6. Sixthly, conuersing with profane men, does cross and overthrow a common
Christian duty, which is this; In all companies, either do good, or take
good, or both. For in this case, the Christian both takes hurt, and does hurt:
he hurts, 1. himself, because he throws himself upon temptation, and hazard
of being infected with notoriousnesse, if his companions be very lewd, and
profane; or at least, with formalitie and coldness; if they be but only
ciuilly honest, or formal professors. 2. He hurts also others: 1. He hardens
his companions in their unregenerate courses, because they think, he would not
so familiarly converse with them, except he were well conceited of their
spiritual state; and so they rest with security and confidence in their
unregeneration. 2. He is a stumbling block to the weak Christian, who by
looking upon his example, may be led awry from the straight path of his
profession, and by taking thereupon liberty of imitation, may have his young
beginnings of Grace choked and smothered by the delightful vanities of good
fellowship, in the press of profane company. 3. He grieves also strong and
understanding Christians, to see him so far forget himself, and disgrace his
profession, as to converse with the enemies of God, and by his practice to
persuade the world, that the base fooleries of good fellowship, are more sweet
and tastefull, then the glorious pleasures of the communion of Saints.

7. There is another reason, which though it be not very obuious to men's
apprehensions, or much taken notice of; yet in my understanding, it should be
very powerful, and of very great weight, to drive Christians out of the
company of unregenerate men, and to restrain them from a familiar and
delightful correspondence, and conuersing with them (except they have a
warrantable Calling, and the testimony of their consciences to converse with
them for their conversion and spiritual good.) It is this: when an
unregenerate man observes, that a Christian presses into his company, desires
to spend time with him, and is well enough content to exchange mutually many
offices of intimate kindness; he presently conceiues and concludes, that sure
he sees in him matter worthy of Christian company, and endowments sufficient
to rank him amongst the Saints; else he could not take such contentment in
his conditions and conversation. Whereupon he is fearfully hardened in his
present courses, and settles with resolution, confidence, and security upon the
plausible deceitfulness of his unregenerate state; and thinks himself well,
that he may both enjoy the pleasures of the present, and also a good testimony
and hope of his rightnesse in the way to Heaven; because it is well known and
acknowledged, that his companion both knows, and walks in the right path. And
since he has one to take part, he takes it not much to heart, that other
Christians are more vnfamiliar, and strange unto him; for he imputes it only
to their sowrenesse and vnsociablenesse. Assuredly, there are many Christians
very faulty this way, and have very much to answer for in this kind. They
familiarly converse with unregenerate men; and because they would not displease
and be distastefull, they say nothing unto them of the cursednesse of their
condition toward God, and of the fearfulness of their case, in respect of
salvation. Hereupon they grow into a conceit, that they are well conceited of
their spiritual state, and so walk far more resolutely and confidently
toward Hell, by reason of the society and silence of their Christian
companions. I think verily, that profane men do not only sometimes desire
the company of Christians, to win reputation from the better sort, and to guild
over the rottenness of their conversation with some little tincture, and
lesser splendor reflected from the glory of their Christianity; but also to
purchase some counterfeit comfort to their consciences, and false hope unto
their hearts, that their case is the better toward God, because Gods children
vouchsafe to keep company, and converse more familiarly with them.

8. But above all, for this purpose peruse often, and ponder well, 1. The
effectual prohibitions in Gods Book: 2. the protestations and practice of the
Saints, 3. and punishments inflicted for familiarity with the ungodly. For the
last, see 2. Chron. 19. 2. and Hinc difcim^ pericul sam esse cum impijs
coniunctionem; ideoque sugienda soedera, ^ffinitates* societates cum ^lis,
Lauat. in hunc locum.
20. 37. For the second, see Psalm. 26. 4, 5. Ier. 15. 17. 2. King. 3. 14. For
the first, see 1. Cor. 5. 11. Ephesians. 5. 11. Prou. 14. 7. 2. These. 3. 6. where
he solemnnely commands them in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they
withdraw themselves from every brother that walks inordinately, etc. He aims
specially in that place at idle persons; by consequent then, and good
proportion, at more notorious fellows. If we must withdraw our selves from
those, who have leisure to be for all companies, at all times, upon all
occasions, and are therefore accounted the only companions: how fast must we
run from liars, swearers, whoremongers, drunkards, scorners, reuellers, and
fellows of such infamous rank? Prou. 4. 14. where iteration of the same sense
in variety of phrase, argues the necessity of the duty and earnestness of the
Divine Penman to persuade; Enter not, says he, into the path of the wicked;
and go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass by it, turn from it, and
pass away. Deep apprehensiuenesse of the excellency and worth of the matter,
or extraordinary seruencie to impresse and persuade the point, does many times
in Scripture clothe the same thing with diverse forms of speech, and variety
of phrase.

2. Now in a second place: If thou desire to converse with some of thine
unconverted kindred, friends, neighbors, old acquaintance, etc. for their
spiritual good, observe these three rules: 1. Let there be good probability,
proportionably, of more power of grace, knowledge, sanctification, spiritual
wisdom, Christian resolution, etc. in thee to convert them, then poison of
unregenerate stubbornness, sensual malice, sinful wit, worldly wisdom,
Satanicall sophistry in them, to pervert thee. 2. See that thy heart be
sincere, and that in the singleness thereof, thou seek truly their
conversion, and not thine own secret contentment: for in this point, thine
own heart will be ready to deceive thee. Thou may offer thy self into
such company, with pretense and purpose to solicit them for salvation, and
prevail with them about the best things; and yet before thou be aware, be
plunged and ensnared in the woonted unwarrantable delights of good fellowship,
pleasant passages of wit, idle and impertinent follies and familiarities, which
thou wast accustomed to exchange and enjoy with them in thy unregenerate time.
So that in stead of the discharge of a Christian duty, thou may both hurt
thy self, and harden them. 3. As Physicians of the body arm and animate
themselves with strong repercussiues, preservatives, and counterpoysons, when
they visit contagious and pestilentiall patients: so in such cases, be thou
sure to furnish and fortify thy self beforehand with prayer, meditation, the
sword of the Spirit, store of perswasiue matter, strength of reasons, and
unshaken resolution, to repel and beat back all noisome insinuations of
spiritual infection.

3. Into Christian company, which thou should prize thine only Paradise and
Heaven upon Earth; the very flower and festival of all thy refreshing time in
this vale of tears, ever bring 1. A cheerful and lightsome heart. Methinks,
though thou should come amongst the Saints with a sad heart, and something
ouer-cast with mists and clouds of heaviness and discomfort; yet the presence
and faces of those, whom hereafter thou shall meet in Heaven, and there, with
incomparable joy behold for ever, clothed and shining with eminency and
eternity of glory, should disperse and dispell them all, and infuse
comfortable beams of heavenly lightsomnesse and spiritual mirth. I know them,
who being cast sometimes full sore against their wills, amongst profane company,
are quite out of their element all the while, struck dead in the place, as
they say, as solitary as in the silentest Desert. But let them come amongst
Christians, and they are quite other men, as full of lightsomnes and life, as
full of heart and Heaven, as if they had the one foot in the Porch of Paradise
already-Sadnesse is not seasonable, where such precepts as these have place; Be
glad in the Lord. and rejoice, ye righteous, and shout for joy, all ye that
are upright in heart. 2. A fruitful heart, full as the Moon with gracious
matter to uphold edifying conference, and sanctified talk. Being forward and
free without any hurtful bashfulnesse, or vainglorious aim, both to
communicate to others the hidden treasures of heavenly knowledge, which thou
have happily dug out of the precious quarry, as it were, of the great
mystery of Grace, and also by moving of questions, and ministering occasion
mutually to draw from them with an holy greediness the waters of life, for a
reciprocal refreshing and quickening of the deadness and vnheauenlinesse of
thine own heart. And here it will be a profitable wisdom, to take notice
of, and observe each others singularity of gifts, and several endowments, and
thereafter with wise insinuations, to provoke and press them, to power out
themselves in those things, wherein they have best experience and most
excellency. Some are more dexterous and skillful in discussing controuersed
points: others in resolving cases of conscience; some, in discovering the
Devils depths, and treading the Maze of his manifold temptations: others, in
comforting afflicted spirits, and speaking to the heart of mourners in Zion,
etc. I am persuaded many times, many worthy discourses lie buried in the breasts
of understanding men, by reason of the finfull silence, I think I may say so,
and barrenness of those about them. And therefore Christians ought to be more
forth-putting, active, and fruitful this way. 3. An humble heart, ready and
rejoicing to exchange and enjoy common comforts, soule-secrets, heavenly
consultations, with the poorest and most neglected Christian. If thou be
haunted with the white Devil of spiritual pride, it is likely thou will be
either too prodigal and profuse, and so ingrosse all the talk, which is
sometimes incident to new conuerts or counterfeits; or else too reserved and
curious, and so say no more then may serve to breed an applause and admiration
of thy worth; which is a very filthy and fearful fault. There is no depth of
knowledge, no height of zeal, no measure of Grace; but may be further
enlarged, more inflamed, blessedly increased by conference with the poorest
faithful Christian: See Romans 1. 12. and 15. 24. how Paul, that great learned
and divinely inspired Doctor of the Gentiles, stood affected in this point.

V. But above all, be most busy with thy heart: for it is the root that
either empoysons or ensweetens all the rest; that is the fountain, which
causes all the streams of thy desires, purposes, affections, speeches, and the
whole current of thy conversation, to run either muddy or clear. Ply
therefore amongst others, these three points of special and precious
consequence for the present purpose, with all seriousness and zeal.

1. Captiuation and conformity of the thoughts and imaginations of thy heart,
to the sovereignty and rules of grace. If thy change in words, actions, and all
outward carriage were Angelical; yet if thy thoughts were the same, and
unsanctified still, thou were still a limb of Satan. Purity in the inward
parts, is the most sound and vndeceiuing evidence of our portion and interest
in the power and purity of Christ's saving Passion and sanctifying Bloodshed:
See Ier. 4. 14. Isa. 55. 7. Now, that thou may the better conquer and keep
the thoughts of thy heart in subjection and obedience unto Christ, be persuaded
and acknowledge 1. The pestilencie of that wicked Proverb, Thoughts are free.
It is true, the immediate invisible productions and proiects of the heart, lie
not within the walk of humane Justice, neither are liable to the censure of
earthly Courts and Consistories. But there is an All-seeing and Omniscient Eye
in Heaven, to which, the blackest Midnight is as the brightest Noonetide,
Psalm. 139. 12. which sees our secretest thoughts afar off, ver. 2. and sets
them in the light of his countenance, Psalm. 90. 8. Hence it is that many humble
souls, sensible of their secret provoking the glory of Gods pure Eye, are more
grieved (setting aside the ill of example and scandal, ordinary attendants
upon open and visible miscarriages) for the rebelliousnesse of their thoughts,
then the exorbitancie of their actions. For the sting of these is something
eased and lessened, as they think, by the absence of Hypocrisy, and because
the world sees the worst. But concerning the other, it cuts them to the very
heart, that they are not as well able to preserve their inward parts in purity
toward the All-searching Eye of that God, who stretched forth the heavens, and
laid the foundations of the earth; as their words and actions in plausiblenesse
toward man, who shall die, and the son of man, which shall be made as
grass. Whereas then the natural man is wont to let his heart run riot and
at random into a world of idle imaginations, without remorse or restraint; do
thou make thy sanctification sure unto thy self, by this infallible sign,
That thou sufferst the consideration of Gods All-seeing Eye, the curb of the
last Commandment, and check of a tender conscience, to range thy thoughts
into order, to confine and keep them within a holy compass from their vain
and impertinent vagaries. 2. That thou must be accountable and answerable for
every wandering thought, as well as for idle words and wicked actions. Now
consider what numberless swarms of imaginations pass the Forge of thy
fantasy every day; and therefore, if thou be not extraordinarily and exactly
vigilant and eye-full over thy heart, thou may justly fear, that upon the
opening and illightning of the book of thy conscience, at those two dreadful
days, of Death, and the last Judgment, innumerable armies of exorbitant
thoughts, which have lain in ambush as it were, in the secret corners of thy
deceitful heart, will charge upon thee with a far heavier account then
perhaps thou art aware of, or have seriously thought upon heretofore. 3. That
Gods glory must as well shine in thy thoughts, in the invisible workings,
intentions, desires, and eleuatious of the heart; as in thine outward
conversation. As God exacts and expects honor and service from his Children,
in words and works; so there is also a Thought-seruice, a Thoughtworship, that
I may so call it, which is very pleasing and precious in his eyes, as springing
more immediately from the heart, wherein he principally delights; and because
the secrecy of it is attended with more sincerity. Remember therefore to render
with all reverence and zeal unto the Father of Spirits, and Lord of thy soul,
the daily tribute of thy Thought-seruice, as well as the Tongue-seruice and
Handseruice. And the rather and more plentifully: 1. Because opportunities,
abilities and means may fail for outward performancee, but the heart is ever
at leisure and liberty to think nobly. No times, no tyrants, no wants or
restraint, can hinder it from an invisible fruition of Gods own Self, with
thoughts of sweetest rapture and reverence, of love, and lowliest adoration;
from bathing it self in the meritorious Blood of the Immaculate Lamb, with
thoughts of inexplicable peace, joy, and triumph; from cleaving to the promises
of life, and diuing into the Mystery of Grace with extraordinary dearness,
purest delight, and victorious faith; from being as a mountain of Myrrh and
Incense, sending up a spiritual Sacrifice of praise-full thoughts, infinitely
admiring and magnifying the glory and goodness of that merciful Hand, which
writ thy name with the golden Characters of his endless love, in the Book of
Life from all beginnings: suffered the dearest and warmest Blood in His Sons
Heart to be spilt as water upon the ground, for the washing of thy body and
soul from sin; and after a span of time, will set a Crown of Eternity upon
thy head, composed of all comfort, rest, and peace, joys, pleasures, and
felicities, etc. And also because, besides Gods more special acceptance, and
more certain sincerity of this inward invisible service, it is ordinarily
full of more spiritualnesse, intention, and life, by reason that it is nearest
and most immediate to the object of Adoration. The best man, though he may
labor to do his best every way, yet he shall find a difference and degrees in
his ability to discharge, and the executions of his Duties, Devotions, and
services toward God. His works do not ever answer with that exactness to
his words: His words cannot express so to the life, the thoughts of his heart:
The thoughts of his heart come infinitely short of the excellency of God. Those
streams which are next to the wellhead, are strongest and purest: The
thoughts of a sanctified heart, laying hold upon, with immediate apprehension
and nearest imbracements, that most amiable, holy, and glorious Object, God
Himself, blessed for ever, and his sweetest Attributes, give Him His due and
reverent Attributions, with more heartinesse, life, and heauenlinesse, then his
words or Actions are wont; though all a man's best and utmost, in thought,
word, and deed, falls too fearfully short of that which we owe and ought to
do.

2. A continual excubation and narrow watchful guard over thy heart. It is
like a City, liable every moment both to inward commotion and outward assault.
The fountain of Original impuritie, though its main stream and bloody
issue be stayed, and in some good measure stopped, by the sanctifying power of
Christ's saving Blood; yet it does still less or more bubble up rebelliously.
The world does labor continually with her three great battering Engines, of
Pleasures, Riches, and Honors, to lay it waste, and rob it of all heavenly
treasures. The Devil watches every opportunity to hurl in his fiery darts, to
cast all into combustion, and thereby further to enuenome and inrage the
already too much impoysoned viciousness and impetuousnesse of our corrupt
nature. Precious therefore, and worthy all practice, is that Precept of
Solomon: Keep thy heart above all keeping. Prou. 4. 23. which thou may do
with more success and comfort; if first thou watch over the windows of thy
soul, the senses, as the Worthies of old were wont with extraordinary ward;
See Job 31. 1. Psalm. 119. 37. It is incredible what a deal of pollution and
ill the Devil conueyes insensibly through these Flood* gates of sin, into
their bosoms who are careless and watchlesse this way. To instance in the
ear and eye: What balls of Wildfire, as it were, does many an obscene and
filthy tongue set on fire of hell, throw through their ears into men's hearts,
with rotten and ribald talk, which after begets within, worlds of speculatiue
wantonness, and flames of Lust? Many false reports drop from the slanderers
mouth into the ear, which after in the heart becomes the cursed seed of
heart-burning, spite, and mental murder at the least. And such wicked weeds
cannot but fructify very rankely, in such a naturally sinful soil. A
Talebearer tells thee, that such an one said of thee so and so, when as in
truth it was neither so nor so. Thou presently thereupon conceiuest thoughts of
unkindness, displeasure, and it may be, of rage, against that man that never
thought the ill. Here thou spillest innocent blood, for thy heart may kill as
well as thy tongue and hand. It is fit therefore for every honest face to
furnish and fill it self with frowns of distaste and indignation at the
approach of any Tale-teller. As the North wind drives away rain, so does an
angry countenance a backbiting tongue, Pro. 25. 23. Concerning the Eye, David's
woeful example may warn the holiest men to the worlds end, to be very
watchful with a most restless and eye-full jealousy over that wandering
sense. An idle glance upon Bathsheba, was like a theeuish boy thrust in at a
rich man's window, which lets in a number of villainous desperate Cutthroats, to
ransacke and rob the house; it being not resisted at the first, drew after it
such a black and bloody train, that robbed his royal heart of much heavenly
wealth, and wounded his soul as deeply and dangerously, as perhaps any of
Gods servants ever since. 2. Resist and crush every exorbitant thought, which
draws to sin at the very first Est autem tutissimum -- vt ass^escat animus
solicita semper peruigilique custodia^ discernere cogitationes suas, and ad
primum animi motum vel probare, vel reprobare quod cogitat, vt vel bonas
cogitationes alat, vel statim extinguat malas. Aug* Epist. 141.
rising. Encounter it with this dreadful Dilemma: Say unto thy self; If I
commit this sin, it will cost me vnvaluably more heart-breake and spiritual
smart, before I can purchase assurance of pardon and peace of conscience, then
the sensual pleasure is worth: If I never repent, it will be the death and
damnation of my soul. See what a world of misery man brings upon himself, by
giving way to the first wicked thought, Disc. of true Happiness, page 150. 3.
Entertain ever with all holy greediness, and make exceedingly much of all
good motions put into thy heart by the blessed Spirit howsoever occasioned,
whether by the Ministry of the Word, mindfulnesse of death, Christian
admonition, reading some good Book, some special cross, extraordinary mercy,
any way, at any time. Feed; enlarge, and improoue them to the utmost, with
Meditation, Prayer, and Practice. So thou shall preserve thine heart in a soft
holy comfortable temper, and heauenward, which is a singular happiness.

3. Elevation, and often lifting up of the heart toward heaven. What Christian
heart can endure to discontinue its sweet familiarity and humble intercourse
with God for one day? Let thy broken heart therefore every day, besides solemn
and ordinary eiaculations, Evening and Morning, and upon other special
occasions, be sure 1. To bathe it self deliciously in the blisfull depths of
Gods boundless mercies in Christ, that it may be happily kept, spiritually
merry, thankful, and in heart to all holy duties. 2. To kiss sweetly the
glorified Body of our crucified Lord, with the lips of infinitely dearest, and
vnexpressably affectionate love; though the distance be great, yet the hand of
Faith will bring them easily together; that it may be preserved in peace,
purity, and reuengefull opposition unto sin; for as the application of his
meritorious Blood is a sovereign Plaster to heal the wounded conscience, to
turn Crimsin and Scarlet into snow and wool; so me-thinkes a serious and
compassionate commemoration of the dear effusion thereof, should be both a
precious corrosiue to eat out the heart of corruption, and a special
preservative to keep from sin; since sin was the principal in slaughtering
the Lord of life. 3. To cast the eye of hope upon the glory, euerlastingnesse,
and unutterable excellencies of that immortal shining Crown above; which
after this life (and this life is but a bubble, a smoke, a shadow, a thought)
shall be set upon thy head by the hand of God: a very glimpse of the goodly
splendor and rauishing beauty whereof, is able both to sweeten the bitterest
villainies and basest wrongs from the world and wicked men; and to dispell those
mists of fading vanities and hurtful fumes of honors, riches, and earthly
pleasures, which this great dunghill of the world, heated by the fire of
inordinate lusts, is wont to euaporate and interpose betwixt the sight of men's
souls and the bliss of Heaven.

VI. Be very watchful over thy most predominant and troublesome passion;
whether it be fear, sorrow, love, anger, etc. All of them are unruly and
raging enough, but yet commonly one ouer-rules all the rest, and plays Rex (as
they say) in the unregenerate man; nay, too often offers to rise in rebellion
even against the most sanctified soul.

Whatsoever it be, 1. In thy private morning sacrifice, be sure to lay on load
of deepest groans and strongest cries for mortifying grace against it, and
comfortable conquest over it. Let that period and passage of thy prayers be
enforced and enlarged with an extraordinary pang of feruencie, and feelingly
sealed, as it were, with the most Seraphicall Selah. 2. Cut off all occasions,
whatsoever it cost thee, which may any ways stir, awaken and kindle it.
Withdraw the fuel that ministers food unto that passionate flame, though it
should be as painful unto thee, as the plucking out of thy right eye, or the
cutting off of thy right hand. Assuredly, the pleasures of inward quiet, and
sweet spiritual calmnesse of thy so understanding Soul, will infinitely
recompense any pains in oppositions and resistances in that nature. 3.
Consider seriously beforehand, what a deal of disturbance and vnsettlednesse
the visible exorbitancy and breaking of it out, will breed and bring upon thy
inward man. It will be like a dead Fly in a box of precious ointment,
disgrace all thy graces, and full foully darken the glory of thy profession. It
will be like fire in the Thatch, and for the while cast into combustion, as it
were, the whole frame of thy spiritual building, and turn the heavenly peace
of thy appeased conscience, into a bitter tempest. Tell me whether after a
lawless transgression of those bonds of moderation, to which thy Christian
resolution has confinde it; and that it has prevailed against thee with any
notorious excess; I say, whether at night thou find not thy spirit quite
down and much deaded to the exercise of prayer, or any other evening duty? And
if upon thy waking in the night, there should be any terrible wind, dreadful
thunder, or other affrighting accident, whether thy heart would not smite thee
upon that occasion, with much more fear and apprehensions of horror?

I will suppose, thy reigning, or rather rebelling passion (for I speak to the
Christian) to be choler and anger: and then first listen to the counsel which
the very moral* Sages minister against this spiritual malady, and to the
rules and remedies which the light of reason leads us unto.

1. Cut off (say they) the causes, and the effect will vanish. Quench the
firebrands which enrage this fury, and thou shall be at quiet: They are such as
these:

1. Weakness of spirit, vnmanlinesse of mind. Hence it is that old men,
infant^ and sick folks are commonly more choleric then others. Impotency
and excess of passion ever argues the disgrace and inferiority of the
understanding part, the noblest power of the soul. And therefore if we would
be armed against the sallies and assaults of this domineering raging distemper,
we must suffer the hiest and heauenliest part of our soul to know and exercise
its place and strength. We must not make our understandings vnder-lings, but
give reason his right and regiment.

2. Self-love, a foolish doting upon and adoring our selves, which springs
from the cursed root of Selfe-ignorance, and quite puts out that light of
Natures law in our consciences; Do as thou would be done by. If before thou
lose the reins to that short frenzy, thou would suppose and set thy self
in the place of the party, with whom thou art angry; and then say and do no
more then if thine own person were the patient, it would be a notable means
to curb thy choler, and keep the credit of dipassionatenesse and moderation,
and make thee patiently suffer that which perhaps thou have often confidently
offered to others.

3. An ouertendernesse and delicate niceness in bearing wrongs: an impetuous
impatiencie for being abused: (Whereas insensibilitie and contempt would better
become Immensae virtutis est, non sentire te esse percussum.
a great spirit:) an effeminate facility to be moved and touched with every
trifle. A spot or wrinkle upon their garment, a dish misplaced upon their
table, some error in their dressing; a Bird, a Dog, a Glass, etc. or some
lesser toy will turn some kind of people quite out of tune, and put them out
of their humor, into a pelting chafe, as they say. Great minds and victorious
over this furious Arch-Rebell, are not moved but with great matters. It is a
special point of manly wisdom, to pass by many petty prouocations to wrath,
without notice or acknowledgement, without wound or passion; and to digest many
times the brawlings and indiscretions of hasty men, with the same patience that
Surgeons do the injuries and blows of mad men, when they let them blood.

4. Credulity, lightness in believing whatsoever comes first to the ear:
That is the high way to hold choler still in combustion. For so the tongues of
slanderers, Talebearers, Whisperers, Pick-thanks, will prove as so many
Bellows blown by the Devil himself, to keep this fire in height and
fullness of flame.

5. Curiosity, an itching humor, and needless inquisitiveness to know every
thing that is done or said. If a man will needs be so meddling; he shall find
matter enough to fill his gall. Some men, out of this humor, are eager to know
what is said against them, in such and such company, listen to hear what their
servants talk concerning them, and if a letter fall into their hands wherein
they think themselves to be mentioned, they will make no bones, against the
laws of humanity, to break it open. Busybodies in this kind never want
wrath and woe. Antigonus, as it is said of him, was wise to abandon this
vanity. For when he heard two of his subjects speaking ill of him in the night
near his Tent, willed them to go further off, lest the King should hear them.

6. Covetousness, the Cut-throate of Grace, and canker of the soul, like an
eating insatiable Wolf, will either still feed upon gain, or else gnaw upon
the heart with fretting: and therefore the very loss of a penny, sometimes the
omission of a good bargain, the miscarriage of some domestical trifle, the
death of a beast, etc. will presently put a covetous man into choler: for his
eyes are so earthly, that they look only upon the secondary, not upon the
supreme cause.

7. A conceit of being contemned by others in word, deed, countenance. Many are
so weak this way, that if they spy but any secret smiling, two whispering
together in the company, or any talking, especially with their eyes now and
then cast toward them; they presently think, that themselves certainly are
their aim, and object of their scornful observation; and so grow sour, out
of tune, and unfit for company all the while after. Such as these are extremely
troubled, and take on to themselves, if they have not the chief place, and
upper hand at meetings, respect and resalutation from those that they salute,
exact observance, and obeisance from their inferiors, the wall from all
comers, if they be not begun unto in matters of complement and services of
humanity, etc.

A riddance and restraint of these and the like maladies of the mind, will be
a notable means to prevent and hinder the assaults and surpriz all of this
furious and foul fiend.

2. But if at any time thou feel this Viper to receive heat in thy bosom,
and that occasions of choler are offered, then say they:

1. Contain thy body in quiet, and tongue in silence. The stirring and
agitation of thy body, by stamping or flinging about, inflames the blood and
humors, and the walking of thy tongue keeps both the passionate heat in
thine own heart, and many times sets on fire those that thou art angry with.
The barking of one Dog sets all the curres in a town a bawling. Thy breaking
forth into raging terms, may raise the spirit of rauing in others: And
therefore silence is a singular cooler to this choleric distemper. If the
swelling and boisterous waves rebound from the soft and even sands, there is no
great ado; but if they encounter a Rock, they return with great turbulencie,
and turn into foame. Silence or a soft answer stops the ouer-flowing of the
gall on both sides; but if fury be set upon with rage, they grow both almost
stark mad for the time.

2. Give reason leave to interpose and resolve. It was good counsel which was
given to Augustus; That when the object and occasions of choler were in his
eye, he should not be moved, before he had pronounced over the letters of
the Alphabet. It is as absurd for a passion to usurp and domineere over
judgment, as for an intemperate Scold to iustle a reverend Judge out of his
place; and there to take on in her talkatiue and scurrill manner. If thou give
the swinge and reins unto it at the first rising, it will presently quite
banish reason and judgment, and be like a man that puts the Master out of the
house, and sets it on fire, and burns himself alive within: or like a Ship
that has neither Stern nor Pilot, nor Sails, nor Oars, exposed to the mercy
of the waves, winds and tempest in the midst of a furious Sea. 3. Divert to
some other business, company, place, pleasant employment, thoughts of content,
etc. These are notable coolers, and very convenient to flake this passionate
fire, when it first begins to burn in thy bosom.

3. Habituate thy heart, and keep it exercised and seasoned with
considerations: 1. Not only of melancholy, a ferall passion, and other bodily
distempers, which it naturally breeds, by stirring choler, heating the blood,
and the vital spirits; but also, even of the brutish deformities and ugly
distortions with which this rage disfigures those which are transported with
it; as the fierinesse of the eyes, inflammation (...). Ora tumentira, nigrescunt
sanguine venae, Lumina Gorgoneo saeuius igne micant.
of the face, furiousness of the looks, extraordinary panting of the heart,
beating of the pulse, swelling of the veins, stammering of the tongue,
gnashing of the teeth, a very harsh and hateful intention of the voice, and
many other extremely impotent and unmanly behauiours. Hence it was, that angry
men were anciently counseled in the heat of their fit to look themselves in
a Glass. The monstrous representations of that deformed Fury, were able for
ever to fright them out of their choleric humor. 2. Of the sweet
loveliness, and amiable acceptance of a mild unpassionate spirit. It is the
sinew, as it were, and cyment of all delightful society, the flower of
humanity, the very sweetness of civil conversation. As it is a singular
preservative to keep a man's own heart in much calmnesse and quiet; so its
also an attractiue Lodestone to draw unto him the hearts and loves of others.
3. Of the aim and aspirations of moral wisdom which labors to draw a man's
heart to that unshaken, constant and comfortable temper; that beautiful and
noble disposition, which resembles the highest Region of the air, where there
is no ouer-shadowing clouds, nor tempestuous thunders, but perpetual
fairness, serenity, and peace.

I have the longer insisted upon these moral instructions, purposely to make
Christians ashamed, who besides the honest extractions of purerreason, have
also rules of Religion, and heavenly remedies; and yet are too often overtaken
with this mental drunkenness, as some call it. For you must know, that all
this while I mean hasty, unjust, and exorbitant Anger, which misses in
measure, Object, end, season ableness, or other circumstances. For there is a
sinlesse and holy Anger, and therefore says Paul, Ephesians. 4. 26. Be ye angry,
and sin not. Upon the describing and limiting of which, it is neither
incident nor seasonable for me at this time to insist.

Now then in a second place, for religious directions, and more immediately
drawn from divine learning, consider:

1. That all thy wrongs and unworthy vsages, all thy injuries and indignities,
crosses and uncomfortable accidents, that shall ever any way befall thee, are
fore-appointed, ordered, and disposed by Gods wise and merciful providence,
and that to thy spiritual and everlasting good. This very one thought, that
God is ever the principal Agent, kept fresh and on foot in thy mind, will be
of sovereign power to cool and beat back any intemperate heat, which might
either rise in thine heart, or rage in thy tongue against his instruments; and
cause thee many times when thou art cha^ing ripe, and ready to rave, to lay thy
hand upon thy mouth, and say unto God sweetly with David, Psalm. 39. 9. I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. And not like a child, to
beat the place that hurt it; but rather to walk more heedfully: or a foolish
Curre, to snarle and snatch at the stone, never looking after the thrower: or a
mad man, to bite the sword that sticks in his flesh; but rather to pull it out
softly, and get to the Surgeon. There was matter and malice enough in the mouth
of Shemei, to have made David's royal heart naturally to rise with implacable
indignation against that dead dog: unkindness and cruelty enough in the
hearts of Joseph's brethren, to have made him for ever unreconcilable: wrong
and villainy enough in the carriage of the Caldeans, to have set Job on fire
with rage and revenge against them: But these holy men by practice of the
present point, and from the strength of this consideration which I now commend,
for the restraint of choler, procured a great deal of sweet peace and
patience to their own hearts, pleasednesse and acceptance with God,
admiration and example to posterity: For they glanced by the means and the
men, and fastened their eyes upon their Maker, and the first Moouer. Joseph
looked beyond his Brethrens barbarous dealing with him, and said, The Lord sent
me before you: Job beyond the Caldeans lawless outrages, and said, The Lord
has taken away: David beyond Shemeis dogged rancour, and said, The Lord has
bidden him: Jesus Christ Himself, blessed for ever, looked beyond the
Pharisees, Priests, Jews, Judas and the Soldiers, to his Fathers Cup, Ioh. 18.
11. This Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink? when he
commanded Peter to sheathe his sword. This Christian counsel passes that
which was given to Augustus: when the objects and occasions of choler are in
thine eye, or ear; when thou art any ways wronged, belyed, rayled upon,
spurned at, or trampled upon by the feet of honored insolency, or dunghill
malice, before thou inwardly fret, or break out into any impatient behavior,
say first seriously and feelingly in thine own heart, This is from God, for my
good: or with old Eli; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1.
Sam. 3. 18. And let it for ever snaffle, nay, sweetly compose the hastiness
and sowrenesse of thy corrupt nature in case of choler.

^. Let the wonderful patience of that mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth, who is
able with one word to cast all the creatures in the World into Hell; nay even
with the breath of his mouth to turn Hell, and Heaven, and Earth, and all
things, into nothing; I say, let his patience against the infinite intolerable,
and endless prouocations of his own most obliged creatures, who like so many
desperate traitors, live and lie continually in open rebellion against so
great a Majesty, be a Si Dominus nobis, and Pater Deu^ est, sectemur
parientiam Domini pariter and Patris^ quia and seruos oportet esse obsequentes,
and filios non decet esse degeneres. Quales vero in Deo and quanta patientia,
quod in contumeliam suae Maiestatis and honoris instituta ab hominibus profana
templa, and terrena sigmenta, and sacra sacrilega patientissime sustinens,
supe^ bonos and malos aequaliter facit diem nasci, and lumen solis oboriri,
etc. Et cum crebris, immo continuis ex^cerbatur offensis Deus, indignationem
suam temperat, and praestitutum semel retributionis diem patienter expectat.
Cumque habeat in potestate vindictam, mauult diu tenere patientiam; sustinens,
scilicet clomenter, and differens, vt si fieri potest, multum malitia protracta
aliquando mutetur, and homo in errorum and s^clerum contagione volutatus,
velsero ad Dominum conuertatur, Cyprian. de bono patientiae.
Pattern and Precedent unto thee a silly worm, dust and ashes, earth, or any
thing that is naught; of proportionable forbearance (if there could be any
proportion between infinite and finite) toward thy fellow creatures. How many
black and blasphemous mouths are incessantly open against his blessed
Majesty? With what damned oaths do they tear, and re-crucifie the precious
Body of his glorious Son, which sits at his own right hand? With what lies
and slanders do they revile his Ambassadors, and vilify his Chosen? How many
graceless wretches do wilfully and obstinately profane his Sabbaths, pollute
his Sacraments, and turn their backs upon his Word? How many do daily turn
themselves into beasts, by their swinish drunkenness, to the great reproach of
mankind, and dishonor of their reasonable nature? How many enclosing Nimrods,
and cruel Landlords, do grind the faces of the poor; Nay, pluck off their
skins, tear their flesh, break their Mich. 3. 2, 3.
bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and eat the flesh of Gods
people? In a word; How many incarnate Devils do march up and down the earth,
with hearts and hands as full as Hell, with all manner of mischief, lewdness
and rebellion? So many, and with such extreme insufferable audaciousnesse and
impudency, that, as a learned Divine speaks, If but any tenderhearted man
should sit but one hour in the Throne of God Almighty (if it be fit so to
suppose) and look down upon the earth, as God does continually, and see what
abominations are done in that hour, he would undoubtedly in the next set all
the World on fire, and not suffer his wrath to be pacified, or the fire to be
quenched. And yet for all this, our gracious God in the mean time, though he
be armed with his own irresistable omnipotency, and a thousand Charets in the
Whirlewinde; though he have ever in a readiness all the Angels in Heaven, all
the Devils in Hell, all the Creatures in the World; nay, the very hands and
consciences of profane wretches, and all that provoke the eyes of his Glory
with their pollutions, to be the instruments and executioners of his just wrath
upon their sin; yet, I say, our gracious God opposes his infinite patience
against all these restless outrageous prouocations. He sweetly and fairly
tempers and moderates in the mean time his most just and causefull
indignation, to see if the bountifulness of his forbearance and long-suffering
will lead them to repentance. Be thou then for ever ashamed to take on for
every trifle; to break patience upon every triuiall provocation; to turn Lion
in thine own house, and which is common in carnal worldlings, to rage with
extreme folly and baseness against thy wife, children, servants, cattle, or
any thing that comes in thy way, for every cross accident, worldly loss,
domestical miscarriage: nay, many times to torture thine own heart, and
trouble others in this kind upon meet mis-takings, groundless surmizes, and
misconstructions: but rather take this gracious lesson from the Lord Jesus his
own mouth, Math. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am lowly of heart; and an
example of patience from his first Martyr, Act. 7. 60. Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge.

3. Let the sweet experience of Gods patient and merciful dealing with thee,
soften thine heart with a compassionate sense of other men's weaknesses, and a
melting forwardness to forgive. If he out of the riches of his mercy has
remitted unto thee ten thousand Talents, what a base wretchedness were it to
fly in the face of thy fellow-seruant, and to take him by the throat for an
hundred pence? If he entreated thee of all loves, and with all long-suffering,
to come into his stretched out arms of mercy, when thou layst wallowing
abominably in the gore-blood of thy many scarlet and crimsin sins; foughtest
on the Devils side, to the loss of the very lifeblood of thy soul; and every
time thou came to the Lords Supper, shedst the precious blood of his blessed
Son: what a shame is it unto thee to fall a raging, and swell with anger, for
the mere ouer-sight, many times, unwilling miscarriage, and vnpurposed error
of those, perhaps, which otherwise observe thee with obsequiousness and love?

4. If a man will not be moved with more fair and ingenuous motives, to
master and mortify this Bedlam rage (I speak in this passage to him that
hates to be reformed:) let him be amazed, and amend for shame; since the holy
Ghost has charged every man, not to meddle, or make any league of friendship
with him, while he nourishes, and gives the reins to this bosome-Rebell. Make
no friendship with an angry man: and with a furious man thou shall not go,
Pro. 22. 24. What a monster is a man of anger, that Solomon should set such a
brand upon him; whereby every one is warned to beware of him, and fly from him,
as from a nettling, dangerous, unsociable creature?

A word or two of another passion, before I pass out of the point, and that is
Fear, which I had not touched at this time, had it bin only a Rack, whereon the
hearts of covetous, ambitious, and carnal men are woefully rent, and torn, and
tortured all their life long; and not also a cruel engrosser of too much
golden time even from Gods children, not without impressions of much fruitless
sadness, and unnecessary discontent.

The vanity and tyranny of this passion is specially seen and exercised: 1.
In putting all real stings into imaginary evils, and drawing true and bitter
sorrows, from supposed sufferings. 2. In an ouer-greedy apprehension and
anticipation of sorrows to come, so that a man by too much
forethoughtfulnesse, and painful preconceit, does suffer them many times,
before they seize upon him.

1. For the first, who feels not the phantasticalnesse of opinion to forge,
and fasten upon him many dreadful objects; which of themselves have no vigor
to vex, because no real being and existence, yet truly torture and afflict,
by the only strength of imagination?

Thus one eats his own heart with grief for loss of those riches, and that
superfluous wealth, which if he had ever still possessed, he would never have
used. Another lies under the continual slavery of restless fear, lost fire
or robbery, some alteration in the State, or desolation of war, should
disperse his hoard, or hazard his temporal happiness. One is haunted with
much thoughtfulness and carking, what shall become of his children after his
death; what men will say of him when he is gone; lest his wife should marry
after his departure. (For naturally our minds are so vain, that besides the
abundance and burden of present cares, they will transport our desires and
affections beyond our selves and being.) Another frettingly fears, that he
shall be undone in a dear year, or the next Rot of sheep, and tires himself
with variety of plots for commings in, for many years to come, when many
times he dies in the mean time. Some take up too much precious time, from
present and more profitable meditations, by troubling their hearts, lest, if
the times turn, they should not be able to endure the fiery trial; whereas
afterward, perhaps, they end their life in the peaceful noone-tide of the
glorious Gospel. Others upon thought, or talk of death, are ready to
entertain fearful apprehensions, lest they should disgrace their Christian
life with an uncomfortable end, and by some extraordinary temptation, rauing,
furious carriage, lie open to the worlds interpretation, sinister censures, and
misconstructions of their former courses; when as after, it may be, they
conclude their days calmely, in good memory to the last gasp, without any
storm, or cloud of feared horror and discomfort; (except former distrustful
fears justly bring upon them that which they feared.) For since every one,
whose life has been consecrated to Gods glory with truth of heart, does
certainly pass through those dreadful pangs and last pain, into pleasures
endless and unspeakable; he ought also to submit with all patience and
quiet, to glorify him, and to be serviceable to his secret ends, with what
kind of death he please; whether it be, 1. Glorious, and vntempted: 2.
Discomfortable, by reason of bodily distemper, and by consequent, interpretable
by undiscerning spirits: 3. Mingled of temptations, and triumphs: 4. Or
ordinary, and without any great show, or remarkable speeches, after
extraordinary singularities of an holy life, which promised an end of special
note and observation.

2. For the second, besides these utterly unnecessary and merely imaginary
miseries; many fearful spirits especially haunted with the humor of
melancholy, will not suffer also certain and inevitable evils, which at length
must needs befall them, to sleep, and keep in their stings, until the time
appointed: but many times awake them by the cry of Fear, like so many sleeping
Lions, and cowardlily provoke them with timorous expectation to rent their
hearts, and sting terribly before the time. Thus our vain minds torment us
more with the fear of evils, then with the evils which we fear; spur us on
with much unmanly folly, to meet in the midway; nay, to overtake, outrun
sorrows to come, and make us a thousand times miserable with one individual
misery.

For instance: Thou have a child, and, perhaps, but one which thou love most
dearly; for that affection which would be severely strong toward ten, or how
many soever, is united in it alone. Thou enioyest a wife, whose death would be
unto thee, as the loss of half thy heart; and so proportionably of any
worldly comfort. Now certain it is, thou must at length part from all these,
or what else soever most dear and desirable things in this life, they must be
taken from thee, or thou from them. In this case then, if thou give way and
forth unto this faint-hearted tyrant, and malicious passion, it will wound
thine heart many and many a time with sense of their loss, before thou loose
them: and mingle amidst thy dearest and most doting apprehensions of their
sweetness and worth, many bitter thoughts of the day of divorce, and stings of
much worldly grief (for such only I mean) from a torturing preconceit of
painful heartbreake at parting. But the most tormenting rack in this kind,
upon which this tyrannical passion does much terrify and tear the hearts of
carnal men specially, is death: It is called, the Prince of terror, by reason
of its own extreme inevitable pangs; and to them also it is a certain passage
to torments without end, and past imagination: and therefore if their
consciences be not desperately seared, and sealed up securely with the spirit
of slumber against the Day of vengeance; they are wont to dye almost every
day, by a slavish fear of death: see Heb. 2. 15. O death, says the wise man,
how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things! Oh how the heart of such a man does shrug together
for horror, quake like an Aspen leaf, and die all the while, when this fear
does represent unto it in the glass of his imagination, the griesly forms and
ougly face of death, with those other dreadful circumstances, as the wailings
and outcries of wife, children and friends about his last bed, parting from
all worldly pleasures for ever, rotting in the grave, dragging to the Tribunal
and terror of the last Day, etc!

Besides these imaginary sufferings, and untimely sorrows, take notice of
three other base pestilent effects and mischiefs, which this natural,
slavish, distrustful fear (for that I only mean in the whole point) puts
upon a man. 1. It may bring upon him the thing which he fears: by fearing to
become miserable, he may become that he fears, and so turn his vain fear
into certain miseries; according to that of Solomon, Prou. 10. 24. That which
the wicked fears, shall come upon him. And that of Isai. 66. 4. I will bring
their fears upon them. Thou have a wife, a child, an outward state, an hie
place, which thou art immoderately afraid to loose; now this very distrustful
fear derogating from the glory of Gods merciful providence, which sweetly and
wisely disposes all things, may justly provoke him to deprive thee of them,
whereas other wise, thou might have enjoyed them still. 2. It robs and
bereaues thee of the kindly relish, and comfortable inioyment even of good
things. A man can take no delight in the fruition of that good, which Quotidie
moritur mortem qui assidue pauet.
he fears to loose. Life it self is loathsome, if a man slauishly fear to
dye. That good breeds the truest present contentment, against the loss whereof
we are always prepared. And therefore those who live in continual fear to
loose their child, goods, liberty, life, or any other thing that is dear unto
them, loose a great deal of that honest joy and Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
allowed pleasure they maight have, even in these outward things. 3. It deiects
and debases his noble nature, below the miseries and baseness of beasts in
this point: for they are fenced from this folly and vanity, by the benefit of
their weakness, and want of reason; never re-afflicting themselves with evils
past, or fearing any to come; but through their whole life enjoy entirely and
with full security, all contentments and pleasures incident to their natures,
save only when they are pinched with sense of present pain. What a shame then
is it to man, who being honored with the excellency of an understanding,
reasonable, and provident spirit, whereby he out-shines all other creatures,
like an Angel upon earth, should by the abuse and mis-imployment thereof, make
it a means unto himself, to become more miserable in this respect then a
brute beast?

Now many and sweet are the places and promises in See Reu. 2. 5, 10.
Gods Book, which may serve as precious counter-poisons, and cordials, against
this carking venom, which haunts with too often insinuations, even the most
heavenly mind; but eats continually like a Canker into the carnal heart:
They are such as these; I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.
Should thou fall into the fiery trial, assuredly thy merciful God would
either supply thee with a supernatural and extraordinary power and patience
over that most exquisite pain; or else, abate and lessen the rage of the
flames for thy sake. All things work together for good, to them that love God,
Romans 8. 28. Sin, in it own nature, is the deadliest and rankest poison to the
soul; and in it self, the greatest evil that is or can be; yet Gods infinite
Power and Wisdom, which at first drew light out of darkness, as a skillful
Apothecary deals with poison, so orders and tempers it to his, that by
accident it proves medicinable: much more does He turn to their good, crosses,
disgraces, losses of earthly things; poverty, want, life, death, any thing,
every thing. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it, 1. Cor. 10. 13. It is Gods Child's peculiar, in the
case of afflictions and all future troubles, to expect supportation in them,
benefit by them, deliverance out of them. He that spared not his own Son,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32? If Jesus
Christ be ours, it is infinitely absurd to fear slauishly, either hurt by ill,
or want of good. He is incomparably more worth then ten thousand worlds, were
they all extant. If thou enioyest then such a Jewel, what a cursed vanity is
it to torture and tear thy heart with fear of any earthly loss, or of ever
being prevailed against by any created power? Take yet more spiritual armor
and Heroical resolution, against the assaults of this cowardly Tyrant, which
does so unworthily afflict the spirits of men, not only with imminent ills,
but also with those which are not, and perhaps shall never be, nay sometimes,
which cannot possibly be, out of those two sweetest Psalms, for promises of
future protection, 91. and 121. Esa. 43. 2. But the special preservative,
which at this time I would commend unto you, against this distrustful
hearts-poyson, may be extracted from Christ's own words, Mat. 6. 34. After
many strong and precious Arguments against thoughtfulness and carking, our
heavenly Doctor concludes, Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the
morrow shall take thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day,
is the evil thereof. Whence I collect and counsel, that the Christian ought,
in respect of any torturing care, or carking forecast, to unite and confine his
thoughts, the workings and agitations of his spirit, to the managing of the
affairs, and mastering the miseries of the present day. The strongest mind
and best composed, is weak enough to sustain the brunt and encounter of every
days crosses. Temporal troubles, or spiritual temptations, fightings,
without, or terrors within, are the certain portion of the Saints in this
vale of tears. And what day so fair comes over the Christians head, wherein he
scapes Scot-free, as they say, herein? Since therefore every day brings forth
sorrow sufficient for the exercise of the retiredst presence of the most
recollected spirit, and the heartiest man shall have his handful, in passing
patiently and profitably through present troubles, which many times fall as
thick upon him, as one wave in the neck of another; what a base and unworthy
weakness is it, to unfit and disable our already too weak minds, for a
comfortable dispatch, and digesting of daily uncomfortable occurrents, by such
needless, senseless, fruitless distractions, vagaries of vanity, and Vtopian
peregrinations? As either 1. To loose them in the endless maze of imaginary
afflictions: 2. Or to waste them by untimely wrestling with certain evils to
come: 3. Or wound them with a painful remembrance of sorrows already past.
For some there are so ouer-greedie of grieuing themselves, and transported with
the tyrannical vanity of their own minds, that besides their trouble with
present, fained, and future miseries, collect also matter of mournefulnesse
from time past. For instance: Thou have lost thy dearest child, which is one of
the extremest earthly crosses, and goes nearest the heart, but long since, so
that if reasons from reason and Religion assuaged not the immoderation and
excess of thy sorrow; yet time has worn out, and wiped away thy tears, and
made thee weary of weeping: but notwithstanding, thy vain mind will not
suffer that grief, which even length of time has buried long ago, to lie
quietly in the grave, but draws into consideration, and remembers for the
nonce, its speeches, favor, pretty behavior, and other lovely circumstances,
to make thy heart bleed afresh, and wring from thine eyes new torrents of
tears, etc. Sovereign therefore against these Harpies and deuourers of the
heart, is that counsel of Christ, which I have commended unto you from his
own mouth; seconded also by the Apostle, Philip. 4. 6. Be (...), is derived,
(...) is so full of a vexing sense, that Virgil is (...) to express Homers
(...), a word of the same Original and signification in two Uerses.
careful for nothing: That is, with tearing and torturing the heart, with
carking, thoughtfulness, anxiety, fretting, impatiencie. Do not waste and
weaken thy mind, immoderately, unseasonably, imaginarily, vntimelily, with
distrustful anguish, pensiveness, and base prostitution of the flower and
sinew of thine immortal spirit, to fruitless and endless impertinencies and
mis-imployments. For by the way, we must take notice and acknowledge,
notwithstanding what has been said against carking, and other needless
distractions Atque animum nunc huc celere^, nunc diuidit illuc: In partesque
rapit va^ias, perque omnia versat.
and exorbitancies of vain minds; that a moderate, Christian, provident care
and forecast, is both convenient, and commanded; both for provision of things
necessary, and prevention of dangers. But this is not distressefull, but
delightful, because enjoined by God: See 1. Timoth. 5. 8. (For Quando men's
fibi recti est conscia, gratulatur: vel infusione quadam spirituali repletur
animus gaudio: cum aiicuius vel studia, vel ope^a a Deo probantur. Ambr. De
Cain and Abel.
performance of Gods Commandment, and the very act of Obedience with
sincerity, should beget much spiritual sweetness, delight, and joy in the
heart.) And a fair, easy, vnangry providence for things needful and time to
come, sweetened with the life of Faith, and a patient relyance upon Gods wise
and merciful disposing all our affairs, and their success, is one thing: and
a restless carking, and pursuit after things unnecessary, imaginary, and
sometimes impossible, embittered with many slavish fears of fained or future
evils, is another. It is profitable also to gather matter from time past, by
contemplation of youthful pollutions, crosses, and corrections for sinful
courses, companions in iniquity, or any other aggravating circumstance, for the
increase of godly sorrow, and hatred of sin. But this is joyful, and eases
the heart: for howsoever carnal joy and sorrow can never consist together at
the same time; yet that which is Christian, Peruersum aliquid videtur docere
sermo diuinus, Flere in laetitia: and in moerore laetari: audi in moerore
laetantem, Gloriamur, inquit, in tribulationibus, Romans 5. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 136.
Beat^ qui fic lugitis, quia ridebitis in lacrymis, Idem Tom. 9. page 1022.
sweetly ought, and may, of what sort soever the sorrow be. For first, causes
of it, from without, as reproaches, persecutions, shame, crown the Christians
head with abundance of glory, his heart with joy, his soul with blessedness,
1. Pet. 4. 14. Acts 5. 41. Matthew. 5. 10. Secondly, if it be inward, for sin
and corruption, there is great matter of much joy; for it sweetly signifies the
sof^ning and melting of the heart, and by consequent, the presence of Gods
sanctifying Spirit. Such tears as burst out of a heart oppressed with grief for
sin, are like an April shower, which though it wet a little, yet it begets a
great deal of sweetness in the herbs, flowers, and fruits of the earth. A
great man guilty of high Treason, comes to the Block to loose his head: In
the very nicke, when he is ready to lay down his neck, a gracious Pardon is
shown from the King, whereupon he bursts out abundantly into tears, springing
partly from an angry indignation against himself, for his traiterous carriage
toward so tenderhearted a Prince, partly from an inexplicable joyful sense
of his own safety. It is proportionably so, when we mourn for Him whom we
have pierced, and in Evangelical repentance. (God has so mercifully ordered
all things for his, that if they be not wanting to themselves, they may be ever
merry, and find continual matter of rejoicing: See 1. These. 5. 10. For he
well knows what great need their poor hearts have of this joyful affection;
both to sweeten their outward sufferings and bitterness from the world, and
also to season their spiritual sacrifices and services unto himself:) And
besides, it is one thing, to rake with our remembrance into the grave of buried
griefs, for sharpning the teeth of worldly sorrow, to eat our hearts: Another
thing, to make our memories minister matter from former times, of more
humiliation under Gods mighty hand, deeper detestation of our abominable
vileness, and to make our hearts many and many a time melt again, and bleed
afresh with comfortable softness, and godly sorrow for youthful sins.

VII. Prize and ply, as a most sweet excellency, and comfortable perfection in
Christianity, a right and religious ordering of thy tongue. It is very
material, and of special importance, for preservation both of outward and
inward peace. Original corruption has naturally put upon every man's tongue an
empoysoned fiery edge, whereby like a sword in a Bedlams hand, it kills and
slayes on all sides, woefully wounds his own conscience, infects and enuenomes
mortally the souls of the present, mangles the good names of the absent with
deadly malice, and so bathes it self remorselesly in continual bloodshed;
(for there is heart-murther, and tongue-murther, as well as hand-murther)
until the attainment of this grace, and mortifying circumcision of such an
unruly evil. That it may therefore neither be unseasonably idle, nor sinfully
exercised, besides many other caueats, and constant watchfulness, take notice
of, and to heart and practice:

I. That much and generally neglected duty of Christian reproof.

By reason of that general and common fellowship, whereof I gave a taste and
touch before, (of his arbitrary and intimate company, every Christian makes
conscience of better choice) which thou must sometimes entertain and exercise
with the men of this world, except thou will go out of the world; thou shall
meet now and then upon unavoidable necessity, and by the exigencie of thy
calling, with men of intolerable conversation, and very scandalous discourse;
and at unawares, and unwillingly fall amongst such companions, as will swear,
blaspheme Gods Name, talk filthily, slander the Ministry, rail against good
men; besides many other scurrill, base, and profane speeches; much froth and
folly in this kind. Now in this case ordinarily, profane men meddle not. They
hold it a point of preciseness to mar the mirth, and cast the company into
dumpes of melancholy, by calling sin into question. They love not (as they
say in their hearts) to be displeasing and vnplausible, where themselves gain
nothing, and perhaps do no good to the party. They are commonly old-excellent
in railing upon, and slandering a good man in his absence; but they are
starke-naught, and nobody in reproouing a notorious wretch unto his face. If
they open their mouth this way, it is commonly in jest, in bravery, in form,
in derision, for some Ones sake in the company, who, they know, cannot endure
it; or at best, out of a civil detestation of outrageous villainy, and furious
blasphemies of Gods glorious Name. But in such cases, the Christian is truly
sollicitous and zealous; very much troubled, and careful how to frame and hold
a serious, wise, and seasonable contradiction to the language of hell, which
consists in oaths, lying, slandering; in obscenities, raylings, contemptuous
insolences against the Ministry and ways of God, defense of Popery, and in
such rotten and Bedlam talk. He dares not many times in such company, for his
heart hold his peace, lest thereby he be guilty in some degree. 1. Of the
parties going on in sin. 2. Of betraying Gods glory, by a cowardly and
unchristian silence: and 3. For fear of wounding his own conscience. The
omission of the discharge of this duty, will sometimes very much vex the
conscience, and grieve the heart of the true-hearted Professor; when he is
departed the place, and considers that by his baseness and frailty he has
failed in so holy a duty, and been faint-hearted in the cause of God.

For this kind of reproouing then, and such censuring of the words and works
of darkness, the Christian is not to be censured too censorious and precise.
Conscience, charity, Leuit. 19. 17.
and Gods Commandment calls and cries upon him for the performance of this
needful duty; whenever unavoidable necessity, or the exigencie of a
warrantable calling shall have cast him upon profane wretches, and imprisoned
him for the while amongst fellows of lewd discourse and graceless carriage.
Except they be Dogs, or Swine: Christ himself has commanded, that Pearls
and holy things shall not be cast away upon such. Give ye not, says he,
that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before Swine,
Matthew. 7. 6. See also, Prou. 9. 8. and 23. 9.

The ground of this Commandment of Christ, I take to be twofold:

1. A dear, compassionate, and tenderhearted care of God, even over the
temporal lives of his children. Besides the glorious Ministry, and continual
guard of the blessed Angels for their preservation, that they hurt not their
foot Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
against a stone; his own also All-seeing and All-pittying Eye, does ever
graciously watch over them, to keep them as dearly as the Apple of his own
Eye; and therefore he forbids them to cast themselves desperately into the
mouth of a barking Dog, or upon the paw of a reuengefull and blood-thirsty
Lion: that is, he would not have his child to vouchsafe so much as a reproof
to any blasphemous wretch, or desperate Swaggerer, that would furiously fly in
his face for offering him a Pearl.

2. An holy jealousy over the glory and Majesty of his own blessed Word. It
is that holy Wisdom, which issued immediately out of his own infinite
understanding. It is far more pure and unspotted then silver tried in a
furnace of earth, fined seuen-fold. It is a sacred Pearl, framed and fashioned
by His own Almighty hand in the Palaces of heaven, which only by an invisible
and inspired power can raise those which are dead in sins and trespasses, to
spiritual life; stop the bloody issue of original corruption, and preserve
the souls of men in everlasting health. In a word, it is the Word of God, and
therefore most unworthy to be trodden under foot, or trampled in the mire by
any sensual Swine: that is, no ways to be vouchsafed to those hateful and
Swinish wretches, who out of a malicious sottishness entertain so glorious a
message from the mighty God of heaven with contempt and scorn.

These two reasons of the Commandment lie the Text: Give ye not, etc. lest
they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you. Whence we
have also some light to discern who are Dogs, who are Swine.

1. By Dogs, we see, are meant obstinate enemies, that maliciously Canes igitur
hic significat homines in impietate viuentes immedicabili, ^pemque omnino
conuersionis in melius non habentes, Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in 7. Mat.
revile the Ministry of the Word, the Doctrine of God, and the Messengers
thereof; who do not only tread the words of instruction and reproof under
foot, but also turn again, and all to rend the Teachers, and furiously fly
in the face of those who fairly tell them of their faults. Consider this and
tremble, all ye that are become scornful and furious opposites to the power
and purity of the Word, and bloody goades in the sides of the faithfullest
Ministers. Alas, poor wretches, forlorn Caitifes, you cast your selves
desperately into that accursed and horrible condition, that every good man is
bound in conscience not to afford you so much as an admonition, or reproof,
or a caveat to prevent those curses which are coming upon you. And you
wilfully draw upon your own heads that most fearful doom from Gods Spirit,
and from the Church of God; He that is filthy, Revel. 22. 1^.
let him be filthy still. He that is a Swine, let him be Swinish still. He
that rayles against the power of Grace, let him continue still a mad Dog. He
that sets himself maliciously against the Ministry of the Word; let that man
receive no comfort or benefit by the Word of Life. If he will needs, let him
roar still, swagger, be drunk, despair, die, and be damned.

2. By Swine, are meant those sottish scurrill wretches, Porcos vero, in luto
infraenis luxutiae i^giter commorantes, quos fane omnes huiusmodi doctrina
pronunciauit indignos, Idem, ibid*
who do scornefully and contemptuously trample under foot all holy
instructions, reproves, admonitions, tendered unto them out of the Word of
Truth.

1. Some of these are Swine, as it were, only in practice: they do not say
much, or keep any great grunting against good men; but they feed unsatiably,
though silently, upon the dross and filth of sensual pleasures and carnal
contentments: and if at any time a Pearl be cast in their way; I mean, a
seasonable reproof ministered unto them, they trample it in the mire, and with
a brutish baseness tread it under foot; because indeed they hate to be
reformed, and are sottishly and stubbornly resolved, not to exchange these
worldly pleasures which they have in present possession and pursuit, for the
glory of an hundred heavens, which Preachers so much talk of, but they cannot
taste of, or tell when to come thither.

2. Other Swine there are, as it were both in practice and profession; who
besides their hating to be reformed, and obstinate resolution not to forgo
their present pleasures, or forsake their former ways, are also possessed with
a spirit of scoffing. These are rather wild Boares: for with a furious and
Giant-like insolency and outrage, they provoke, and challenge the mighty Lord
of heaven, about the truth of his See Isa. 5. 19. and ^. Pe^. 3. 3, 4.
Judgments and Promises, making a mock of them.

Let all sensual and Swinish wretches consider this, and tr^mble; who with
sinful greediness feed upon earthlinesse, and Epicurisme, and hate to be
reformed; who wilfully wallow in the mud and filth of vanishing pleasures, and
will not be washed; who many and many times come unto, continue at, and depart
from the house of God, with a settled purpose and resolution, not to suffer
their hearts to be mastered by the power of the Ministry, or to change their
old fashions, say the Preacher what he will: but to live, and end their days,
in their ordinary former courses of prophanenes and good-fellowship. They may
read their doom and vengeance that dogs them at the heels, Psalm. 50. 21, 22.

Cursed also is the condition of all you that are scoffers at godliness and
good men. You have wearied your selves so long in walking and standing in
wicked ways, that you are not set down at rest in the chair of scorners. And
therefore all those that stand on the Lords side, are commanded by Christ,
there to leave you in your damned case, and to disquiet you no further. And
what an horrible depth of spiritual misery is this; That you run furiously
toward the pit of hell, and must have no body to stay you; not a man to call
and cry unto you, to tell you, that the fiery Lake is a little before you?

Though we have thus much light from the natural properties of Dogs and Swine,
to descrie and delineate those fellows, to whom, by Christ's commandment,
Pearls and holy things, admonitions and reproves are not to be vouchsafed;
yet Christians are sore troubled many times how to behave themselves, when to
speak, when to hold their peace, whom to repute Dogs and Swine, whom not; when
upon some unavoidable necessity, or by the exigency of their Calling, they are
unwillingly, and unawares plunged into the company of profane wretches, whose
ordinary talk is the language of Hell; oaths, scurrill jests, jesting upon
the holy conversation of the Saints, slandering good men, disgracing the ways
of sincerity, and such other base, and Bedlam-discourse.

But I do not see, how any constant rules, or immutable direction can be given
for Christian carriage in this case; it is so variable, and clothed with such
variety of circumstances, and constancy of alterations. The advice which I
would give in this point to the Christian, is this: when he is perplexed, what
to do in this regard amongst profane company; let him consult with these
bosom counselors, look unto his spiritual wisdom; to his heart; and to
his conscience. These must be his guides, and informers in these cases: and
they are counselors ever at hand, he carries the^ in his bosom.

1. His spiritual wisdom is to guide him in a right apprehension and
discretion of circumstances, and to define the opportunity and
seasonablenesse, when he is to interpose, and in what manner to oppose against
their furious and rotten speeches. It must tell him secretly, and suggest unto
him, when the cause of God, or the innocence of a good man calls specially upon
him for an apology, and at what time he has a calling thereunto. It must
inform him how he must reprove: whether directly and downright, or by
intimation, and indirectly; whether personally, or in the general; whether in
a fair and milder manner, or with a more bold and resolute spirit; whether
presently upon it, and in hot blood, as it were, or afterward to take occasion
to censure the same sin, with aggrauation of the odiousnes and damnation of
it; whether only by discountenance, or discourse; by a silent disapplause,
which I think, may be sufficient for some men, at some times, in some
companies, or with solemn protestation, and a professed opposition and
dislike, etc.

2. Let him also look to his heart: That his reproof spring not from any
imperious humor of censuring, and meddling with his brethren; from a proud
vein of contradicting, and controlling others; out of a Scoical sowrenesse,
and commanding surlinesse; from any purpose to disgrace, and grieuethe party;
from a formal affectation of Pharisaicall severity from a secret ambitious
desire of purchasing an opinion and reputation of forwardness, by being
forward in finding faults; or from any other by-respect: but from an heart
truly humbled with ^ight and sense of its own infirmities, zealously thankful
unto God for preserving him from the like outrage, and excess in sin;
graciously resolved into compassion and commiseration of the offender; lifted
up in a secret supplication for the pardon of its own sin, success of the
reproof, and salvation of the party all at once unto the Throne of Grace, etc.

3. His conscience must guide, and hold him in the right path, and golden mean
between two extremes, which ordinarily in these cases men are very apt to
incur: I mean, faint-hearted silence, and furious zeal.

1. Men many times, by reason of a sinful irresolution, and unchristian
cowardlinesse, would gladly make all such offenders, Dogs and Swine; that
thereby they might challenge the privilege of exemption from the discharge of
that Christian duty of reproof. Though their ears be filled with the oaths
and blasphemies of those that are about them, and grated upon with graceless
raylings against good men, and foul disgracements of the ways of God; yet
they never open their mouth; as though there could be any nobler object, or
exercise of their best eloquence, and greatest courage, then the just defense
of Gods glory, and Christians innocence. Oh! these are vile cowards in good
causes, and a kind of traitors to the state of Christianity. By such sinful
silence, they labor to purchase a name of No-meddlers in other men's matters;
of merciful men to their Brethrens infirmities; of plausible companions; of
wiser and more moderete Christians. But let them know, that such No-medling is
a kind of soule-murthering; such mercifulness is cruelty; such plausiblenesse
is pernicious; such wisdom is not that of the Serpent, commended by Christ;
but the wiliness of that great red Dragon, suggested by Hell.

Nay, some men are so strangely lewd and graceless, that they can hear, and
digest with patience and silence, the oaths and rotten speeches of their
servants, and, perhaps, their Audis filio^ bla^ phem^ntes, and patienter fers
Christian, quod Rex Nabuch donolo^ ^lienigena non potuit sustinere, dicens, Si
quis dixerit blasphemiam in Deum Sidrach, etc. in i^teritum erit, August. ^om.
^. p. 12^.
sons, without any contradiction, or correction. In their own families,
some, perhaps, swear, others talk filthily, some rail against the Ministry,
others jest upon the sincerity of the Saints, etc. and yet the wicked Governor
^ayes never a word. But in this point my purpose is principally to counsel
Christians; I meddle not at this time with such Synagogues of Satan, and dens
of Atheists.

2. Some others, it may be, but they are not near so many, may run into the
other extreme, and out of a spiritual foole-hardinesse, as it were, and
furious zeal, with an imperious, and unwarrantable boysterousnes fly in the
face of some desperate Swaggerer, with an undigested and unseasonable reproof:
whereby they both incur the guilt of giving an holy thing unto a Dog, and
unnecessary danger from the graceless fury of the party. Or else for want of
spiritual wisdom, and an holy discretion of circumstances; they may tender
an admonition to some such contemptuous swinish wretch, which will pass over,
and put by the precious severity of the Word of Truth with a scurrill jest; or
with a dull, and scornful sottishness trample underfoot that sacred Pearl.

Though it be no constant character of Dogs and Swine, yet commonly those
desperate wretches, to who^ by Christ*s commandment we must give no holy
things, are fellows of dogged, sour and contracted countenances, especially
toward true Christians; and have a kind of desperate furiousness impressed
upon their foreheads, which is then most visible, when they are crossed in their
villainies, and hear of any contradiction, or condemnation of their graceless
courses and contemptuous carriages. And those Swinish Gadarens, before whom we
must cast no Pearls, are fellows of a ^leering, gibing and scornful
carriage, especially toward good men, and godly exercises: they are so drowned
in sensuality, and glued to the earth; that they do not only despise, but
also deride the precious things of Heaven. As I take it, sensuality, and
earthly mindedness, mingled with a great deal of Atheism, begets in men
this sottish swinishnesse, and brutish contempt of the blessings of Grace, and
directions to everlasting bliss.

These premonitions and cautions premised, and observed, every Christian ought
to address himself with resolution, and conscience to discharge this
Christian duty of reproouing, when a just occasion, and a calling thereunto do
require and exact it at his hands. For these reasons:

First, in respect of the party offending, 1. A seasonable reproof, mingled
and sanctified with the spirit of invocation and compassion, may, by the
blessing of God, be an occasion of conversion to the offender. And let him
know, that he which conuerteth the sinner from the Iam. 5. 20.
error of his way, shall sa^e a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude
of sins. And it is the most glorious work in the World, and the noblest
employment under the Sun, to have an hand in the holy business of saving a
soul. Let hope then of doing spiritual good to thy brothers soul, be the
special aim, and a principal motive of performing this duty. There is a
Law, Exodus 23. 4, 5. that if a man meet his enemies Ox, or Ass, going
astray, he must bring him again* If he see his enemies Ass lying under his
burden, he must help him up again: How much more dear and precious in our
eyes should the immortal soul of our Brother be, then the Ass of our enemy?
If we must turn back the straying Ox of our enemy, and lift up his Ass,
when he is crushed under his burden; with what eagerness and zeal ought we to
labor, to stop the furious course of a reasonable creature toward the pit of
Hell; and to put our helping hand to raise up that silly foul, which by reason
of the heavy weight of its finne, is full sorely bruised and bleeding, ready
even to breathe out it last, and sink into the misery of endless horror?
Speak then boldly in the cause of God, when thou hear thy brother blaspheme
his Name, jest with his Word, talk filthily, rail against holiness, slander
good men, plead for profane pastimes, etc. for they are so many mortal stabs
into his own poor soul; besides the natural infectiousnesse of rotten
speeches, which may do much mischief to the standers by. Though thy reproof
prevail not at the present; yet thou know not what impression and working
it may have afterward upon his hard heart, whereby perhaps he may happily
think upon a new course, and of conversion to God; and so thou be a blessed
instrument of saving a soul. 2. But if it have not so happy a success upon
his soul, yet it may be, thou may thereby tame and take down his
insolency; so cut his comb by a seasonable contradiction, that he do not
carry it away bravely; so cool and confound his swaggering humor, that he do
not glory in his villainy, that he do not pride himself in his blasphemies,
and bloody oaths, in his contempt of Grace, and other outrageous carriages.
Answer a fool, says Solomon, according Prou. 26. 5.
to his foolishness, lest he be wise in his own conceit: lest he be too
proud. If a desperate and profane wretch will needs swear, and swagger, and
rail against the servants and services of God; yet let him know, that all the
while, he fights against God, damnes his own soul, and pleases none but
Devils, Drunkards, and deuilish men. If he will needs labor to be famous, by a
surious opposition to the Ministry, and ways of God; let him know, that his
name shall rot after (...). 10. 7.
him as vilely, as his carkeise in the grave, and himself burn in Hell
everlastingly; if he hold on in that humor without timely repentance and
reformation. 3. Thirdly, at the least, thou should thereby increase, and
aggrauate his inexcuseablenesse, and so glorify the Tribunal of Gods Justice;
when it shall there appear, that besides many other means afforded, and
offered unto him by Gods mercies; thou also did lend him thine hand, to
have Jude 23.
pulled him out of the fire, and gave him one call to have stayed him in the
furious and wilful pursuit of his own damnation. But because he still hated
to be reformed; because variety of means for his amendment, made him more
malicious, and obstinate in his own ways; and that contradiction, and
counsel to the contrary inflamed, and set on fire the lustful viciousness of
his corrupt nature, to hunt more greedily after forbidden pleasures; therefore
I say, he will be more and more fearfully ashamed, and confounded at that
great and fearful Day: and the more occasions he has had of his conversion,
the iuster cause then will he see of his deserved confusion; and by consequent
more glory will accrue unto the glorious Tribunal of Gods Justice.
Secondly, in such cases the Christian must speak in respect of himself. 1.
When the air is impoysoned with any infectious vapor, men use to fill their
sense with some Pomander, or other sweet perfume, and so they may declaime
noysomnesse of the smell, and repel the contagious insinuation: so when any
profane wretch has let fall any rotten speech, the Christian with a present
counter-poyson as it were, of a seasonable reproof, should stop his own
apprehension, lest any baser infection insinuate, and stain the soul; and to
preserve in heat and life, a fresh and strong opposition of the heart and
affections to all such lewdnes and scu^ility. 2. Silence at such a time will
seem to bewray either thy cowardlinesse in the cause of God; or hypocrisy in
thy profession. For it will seem strange, that thou which make show of
standing on the Lords side, and professest thy self to be a party in that
glorious Communion of Saints, should hear the name of God profaned in a
base and blasphemous manner, and the innocence sometimes of a good man carried
in triumph by the slanderous tongues of wretches, and trampled upon, as it
were, even unto dust, by the feet of pride and malice; and yet never open thy
mouth. As thou therefore desire to preserve the glory of thy Christian
reputation entire and shining, and hold it thy crown and honor to be
Champion unto the mighty Lord of heaven, a Proctor in his Spiritual Causes,
and the protector of the good names of good men; be ever ready to open thy
mouth, when a just apology in any of these respects is needful and required
at thy hands. 3. If thy conscience be enlightened, awake, tender, and rightly
informed, it will smite, and check thee after the omission of such a duty;
when afterward thou considerest with thy self, that by thy cowardly and
unseasonable silence, thy soul is entangled in the guiltiness, and has
incurred an accountablenesse for that sin. As thou then would keep all in
quiet at home in thine own bosom, and still possess the paradise of a
peaceful heart, suffer not blasphemies, obscenities, raylings, and other such
ribald, and rotten talk pass uncensured, and vnsorrowed for. Nay, and in so
doing, besides the invaluable comfort of a peaceful conscience, thou shall
also purchase unto thine heart a sound testimony of that gracious
tender-heartednesse, which is wont to melt, and resolve the hearts of Gods
children into compassion and commiseration in such cases* and which they use to
express, and exercise even toward the lewdest wretches, and such as have no
pity upon the spiritual miseries of their own poor and woeful souls. See
1. Sam. 15. 35. and 16. 1. Ier. 9. 1. Phil. 3. 18, 19. 2. Cor. 12. 21. Luke 19.
41, 42, etc. It was the dogged, and damned voice of cruel and cursed Cain, to
say, Am I my brothers keeper? But every true and tenderhearted Christian does
grieve to see so many of his brethren stick fast in the clutches of that
roaring Lion, and between the teeth of that Red Dragon; and therefore labors
by all means he can, to rescue them; to see so many about him run as fast
and furious as they can, to drown themselves in the pit of endless perdition*
and therefore as occasion serves, calls and cries unto them to stay their
course, before the hellish Gulf of confusion and horror has shut her mouth
upon them.
Thirdly, in respect of those which be present. 1. By thy speaking in such a
case, thou may lay, as it were, the spirit of profaneness for that time; so
that it do not rage, and overrule in the rest, as otherwise it would. For we
may sometimes observe, that a seasonable reproof passing from a man of
understanding, with resolution and authority, upon a fellow that so behaues
himself as though swearing were his profession, and traducing the Saints, his
Trade, does so quell and confound the swaggering humor of the rest of the same
crew in the company, that they are quite put out of their humor, as they say,
perhaps hang down their heads all the while, and think in their hearts, if
once they get out, they will come no more amongst such precise fellows which
cannot abide an oath; or where they cannot have their fling and forth in their
profane villainies and cursed reuelling. 2. Thou may hereby hold in the
weak, that they be not scandalized. 3. Thou may hold up the hearts of
stronger Christians, that they be not grieved and cast down with the
domineering of profaneness, and out-swaggering rage of Satan's Reuellers.
Fourthly, in respect of God Himself: 1. That, though the days wherein we
live, be strangely profane, and desperately naught; for this old age of the
world is pestred with all the pollutions, and abominations, which the course
and current of all former ages have conveyed and carried into it; though
iniquity mightily abound with much tyranny and triumph, and fearfully prevail
in all places; yet I say, that it may appear, that God has some to speak for
Him. That though Satan, more is the pity, has innumerable swarms of knights
of the Post, as they say, that are ready at a beck to do him any desperate
service; yet, notwithstanding here and there God has a Champion, who
fearelesse of the face of man, dare with an undaunted and holy resolution,
defend His ways, and stand on His side. 2. But above all, let that strict
charge from Gods own mouth, ( Tertul. hunc locum accipit de correptione
fraterna. Iudaeis hic praecepta. Lib. 4. cont. Marcion. cap. 35.
Leuit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him:) fright and fire
every one of us out of our sinful silence and cowardlinesse this way, and
keen us with resolution and forwardness, to a seasonable discharge of this
holy duty.

Take notice of a threefold duty, which lies upon every Christian in his
carriage toward men in their presence, and before their faces: 1. Christian
admonition: 2. Christian reproof: 3. Christian silence, and forbearance in
such cases.

1. If a brother be overtaken with a fault, or some less offense, we are to
admonish him in the spirit of meekness, Non agit ibi de irrisoribus cum illis
duriter agendum, sed de fratribus, Martan c. ^9. 2. Sam.
Gal. 6. 1. 2. If he offend more grievously, we are freely to reprove him;
and not to suffer sin to rest upon him, Leu. 19. 17. 3. If he be a son of
Belial, a scoffing Ishmael, a dog, or a swine; we are commanded by Christ to
say nothing; Matthew. 7. 6. Neither private admonition, nor brotherly reproof is
to be vouchsafed to desperate sinners or profane Ruffians, who would
entertain it with cruelty or scurrilitie.
II. Observe a sanctified silence; from

1. Rash censuring, which is severely censured by Christ Mat. 7. 1* 2.
Himself, and set as a visible Brand upon the face of the Hypocrite. Let it
ever be only the peevish property of those who are naught, and most obnoxious
themselves; of Pharisees and false-hearts, to be the greatest finde-faults;
uncharitably to entertain causlesse disconceits, and to pass rash censures
against those, who are far better then themselves. Which they will ordinarily
do: because,

1. They were never truly humbled with sight and sense of their own sinful
and accursed state. They never trembled, nor were thoroughly frighted with the
wrathful countenance of God, for their infinite pollutions and prouocations of
the eyes of his glory. Their consciences were never awaked out of their dead
sensual sleep, by the Trumpet of the Law, nor received any special and
particular illumination from the sanctifying Spirit. In a word, they have no
terror, no trouble, no work or business at home about their own finnes, in
their own consciences, and therefore they have leisure enough to look about
them, and are full enough of sinful curiosity, and unnecessary meddling, to
pry and enquire into other men's courses and carriages; of malice and
spitefulness, to mistake and misinterpret; of pride and peremptorinesse, to
proclaim many times with great noise, and selfe-applause, their own idle
malignant forgeries and fancies, for faults of those, who are much more
righteous the^ they. When they look forward, or any ways about them, they are
very sharpe-sighted into the fashions and failings of others; most exact in
observing their neighbors ways; Eagle-eyed, to pierce beyond the Moon; to
spy the least moate in the Sun, I mean, the smallest infirmity in the most
glorious Saint: Nay, they are of such a refined and sublimated eyesight, that
they can discern some errors and exorbitancies, especially in Professors of
Religion, which never had any existence. But when they should reflect upon
themselves, and turn their eyes to contemplate and consider their own
corruptions, there lies a great beam of hypocrisy between them and
themselves; so that they cannot possibly fee so much, as those huge mountains
of many crying sins, which full heavily press down their own souls
toward hell; those unnumbered swarms of beastly lusts, which rage remorslesly
within their own bosoms. 2. It is a point of their hypocritical policy,
cunningly, and confidently to impute those sins unto others, which are grossly
predominant in themselves; that thereby they might purchase an opinion of a
supposed innocence, and freedom from the like faults. For when they cry out
with great noise and clamor upon other men, they think they still the cry,
and stop the mouth of their own sins; and labor to fasten a persuasion upon
their own hearts, that since they, with such confidence, and bold faces
reprove and censure others, others will not, out of the congruity of a
charitable ingenuousnesse think them so shameless, as to be justly liable to
the same imputations; except some few wiser, and more judicious Christians, who
are able by spiritual experience, to discover the depths and mysteries of
their hypocrisy; and for such they care not much: for in point of reputation,
they rely most upon the common sort, and greater part. 3. It is the natural
humor of an hypocrite, to be supercilious and censorious. Pride is no where
more naturally bred, so proudly seated, and highly enthroned, as in his heart.
And therefore it is his common practice to hunt after estimation, by disgracing
and disabling others. Since he wants worth in himself, he labors to shine by
darkening others, misconceiuing that every detraction from other men's
reputations, is an addition to his own. 4. They hold it a point and proof of
forwardness, to be forward in finding faults. As though the flame of an holy
zeal were enkindled in any man's heart, only to give him light, for the
discovery of other men's sins, and not as a sacred fire, to burn up the
noisome lusts which boil in his own breast.
Thus, and upon such grounds as these, it is the hateful property of
Hypocrites and selfe-guiltie ones; and a common mark of their cruel
severity, to wade deeply into the search and censure of other men's ways, and
to gore very bloodily into the consciences of others, whereas they never
purged their own. But true zeal ever casts the first stone at a man's self,
and plucks the beam out of his own eye, that he may better discern and draw
the mote out of another eye: I mean, a sincere heart is ever most censorious
and severe against it self; most searching into, and sensible of its own
sins; prying with special curiosity and inquisitiveness, into the endless
maze of its own wicked windings and depths of guile. Though it heartily and
unfeignedly detest all sin in whomsoever; yet its own iniquities and
pollutions stick closest, and go nearest, and beget in it a more particular
and extraordinary impression of remorse and loathing. The reason is, it has
truly tasted the terrors of a wounded conscience, been scorched with the secret
sense of Gods angry face, and formerly full sorely crushed under the most
grievous burden of innumerable sins. It knows right well, by woeful
experience, what bitterness of spirit, and anguish of soul springs naturally
from the retired survey of scandalous transgressions in cold blood. It feels
from time to time, deadness of heart, lessening of graces, loss of comfort to
ensue upon every gross relapse, or willing fall. It finds too often, to its
much grief, that if it foster and nuzzle in it self any sensual corruption
or secret lust, the Lord will not hear its prayers. It is full well acquainted
with the invaluable preciousnesse of a peaceful conscience and Gods favorable
countenance, which it cannot possibly enjoy, if it lie delightfully in any one
sin against its knowledge, etc. This being the experience, exercise, and
constitution of an upright heart; it is most angry and displeased with, most
Eagle-eyde and watchful over, most strict and severe against its own sins.
Which home-imployment happily hinders and moderates a man from too much meddling
abroad. This world of work within, about his own soul, in discovering,
opposing, and mortifying his own unruly lusts and rebellions, ties his tongue
from being so busy in censuring other men's faults. As therefore thou would
have a true testimony of taking thine own sins to heart, and of having
been sincerely humbled under Gods mighty hand thy self, keep a constant and
narrow watch over thy tongue: be very sparing in speaking the evil which thou
know by others: judge no man rashly, out of spleen, humor, passion, pride,
prejudice, Pharisaisme, etc. or of his Noli esse alien^ vitae aut temerarius
iudex, aut curiosus explo^* B^n.
final state. For all sound Conuerts and truly mortified men desire, and
labor to be very charitable, merciful and seasonable in their censures.
Consciousnesse of their own corruptions, makes them compassionate toward
others in this kind.

Object. Yea, but will some say, howsoever you put it upon profane men and
hypocrites; yet it is well known, your Professors are the only shrewd
censurers, very sightfull, and severe about other men's faults, and are still
ready upon all occasion, by their peremptory judging, to send all others unto
hell save themselves, and those of their own sect, as they speak: (And so was
the way to heaven styled Act. 28* 28.
many a year ago.)

Answer. This I grant, is many times the profane man's censure of the true
Christian, and therein he discouers himself to be a true hypocrite: for with
much bitterness and malice he censures sincere-hearted men, to be censorious,
when himself is the only unconscionable Critic and cenfurer. He reprooues
Gods faithful Ones for reproouing, when himself full often amongst his
companions, out of a pang of imperious choler, and implacable hatred to
holiness, condemns for Counterfeits, without all ground, or truth, those whom
the Lord himself iustifies for true-hearted Nathaneels, and passes sentence of
guiltiness and gross hypocrisy, after they be cast by a jury of
Ale-knights, upon those, whom the Highest Tribunal does mercifully acquit.

To illighten a little, and rectify thy judgment in this point of private
judging; conceive with me;

1. First, that all judging and censuring is not censurable and condemned: But
that, when a man with an evil mind judges amiss and uncharitably of others
for some evil end. We may judge the tree by his fruit. If we see a fellow
constant and incorrigible in his lewd rebellious courses, evidently infamous
for rotten fruits, hanging out in the open fight of the Sun; as drunkenness,
swearing, usury, whoredom, persecuting the power of godliness, scoffing
Religion, unrighteous dealing, etc. We may, leaving his final doom to the
Searcher of all hearts, judge and censure him for the present to be Gods enemy,
and in a most wretched estate. But in such cases, besides just cause, be sure
of a warrantable calling, conscionable Christ judging the Pharisees both for
lif^ and doctrine, called them Hypocrites, for caution to his Disciples: Matthew.
23. 1, 2, 3. and 16* 6. and Herod, Fox^ for adm^nition to others.
end, and no beam in thine own Matthew. 7. 5.
eye.

2. Secondly, let us take notice of some differences between the true
Professors, and profane man's censuring. It differs, in respect,

1. Of the Object. The principal aim and object of carnal men's cruel
disconceits, and bitterest censures, is the zealous Professor. Dogged they are
enough many times amongst Luke 13. 32.
themselves, about worldly affairs, and maliciously enter-teare one another
like wild beasts; mutual brawlings about earthly things, wrongs, encrochments,
underminings, coozening, ouer-reaching, ambitious contentions, etc. fill their
hearts with much gall and greediness of revenge, their mouths with mutual
barking at and biting one another. But to the people of God, in their Bedlam
fits, they are not only Dogs, but even enraged Devils, and swell with the very
venom of Hell, the ouerflowing whereof does drown all private discords. Herod
and Pilate behaved themselves before, like two angry Mastiues one against
another; but when opportunity was offered, they pursued Christ with reconciled
malice, and united forces. Put up an hare before two Greyhounds, snarling about
a bone, and they will both doggedly concur in the pursuit of that harmless
beast. It is just so with graceless men against Gods Child: and ever the more
forward he is in the narrow way, the more furiously is he persecuted by the
spite of tongues. The most resolute for Gods glory, and in good causes, is
ordinarily most rayled against, and reviled. The foul spirit of
good-fellowship, as they call it, is still foaming out against Gods chiefest
Favorites, the foulest censures: That they are hypocrites, humorists,
factionists, traitors, pestilent fellows, and all that naught is. David was so
charged by Saul and his Courtiers: Jeremy by the profane Nobles: the godly
Jews by Haman: Nay, Christ himself by the Scribes and Pharisees: Paul by
Tertullus: the Prim^tiue Christians by the Heathens: and all that will*liue
godlily in Christ Jesus, must look for the same portion, the same persecution
amongst the men of this world; even to be most vile, and contemptible in their
conceits and construction. There is no creature that ever God made, not Satan
himself excepted, which is more maliciously set against and censured, then
good men. Neither should any have so bad a name as they, could the hellish
mists of virulent tongues obscure and stain the glory of their reputation. If
sentence should pass upon the godly at that last and great Day, according to
the verdict of them that are not friends or parties, we should certainly all
be cast and condemned, not a man freed and acquit. But blessed be God, the
Searcher of all hearts, the Almighty Protector of all innocence, who to the
shame and confusion of all spiteful opposites, will witness for us at that
highest Tribunal; and then at the furthest before men and Angels, will bring
forth our righteousness as the light, and our judgments as the Noonday. Oh
that I had some to hear me! says Job: Behold my sign that the Almighty will
witness for me: though mine adversaries should write a book against me,
etc. And in this itching humor of mis-censuring the servants of God, the
wicked are so wilful and eager, that rather then they will want matter, they
will most basely, and unworthily snatch it from the enuenomed tongue of a
Talebearer; from the slanderous folly of some seurril Iester, the frothy
rauing of a greasy drunken Ale-house-haunter, nay rather then fail, forge it
out of a suspicious selfe-guiltinesse in their own profane fancies, and suck
it, as they say, out of their own fingers. But let them know, that when a son
of Belial censures a sincere Professor, it is as if the darkest nooke in Hell
should find fault with the Moon, that great Light of Heaven, for those little
spots in her face, whereas otherwise she is a fair and goodly creature: as if
the most loathsome dunghill should challenge the fairest garden for
vnsauourinesse, because there is here and there a weed amidst variety of
other: fr^grant flowers: as if a worthless lump of dross should censure an
angel of gold, for want of a grain or two in weight: as if a fellow almost
eaten up with the filthy French disease, Velut si aliquis saeuissimo Hydrope,
vel quolibet immedicabili languore constrictus, hunc quidem etiam negligat, eum
vero culpet, qui exig^um in aliqua corporis sui part non curet tumorem.
Chrysostom hom. 24. in cap. 7. Matthew.
should cry out of the danger of a growing Ague in another. For in this case,
he who as yet is nothing but an accursed lump of sin and lust, damnation
and hell, loades with censorious lies that happy soul, which in the fountain
of Christ's meritorious blood, is made far whiter then the Snow in Salmon, and
fairer then the wool of the sheep coming up from washing, though some spots
and stains of infirmities and frailties cleave unto it, while it yet dwells in
an house of flesh, and tabernacle of clay.

But now on the other side, the ordinary object of the Christians Censure, is
according to Christ's rule: those trees which discover themselves to be stark
naught, by the rotten fruits, which hang upon them in the sight of the Sun.
And yet that also must be seasoned with charity, discretion, seasonablenesse,
freedom from spleen, humor, passion, personal hatred, insolency, or any
other exorbitant distemper. Those professors prove too often, either utterly
unsound, or not so thoroughly humbled, who unmercifully insult either over the
damnable estate of those which are without, or uncharitably blaze abroad the
infirmities and failings of the brethren, which they ought to conceal; and as
the hand (...) a salve upon any sore part of the body, and then couers it; so
to apply a plaster of a gentle and mild reproof, that it may secretly heal,
and the World be never the wiser. Ordinarily, so far as some men are fierce,
boisterous, and master-like in searching out, censuring, and secret insulting
over the falls, fraileties, difference from them in some indifferent things, of
their Fellow Christians; so much many times come they short in mortification,
holy wisdom, humility, self-denial, faithfulness in their Callings, etc.
and that of those, perhaps, whom they so imperiously disable and undervalue.
Commonly, too busybodies this way, are either dangerously proud, or sinfully
politic: proud, and therefore endeavor to raise their own, upon the ruins of
other Christians reputation, better then themselves: or politic; for,
themselves being censurable for some grosser infirmities, or scandalous
walking, they labor cunningly to find answerable errors in more noted
Professors, that themselves may go more unnoted.

2. In respect of the order. The true Christian ever casts the first stone at
himself, and first, the beam out of his own eye; that is, begins with
himself, searches his own heart, rips up and ransacks his own conscience,
censures his own ways, condemns and crucifies his own corruptions, and
abandons all his known sins; and then he may with a more comfortable
calling, Matthew. 7. 5. with more sincerity and success censure Non generalite^
peccata omnia prohibuit iudicari, necprorsus, omnibus istius rei abstulit
potestatem: sed his profecto solis, qui quum ^lagitijs abundent innumeris,
alios de leuissimis quibusque delicti^ tota temeritate condemnant, Chrysostom.
hom. 24* in cap. 7. Mat.
others. But hypocrites, and those who hate to be reformed, first begin with
others, are most prying into other men's carriages, perusing other men's lives,
thirstily hunting after, perhaps, by the help of many dogged spies, and
fawning Spaniels, the falls and faults especially of Professors; (for there is
the kindly triumph:) ever tampering and meddling with their motes; but have
never any leisure or pleasure to look into their own rotten hearts, and
rebellious courses. The reason of this difference may be this: Every godly man,
together with the power of grace, puts on an holy bashfulnesse, an ingenuous
modesty; that he would be foully ashamed, and could not with any face charge
others with those crimes, which he should allow in himself. But hypocrites
wear maskes, vizors and whorish foreheads; they will hardly blush, or be
ashamed at any beastly carriage, especially bringing in pleasure or profit;
much less for seeming holy by their strictness and severity against other
men's faults, though as full of lewdness and lust themselves, as the skin will
hold. How often may we hear imperious Pharisees mangle and martyr a good man's
good name, for some lesser infirmity, who never learnd to mourn for, or
mortify any one of those many gross corruptions, and secret villainies, which
reign in themselves?

3. In respect of the manner. Selfe-guilty Pharisees are wont peremptorily to
pass their rash censures upon the more righteous then themselves, with much
malice, pride, scornefulnesse, and profane insultation: but the seasonable
censures of truly humbled Christians, ought ever to be mingled with much
mercifulness, commiseration, sensiblenesse of their own infirmities, and love.

4. In respect of evidence and truth. Profane men's censures of Gods servants
are many times not only groundless, causeless and false; but also
prodigiously absurd, and utterly impossible, without any shadow or show at all
of likelihood. The enemies to Christ's ministry confidently censured Ioh. 7. 20
and 8. 48. 52. and 10. 20.
him to have a Devil, in whom notwithstanding the fullness Coloss. 2. 9.
of the Godhead dwelt bodily. Tertullus judged Paul to be a pestilent fellow,
when he was the most precious man upon earth. Elijah was accounted a troubler
of Israel; who was in truth the very Charrets and horsemen of the same. The
Princes suggested to the King, that Jeremy was a traitor ^er. 38. 4.
to the State; from which he was so far, that he desired his head to be
turned into waters, and his eyes into springs of tears, that he might weep
day and night for the desolations of it. Proportionable for monstrousness of
falsehood, are Mal^ est mentis, mali moris, affingere mihi mores ex ^uis.
many and many censures passed upon Professors at this day. Opposites to the
power of godliness are so impudently perverse, that they commonly cut
conditions unto others, out Mali alios de suo aestimant ingenio.
of the cursed corruptions of their own rotten hearts.

But now on the other side, Gods people must be very careful and tender, what
conceits they entertain, and what censures they pass upon others. They are
bound by the Laws of divine love, to conceive and speak the best of every
one, until his words, ordinary carriage, open profaneness, and fruits of
the flesh, clearly conu^nce the contrary; to construe and interpret all things
in the better part, so far, as they may with a good conscience, without
prejudice to the truth, or impeachment of Gods glory. They ought to be so
far from greedy apprehension of imaginary matter, or violent wresting of
men's words, actions and behavior to the worst sense; that if matters be but
probable, poyzd with equal circumstances, and with even weight of reasons
interpretable both ways, they are ever to suffer their conceits and censures
to be carried the more charitable way. They ought to be so far from censuring
others without ground, truth and proof; (which is the ordinary practice of
most men) that they should never speak the ill they too certainly know by
their brethren, but with fearfulness, as it were, and some kind of
enforcement.

5. In respect of the end. The ends why Pharisees and Good-fellowes, as they
call them, entertain many groundless disconceits, and thereupon exercise such
censoriousnesse against holy men, are such as these:

1. To bind up their bleeding souls in the mean time with a palliate cure,
as they call it; to procure some temporary ease to their hearts, against the
checks and bitings of their guilty consciences, For when consideration in cold
blood of their impenitent courses, and of their certain walking in the broad
way, by reason of their own sensual liberty, and much company, does sting
them with remorse, they have recourse to the ill opinions they have conceived
of the best men; and thereupon think within themselves, and take occasion to
say unto others; What need we take these things so much to heart, or trouble
our thoughts with necessity of more strictness? Are not those, who go for
the godliest, and are accounted the prime Professors, such and such men? Have
not they also their infirmities and follies, though they guild them over with
goodly shows, and pretense of zeal? Hereupon they somewhat assuage the secret
slavish smart of their now and then wounded consciences, and walk more merrily
toward their eternal perdition. For a settled disconceite of a Christian
harbored and applauded, is a strong nail to fasten an unregenerate man to his
own ways, and a mighty bar to keep him out of a gracious state.
Sensualists are so strangely bewitched by Satan, that he first causes them to
forge in their own brains, or take up from a spiteful tongue, some lying
tale of a good man, and then after makes it his means to keep them with
security and contentment in the kingdom of darkness, and to stand in
everlasting opposition to the ways of sincerity, and salvation of their souls.

2. To make, by an affected liberty and severity in censuring others, the
maskes of their own hypocrisy, less markable. For by their fained triumphs,
and imperious insultations in this kind, especially upon fresh news of some
Professors scandalous fall, they would have the bystanders to conceive, that
howsoever they be not so precise and forward, or make so great a show as
others; yet they are fully as honest men as they, and may, perhaps, step into
heaven before them.

3. To wreake their spite upon the children of Light; who are ever eye-sores
and heart-sores to all sorts of sinners, He, meaning the righteous man, (says
the Author of the Chap. 2. 15.
Book of Wisdom, though Apocryphal, yet ancient) is grievous unto us, even to
behold: for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion.
And it angers them at the very heart-roote to consider, that whereas, they
hope, and hold themselves sufficiently qualified for Heaven; yet the righteous
man's forwardness, zeal and living of another fashion, if ingenuousnesse
dispell the mist of prejudice, clearly remonstrates to their own consciences,
and proclaims aloud to all spiritually understanding men, that in truth, and
upon trial, they are in the state of wretchedness, and of the family of Hell.
Hereupon it is, that they labor might and maine, with many disgraceful
censures, to dim the glory of his goodness; and, if it were possible, by
publishing their own malicious surmises, others slanderous tales, or
spitefully aggrauated frailties, to pull him back, at least, in opinion of
their favorites and dependants, to the same measure of infirmities, and pitch
of impiety with themselves.

But now the ends, which humble Christians propose unto themselves of just
dislikes, and seasonable censures of unsanctified men, are briefly such as
these:

1. To preserve their thoughts innocent from accessarinesse to sin, by a
secret invisible allowance of it in other men; and their tongues from cowardly
silence, when they have a calling to disgrace it. 2. Left a Knave go for an
honest man, and hypocrites deceive true-hearted Nathaneels. 3. Left the power
of Christianity, wherein Gods glory is highly interessed, suffer, and be
undervalued. For instance: Thou hear sometimes a fellow notoriously branded
with some infamous sin, yet so spoken of by some dawbers with intemperate
mortar, or at least by ignorant worldlings, as though his present condition
were tolerable toward God, and hopeful in respect of salvation, by reason of
some other good parts, for which they praise him: In this case, if the
understanding Christian hold his peace, the bystanders may be so far
scandalized and mistake; as to conceive and collect, that a man may lie in a
sweet sin, and yet live in Gods favor; that the pleasures of the World, and
peace of conscience may consist together, which are as incompatible as Heaven
and Hell. And why should not that silence be sinful, which suffers an open
known profane man, to carry away the reputation of one in the right way; (if
there be time and place for a seasonable, wise and charitable contradiction,)
as well as that, which suffers one which is true of heart, to be charged with
hypocrisy?
2. Secondly, be silent from slandering, backbiting, falsaccusing: Here I will
say nothing of downright forging, and fastening a false crime upon an
innocent, which is the most pestilent and palpable, and other gross kinds of
this very foul sin: (for so it is indeed, howsoever to a carnal eye looking
upon it, painted with the colors of commonnesse and self-love, through the
false glass of these corrupt times, it appears not so ougly. The very
Casuists and Schoolmen, none of the precisest Divines, I am sure, do
deservedly vilify it with a brand of heinousness, far above theft; as they
may well, both for a greater breach of love, preciousnesse of object,
vnrecompensablenesse of loss, difficulty of restitution, concurrence of many
sins, consequence of much ill, etc) I say, I will be here silent of the
grosser sorts of slander, because of them, Gods children are for the most part
more easily sensible, and ordinarily watchful: but let me a little advise and
awake thee to further inspection of the present point, lest sometimes even in
telling the truth, thou be entangled in the briars of this base sin, and
justly incur the fault of a false accuser, which thou may many ways: (For
detraction, to speak Logically, does not formally consist in the diminution of
the truth, but in the denigration of a man's good name.) 1. By discovering
secret infirmities, which love, that covers a multitude of sins, would have
concealed. It is a base ambition, and most unworthy the noble magnanimity of a
Christian heart, to hunt after, and purchase an opinion of precedencie in
graces, and zeal, by the disgrace of another, perhaps every way, save only in
the censurers own ouer-weening conceit, better and more worthy then himself.
When thou hear a man worthily magnified, for eminency of parts and
spiritual worth, be it far from thee, or any that ever took sin truly
to heart, to come in with a But; only because out of a pang, or rather
predominancy of privy pride, thou would gladly be noted for a Nonesuch,
and pass for the matchless Professor. Let it ever be the property and vein
of vainglorious Pharisees, to raise their reputations, and sometimes
themselves, but with execrable villainy, upon the imaginary ruins of good men's
innocencies; and to hold every insolent detraction from other men's
sufficiencies, and addition to their own. 2. By drawing out of other men's
words, actions, and behauiours, upon the suspicious rack of a busy wit,
aims, insinuations, and intentions, which the Author never dreamed on: and by
fathering upon them such enforced sinister senses, and wrested crooked
constructions, which an ingenuous impartial Expositour could never possibly
extract. It is the easiest thing of a thousand, for a malicious mind, to soil
the glory of the brauest and most beautiful actions, with ill and wrong
interpretations and surmises of By-ends. (For the pride of a man's own
disdainefull nature, and the devil himself, are ready mid-wiues at such
monstrous conceptions and bastard births.) There is some truth in that
hyperbolicall speech of him, who said; Let any man present me with the most
excellent and blameless action, and I will oppose it with fifty vicions and
bad intentions, all which shall carry a face of likelihood. Upon this very
point, Tribunals of Justice, which hold more upon policy than piety, especially
of private spleen embitter their Judiciary power against the party, too often
strangely blind the common peoples eyes, and do a great deal of wrong. A
wicked wit, and wide conscience, mounted on horseback amongst a number of
Princes, walking like servants upon the ground (the Epidemicall disease of
these worst and most vlcerous times) upon this advantage, many times work a
world of reuengefull villainy. But how soever it be easy, and too ordinary,
for black tongues to blast and stain by wresting and wier-drawing the beauty
of the best actions, with malicious misconstructions; yet it is villainous and
base. To let laws of divine love alone; even the light of Reason led wise men
to this resolution, as appears by their Semper in dubijs Benignio^a
praeferenda sunt, de diuer. Reg. ^uris. In re dub^a benigniorem
interpretationem sequi^ non minus iustius est, quam tutius, Ibid. 164.
rules of Law; That in doubtful things, we must ever pitch upon the more
favorable construction. We are to be so far from a greedy hunting after a
spiteful misinterpretation of men's speeches, and violent wresting of their
actions and carriage to the worst sense; that if matters be but probable,
poized with equal circumstances, and with even weight of reasons interpretable
both ways, we are ever to suffer our conceits and censures to be carried the
more charitable way. 3. By adding unto the truth, or detracting from it, or
intermixing false adulterate Glosses, or some impertinent Parenthesis of a man's
own. Christ's false accusers were deeply and damnably faulty this way. And in
this kind, many, who are their Crafts-masters, as they say, in malice, will
first of all give good men in their absence their due and deserved
attributions, with many magnificent and plausible speeches; Pessimum inimicorum
genus, laudantes, Tacit. in vita Agricolae. page 679.
but afterward at the cloze, premising some formal counterfeit protestation
and Pharisaicall Preface, as, I am very sorry to hear it: I would it were
otherwise, come in with a But, steept in very gall and vinegar, which Some men
are praised maliciously to their hurt, thereby to stir envy and (...) toward
them.
bites most bitterly, and cuts like the sharpest razour. As thus: A man of very
good parts, great worth, extraordinary endowments; But something proud. He is
one, that is very well reformed of late, of much knowledge, and grown
marueilously forward in Religion; But a little covetous. And thus they speak,
not out of any love unto the party, impartialitie of censure, or that the
imputation is true: but out of a cunning trick, to bring their own credit to
their own door; a perverse humor of measuring another by their own foot;
an envious impatiencie of being surpassed in any sufficiencies; or rather than
all this, from a base, an irregular and dunghill desire of having the best
men, especially every forward Professor, branded with one notorious But or
another. For hypocrites, and enemies to Gods grace, would, rather then their
lives, have the lives of all Gods people stained with some gross sin. Rather
then fail, they will fasten upon them many a lewd slander that way, hammered
only upon the forge of falsehood, and by the midwifery of malice in their own
crafty pates; or broched upon an Ale-bench, or snatched from the distempered
tongue* of some pedling Tell-Tale, whence they may supply themselves with
imaginary matter, both of insolency, and triumph against forwardness and
zeal, and also nourish a Pharisaicall persuasion, that howsoever there may be
a profession, and shows to the contrary, yet others are as corrupt and
censurable as themselves. 4. By relating all the truth, the whole truth, It is
not lawful to sp^ (...) we know by another, though it be true, except we (...)
a Calling.
and nothing but the truth: but Doeg played the dog against David, in all, or
some of these respects.
either with a We must speak the truth in l^sse. Ephesians. 4. 15.
malicious and spiteful heart toward the party; or in a contemptuous,
scornful, and insulting manner; or to a lewd end, and upon purpose to bring
into hatred and disestimation; or some way or other, without any warrantable
and comfortable calling thereunto.

Here therefore it will be seasonable, for help and direction against this
more plausible, but also pestilent kind of slandering, to tell you, that
telling the evil that is true of another, in his absence, does brand you with
the guilt and stain of Back-biters, save in such cases as these:

1. First, of profit, and good to the party absent. For instance; Thou
informest thy friend of a third man; telling him, that he begins to break out
into bad courses, ill company, infamous haunts and houses; and so proceedest
to a more particular and punctual discovery of his lewd pranks and exorbitant
carriage: but all this purposely for the benefit of the party. And therefore
thou intreatest thy present friend, that he would interpose, engage, and
improoue the utmost of that power and interest which he has in his affections,
dependence, or some nearer relation, for his reclaiming and amendment.

2. Of expediencie for him that hears: when he is any way in danger of
injury or infection, from the cunning, or corruption of the party spoken of.
For instance: Thou discernest and obseruest some sly, smooth companion, under
a cloak of Profession, and formal color of conformity to the best things,
to insinuate into liking and acceptance with thine vsuspecting Christian
friend: whereupon thou foreseest, that if he go on without notice and
discovery, and get once within him; a thousand to one, at length he will
either cunningly prey upon him, or cursedly betray him. Now in this case, thou
may lawfully lay out such a counterfeit in his colors, and for prevention of
the mischief which might ensue upon such a dangerous insinuation, disclose
unto thy friend his hollownesse and halting, and that lewdness and knauerie
which he guilds over in the mean time, with a veil of seeming, and vernish of
hypocrisy; but is wont, when once he has attained his end, or acted his
villainy, to throw away his vizor. For such fellows there are abroad in the
world, who purposely mix and join themselves with Gods children, hang upon,
and adhere unto true Christians, as men from whom by reason of the singleness
of their hearts, and charitable vnsuspiciousnesse, they may either directly or
by accident suck out the greatest advantage.

3. Of necessity for him which speaks: That he may be preserved from
guiltiness and accessarinesse to the sin, which by silence and saying
nothing, he should incur and bring upon himself. For instance: There comes
to thy notice some notorious villainies, which concealment and impunitie would
mightily animate, and easily transport to further excess and outrage; but
seasonable advertisement given to authority, as to a Magistrate, Minister,
Tutor, Father, Master, Governor of Family, might be a means to cut the knot
and heart of such cursed good-fellowship, and stay the torrent of that
scandalous insolency: In this case, thou have a calling to reveal, inform,
and implore superior assistance for suppression of sin. And therefore those
of the house of Cloe did well to certify Paul, of the disorders and 1. Cor. 1.
11.
dissentions amongst the Corinthians: And Paul's sisters Acts 23. 16.
son, to acquaint the chief Captain, with that deuillish plot of desperate
conspiratours against Paul. Otherwise, both thou and they, by cowardly and
cruel silence in such cases, might in some sort, justly incur the guilt and
accountablenesse even for other men's sins so unhappily concealed.

4. Fourthly, when a seasonable, warrantable occasion is given thereby, of
performing some Christian duty, as

1. Of instruction, and forewarning to others; thus, or in the like manner:
Thou have a friend, whom thou see, and fear is entering a licencious
course, which at length is like to breed his confusion: Whereupon thou tellest
him, that such or such a man, just as he begins; from contempt of the Word,
profanation of the Sabbath, disobedience to Parents, fell fearfully into a
desperate knot of lewd companions, then to Alehouse hanting, after, to gaming,
at last, to the gallows: and therefore thou aduisest him to take heed in time:
to let such woeful precedents of sin and shame stand still in his eye, to
stay him from breaking his neck at the bottom of the same stairs: for if he
continue the reins but a while longer upon the neck of his rebellious nature,
and still hold on so desperately with such wild colts, the devils Dromedaries
to the ^ame excess of riot, he shall find no more power in himself to stay,
until from the height of sin, he fall into the bottom of hell, then a man
having begun to run down the steepest hill, can stop before he comes at the
bottom. He that lays his foundation with fire-worke, must look in the end to
be blown up: he that premises profaneness and rebellion, shall be sure to
conclude in cursednesse and confusion.

2. Of praising God for the ruin, and rooting out of some implacable
impenitent Non desu^ Ecclesiae persecutiones etiam in hoc tempore, quando
tranquillitas videtur Ecclesiae* qui^ verum est illud, Omnes qui volunt pie
viuere in Christo, persecutionem patientur. Non pateri^ persecutionem, non vis
pie viuere in Christo. August. in Psalm. 54.
persecutor; thus, or in the like manner: A remarkable vengeance has seized
upon such a scornful caytife, who has been a perpetual bloody Goade in the
sides of the Saints all his life long. Upon which occasion thou discouerest
unto thy friend many passages and plots of his cruelty and hate against the
Kingdom of Christ and his precious people, and that purposely to minister
matter also unto others, of more heartily magnifying the glory of Gods
justice; which at length has happily struck down Antiochus with an
incurable, and invisible plague; eaten up Herod with vermin; made Pashur a
terror to his friends; Zedekiah to run from chamber to chamber to hide
himself. For you must know, that the hearts and tongues of all good men, and
friends to the Gospel, are wont to be filled with much glorious joy, and
heartiest songs of praise, at the downfall of every dogged opposite; when the
revenging hand of God, not without special terror, has tumbled from the top
of malice and pride, any Antichristian and enraged enemy. So the Jews feasted,
after Haman was hanged. But in such cases look unto thy heart with
extraordinary watchfulness and search: That he be an enemy indeed, I mean,
to Christianity: that thou do it not out of spleen, humor, faction,
personal enmity, for the destruction of the creature or the like: but simply
and sincerely out of zeal to the glory of Gods Justice, prosperity of the
Gospel, and peace of the Church. Otherwise, in stead of a Christian duty, it
will prove to thee a cursed cruelty.

3. Of Prayer, Thus, or in the like manner: Thou art acquainted with the secret
plots of some plausible Tyrant against the people of God, whose words perhaps
may be as soft as Butter, or Oil, and outward deportment promise fair; but
his thoughts and invisible intendments against the better side, composed all of
blood and bitterness, of Gall and Gunpowder; whereupon, as occasion is
offered, thou vnmaskest his malice amongst thy Christian friends, to the end
that they may communicate, and contribute their prayers for the confusion and
infatuation of all his deuilish depths and devices of hell. Tears, patience,
and prayers, were ever the defensive weapons of Gods people. Let Powder plots,
Parisian Massacres, invincible Armadoes, slaughtering of Kings, and such like
horrible and hellish combustions, brand with an everlasting stain of cruelty
and blood, the Popish religion and persecutors of Heavenly truth: But let the
sons of the Gospel be ever content to confront and beat back the
implacable rage of all Gods enemies, and haters of sincerity and grace, only
with the cutting edge, and sharpened point of fervent prayer. Which weapon they
may discharge: hree ways: 1. Indefinitely, against all desperate enemies to
God, his Church, and Gospel, without intimation, so much as by thought, of any
particular persons. So David, Psalm. 129. 5. Let them all be confounded and
turned back, that hate Zion. Deborah, Judges 5. 31. So let all thine enemies
perish* O Lord: but let them that love him, be as the sun when he goes
forth in his might. 2. Conditionally, when they perceive some insulting
Shebnaes, and insolent Hamans to persist and hold on in persecuting the Saints,
and opposing the power of Godliness; they may entreat the Lord, if they
belong unto him, to humble them in their places, and give them repentance: but
if he purpose to give them over finally to a Reprobate mind, and to the
impetuous rage of their own cruel dispositions, to cut them off, and utterly
confound them, that they be no longer a burden to the Church, and vexation to
his people. 3. Abstractiuely; against their extreme oppressions, and malicious
plots, without any relation at all ^o their persons. So David, 2. Sam. 15. 31.
O Lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness.

Or thus: Thou obseruest some one to have continued long a worthy and noted
Professor, but now unhappily begins to fall off from his former forwardness,
to grow flacke and negligent in Family duties, cold and cowardly in good
causes, heartlesse, and hanging down the head in godly company; to dis-regard,
and vnderprize the powerful means; to entertain but ordinary affections, if
not some kind of strangeness toward other Professors, especially of greater
eminency and acceptance for their grace; to suffer immoderate employment and
entanglement in the world to waste his heauenly-mindednesse; so that in all
likelihood God will shortly give him over unto some scandalous fall, as a
punishment of his backsliding: whereupon thou discouerest unto thy Christian
friends his declining state, only that they may join with thee in prayer,
that the Lord would be pleased to stay him in time, and re-establish him in
his first love; lest by his further falling, the credit of the Gospel also
receive a bruize and blemish, profession be ill spoken of, and the enemies of
sincerity blaspheme.

4. Of vindicating the power and truth of Religion from the mistakings of
Ignorants, and Vnder-prizers. Thus, or in the like manner; Thou art in company
where thou hear a mere civil man, or a formal Professor at the best, whom
the Church never discovered, or acknowledged to be any of Hers, and thy self
can auerre out of thy certain particular knowledge, that he never set
himself to seek God with any conscience or constancy; but is utterly
unacquainted with the mystery of godliness, family-exercises, sanctification
of the Sabbaths, contributions to the Saints, exercises of mortification,
self-denial: I say, Thou hear such a man commended for his Religion,
forwardness, and the fear of God; which commendation, if he carry away
without contradiction, the rest of the company may be very greedy to apprehend
such a precedent, and resolve not to pass his Pitch of profession, as
unaccompanied with such pain and preciseness; and yet approved by wise and
understanding men, as hopeful and comfortable. Now in this case, it may
concern thee, but with as much wisdom, discretion, and charity as thou can
possibly, to disroabe such a fellow of his undeserved attributions, and the
reputation of that holiness which he never had; lest both the Bystanders be
hartened to come short of Heaven, and the power of Christianity be disparaged
by an ignorant and hurtful vnder-ualuation.

3. Thirdly, be silent from all unsavory communication; as lying, swearing,
profane, foolish, filthy Linguam habes, non vt alios salibus tuis mordeas, sed
vt Deo gratias agas, etc. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians cap. 5. Sermon. 17.
jesting; jesting out of Scripture, mocking and making Gods people as Lam. 3.
63.
Music at Feasts, merry meetings, and cursed conuenticles of Good-fellowship;
and such other rotten, ribald and Bedlam talk: which, because they are the
known and proper language of the sons of Belial, the dung, froth, and damned
euaporations of drunken wits; Christians, whom alone I labor to direct in this
point, are not in such danger of, and therefore I have nothing to do with them
at this time.

III. Pray for, and practice an holy and discreet dexterity, to divert and
draw from profane and wicked, or too much worldly and ordinary talk, to more
sauoury conference, and heavenly discourse. Me thinks, it is great pity, that
Professors should ever meet without some talk of their meeting in heaven, or
of the blessed means and ways that lead thereunto, before they part. Yet
many times, (such a deadness and dampe of zeal, and heauenlymindednesse,
haunts even the holiest hearts in these unhappy days of security and form)
worldly matters, Talk of others, or some more remarkable accidents and
affairs abroad, speculatiue curiosities, some ceremonial unseasonable
controversies, or other such like impertinencies in one kind or other, take up
and ingrosse, even from Gods children, too much of many golden seasons, which
might preciously serve, by their mutual diuing with more Christian edifying
discourse into the great mystery of godliness, and walks of Christianity,
to nourish and increase amongst them much spiritual warmth, comfort, and
resolution against all ungodly oppositions, and to build up one another in
their most holy Faith, acquaintance with temptations, experimental knowledge,
more comfortable walking with God, etc. To confront this common mischief and
Mar-conference at Christian meetings, come unto them prepared, as I advised
before; page 86, 87. But if the company be contrary-minded, and vn-inured to
the language of Canaan, exercise and interpose all thy wit, courage,
authority, and eloquence, to draw them from the dunghill of rotten talk; and
by a wise plausible diuersion, and modestly ouer-ruling transition, carry the
current of their present discourse, all thou can, toward some Heavenly good,
and spiritual end. 1. To which end, observe, and apprehend all opportunities
and occurrences, which may minister matter of digression into divine talk; and
acquaint thy self with the Art of abstracting sacred instructions from the
book of the Creatures and businesses in hand. It was the practice of our
blessed Savior: Upon mention of bread, Matthew. 16. he pressed upon his
Disciples, a disswasion from the Leaven of the Pharisees: when he observed, John
6. a number of people to throng about him for more miraculous bread, he
digressed into a most heavenly discourse of the food of life. Upon occasion of
drink being denied him by the Samaritane woman, John 4. he forgetting his
weariness, hunger and thirst, labors to allure her to the well head of
everlasting happiness. 2. Have ever in a readiness some common heads, of more
stirring and quickening motives to mind heavenly things: as the cursed
condition of our natural state, the incomparable sweetness of Christian
ways, the vanity and vexations of all earthly things, the uncertainty and
miseries of this short life, the euerlastingnesse of our second state in
another world, the sudden executions of Gods fierce wrath upon some notorious
ones even in this life, especially those, which are freshest in memory, and
lateliest done; the terrors of death, the dreadfulnesse of that last and great
Day drawing on apace, the horrors of a damned soul, etc. Mention of these
things, many times will strike full cold to the heart of the most swaggering
and sensual Belshazzar, the most raging and roaring companions, and drive the
most confident and domineering worldling into his dumps. Talk then of these
terrible things, may by Gods blessing prepare and soften sometimes the hardest
hearts for some thoughts of remorse, and more heavenly impressions. 3. But
above all, get into thine own heart an habit of heauenly-mindednesse by much
exercise, intercourse, and acquaintance with God, in pouring out of thy soul
ever and anon before him, in renewing and recovering thy peace, and comfortable
access unto him upon every fall and check of conscience, in often
contemplation and foretaste of the inexplicable sweetness, glory, and
eternity of those Mansions above; in diuing into the secrets of his Kingdom
by the help of humbleness and godly fear; upon the most sweet and
soule-fatting days of humiliation, mortifying visitations of troubled and
afflicted consciences, often conferences with humblest and best experienced
Christians, etc. By private employment of thy soul in solemn reflections upon
it self; fruitfully recounting with what variety of trains it was long
detained in the state of darkness; with what delays and tergiuersations, lets
and assaults it met in its way to light; what bitterness and terrors it passed
through in the pangs of its newbirth; the tentations incident to its infancy in
grace, progress and growth in several graces, and the whole body of
Christianity; relapses, desertions, their discoueries, recoueries, with all
the means and circumstances: In a word, by a punctual observing how God
deals with it every day. Be, I say, thus blessedly busied at home in thine
own heart, and thou shall find thy self much more pregnant and plentiful in
holy talk when thou come abroad. We are most apt and readiest to power out
our selves in public, according to our private provisions, and the most
predominant discourses and contemplations of the mind. The conferences of free
and vnreserued spirits are ordinarily nothing else, but the clothing of their
ordinary mental conceptions, and heart-secrets with familiar forms of
speech. Men for the most part, speak most and most willingly of those things
they mind most. I advise thus in this point, that thou may be habituated and
heartened with resolution and delight, in the art and exercise of putting
forward good talk; or of diuerting and drawing toward better in case of the
contrary. Otherwise, thou shall never be able to hold out with constancy and
courage, to cross many times the general mirth of the company, to put
worldly-wisemen out of their element of all earthly talk, to draw worldlings,
which goes most against the hair, to hear of heavenly things.

VIII. Survey thoroughly before hand with the glorious Lamp of the Word of Life
and Truth; watch over, narrowly with the illightened eye of a tender
conscience, and ever punctually manage, and conduct with the particular light
of spiritual prudence, every action thou undertake, or that shall at any
time pass through thy hand; of what kind soever it be, whether natural,
recreatiue, civil, of mercy, Religion, etc.

To which particulars, before I descend, let me commend unto thee, and premise
this Principle concerning actions in general.

Every truly commendable and comfortable action, consists of an absolute
integrity of all concurrents and requisites. Or thus: That which is good and
lawful, must be entire. I mean it in that sense, as our Divines speak of
sanctification, Bonum non existit nisi ex integra causa: malum ex quolibe^
vitio. Non est actio bona simpliciter, nisi omnes bonitates concurrant: quia
quilibet singularis defectus causat malum: bonum autem causatur ex integra
causa. To do a good work, the concurrence of all circumstances is necessary:
but the want of one only* ^ sufficient for an ill. Thus the Schoolmen, though
a rotten generation of mongrell Divines, yet now and then let a truth fall from
their pens. Aqui. 12. q. 18. Art. 4. ad 3. Catar. Hist. of the Council of
Trent. lib. 2. page 196.
which if saving, say they, must be perfect and entire, though not in respect
of degrees, yet in respect of parts. Every part and power of body and soul
must have its part of sanctification, though no part his full perfection and
all degrees, before the dissolution of our earthly tabernacles. Proportionably
in the present point; though some mixture of infirmities and imperfections will
cleave unto the face of the fairest action (an absolute and unstained purity is
incompatible with this unglorified state of mortality;) yet notwithstanding,
every several ingredient must be attended, and tempered with its own
particular goodness and honesty, and seasonable conformity to the whole; or
else the whole action, howsoever right in other respects, is utterly robbed and
disroabed of all true splendor, acceptance and grace. A little heaven sowres
the whole lump: one noxious herb brings death into the pot: The goodliest
deed or duty is quite perverted and empoysoned, by the enormitie of any one
particular requisite. We say truly in the Schools; The conclusion ever
follows the worst part: Semblably in morality, the iniquity, defect, and
exorbitancie of any one ingredient, denominates the whole action naught.

In every one of thine actions and undertakings, look ever, if thou look for
comfort, that every concurrent be justifiable, that every ingredient be
gracious, (...) bring his probatum est. For instance:

1. It must be good in its own nature, and warrantable out of the Word; by
which all things must be sanctified unto thee, 1. Tim. 4. 5. as a good servant
will venture upon nothing, but what he knows will please his Master.
Otherwise, let the person be never so pleasing unto God, his intention never so
good, his heart never so zealous, the means, circumstances and end never so
excellent, yet all is naught. Worshipping Christ in a Crucifixe is naught in
its own nature, abominable, idolatrous, condemned in Gods Law, Exodus 20. 4,
etc. And therefore, be it done with never so great devotion and good meaning,
with never so much Popish dawbing, or goodly pretense whatsoever, it is still
cursed and damnable.

2. The object, whereabout the action is exercised, must be qualified according
to the rules of Religion. Almesdeeds, and Doles of charity, are sweet and
acceptable sacrifices unto God. But amongst other cautions and considerations
to season them, the parties, that are to be made partakers thereof, are to be
singled out with all godly discretion. 1. The true wants of a religious
Professor, should in the first place be the principal and most moving
object, to draw bounty from a truly charitable heart: according to that,
Galat. 5. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith. 2. In the next place,
the lame, the blind, the sick, the aged, the trembling hand, or any that God
has made poor. 3. Any whosoever in a case of true necessity and extremity,
whatsoever the party has been before: for there not the man, as it were, but
the common state of humanity is relieved. But now, if for such a purpose, thou
make choice of a sturdy beggar, idle (...).
rogue, canting companion, the shame and plague of this noble Kingdom; thou
do not only deprive thy self of the comfort and honor of a truly
charitable deed; but thereby incurrest a great deal of guilt, by encouraging
and nourishing idleness, filching, many strange unknown villainies, nay, even
an execrable irreligious Paganism in such lewd, lazy drones, unprofitable
burdens of the earth, and intolerable caterpillars of the Commonwealth. For
such (says a worthy Divine) as turn begging into an Art and occupation, they
are by order to be compelled to work for their maintenance, which is the best
and greatest alms.

The object of thy special, intimate, and dearest love, must be the
Christian, even the poorest professor of Religion, not the complete
Carnalist, or most magnificent Worldling.

3. Thou must also look unto the matter, else all may be mard. For instance:
The matter of thy bounty and beneficence, must be thine own goods got
lawfully, not formerly hoarded by Usury and wrong; otherwise it will but
prove, in respect of divine allowance, but an abominable sacrifice Eleemosyna
cum iniquitate acquisita, abominabilis est coram Deo; and acceptum ei, quod
sideliter fuerit acquisitum. August. tom. 4. part. 2. page 512. De justice
laboribus faci^e eleemosynas. Non enim corrupturi estis Iudicem Christum, vt
non vos audiat cum pauperibus quibus tol^itis. Nolite velle eleemosynas sacere,
de foenore and vsuris. De verbis Dom. Ser. 35. Sed ait mihi raptor rerum
alienatum, -- Agapem facio, inclusis in carcere victum mitto, nudos vestio,
peregrin^s suscipio. Dare te putas: tollere noli, and dedisti. Cui dederis,
gaudet, cui abst^leris, plorat. Quem duorum istorum exa^diturus est Deu^ Dieis
ei cui dederit, gratias age, quia ac. ep^ sed alius ^bi ex alia part di^t, Ego
ge^o, cui abstulisti; and pe^e totum tul^sti, and exiguum i^i dedisti. S*
totum, quod (...)* egen^bus* ed^, nec talia opera diligit Deus. Lib. 50. Hom.
Hom. 7. Bonus vsus non iustificat ininste (...).
: for many times, that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in
the sight of God, Luke 16. 15.

3. The person must be pleasing; the actor acceptable unto God: Otherwise, his
best and most bountiful deeds, are at the best but beautiful abominations;
Services most sacred in their own nature, as Prayer, hearing the Word,
receiving the Sacrament, etc. are from him, and the altar of his unsanctified
heart, but as the offering of Swines blood. If thou be not justified by faith,
and accepted through Christ, all thy actions, natural, civil, recreatiue,
religious; whatsoever is within thee, or without thee, the use of the
creatures; all thy courses, ways, and passages, are turned into sins and
pollutions unto thee, enlarge and aggrauate thy woe and damnation: Even the
sacrifice and whole way of the wicked, is an abomination to the Lord, Prou. 15.
8, 9. The Pharise, Luke 18. was not a button better for all his prayers,
fastings, etc. nay, by accident more accursed; I mean, in respect of any
gracious entertainment with God, who was not pleased with Him, in Him, in whom
He is well pleased.

4. The heart must be sincere, else even the noblest duties of Religion are
nothing. Matthew. ^0 7, 8.
Judas gave his name to Christ, preached, and wrought miracles; and yet all the
while was a desperate hypocrite, a very incarnate devil; because his heart was
rotten, drencht in the gall of bitterness, and snared in the bond of
iniquity. The Israelites humiliation seeking God, returning, and inquiring
early after him: bespeaking him with all terms of dearness and dependence;
our Rock, our high God, our Redeemer; was all but temporary and unsound,
because their heart was not upright. When he slew them, then they sought him:
and they returned, and inquired dearly after God. And they remembered, that God
was their Rock: and the high God, their Redeemer. Nevertheless, they did
flatter him with their mouth: and they lied unto him with their tongues. For
their heart was not right with him, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37.

5. The means must be good. Otherwise, be the end never so excellent; let
there be never so exact and absolute concurrence of all other causes; yet the
glory and comfort of the action is quite darkened, and desperately empoisoned
to the man, that willingly, and against the cry of an illightned conscience,
imployes and puts his hand to any wicked means for the atchieuement. Suppose
that by a lie, thou could save a man's life, his Ad sempiternam salutem
nullus ducendus est opitulante mendacio. August. de mendacio ad Consent. cap.
19.
soul, the souls of all the men upon earth; nay, win thereby unto God as
much glory, as accrewes unto him by all his creatures; yet for all this, on thy
part all were Sed ca quae constat esse peccata, nullo bonae causae obtentu,
nullo quasi bono fine, nulla velut bona intention facienda sunt. Contra
mendacium ad consent. cap. 7.
naught. For it is a sacred Principle, sealed unto by Truth it self; We must
do no ill, that good may come, Romans 3. 8.

6. The circumstanes must be seasonable. For instance: Personal and private
prayer, is a right precious sacrifice and service: but let it be seasonable
for the circumstance of place, or else it may loose its sweet smelling savor
in the nostrils of God, and be tainted with Cum vbique opportunum sit ab inani
gloria liberum habere pectus ac vacuum: tamen in oratione praecipue. Chrysostom.
hom. 19. in cap. 6. Mat.
Pharisaisme. The closet, or some retired place, is fit for this exercise,
which the more secret, the more sincere; not the Mat 6. 5.
Synagogues, and corners of the streets, which was the Pharisees vainglorious
wont, who sought more for Ioh. 12. 43.
praise of men, then pleasing of God. Meditation upon divine mysteries, and
quickening spiritual points, is an excellent, and acceptable exercise, so it
keep its own turn, and be confinde to a fit time: but in the heat of the
Preachers pouring out his soul for us in prayer at the Throne of Grace, it is
sinful, because unseasonable. Calling to mind seriously some special
passages formerly heard, or read, to press them with more life and power upon
the conscience, is a right needful, and religious duty: but so to do at a
Sermon, in singing a Psalm, or when we ought to bend all the powers of our
souls, and best attention to the present, is but one of Satan's tricks in the
glory of an Angel, to make us guilty of the contempt, and rob us of the
comfort of the ordinance in hand.

7. The end also must be answerable in goodness; and by its excellency and
attractiuenesse, inspire amiablenes and allurement into all the means leading
thereunto, though they should be in their own nature painful and unpleasing.
In all thy enterprises and undertakings, thou must have in thine eye
principally, that universal aim of all our actions, Gods glory; other wise,
let the whole affair be carried never 1. Cor. 10. 31.
so fairly in the eyes of men; be clothed with never so goodly a show, and
glorious outside; yet in respect of acceptance with God, or true comfort to
the party, it is no better then the cutting off a Dogs neck. Iehu did right
noble and worthy 2. Kings ^.
service, by his resolute rooting out, and courageous cutting off that bloody
and idolatrous House of Ahab: and sweet in the nostrils of GOD, was that great
sacrifice of Baals Priests: he marched furiously in this holy business, and
was very zealous to execute Gods charge in that regard exactly. And yet for all
this, all these outward glorious visible conformities to Gods commandment,
were to him, but as the killing of a man; because his eye was not upon the
right end, Hos. 1. 4.
Gods glory. He principally aimed at the secure settling of the Crown upon
his own head, by an utter extinguishment of the Kings family. Had his aim
been right, his heart had been as well set against the golden Calves in Dan
and Bethel, as his hand and sword against the idolatrous house of Baal; but it
was not so, 2. King. 10. 29.

Now I come to some particulars; and

1. First, concerning recreations; which howsoever, they ought to be very
moderate and sparing; and in that respect, me thinks, I should rather spare my
labor, and not spend many words; yet because they are not only insatiably
pursued and plunged into by men of this world; but also too much looked after,
and lain in, even by some who look toward Religion, I shall be somewhat the
longer; and advise, that they be not

1. Costly. To curb and confine thine affections to a seasonable and
sanctified moderation herein, consider 1. how the backs and bowels of many
Quid si volumu^ pecuniam nostram ita collocare? Nonne sumus Domini rerum
nostrarum? No^ inferimus iniuriam proximo, non auferimus aliena. Haec illi
habent in ore. At eos oportuit intelligere: Magistratus esse, prouidere, vt
quisque re sua been vtatur. Altit^s praeterea spectandum est, Deum illis
dedisse pecunias, quo habeant, vn^ de familiam alant, vnde pauperibus
consulant: non quas conijciant in casum, and fortunae ludibrio exponant. Pet.
Mart. cap. 12. class. 2. Loc. Commu.
poor members of Jesus Christ, and distressed Saints call, nay, cry even with
tears of blood for relief and compassion from thine abundant and ouerflowing
abilities. 2. That thou must be called upon, and accountable with severity,
and exactness at that last and dreadful Tribunal for every farthing; how
thou gotst it; and with what warrant thou keptst it; upon what thou spentst it.
3. The judgment of Austin, that great and renowned Father of the Church, who,
as Divines report (for I must confess, I take it at other Quid ergo fiet de
pecunia? Erogandam esse dicunt in pauperes; vt qui perdidit, afficiatur damno:
and qui lucratus est, non fruatur male partis. Id faciendum est, cum
ttansfertur Dominium. Idem sensit. Augustinus in Epist. 45. ad Macedon. Mart.
ibid. Bishop Babington quotes the same place of Austin for the same speech,
upon the eight Comm.
men's word, not knowing where it is in his works; but it is a saying worthy so
excellent a man) would have all things gotten by play, taken from the winner,
and never restored to the looser, but given to the poor; that both the winner
might want, what so greedily he gaped for, and the looser not to recover, what
so foolishly he parted with. 4. The resolution of that grave and profound
Divine of these latter times: But some say, says At nonnulli dicunt, se non
oblectari ludo, nisi pro pecunia ludant. Verum eam pecuniam, rogandi sunt, in
quem vsum velint insumi. Forte dicent, in conuiuium. Cur non potius in
pauperes? Ego vero dico, Multo melius, and tutius esse, ne interponatur
pecunia: Etsi enim fieri potest vt tu cupiditate non tangeris, alter tamen cum
quo Iudis, fortasse tangitur. Mart. loco praecitato.
he, they can take no pleasure in play, except they play for money, But we are
to know of them; how they would have the money bestowed? Perhaps they will say,
Upon a common Feast. And why not rather upon the poor? But I say, It is much
better, and more safe, that no money be laid to the stake: for although it may
be, that thou art not touched with greediness of winning, yet he with whom
thou playest, may be tainted that way. Let occasions of ill be taken away,
which are too many at all turns.

II. Cruel. Bathe not thy recreations in blood: Refresh not thy tired mind
with spectacles of cruelty: Consider, 1. How God himself out of tenderness
and pity, would not have his people feed upon the flesh of Beasts with the
Ego hic vtrunque puta^im includi; ne aut membrum exanimante adhuc viua
palpitans, aut etiam sanguis adhuc palpitans edatur, nam esum alioqui sanguinis
iugulato animanti, qui iam refrixerit, hic prohibitum non putarim, nisi ex
consequenti. Merc. in v. 4. cap. 9. Ge^ That many people did use raw,
lifeblood in this sort, as Mercerus thinks, Stories and Poets plentifully
testify. So that some good Divines conceive, that there is an allusion to such
a practice, Genes. 9. 4. See Sanest. in. Acts 15.
blood, lest thereby they should be flesht to cruelty, and inured to behold
rufull objects without horror. And do thou think then, he will allow thee
to feed thine eye and fancy, with their bloody torturing and tearing one
another in pieces? 2. With what brutish savageness thou deiectest and debasest
humanity, below the immanitie of beasts. No beast, they say, takes contentment
in the hurting of any other, except in the case of hunger or anger. They
satisfy their appetites and rage sometimes with cruelty and blood; but their
eyes and fancies never. 3. That men bloodily minded toward harmless beasts,
discover our natural propension to cruelty, which is further manifested, 1. by
the multitudes many times, thirsting and thrusting after the curiosity of
woeful spectacles, and their impatiency to tarry the beholding of the
lamentable executions of guilty persons. 2. And in that they take no delight
to see wild beasts play, and sportingly to make much one of another; but are
well pleased to see them bloodily encounter, mangle and enterteare each other.
These seeds then, or rather weeds of cruelty, originally implanted in our
hearts by the curse of nature, are too rank and luxuriant of themselves; they
need no manuring with barbarous inhumanities, and sports of blood. 4. That Rule
which Divines give about recreations, we must not make Gods Judgments and
punishments of sin, either upon man or beast, the matter and object of them.
Now, best Divines hold, that enmity amongst themselves, was a fruit of our
rebellion against God, and more general judgment inflicted upon the creature
after the fall. Which misery coming upon them by our means, should rather
break our hearts and make them bleed; then minister matter of glorying in our
shame, and vexing those very vexations, which our impiety has put upon them.
Alas, sinful man, what an heart have thou, that can take delight in the
cruel tormenting of a dumb creature! Is it not too much for thee to behold
with dry eyes that fearful brand, which only thy sin has impressed upon it;
but thou must barbarously also press its oppressions, and make thy self merry
with the bleeding miseries of that poor harmless thing, which in its kind
is much more and far better serviceable to the Creator then thy self? Yet I
deny not, but that there may be another lawful use of this Antipathy, for the
destroying of hurtful, and enjoying of useful creatures; so that it be
without any taint, or aspersion of cruelty on our parts, or needless
tormenting of the silly beasts.

3. Ingrossers of time. Thousands there are, who plunge themselves over head
and ears in courses of pleasure; which they call recreations, wherein they
very unworthily and woefully waste the fat and marrow, as it were, of dear and
precious time, the flower of their age, the strength of their bodies;
emasculate and melt the vigor of their spirits, into effeminatenesse,
sensuality, and lust; drown the fair and goodly hopes of their education,
the honor of their Families, the expectation of the Country, the improouement
of their parts, in froth and folly: As though they were placed upon earth, as
Leuiathan in the Sea, only to take their sport and pastime Sunt profecto, qui
ob hoc in hanc vitam adductos se putant, vt delicijs vacent, and ventrem
disrumpant, and corpus impinguent: ato; sic hinc migrent vermibus largiorem e
sua ca^ne me^sam instructuri. Chrysostom. Sermon. contra Luxum and Crap.
therein. Lovers they are of pleasures, Mirth-mongers, men of this world,
sworn Vassals to carnal looseness and riotous excess. They have their
fools Paradise here, and therefore in the equity of a just and holy
proportion, must with the Rich man look for their payment and torment
hereafter. But Gods children must make conscience of meddling at any time with
recreations, without true cause and a just calling thereunto, and hold them of
the same account and consequence, with sleep and other temperate refreshings,
which serve only to quicken the mind, revive the body, enlarge the breath,
that we may return with more lightsomenesse and alacrity to our work and
Callings. The season then of comfortable recourse unto these repaires and
restoratiues is, when we have truly wearied our bodies with some honest
employment, or tired our minds in worthy and noble exercises, or both. And as
we must not press upon them at our pleasure, and prevent true need, out of an
hankering humor after sportfull vanities, old haunts, good fellow meetings,
conformity to the times, or some such sensual and inordinate attractiue: so
in the entertainment of them, we must receive them, as men do honey, with the
tip of the finger, not with a full hand. By no means ought we to engage, and
as it were, to engulfe our affections into their excesses and immoderation; not
suffer them so to insinuate, as to steal away our hearts into a pleasing
insensible thraldom; so creating necessities of recreations; which is an
extreme misery, and intolerable slavery; wherein, notwithstanding many truly
unworthy and unnoble Gallants miserably languish, and come to nothing; prove
only unprofitable burdens of the earth; and in stead of a blessing, the very
bane of the Country that bred them.

Let such considerations as these serve as so many curbes, to restrain us from
an unseasonable intrusion upon them: and so many keen spurs to poast us out
of them, before we be limed and entangled by them.

1. Time is short. Our life is but a span long, a bubble, a Punctum est, quod
viuimus, and puncto minus.
thought, a smoke, a shadow, a dream, the very dream of a shadow; or if you
can name any thing more fading and frail: and yet upon this moment depends
eternity. As we behave our selves here upon earth, either in conformity to
the ways of God, walking with him, selfe-denyall, etc. or in fashionablenesse
to the world, serving the times, and our own turns, etc. so shall we fare
everlastingly in another life: And either become most glorious and happy
creatures, crowned with an exquisite confluence and quintessence, as it were,
of sweetest unmixed eternal pleasures; a very shadow whereof, not the largest
natural hearts of deepest understanding men, from the Creation, to the last
day, were they all united into one exactest height and excellency of conceit,
could possibly comprehend; nay, in this one circumstance, at the least, the
Saints shall surpass even Angelical felicity; they shall behold, with
incredible joy, their own nature, in that respect, honored and advanced above
the brightest Cherub, shining for ever with infinite beauty and glorified
splendor, in the sacred Person of the Son of God: or else fall irrecouerably
into the mouth of inexplicable and remediless horror, and so become the
forlorn and woeful Objects, upon which shall be exercised and executed the
unquenchable wrath of God, and fiercest torments in hell, with extremity and
euerlastingnesse; nay, and in this point, more unhappy than the very Devils:
For since their Apostacy, there was no means or possibility vouchsafed unto
them of recovery and return to those everlasting Mansions of glory; But the
sons and daughters of Adam, since their fall, have had the very Son of God
himself, with the dear and invaluable cry of his own hearts blood, to
meditate unto, and solicit the Father of all compassions and mercy, for
restitution into favor and plantation into the Angels room. And therefore as
this thought, Oh what unhappy and accursed creatures were we, who being crowned
with the matchless transcendency of all felicities and glory, would not hold
our station and have shined still! I say, as this thought will endlesly haunt
the damned angels with inconceivable biting and anguish; so, not only an
answerable selfe-fretting torture from this conceit; Alas, that we kept not
Paradise! will rent and tear the woeful hearts of the wicked in hell: but also
a further sting of that neuer-dying Worm, not incident to the Apostate angels,
will extremely enrage them with restless gnawings of conscience and gnashing
of teeth; when out of the horror of their hideous woeful yellings, they shall
cry out against themselves; What wretches? What beasts? What madded Devils were
we! who when the glorious Blood of Christ Jesus was so mercifully tendered unto
us in the Ministry of the Word, all our life long, we turned our backs
against such blessed and bleeding imbracements; and cruelly cut the throats of
our own poor souls, by impenitent continuance in sin: so loosing for a few
bitter-sweet pleasures in this vale of tears, for an inch of time, fullness of
joy at Gods right hand, through all eternity.

2. Time is precious. If all this great massy body of the whole earth,
whereupon we tread, were turned into a lump of gold, it were not able to
purchase one minute of time. And were there no other circumstance to set an
impression of high valuation upon it, yet this very one does much ennoble it;
That all these fair and shining bodies above our heads, and principally the
Prince of all the lights of heaven, that glorious and mighty Giant, the prime
and crown of all corporal creatures, do tire and waste, as it were, their
celestial vigours, with the incredible swiftness of endless reuolutions, to
beget and give us time; I say, us, who for the sin of every moment in it,
deserve eternity of punishment. But that our hearts may be more sensibly
wrought upon, and more effectually affected with the dearness and
preciousnesse of it; let us suppose that the Lord, by divine and extraordinary
dispensation, should give leave to a damned soul to come into this life
again, and would vouchsafe him but one hour of a new trial, as it were, and
a second time of gracious visitation: Oh how highly would he prize, how
eagerly would he apprehend, with what infinite watchfulness, endeavor, and
diligence, would he improoue that little short golden season? And if therein
he might have but the happiness to hear a Sermon; Oh with what affectionate
inflamed attention would he listen unto the Word of Life! how would his heart
break and bleed within him, and fall asunder in his breast, like drops of
water, to hear Gods just wrath and holy indignation thundered out and threatened
against sin! With what insatiable grasping and dear imbracement would he
labor to lay hold upon Christ Jesus and his gracious promises? In a word, he
would think, that in demonstration of thankfulness for Gods favor, might he
be so happy as to have it, the spending of every moment of all that great body
of time, which lies between the Creation and the worlds end, if he might live
so long, in as holy, pure, strict, precise, heavenly manner, as ever did the
most mortified Martyr upon earth, were far too little. Shall we then
triflingly pass and play away the time that is so precious? And in my
supposition, the damned soul should be sure of an hour: But none of us can
possibly purchase security for very one moment, after I have spoken this word.
The time present is our only time; we have no more power and command over the
time to come, then over the time past. Even the next minute thou may be cut
off by the stroke of death from all further time of repentance, acceptance,
and grace for ever. Nay, yet further, were it possible that any uncomfortable
passion were incident to a glorified Saint in heaven, he would be sorry and
transported with extreme anger and indignation against himself; That he was
not a more greedy ingrosser, as it were, and improouer of time, for doing
excellently upon earth; and that every hour after his conversion was not
crowned with some rarer and more remarkable exploit; with some more special
and noble service, for the glorifying of that most bountiful, and euer-blessed
God, who has now honored him with such unspeakable glory, and that Crown of
joys, so infinitely transcendent to the utmost expectation of the most
enlarged heart. Howsoever therefore men of this world, for the most part,
except they be continually exercised in variety of pleasing employments, and
still entertained with fresh successions of new pleasures, are sore troubled
with time, and tediously perplexed how to pass it; which is the reason that
they devise so many passe-times; with much sollicitous and sensual forecast,
plot and project to themselves aforehand, many and many a merry meeting, idle
visitations, feastings, mutual entertainments of mere complement and vanity,
iouiall reuellings, as they call them, etc. that they chain together, as it
were, by the Art of Epicurisme and with linkes of liberty, continued occasions
of company keeping, and good fellow meetings, from the one end of the week to
the other: (For solitariness and selfe-conuersing, is a very torturing rack,
and the tide-time of melancholy, to the waking consciences of graceless and
guilty men.) Though, I say, this be the custom and carriage of Satan's
Reuellers; yet all Christians ought to have time in dear and high esteem, in
every moment whereof should they lay down ten thousand lives for His sake that
pardons their sins; and also do him all the glorious service of all, both
the militant and Triumphant Saints, it were infinitely too little for his love.
Wherefore no marvel though well-aduised and watchful, they feel themselves
rather pincht with want, then pressed with plenty of her golden offers and
opportunities to do good, and be ever addressed to entertain and welcome every
hour with special attendance, as a gracious Indulgence of his patient love,
and long-suffering, and suffering them to do him yet more honor, (for which
cause alone they long to live) before they go down into the pit and be seen
no more. And they should be so far from being afraid of solitariness, as to
hold their time alone, the only time for sweetest contemplations, heavenly
commerce, nearer conuersing and communion with God.

3. We that are earthly Angels by the nobleness of Creation, though by
voluntary degeneration incarnate devils, were put into, and planted within the
compass and comforts of this great and curious Frame round about us, the
goodly Workmanship of Gods own Almighty hand, wherein we have the Sun to
serve us; and we of this Kingdom by matchless and incomparable favor, the
heavenly and healing beams of the Sun of righteousness, to shine upon us
through his glorious Gospel, I say, we were placed in this world, not to serve
our own turns, to please our own hearts, to follow our own ways, to eat,
drink, and sleep; to temporize, revel, or root in the earth; to play the
Epicures, Libertines, Machiauelians; to climb into high rooms, by all means
lawful and unlawful; by briberie, simonie, flattery, base insinuations,
following the times; or some fouler means, and thereto domineere and
tyrannize: In a word, to serve the devil for a few and evil days, to die,
and so to be damned. No, no, a nobler task and more excellent end is appointed
and apportioned for the Prince and principallest of all earthly creatures. Our
being upon earth this little inch of time, is for business of another nature,
and for a far more important affair, and of dearest consequence; even with
humbleness and truth to know and obey our God, to serve our brethren in love,
and to save our own poor souls in the Day of Christ. This is that One
necessary thing, in respect of which, all other things, though otherwise
honest and excellent, are but respectively necessary, and so far as they
further, and are warrantably and comfortably subordinate and contributary to
this end: Nay, to this the exquisite Quintescence and concurrence of all other,
the dearest and most desirable things under the Sun, are to be accounted but
dross and dung. And yet for all this, many of us, while we yet abode in the
darkness and damnation of our natural state, spent many years, some twenty,
some thirty, some perhaps forty, wholly upon hell, in base and unblessed
courses, quite cross to the end of our Creation. All that time (a misery to be
lamented even with tears of blood) was utterly cast away upon the kingdom of
darkness, fearfully lost upon our own lusts, sinful fashions, and pride of
life; slauishly and woefully wasted in the devils service. Nay, all that while,
abominable and beastly wretches that we were, we set our selves with sensual
rage, against the very face of heaven, lay in actual high Treason, and bore
Arms in open Rebellion against that dreadful Majesty, which might most
justly every moment of that woeful time have arrested us with death, arraigned
us at the Bar of his Justice, and thrown us down into hell. What manner of
persons then I pray you ought we to be, in the short remainder of those few
and evil days which are behind? Even to employ and improoue the utmost
possibility of all our natural acquired and gracious parts, our credit,
calling, outward state, all our power, means, occasions, advantages, to win and
work out glory unto God, enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, confusion to the
devils dominion, conversion of others, comfort unto our own poor souls
against our ending hour. A fellow that has loytered a great part of the day
in his journey, or business, and yet must needs reach home and finish his
task, will toil and sweat at it toward night, double his pains, and put all
his strength unto it: so we having not only been slack in our business about
Gods service, and slow in the way to heaven, but even for many years, perhaps,
run in a quite contrary course, and done the devils work, must now toward
the night of our natural life, and the conclusion of the short span thereof,
spare no pains, double our diligence, press hard to the Price of the high
calling, quit our selves like men, and be strong, with an holy violence lay
hold upon the Kingdom of heaven, with all zeal, courage, and resolution,
labor to redeem the time past, for the days are evil; and our particular
doom for eternity of joys, or woes; pleasures or pains, draws on apace,
and is even at the door.

And as consideration of former time cursedly misspent; so a fore-conceit also
of dreadful times to come, may justly cause us to make much of, and husband
well every moment we have presently in our hands; for treasuring up an
heavenly hoard of grace, comfort, patience, and courage, against the evil day.
Though the times, as yet, be fair and calm, happy and Halcyonian; and the
Candle of God shines still upon this Kingdom, with extraordinary prosperity
and peace; there is no carrying into captivity, or crying in our streets, but
every man is quietly reposed under his own Vine; and there refreshes himself
with the riches and comforts of a good and pleasant land; yet as sure as the
night follows the day, a change will come. If the glorious and Triumphant
times of the daughter of Jerusalem, that men called, The perfection of beauty,
The joy of the whole earth, ^sai. 22. 5.
The glory of all lands, were turned into a day of trouble, and of treading
down, and of perplexity, by the Lord God of hosts, in the valley of vision,
breaking down the walls, and crying to the mountains: what may we of this
Land look for, if we still turn the grace of God into wantonness; but at
length to be turned out of our houses of peace, as the vnthankfullest and
unworthiest people that ever the Sun of Heaven saw, or the Sun of Christ's
glorious Gospel did shine upon so fair and so long? But howsoever the
Kingdom fare, and God deal with us in public: (Only let me tell you by the
way, that in the mean time we stand by a miracle of Gods mercy, and a prop of
his extraordinary patience) yet every one of our particular day and doom
cannot be far off. As yet, perhaps, the Almighty is with us, his providence
protects our habitations, no remarkable affliction has taken hold upon us; so
that there is no mourning, or spectacles of miseries in our families; no
crying, O my father Abraham, and O my son Isaac; O my son Absalom, my
son, my son, Absalom; O Absalom, my son, my son! And these houses of
flesh, it may be, wherein we dwell for a few and evil days, are as yet in
reasonable good repair; and it is every way with us, as it was with Job in the
days of his youth, when he washed his steps with butter, and the rocks powered
him out rivers of oil; yet we may build upon it, as a Principle which never
failed sinful mortality, that days of danger and distress will have their
turn and time also. Sorrow and sickness, perplexity and fear, temptation,
disertion, trouble of conscience, the destroying Sword, a fiery trial,
striving unto blood; Marian times of most abhorred memory, or some dreadful
visitation in one kind or other, may seize upon us, we know not how soon. But
howsoever we escape in the mean time, sure I am, these frail bodies of ours,
after a short while, will fall in funder, and moulder away into rottenness and
dust; and our naked souls must stand at the just Tribunal of the everliving
God, countable with exactness and truth, for all things done in the body.
Far be it from us then, and every one, that at that last and great Day would
not cry to this Rock and that Mountain to cover him, like sons and
daughters of confusion, to trifle away time in this heat of our spiritual
harvest; but rather with doubled and extraordinary resolution, let us gird up
the loins of our minds, and with all fruitfulness and power, improoue every
hour of this fair Day of our gracious visitation; to treasure up peace to our
poor souls against the stormy winter night of death, toward which every
wind drives us, and both sleeping and waking we are posting apace, though we
perceive it not.

4. We must be countable for time. At the dreadful Bar of that last
Tribunal, as we must be exactly answerable even for wandering vain
imaginations, idle words, and every the very least error of our whole life;
nay, for not improouing all our gifts, goods, and graces, to the best advantage
for Gods glory; for misimployment of our wit, understanding, memory,
affections, health, strength, courage, learning, liberty, authority, policy,
or any other power or possibility which God has put into our hands: so must
we also give up a strict account for the expense of every moment of time. Now
tell me at that great and general Audit, whether of these two sums will
sound more sweetly in our ears? Item, so many days in Recreation, or so many
days in Humiliation; so many hours in Prayer, or so many hours in playing at
Cards; so many weeks in Iouiall reuellings and merry meetings, or so many
weeks in watching over our ways, and walking with God, etc. A serious
fore-conceit of the inconceivable comfort of the one; and how cold the other
will strike unto our hearts, might make us easily grow into blessed Bradfords
care and practice this way, of whom it is reported, That he counted that hour
not well spent, wherein he did not some good; either with his pen, study, or in
exhorting others, etc. and not to rush upon recreations unseasonably, without
necessity and warrantable calling.

5. The holiest hearts of the most worthy Saints are woefully haunted with too
many distractions and violent intrusion of idle, vain, and impertinent
thoughts, even in holy duties, religious exercises, and solemn use of the
ordinances: which without extraordinary watchfulness, and wrestling on their
parts, would utterly bereave and rob them of all the sweetness, power and
profit of those blessed means, and by little and little quite transform them
into form and perfunctorinesse. If in the best then and heauenliest
businesses, the vanity of our own minds, and malice of the Devil press upon
us with such importunity and restless assaults; with what furious and
impetuous incursions and vastations of conscience are they like to oppress us
in our idle hours, ill spent time, and pursuit of pleasures? Consideration
whereof, me thinks, should cause Christians, who alone are truly sensible of
the interruption and discontinuance of their sweet communion and society with
Christ, and smart many times for the estrangement of their thoughts and
affections from God: only to have recourse to recreations in case of true
need; for necessity, I say, and seasonably, even as they use physic; so may
they expect Gods gracious protection from the hurtful prevailing of those
sensual distempers and licentious ranging of their thoughts, which are wont to
enrage and empoyson the minds and affections of carnal men, all the while:
and to make account so often as they are haled by the cunning ensnarement of
old companions, the tyranny of former custom, or unmortified yeeldingnesse of
their own deceitful hearts, to immoderation and excess in this kind; so
often to expose their hearts by Gods just permission, as a prey to temptation
and vanity. Whereby they may be in continual danger, either by little and
little to be drawn back and drowned again in the froth and fooleries of
their disauowed pleasures, which were an horrible thing; or else at least, to
bring upon themselves, from time to time, as they transgress in this kind,
much unnecessary discomfort and dissettlednesse in their Christian course,
dis-rellish in Religious exercises, deadness of heart, disacquaintance with
heavenly comforts, loss of that dearest Thing, and earthly Paradise, peace of
Conscience, which perhaps they shall hardly with much ado recover a long time
after. Praesen^ tempus non effundendi gaudii, sed luctus est, tribulationum,
and lamentationum. Tu vero leuiter vrbanis facetijs iocularis? -- Diabolus
dentibus stridet, ac fremit, ignem spirat aduersus salutem tuam; and tu seeds,
facetias effundens? -- Ludimus dilecti? Vis discere Sanctorum conuersationem?
Audi Paulum dicentem: Per triennium, inquit, nocte and di^ non destiti cum
lacrymis admon^e vnumquemque vestrum -- Audi etiam quid and Corinthijs dicat:
Ex mal^a tribu^atione, inquit, and anxietate cordis scripsi vobis per multas
lacrymas. Et iterum: Quis infirmatur, and ego non infirmor? Quis offenditur,
and ego non vror? Quin audi quid and alibi dicat: Nam and nos, inquit, qui
sumus in hoc Tabernaculo, ge^imus, and per singulos dies, vt ita dicam, ex hoc
mundo migrare cupiente Apostolo, Tu rides, and Iudis? Belli tempus est, pugnae,
vigiliarum, custodiae, armaturae and aciei: -- Et tu quae tripudiantium sunt,
vsurpas? Non vides bella gerentium facies, quomodo sint tristes, contractae,
supercilijs terribiles, and horrore plenae? Vid^n aciem oculorum austeram, cor
excitatum, saliens and palpirans? etc. Chrysostom. in cap. 5. ad Ephesians. Sermon. 17.


6. Sixthly, consider Chrysostomes preciseness against wasting time this way.
The present time, says he, is not for melting into (...); but for lamentation
and mourning. And yet do thou vainly mis-spend it in merry conceits? The
Devil gnasheth the teeth, roares, and foames, and flashes out fire against thy
salvation; and do thou sit still and Iouially jest it out? Do we play and
sport our selves, Beloved? Will thou learn the conversation of the Saints?
Hear what Paul says, Act. 20. 31. By the space of three years I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears. 2. Cor. 2. 4. Out of much
affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote unto you with many tears. 2. Cor. 11.
29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? 2. Cor.
5. 4. For we that are in this Tabernacle, do groan being burdened. And the
Apostle desiring, that I may so speak, every day to depart this life; Do
thou laugh and play? Our time here is a time of war, of fight, of watch and
ward, of harnessing, of standing in the face and fury of the enemy; and do
thou demean thy self like a dauncer? Do thou not see the faces of
Soldiers in the fight; how sad they are, how contracted, how terrible with
frowns, how full of horror? Do thou not behold the austore piercing
intention of their eyes, an extraordinary excitation of heart, leaping and
panting in their breasts? etc. His meaning imports thus much: Does an ordinary
Soldier in the field against a mortal man and earthly enemy, recollect and
unite all the spirits and powers of body and soul with all efficacy, and
earnestness, for the encounter: And shall a Christian Soldier that wrastles
not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against Powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places; who is every moment furiously assaulted and hunted
even like a Partridge in the Mountains, by the devils open rage, the
ambushment of the World, and the endless treacheries of his own false heart,
trifle away his time, and turn aside to toys?

4. No incrochers upon heavenly comforts; no diminishers of our delight in God;
no deuourers of spiritual joy. For this is a very dear and divine thing, to
be prized and preserved as a sweet and celestial Jewel, far more worth then
heaven and earth; which the world can neither give, nor take from us; neither
must any stranger meddle with it. We may take an estimate of its excellency,
by casting our eyes upon

1. The intolerable bitterness of the contrary; I mean, spiritual horror,
which, we see, sometimes by woeful experience, does enrage the guilty
consciences of some forlorn wretches, with such restless furies, and
unutterable anguish, that at length, (extremest, I know not whether madness or
cruelty!) they lay violent and villainous hands upon themselves, In which case,
such an hell upon earth is horror of conscience, they care not a button for
the sweetness of life, the rufull cries of their own dear children, the
heavy looks of their yoke-fellowes, the abhorred infamy they bring upon their
own names, families, kindred, burial, posterity. Oh how they spurn at with
a vile, disdainefull contempt, Pleasures, Riches, Honors, Crowns, Kingdoms,
Worlds of gold, any thing, every thing, as miserable comforters! Nay it is so
stinging, that they will rather venture upon that other Hell, to which they are
posting in a Coffin of blood, a thousand thousand times more horrible, then
endure it any longer. If sense then of divine indignation, taking secret
vengeance upon the guilty conscience of an impenitent Rebel, puts him as it
were into hellish flames above ground; what an heaven upon earth is a sweet
feeling of Gods reconciled face, and his everlasting mercies through Christ,
sealed and set on by the holy Ghost, and testimony of a good conscience? And
how deliciously does an humble soul, so honored with a foretaste and
first fruits as it were of eternal joys, graspe the Lord Jesus in his
ordinances, and blisfully sun it self in the love and light of His
countenance?

2. The practice of the profane in their insatiable restless pursuit of
false joys, and painful pleasures, which at best are but as crackling of
thorns under a pot, and flashes of lightning before everlasting fire. They
hunt after them even into hell, and light a candle at the Devil for
lightso^nesse of heart; by haunting Alehouses, Tauerne^, Brothel-houses,
Play Houses, Conuenticles of good-fellowship, sinful and unseasonable sports,
a thousand kinds of vanities and fooleries, which are nothing but the Devils
Wakes, and reuellings of Hell. And all this little poor carnal mirth, is
purchased many times with much shame, loss, misery, beggary, rottenness of
body, discredit, damnation. At what an high rate then, and with what eagerness
and thirst is that true, sweet, unmixed, glorious joy springing out of the
Fountain of comfort in an honest and holy heart, to be set and sought after?

3. The differences between spiritual and carnal joy: in respect,

1. Of Lastingnesse. A spiritually merry heart is a continual feast, says
Solomon; whereas the joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment. Job chap. 20. 5.
Carnal joy is like lightning, spiritual like the light of the Sun. While
the Play lasts, the sensualist laughs; but he falls into his dumps when all is
done. The Drunkard is merry, whilst he revels it amongst his pot-companions
in the Alehouse; but when he comes home, there is many times woeful work.
Whilst the Gamester is at play, he is well enough pleased; but when he has
made away all, he is ready to make away himself also. A cunning and
prosperous Worldling, I confess, by Gods permission may patch together his
pleasures all his life long: but at furthest, at death comes the deadly and
everlasting dampe: whereas he that walks with God, is contented and
comfortable all the day; and death is the daybreake to him of everlasting
brightness. Carnal joy, I say, is like lightning, a flash and Si quid
arrisisset prosperum, taedebat apprehendere, quia pene prius, quam teneretur,
auolabat. August.
away; Del^ctatio occidit, and praeterijt, vulner^uit, and transijt, miserum
fecit, and abijt, infoelicem reddidit, and reliquit. August. Sermon. 3* d^
tempore.
leaves the mind in more extreme and deeper darkness; blasts the heart and
affections with all spiritual deadness and desolations, with many boiling
distempers, much raging wildfire, and unquenchable thirst after sensuality,
earthlinesse and Epicurisme; and first or last, it is ever certainly followed
with renting and roaring of the spirit, spiritual terrors, thunders,
darkness and damnation. But godly joy is like the light of the Sun, which
though it may for a time be ouercast with clouds of temptations, mists of
troubles, and persecutions, darkness of melancholy; yet it ordinarily breaks
out again with more sweetness and splendor, when the storm is over: but
howsoever, it has ever the Sun of righteousness, and Fountain of all
comfort, so resident and rooted in the heart, that not all the darkness and
gates of Hell shall ever be able to displant or distaine it, no more then a
mortal man can pull the Sun out of his Sphere, or put out his glorious eye.

2. Of purity. The edge and relish of carnal joy, is ever much rebated and
imbittered with many sour sauces, and enuenomed mixtures; impatiencie of
delay, difficulty and danger in attainment, vnanswerablenesse to fore-conceits
and expectation, many secret terrors, fretting iealousies, discontented
indignations against their discontinuance and vanishing, etc. And besides,
those three ensuing individual stings, which to an illightned conscience as
inseparably and sensibly dog them at the heels, as a shadow the body in the
Sunshine; cut the very throat, and burst the heart of all worldly pleasures.
1. One of them is, as it were, natural, immediately attending all earthly
mirth; more melancholy and heauy-heartednesse afterward. For as the Rivers of
sweet water run their course to die in the salt sea; so the honey of all
earthly pleasure, ever ends in the gall of grief. Voluptuousness even in
her dearest minions, ordinarily expires with anguish and anger that it is gone.
The transitory flashes of sensual delight, are like the light of a candle,
which leave at the cloze a noisome vexing snuff behind. Extrema ga^dij luctus
occupat.
And that sweetness which sensualists swallow down so greedily, turns to
gravel in their guts, and at farewell fills their spirit with the return of a
more heavy melancholicke humor, then before the receite. 2. The other I call a
temporary sting: for all the ways of worldly Cum c^peris te aliquid temporale
delectare ad peccatum -- Noli te credere tali delectationi; maiores dolores
habebis, quam suauitates. August. in Psalm. 136.
pleasure are strowed also with needles and nettles, that I may so speak, which
ever and anon prick and sting her darlings, as they pluck her fading flowers.
So that at best they are but like Bears robbing a Waspes nest, who rauenously
rifle the combs, and with much ado suck out a little honey, but in the mean
time, are soundly stung and swollen about head for their painful pleasure. In
their several walks of a fools paradise, they hunt both unreasonably and
unseasonably after transitory delights; but they are even pained, and paid
home with a witness in the very pursuit. For instance: The covetous man
accounts worldly wealth, and an ^oard of gold, his heaven upon earth; but in
heaping it together, his heart is woefully rent and torn asunder with carking,
thoughtfulness, restless rooting in the earth, anxious and endless casting
about and forecasting: In a word; with much care in gathering, more fear in
keeping, and most grief in parting from it. So that for feeding his greedy eye
upon a little vanishing heap of yellow earth, his heart is continually haunted
with such vexing Harpies, I mean, wasting cares and false fears, that dry up
even his vital moisture, and cut his very heart strings in Plus egent, quanto
plus habent, desiderijs vastantur, cupiditatibus dissipantur, timo^ibus
cruciantur, tristitia contabescunt. August. in Psalm. 29.
pieces. Good Fellow meetings and Alehouse reuellings are the drunkards
delight: but all the while he sits at it, he is, perhaps, in a bodily fear
of the Puritane-Constable: when toward night he goes grunting homewards, he
becomes a gazing and Ridiculus in foro pueris videtur, occasionemque vt ab
omnibus contemnatur praebet. Basil. hom. in Ebri^t. and luxum.
laughing* stock to children in the streets; no sooner comes he reeling into
his own house, but he wrings fresh cries, and tears of shame and grief from
his wife and family; for the reproach, beggerie and misery he brings upon
them. And as he goes on in this drunken good-fellowship, and takes a pride and
pleasure in pouring in of strong drink; there many times insensibly grow upon
him many loathsome diseases and deformities of body, Rheumes, Dropsies,
Palsies, a fearful face, spuing, falling, and never rising again; sometimes
not even out of a little gutter, that would scarce choke a child. The
lascivious wanton that wanders in the twilight, in the evening in the black and
dark night, after the strange woman; besides the dart which sticks fast, and
ranckles in his Liver; meets in the mean time with rottenness in his bones,
a consumption of his marrow, a wound, and dishonor, and reproach, that shall
not be wiped away. The boisterous aspiring Nimrod, out of a gluttonous desire
of grasping offices and honors, scrues himself vijs and modis, into some high
place as his only Paradise; and when he is gotten up, dances full merrily in
golden fetters upon his slipperie standing: but could thou see into his
inside, thou should behold his heart miserably fretting and vexing it self;
raging with many passionate distempers, for the indignation of good men;
contempt of inferiors; thwarting of competitors; envy of compeeres;
underminings of counter-factionists; iealousies of Princes, etc. How many great
men's hearts have burst with the blasting frowns of a Kings forehead? Nay, and
which is a Bedlam misery upon the ambitious man; he is many times more grieved
for an affront of some grand opposite; because he cannot have his will of this
or that man, that stands in his way; or for the neglect of some expected
complementall respect and observance, then pleased with all the other bravery
and iollitie of his high room. This is clear in Haman, though he was
encompassed and crowned with much undeserved and extraordinary precedence and
pomp; yet this one little thing, to wit, because Mordecai would not bow the
knee, and do reverence unto him at the Kings gate, did utterly mar and
dissweeten all the other excellencies and extraordinarinesse of the Kings
favor: See Hester, Chap. 5. Verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. And Haman told his friends
and wife of the glory of his riches, etc. But all this, says he, does nothing
avail me, as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. 3. The
third is an eternal sting, which to a waking and working conscience arises
out of a serious consideration, and sense of Gods causefull, just and holy
indignation revealed in his Book against impenitents in such kinds. Whereupon
it is no marvel, though many times their hearts hating to be reformed, and
hearing their several doomes denounced against them from Gods own mouth, in
that Word, by which they shall be judged at the last Day, be full sorely
smitten with inward bitter gripings, and secret guilty stings, the very hellish
flashings and foretasts of that neuer-dying worm, which hereafter without
timely repentance, will gnaw upon their consciences with full rage and
unquenchable horror world without end. The worldling therefore may justly
tremble and roar when he reads that cutting Commination, Iam. 5. 1, 2. Go to
now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you.
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moth* eaten: your gold and silver
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for the last
days. The wanton, when he well weighs that flaming place, Heb. 13. 4. so full
of vengeance against him: But whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. The
drunkard, when he finds himself in the cursed Catalogue of that damned crew,
1. Cor. 6. 9. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, -- nor
drunkards, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. The Ambitionist, when he
casts his eye from the top of his usurped honors, upon that dreadful An non
and videmus saepe, quodis quem hodie praecedunt lictores, and stipant
satellites, eras in carcerem conijcitur, and cum malefactoribus versatur* Quid
hac vana and inani gloria fallacius* Quod si in hac vita praesenti
vicissitudinem hanc euadit, omnino mors veniens soelicitatem resecabit. Et quem
hodie in foro magna pompa comitabatur, and qui in carcerem conijciebat, and
super thronum resideba^, and inflabatur, and homines alios, quasi vmbras
de^piciebat, is subito postea iacebit mortuus absque spiritu, foetulentus,
petitus innumeris conuitijs, and ab his, quos pridem iniuria affecit, and quos
nulla affecit iniuria: condolentibus tamen his, qui ab isto iniuria afflicti
fuerunt. Quid hoc miserabilius fuerit? Item collecta omnia saepenumero inimici
and hosts inter se partiuntur and distribuunt: peccata autem per quae haec
coaceruata sunt, secum aufert, de quibus diligens, and accurata ratio exigetur.
Chrysostom, Hom. 22. in Genesis
downfall, Obadiah 4. Though thou exalt thy self as an Eagle, and though thou
set thy nest among the stars, thence I will bring thee down, says the Lord.

But now on the other side, spiritual Joy, which springs out of the wells of
salvation, and is a ray and representation, as it were, of the Sun of
Righteousness, and that eternal Fountain of soundest and lasting comfort, is
all sweet, pure, shining, calm, hearty, unspeakable, utterly free from those
fore-grumblings and reluctations of conscience; enuenomed mixtures and slavish
apprehensions; after-repentings, stings and melancholic dumps: though it may
be assaulted, and something dimmed with some doubts, distrusts and weakness
of degree, by reason of our unglorified state of mortality; yet in respect of
its creation, substance, truth, and blissful issue, it is a very glimpse of
heavenly glory, a pure taste of the rivers of Life, and first fruits of
everlasting joys. Thus the blessing of the Lord makes the heart spiritually
merry with incomparable sweetness, and he adds no sorrow with it.

3. Of dignity and divine temper. Carnal joys have for their foundation the
fading arm of flesh, and the fashion of this world, frail and fleeting as
themselves: earthly power and policy for their prop and support: For their
Object, the Garbage of the earth, Gold and Silver, food for swinish
worldlings; noble captiuities, gilded fetters, I mean, undeserved dignities,
honors, offices, greatness, and high rooms, the only aim of ambitious
Shebnaes; the filth and froth of brutish pleasures, fuel for Sodomiticall
flames, and such like trash, pelf, and vanity: For their companions, fears,
iealousies, guilty gripings: The senses for their seat: Time for their limit:
for their end, endless grief and horror of heart: For all earthly pleasure
determines in heaviness, as the Sun sets in darkness.

But now on the other side; spiritual Joy is the blessed Spirits sweet and
lovely Babe, grounded upon the sure Covenant of everlasting Love, Mercy, and
Peace in Jesus Christ: The matter of it, is the light Quid enim iucundius, quam
Dei Patris, and Domini reconciliatio, quam veritatis reuelatio, quam erroru^
recognitio, quam tantorum ^etro criminum venia* quae mayor voluptas quam
fastidium ipsius voluptatis, quam seculi totius contemptus, quam vera libertas,
qua^ conscientia integra, quam vita sufficiens, quam mortis timor nullus? quod
calcas deos Nationum, quod daemonia expellis, quod medicinas facis, quod
reuelationes petis, quod Deo viuis* Hae voluptates sanctae perpetuae, etc.
Tertull. lib. de spectat. cap. 29. Sospitate Dominus moerentes erigit: quia
Electorum men's non de praesentis vitae insania, sed de certitudine aeternae
salutis hilarescit. Gregor. in cap. 5. Ioh. cap. 11.
of Gods countenance, the Garments of salvation, the precious Robe of Christ's
righteousness, interest in his dearest Blood, and all the rich purchases of
his Passion; looking upon our names in heaven through the glass of
sanctification, Gods holy Image renewed upon our souls, and the illustrious
beams of heavenly graces shed from the Throne of Grace and shining there;
every sweet promise in his blessed Book: In a word, Iehoua, Isa. 61. 10.
Habakkuk. 3. 18. Phil. 4 4. And that glorious Name proclaimed, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
a wellspring of unspeakable refreshing to every truly broken and bleeding
heart; being well opened by a feeling and a fruitful meditation: For measure,
it is immeasurable, without bound or stint, and passes all understanding, no
stranger does intermeddle with it, neither can any man possibly conceive it but
he that enioyes it. It is, as it were, the amiable splendor and sparkle of
that white Stone in the Revelation, Chap. 2. 17. which only shines upon
heavenly hearts, with delight unspeakable and glorious: For seat and
certainty; It is engraven by the Finger of God with an heavenly Sun-beame, as
it were, shining from the face of Christ in the very center of the heart; which
not all the powers of darkness or hellish mists can finally dim or dispell;
the world neither give nor take from us, neither man, nor devil, nor shadow of
death ever raze or root out. It is honored with that supernatural
singularity and sacred temper, that utterly against nature and all natural
possibility, it extracts sweetness and life out of ordinary causes of
deiection and sinking. Troubles, persecutions, and reproaches, do fortify it,
and serve as fuel to enlarge its lightsomnesse. See Act. 5. 41. and 16. 25.
Acts and Monum page 2003. where the glorious Martyr Woodman speaks thus: When
I have been in prison, wearing otherwhile bolts, otherwhiles shackles,
otherwhile lying on the bare ground, sometime sitting in the stocks, sometimes
bound with cords, that all my body has been swollen; much like to be overcome
for the pain that has been in my flesh; sometime feign to lie without in the
woods and fields, wandering to and fro; few, I say, that durst to keep my
company, for^feare of the Rulers; sometime brought before the Justices,
Sheriffs, Lords, Doctors, and Bishops; sometime called Dog, sometime Devil,
Heretic, Whoremonger, Traitor, Thief, Deceiuer, with diverse other such like:
yea, and even they that did eat of my bread, that should have been most my
friends by nature, have betrayed me^: Yet for all this, I praise my Lord God,
that has separated me from my mothers womb; all this that has happened to
me, has been easy, light, and most delectable and joyful of any treasure
that ever I possessed. For duration, It is a very glimpse of heavenly glory,
which springing up in a sanctified heart, out of the wells of salvation, and
carried along with addition of the fresh comforts, from the Word and
Sacraments, through a fruitful current and course of a Christian life, is at
last entertained into the boundless and bottomless Ocean of the endless
joys of heaven.

4. Of vnconquerablenesse against all created (...) and assaults of earthly
discomforts. An o^ce of sorrow (...) a whole sea of worldly mirth. The
boisterousnesse and bravery of all carnal joy vanishes quite away, and
expires even as a flower when the heat rises that is sent upon it, upon the
very first approach or presence of any either outward trouble, or inward
terror. A prick of a needle, much more a pang of the Stone, or fit of the Gout,
is able to deprive a man of the pleasure of the worlds Monarchy. One serious
thought of death, or the sight of one finne armed with Gods anger, will put the
proudest Ni^rod, the greediest engrosser of all earthly delights, into
Belshazzars shiuering. But now let the Christian, whose heart is sweetly
reposed upon the Rock of eternity, be utterly stripped of all outward comforts;
let heavy accidents fall upon him as thick, as one wave in the neck of
another; which befell blessed Job: yet he is still where he was; he has made
God his portion, his only Jewel and Joy which he has in Heaven, or on Earth;
his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; and therefore when all earthly stays
and staves of reed, shrink in the wetting, and are shattered to nothing, he
cleaues with an unshaken and triumphant tranquillity of mind to his Sun and
shield, Psalm. 84. 11. To his light and life* Ioh. 8. 12. To his strong Tower of
defense, and exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. 1. hear his sweet and noble
resolution in this case, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the figtree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines: the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalles: yet I will rejoice in the
Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation. While Iehoua is in Heaven, his
heart is in the Haven, though never so many storms or tempests of the
troublesome sea of this World beat upon his house of clay. Rob him of all
earthly refreshments and lightsomnesse of this life, and let but the light of
Gods countenance shine upon him, which no darkness* nor dungeon, nor Devil in
Hell can intercept; and he is incomparably more merry, then the Worlds choicest
Minion, Pleasures dearest favorite, or the brauest Belshazzar upon earth, in
the very top and ruff of his most iouiall reuellings, and swaggering
sensuality. But it is not so with the earthly-minded man: For howsoever he may
digest with reasonable patience, and carry well enough away, all crosses and
contradictions to his other worldly comforts, while he does yet wallow without
interruption and disquiet in the sinful pleasures of that selected way of
death, upon which the more headstrong current of his corrupt nature has cast
him; and the natural bent of his carnal affections has singled ou^, and made
special choice of, to follow and feed upon with greatest delight; which the
Fathers call peccatum in delicij^, a man's bosom sin; yet cut him once short
of the free and full enioyment of this his sensual idol, and earthly god, and
you kill his heart quite, and plunge him presently into desperate distractions.
For instance: The covetous man, while his heart may nessle securely upon his
golden heap, will pass by without any great wound or passion, the curses of
the poor, the grumblings of his conscience, the comminations of the Ministry,
the cry of the whole Country against his oppressions, usury, sacrilege, and
sinful ways of hoarding. When he comes home, and finds his bags and bonds
safe; he blesses himself in his heart against -- Populus me ^ib* lat, at mihi
plaudo, Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.
all threatened judgments, horrors, curses, confusions. Though Jesus Christ
himself should preach and press them upon him, Luke 16. 14. with his golden
wedge he easily cuts asunder all scruples, doubts, exceptions, reasons,
arguments, objections, which any ways oppose his covetous and cruel courses.
He pleases and applaudes himself against all censures, and contradictions
whatsoever to the contrary. But let Gods angry hand in his just judgment, by
fire, robbery, or some secret consumption, snatch away his wealth; and he is
likely enough to go out of his wits, and in great hazard of hanging himself.
While the ambitious man is proudly mounted, fits fast upon the Seat of honor,
and is Idolized, as it were, and adored above others; he can easily enough
ouerlooke with an imperious disdain, the indignation of good men, emulation of
great Ones, the reproaches of the multitude, and all other petty and private
crosses: but throw him down from his high place; turn him out of his offices
and honors; and how weary is he of the World? how ir^esome to himself? how
prodigal of his life? how impatient of the company of men? While the wanton
wallowes in the brutish pleasures of his abominable filth; he bears well
enough away the weakening of his body, the wasting of his goods, the shame of
his sin, loss of friends, stain of reputation: but beat him back, and
b^rie him from the house of the strange woman, and you break his heart; banish
him from his Minion, and he is ready to make away himself. Woe, sorrow,
contentions, wounds without cause, redness of eyes, undoing of wife and
children, houting at in the streets, will well enough down with the d^unkard;
while he may domineere upon the Ale-bench: but cut off the new wine and strong
drink from his mouth; cross him in his swaggering course; confine him from
his good fellow meetings, and you take away the very life of his life. Thus
every unregenerate man secures himself in some one sensual Hold or other,
wherein the crown of his carnal joy consists; of which bereave him, and you
shall leave him ioylesse, heartlesse, hopeless, and helpelesse. But take from
the true Christian, if it were possible, both Heaven and Earth, and all the
creatures and comforts of both; yet you cannot take away his joy. God is the
strength of his heart, and his portion for ever* Surely he shall never be
moved: his heart is fixed and believes in the Lord.

Which since it is so, that spiritual joy is such an invaluable Jewel, and
carnal so cursed a vanity; let every Christian be exceedingly careful, not
to suffer the froth and filth of this, to stain or lessen the glory and
sweetness of the other. But if he once perceive any company or kind of
recreation begin to steal away his heart from communion and comfort in his
God; let him abandon it as a canker and cut-throate of his spiritual
happiness; and ever prize and prefer the joy of the soul, delights of
Grace* refreshings of the holy Ghost, infinitely before all worldly pleasures,
carnal contentments, ease, or any earthly thing.

Thus much of recreations.

II. Let me add a word or two of visitations. For complementall visitations of
unsanctified great Ones, without just occasion and a warrantable Calling;
besides, sinful expense of precious time, are many times unhappy occasions to
embarke, especially yielding natures, in some base and scand^lous businesses;
and to entangle them in those wicked services, or some uncomfortable
inconvenience; which afterward in cold blood woefully wound their consciences,
and perhaps much weaken their Christian reputations.

Iehosaph^t may serve as a remarkable instance for this purpose. Upon a time,
he came down to see Ahab King of Israel, by way of Courtly visitation. And
though he was equal unto him in the crowned Majesty of a King, and a good
man; yet trains and insinuations by Royal entertainments, and a Princely
feast premised, as it appears in the story, he was cunningly c^tcht and cast
into the confederation and society of an unhappy war: whereby with a
dishonorable precipitation, he plunged himself both into spiritual miseries,
and temporal mischief, both hurt his conscience, and hazarded his life. For
the first, 1. He suddenly and rashly promised aid unto Ahab, whom the Lord
hated, before he knew Gods will in the point from the mouth of the Prophet. 2.
When faithful Michaiah had delivered the truth, and acquainted them with the
mind of God; he notwithstanding went on with the business. 3. He did not
appear on the Prophets side, and in his defense, against the imperious
insolency of that false flattering Zedechiah; or the merciless tyranny of
Ahab; who sent him to prison for telling him the truth. Foul aspersions upon
so famous a King! For the second, by the cruel cunning of hollow-hearted Ahab,
he exposed himself both to the en-eagred and concurrent fury of the whole
Syrian Army; (only upon a penitent eiaculation, his life was rescued
miraculously from that extremest danger) and also to the wrath of God, for
helping the ungodly, and loving them that hared the Lord as the Prophet told
him, 2. Chron. 19. 2.

Mistake me not: I purpose not in this passage to censure or disgrace any
warrantable ceremony and solemnities of State; mutual intercourse of noble
deportment amongst Compeeres; civil exchange of fair and amiable behavior
one toward another; any charitable offices of humanity, or Christian passages
of courtesy and love: but the idle, formal, flattering vanities, Hypocrisies,
disguisements of those many needless, fruitless and endless salutations,
complements, visitations, entertainments, affected and acted by such vain
people, who are extremely troubled how to be rid of time. A commodity of high
account with all those, who are sensible and mindful of their last account:
Every moment whereof ought in the mean time to be crowned with fruitful
improuement, by all those that truly fear God. I could wish that a gracious
concurrence of goodness and greatness, true Nobleness indeed, where God
himself is top of the kin, and Religion the root; ( Nobilitas Heroica est
eminentis quaedam notabili^ homini proueniens -- ex supernaturali gratia, per
quam homo fit per adoptionem filius Dei: fit Sponsa Christi: fit templum
Spiritus Sancti. Sine qu^ nob litates caeterae nihil sunt, nihil proficiunt.
^bsunt (...) aliquando. Quia quod altum est hominibus; ^bominatio est apud
Deum. Gerson. Tom. 4. De no^ilitate.
in respect whereof those other: by birth, by riches, by mere moral virtue,
by valor, by learning, by favor of Princes, are but shadows and shapes of
nobleness) were honored with all due attributions, highest respect, and best
observance. In such a case it is not uncomely for Paul, to travail from Arabia
to Jerusalem to visit Peter, Galat. 1 18. Or the Queen of the South, from the
uttermost parts of the earth, to see Solomon, 1. Kings 10. 1. But I would not
have glistering folly, gilded rottenness, sacrificed unto with so much
flattery and counterfeit crouching. For why should silken dung be so adored,
and golden damnation deified? Now the reasons why such visitations, as well as
recreations may many times prove snares to entangle us in sin, damps to dull
our forwardness; or one way or other breed and bring upon us some spiritual
miseries, are such as these:

1. Great men without grace, ordinarily make use of all others for their own
advantage. With an imperious policy and a kind of Machiauelian Alchymy, they
secretly and inuisibly convert, dispose and manage the agency, abilities, and
serviceableness of their followers, visitants, adherents and dependants, to
serve their own turns, to feed their humors, further their private ends of
profit, pleasure, rising, reputation, or some other choice carnal contentment
and predominant worldly delight. They have their portion in this life, and
their heaven here; therefore they labor to make their earthly Paradise as full
of pleasures, as possibly they can. Their own sensual covetous and ambitious
hearts are the centers, wherein the lines and level of all their plots,
policies, and proiects do concur, and meet; and to which they conduct and
direct the officiousness, pliablenesse, and several services of all those
with whom they hold any kind of correspondence or intercourse.

2. Such exercises of Courtly vanities, sleeuelesse errands, idle business,
are Satan's chiefest and choysest seasons for the suggestion of temptations, and
too successful discharge of his fiery darts. He has ordinarily more power
over men, and is much likelier to prevail, when he finds them idle or ill
occupied; then when they are busied with humbleness and sincerity in
religious duties, or the necessary works of a lawful Calling. In our best
and holiest imploiments he is indeed most eager against us; but at times of
idleness and exercises of vanity, he is commonly most successful. In Gods
businesses, the honest executions of our Calling, and seasonable Christian
recreations, we may expect upon good ground, and with hopeful comfort, Gods
protection, the ordinary assistance of his blessed Spirit; harmlesnesse from
the creatures; Satan's restraint; some good measure of mortifying help against
the rebellious stirrings of our own corruptions, and such other blessings
promised in such cases. But if men will needs be idle or employed in vanity,
they justly bereave themselves of all these comfortable protections and
privileges. For it is just with God, at such times that He should withdraw
from them His own protecting hand, restrain the gracious influences of that
holy Spirit, and let loose against them with indignation, Satan, the creatures,
and their own corruptions, which is a very grievous cut to a tender and waking
conscience.

3. The presence and protestations, the intimations and motions of men in high
place, mingled with an affected familiar communication of themselves, and
plausible neglect of all formal solemnities and austerities of state, upon
purpose to insinuate sooner, and more suttlely; are many times very potent to
prevail with, and persuade especially inferiors. For they are apt when they
are so assaulted: 1. To conceive themselves highly honored, when those
condescend and vouchsafe to entreat and be beholding, who might in other cases
command, nay, and perhaps upon a point of advantage, and pang of displeasure,
quite crush and cashier them. 2. To hold it a convenient policy in these days
of the reign of iniquity and self-love, when Judgment is turned backward,
and Justice stands a far off; when truth is fallen in the street, and equity
cannot go, as the Prophet speaks, to gratify and demerit such mighty Ones,
as may shelter and protect them from all storms of violence, oppressions and
wrong; nay and perhaps, by their countenance procure them a great deal of
credit and esteem; if not observance and awfulnesse from those amongst whom
they live. 3. To call to mind out of too many woeful experiences, that in the
frowns and angry foreheads of great men, are infolded many times many secret
complots of cunning cruelty, and plausible malice: which when time serves, fall
full heavy upon the hearts and heads of inferiors, which are not in all poinis
pliable to their humors. And out of such carnal considerations as these, by a
rash unadvised yeeldingnesse, they too often plunge themselves hand over head
into unworthy engagements, and become instruments of ill offices; the baseness
and iniquity whereof does afterward in cold blood strike full cold unto their
hearts; and leaves a gash and grievous wound in their consciences, comforts and
Christian reputations.

4. At such entertainments and tables of Great men, not friends to the truth;
thou will be ready to vomit thy morsels, Prou. 23. 8.
and shall loose thy sweet words. Thy dainty fare may be sawced perhaps with
many bitter girds, much rotten talk, Surrepunt etiam fabulae freq^enter de
seculo ac voluptatibus: claudere aures non potes: prohibere putatur superbiae:
surrepunt etiam praeter voluntatem pocula. Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 20.
enforced healths, if not empoisoned with blasphemies, obscenities and horrible
oaths. Thy music will be merry lies, fained jests, scofs and scurrilities,
against Gods best servants, and the Kings best subjects; commonly calumniated
as pestilent fellows. For so the Church complains, Lam. 3. 63. I am their
music. Few feasts, where the founder is not Gods friend; but after his
good fellow guests be well heated with variety of dishes, and strong drink;
as their faces In their faces be sometimes seen the express tokens of this
intemper ancy. Hom. against gluttoni^ and drunkenness.
are inflamed with fiery reflections one from another, so their hearts will be
enraged (...). Acts 24. 5.
with mutual infection of furious malice, to belch out most prodigious
dunghill villainous lies hammered by the very foulest Fiend in the darkest nooke
of hell, against those that are true of heart: Lord, thou know! The
complementall forms and flourishes of thy welcome, may prove as a pitfall to
plunge thee into some dishonorable employment, or one way or other to betray
thee to an uncomfortable entanglement of thy conscience. So that if thy
generous spirit will nobly rise against such froth and folly, ribaldry and
railing, the unworthy degenerations of these worst times; if it be sensible of
Gods dishonor, the disgrace of the Saints, and thine own danger; thou can
not choose but be weary of such good cheer. Nay, besides the resolution of
thy judgment, that in such a case thou would far rather have stayed at
home with a dinner of green herbs, then to have thine ears so grated, and
heart grieved all the while at a great table; even in nature thou shall fare
worse. For thy just indignation, coffeehouse and sadness upon such ground,
will naturally contract thine heart, thicken thy blood, chill thy spirits; that
natural hear will faint and fail in the ordinary current and course of
concoction. No marvel then though thou be readier to vomit thy morsels, then
to rejoice in those high entertainments or variety of messes, which are
dissweetened with such distasteful and bitter mixtures. And thou shall loose
thy sweet words: both of humanity, and Christianity. For the first; out of the
ingenuous simplicity and honesty of thy heart, thou will return real,
sincere, affectionate demonstrations of thankfulness, for mere dissembled
formal ceremonies of entertainment and welcome. For the other; thou shall be
so far from finding a free and comfortable vent and entertainment to any good
talk; that if thou meddle that way, thou marrest all the mirth. Mention of
heavenly things, our last account, the life to come, judgments against sin,
privileges of the Saints, happiness of the holy Ones, etc. which might
sweetly season, and as it were, sanctify their meeting, and those good
creatures of God they so plentifully enjoy; would presently cast all the
company into dumps of melancholy. The Word of God, writ upon the wall in the
very height and ruff of their greatest iollitie and reuelling, did make the
heart, joints and knees of that mighty King Belshazzer to tremble, as the
leaves of the forest when they are shaken with the wind. How often may we
observe many goodly and gracious discourses buried in the bosoms of men of
understanding and worth, placed below, by reason of the domineering
talkatiuenesse, and imperious ignorance of some silken Idol sitting at the
head of the table? Horses, and Hounds and Hawks, devour full often and eat up
not only spiritual and holy, but even all moral and manly talk.

For the more convenient declining and prevention of any ensnarement and
inconvenience in this kind; let me commend to the Christian such cautions and
considerations as these:

1. Ever before thou enter out of thy doors, upon any occasion, business,
journey, visitation; weigh well with due deliberation, in the balance of an
holy wisdom, all circumstances, concurrents, company, probability of all
events, and consequents on both sides; of staying at home, or going abroad;
visiting this or that friend; undertaking that or the other business; and ever
constantly incline and resolve that way; which in all likelihood will bring
most glory unto God, good unto others, and comfort unto thine own conscience.
Let it only be the sinful liberty of hopeless worldlings, to waste their
time and labor; (for the needless expense of every moment of the one, and
motion of the other, they must very shortly be full dearly accountable at Gods
strict Tribunal) in those impertinent vagaries and idle visitations, which
have no other motive, but a desire to be rid of time, and to feed a gadding
and restless humor; no other end, but vanity or vainglory; no issue, but
temptation, and greater disabilitie to good duties. But let every wisely
resolute and truly judicious Christian disdain, howsoever worldly wisdom
deride it, to step over his threshold without a warrantable Calling, aim at
some honest end, probable foresight of some good to come thereon, honor to
God, furtherance of some good cause, good unto our brethren, discharge of some
duty of our Calling, performance of Christian offices, of charity, humanity,
natural affection, mutual comforting, confirming, refreshing, and building up
one another in our most holy faith, and the like. Otherwise he shall be in
great danger to return home far worse, then when he went out; laden both
with more personal guiltiness, and accessarinesse to others sin; bleeding
with some fresh bruise of conscience, by falling scandalously, or failing in
some Christian duty; grown into a further disacquaintance and estrangement
from God; deepelier sunk, perhaps, into some sinful society, and sensual
conformities with men of this World.

Some actions, I confess, and undertakings in their own nature, and in
respect of the object, Actus moralis consideratur ^ter. 1. Secundum rationem,
quam sortitur ex solo obiecto absque circumstantijs. Vel: 2. Secundum rationem,
quam sortitur ex obiecto cum omnibus circumstantijs, finis, loci, temporis, and
huiusmodi. Primo modo contingit dari actum indifferentem, qui nec est bonus,
nec malus, etc. See Durand. 2. Did. 40. q. 1. It may not well be denied, that
all actions of men endued with the use of reason, are generally either good or
evil. Hooker lib. 2. Sect. 8. of Ecclesiast. Polity.
as the School* men speak, are indifferent: but clothed with circumstances,
and indiuiduated by the actual working of a particular Agent, are not so, but
necessarily become morally good or evil, to the doer. And therefore the
assertion of Hist. of Counc. of Trent. page 196.
Catarinus in the Council of Trent, to this purpose, was consonant to the
opinion of the greater part of the Thom 1. secundae q. 18. Art. 9. Nullus
indiuidualis actus est indifferens. Alber. 2. did. 40. ar. 4. Aegid. 2. Did.
40. q. 2. Richar. 2. Did. 40. ar. 2. q. 3. Dur. 2. Did. 40. q. 1. See also
Eustachius. Tract. de act. H^ma. q. 5. Actiones humanae, says he,
considerantur: 1. Vel secundum speciem, and in actu signato. Sic admittuntur
quidam actus humani secundum se, and ex natura sua indifferentes. 2. Vel
Secundum indiuidu^m, and velut in actu exercito. Et sic nullae humanae actiones
sun^ indifferentes.
Schoolmen: Every particular action, said he, is good or evil, neither is
there to be found any one indifferent: he means in the singular and actual
existence; in the general there may. Recreation is of it self, and in its
own nature indifferent; but drawn into existence and exercise, put in
practice, and putting on circumstances, it will ever become unto thee either
sinful, or sanctified. If rectified by such rules as I have formerly delivered
for that purpose; it may prove comfortable, but staind with profane company, a
sensual end, immoderate delight, no necessity in respect of weariednesse of
body, or tirednesse of mind, vain expense of precious time due to holy
duties, or discharge of our Calling, it may prove cursed. It is so also in the
present point of visitations.

2. Although the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 27. in these words; And ye be disposed to
goe] seems to intimate, that it is not utterly and absolutely unlawful upon
any occasion for a Christian, especially if invited, to visit an irreligious
man; yet let none who desires to preserve peace at home in his own bosom,
presume hereupon to plunge himself hand ouer-head into any unwarrantable
engagements and correspondencies with worldly men; or build hence a licentious
conceit of any allowance to communicate himself promiscuously with familiarity
or content, either by way of inuitation or visitation to all comers, all
company. It is a foul sign of a false heart, and a fellow, that at length
will certainly fall away; to expect, entertain, and enjoy with equal
patience and delight the Worlds Favorites, and Gods Friends: to be as
openhearted, open-handed, and open-housed to a good fellow, as to a gracious
man. Every true-hearted Nathaneel rightly informed, and well advised, cannot
choose but apprehend, acknowledge and feel a vast and invaluable difference,
between the sweet heavenly communion, and confident communication of
heart-secrets with faithful fruitful Christians; and the irksome intrusions,
vexing vainglorious tediousness, and frothy conferences of carnal men. If
any of Gods children therefore, at any time be disposed to take any allowance
and encouragement from this place, to inuit, or visit known enemies to the
purity of Religion, or power of godliness; let him cast his eye also upon
those cases and cautions, which may make it comfortable. They are such as
these: 1. Their salvation. 2. Thine own safety.

1. For the first, be sure to propose unto thy self their spiritual good, as
thine only aim, or at least, principal end; and in the sincerity and
singleness of thine heart, to seek indeed the salvation of their souls. We
have Christ Jesus himself a precedent in this case, Matthew. 9. 10, 11, 12. He
suffered with patience, Publicans and sinners to press into his company, and
did eat and drink with them, upon purpose, to heal their souls, and help
them out of Hell. But his pure and sacred soul was endowed with an infinite
impossibility of receiving any touch, or tainture from those wicked Ones, with
whom he conuersed; whereas, worms and wretches that we are! if we watch not
extraordinarily, and stand stoutly upon our guard, we are far likelier to be
perverted by them, then they converted by us: And therefore at such times it
concerns us much, to recollect and quicken up all the powers of our souls,
and spiritual forces, with special address and resolution to preserve and
vindicate, all we can, the honor, truth, and servants of God from all stain,
disparagement and unworthy censure. Let us labor and look to bring as much
wisdom and courage, to confront and countermine; as the Devils Proctors,
cunning and malice, to undermine and affront the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and
glory of Christianity. It is lawful and laudable for the Phisicions of the
body, to visit sometimes such patients, as are infected with contagious
diseases, to cure and recover them: so that according to the Rules of their
Art, they arm themselves with preservatives and counterpoysons, to prevent and
repel the noysomnes of the air, and noxious vapors: so it may not prove
unseasonable for spiritual Physicions, to be drawn sometimes out of a desire of
doing good, into the company of those, who are woefully ouerrun with the
leprosy of sin, and have, as it were, the plague sore of scandalous life
running upon them; so that they be fore-armed with prayer, premeditation,
watchfulness, etc. to purify and preserve their own souls from spiritual
infection.

2. Secondly, in case of thine own safety; but so, that in so doing, thy
sincere heart be not conscious unto it self, of slavish distrust, false
fears, prejudice of Gods providence, reliance upon the arm of flesh, etc. but
that it apprehend and approve upon good ground, and out of an holy wisdom,
the present occasion, whether of inuitation or visitation, as a comfortable
means offered by Gods good hand to mitigate the malice, and mollify the
hearts of those which might do thee a mischief. It was the saying of a wise
man, that he would rather have a Dog to fawn upon him, then bark at him;
and bark at him only, then bite him. Whereby he intimated thus much, as I
conceived; that Gods children should not out of an austere, sour,
unwarrantable retiredness, exasperate and enrage unnecessarily the too much
already alienated affections of the contrary-minded; but so far as they may,
without wound of conscience, stain of their innocence, or imputation of
spiritual cowardlinesse, observe them with such common offices of humanity,
which may dis-infierce and keep them, if not hearty friends, yet at least
(which in these corruptest and angry times we hold a degree of happiness)
moderate and ingenuous enemies. Isaac may be an instance in this second case,
who for a more confident securing of himself, and comfortable settling of his
peace, invited Abimelech and his followers to a Feast, Genesis 26. 30. To the same
purpose, Jacob sent a present to Esau, Genes. 32. 20. and promised to visit him
at Seir, Genes. 33. 14. But now at such times, and in such company, thou had
need put on a great deal of courage and patience, wisdom and watchfulness;
and warily decline two obuious errors, and dangerous extremes; furious zeal,
and saint-hearted silence; of which see before, page 119.

3. Do not so distaine thy worth and worthy hopes; discover not such extreme
weakness and true baseness of mind: resemble not so near the fearful
folly of obnoxious and vainglorious worldlings; as to suffer the eye and
excellency of thine heavenly Spirit, to be any whit dazeled or dulled with
formal affected glistering of outward glory; as to hunt with fawning terror,
after the transitory favor of worldly greatness, to adore worthless
Magnificoes, and the worlds Minions with undeserved flattering attributions;
and with ambitious affectation, to contend for their countenance and
uncomfortable correspondence with them. The greatest man without virtue and
grace, though never so gloriously enriched with humane felicities, is but as a
dead carcass hung over with jewels; a very spectacle of commiseration, to
every spiritual eye; even as that body is, which adorned with a goodly
feature, and many other admirable beauties, yet wants eyesight, the comfort
of life; whereby it walks in perpetual darkness and desperate danger.
Goodness, though attended with contempt and disgrace, is incomparably more
amiable in the eye of an honest Cato; much more of an holy Christian, then all
the vainglorious boisterous representations of any greatness or pomp.
Memorable and remarkable to this purpose, was the magnanimity and resolution
of that holy Prophet, 2. Kings 3. 14. As the Lord of hosts lives, before whom
I stand, Surely were it not that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat the King
of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. Miserable then is the
vanity and vainglorious slavery of such as with great eagerness and
impotency hunt so ambitiously after high dependances, and hold it a strange
happiness to insinuate into the bosom of the worlds Favorites; though it be
by baseness, bribery, an universal obsequiousness, and vile accommodations.
They, many times with vaunting intimation also to others, proudly applaud and
please themselves for their access, countenance, and entertainment with Great
men; as though it argued in them some rare extraordinary sufficiency and
worth: when as perhaps it is their own flattering insinuations and intrusion;
their isntrumental agencie and employment in some ill offices, lewd services,
which brings them into such request and acceptance. But let such know, it is a
thousand times more comfort and true credit to be received with Christian love
and arms of grace, into the heart and affections of a good man; then to be
entertained with greatest bravery and worldly applause, into grace and favor
with the greatest graceless One upon earth. For alas, when a man has done all
he can to please the humors of ungodly great Ones, by an unconscionable
satisfaction of their carnal desires; and to gratify them, has unhappily
grieved his own conscience; he can at last, when Gods dreadful visitation
and flaming vengeance shall seize upon him for that sin, look for no better
reward and reply, than that cold comfort and cutting answer, which Judas in
the extremity of his anguish and horror received from the High Priests and
Elders, Matthew. 27. 4. That cursed man came unto them, ready, out of the rage of
his vexed conscience, to tear his traitorous heart out of his body with his
own bloody hands, and threw the thirty pieces of silver amongst them, and cried
out, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. But what
recompense do they return for his employment in villainy, to serve their
turn? Their reply is, What is that to us? See thou to that. And such a man
shall certainly in the day of distress, be enforced to take up some rufull
complaint, proportionable to Wolseyes heavy groan; Had I been as careful to
serve the God of heaven, as my great Master on earth, He had never left me in
my gray hairs. And we see in the mean time, favor is deceitful and
transitory even in private men; much more in great personages: The volubility
of whose nature is soon glutted; and very variable for kinds of satisfaction.
A thousand experiences in all Stories and times teach us; how irregular, and
many times retrograde the reuolutions of highest favors run. They have their
paroxysmes and declinations, and ever at length their most certain expiration
and everlasting period.

But on the other side, consciousnesse of having held an unfeigned fruitful
correspondence and communion with Gods people; the only excellent Ones, by all
nearest and dearest engagements and Obligations of a profitable and comfortable
fellowship in the Gospel, and mutual intercourse of godly conference,
heavenly counsel, spiritual encouragements, consideration one of another,
confirmation in grace, and well-grounded testification of meeting together in
heaven, will incomparably more refresh the trembling heart of a dying man, than
if he had been crowned all his life long, with the Imperial glory of all
earthly kingdoms. And in the mean time there is nothing in this world to be
admired, but the illustrious splendor of heavenly graces, shed and shining
from Gods merciful Throne, by his sanctifying Spirit, into the souls of the
Saints. Neither any thing so to be desired, no such prerogative and Paradise
in this vale of tears; as a mutual communicating of their divine brightness,
and the sweet joy issuing thence, a very glimpse and earnest of everlasting
glory, to the humble hearts one of another.

4. When thou visitest others, or thy self inuitest them; take notice ever
beforehand, with as punctual and special survey, as thou can possibly; of
their humors, dispositions, carriages, opinions, and behauiours; and thereupon
premeditate and prepare convenient and seasonable matter; whereby thou may
more successefully address and apply thy self with all meekness of wisdom
and patient discretion, to insinuate, interpose, argue, answer, reprove,
reply, and so demean thy self in thy whole discourse, that through thy
default, neither the glory of God, the honor of his Truth, the reputation of
Christianity, or thine own conscience, receive any indignity, disgrace,
diminution or wound. Would Christians take this counsel, hold this course;
they would at such times, not so often depart with spiritual discontent, and
so smitten with consciousnesse afterward, of their silence, omissions,
cowardlinesse, and unprofitableness in company. For want of care and
conscience in this point, country people meet many times in their Conuenticles
of goodfellowship, at Alehouses, Bake-houses, Gossippings, as they call them,
etc. as at a common Mart of Tale-telling, back-byting, disgracing their
neighbors, raging against Professors, sawcily and unseasonably meddling with,
and miscensuring other men's matters; yea, and would you think it, sometimes
even highest Mysteries of State; reuiling the Ministry, especially if managed
with manifestation of the Spirit, and an holy impatiency, to see the devil
domineere and revel it in the blood, of the peoples souls without
contradiction. When they come together at such times, every one opens his pack
of tales; for I have told you heretofore, that a Talebearer is compared to a
(...) Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer. Liu. 19. 16. Of (...)
Mercari. Se^ Pag^in.
Pedlar, as the word in the Original clearly intimates, who having furnished
himself, and filled his pack with variety of peddling and petty stuffes,
trots up and down for vent from house to house, where he finds best custom
and speall entertainment: I say, at such meetings, it is their manner to open
every one his pack of false and slanderous tales; which they have raked and
scraped together by their own malicious surmises, listnings, whisperings,
pragmaticall inquisitiveness into other men's businesses, or some odd idle
Intilligencers, whom they entertain for that purpose; and there, out of an
itching humor of talkatiuenesse and tattling, they lay abroad such rotten
wares, to the empoysoning of the ears of those that hear them, the defaming
of their brethren far better then themselves, and certain remonstration to
their own consciences, that they are as yet the children of the devil the
father of lies and slanders, and have of him already learned the very language
of hell. Were such meetings mingled and seasoned with gracious talk, (and all
our talk ought always to be with grace, Coloss. 4. 6.) with holy conferences,
and helping one another toward heaven; with planting and preserving Christian
love, and kind affections one toward another, it were an happy thing: but
while there is nothing but ribald and rotten communication, sowing many times
much seed of bitterness and heartburning against their brethren, in the earas
of one another, and a cursed sacrifice, as it were, of spiteful and slanderous
tongues, offered up unto Satan; such miserable meetings are fitter for Pagans,
then Professors of Religion; for the consistory of hell, then for the communion
of Saints. Neither are higher places and great Feasts free from such froth and
transcendent villainies of the tongue: Because there the most hold it a point of
preciseness, to make conscience of their conference, say to themselves, Our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4. labor more to furnish
themselves before*hand with complementall phrases, forms of flattery,
flourishes of wit, variety of jests, and other vain glorious ostentations of
courtly ornaments, then with any one word of the Word of God, world to come, or
the way to heaven. They, I say, therefore, too often unworthily dishonor such
meetings with much unnoble deportment in their discourse. Besides other
deformities and indignities, how seldom shall we find great Tables and
solemn Feasts, without that cursed Music, mentioned, Lament. 3. 63? But oh,
how infinitely unworthy is it a man of honor and worth, to suffer with
patience, any roguish Fiddler, scurrill Iester, or stigmaticall son of
Belial, to fall foul upon those men, the truest Nobles upon earth, Psalm. 16.
3! Of whom, and the time is at hand, even the proudest of them all, repenting
and groaning for anguish of spirit, will say, nay with hideous yellings roar
out: These were they whom we had sometimes in derision, and a Proverb of
reproach. We fools accounted their life madness, and their end to be without
honor: but how are they now numbered amongst the children of God, and their lot
is among the Saints? Therefore have we erred from the way of Truth, etc. Where
is now the bravery and pomp of our high places? the earthly Paradise of our
dearest pleasures? the Rose buds, with which we crowned ourselves in the spring
of our youth? They are all withered, vanished, and come to nothing; they are
passed away like a shadow, as the remembrance of a guest that tarrieth but a
day; nay, as a Poast that hasted by.

Thus much also of Visitations. Now,

III. Concerning natural actions, as meat, drink, sleep, etc. I shall not
say much. For were it not, that through the course of nature, we woefully besot
even common sense, and infatuate our reason with sensuality and wilful
blindness; every man might be a rule unto himself, for temperance, and
moderation this way. Hence that proverb has its porbability, Every man is
either a fool or a Physicion. Either he has learnt by manifold experience,
and observation of the state, exigency and ability of his own body; what
seasons and proportions of such natural helps may be fittest for his
temperament and constitution; or else he is most unworthy of that noble thing,
an understanding soul, which he bears in his bosom.

For the first, Gluttony, fullness of bread, one of Sodoms Ezech. 16. 49.
sins; which as the Scholemen say out of Sciendum p^aeterea est; quia quinque
nos modis gulae vitium tentat: Aliquando namque indigentiae tempora praeuenit:
aliquando vero tempus non praeuenit: sed cibos lautiores quaerit: aliquando,
quae sumenda sunt praeparari accuratius expetit: aliquando autem* and qualitati
ciborum, and tempori congruit; sed in ipsa quantitate sumendi mensuram
moderatae refectionis excedit: Nonnunquam vero, and abiectius est quod
desiderat; and tamen ipso aestuimmensi desiderij deter^us peccat. Praepropere,
laute, nimis ardenter, studiose.
Gregory, consists in these five points: 1. In an ouer-burning of nature with
new matter, and more meat, before the perfection and period of concoction have
raised a kindly appetite. 2. In a curious hunting after costlinesse, variety
and daintiness of fare. 3. In a luxurious affectation of too much Art, and
exactness in dressing and preparing it. 4. In excess and immoderation in
respect of the quantity. 5. In a sensual fury of the appetite after good
cheer. I say, this unmanly monster and Tyrant of the belly, as Chrysostom
calls it, does at this day reign as generally, and cry as loud, as any sin I
can upon the sudden remember so little contradicted. (And yet there are many
foul and scarlet abominations, contempt of godliness, unworthy coming to the
Sacrament, usury, idleness, many hateful baits and entisements to lust; as
nakedness of breasts and wrists, abhorred filth! painted Quid facit in facie
Christianae (...), and ce^ussa? Quorum alterum ruborem genarum, labiorumque
mentitur; alte^nm candorem oris, and colli, ignis iuuenum, fomenta libidinum,
impudicae mentis indicia. Quomodo flere potest pro peccatis suis, quae lacrymis
cutem nudat, and s^lcos ducit in facie? Qua fiducia erigit ad coelum vultus,
quos Conditor non agnoscit* Hieron. ad Furiam de statu viduali. Epist. 24. q.
3. Tract. 7. Fol. 59.
faces, false Audaci conatu and sacrilego contemptu crines tuos inficis, malo
presagio futurorum, capillos iam tibi flammeo auspicaris -- Non metuis oro quae
talis es, ne cum resurrectionis dies venerit, Artifex tuus te non recognoscat,
and ad sua praemia and promissa venientem, remoueat and excludat* increpans
vigore censoris and Iudicis dica^: Opus hoc meum non est, nec imago haec nostra
est; cutem falso medicamine poluisti, crinem adultero color mutasti, expugnata
est mendacio facies, figura corrupta est, vultus alienus est, Deum videre non
poteris, quando oculi tibi non sunt, quos Deus fecit, sed quos Diabolus
infecit. Cyprian. D^ Discip. and Habitus Virginum.
hair, monstrous fashions, etc. which are not taken to heart in any proportion
to their execrablenesse; against which, Pulpits are too silent, and the times
digest without any great remorse and reclamation.)

We lift up our voices loud against drunkenness, and it is high time; for it
grows toward an high tide, and threatens, without timely and resolute
opposition, a lamentable inundation to the whole Kingdom. Whereas his fellow
foul fiend, gluttonous reuelling, eats up Gods creatures with abominable
excess, far more vnobseruedly and uncensured; and yet it is a work of
darkness, and damnes as well as drunkenness. Romans 13. 13. Gal. 5. 21. nay,
and that more dangerously, because more insensibly. To preserve thee fair and
free, not only from wallowing in this beastly sin, which is proper to
Belials, but even from any touch and all appearance of it, take notice; Nay, to
fire the most ravenous sensualist out of this swinish filth, let him also
consider;

1. First, That even that sinful superfluity, by which he slays his own
body ( For by surfeting, says the Wise man, have many perished) might very
comfortably revive the hungry faintings, and sustain the languishing life of
Vnus gulosus expendit in piscibus, vnde vigenti pauperes sati^ haberent de
pane. In quo fratres suos de portione sua defraudat. Noli putare gratuitum quod
impendis; velis, nolis, Debtor es. Bern.
many made of the same mould, and far better then himself. So that, upon the
matter, there is, as it were, a double murder. How then are such good creatures
of God sanctified by Word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5. to such luxurious
Fratricides, unmercifully mindlesse of Joseph's afflictions? or how do they
eat to the glory of God? 1. Cor. 10. 31.

2. Whereas thou might enjoy an active, able, healthful, and lightsome
Socrates is said, by sobr^ety to have had always a strong body; and to have
lived ever in health. Nay, it is further reported of him, that by good order of
diet, he escaped the plague at Athens, never avoiding the City, not the company
of the infected: whereas the greatest part of the Cit^ was consumed. Haven of
health chap. 243. Galen reports of himself lib. 5. cap. 1. De sa^it tuend.
That after 28. years of age, (and he lived, as Sipontinus writes, 140.
years, and died only through feebleness of nature) he was never grieved with
any sicknes^e, except the g^udge of a Fever of one day Now his rules were
chiefly 1. Never to eat and drink his fill: 2. Never to eat any raw thing:
3. To have always some sweet savor about him. The preservation of health is,
to rise from the Table with an appetite. Hypocra. Epid. Sect. 4. Aph. 20.
Tenuis mensa sanitatis matter Chrysostom. Hom. 55. ad pop. Antioch.
body; which is an happiness to be prized above gold, riches, infinite
wealth; By thine intemperancy this way, thou fillest it with crudities,
rheumes, obstructions, distillations, and many woeful Pedum dolores, and
capitis grauedines, and vertigines, and manuum cruciatus, and tremores, and
remissiones, and arquatus, and longae febres, and aestuosae, and alia his multo
plura non ex indigentia, par^oque victu, sed ex crapula, and saturitate nasci
solent, Chrysostom. ibid.
distempers. The pains of watching, and choler, and pangs of the belly, are
with an insatiable man, says the Wise man. Many a one complains of his head,
for sending down so much rheum, the mother of all maladies. But the head
might well answer as one says wittily, Desine fundere and ego desinam fluere:
Be thou sober in pouring down, and I will be sparing in dropping down. Do
not thou distemper with excess, and I will distill less. The stomach
surcharged above the sphere of its actiuitie, as they say, and power of
natural heat, by immoderate cramming or heaping upon it more meat, before
the former be concocted; like a fire beginning to burn, laden with green
wood, engenders many smoaky clouds, as it were, of raw superfluous fumes; which
ascending into the brain, and resolved by the coldness thereof, as vapors in
the middle region of the air, rain down into the body abundance of rheum,
the source of all sicknesses, distempers and diseases; gowts, dropsies, aches,
consumptions, palfies, and other innumerable maladies. As therefore thou
would not with a dram of swinish (...) quidem ad gutter vsque perueni^, and
linguam: remora namque mensa, vel vorato cibo, ^imi lis est illi, qui non
gustauit, imo long peior, onera inde ferens, and c^pitis grauididem, and
somnum morti similem: frequenter autem and in somniam ex crapula, and spiritus
praeclusione, and eructatione. Ibid.
pleasures purchase a pound of exquisite pain, rise still from the table with
an appetite.

3. Continuance of life, is a dear indulgence from God* and to be highly
prized; both of the unregenerate, that he may yet repent and make his peace
with God, before the pit of destruction has shut her mouth irrecouerably upon
him; and also of the Christian, that he may do more nobly yet, make his
election yet sure, with fuller conquest trampl^ upon his bosom lust, and body
of death; grow into a nearer fellowship and communion with his God; and look
back upon as much time as he can possibly get, spent sincerely in his service,
before he look his Captain Christ Jesus in the face; who has so dearly
bought him, and will so gloriously crown him. Now this foul excess and
fullness of feeding robs us of this Jewel before our time, and shorteneth yet
more our already short spanne of living in the world. He that dieteth himself,
prolongeth his life, says the Wise man. Therefore it follows by a consequence
of contrariety; he that is greedy upon meats, puts a knife unto his throat.
Whereupon, says one, many by overmuch eating, and continual feasts, stifle
Nature, and choke up themselves; which had they fed coursely, or like Gally
slaves been tied to an oar, might have happily prolonged many fair years.
And a noble learned Knight inquiring the cause of our short-l^uednesse in these
last times, in respect of former, renders such reasons as these:

1. The tender bringing up of children, first fed and nourished with the milk
of a strange Dug; an unnatural curiosity having taught all women (but the
Beggar) to find out Nurses, which necessity only ought to commend unto them.

2. The hasty marriages in tender years, wherein Nature being but yet green
and growing, we rent from her and replant her branches, while her self has
not yet any root sufficient to maintain her own top: and such half ripe
seeds (for the most part) in their growing up, wither in the bud, and wax old
even in their infancy.

3. But above all things, the exceeding luxuriousness of this gluttonous age,
wherein we press Nature with over weighty burdens, and finding her strength
defective, we take the work out of her hands, and commit it to the artificial
help of Sack, Tobacco, strong Waters, hot Spices, provoking Sawces, etc. As
thou would then, not abridge thy days, and be guilty of thine own
untimely death, do not gormandize.

4. Never any man given to his belly, did nobly in any kind, or ever performed
any great work; but ordinarily proves a swinish idle unprofitable burden of
the earth; and has his soul only, as they say, for salt to keep his body
from putrefaction. The excellency and actiuitie of the soul is quiet dampt;
and utterly disabled from all deep and diuiner contemplations, from all noble
atchieuements and imploiments of weight, by the burdensome fullness and Nihilo
fiunt afinis melioris animi, ta^ium mensarum de^cias sectantes. Chrysostom. Hom
55. ^d pop. Antioch*
dullness of a gluttonous body. We can never look for great matters from that
man, which better relisheth sweet sawces, then the sweetness of doing
virtuously; and has a better palate then brain. All the greatest personages
of the world, and those that have excelled any way, either in managing affairs
of Kingdoms, warl^ke exploites, heavenly, natural, moral, or manual skill,
etc. have been sober. Even amongst the very Heathens, as Cyrus, Caesar, the
Roman Curij and Fabritij, more ennobled and renowned for their frugality, then
famous victories. But now on the contrary, the most execrable monsters for
villainy, cruelty, luxury unnatural impuritie, that ever lived, have been
gluttons, as the Ezech. 16. 49.
Sodomites, Luxus f^it portentosi; vt qui etiam p^nes deauratos habueri^. (...).
Caligula, etc. As therefore thou would not drown, and dull the powers of
thy soul in the sottishness of such dunghill excess: but have them at
command for the ready exercise and improuement of their best abilities, at time
of need, and for a comfortable discharge of both thy Callings; eat moderately.
Sound sleep comes of moderate eating, says the Wiseman, he rises early,
and his wits are with him; to wit, able, active and strong for any undertaking.
For as the soul ought not with carking thoughtfulness, false fears,
unnecessary deiection, to afflict and waste the body: so neither ought the
body by any sensual indulgence and intemperancy, to weaken and emasculate the
soul: but both body and soul should serve one another in sobriety and
moderation; that the whole man may be more sufficiently and chearefully
serviceable to him that created both body and soul for that purpose.

5. The very Heathens by the light of reason, did abominate with much moral
indignation, the superfluous vanity and curiosities of this swinish sin. A
Bull, says Taurus pa^cissimorum iugerum pascuis impletur: vna sylua Elephantis
pluribus suffici; homo and terra pascitur and mari. Quaesi^mae dapes non gustu,
sed difficultatibus ^stimantur, miracula auium, longinqui (...) pisces, alieni
temporis poma* aestiuae ^iues, Hibernae rosae. Homines itaque ventri
obedientes, animalium loco numeremus, non hominum: quas^ (...) animalium
quidem, sed mortuorum.
Seneca, will be filled with a pasture of a few Acres: one Forest will suffice
many Elephants. But scarce the Air with all her Foul, the Sea with all her
Fish, the Earth with all her roots and rich^s, will satisfy the insatiable
Gut of a gluttonous Epicure. And therefore, says he, we may well rank and
reckon men given to the belly, amongst bruit beasts, not reasonable creatures*
nay, some of them not so much as amongst living creatures, but rather loathsome
dead carrions.

Now in a second place, concerning excess in drink: It is not possible, that
any who has given his name to the purity and power of godliness, would plunge
himself into the hateful and abhorred dungeon of drunkenness, which Austin
Ebrietas enim quafi inferni puteus. De temp. Sermon. 231.
compares to the pit of Hell. In steed therefore of pursuing this foul Fiend,
the proper familiar of the sons of Belial, I will spend a word or two about
Healthing; to which, perhaps, at sometimes, in some company, thou art tempted
with much scornful importunity; but after troubled in cold blood for having
so conformed to the fashion of the World. (...). Romans 12. 2.
And lest opposition to this exorbitant humor of the times, should be charged
with too much preciseness and novelty; I will only at this time in this
point, acquaint you with the judgment, zeal and noble indignation of the
ancient Doctors, both of the East and West Churches against it.

Many foul sins are there in these last and worst days, which elder times
were exceedingly angry with, and all sacred learning abominates, and yet I know
not how, are so transformed, and incorporated into the affections and
approbation of the present times, that they rather go in the esteem of the
most, for honest recreations, Gentlemen-like sports, tolerable trades, trifles
not to be taken notice of; Prodigious impudency! then for works of
darkness, and Satan's services, as they are indeed. Such as Stage Plays, mixed
dancing, dicing, officious lies, painting of faces, false hair, usury,
healthing, etc. these and the like, are at this day so painted over with
sensual dawbing, and streines of wit; so preualent in men's affections, so
impatient of contradiction, so raging against any talk of reformation, and
sheltered under the wings of good fellowship; that the Minister which meddles
with them, shall twenty to one, be ipsofacto a rank Puritan. Against the rest
I have upon other occasions discharged the Ordnance of Antiquity: Hear at this
time what the Fathers say against Healthing.

Ambrose powers out himself in a mighty torrent of sacred eloquence, with much
power and holy indignation against the Healthers of his time; as you may see in
diverse Chapters of his book de Helia, and iniuni^: his 13. Chapter is
entitled, De Potu ad equales calices; Of drinking Healths. In the 18* Chapter
he brings them in thus, in their swaggering humor: Let us drink, say they, to
the health of the Emperor, Bibamus, inquiunt, pro salute Imperatorum, and qui
non biberit, ^it reus in deuotione. Videtur enim non amare Imperatorem; qui pro
eius salute non biberit.
and whosoever pledgeth not his health, let him be obnoxious and guilty in
point of devotion. Highest profaneness! Hateful impiety! Shall an honest
sober man, and faithful subject, who loves the King dearelier then his own
hearts blood, and would willingly both out of courage and conscience, power it
out if need required, for the preservation of his person; besides Prayer for
him in the House of God, and in his family makes conscience also of soliciting
the Throne of Grace ordinarily twice or thrice a day in private, with
heartinesse and feruency for chiefest and choicest blessings upon his soul,
body, government, posterity, etc. and if any convenient and discontented
thought offer it self, repells it as a diabolical temptation? I say; Shall
such an one, only because he dares not give his name by reuelling, to that
cursed catalogue of carnal condemned works, Gal. 5. 21. 1. Pet. 4. 3. nor
conform to the exorbitant riotous humors of the time, lest he wound his
conscience, and weaken his power to pray for him, be questioned about his good
intentions, and wellwishing to the King? And shall a swaggering Gallant empty
many times of all real worth, and truly noble parts; only audacious enough to
expose the crowned Majesty of our earthly gods to cheapenesse and contempt, by
an unhallowed tossing the venerable name of Sovereignty amongst his Cups; and
in stead of praying, to which he is of a mere stranger, and holds it
Puritanicall, prouokes daily and hourly, and pulls down, all he can, Gods
fierce wrath both upon King and Kingdom, by his swearing, drinking, lying,
whoring, etc. Hos. 4. 1* 2. I say; shall he be the Emperors only friend?
Whereupon the good Father immediately after, ironica^ly abominates such Bedlam
folly; Opiae deuotionis obsequium! says he; A sweet piece of pious devotion
sure! Paul teaches us another lesson, 1. Tim. 2. 12. That we should pray for
the health and salvation of Kings. And therefore it was a wise speech of a
great man; By your leave, I will pray for the Kings health, and drink for mine
own.

Great Hono. 14 in Ebriet. and luxum.
Basil also paints them out, and the fashion of his times, in his Sermon of
Drunkenness to this sense: Procedente autem potatione, prodit in medium
Adolescens nondum ^brius, Phialam vini refrigerati humeris ferens. Is submoto
illorum pincerua, in medio astans, per obliquas ^istulas aequam conuiuis
distribuit ebrietatem. Nouum genus hoc mensurae, vbi nullus est mensurae modus,
vt per poculorum aequalita^em, inter eos nulla sit inuidia, nec alius alium
bibendo circumueniat, aut defraudet.
Then growing to the heat, and height of their bouzing and banqueting, there
comes me out a young man, not yet drunk, and brings upon his shoulders a
vessel of cooled Wine; and he, the drawer withdrawn, standing in the midst,
does derive and convey through several crooked pipes, to all the good fellow
guests, equal measure of drink, and matter of drunkenness. This is a new
kind of measure, says he, where there is no measure of their measure; that by
equality of their cups, there be no grumbling amongst them, nor one deceive or
circumuent another in drinking.

Learned (...), etc. De tempore, sermon 231. and 232.
Austin in his Sermons of avoiding drunkenness, pursues this luxurious vanity
and swaggering excess in many zealous passages: amongst the rest, me thinks
these should move.

It is now come to this, Vt in conuinijs suis irrideant eos, qui minus bibere
possunt; and per ^nimicam amicitiam adiurare homines non erubescunt, vt potum
amplius accipiant, quam oportet.
That at their feasts and banquetings, they laugh at those which can drink
less; and blush not to adjure men by unfriendly friendship, that they would
take more drink then is meet.

Frequenter etiam vsque ad vomitum ingurgitare se non erubescunt; and ad
mensuras sine mensura b^bere. Maiore pocula prouidentur. Cirta bibendi lege
contenditur. Qui poterit vincere, laudem meretur ex crimine.
They blush not to swill oftentimes even until they vomit, and to drink by
measure without measure. Greater cups are provided. They contend by a certain
law of drinking; and he that can overcome, gets praise by his horrible sin.

Ad extremum, tu ^um noli adiurare, noli cog^re; sed in potestate illius
dimitte, vt quantum sibi placuerit, bib^t; and ^i se inebriare voluerit, vel
solus pereat, and non ambo pereatis.
Do not adjure, do not urge thy friend to drink, but leave him to himself to
drink as much as he please; and if he will needs be drunk, let him alone
perish, and be not both damned.

Ergo fratres charissimi, dam haec suggero, me absoluo apud Deum. Quicunque me
audire contempserit, and ad bibendum pronus fuerit; and pro se, and pro illis
in die Iudicij reus eri* Et quia quod peius est, aliqui etiam Clerici^qui hoc
deberent prohibere, ipsi cogunt bibere aliquo^, plus quam expedit. Amodo
incipiant, and scipsos corrigere, and alios castigare, etc.
Beloved brethren, while I tell you these things, I free mine own soul before
God. Whosoever disdaines to hear me, and continues still in his h^mour of
drinking; or to adjure and urge others at their feasts, shall be full dearly
answerable both for himself and them at the day of Judgment. And because,
which is worse, even some men of the Church also, which ought to forbidit, even
they urge others to drink more then is expedient; let them henceforward begin
to amend themselves and reprove others, etc.

Et illud ante omnia rogo, and per tremendam diem Iudicij vos adiuro, vt
quotiescu^que vobis inuicem conui^ia exhibetis, illam credam consuetudinem per
quam grandi mensurae sine mensura, etc.
Above all, let me entreat this at your hands, nay, I adjure you by the
dreadful Day of Judgment, that as often as you mutually inuit one another,
you would abominate and abandon from your banquets, as the very poison of the
devil, that filthy custom by which men are wont either willingly or
enforcedly to drink by great measure without measure, etc.

But those passages which are more punctual to my purpose, are to be found in
the second Sermon: wherein he meets with those ordinary excuses, which they
who are conquered, and conform to the company and times, are wont to pretend.

But they are wont to say, says he, Persona poten^ me coegit, vt amplius
bibam; and in conuiuio Regi^ non potui aliud facere.
Some great personage pressed me unto it, and urged me to drink more, and it
was at the Kings banquet, I could do no other.

Austin answers, Well, says he, Etiamfi ad hoc veniretur; vt ibi diceretur,
Aut bibas; aut morieris; melius erat, vt caro tua sob^ia occideretur, quam per
ebrietarem anima moreretur.
If it come to this, that there it be said unto thee; Either drink, or die; it
were better thy sober body were slain, then thy soul be damned for
drunkenness.

Secondly, says he; Sed excusatio ista falso obijcitur. Ip^i enim Reges* and
quicunque sunt alij potentes, quia Deo propitio, and Christian^ sunt, and
prudentes, and sobrij, and toto cord. Deu^ timentes; si te viderint definisse,
vt eis, non acquiescas pro timore Dei incbriari; si tibi sub h^ra videant^
iras^i; postea vero te in grandi admiratione suscipiu^, dicentes, Quantum cum
illo egi^us? Quantis cum minis, and terroribus fatiga^imus* Et tamen nunquam
cum a sobrietate separare potuimus. Nam and Deus, qui ^ videt* per ^ius amorem
incbriari non velle, ipse (...) gratiam etiam illorum dabit, qui ^, vt amplius
biberis videbantur hortari and cogere.
This is but a frivolous and false pretense for Kings and great men, because by
the mercies of God, they are Christians, and wise, and sober, and fear God
with all their heart; if they see, that out of conscience thou stands out
resolutely against that drunken custom; although they seem to be angry with
thee for an hour, or so; yet after, they will have thee in great admiration,
saying: What ado we had with him? And with what threats and terrors, did we
fright him, and yet could not possibly separate him from sobriety. For that God
which sees, that for thy love to him, thou would not conform to their
drunken fashion, will give thee favor even in their eyes, who seemed to
persuade and press thee to drink more.

Take notice by the way, lest any causelessly please himself in any of the
forecited passages; because he uses not to Health, until he be stark
drunk: that not only those are to be esteemed drunkards, say Divines, who
deprive themselves of reason and become brutish; but also they who addict
themselves to drinking, and power in excessiuely, though their brain will
bear it without any great alteration. And a dreadful woe dogs them at the
heels, as well as the gross drunkard. Isa. 5. 22. See also 1. Pet. 4. 3.

Austin forbids both: Nullus se inebriet, nullus in conuiuio cogat alium plus
bibere, quam oportet. De rect. Catho. conuersa. Tom. 9. p. 1450.
Let no man be drunk, says he, let no man at any feast press another to
drink more then is fit.

Jerome also iumps with the former Fathers against this noble vanity.
Accusationis occasio est adiuraru^ per Regem frequentius non bibisse. Hieron.
in Comm. in cap. 1. ad Tit^.
It is an occasion, says he, of accusation; as if he should say, a means to
ensnare a man in a suspicion of disloyalty, Not to drink again and again when
the King is named.

But not only the Fathers by diuiner illumination; but the very Heathens also
by natural light condemned this custom. In that most magnificent Feast of
that mighty Prince Ahasuerus, there was a Royal charge and command from the
King himself, that none should be enforced to drink, but every one left to
his own liberty. And the drinking was, says the Text, according to the Law,
none did compel: for the King had appointed to all the officers of his house,
that they should do according to every man's pleasure. Ester 1. 8.

Nay, the very Popish Doctors, who in other cases allow some foul sins,
which honest Heathens did abominate, even they despute against this sin.

Lessius de iustitia and iure, in his Question, Vtrum sit peccatum prouocare ad
aequales calices, and an fas sit respondere? Whether it be a sin to begin an
health, and whether it be lawful to pledge it? Besides other proofs and
authorities; Aduersatur rarioni. Nam regula bibendi statutur, non ratio, non
necessitas naturae, non bono valetudo, non animi vigor, aut sensuum alacritas;
sed tota ventr^s, viscerum and venarum capacitas
It is against reason, says he: for neither reason, nor necessity of nature,
nor good health, nor the vigor of the mind, nor the alacrity Vtres,
vellagenas, vt eos vocat Basilins) rectius hos dixeris, aut certe tubos, vel
potius cloacas, quam homines; solum ad hoc idoneos, vt plurimum vini^, tanquam
lagenae capiant; vel per corpus, tanquam per tubum, aut cloacam transfundant
and perdant. Et mirum, non simili modo, institui certamina comedendi,
dormiendi, etc.
of the senses, is made the rule of drinking; but another man's belly, nay, the
whole capacity of his belly, bowels, veins. Thou may fitlier term these, as
great Basil calls them, botteles, barrels, very pipes, or rather sinckes, then
men; fellows fit only for the office of Hog-heads, to receive a great deal
of wine, or rather to convey it through their body, as through a sink; and so
wickedly waste it. And it is a wonder, says he, they do not in like manner
make matches, and try masteries also in eating, sleeping, etc.

Lastly, It is Iustitiae distributive contraria sunt, superbia, (...)
tyrannis'inuidia, iniuriae, and quaeuis proportio Arithmetica, quae personis
adhibetur: vt cum in conuiuijs illiberalioribus ad aequales haustus imbecilles
perinde ac robusti vrgentur, etc. Wesenbecius in Pandectas Iuris ciuilis Lib.
1. Tit. 1. Number. 12.
contrary to distributive Justice, says the Ciuilian: Even the Vna salus sanis
nullam potare solutem: Non est in pota vera salute salus.
Poet gybes at it: In a Book, entitled, The Life, Confession, and hearty
repentance of * Francis Cartwright, Gentleman.
Cartwright, in the perusal of his conscience, and publication of his
repentance to the whole world, cries out: It wounds me to think of my
blasphemous oaths, uttered in passion and destemper: my disobedience to my
Parents, my excess, my drinking of Healths, etc.

Now in a third place, concerning sleep, I have little to say: no constant
rules of and certain measure can possibly be prescribed: Because it is much
diuersified, and necessarily receives great variation by health and sickness;
by age; by time of the year; by emptiness, or fullness of the body; by
variety of natural constitutions: only let me counsel Christians, who only
make conscience of expense of time, and are sensible of its preciousnesse
expressed before, to take notice, that they may surfeit and sin in sleeping;
as well as in eating and drinking. That it ought only, as other of Gods good
creatures, to serve the strengthening and refreshing of our bodies; not to
satisfy ease, sloth, and a sluggish humor: and therefore to beware, and
diligently to watch, lest that great deuourer and waster of time, rob and
bereave them of the very marrow and fat of time; the flower, and first fruits,
as it were, of the day, I mean, many precious and golden hours in the
morning; freshest, and fittest to converse most fruitfully with God, to examine
our spiritual state, to offer up an acceptable sacrifice of Prayers and
Praises, to buckle fast unto us the Christian Armor, and to prepare with
resolution and life, to hold a sweet and blessed communion with his holy
Majesty all the day after. And let them often remember when they see the Sun
up before them, that saying of Austin: It is an uncomely thing for a Christian
Indece^s est Christiano, si radius Solis cum inueniat in lecto: posset enim
dicere Sol, si potestatem loquendi haberet^ Amplius laboraui heri, qua^ tu: and
tamen cum iam surrexerim, tu adhuc dormis.
to have the Sun-beame find him in bed: and if the Sun could speak, says
he, it might say, I have labored more then thou, yesterday; and yet I am
risen, and thou art still at rest.

For conclusion, let me advise and forewarne with as great earnestness and
heartinesse as I can possibly, all Gods Children, that as they tender and
prefer infinitely a pure heart, an heavenly mind, that invaluable Jewel of
a peaceable conscience, and that sweetest life, walking with their God, before
a world of gold; they would watch over themselves very extraordinarily, and
with singular care and heedfulnesse, in the use and enioyment of things lawful
in their own nature; yet by our corruption, capable of inordinatenesse and
excess, such as are meat, drink, sleep, apparel, marriage, visitations,
recreations, etc. For more, says a worthy Divine, perish with preposterous
following of lawful things, then by unlawful courses. Soft sands swallow more
ships, then hard rocks split asunder. How soever, sure I am, Christians are in
more danger of being spiritually undone by a sly infinuation and ensnarement
of licentiousness and immoderation in such lawful things; then by the gross
assault of foul sins, and temptations to do notoriously. For,

1. A sanctified heart will generously rise, and resist with resolution against
the invasion and grieflinesse of any work of darkness; which by its enormity
wastes the conscience; as adultery, murder, swearing, profaning of the Lords
Day, usury, bribery, speculatiue wantonness, idleness, etc. which it may too
often be insensibly seized upon, and surprised by an excessive sinful delight,
in things vnsinfull in themselves; yet empoysoned unto us, by the venom of our
own ouer-eager unmortified affections. and that without any great remorse or
reclamation.

2. We find too often by woeful experience, that some who having given their
names to Religion at first, with great forwardness and heat; yet afterward
not so much foild by gross relapse into notorious sins; as surfeiting with
licentious excess, in the abuse of lawful things, and drinking too deep of
worldly pleasures, under a color of Christian liberty and convenient
recreations, fall fearfully into a dead sleep of carnal security, and cursed
forgetting of God, at least, for a time, until they be revived and quickened by
the inquisitiue hand of some piercing Ministry, the smart of some outward heavy
cross, or wrath of God upon their consciences; if they fall not quite away.

3. Things not sinful in their right use, and offering themselves with
unsuspected representation of harmelesnesse and allowance, without
extraordinary watchfulness and heed, do more easily lime our earthly ravenous
affections; far sooner ensnare and deceive; insensibly draw and drown us in
many scandalous excesses and estrangements from God, before we be aware.

Thus much also of natural actions.

IIII. Now concerning civil affairs, and dealings in the world: That thou
may settle and keep thine heart and hands in an holy temper, and untainted;
without wound, wrong-doing, or any uncomfortable entanglement:

1. Ever in all their bargains, contracts, covenants, dealings, negotiations,
mutual intercourse of any kind of commerce with others, represent seriously
and solemnly to the eye of thy best judgment and deepest confideration, that
royal Principle, Do as thou would be done by. In a fellow-feeling real
conceit, put thy self into the place, and impartially put on the person of the
party with whom thou art to deal. Weigh well all the circumstances,
conditions, covenants, inconveniences, consequents, and passages of the whole
business; and then returning to thy self, deal out, and proportion unto him,
that measure in every particular, which thou would be willing, upon good
ground and sound reason, to receive at the hands of another, if thou were in
his case. This is the sum of the Law and the Prophets, for serving our
brethren in love, pressed upon us by the Lord Jesus himself. Mat. 7. 12. All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them. Which, if it were as effectually: and feelingly taken to heart, and
practiced, as it is ordinarily talked of and pretended; it would not only cut
off, and prevent all cruelties, oppressions, grinding the faces of the poor,
all coozening, undermining, ouer-reaching, defrauding, defaming, etc. but also
stir up and quicken our affections, with a compassionate lively touch, to a
mutable exercise and exchange of all offices of humanity, kindness, and love
in all kinds.

But that you may understand this rule a right; conceive, that when we
counsel men to do unto others, as they would be dealt with themselves; It is
not to be understood, of any irregular, passionate, exorbitant will: but that
which is grounded upon right reason, guided by a rectified conscience, ordered
and illightened by grace and Gods Truth.

And I the rather refresh your memories with the true apprehension of this
point, that you may clearly see the rottenness and vanity of the Usurers
cunning cavil, but of cruel consequence.

Ob. I deal, says the Usurer, as I would be dealt with, and do as I would
be done by: and therefore all that while I hope I do no wrong: I would
willingly pay ten in the hundredth, if I had need, and then why may I not
take so?

To which, I answer:

1. That Royal Rule, Do as thou would be done by, must be understood and
expounded, as I intimated before, according to the grounds of a good
conscience, dictates of right reason, and directions of a just and rectified
will; not out of the mists and miseries of a depraved and exorbitant judgment.
Otherwise, Abimelech, Saul, and other of that desperate rank and resolution,
might conclude, that it were lawful for them to kill other men, because they
were willing to be killed themselves. See Judges 9. 54. 1. Sam. 31. 4. for they
might say, they did but as they would be done by. It would also follow very
absurdly; the Magistrate being in the malefactors case, would gladly be
pardoned, therefore he must pardon the malefactor: Some son of Belial would
be content villanously to prostitute his wife whom he cares not for himself,
to others; therefore he may abuse another man's wife whom he loves better.
These, and the like abominable and absurd consequents, demonstrate the vanity
of the Usurers inference, and that Christ's rule is not so general, but
restrainable to that will, which is orderly and honestly guided by the light of
Nature and Gods Law.

2. We must then have recourse to this general Fountain of the second Table,
and fetch light and direction thence; when we have no express and special
word in Gods Book; but the Scriptures have clearly and directly determined
and resolved the point of Usury.

3. If the Usurer were in the borrowers case, he would not willingly, as he
pretends, give ten in the hundred. I mean, with an absolute and free will,
but of force and constraint, because without paying after that rate, he could
not have it. If a man would borrow upon Usury, to buy land, ingrosse,
forestall, or compass some unlawful matter; that were a corrupt will, and no
rule: But if his desire so to borrow were just and lawful, as in some cases it
may be, then it is no entire will, but mixed and forced by some necessity,
for the avoiding of a greater evil; and therefore denied in the eye both of
law and reason, to be any will at all. He that would borrow, should have need
to borrow, for a needless desire is unlawful; and an ingenuous man who has
need to borrow, would not willingly borrow but for need, much less would he
pay Usury. Therefore the will of the borrower, in this case, is either
corrupt, or no will at all, and so consequently without the compass of Christ's
rule.

The will of the borrower in this case, is like the will of an honest
Trauailer, in giving his purse to an arrant thief; for fear he should loose
both purse and life. Is such a man willing, think you, to loose his money? Or
like the will of a man, whose house being on fire, plucks down part thereof
to save the rest; willingly indeed as the case stands with him, yet not
simply, but upon necessity. So the borrowers will is not free, but forced; and
so a will against will.

2. With an infinite disdain, and resolute contempt abhor to get so much as
one farthing all the days of thy life, by any wicked means or wrong doing.
Do not plague thy present outward state, be it little or much; neither
empoison it to thy posterity, by any addition unto it; by usury, bribery,
symony, sacrilege, stealing, grinding the faces of the poor, oppression,
lying, falsehoods, forswearings, ouer-reaching tricks of wit, coozening,
cunning conueiances, etc.

1. Thereby thou shall desperately fall into the revenging hands of an angry
God: divine vengeance will dog thee hard, and continually at the heels for thy
destruction. Which is inco^parably a greater plague then extremest beggary, and
the bitterest confluence of all the most vexing outward miseries in the world.

Let no man, faith Paul, go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter,
because that the Lord is the auenger of all such. 1. These. 46.

2. Secondly, A little ill got, naturally accompanied with Gods curse, may so
empoyson thy whole inheritance and all the rest of thy goods, that it may
prove like a dead Fly in a box of precious ointment; a spark of fire in the
thatch; a strong incentiue to divine justice, not only to eat up all honest
comfort in outward things, but also to consume and waste all thy wealth: Nay,
and since immoderate desire of enriching and raising his S^d dicturus est, Habeo
frios, quibus laborem, habeo quibus prospiciam; habeo quibus curam maximam
geram. -- Quam curam geris filiorum, vt eos obruas lachrymis miserorum? Non est
hoc filios amare, sed potius neeare. August. Tom. 10. page 702.
posterity, is the keenest spur to his unconscionable hoarding; even to cut
off also many times the cruel worldling himself, and cast him out of the
world without stock or seed. And therefore though the covetous caytife out of
the hardness of his heart, and searednesse of conscience, be fearelesse and
senseless of the wrath of God, the wrong of his neighbor, and the
wretchedness of his own soul; yet if he desire, as he does, with a raging
insatiableness, like the grave, or hell, to thrive in his outward state, and
prosper in the world; let him not meddle so much as with a stick, or a straw,
a pin, or a point of another man's; neither at any time put his hand to any
wicked way of getting, lest, beside the loss of his soul at last, and a world
of miseries in the mean time, he miss the very mark so eagerly aimed at; of
making him and his great in the world. For hope of which he is cursedly
content to part with all true contentment in this life, and a Crown of bliss
in the Kingdom of heaven.

For this purpose, and to persuade, and press this point unanswerably, let us
take a view in Gods Book of the diverse ways, how he is wont in wrath to deal
with wrongdoers and unconscionable dealers.

It comes to pass, sometimes that the wicked worldling, insatiable
earth-worme, God cursing his covetousness and cruelty, may see an end of his
wealth even in this world, according to that, Ier. 17. 11. As the Partridge
sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not: so he that gettethriches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
fool. Job 20. 15, 28. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them
up again: God shall cast them out of his belly. The increase of his house
shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.

Or it is no strange thing to see him prosper by vnconseionablenesse and craft,
usurious and other injurious practices, all his life long; but then having
scraped together his hoard of iniquity, with a great deal of carking,
thoughtfulness, and self vexation; kept it with extreme fear, slavish
distrust, and heart-gnawing iealousies; parted Temporalium amor quantum
afficit, quum haeret possessio; tantum, quum subtrahitur, vri^. Gr^g.
from it with much anguish, horror, and almost with as painful divorce as
that of the soul from the body: at last after the loss of it soul and all*

1. He either leaves it to them who will liberally let fly abroad, and enlarge
those golden heaps which greediness had formerly confinde, and strongly
guarded with bolts and bars: According to that, Prou. 28. 8. He that by
usury and unjust gain increases his substance, he shall gather it for him
that will pity the poor. See also Prou. 13. 22. Job 27. verse. 16, 17.

2. Or it may be wholly scattered amongst mere strangers, according to that,
Eccles. 6. 2. But a strange man shall eat it up: See also Psalm. 39. 6.
Eccles. 4. 8. and 2. 18, 19.

3. Or being bequeathed to his own children, and blasted by Gods secret curse,
it may melt away in their hands, as snow before the Sun, according to that,
Eccles. 5. 13, 14. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun,
namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. But these riches
perish by evil travel; and he begets a son, and there is nothing in his
hand.

But howsoever, whether ill gotten goods perish or prosper in the owners hands,
or his posterity: sure I am, the inevitable plague and just vengeance of God
cleaues inseparably unto his soul; and hunts that man to destruction,
whosoever he be, that enricheth himself by wicked and wrongful means,
without timely repentance and true restitution, if he be able.

He that has oppressed the poor and needy, or has spoiled by violence, -- or
has given upon usury, or has taken increase; the same reason is also of all
indirect and unlawful getting, shall he live? He shall not live: he has done
all these abominations, he shall surely die, his blood shall be upon him,
Ezekiel. 18. verse. 12, 13.

And marvel not, neither be misled, though thou observe sometimes wicked
worldlings themselves, their heirs, and heirs heirs, to wallow also in that
wealth which the Grandfathers got wrongfully. For they are for all this, but as
so many sensual earth rooting hogs, fatted for the Psalm. 92. 5.
knife; and have this woeful brand set upon them by the Spirit of God, Psalm.
17. 14. They are men of the world, and have their portion in this life. But
ever hold this as a terrible and true principle. It is one of the greatest
Nihil est infoelicius foelicitate peccantium; qua poenalis nutritur impunitas,
and mala voluntas velut hostis interior roboratur. August. Epist. 5.
curses under the Sun; to prosper in our ways, and be out of the way to
Heaven.

3. Thirdly, it is a ruled case and concurrent resolution amongst Divines: That
if thou do not restore, being able, whatsoever thou have any ways got
wrongfully, and wickedly; thou can have neither well grounded assurance of
unfeigned Without restitution, God accepts not your confession, nor yet your
repentance. Hom. of the resurrection.
repentance, nor true comfort of the pardon of that sin. A cutting conclusion
against all cutthroat Usurers, Simonists, Sacrilegians, Bribe-takers, Grinders
of poor men's faces, Hoarders by fraud, Oppressors of all under them Whosoever
makes not restitution, being able to restore, He neither has unfeigned
repentance for his sin, nor any sound assurance of the forgiveness thereof.
Downam upon Psalm. 115.
of the same trade, by some Machiuillian trick, and the rest of that cruel
crew.

How can he be said to repent soundly, that lies still soaking in his sin,
wittingly, and willingly? Now, whosoever keeps still in his hands any thing
wickedly got, continues a wrong doer still; and therefore does it not
faithfully, but only faineth repentance. Whereupon says Austin, If a man Si
res aliena propter quam pec atum est, cum reddi possit, no^ redditur, non
agitur poenitentia, sed fingitun. Epist. 54 page 280. Non remittitur peccatum,
nisi restituatur ablatum. Ibidem.
restore not ill gotten goods being able, his repentance is not comfortable,
but counterfeite.

Dreadful also is the doom of the said Father upon all wrong-doers, The sin
is not remitted, except that which has been unjustly taken be restored: Either
in act, if thou be able; or at least in unfeigned affection, if thy state be
wasted.

What a bedlam folly is it then, and cursed cruelty to thine Effectu, or
affectu.
own soul; to heap up those riches of iniquity, by baseness and wrong,
which thou must afterward restore in the sense I have said, or else never enjoy
any comfortable assurance of a true conversion or pardon of sin? Were he not
a foolish thief, that would keep his stolen goods both in the face of his
accuser and Judge? Though in the mean time thou conceal thy cunning
conueiances from the discovery and doom of humane justice; yet assure thy
self, besides the secret grumbling of thy selfe-accusing conscience; the angry
eye of God also sees clearly, and will shortly most certainly revenge.

4. Almesdeeds, charitable erections of Colleges, Hospitalls, Free-Schooles,
and other inferior bountiful contributions; when God inables by good means;
the necessities of his Poor cry for relief, and the sanctified heart with
affectionate sincerity, aims at Gods glory; are sweetesmelling sacrifices with
which God is well pleased, Philip. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16. But if his slavish
gifts, and good deeds, largesses, and liberalities in this kind, be
impoysoned with former fraud, oppression, and wrong; though it be well that
the Church of God sometimes, the backs and bellies of the poor be better
thereby; yet to the impenitent and not restoring usurer himself, or any other
wicked dealer, in respect of acceptance with God, and true comfort to his own
heart, they are no better then the cutting off of a Dogs neck, or the
sacrifice of a fool. Ill gotten goods are for restitution, not for
distribution. Lest any covetous cauiller think the point too harsh and
precise, hear what the ancient Fathers say to this purpose: Non recipit
Eleemosynas de manu raptoris, aut foeneratoris, In Cant. Sermon. 71.
Bernard: God receives not any alms at the hands of an oppressor or usurer.
Significanter dicitur, suum; ne rapinis and vsuris, and alieno malo quaesitum
panem vertamus in misericordiam. In ca. 18. Ezech. page 536.
Hierome: Significantly says the Prophet; His own bread, lest men should
turn bread gotten by oppression and Usury, into a work of Mercy. Cum iudicare
coeperit Deus; dicturi sunt hi, qui de fraudibus viuunt, and de spolijs
miserorum eleemosynam faciunt; Domine praecepta tua seruauimus, and in nomine
tuo misericordias fecimus, pauperes pauimus, nudos operuimus Quibus dicturus
est Deus, Quod dedistis, dicitis; quos pauistis, memoramini, quare non
recordamini quos necastis? Quos operuistis, gaudent, quos expoliastis,
plangunt, etc. Tom. 10. Hom. 47. De remedijs peccatorum, page 699. Vnus
repletur panibus, quem de rapinis satiasti: and benedicet Dominus non te, sed
eum, quem necasti, Ibid.
Austin: When God shall begin to judge, those that live now by fraud, and give
alms of the spoils of the oppressed, will say; Lord, we have kept thy
Commandments, and in thy name we have done works of mercy; we have fed the
Hungry, we have clothed the Naked, and entertained Strangers. To whom God will
reply, You tell me what you have given; but you tell me not what you have taken
away. You recount whom you have fed; but why remember you not whom you have
undone? They rejoice whom you have clothed; but they lament whom you have
spoiled, etc. A man is filled with bread, whom thou feedest with spoil: but
the Lord will bless, not thee, but him whom thou have undone, etc.
Chrysostom; Sed quaenam est multorum excusatio? Foeneratus sum, aiunt; sed
pauperi obtuli. Bona verba quaeso: talia Deus sacrificia non accepit. Quod enim
justice laboribus collectum argentum est, propter hos iniquos foetus plerumque
contaminas, etc. Hom. 57. in Mat.
But what is the excuse of many? I have indeed been an Usurer, say they, but I
have also been good to the poor. A sweet piece of matter, sure! But God
accepts not such sacrifices. It were far better to give nothing to the poor
at all, then give in that manner. That wealth which is won by thy just
labors, is many times quite mard with such wicked mixtures, etc.

The very Paupetes non vt ferarum catuli, sanguine and caedibus nutriendi:
quodque gratissimum est accipientibus, scirent dari sibi, quod ne mini est
ereptum Plin. Panegyr. ad Traianum.
Heathen man tells us, That the poor are not to be fed like the Whelps of
wild beasts, with blood and murder, rapine and spoil: but that which is most
acceptable to the receivers; they should know, that that which is given unto
them, is not taken from any body else.

Nay, one of the bloodiest men that ever breathed, Selymus, a Turkish Emperor,
yet upon his bed of death replied thus to his Bassa, moving him with the
wealth taken from the Persian Merchants, to build an Hospital for relief of
the poor: Hist. of the Turks in the life of Selymus the first. page 561.
Would thou, Pyrrhus, that I should bestow other men's goods wrongfully taken
from them, upon works of charity and devotion, for mine own vain glory and
praise? Assuredly I will never do it: nay rather, see they be again restored
unto the right owners. Which was done forthwith accordingly, to the great
shame, says the Author, of many Christians; who minding nothing less then
restitution, but making ex rapina holocaustum, do out of a world of evil
gotten goods, cull out some small fragments to build some poor Hospital, or
mend some blind way. A poor testimony of their hot charity. Wretchedly then
do they delude the World, and deceive their own souls, who vainly think,
that some works of mercy at last, when they must needs leave all, will expiate
and recompense the cruelties and unconscionable dealings of their whole life
before. Zacheus penitent Proclamation consisted of two branches, Luke 14. 8. As
well for restitution, as distribution. He that would find the same mercy, must
follow the same method.

3. Let thy desire and delight never fall, or be fastened immoderately upon any
earthly thing, though never so excellent, delicious, or amiable. For
exorbitancy and error this way brings many times, 1. A loss of the thing so
doted upon. 2. Sometime a cross. 3. Ever a curse.

1. For the first; our righteous and holy God, when he ^ees the current of his
creatures affections to be carried inordinately and preposterously from the
Fountain of living waters, upon boken Cisternes that can hold none; from the
bottomless treasury of all sweetest beauties, dearest excellencies, amiable
delights, upon painted shadows; from the Rock of eternity, upon a staff of
Reed; I mean, from the Creator, upon the creature; He wisely and seasonably
in the equity of his Justice, and out of the jealousy of his own Glory
takes away that earthly Idol, that the occasion of such irregular affection
removed, he may draw the heart, in which he principally takes pleasure, to his
own glorious Self, the only Load-Starre of all sanctified love, and
boundless Ocean of happiness and bliss. Nay, it may be said in the
sweetness of his mercy also, when he sees us distracted, and as it were,
desperately mad with making too much of any transitory thing, so that our mind
does still run and rest upon it, as our only heaven upon earth; He snatches
the edge tool out of our hands, lest we make away our selves spiritually; and
withdrawes the beloved vanity from before our eyes, lest we grow stark blind
in the mysteries of Faith, and matters of Heaven, by too much gazing upon the
fading beauty of any baser earthly object.

Thus the immoderate partial affection of Parents, may become many times
occasional and accessory to the untimely taking away of a sweet, fair and
towardly child. Whereby our gracious God justly intimates unto them their
intolerable unthankfulness of his mercy, and extreme indignity to his
Majesty, in wickedly preferring in their love, a creature before their Creator,
and mercifully teaches them, that the flower and seruour of their best and
dearest affection is only due, and should be wholly devoted to the greatest
Good, God himself, and those truest, unutterable, euer-during delights
prepared for the Blessed, in his Word here, and in the World to come hereafter,
1. Cor. 2. 9.

Conceive proportionably of other things immeasurably desired, and delighted
in. If thou dotest upon a good wit, thou may be stricken with distraction:
if upon abundance of learning, or much worldly wisdom, thou may be
infatuated, at least at some special times, when thou would gladly do the
best; or in some important business, which most concerns thee: if upon some
highplace, thou may with Haman, Shebna, and thousands more, be thrown down
into the gulf of calamity and woe, contempt and scorn: if upon a fair
house, it may be leuelled with the ground, by the flames of Gods wrath: if upon
a beautiful face, it may be disfigured with the Pox, or other deformities:
if upon a hoard of gold, it may be dispersed by fire, robbery, desolations of
war: nay, if even upon thy graces with an ouerweening conceit of
selfe-excellency, selfe-opinion, selfe-sufficiency; if they be only general
graces, thou may be quite stripped of them; if saving, thou may be cast
into a dampe and desertion for a time, in respect of all comfort, sense, use
and exercise, etc.

2. For the second, though God may permit thee to possess still that outward
worldly comfort, upon which the fury of thine affection is so fastened, and
thine heart graspes with such greediness and excess; yet in this case thou
may justly expect a cross; either, 1. In the thing doted upon. With what a
deal of cutting discomfort, and gashes of bitter grief did Absalom dandled in
David's affection with too much indulgence, rent his Fathers royal heart by
imbruing his hands in his brothers blood, and with unnatural traiterous
violence and villainy snatching at the Imperial Crown upon David's head?
Another famous instance to this purpose we find in the story of the Greek
Emperors. The old Emperor Andronicus doted with such extreme impotency of
partial affection upon his Nephew, young Andronicus, that in comparison of
him, he did not only disregard the rest of his Nephews, but also his own
children: and as the (...) Stori^* page 158.
Story tells us, was not willing to spare him out of sight either day or night.
But what were the consequents of this cockering? When he was stepped further into
years, besides a world of miseries and molestations created to his Grandfather
in the mean time, at length pressing without resistance upon his Palace, with
purpose to surprise his person, though the old Emperor entreated him with much
affectionate Royal eloquence, which might have pierced an heart of steel or
Adamant, That he would reverence those hands, which had oftentimes most
lovingly embraced him, yet crying in his swathing clothes: that he would
reverence those lips, which had oftentimes most lovingly kissed him, and called
him his other Soul: that he would spare to spill that blood, from which
himself had taken the fountain of life, etc. For all this, after some kind
words, and courteous embracement, at first indeed premised, and in hot blood;
in conclusion, being polled and shaven, was made a Monk, and the Anuile of
much dunghill scorn and vilest indignities, until the workmanship of death
had finished the sorrowful business of a wretched life. A third, and very
remarkable to fright all Parents from foolish doting, hear out of Austin. Non
mi^emini, statres charissimi, si hodie ter sermone^, Deo auxiliante, perfecero.
Accidit hodie terribilis casus, vt omnes audistis; propter quem non solum ad
Ecclesiam Hypponensem omnes antiquiores habere volui, sed etiam omnes soeminas,
and infantes in vnum congregari praecepi, etc.
By reason of a terrible and dreadful accident, he called his people together,
as it seems, to a Sermon the third time, the same day; thinking, no doubt, out
of his watchful spiritual wisdom, to work more succesfully, and to leave more
strong and lasting impressions in their hearts, while the bloody unnatural
villainy was yet fresh in their eyes and ears. And when they were met together,
he relates the doleful story: Filium, vt scitis, habebat: and eum vnicum
possidebat: and quia vnicus erat, eum superflue diligebat, and supra Deum. Ideo
superfluo amore in ebriatus, filium corrigere negligebat, dans etiam potestatem
faciendi omnia, quae placita essent illi. O dolosa libertas! O grandis filiorum
perditio! O paternus amor mortiferus! Ecce, filios se dicunt diligere, quos
iugulari procurant. Dicunt eos amare, quibus iam suspendia parant, etc. Sed
ecce, hodie ebrietatem perpessus, matrempregnantem nequiter oppressit, sororem
violare voluit, patrem occidit, and duas sorores vulnerauit admortem. O magna
Diaboli dominatio! etc. August, adfratres in eremo. Sermon. 33.
Our noble Citizen (says he) here of Hippo, Cyrillus, a man mighty amongst
us, both in work and word, and much beloved, had, as you know, one only
son, and because he had but only one, he loved him immeasurably, and above
God. And so being drunk with immoderate doting, he neglected to correct him,
and gave him liberty to do whatsoever he list. Now this very day, this same
fellow, thus long suffered in his dissolute and riotous courses, has in his
drunken humor wickedly offered violence to his mother great with child, would
have violated his sister, has killed his father, and wounded two of his
sisters to death. O mighty domination of the Devil! etc. But I need not
prosecute this point by further illustration out of strange Stories. Daily
experience presents unto our eyes and ears, the many woeful discomforts,
unkind requitales, and unnatural vsages, which Parents receive at the hands of
those children, which in their younger years they made wanton with their love,
and indiscreetly doted upon. 2. Or in some other kind; for example: If thine
heart be set upon riches, God may justly, and mercifully too, exercise, and
afflict thee with his heavy hand; upon thy body, with sickness; upon thy
conscience, with terror; upon thy reputation, with disgrace, or the like,
thereby to vnglue thy noble spirit from the dust, and rent it from
grouelingnesse upon the earth. If thou be ambitiously enamoured upon honors
and high rooms; after wasting thy wealth, wounding thy conscience, wearying
thy self with bribery, baseness, and irksome waiting, thou may be taken
away untimely in the very pursuit, or presently after the attainement of them,
etc. Thus it is not strange or extraordinary with God, to prevent, or take off
our hearts from taking selfe-conceited pleasure or pride in any thing we enjoy,
by crossing and correcting us in other kinds. Even Paul, that blessed Saint
and servant of the Lord, lest his heart should be too much pleased, and puffed up
with abundance of revelations; he was vexed and crossed with his own
concupiscence, there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12. 7. that is, as I conceive, he felt his
original corruption sharpened, and eneagered against him, and let loose in
some sort upon him: which is a terrible cut to a tender conscience.

3. For the third, howsoever it fare with thee otherwise; if thou settle thine
heart upon any earthly thing with inordinate desire and delight, thou shall be
sure to be haunted with a double curse: 1. The rage of insatiableness,
vnsatisfiablenesse: 2. That greatest plague, hardness of heart.

1. The Father of Spirits has inspired into our immortal souls a large
capacity, and such an infinite appetite, that no finite excellency, created
comfort, or earthly thing can possibly fill. Gold, silver, riches, honors,
crowns, kingdoms, are no fit matter or adequate object, for such an
immateriall and heavenly borne spirit, to repose and feed upon, with final
rest and full contentment. Nay, not this whole material world, were it
beautified and set out with all the amiablenesse, splendor, and allurements,
which the devil by his iugling Alchymy put upon it, when he presented it to
the eye of Christ Jesus, Math. 4. 8. with addition of the starry and Empyrean
heaven, shining with all their admirable beauty and glorious inhabitants, could
by any means confine, satisfy, and content the irke some wanderings, unlimited
desire, and vast comprehensiuenesse of the soul: but it would still be Cor
humanum in desiderio aeternitatis non fixum, nunquam stabile potest esse, sed
omni volubilitate volubilius, de alio in aliud transit, quaerens requiem, vbi
non est. In his autem caducis and transitorijs, in quibus eius affectus captiui
tenentur, ver^m requiem inuenire: quoniam tantae est dignitatis, vt nullum
bonum, praeter summum Bonum, ei sufficere possit. Aug. Tom. 9. page 1003.
transported with the passionate disquietnesse of self vexation, and tortured
upon the rack of restless discontent; until it fasten and fix upon an
object, infinite both in excellency and endlesnesse, wherein is contained the
whole latitude of Entity and goodness, the euer-blessed and onlyadored
Trinity. Where, and when alone, it softly and sweetly, with the hight and
fullness of all desirable contentment, rests in the arms of God, and bosom
of eternal bliss; which all blessed souls attain thus, and by these means:

When it pleased God by the merciful violence of his Almighty hand, to turn
the sensual bent and powerful current of the seduced soul, from the
creature, to the Creator; from the painted bravery of this vain world, to the
heavenly beauty of his blessed Word; from carking encumbrance about many
things, to pursue and ply that One needful thing; by a sound and universal
change of the whole man, and translation of him from the darkness of natural
ignorance, death in sin, and power of the devil, to the light of saving
knowledge, the life of sanctifying grace, and the living God: I say then, the
restless wanderings of the unsatisfied soul, begins first to settle with some
sweet contentment, upon the flowers of Paradise, glimpses of heavenly glory,
infallible earnests of everlasting bliss, saving graces; and its infinite
appetite is well stayed in the mean time, with that comfortable intercourse
and blissful Communion, which it enioyes in part with the blessed Trinity, by
the Word, Sacraments, and other his holy Ordinances, appointed and sanctified
for that purpose; until it remove from an house of flesh* into the Empyrean
heaven. And then,

1. The understanding is first filled with final and everlasting contentment,
by a clear glorious sight of God, which they call Beat ficall vision; when we
shall see him face to face; know him as we are known, 1. Cor. 13. 12. see him
as he is, 1. Ioh. 3. 2. For as the Sun of this world, by his beams and
brightness ill^ghteneth the eye, and the air, that we may see, not only all
other things, but also his own glorious face: so God, blessed for ever, the
Suns Creator, the Imperial Sun of the world above, in whose presence, the
united splendor of ten thousand of our Suns would vanish away, as a
darkesome moate and lump of vanity, does by the light of his holy Spirit, so
irradiate the minds of all the blessed, that they are thereby enlarged and
enabled, not only to behold eminently in him, the beauty, goodness, and
excellency of all creatures, in a far more admirable and orient manner then
in their own beings; but also his own face, essence, will and counsels,
perfections and attributes, incomprehensible greatness and Majesty.

2. Secondly, the will also is then fully and for ever satisfied with a
perfect, inward, eternal communion with God himself. O^r sweet glorified
Savior, being God and man, by his humane nature assumed, unites us to God,
and by his divine nature assuming, unites God unto us: so that by this secret
and sacred communion, we are made in an admirable and blessed manner,
partakers, and as it were, possessours of God himself; and communicate with
him in all his goodness, perfections, excellencies, and happiness. O
bottomless depth, and dearest confluence of all joys, pleasures, sweetnesses,
delights, inconceivable, unutterable, infinite! This is the supreme end of our
Creation and Redemption; the very flower, quintessence, and sinew, as it were,
of our So ueraigne good. By this act of blessedness, we are filled with all
the fullness of God: He becomes unto us All in all; so that thereby we live his
very life, in purity, eternity, sincerest pleasures, highest perfection; though
not to the height of his infiniteness; for we are but creatures; yet in
proportion to our capacity, and utmost possibility, which is a felicity above
measure, and past imagination. In these two acts thus exercised about an
infinite Object, God himself, does Blessedness, essentially and formally
consist: but principally in the fruition of God, by a full, immediate, and
complete communion with him, and most blessed participation of all his glory
and All Sufficiency. And therefore Aquinas and all his followers come short, in
placing our highest bliss, only in the act of the understanding, the Vision
of God. I am wont to express and illustrate it thus: though there be an
infinite distance and disproportion in the things compared: It would mightily
delight a man, really and in person, with ease and safety to pass over and
view the circuit of the whole earth, and all the wonders of the world; all the
great cities, renowned men, magnificent courts, rich mines, spicie Islands,
Crystal mountains, coasts of Pearls, rocks of Diamond, etc. of which
Geographers write, and Trauailers talk: but if besides, as he passed along, he
should have sure and everlasting possession given of them all, what an
immeasurable material addition would it make unto his speculatiue delight? And
with what strange amazement and admiration of his making for ever, and
marvelous happiness, would it ravish his heart? Even so proportionably, but
above all degrees of comparison; though a boundless Ocean of endless
sweetness, and inexplicable joy arise in the soul from the sight of God; yet
this blissful communion, whereby we possess and enjoy him, in a near,
excellent unspeakable manner; and partake with him in all his excellencies,
perfections, and felicities, does crown, as it were, our Crown of glory, and
actuate that heart-rauishing contemplation, with the very life of everlasting
life, and soul of heavenly joys and highest bliss. Thus, and in this manner
do the restless wanderings and infinite appetite of these aspiring sparks of
heaven, our immateriall and immortal spirits, come to final rest and
everlasting repose: When at last they shall graspe in the arms of their
desire, that chiefest Good, the most glorious Deity, and bathe themselves
freely and fully in that euer-during Welspring of Immortality and Life. But now
set aside the fruition of this Object, infinite both in excellency and
endlesnesse, the only aim and end of the souls endless aspirations: And
though thou should crown a man compleately with the worth of this whole
world, the admirable splendor of the Empyrean heaven, the beauty of a shining
Sunne-like body, the rich and royal endowments inherent in a glorified soul,
the sweetest company of Saints and Angels, the comfort of eternity; yet his
soul would still be full of emptiness and appetite, and utterly to seek for
the surest Sanctuary, and supremest solace to settle her unsatisfied longings
upon. Only once admit it to the face of God, by Beatificall Vision, and to
fruition of the most glorious and euer-blessed Trinity, by immediate communion,
and so consequently to those Torrents of pleasures, and fullness of joy flowing
thence; and then presently, and never before, its infinite desire expires in
the bosom of God, and it lies, as it were, down softly, with sweetest peace
and full contentment, in the imbracements of everlasting bliss. The other
innumerable inestimable joys in heaven, are, I deny not, transcendent, and
rauishing: but they are but all accessories to this Principal, drops to this
Ocean, glimpses to this Sun. Well then, if this be the only way to the
souls eternal welfare; then those unhappy souls, which run a contrary
course, and seek for satisfaction in any creature, or created comfort, stand
deservedly still upon the rack of restless coffeehouse, and are justly
cursed with the gnawing rage of insatiableness: and must needs be so. For
besides, 1. That the furious torrent of our sensual corruption, being once on
foot after worldly pleasures, and swelling by a continual infusion of hellish
poison, does with an impetuous headstrongness, bear and break down all
bonds and banks of moderation and stint, and will never be restrained from its
insatiable rage, if God help not, until it be swallowed up in the bottomless
gulf of misery and horror: for it is the native property, or rather, poison
of inordinate affection, not only to drink deep of sinful delights, but to
carouse, to be drunk; nay, to add unquenchable thirst unto drunkenness,
sucking them in with fresh supply of endless greediness, as the Horse-leach
corrupt blood, till it burst again. 2. That the infinite desire of the soul
confined to a creature, or any worldly comfort, is payned and pinched, as a
foot wedged in a straight shoe; it being no competent or proportionable
satisfaction to its expectation and large capacity. Hence it is, that give
Rome to Caesar, as they say, and he will ambitiously pursue the Sovereignty of
the whole earth. Let Alexander conquer the world, and he will ask for more: let
those be subdued, he would climb up the stairs of his vast desires toward
the stars: if he could aspire thither, he would peep beyond the heavens,
etc. No Non satiat atimu^, nisi incorruptibilis gaudij vera, and certa
aeternitas. August.
rest unto man's soul, but in Gods eternal rest. 3. That there being no
proportion between spirits and bodies; thou may as well undertake to fill a
bag with wisdom, a chest with virtue; as thine immortal soul, with gold,
silver, riches, high rooms, this whole material world, or any earthly thing.
See Eccles. 5. 10. 4. I say, Besides these three causes of vnsatisfiablenesse,
God himself does justly put that property and poison into all worldly things
doted upon, and desired immoderately, that they shall plague the heart that
pursues them; by filling it still with a furious and fresh supply of more
greediness, longings, iealousies, and many miserable discontentments: So that
they become unto it, as drink unto a Auaritia insatiabilis ebrietas. Et ficut
ebrij, quanto plus vini ingurgitant, tanto magis ad sitim inflammantur: sic and
isti quoque insaniam hanc indomitam nunquam sistere possunt, sed quanto magis
suas opes augeri vident, tanto and concupiscentia magis flagrant. Neque antea a
pessimo appetitu hoc absistunt, donec in ipsum malitiae profund^m descenderint.
Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Genesis
drunkard, a man in a Hydropicus, quo amplius biberit, amplius sitit: and omnis
auarus ex potu sitim multiplicat. Quia cum ^a, quae appetit, adeptus fuerit, ad
appetenda alia amplius, and amplius anhelat. Qui enim adipiscendo plus appetit,
huic sitis ex potu crescit. Greg. in cap. 18. Job cap. 6.
dropsy, or burning fever, serve only to inflame it with new heat, and
fiery additions of insatiable thirst and inordinate lust. No marvel then
though the working heart of every natural man, unreconciled to God, be Isa.
56. ^0.
like the raging sea that cannot rest. That roaring Element, to which the
Spirit of God resembles a wicked man, must needs be a much troubled and very
restless creature; since it is continually tossed, and turmoyled with variety
of contrary and confused motions; that of estuation, revolution, reflectio^,
descension, and agitation by the winds: semblably, if thou could see the
inside of the greatest graceless Monopolist, and ingrosser of all the most
desirable excellencies under the Sun, glistering in the highest Imperial
Throne upon the earth; thou should behold his heart for all that, rent
asunder with many raging distempers, and tempestuous whirlewindes of contrary
lusts; a very hiue of unnumbered cares, sorrows, and passions; boiling
incessantly with irksome suspicions, false fears, insatiable longings, secret
grumblings of conscience, torturing distractions, and tumultuations of hell.

By the way, let me tell you, that this immoderate desire, inordinate delight
which I speak of, glued to some special sensual object, which natural
corruption singles out, and makes chiefest choice of, to follow and feed upon,
with greatest contentment and carnal sweetness, become the parents of every
man's bosom sin.

If it fall in love with honors and greatness, it breeds and brings forth
ambition, which is an unquenchable thirst after visible glory, and a gluttonous
hunting after high rooms. As it inhabiteth the highest and haughtiest spirits,
and is superlatiue and transcendent in its object and aspirations; so of all
the stormy perturbations, which rent and rage in the heart of man, it is most
tempestuous and desperate. Ventrous it is to climb up any stairs of
baseness, bribery, blood; to tread upon the ruins of the noblest innocence,
upon the merciless desolations of dearest friends and nearest kindred, to
domineere for a while, though it be damned everlastingly afterward; as it is
too clear in the Turkish Emperors, and in that great Master of mischief and
Machiauelisme, Richard the third, of this Kingdom, who with a bloody hand
pressed out the breath of those two orient Princes in the Tower, his Nephews,
and natural Lords. It is victorious over all other affections, and masters
even the sensuality of lustful pleasures; as appears in the greatest
Warriors and ancient Worthies amongst the Heathen, who tempted with the
exquisiteness and variety of choicest beauties, yet forbore that villainy, not
for conscience sake, and fear of God whom they knew not; but lest they should
interrupt the course, and stop the current of their warlike reputation,
ambitious designs, and atchiuements of state. But whatsoever other pestilent
properties empoyson it, it never fails to engender in the heart, which
harbors it, as its proper Thunderbolt, and blasting, fears, cares,
iealousies, enuies, enraged thirst of rising still, impatiencie of competition,
vncapablenesse of satiety, which is most for my purpose. For the proud and
ambitious man enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satisfied. Hab. 2. 5. Who can fill the bottomless pit of hell, or stop the
insatiable jaws of death? neither can the greedy humor of an haughty
spirit, the aspiring insolency of a boisterous Nimrod be possibly stayed or
stinted; no not with the top and variety of highest honors, though he should
alone and absolutely be crowned with the Soueraignitie of the whole earth, and
command the felicities of this wide world.

If it fall in love with riches, it breeds and brings forth covetousness, the
vilest, and basest of all the infections of the soul, in the most
contemptible, and dunghill disposition. For this kyte-footed corruption
wheresoever it seizes, and domineeres, blasts, and banisheth all nobleness of
spirit, natural affection, humanity, discretion, reason, wisdom, manliness,
mutual entertainements, intercourse of kindness, and love; and turns all,
even the soul it self, into earth and mudde. It draws by a cunning reserved
baseness, all occasions, circumstances, advantages, wit, policy, even
friends, and acquaintance; nay religion, conscience, and all to be
serviceable, and contributary to a greedy wolf, and raging gangren of hoarding
up Gold, and worldly pelf. In a word, it makes a man with a Bedlam cruelty to
contemn himself, body and soul, for a little transitory trash; wilfully to
abandon both the comfortable enioyment of the short time of this present
mortality, and all hope of the length of that blessed eternity to come. And as
the object of it is most earthly, base, and incompetent, so of all other vile
affections, it is most sottishly, and senselesly vnsatisfiable. For how is it
possible that earth should feed or fill the immateriall, and heauen-borne
spirit of a man? It can not be, and the Spirit of God has said, it shall not
be. Eccles. 5. 10. and 4. 8. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver. The eye is not satisfied with riches. Hence it is, that the deepelier
and more eagerly the dropsy heart of the covetous man does drink of this
golden stream, the more furiously still it is inflamed with insatiable thirst:
nay certain it is, that if he should purchase, and possess a Monopoly of all
the wealth in the world; were he able to empty the Western parts of Gold, and
the East of all her Spices, and precious things; should he enclose the whole
face of the earth from one end of heaven to another, and heap up his hoard to
the stars; yet his heart would be as hungry after more riches, as if he had
never a penny, and much more.

If it fall in love with beauty, and the swaggering bravery of good fellowship,
it begets lust, and sensuality; which make their minions mad with bitterness
and malice, against the very least glimpse of holiness, or any religious
restraint; enrage them with mutual fury, to engulfe themselves into the
bottomless whirlepoole of sensual pleasures, and so empoyson their hearts
with a furious unquenchable thirst after them, that they will never leave their
hold, and haunt, until they either be broken with the hammer of the Word, or
burst with the horror of despair. You may trace these pestilent properties in
the practice of those voluptuous Gallants, Wisdom 2. (A book though not of
divine authority, yet profitable for precepts of morality.) In which Chapter
you may find, as I have ever conceived, a description to the life, and most
exact Character of the goodfellowes of our times; who are transported equally
with a desperate insatiable humor of ravenous feeding upon the froth, and
filth of their impure delights, as greedily as the Ox suckes in water: and
with an implacable enmity against Iam. 5. 5, 6.
the purity, and power of godliness. For the first, hear their cry unto their
companions. Verse 6, etc. Come on therefore, let us enjoy the good things that
are present: and let us speedily use the creatures like as in youth. Let us
fill our selves with costly Wine, and Ointments: and let no flower of the
Spring pass by us. Let us crown our selves with Rosebuds before they be
withered. Let none of us go without his part of our voluptuousness: let us
leave tokens of our ioyfulnesse in every place; for this is our portion, and
our lot is this. For the other, take notice of their boystrous swaggering
combination, to become bloody goades in the sides, and cruel pricks in the
eyes of Gods people. For proportionable to their impatiency of being crossed in
their course of pleasures, is their rage in persecuting the godly. And
therefore being resolute to live and dye good fellows, they also resolve from
the same ground, to hold an everlasting unreconcilable opposition to the way
which is called holy, Acts 28. 22.
especially, since every where it is so spoken against. Whence, I say, they
grow, and glue themselves together in this combination, Verse. 10, etc. Let us
oppress the poor righteous man, -- Let our strength be the law of justice:
for that which is feeble, is found to be nothing worth. Therefore let us lie
in wait for the righteous: because he is not for our turn, and he is clean
contrary to our doings, he vpbraideth us with our offending the Law, and
obiecteth to our infamy, the transgressing of our education. He professes to
have the knowledge of God: and he calls himself the child of the Lord. He
was made to reprove our thoughts. He is grievous unto us, even to behold: for
his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion. We are
esteemed of him as counterfeits: he abstaineth from our ways, as from
filthiness: he pronounces the end of the just to be blessed, and makes his
boasts that God is his Father: -- Such things they did imagine, and were
deceived: for their own wickedness has blinded them. As for the mysteries of
God, they know them not: neither hoped they for the wages of righteousness:
nor discerned a reward for blameless souls.

If it edge, and eneager malice, it breeds revenge, a woluish, and unnatural
thirst after blood: which haunts most, the most weak, fearful, and cowardly
spirits. For we ever see the baseft and most worthless men, to be most
malicious and reuengefull. Seldom does it find any harbor in a welbred, and
a generous mind. As Thunders, Tempests, and other terrible agitations in the
air, trouble only, and disquiet these weaker frail bodies below, but never
disturb or dismay those glorious heavenly Ones above: so scurrill girds,
imperious doggednesse, disgraces, and wrongs, vex, and distemper men of baser
temper: but the nettling disposition, causeless spite, and childish brawlings
of hasty fools, wound not great and noble spirits. Now this boiling and biting
distemper, though against nature it feed upon blood; yet, so true is the point
I pursue, (but would you think it?) is also insatiable. Witness that Monster
of Millaine, who, as De Repub. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Bodin reports, when he had surprised upon the sudden, one whom he
mortally hated, he presently overthrew him; and setting his dagger to his
breast, told him, he would certainly have his blood, except he would renounce,
abjure, forswear, and blaspheme the God of heaven. Which when that fearful
man, too sinfully greedy of a miserable life, had done in a most horrible
manner; he immediately dispatched him, as soon as those prodigious blasphemies
were out of his mouth: and in a bloody triumph insulting over his murdered
adversary, as though whole hell had dwelt in his heart; he added this most
abhorred speech: Oh, says he, this is right noble, and heroical revenge;
which does not only deprive the body of a temporary life, but brings also the
neuer-dying soul unto everlasting flames. Witness the cruellest of men,
Mahomet the great, who as the Story reports, was in his time History of Turks,
page 433.
the death of eight hundred thousand men. But above all, that Beast of Rome
carries away the bell for insatiablenesse in blood-sucking, who though he was
long since drunk with the blood of the Saints, as with new Wine; and in his
drunken humor, has furiously spilt, and powered out upon the face of
Christendom, a world of blood, almost all in our remembrance: Witness the
incredible deal of Christian blood which that merciless monster, the Popish
Inquisition swallows down in secret: Witness the horrible butcheries
executed upon Professors in the Low countries: Guess the rest by that cruel
confession of Metran. Belg. Hist. lib. 4. p. 127.
Alua, who bosting in the bloodshed of the Saints, said on a time at his table,
that he had been diligent in rooting out of heresy; (so the Antichristians
call the right way to Heaven.) For besides those which were slain in war,
and secret massacres, he had put into the hand of the Hangman eighteen
thousand in the space of six years: Witness Discedens ex Italia Farnesius,
dixisse fertur, se tantum esse daturum stragem per Germaniam, vt in
Lutheranorum cruore vel natare possit ipsius equus Sleidan comment. l. 17.
Farnesius his ferall resolution at his departing out of Italy; to make his
Horse swim in the blood of the Lutherans: Witness that most abhorred
prodigious villainy, that ever the Sun saw; the massacre at Paris, when in
diverse places of France, about Hist of France, page 794.
threescore thousand persons were murdered, and the streets of that City, as
the Story tells us, strewed with carcases, the Pauements, Marketplaces and
River dyed with blood: Witness, besides other cruelties and bloody
afflictions, three hundred faithful servants of Christ burned to ashes in this
Kingdom, within His vero temporibus per totum Christianu^ orbem, and nominat
im per Galliam, infiniti haeretici sublati sunt. Franciscus Veronensis
Constant. p. 2. cap. 11. page 96. Those which he calls Heretics, were blessed
Martyrs.
less then five years: Witness that horrible parricide perpetrated upon the
Royal persons of two French Kings, Henry the third and fourth, who were
successively butchered in a most barbarous manner, by two Popish Assasins,
Clement and Rauilliac: Nay, in the late civil wars of France, twelve hundred
thousand natural French are said to be slain: this Romish Beast being the
bellows and incendiary, etc. Yet I say, Though he has already drunk up such
a deal of blood as insatiably, as Behemoth the River Jordan: he is yet still
like a shee-wolfe in the evening; and at this very time carousing almost in all
corners of the Christian world, the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus as greedily,
and with as furious thirst, as ever he did, since the Dragon first gave him
his power. Revel. 13. 4.
But I hope in the strong God of our salvation, ( For strong is Revel. 18. 8.
the Lord God, who judges the Whore) that this is the last draught, and that
upon his next health, as it were, begun to the Devil, in this cup of fiery
cruelty against the servants of Christ, the Vial of Gods unquenchable wrath
will choke him for ever. Blood he shall have enough, but from the revenging hand
of the Lord God of recompenses, in fury, and jealousy.

2. Besides that thus the rage of insatiableness and restlesnesse of pursuit,
does still boil in every carnal heart, that is carried immoderately after its
own ways, or inordinately upon any earthly thing: it is also thereby in Gods
just judgment extraordinarily hardened, and estranged from God. For the
deepelier our affections are drowned in the World, and endeared to any sensual
delight; the more desperately are they divorced from God, and deaded to
heavenly things. It is just with God, to suffer that heart to be turned first
into earth and mud; and after to freeze and congeale into steel and Adamant,
which preferres Earth before Heaven; a dunghill before Paradise; broken
cisternes which can hold no water, before the euer-springing Fountain of glory
and bl^sse; a few bitter-sweet pleasures, for an inch of time in this vale of
tears, before unmixed and immeasurable joys, through all eternity in those
glorious mansions above. Our hearts are originally hard by the curse of Nature,
Ezekiel. 11. 19. afterward by a wilful course, and continuance in sin, we add
Adamant of our own, Isai. 48. 4. Zech. 7. 12. and by not suffering the Sword
of the Spirit to search and sunder our minion-delights from our bosoms, Heb. 4.
7. Then Satan is let loose to put to his iron sinews, Luke 22. 3. Lastly, God
himself hardens by an act of Justice, as we may see, Josh. 11. 20.
Exodus 9. 12. Thus the heart which hates to be reformed, being glued to a
sensual object, or worldly lust, by its own inbred corruption, infusion of
hellish poison, and just curse of God, grows into such a prodigious rock:
That no cross or created power; not the softest eloquence, or seuerest course;
nay, not the weight of the whole World, were it all pressed upon it, can possibly
mollify or reclaim it. It will never yield or relent, or be rent from its
darling delight, but dye in its deadness, and be desperately hardened for the
very depth of Hell; except the Almighty Spirit take the hammer of the Word
into his own hand, that by his special irresistable power, and merciful
violence, he may first break it in pieces with legal remorse, and after by
the sprinkling and powerful application of Christ's blood, resolve it into
tears of true Evangelical repentance; that so only by a gracious miracle of
divine mercy, it may be softened, sanctified, and saved. The stubborn Jews
were heavily laden with an extraordinary variety of most grievous crosses and
afflictions. There was nothing wanting to make them outwardly miserable; and no
misery inflicted upon them, but upon purpose to humble, and take down their
rebellious hearts. The Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 1. paints out to the life, the
rufull state of their fresh bleeding desolations; The whole head (says he) is
sick, and the whole heart is heavy, etc. (for the place is meant, not as some
take it, of their sins, but of their sorrows.) But all these blows and
pressures were so far from melting them, that they made them harder:
Wherefore should you be smitten anymore, for ye fall away more and more? What
created power can possibly have more power upon the souls of men, then the
sacred Sermons of the Son of God, who spoke as never man spoke? And yet His
dear entreaties, and melting inuitations, which sweetly and tenderly flowed
from that heart, which was resolved to spill its warmest and inmost blood for
their sakes, moved those stiffenecked Jews never a jot: Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I, and you would not? Matthew. 23. 37. Isaiah, that
Noble Prophet; whose matchless style, incomparably surpasses the utmost
possibility of all humane invention; and to which the choicest elegancies of
profane Writers, are pure barbarism, shed many, and many a gracious shower of
most heavenly, piercing, sweetest eloquence upon a sinful Nation, and
rebellious people, which were fruitlesly spilt as water upon the ground, or
lost, as upon the hardest flint. His many heavenly soule-searching Sermons,
which breathed nothing but spirit and life; yet to them hardened in their
sins, and hating to be reformed, were but as an idle and empty breath;
vanishing into nothing, and scattered in the air. The Lord (as he says) made
his mouth like a sharp sword, Isa. 49. ^.
and himself a chosen shaft; and yet that two-edged sword was full often
blunted upon their hardest hearts; and his keen arrows discharged by a
skilful hand, rebounded from their flinty bosoms, as shafts shut against a
stone-wall. Verse. 4.
Which made that Seraphicall Orator cry out; I have labored in vain, I have
spent my strength for naught, and in vain. A course of extraordinary severity
and terror, was taken with the Tyrant Pharaoh, he was not only chastised with
rods, but even scourged with Scorpions; and yet all the plagues of Egypt were
so far from taming, and taking down his proud heart; that every particular
plague added unto it a several iron sinew; so far they were from softning
it, that they seared it more. No material weight can more crush the heart of a
man into pieces, then braying in a mortar: and yet says Solomon, Though thou
should bray a fool, an old obstinate sinner, in a mortar among wheat with
a pestle: yet will not his foolishnes, his wilful cruelty in killing his own
soul, and Bedlam madness, in exchanging a little transitory pleasure, with
endless pain, depart from him. Prou. 27. 22. Now what an horrible hardness,
and hellish stone is that, which no ministry or misery, nay, nor miracles, See
Exodus 10. 27. 1. King. 13. 33. 2. King. 1. 11. Ioh. 18. 12. nor mercies, Isai.
26. 10. can possibly mollify?

Here now should I have passed out of this point, did I not conceive, that of
all the waightiest civil affairs incident to humane deliberation, there is
none more material, important, or of greater consequence, either for extremest
outward vexation, and hearts-griefe; or extraordinary sweet contentment, and
continual peace, then matter of marriage. A word Bonum coniugium est
terrestris Paradisus: malum, terrestris infernus.
or two therefore of, 1. convenient entrance into, and, 2. comfortable
enioyment of that honorable estate.

For the first: 1. Let thy choice be in the Primum ergo in coniugio religio
quaeritur. Ambros. primo de Abrah. Patriarch. cap 9. While they (meaning women
not marrying in the Lord) please him not by marrying in him, they do that
whereby they incur his displeasure, they make an offer of themselves into the
service of that enemy, with whose servants they link themselves in so near a
bond. Hookers Paraphrase, Lib. 2. Sect. ^. upon those w^ras of Tertul. Quae
Domino non placent, vtique Dominum offendunt, vtique malo se inferunt. Lib. 2.
ad vxorem.
Lord, according to blessed Saint Paul's Rule, 1. Cor. 7. 39. only in the Lord.
Let piety be the first moouer of thine affection, the prime and principal
ponderation in this greatest affair; and then conceive of personage,
parentage, and portion, as they say, and such outward things, and worldly
additions, as a comfortable accessory, considerable only in a second Dummodo
morata recte veniat, dotata est satis.
place. Let the world say what it will, to a mind truly generous, and ennobled
with grace, the absolutest concurrence, and quintessentiall exquisiteness of
beauty, gold, birth, wit, or what else besides may be found most remarkable and
matchless in that sex, should be nothing, nor hold scale with the lightest
feather upon any Ladies head, in respect of a gracious disposition and godly
heart. Religion and the fear of God, as it is generally the foundation of all
humane felicity; so must it in special be accounted the ground of al comfort
and bliss, which man and wife desire to find in the enjoying each of other.
There was never any gold, or great friends; any beauty, or outward bravery,
which tied truly fast and comfortably any marriage knot. It is only the golden
link, and noble tie of Christianity and Grace, which has the power and
privilege to make so dear a bond lovely, and everlasting; which can season
and strengthen that nearest inseparable society with true sweetness and
immortality.

2. Let conjugal love warm thine heart, at least in some measure with
affectionate contentment, and some more special repose upon the party, as one
with whom thou can heartily and comfortably consort: for the husband, all
concurrents, and ordinary possibilities considered, ought to settle his
affections upon his wife, as the fittest that the world could have afforded
him: and the wife should rest her heart upon her husband, as the meetest for
her, that could have been found under the Sun. By a constant intercourse of
which mutual contentment in each other, the husband will be to the wife as a
covering of her eyes, that she lift them not Genesis 20. 16.
up amorously upon any man: and the wife to the husband, the pleasure of his
eyes, that he may still look upon her with Ezekiel. 24. 16.
sober and singular delight. Otherwise they will find but cold comfort in that
counsel and commandment of Solomon, Prou. 5. 18, 19. Rejoice with the wife of
thy youth. Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe: let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love. Without
this mutual complacency, that I may so speak, and loving contentment each in
other, I doubt whether I should encourage any to proceed. And yet why should
not a comfortable concurrence of grace on both sides, consent of Parents,
meetnesse in state, stature, birth, years, and all other requisites besides,
create in a mortified heart, matrimonial affection? And yet I would by no
means causelessly confine and ensnare any. And yet I would not have an
invincible Antipathy, and Non am^ to^ Sabidi.
I cannot love, but I know not why, pretended, when as perhaps indeed and truth
it is only carnal curiosity which breaks a convenient match.

3. In going about such an important business, plie the Throne of Grace with
extraordinary importunity, and feruency of prayer; press upon, and wrestle,
as it were, with God in days of more secret and solemn humiliation for a
blessing in this kind, and with that sincerity; that thou do heartily desire
him, whatsoever thy conceits, and expectation of future comforts, and
conueniences may be; yet if it be not with his liking, and to his glory, he
would be pleased to dash it quite. A good wife is a more immediate gift of
God: House and riches, says Solomon, are the inheritance of fathers; but a
prudent wife is from the Lord. Hinc efficitur. speciali quadam ratione a Deo
per preces vxotem piam and prudentem quaerondam esse. Car tw* in cap. 19. Prou.
Si quod bonum vitae profuturum precibus a Deo, and votis petitur: maxim
petenda est vxor bona. redditura and ^es prosperas laetiores, and leuiores
aduersas; contra vero mala and secundis insoleicet, and tristibus despondebit
animum. A very Papist give this counsel; let it not then ^e contemned as ^oo
precise. Viues de Offic. Mariti. cap. 2. page 22.
And therefore such a rare and precious Jewel See Genes. 24. 12, 63.
is to be sued and sought for at Gods Mercy-seate, with more extraordinary
earnestness, importunity and zeal. And methinks, that wife, child, or what
other good thing is procured at Gods merciful hand by prayer, should bring
with it, even in our sense and thankful acknowledgement, a thousand times
more sweetness and comfort, then that which is cast upon us by Gods ordinary
providence, without any suite at all, unto his heavenly Highness.

4. Let the parties deal plainly and faithfully one with the other, in
respect of their bodies, souls, and outward state. I mean it thus; That they
should not deceive and coozen one the other by a crafty co^cealement: of some
foul disease, special deformity, natural defect, etc. in body; especially,
which they think in their consciences, and impartial consideration, if it
were their case, would breed intolerable distaste and coffeehouse: or of
some secret maime and crack in their outward state, which neither the other
party, or friends, do either expect, or suspect: For so they may bring a great
deal of after-misery, and too late repentance upon the match. For naturally we
hate them which beguile us. And a man or woman is most impatient of failing,
and being disappointed of their hopes and expectations, in so great and weighty
affair as Marriage is. And therefore it were very convenient, and much better
to disclose the one unto the other, the material infirmities and wants in
either of their bodies or goods, though with hazard of missing the match;
rather then the one to obtain the other, with guile, cunning, and
after-discomfort. I said also, in respect of their souls; by which I mean;
that for the time of Wooing only, as they call it, they should not put on a
visour, flourish, and show of Religion, conversion, and grace; when in deed and
truth, there is no such matter. For this execrable imposture also, is sometimes
villanously practiced, to the infinite prejudice, and perpetual hearts-griefe
of the deluded party. And not only some parties are cunning, reserved, and
faulty this way; but even Christian friends are too often too forward,
peremptory, and audacious, in giving testimonies and assurances in such cases.
Now this is the greatest guile, and most cursed coozenage of all; when one
conceiues, by the present cunning carriage of the party, and partial
information of friends, that he or she has met with a soul beautified with
grace; whereas when it comes to the trial, has just none acquaintance with
God at all.

Now I come unto the second Point; A religious and comfortable continuance in
the Marriage-state. For the happy attainement whereof; let us take notice of,
and to heart; first, some common Duties, which are mutually to be performed on
both sides.

I. Louingnesse. Which is a drawing into action, and keeping in exercise that
habit of conjugal affection, Matrimonial love mentioned before. It is a
sweet, loving, and tenderhearted pouring out of their hearts, with much
affectionate dearness, into each others bosoms; in all passages, carriages,
and behauiours, one toward another. This mutual melting-heartednesse, being
preserved fresh and fruitful, will infinitely sweeten and beautify the
Marriage state.

For an uninterrupted preservation of this amiable deportment on both sides;
let them consider,

1. The wise hand of Gods gracious providence guided all the business, and
brought it to pass. And he commands constancy in this loving and lightsome
carriage. Pro. 5. 18, 19. Rejoice with the wife of thy youth. Let her be as the
loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and
be thou ravished always with her love. See also Ephesians. 5. 25. Methinkes this
charge from the holy Ghost, being often reverently remembered, should ever beat
back and banish from both their hearts, all heart-rising and bitterness;
distaste, and disaffection; all wicked wishes, that they had never met
together, that they had never seen one another faces, etc. When the knot is
once tied, every man should think his wife, and every wife her husband, the
fittest for him of any in the world. Otherwise, so often as he sees a better,
he will wish that his choice were to make again; and so fall off from respect
to this Commandment, and from kindness and love to his own. Which is an
inexpiable disparagement to Gods providence, and an execrable empoysoner of
Marriage comforts.

2. That by the power of the honorable Ordinance of Marriage, the two are made
one. And therefore they ought to be as lovingly and tenderly affected one unto
the other, as they would be to their own flesh.

3. The compassionate and melting compellations, which Christ and his Spouse
exchange in the Canticles: My fair one, my sister, my love, my Dove, my
undefiled, my well-beloved, the chief of ten thousand, etc. whose chaste and
fervent love, that of married couples should resemble and imitate.

4. That these mutual expressions, and exercise of this matrimonial love, are
very powerful to preserve chastity and pureness in body and spirit on both
sides. It is noted of Isaac, that he loved Rebekah dearly; and this was a
special preservative, that he fell not to Polygamy or concubines, as many of
the Patriarchs did.

II. Faithfulness. 1. In respect of the Marriage Bed; which they ought on both
sides to keep inviolable, undefiled, and honorable. Wherein, if they
transgress, besides an whole hell of spiritual miseries, they strike at the
very sinew, heart, and life of the Marriage Knot; and become liable (if the
Magistrate should do, as God commanded amongst his people) to the bloody
stroke of a violent death. And therefore it behooues all that enter this state,
to be humbled, and repent for all former wantonness; or else, a thousand to
one, it will break out, either into a sensual, immoderate abuse of the
Marriage; which the Fathers call, Adultery with a man's own wife; or else into
a lustful hankering after the strange woman.

2. In respect of domestical affairs, and businesses of the family. The care
and burden whereof is common to them both. The Husband that has a prodigal
and slothful wife, does but draw water with a Sieve, as the Heathen man said,
and casts his labors into a bottomless sack. And the wife that is ma^cht
with an idle vnthristy Husband, draws a Cart heavy laden through a sandy way,
without a Horse. By which is intimated an impossibility of thriuing in the
world, and prospering in their outward state.

3. In the concealment of each others secrets. It is a very unnatural and
monstrous treachery, to publish one another faults and frailties, or any
thing, which in hope of keeping counsel, they have communicated one to
another. They are ill birds, as they say, that defile their owne-nests; and
frantic Bedlams that so throw dirt in each others faces.

III. Patience. Which is as precious and needful an holy duty, as I can
possibly commend in this case, for comfortable conuersing together.

For a more prepared and constant exercise whereof; consider,

1. That two Angels are not met together in a Matrimonial state, but a son
and daughter of Adam: And therefore they must look for infirmities, frailties,
imperfections, passions, and prouocations, on both sides.

2. That it is a charge given to all; That the Sun must not go down upon
their wrath: much more to Man and Wife linked together in the nearest bond.

3. That there never did, nor ever will come any good, by the falling out of
Man and Wife. Well may they thereby become ridiculous to their servants, a
byword to their neighbors, Table-talke to the Country, troublers of their
own house, and as a continual dropping one unto another: but they shall never
gain by their mutual hastiness, passions, and impatiencie. What good can
come by a man's anger and indignation against his own flesh? What prodigious
madness is it for them to grow strange, whom so many and perpetual bands have
tied so fast; and who without dearest and most intimate familiarity, can
neither enjoy civil contentment or peace of conscience? Suppose that the heart
should fall out with the head, and deny unto it, those spirits which become
animal in the brain, and serve for exercise both of sense, and by consequent
of the higher part of the soul; What would follow, but distemper, distraction,
and madness? Or that the head should fall out with the body; and thereupon
restrain from it the influence of animal spirits, the instruments of the
quickening and moving it; What would become of the head, when the body were
dead? Proportionable mischiefs and miseries fall out upon the Marriage-state,
by falling out, strangeness, bitterness, and angry reservedness between the
parties.

This grace then will be of excellent use, and must be exercised many ways:

1. In bearing with the wants and weaknesses, infirmities and deformities of
each other. And let the man, (for the woman is the weaker vessel) remember for
this purpose; how many faults, frailties, and falls; and how many times Christ
remits and pardons to his Spouse the Church. And he ought to love his wife, as
Christ does the Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. The body does not reject the head, because
it is bald, or but one eyed: The head rages not against the body, because it
is deformed or diseased, but does rather condole and sympathize.

2. About cross accidents in the family, losses in their outward state; going
backward of businesses, etc. They must not lay the fault one upon another, to
the breaking out into choler, impatiencie, and stamping; but both join with
blessed Job, in that sweet and meek submission to Gods pleasure: The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken away: Job 1. 21.
blessed be the name of the Lord.

3. In waiting for the conversion of one another; if either prove unconverted.
In which case, be patient, pray, and expect Gods good time. We have God
himself a sweet Pattern for this purpose. See before, page 102. Or if the one
be but a Babe in Christ, weak in Christianity; deal fairly, lovingly, and
meekely. Let our Lord Jesus his tender-heartednesse to spiritual younglings,
teach us mercy this way. See Isa. 40. 11.

IV. An holy care and conscience to preserve between themselves, (for there is
a conjugal, as well as virginal and viduall chastity) the marriage bed
undefiled, and in all honor Heb. 13. 4.
and Christian purity. It ought by no means to be stained and dishonored with
sensual excesses, wonton speeches, foolish dalliance, and other unclean
incentiues of lust, which marriage should quench, not inflame. Even in
wedlock, intemperate and unbridled lust; immoderation and excess, is deemed
both by ancient and modern Divines, no better then plain adultery before God.

Two ancient worthy Fathers, Ambrose and August. contra Iulia. Pelag. lib. 2.
page 322. Intemperans in coniugio, quid aliud nisi quidem adulter vxo^is* And
at the bottom of the same page: Nec vo care dubitat, ( speaking of Ambrose,
whom he appr^oues) vxoris adulterum, intempera^tem maritum: omne connubij
bonum pensans non cupiditate carnis, sed fide potius castitatis: non morbo
passionis, sed foedere coniunctionis: non voluptate libidinis, sed voluntate
propaginis.
Austin, speak thus: What is the intemperate man in marriage, but his wives
adulterer? The resolution of the Adulter est vxoris propriae, amator ardentior.
Hier an cap. 18. Ezech. Ex Xysti Pyth gorici Sententiolis. Nihil est soedius,
quam vxorem am^re, quasi adulteram. Idem lib. 1. contra Iouinianum ad fin.
Debent quidem coniuges debitum sibi inuicem reddere, sed turpiter conuenire non
debent. Greg. Tom. 2. in 1. Sam. cap. 15. Col. 1572. Coniuge seipsi^ vti debent
non ad turpitudinem meretriciae ob^coenitatis, sed ad temperantiam honestatis.
Ibid. Col. 1575. Si subaudiamus (...), praeceptum erit ad coniuges, vt pudice,
and qua decet honestate matrimonium inter se colant, vt vir cum vxore
temperanter and cast habitet, nec torum maritalem indignis ^asciuijs profanet,
sciantque coniugati non quiduis sibi licere: sed v^um tori legitimi debere esse
moderatum, ne quid alienum a coniugij pudore and castimonia admittant. Par.
inv. 4 cap. 13. ad Heb.
rest sound to the same sense.

Dod upon the seventh Commandment.
As a man may be a wicked drunkard with his own drink; and a glutton, by
excessive devouring of his own meat: so likewise, one may be unclean in the
immoderate use of the marriage bed.

Even Popish Casuists discover and detest aberrations and exorbitancies of
married couples in their Matrimonial meetings. (But read such passages with
much modesty and judgment.)

Nay hear what a very Philosopher says of the point: In the private
acquaintance, says he, and use of marriage, there must be a moderation; that
is, a religious and a devout band: for that pleasure that is therein, must be
mingled with some severity. It must be a wise and conscionable delight. A man
must touch his Vxor nomen dignitatis, non voluptatis.
wife discreetly, and for honesty, etc. Another thus: Marriage is a religious
and devout bond: and that is the reason, the pleasure a man has of it, should
be a moderate, stayed, and serious pleasure, and mixed with severity: it ought
to be a delight somewhat circumspect and conscientious.

We may conceive, what moderate, reverent, and honorable thoughts Antiquity
entertained of the Marriage state, and conjugal chastity; by Euaristus words,
Epist. 1. ad omnes Episc. Aphri. Let new-married couples, says he, for two or
three days ply Prayer, -- that they may have good children, and please the
Lord in their marriage-duties. d Conc. Tom. 1. page 106 ed (...). Though I
agree to Osianders censure, Cent. 2 lib. 1. cap. 2. page 4 yet in the sense I
cite it, it ^itly serves my turn.


Now all intemperate, excessive, or any ways exorbitant pollutions of the
marriage bed, though Magistrates meddle not with them, because they lie without
the walk of humane censure; yet assuredly Gods pure Eye cannot look upon
them, but without repentance will certainly plague them. Methinkes therefore,
if the fear of God, awfulnesse to his All-seeing Eye, love of purity, etc.
will not restrain from immodestie and immoderation in this kind; yet that
slavish horror, lest God should justly punish them therefore, with no
children, misshapen children, idiotes, or prodigiously wicked children, or
some other heavy crosses, should fright them from such abhorred filth.

In the next place, let us take a view of, and to heart, duties peculiar and
proper to each severally.

I. To the Husband:

1. Let him behave himself as an head to the body, 1. Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23.

1. The head is, as it were, the Non immerito capiti quasi consultori suo
caetera membia famulantur; and circumferunt illud setuli gestamine sicut numen;
atque in sublime locatum v^hunt. Ambr. Hexam. l. 6. c. 9.
glory and crown of the body: So let the husband shine, and show himself in a
kind of eminency, excellency, and authority over the wife. To be an head,
implies and imports a preeminence, superiority, and sovereignty, as appears by
the Apostles gradation, 1. Cor. 11. 3. Man is the woman's head, Christ is man's
head, God is Christ's head. For procuring and preserving which; Let the husband
be manly, grave, worthy; not light, vain, contemptible: Let him not be
bitter, wayward, passionate: Let him not be base-minded, vicious, vain
glorious: Let him not be a drunkard, a gamester, a good fellow.
Dissoluteness, and a disordered life in the Man, does much abate and diminish
the wives respectfulnesse and reverence unto him. Majesty, authority,
venerablenesse in any Superior, is not any ways more lessened or sooner lost,
then by light behavior, personal worthlesnesse, or unworthy deportment in his
place. Whereas true worth, goodness, grace, shining from within, does beget a
more loving reverence, and reverent love, then all outward forms of pomp and
state; then any boysterousnesse, or big looks can possibly produce.

2. The Head is the seat of understanding, wisdom, discretion, forecast. Out
of which consideration; Let the husband stir up, quicken, and enlarge his
manly spirit, to comprehend, and rightly conceive all affairs, provisions,
occasions, offers, ingenuous deportment, and worthy vsages, which may any ways
procure and promote his wives true contentment, honor, and happiness. It is
his necessary and noble charge, with a special and punctual care, and casting
about to provide for her soul, body, comfort, and credit; with all meekness
and love, to instruct and inform her in all passages of her duty, and
procurements of her good.

3. The Head indeed has the precedence and prerogative of noblest operations,
and the souls diuinest acts, by the benefit of its native temper and
constitution, seat of the senses, and other proper instruments fitted for such
high employments, and challenge of that excellency; yet notwithstanding, the
body, and other parts are animated and enlyued with the very same soul, both
for substance, faculties, immortality, actiuenesse, every way: So that if the
foot, for instance, had an ear, an eye, an animal spirit, and an
organization, as the Philosophers speak, apted for such functions, it would
hear, and see, and understand as well as the head. And therefore the head, by
a natural instinct, as it were, and sympathy, does continually and tenderly,
with fresh successions of a lively and quickening influence, cherish, and
refresh other parts as well as it self. The husband, by the benefit of a more
manly body, tempered with natural fitness for the soul to work more nobly
in; does, or ought ordinarily outgoe the wife in largeness of understanding,
height of courage, stayednesse of resolution, moderation of his passions,
dexterity to manage businesses, and other natural inclinations, and abilities
to do more excellently; yet notwithstanding, let him know that his wife has
as noble a soul as himself. Souls have no sexes, as Anima enim sex^ non
habet. Sed ideo fortasse foemineum nomen accipit, quod eam violentior aestus
carnis angit. De virg. l. 3. fol. 14.
Ambrose says. In the better part they are both men. And if thy wives soul
were freed from the frailty of her sex, it were as manly, as noble, as
understanding, and every way as excellent as thine own: Nay, and if it were
possible for you to change bodies; hers would work as manlily in thine, and
thine as womanly in hers. Let the husband then be so far from insulting
over, contemning, or vnderualuing his wives worth, for the weakness of her
sex; that out of consideration that her soul is naturally every way as good
as his own; only the excellency of its native operations, something damped,
as it were, and disabled by the frailty of that weaker body, with which Gods
wise providence has clothed it upon purpose, for a more convenient and
comfortable, but ingenuous seruiceablenes to his good; that, I say, he labor
the more to entertain and entreat her with all tenderness and honor, to
recompense, as it were, her suffering in this kind for his sake.

4. The Head is the wellspring of all quickening motion and sense, liveliness
and lightsomenesse to the body. If the deriuation of animal spirits from the
brain, were restrained and intercepted for a while; the body would be
presently surprised with a senseless dampe and dead palsy. The wife for the
husbands sake, has forsaken her native home, fathers house, father, mother,
and many comforts in that kind: And therefore good reason she should expect
now, and receive from her Head; new matter, and a continued influence of
lightheartednesse, comfortable enjoying her self, and cheerful walking. If
he to whose company and conditions she is now so nearly and necessarily
confined, and, as it were, enchained, prove dogged, she holds her self
utterly undone for any outward contentment.

2. Let him dwell with her, according to knowledge. 1. Pet. 3. 7.

1. By a wise discovery at the first, and timely acquainting himself with her
disposition, affections, infirmities, passions, imperfections; and thereupon
with all holy discretion, apply and address himself in a fair and loving
manner, to rectify and reform all he can; and to bear the rest with
patience, passing by it without passion and impatiency, still waiting upon God
by Prayer, in his good time, for a further and more full redress and
conformity. One of the rankest roots of distastes and coffeehouse in the
Marriage-state, is the neglect of a punctual observation of each others
properties; of taking the right measure of each others manners, upon purpose,
that with mutual patience and forbearance, they may support each other in
love, and lovingly bear one another burdens. Memorable is that speech, and
may be a fit medicine against marriage-iarres; which a reverend man received
from an husband, being asked how such a choleric couple could so consort
together: Thus, says he, when her fit is upon her, I yield to her, as Abraham
did to Sara; and when my fit is upon me, she yields to me: and so we never
strive together, but asunder.

2. By a provident, discreet, and patient ordering, guiding, and managing
businesses abroad, and family affairs; without that carking, impatiencie,
prevention, and distrust of Gods providence; without that clamor,
boysterousnesse, and confusion, with which worldlings are wont to trouble
their own houses. It is incredible to consider the vast and invaluable
difference between the comforts, calmness, and many sweet contentments of an
household, governed by the patient wisdom of an heauenly-minded man: and the
endless brawlings, bitter contestations about trifles, disorders, domestical
hurlyburlies, etc. which haunt that family, where a choleric, covetous, and
hairebrained husband does domineere. This latter, is like the middle region of
the air, continually torn and rent with fresh commotions, thunders, and many
tumultuous stirs, which rise at first from a thing of nothing; a thin
invisible fume drawn out of the earth: So earthly things, vainer then the most
vanishing vapor, do ordinarily raise in such Nourceries of disquietnesse and
noise, a world of needless troubles, passionate distempers, and
selfe-vexations. But the former is like the highest part of the air, full of
calmness, tranquillity, and constant light; the Sun of righteousness
shining still upon it with the blessed beams of patience, contentment and
spiritual nobleness of mind; does from time to time dissolve and drive away
all mists of worldly mourning, storms of bitterness and brawling, matter of
such senseless and brainelesse molesting one another; and does with a sweet
and kindly heat refresh and support the heart, against all chollericke
encounters and cross accidents; by virtue of such heavenly and healing
cordials as these, which were wont to calm and repel the most tempestuous
assaults upon the afflicted Saints, Job 1. 21. 1. Sam. 3. 18.

3. But above all, by leading his wife in the way of life, and path, that is
called Holy. This is the flower and crown of all his skill, to be a blessed
and manly guide unto her, toward everlasting happiness. For want of this
wisdom, and will, many a poor soul lies bleeding unto eternal death, under
the bloody and merciless hand of an ignorant, profane, or Pharisaicall
husband; which perhaps may have knowledge enough and too much, to thrive in the
world, to prosper in his outward state; to provide for posterity; nay to
oppress, ouer-reach, and defraud his brother: But no wit, no understanding, no
brains at all, to teach, and tell his wife one foot of the right way to
heaven: wise to do evil, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 4. 22. But to do good,
no knowledge at all: No holy habit or heart to pray with her, to instruct, and
encourage her in the great mystery and practice of godliness; to keep the
Sabbath holy, and days of humiliation; to read Scriptures, repeat Sermons,
and confer of good things with her, etc. from which he is so far; that
although it be the strongest bar to keep her from grace, and the bloody
cut-throate of both their souls; he will needs persuade her that all this is
too much preciseness. And yet hear Ad Ecclesiam quisque accedat, and eo^um
quae ^bi dicuntur, and leguntu^, vel pa^tem aliquam d^mi, and vi^ ab vxore, and
vxor a viro exig^t. In Epist. ad Ephesians. Sermon. 20. Col 894. Doce timorem Dei, and
omnia tanquam ex font abunde adfluent, e^que domus tua innumeri^ bonis r^ita.
Ibid. Col. 895.
Chrysostom: Let them both go to the Church, and afterward at home let the
husband require of the wife, and the wife of the husband, those things which
were there spoken and read, or at least, some of them. And in the same Sermon,
Teach her, says he, the fear of God; and all things will flow in abundantly,
as out of a fountain: and thine house will be replenished with innumerable
good things.

4 By a conscionable and constant care also, for the conversion, and Job non
tantum pro corpore filiotum sollicitus erat, sed plus de a^ima cogitabat. Orig.
lib. ^. in Job.
salvation of their Diligatur proles non vt nascatur tantum, verum etiam vt
renascatur, Nasci^ur enim ad poenam, nisi renascatur ad vitam. August De (...)
and conc^piscentia. lib. 1. cap. 17.
children and servants. Every husband and head of Family is as it were, a
Priest and Pastor in his own Veruntamen charissimi in tanta^ morum
diuersitate, and tam detestabili corruptel^, regite domus vestras, regite
filios vestros, regite familias vestras. Quomodo ad nos pertinet in Ecclesia
loqui vobis, sic ad vos pertinet in domibus vestris agere, vt bonam rationem
redda^is de his qui vobis sunt subd^ti. Aug. in Psalm. 50. p. 596.
house; and therefore, if he take not a course to catechize them, pray with
them, prepare them for the Sacrament, and to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, as the Apostle counsels, Ephe. 6. 4. to restrain them
all he can from lewd courses, ill company, the corruptions of the time: but
suffer them to have their swinge in their youthful rebellions, unhallowing the
Lords Day, Alehouse-hauntings, stubbornness against the Ministry, etc. until
many times they swing in an halter, as they say: Let them then know, that all
those sins they so run into, by such gross neglect and default, are set
upon his score, and he must be exactly countable, and full dearly answer for
them at that great and last Day. Nay let me further tell him that, which will
make his ears to tingle, and heart to tremble, if it be not of Adamant, and
his heartstrings turned into Iron sinnewes: Those his children and servants,
which by his impenitent omissions and inconsionableness in this kind, have
perished in their sins, will curse him for ever hereafter amongst the fiends
in hell. They will follow thee up and down in that euer-burning Lake, with
direful bannings, and hideous outcries; crying out continually: Woe unto vt,
that ever we served such a wicked and wretched master, that had no care of the
salvation of our souls, took no course to save us out of these fiery
torments. Even thine own dear children in this case, will yell in thine
ears, world without end: Woe and alas, that ever we were borne of such
accursed parents, who had not the grace to teach us betime the ways of God; to
keep us from our youthful vanities, and to train us up in the paths of
Godliness! Had they done so, we might have lived in the endless joys of
Heaven; whereas now damned souls, we must lie irrecouerably in these
everlasting flames. Oh, will they say, it was the bloody knife of our own
dear parents unconscionable, and cruel negligence, that all our life long
stuck full deep in our souls, and has now strangled them with everlasting
horror! That this must needs be so, ordinary observation, common experience
does too often confirm. We hear many times many miserable malefactors
bitterly complain at the place of execution, against parents and masters
careless and consciencelesse in this kind; and saying: If they had had care
and conscience to have taught and restrained us betime, we had never come to
this Dogs death, and shameful end. How much more will they cry out against
them with endless yellings, when they shall feel the flames of hell?

II. To the wife.

1. Let her be in subjection to her head.

1. By a reverent and humble persuasion of his precedence and authority over
her, grounded and engraven in her resolution principally: 1. By virtue of
divine ordination, Genesis 3. 16. Ephe. 5. 24. Though 2. The very law of nature,
3. Her husbands headship, 4. Womanly infirmity may also be powerful motives
to this purpose. For if her heart begin to swell, and be lifted up with an
ouerweening conceit of a sufficiency above her sex; so that she grow
discontent, and impatient of contradiction and command, she brings a world of
unnecessary misery and molestation into her own house, and lies in a grand
transgression and grievous sin against the institution and honor of the
marriage-state. It is no Quod si tu nobilissima es, maritus tuus aut
nobilissimus fit per te, aut tu ignobilis per illum.
nobleness of birth greatness of portion, nimblenesse of tongue, pregnancy of
wit, or any other excellency incident to her sex, which can give her any right
or privilege to seize upon the sovereignty, and take the raines into her own
hands. Some servants also may be wiser then their masters: some subjects more
politic then their Prince; but that gives them no warrant; nay, for all that,
it were monstrous and unnatural villainy* for any servant thereupon to
domineere; or private man to rush into a Royal Throne. No sufficiency of
gifts, or singularity of worth must iustle us out of that rank and station,
wherein Gods wise providence and all-seeing wisdom has placed us. A man may
be a superior in power and place, to his superior in parts and personal
endowments. No pretense then or plea on the woman's part, can possibly procure
any dispensation against God and nature, of unwomanly domineering and deposing
her head.

2. By an hearty and cheerful submission: 1. To all his lawful and honest
dictates and directions: For her personal behavior and carriage; that it may
be fashioned and addressed, with an ingenuous and loving acco^modation of her
self to do him all the honor, and give him all the contentment she can
possibly with good conscience: for educating, ordering and disposing her
children, servants, and other domestical affairs (wherein notwithstanding
there are some passages, more proper and native to her sex, in which, except
she be witless, graceless, and strangely weak, it will be very unmanly,
dishonorable and unworthy for him to be too meddling, prying and pragmaticall:)
But above all, for guiding her aright in the sweet and glorious path of
Christianity, that after their nearest, and dearest comfort, and communion in
the best things and spiritual blessings, which only can allay the smart of al
cross accidents, and sweeten the bitterness of a few and evil days in this
vale of tears, they may for ever be crowned together in heaven. 2. To all his
reasonable, and Religious restraints: not only from wicked haunts, and
customs, sinful fashions, and passions^ but in case of inconvenience,
dishonor or just displeasure, for the abridging, or abandoning of her ease,
will, desires, delights, this or that company, conformity to the times in her
attire, etc. For the Spouse, for Christ's sake, sovereignty and love, does deny
her self, her own reason, and wisdom, her natural wit, and wilfulness,
her passions, pleasures, and profits, her ease and liberty, etc. And the wife
is charged by blessed Paul, to be subject to her husband, as the Church is to
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 24. 3. To all his motions, admonitions, counsels, comforts,
reproofs, commands, countermands, even in every thing, only in the Lord. So we
see the (...)* Ephe. 5. 24.
body to rest upon the heads motion, either for rest, or motion. In a word, she
ought like a true looking glass, faithfully to represent and return to her
husbands heart, with a sweet, and pleasing pliablenesse, the exact lineaments
and proportions of all his honest desires, and demands; and that without
discontent, thwarting, or sowrenesse. For her subjection (...). Ephesians. 5. 22.
in this kind should be as to Christ, sincere, hearty and free.

2. Let her be an helper, Genesis 2. 18. and do him good all the days of her
life, at all times, upon all occasions, in all estates; of adversity, or
prosperity; acceptance, or disgrace; sickness, or health; youth, or old age,
etc. and that, with kindness and constancy. A most memorable, Pro. 31. 12.
Lib. 2. De Christiana foem. p. 360.
and famous pattern for this purpose is recorded by Uiues. A young, tender and
beautiful maid was matched (as he reports) to a man stricken in years: whom,
after she found to have a very fulsome and diseased body; yet notwithstanding
out of sense and conscience, as it seems, that now by Gods providence she was
become his wife; she most worthily digested with incredible patience and
contentment, the languishing, and lothsomnesse of an husband continually
visited and vexed with variety and new successions of most irksome and
contagious diseases. And though friends and Physicions advised her by no means
to come near him, for fear of danger and infection; yet for all this, she
passing by, with a loving disdain and contempt, these unkind disswasions,
plied him still night and day with extraordinary tenderness and care; with
obsequiousness and services of all sorts, above her strength and ability, or
possibility, as the Author says: had not her dearest conjugal affection
supplied and supported her weak body, with fresh accessions of vigor and
vnweariednesse. She was to him friends, physicion, husband, Nurse. These are
nothing: She was Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, daughter, every thing, any
thing, to do him good any manner of way. Nay, had there bin one exquisite
quintessence of tenderness, dearness, affectionatenesse, and love collected
and extracted from all these; it would hardly have matched her mercifulness,
and melting affections toward him. In case of want, by reason of extraordinary
expense, and excessive charges about him; she sold her Rings, chains, and
richest attire; she emptied her cupbord of plate, her cabinet of chiefest and
choycest Jewels, to do him good. And when he was dead, and friends came about
her rather to congratulate her happy riddance, then to bewail her widdowhood;
she did not only deprecate and abhor all speeches tending that way: but
protested if it were possible, she would willingly redeem her husbands life,
with the loss of her five dearest children. And though as yet, the flower, and
prime of her beautifullest and best time was not expired; yet she strongly
resolved against a second match, because, said she, I shall not find a second
Ualdaura; (for so her husband was called.) Whence it appears, that this worthy
woman was wedded to her husbands soul; not to his body: no infirmity or
deformity whereof could cool or weaken the manliness, and feruency of her
love. Such choice as this, were the way to make wives never weary of their
husbands. Whereas affections fastened only on a man's outside, are subject to
the tedious misery of inconstancy and change, and torture of many wicked and
impossible wishes, according to the vanity and vexation of its transitory
object. Against which hear the indignation of an ancient Father: Sed horridus
and incultus est. Semel placuit: nunquid vir frequenter est eligendus? comparem
suum and bos requirit, and equus diligit: and si mutetur aliu^* trahere iugum
nescit compar alterius, and se non totum putat: Tu Iugalem repudia^ tuum, and
putas saepe mutandum. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 5. cap. 7.
But thy husband, says he, is grown unhandsome, and homely. He once pleased
thee: would thou ever be choosing an husband? The Ox and the Horse like
their mate: And if the one be changed, the other knows not how to draw; but
wants, as it were, half of himself: But thou refusest thy yoke fellow, and
would often change.

Helpefulnesse to her husband, must be universal; apprehending and improouing
with all readiness and love, all opportunities to do him any good in soul or
body, name, estate, etc. In a special manner she must learn, and labor with
all meekness of Wisdom and patient discretion, to forecast, contriue and
manage, as her more proper and particular charge, household affairs, and
businesses within door, as they say. For which, see a right noble glorious
pattern, Prou. 31. For the pride, vanity, idleness and luxury of these last
times, wherein there is so much hell upon earth; such an impetuous reign and
rage of sin in all sorts, has transported also that sex into many monstrous
degenerations: So that our great women in these days would be very loath to
work after this sample, though set by the holy Ghost himself: Yet heretofore
right Noble Princesses and daughters of mighty Kings, made conscience of a
particular Calling, and disdayned not to put their hands to huswifery. See Genesis
18. 6. And 27. 14. 2. Sam. 13. 8.

But above all, let here be assistant to him in setting up, and forward the
rich and Royal trade of grace; in erecting and establishing Christ's glorious
Kingdom, both in their own hearts, and in their house. This is that one
necessary thing, without which their family is but Satan's seminary, and a
nurcery for hell. And therefore let her be so far from drawing a contrary way
(a cursed villainy of some wicked wives abroad in the world) or
dead-heartednesse this way, which is the grave of all spiritual graces, that,
in case of negligence and slacknesse, she should labor by all wise, modest,
seasonable insinuations, to stir up and quicken her husband to constancy and
seruency in religious exercises of prayer, reading, catechizing, conference,
days of humiliation, and other household holy duties. As the two greater
lights of Heaven do govern this great world with their natural: so let the
husband and wife guide the little world of their family, with the spiritual
light of divine knowledge and discretion. When the Sun is present in our
firmament, the Moon out of a sense, as it were, of a natural reverence to the
fountain of all her beauty and light, does veil her splendour, and retire her
beams. But when he is departed to the other Hemisphaere, she shows her self,
and shines as a Princess amongst the lesser lights. When the husband is at
home, let the wife only, if need be, serve as a loving remembrancer to him, to
keep his turns and times of illightning and informing the ignorant, dark and
earthy hearts of their people. But in his absence comes her course, when her
graces of knowledge and prayer, etc. ought to show forth themselves, and shine
upon them, to preserve them from coldness, and that dreadful curse which
hangs over the head of those that know not God, and shall certainly fall upon
those Families that call not on his Name. See Ierem. 10. 25.

For conclusion of the point, and crowning of the marriagestate with sound and
lasting comfort in the mean time, and with everlasting peace and pleasures at
last: Let man and wife jointly labor to sweeten and sanctify their mutual
carriages, both common and several duties each to other, with often and
constant meeting together in prayer. For persuasion to which practice: Consider
such places as these* (...) Ad coram, coram, in praesentia vxoris suae. Buxto^
fius. Ob vxorem, i. e. ea praesente and vna cum illa. Iunius. For and before
his wife: and so it seems to be some solemn prayer which they made together,
for this matter. Ainsw.
Genesis 25. 21. Loquitur, says Par. De arbitra^ijs, ieiunijs and orationibus,
quae publico Ecclesiae instituto, vel priuato coniugum arbitrio suscipiebantur,
atque suscipi debent ingrue^te calamitate, vel negotio aliquo arduo public aut
priuatim in cumbente.
1. Cor. 7. 5. Alloqui^ur quidem Petrus maritum and vxorem dum iubet concordes
esse, vt simul Deum vno animo precentur. Calu* Maritus and vxor preces quotidie
vn^ debent concipere, ad impetrandum a Deo omnis generis bona.
1. Pet. 3. 7. That precise passage in Simul ad orationem nocte vobis surgendum
est, and coniunctis precibus obsecrandus Deus. De Abraam Patr^archa, cap. 9.
Ambrose: You must both (speaking of married couples) rise in the night to
prayer, and God is to be entreated of you with joint supplications. Continuo
qu^ vtilia sunt doce, sint vobis preces communes. Chrysest. Sermon. 20. in 6. ad
Ephesians.
Continually, says Chrysostom, teach her profitable things, and pray together.

If besides Family-prayers, wherein the more general affairs of the household
are to be commended unto God, man and wife make conscience also of this more
private duty between themselves, wherein many particulars are to be
petitioned, only proper and individual to that near society; I say, if they
set themselves unto it with sincerity of heart, it may be a notable help, and
by Gods blessing prove a sovereign antidote against any root of bitterness,
heartrising, dissension, or discontent betwixt them: (wrath, and illwill
toward any, lurking in the heart, does utterly dampe and empoyson the power
and comfort of prayer, much more toward one tied unto thee with so many dear
and perpetual bonds; so that prayer together will make them leave iarring; or
iarring will make them leave praying) against all immodesties, dishonours, and
defilements of the marriagebed; against want, monstrousness, and miscarriage
of children; against weariness, saciety and light esteem one of another;
against plunging themselves insensibly into the gulf of worldly-mindednesse,
the canker and cutthroate of all grace, comfort, and nobleness of mind, etc.
This private morning and evening sacrifice offered to the Throne of grace, with
heartinesse and life, will spiritualize (that I may so speak) their love, and
renew it daily upon their hearts, with fresh, ardent, and heavenly
embracements. It will marueilously sweeten all reproaches and contumelies cast
upon them for their profession by enuenomed tongues; when they shall come
together in private, and complain unto God, and beg at his merciful hands,
patience, and Christian fortitude to take them, in submission to his will, and
conformity to his Son, as so many crowns of glory to their heads, and of joy
unto their hearts, Acts 5. 41. 1. Pet. 4. 14. Job 31. 36. It will sweetly seal
unto them in the mean time, their assurance of meeting together hereafter in
Heaven: and when the time of sorrow shall come, and stroke of death divorce
them for a time, consciousnesse of their former blessed communion in prayer,
will not only serve as a counterpoyson against all slavish bitterness of
immoderate grief incident to hopeless worldlings: but crown their hearts at
parting, (which is a precious thing) with incomparably more true, inward,
lasting contentment, then if they two had couetously hoarded and heapt
together, all the wealth both of this and the other golden world.

Thus much for our dealing in the world and civil affairs.

V. Now concerning works of mercy, which springing from an heart, melting with
sense of Gods everlasting mercy to it self; quickened with a lively faith in
the Lord Jesus, and shining with saving graces, are an odor of a sweet smell,
a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God, Philippians 4. 18. Hebr. 13. 16.

Conceive first, there be two sorts of them; 1. Spiritual. 2. Corporal.

1. Spiritual, flow from the fountain of truest mercy, and compassion of
greatest tenderness and consequence; even to relieve, repair, and refresh the
poverty, wants and miseries of the soul. 1. By instructing the Ignorant, Prou.
10. 21. and 15. 7. 2. By giving Ecce nec laboras, nec aliquid perdis, das
consilium, and praestitisti elecmosynam. August. in Psalm. 125.
counsel to them that need, or seek it. Exodus 18. 19. etc. Ruth. 3. 1, etc.
3. By reducing the erroneous. Exo. 23. 4. 4. By laboring the conversion of
others. Psalm. 51. 13. Luke 22. 32. 5. By exhorting one another. Heb. 3. 13. 6.
By reproouing the offender. Leuit. 19. 17. 7. By admonishing them that are out
of order. 1. These. 5. 14. 8. By considering one another, to provoke unto love,
and to good works* Hebr. 10. 24. 9. By comforting the heavy heart, and
afflicted spirit. 1. These. 5. 14. 10. By Non solum qui dat esurienti cibum,
sitienti potum, nudo vestitum, perig inanti hospitium, ^ugienti latibulum,
aegro, vel incluso visitationem, captiuo redemp^ionem, debili subuectionem,
caeco deductionem, trist^ consolationem, non sano medicinam, erranti viam,
deliberanti consilium, and quod cuique necessarium est in digenti: verum etiam
and qui dat veniam peccanti, elecmosynam dat: and qui emendat verbere in quem
potestas datur, vel co^^rcet aliqua disciplina, and tamen peccatum eius, quo ab
illo laesus est aut offenius, dimittit ex cord, vel orat vt ei dimittatur, non
solum in eo quod dimittit, atque orat, verumetiam in eo quod corripit, and
aliqua emendatoria poe^a plectit, elecmosynam dat: quia misericordiam praestat.
August. Ench^r. ad Laurent. cap. 72. The Schoolmen comprise some of them in
this verse. -- Consule, Castiga, Solare, Remitte, Fer, O^a. Non solum qui
esurienti, and sitienti, and nudo beneficium largitatis impendit, sed and qui
inimicum diligit, and qui lugenti affectum compassionis* and consolationis in
pa^titur, aut in quib^slibet necessitatibus, alijs confilium adhibet, sine
dubio elecmosynam facit. Isid^r.
forgiving from the heart our brethren their trespasses. Matthew. 18. 35. 11. By
chastising delinquents. Prou. 22. 15. 12. By raising those which are fallen by
infirmity, with much meekness, and tenderness of heart. Gal. 6. 1. 13. By
mutual encouragements against the cruelty and confusions of the times, and in
the way to Heaven. Mal. 3. 16. 14. By supporting, and mercifully making much of
weak Christians. 1. These. 5. 11. 15. By patience toward all men. 1. These. 5.
14. 16. By praying one for another. Iam. 5. 16.

2. Corporal, spring from a compassionate heart, and fellow-feeling affection,
yerning over the temporal wants and necessities of our brethren; whereby we
are stirred up, as occasion is offered, according to our ability, to succor
and support their outward extremities and distresses: To feed the Hungry: To
give drink to the Thirsty: To clothe the Naked: to entertain the Stranger: To
visit the sick: To go to those that are in Prison. Math. 25. 35. To put to an
helping hand for raising our Brethren fallen into decay. Visito, Poto, Cibo,
Redimo, Tego, Colligo, Condo.
Leuit. 25. 35. To lend, hoping for nothing again, etc. Luke 6. 35.

Thus Christians ought to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate in all
kinds to the outward necessities also: 1. First; Of those of the household of
faith, the principal and most moving object to draw bounty from a truly
charitable heart. Gal. 6. 10. 2. In the next place; Of the lame: the blind, the
sick, the aged, the trembling hand, or any that God has made poor. 3.
Thirdly; Of any Pasce fame morientem, si non pauisti, occidi^i. Ambros. Qui
indigenti etiam peccat^ri, panem suum, non quia peccator, sed quia homo est,
tribuit: nimirum, non peceatorem, sed iustum pauperem nutrit: quia in illo non
culpa^, sed natural diligit. Greg. lib. pastoral. admonit. 21.
whosoever, in a case of true necessity and extremity, whatsoever the party
has bin before: For there thou relieuest not his notoriousnesse, but his
nature: though thou abhor the man for his former villainy; yet upon point of
perishing, do good unto the common state of humanity.

Now of these two kinds; Si in cellario, vel horreo non habes quod dare
possis, de the fauro cordis tui potes proferre, quod tribuas, and elecmosyna
cordis multo mayor quam elecmosyna corporis. August* Tom. 10 l. Hom. 50. Hom.
6. page 544. Melius est animam semper victuram verbo vitae reficere, qua^
ventrem moriturae ^arnis terreno pane satiare. Gregor.
Fathers, Aquina^ 22 ^. q. 32. art. 3. Durand. in 4. sentent. q. 7. etc.
Schoolmen, Casuists, all concur, and conclude, that spiritual alms In
aliquo particulari casu, quaedam corporalis elecmosyna alicui spirituali
praefertur, puta magis pascendus fame moriens, quam docendus: quamuis docere
simpliciter sit melius quam pascere.
caeteris paribus, as they say, are more excellent and acceptable then
corporal. Because, 1. The gift is more noble in its own nature. 2. The object
more illustrious; Man's immortal soul. 3. The manner transcendent, being
spiritual. 4. The charity more heavenly, which aims at our brothers endless
salvation.

Let then every Christian conscionably and constantly endeavor to improoue to
the utmost upon all occasions, and seasonable offers; all his spiritual
abilities, heavenly endowments, illuminations of learning, moral wisdom,
providence, discretion, etc. all his skill in the Mystery of Christ; Word, and
ways of God; all his experience in temptations, cases of conscience,
spiritual distempers; his spirit of counsel, comfort, courage, or what other
gift or grace soever he is illightened, and endowed with; to relieve and
refresh every way the souls, to procure and promote by all means, the
eternal salvation of others.

Let the saving light of thy divine knowledge, spiritual wisdom, heavenly
understanding, or what other excellencies, and perfections of the mind shining
in thy soul; resemble in all fruitful improouement, and free communicating it
self, that bountiful light in the body of the Sunne^ That 1. first
illighteneth that goodly Creature wherein i^ originally dwells, and makes it the
fairest and beautifulle^ thing in the world. 2. Next, it illuminates, and
beautifi^ all the Orbs, and heavenly bodies about it. 3. Thirdly, b^ the
proiection of his beams, it begets all the beauty, glory, sweetness, we have
here below on the earth. 4. Fourthly, it insinuates into every chinke and crany
of the earth, and concurres to the making of those precious metals, which lie
in her bowels. 5. Fifthly, his beams glide by the sides of the earth, and
illighten even the opposite part of Heaven, with all those glorious Stars we
see shining in the night. 6. Sixthly, it is so communicatiue, and greedy of
doing good in its kind, that it strikes through the firmament in the
transparent parts, and seeks to bestow its brightness and beauty, even beyond
the Heavens; and never restraines the free communication of its influence and
glory, until it determine by natural and necessary expiration. Even so
proportionably, let the fruitful light of thy divine knowledge, and heavenly
counsel especially, be still working, shining, spreading to do all possible
good. 1. Let it, First, make thine own soul all glorious within, fairly
enlighten it with an humble reflection of selfe-knowledge, with purity, peace,
and spiritual prudence, to guide constantly thine own feet, with all
uprightness and patience, in the path that is called holy. 2. Secondly, Let it
shine upon thy family, and those that are next about thee, with all seasonable
instructions in conuincing them of the truth, and goodness of the Quaeso mi
frater, quaeso, omnibus tibi subiectis in domo tua, a maiore vsque ad minimum,
amorem and dulcedinem regni coelestis, amaritudinem, and timorem gehennae
annuncies, and de eorum salute sollic^tus, ac p^ruigil existas: quia pro
omnibus tibi subiectis, qui in domo tua sunt, rationem domino reddes* Annuncia,
praecipe, impera, suade eis, vt caueant se a superbia, a detractione, ab
ebrietate, a fornicatione, a luxuria, ab ira, a periurio, a cupiditate quae est
radix omnium malorum. August. Tom. 4. par. 2. de salutaribus documentis. page
541.
ways of God, either for their conversion, or inexcusablenesse. 3. Thirdly,
let it be spent and employed upon thy neighbors, kindred, friends,
acquaintance, visitants of all sorts, when they come toward thee; to warm
their hearts all thou can, with heavenly talk, and to win their loves to
the life of grace. 4. Fourthly, let it insinuate also amongst strangers, and
into other companies, upon which any warrantable Calling shall cast thee: and
intimate unto them, especially if it find acceptance, and entertainment: That
one thing is necessary: That all impenitents shall be certainly damned: That
upon this moment depends eternity, etc. 5. Nay, let it offer it self with
all meekness of wisdom, and patient discretion, even to opposites: and
labor to conquer, if it be possible, the contrary minded; if their
scornful carriage, and furious visible hate against the mystery of Christ,
has not set a brand of Dogs and Swine upon them. 6. Lastly, when upon all
occasions, in all companies, by all means, it has done all the good it can,
yet let it still retain that constant property of all Heavenly Graces, an
edge, and eagerness to do more good still, and rather want matter and means,
then readiness and resolution to propagate it self. And this way now may the
poorest Christians be plentiful in works of mercy, and enrich the richest
with spiritual alms. Which in the mean time may comfort the bountiful
hearts of those who are true of heart; to whom the Lord out of his best
wisdom, has denied this earthly dross. But yet for all this, I would have
you know, that I know none, not the poorest, excepted or exempted from
seasonable ministering to the corporal necessities also of their brethren. We
have a Precept from blessed Paul, Ephe. 4. 28. 2. Cor. 8. 2.
That we must work with our own hands, that we may have to give to him that
needs. And a noble president in the poor Widow, Mark. 12. 44. who cast her
two mites into the Treasury, which was all she had, even all her living. And
if any here make a counterplea of their poverty, I would know if there be
any so poor, which is not able to give Fac aliquem non habere vel duos nummos;
est aliquid vilius, quod seminemus, vt metamus illam messem? Est. Calicem aquae
frigidae, qui dederit discipulo, non perdet mercedem suam. Calix aquae frigidae
non duobus nummis, sed gratis constat -- Non sine causa, addidit frigidae, ne
quis vel inde causaretur, quod lignum non habuerit, vnde caiefaceret aquam.
August. in Psalm. 225. p 722. Dominus non copia largitatis, sed be neuolentia,
and deuotione largientis delectatur and pascitur: vt autem nullus pauper ab
cieemosyna se excusare possit, ipse Dominus pro calice aquae frigidae se
mercedem esse redditurum promisit. Aug. Tom. 9. de rectitudine Catholicae
conuer sationis. page 1453.
a cup of cold water only; and yet this from a sincere heart, shall be both
graciously accepted, and certainly rewarded, Matthew. 10. 42.

And therefore in a second place, I infinitely desire and entreat, (and this
is that which in this point I would specially press and persuade with deepest
impression) that every one which has given his name unto Christ, rich or
poor, according to his power and proportion, would with singular care and
conscience address himself to a fruitful, affectionate, and constant
discharge of this much honored duty of almes-giuing in this kind also,
properly so called.

1. For we are bound to abound in this grace also. Therefore says Paul, 2.
Cor. 8. 7. ( As ye abound in every thing, in faith, etc.) see that you abound
in this grace also. There is no religious Professor of any reputation, upon
good ground with the Church of God, but takes to heart, and desires to be
exact in all commanded Christian duties every day, as Prayer, reading
Scriptures, etc. Upon thy secret then, and solitary reuise and survey of the
day past, call thy self to a strict account; as for others so concerning this
duty also, of doing good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the
household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. (for the discharge of this duty ought also to
be daily; if thy ability will bear, and the necessities of the poor shall
require: In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy
hand. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, Eccles. 11. 6, 2.) and let
the sense and consciousnesse of any omission, neglect, or sloth in performing
it, wound thy conscience also, humble thy soul, and quicken thine heart, with
new life of resolution, and more lively endeavor to mend every morning; and
perfume, as it were, thine every days walking with God, and this sweet
smelling sacrifice also of mercifulness, bounty, and love, Phil. 4. 18. Let
this duty likewise with the rest, fall within the compass^ of thy seuerest
search; penitent melting, renewed vows, in all thy more solemn
selfe-examinations before the Sabbath, Sacraments, upon days of humiliation,
etc. It is a profitable consideration, to think that a customary gross
neglect of any one Christian duty, in its season, of which the conscience is,
or may be convinced, may justly dampe and dead the lightsome and fruitful
performance of all the rest. For example: A willing known omission of private
Prayer, or set reading the Word every day, may intercept and restrain the
sweet influence of Gods woonted refreshing mercy, and the fructifying beams of
his pleased countenance from thine heart, in the use of all the other
ordinances: an affected idleness, and dis-imployment of any one grace in the
soul, when seasonable occasion calls for improouement, may blast the
comfortable exercise and sensible comfort of all the rest. For example: If thou
suffer thy patience ordinarily to sleep, when thy disauowed passions begin to
break in upon thee like a torrent, and heat thine heart with their swelling
poison; or when some cross does nettle thy desire of ease; no marvel though
thou find a faintness also to seize upon thy faith, brotherly kindness,
love, zeal, joy, and peace in believing, etc. Why then, when thou feel
thine inward man to begin to languish, and the whole body of Christianity, to
grow, as it were, toward a consumption; amongst other inquisitions, why do
thou not also fear out of a godly jealousy, and labor to find out, whether
the coldness of thy charity, and too much neglect of releeuing the poor
members of Jesus Christ, may occasion thy spiritual dampe? It is the duty and
property of every true-hearted Nathaneel, as to have respect to all Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. so, though they cannot in perfection and height,
yet with truth and sincere endeavor, to have respect to a conscionable use of
all the ordinances; to the performance of all holy duties, and exercise of all
spiritual graces in their due seasons.

2. If the world has locked up thine heart, and congealed the bowels of thy
compassions toward the poor; let the blaze of thine outward profession shine
never so fair, As I heartily love the amiable face of tru^ holiness, so I
infinitely abhor the mere vizor and counterfeit of it.
manage the heartlesse representations of external holiness never so
demurely; keep the times and taskes of daily duties with never so great
austeritie; nay, though thou be able to amuse weaker Christians with some
affected strains, and artificial feruency in Prayer (for by the mere power,
or rather poison of hypocrisy and vaineglory, a man may pray sometimes to the
admiration of others, especially less judicious, having cunningly collected
the most moving passages for that purpose, from the best-gifted in that kind,
and then giving an enforced action and life unto them in the delivery, as some
in other cases act other men's inventions to the life.) I say, for all this, if
the holy heat of brotherly love does not warm thine heart, and upon occasion
work affectionately and effectually, I dare say, thou art rotten at the
heart-roote, there is no true love of God in thee, no grace, no hope of
salvation. Let that terrible and flaming place against all covetous Pharisees,
1. Ioh. 3. 17. dissolve thy frozen-heartednesse this way, and enlarge the
bowels of pity toward the poor brethren of Christ Jesus, or else never look
hereafter to look him in the face with comfort, or to find mercy at that Day.
Mark it well, and meditate upon it: Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his
brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him?

3. But above all other motives of mercifulness to the poor, which in the
Book of God are very many, and most quickening; methinkes that argument which
Paul presses to this purpose, 2. Cor. 8. 9. should melt the most flinty heart:
For ye know, says he, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be rich. Shall the only dear innocent Son of the All-powerfull and
euerblessed Lord, and King of heaven and earth, dis enrich, as it (...).
were, and disrobe his heavenly Highness of that Royalty and Majesty above,
and become so poor, that whereas the Matthew. 8. 20.
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; yet He not where to
lay his head: that through his poverty, and pouring out his hearts blood, he
might crown us with the inestimable riches of heavenly glory; with joys and
pleasures more then the stars of the firmament, even for ever and ever; and
shall not we Worms and wretches, most unworthy the least bit of bread we put
into our mouths, part with our superfluities, sometimes, both in respect of
the necessity of nature, and exigencie of estate, as the Schoolmen speak, to
relieve the fainting soul of him for whom Christ died, and which he would take
as done unto himself, Matthew. 25. 40. were it but a cup of cold water only?
Mar. 9. 41. Monstrous unthankful cruelty! mercilesnesse, meriting without Gods
singular mercy, and turning merciful our selves, the fiercest flame in the
dungeon of fire and brimstone.

4. The last and everlasting doom, at that great and dreadful Day, must pass
upon us according to our carriage in this kind. Then shall there be a severe*
and sincere search and inquiry made after Cur vero non iuxta fidem si^
pronuntiaturus aperta causa est: quoniam iustae sententiae suae in vtrosque tam
oues, quam haedos, non occulta (cuiusmodi sunt fides, vel infidelitas) sed
conspicua testimonia allegabit vt omne os obtu^etur. Matthew. 25. 34.
works, as the signs, evidences, and outward demonstrations of faith, and the
root of grace in the heart: or of unbelief and rottenness at the heartroote;
and consequently, as arguments of a righteous doom passed upon the Sheep and
Goats. That glorious sentence of absolution; Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: (which
sounds out nothing but pleasures, joys, delights, glories, beauties,
felicities, crowns, kingdoms, Angelical entertainments, beatificall-visions,
spiritual rauishments, highest perfections, unutterable exultations of spirit,
sweetest varieties, eternities) shall be pronounced upon the godly, according
to the effects and fruits of their faith, to teach us in the mean time, what
faith to trust unto, and rest upon for justification; even that which works by
love: and at that day, to let all the world see, Angels, men and devils, that
the kingdom of Heaven is given only to true-hearted Nathaneels, honest
Professors, working believers. Now in the text for this purpose, there is
singled out with special choice, an eminent Synechdochicall instance, in one of
the worthiest effects of faith, and noblest fruit of grace; even the point I
now press, and labor to persuade: an open-hearted, real, fruitful bounty
and love to Gods people, and distressed members of Christ Jesus, for Christ's
and their goodness ^th. 25. 40.
sake. But that other doom of damnation, Depart from me Matthew. 25. 41.
you cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels;
which breathes out nothing but fire and brimstone, stings and horrors, woe,
and alas, flames of wrath, and the Worm that never dies; trembling, and
gnashing of teeth; seas of vengeance, torments without end, and past
imagination; shall pass upon the reprobates, for omission Verse 22.
and neglect of this noble duty. For mercilesnesse to the poor members of
Christ, unkindness to Christians, hardheartednesse toward the household of
faith, is one of the ranckest bitterest weeds, which grows out of a graceless
heart; a clear pregnant evidence, that all was naught; and a notable
remembrancer, as it were, to that high and everlasting Judge, that his blessed
Spirit never dwelt there. How deeply then does it concern every Christian to
practice, and ply upon all opportunities, that most gainefull art of
almesgiuing, Eleemosyna, ars omnium artium quaestuosissima. Chrysostom. ad popul.
Antioch. Hom. 33.
which shall be so highly honored at that great Day, before that glorious
universal presence; when every merciless man shall cry to that Rock, this
mountain, to fall upon him, and hide him from the wrath of that just God;
which will flame vnquenchably and everlastingly against all those, who in this
life have shut up their bowels of pity against His poor; and been dogged
toward the dearly beloved of Ierem. 12. 7.
his Soul.

I know, De iustific. lib. ^. cap. 3. art. Tertium argumentum.]
Bellarmine labors to empoyson this last passage with his false gloss, and
Popish sophistry.

The causall conjunction For, Matthew. 25. 35. as he there cauils, intimates and
implies works meritoriousnesse.

I say no. For, is there a Note of consequence and order: not of the cause, or
any Enim] non designat causam efficientem, vel meritoriam Regni, sed argumentum
notorium iustae sententiae: quod hi vere sint benedicti ab aeterno scripti
haeredes Regni, id est, ex electorum fidelium numero: quia operibus externis se
tales probauerint. Immo ipsi benedicti negabunt se operibus suis promeritos
Regnum, quoniam merita sua d^ Christo nesci^nt, non agnoscent. Quando vidimus
Tc, etc?
meritorious causality. The causall conjunction in Grammar does indeed serve to
show the reason of a former sentence: but it does not necessarily show a reason
from the cause of a thing: but many times also from the effect, and other kind
of arguments. And Logic also reaches, that there be diverse kinds of causes;
principal, and less principal, etc.

Bellarmine replies: Does not Christ there speak in the same manner, of the
rewards of the godly, and of the punishments of the wicked? But no man can say,
that in these words, Go ye cursed, etc. that the cause is not rendered; but
only the order and consequence employed: For the wages of sin is death, Romans
6. 23.

I answer: By the like fallacy also do the Popish Impostors plead for
Justification by Works: Evil works damn, therefore good works save. Most
falsely: as appears by that rule in the Topics: Non valet con sequentia, cum
non est perfecta contrarietas.
The consequence is of no validity, where there is not a perfect contrariety.
Now between good and evil works, there is no perfect contrariety: Mala
opera, seu mali malarum arborum fructus, damnationem ex se merentur; bona autem
bonorum opera, imperfecta cum sint, and ex mixtis principijs, carne sc. and
spiritu orta: non eandem respectu salutis, quam mala respectu damnationis
causam, immo nullam prorsus habere possunt, ac proinde vt signa, and
testimonia, non vt causae salutis sunt spectanda. Mala habent perfectam
malitiam, quae est (...), and vnum peccatum ad mortem promerendum satis est.
Ezekiel. 18. 4. I am. 2. 10. Bona sunt imperfecte bona, ^ec si perfecto bona
es^ent, me^ita vitae aeternae essent, quia omnia sunt debita. Luke 17. 10.
for evil works are perfectly evil against the Law of God: but good works
are not perfectly good according to the Law of God. By the same reason neither
does it follow: Eternal death is the wages of sin: therefore eternal life
is the wages of good works.

5. If thou lay out to the poor Deuteronomy. 15. 10. 2. Cor. 9. 7.
cheerfully, Prou. 3. ^7, 28.
seasonably, 2. Cor 9. 6. Prou. 11. 25.
liberally, and yet but according to thy 2. Cor. 8. 13, 14. Act. 11. 29.
ability; thou shall become (which besides the only course of growing
comfortably rich, is also a Crown of infinite honor) Creditor even to thy
Creator. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and that
which he has given, will he pay him again, Prou. 19. 17. And in the mean
time for repayment in due time, thou have security infinitely above all
exception, a Bill under his own hand, even his own blessed Book; wherein to
fail, were to forfeit his Deity, if I may so speak, which is prodigious
blasphemy to imagine. Now what a keen spur, and inflaming motive is this to
be merciful: that we shall make God himself our Debtor, the ever springing
Fountain of Bliss, and Lord of all goodness who does all things like
himself; omnipotently, bountifully, above all expectation, as becomes the
mighty Sovereign of Heaven and Earth? If he work, he makes a world: If he be
angry, he drownes the whole face of the Earth: If he love, the hearts-blood of
his dearest Son is not too dear: If he stand upon his peoples fide, he makes
the Sun to stand still, and the Stars to fight: If he repay, he gives his
own All-sufficient Self, with the ouerflowing torrents of al pleasures and
glory through all eternity.

6. Nay, the way to thrive and fare well in the World, if our most wise God
think it fi^, is to be compassionate this way. If thou draw out thy soul to
the hungry, says the Prophet, and satisfy the afflicted soul: then shall thy
light rise in Isa. 58. 10. 8. 11.
obscurity, and break forth as the morning, and thy darkness be as the
noonday: and thy health shall spring forth speedily: the Lord shall guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and
thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters
fail not. Thine horn Psalm. 111. 9. Prou. 28. 27.
shall be exalted with honor, and thou shall not want. It will be then a
profitable Inquisition amongst others; when a man finds himself to go
backward in his estate, Gods secret displeasure to blow upon his wealth, or
afflict his body with painful diseases, etc. to examine well, whether he was
1. Ioh. 3. 17.
not ordinarily wont rather to shut up his bowels of compassion, then to power
out his soul to the poor.

In a third place, take notice of the order of those objects, upon which thy
Christian love is regularly and seasonably to be directed, and thy works of
mercy discharged. The Catalogue of them runs thus, as I conceive.

The public State wherein thou live, and whereof thou art a member,
challenges the first place and precedencie: If it lived a natural life, as
thou do, and thou had but one morsel of bread, which would only
sustain the life of one of you; thou were to perish, that it might flourish:
for it is ever better, that one member should be cut off, then the whole body
consumed. This order hold^ cae^eris paribus, as they say, when other things are
alike. When they be like in poverty: else we must relieve our enemies in
extreme necessity, before our own parents in ordinary want: l^ke in piety,
else we must help holy men being sarther off, before these who hate to be
reformed, though nearer unto us: like in mutual relations and obligations one
unto another; else we must preserre a truly religious brother, before a more
religious stranger; a kinsman, neighbor, and benefactor, before either a
kinsman, or neighbor, or a benefactor alone.
In the next place stands thy self; then thy wife; then thy parents; then thy
children and family; then the Plus debemus diligere extraneos, qui nobis sunt
comuncti vinculo charitatis Christi; quam propinquos, qui Deum non diligunt,
nec Deo seruiunt. Quare? Quia sanctior est copula cordium quam corporum. Bern.
lib. De modo beneviuen. Sermon. 5.
household of faith; then thy natural kindred sprung lately from the same
progenitors; then thy nearest neighbors and common friends; then thy
countrymen; then strangers; then thine enemies. For as thou would be holden
a child of the Highest, Luke 6. 35. thou must love thine enemies, and relieve
them too, Prou. 25. 21. Romans 12. 20. And because our naughty hearts do
naturally rise, and swell against them with much enraged anger, disdain and
contempt: ponder seriously upon these points, as counterpoysons to keep out
these foul fiends, and preserve thine affections ever calm and unstained this
way, and in an holy charitable temper and disposition to do them good.

1. First, he that becomes a bloody goad in thy side for thy blessed
profession, and because thou followest goodness, is stark mad, and utterly
besides himself in matter of salvation. He is as a dead man without all sense
of spiritual selfemurder: now it is extreme weakness, to even thy wit (as
they say) with a Bedlam; and barbarous inhumanitie, to wreake thy spite upon
the dead, and basely to vex a liuelesse carcass with brauing insultations.

2. Thou should most wilfully forsake thine own mercy, and judge thy self
more then infinitely unworthy of everlasting life, of any part or portion in
the rich, glorious, eternal purchases of His meritorious death; if thou
could not frankely forgive the greatest wrong of thy greatest enemy upon
this ground only; because Jesus Christ has freely powered out the dearest and
warmest blood in his heart, to purchase for thee a worm, and wretch, and while
thou wast yet his desperate enemy, pardon and salvation from the endless woes,
and damnations of Hell.

3. Thirdly, the merciful patience of God himself in forbearing and bearing
with infinite wrongs, and dishonours done unto his great Majesty every day,
may be a matchless pattern and precedent to us woeful sinners, and worse then
nothing, easily to pardon, and patiently to pass by all the prouocations of
our fellow creatures. How many blasphemous mouths are continually open against
the Majesty of Heaven? With what damned oaths do they tear and recrucifie
the precious body of his glorified Son, that fits at his own right hand?
With what monstrous lies, and hateful slanders do they disgrace his
Ambassadors, and vilify his chosen? Nay, where shall you find one of those,
who have sincerely given their names unto Christ, whose neglected innocence is
not trampled upon with the feet of pride and contempt; and whose guiltless
fame lies not bleeding under the merciless strokes of intemperate tongues? How
many sons and daughters of Belial do horribly, and with an high hand
profane his Sabbaths, pollute his Sacraments, and turn their backs upon his
Word? How many every Vtres, vel lagenas rectius hos dixeris, aut certe tubas,
vel potius cloacas, quam homines.
where turn themselves into barrels and beasts, even into sincks; nay, and
sometimes into Sodomites, Hab. 2. 15. by their swinish drunkenness? How many
enclosing Nimrods, and Machiauellian Landlords, grind the faces of the poor,
pluck off their skins, tear their flesh, break their bones, chop them in
pieces as for the pot, and eat the flesh of Gods people? In a word: How many
incarnate devils walk up and down the Earth with hearts and hands as full as
Hell, with all manner of mischief, lewdness and rebellion? And yet we see in
the mean time, our gracious God bears patiently with these many and
prodigious prouocations. Though he be armed with his own irresistable
omnipotency; have ever in a readiness all the Angels of Heaven, all the
creatures upon Earth, all the Devils in Hell; nay, the very hands and
consciences of such stubborn Rebels, to be the instruments and executioners of
his just wrath upon their sin: yet does he sweetly and fairly temper, and
moderate his indignation, to see if the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, and long-suffering, will lead them to repentance. If Almighty God
then, whose Majesty, blessed and glorious for ever, is chiefly wrongged, even
by thy Ille qui tibi iniuriatur, magis iniuriatur Deo quam tibi, qui hoc ei
prohibuit. Si ergo Deus differt vindicare iniuriam, and non est ei dedecus, nec
erit tibi. Peral.
wrongs also, whose mildness and mercy is most shamefully abused with the
horrible ingratitude, and intolerable contempt of such as hate to be reformed,
be so wonderfully patient; be not thou perverse: but rather heap coals of
fire upon thine enemies head by kindness and love, that thou may be the
charitable child of thy Father which is in Heaven; who suffers his rain to
fall as well upon heaths and weeds, as upon flowers and fruit trees.

4. By harboring heart-burning and angry thoughts in thy breast against those
thou art tempted to hate; thou woefully hardenest thine own heart, which is an
invaluable hurt, and depriuest thy self all the while thou art so dogged, of
the blessing, benefit and comfort of all the ordinances; not only of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as ignorant people suppose, but also of Prayer,
hearing the Word, singing of Psalms, conference, etc. 1. Tim. 2. 8. Matthew. 5.
23, 24. Iam. 1. 20. Now what extreme madness is it, and Bedlam cruelty to
thine own soul, by cherishing and keeping warm in thy bosom, such a base
dunghill Viper, as reuengefull spite, to cast the whole Frame of thy spiritual
building into combustion, and to make God thine enemy, whereby thou hurtest thy
Quod malitia tua alteri non noceat, fieri potest: quod autem tibi non noceat,
fieri non potest.
self incomparably more, then thou can ever possibly harm thine opposite?

5. A great deal of spiritual good Omnis malus aut ideo viuit, vt corrigatur,
aut ideo viuit, vt per illum bonus exerceatur. Aug. in Psalm. 54. page 631.
Detractores sunt spinae viam inferni obstruentes viris sanctis. Ipsi etiam
depascunt segetes Domini, ne in paleas luxurient* and pauca grana habeant. Ipsi
sunt limae a vasis gloriae rubiginem auferentes. A filiis Dei, quasi quodam
rasorio, peccatum elationis eradunt. Vnde Gregor. Idcirco laxat Dominus linguas
detractorum in Electos, vt si quid in eis elationis surrexerit, lingua
detractoris eradat. Per. Omnes mali, and amatores mundi, quasi torcularia sunt.
Sic enim in torcularibus, and Vua premitur, and Oliua, vt vinum and oleum
reponatur in cauea: ita per nequitiam malorum hominum, qui boni and iusti sunt,
multis tribulationibus fatigantur, vt animae eorum tanquam oleum and vinum,
etc. Aug. tom. 10. page 552 -- Considera, quod illi, qui te persequuntur, apud
Deum velut molae, ac torcularia deputantur: Tu vero quasi Oliua, and quasi Vua
legitima paruo tempore pressuram malorum hominum sustinere cogeris. Ibid.
does by accident accrue to the Christian, by the malice of his enemies. The
raging and railing enemies of Gods people, serve as scullions to scowre the
Lords Vessels of Honor; as Shepherds Dogs to hunt Christ's Sheep into order,
and to purer pastures. 1. Their narrow watching over his ways to take him
tripping, and prying into all passages of his life, upon purpose to disgrace
his profession, should make him walk more precisely; and to hold a continual
counter-watch over all his courses, that he give no just cause of offense, or
any true matter of cavil or calumniation. Whence it is, that David prays,
Psa. 27. 11. Lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies, or those which
observe me. 2. Their hitting him in the teeth with the reproach of his former
sins, should serve as a remembrancer unto him, to reuise and renew more
effectually and feelingly the great work of his first repentance; and to open
afresh a fountain of penitent tears, or at least of new grief, he can
grieve no more, for those particular sins, which any dogged Shimei, or
slanderous Doeg brings into his mind upon such occasion. For it is the wont of
ignorant enemies to Gods holy ways, to charge upon his children, even with
much bitterness and insultation, the faults and follies of their unregenerate
time. Though God Almighty has buried them for ever in his mercy; yet they will
never suffer them to dye out of their malice. Though the blood of Christ has
covered them everlastingly from the sight of God, and search of Satan; yet
their base and dunghill spite will ever and anon rake into them again to their
disgrace. Thus were Austin and Beza, two great Lights of the Church in their
times; and so are many other modern Worthies and Champions of Christ, daily
dealt with. In which case learned Austin sweetly replied to the Donatists
vpbraiding him in such an unworthy fashion, with the impiety and impuritie of
his former life: Look, said he, how much they blame my fault, so much I
commend and praise my Physicion. And blessed Beza, to a fellow obiecting unto
him his youthful Poems; This Hic homo inuidet mihi gratiam Christi.
man vexes himself, because Christ has vouchsafed me his Grace. And King
David, with whom I should have begun; when Shimei rayled upon him, and called
him murderer; Let him alone, and let him curse: for the Lord has bidden him.
2. Sam. 16. 11.
And yet besides this, I doubt not, but upon these occasions, David's heart bled
afresh for his bloody sin; Augustines, for his former heresy and
sensuality; Bezaes, for the vanity of his youth. 3. Their blazing abroad some
special visible scandalous infirmity of his, and yet to which he is haled,
and as it were hurried by the impetuousnesse of some sudden passion, or violent
temptation, and which is one of his greatest griefs, and much matter of
mourning in secret, should cause him to strengthen his watch, and improoue all
his spiritual valor against the assaults and insinuations of it. 4. Their
malicious fathering upon him by false reports, those faults he yet never fell
into, and yet to which he may be naturally much inclinable, should furnish
him with more then ordinary care and courage, wisdom and watchfulness, to
prevent the scandal of any such guiltiness. 5. Their slanderous laying to his
charge, the things he never did, nor ever like to do; which is also an
hellish humor, and deuilish trick of profaneness against profession, should
lead him to a strict inquiry into his heart and life, to find out some other
sin, of which, upon that occasion, God would have him take notice, and
mortify. It may be, thou art falsely charged with hypocrisy; look that thou
be not earthly-minded; with pride, look that thou be not passionate; with
worldliness, look that thou be not lukewarm, etc.

Thus have I somewhat enlightened, and insisted longer upon this point,
purposely to stir up and quicken the spirits of all Gods people, to a
fruitful constant exercise of Christian charity, and bounty toward their
poor brethren: to be as well plentiful in works of mercy, as precise in
duties of piety: (God loves mercy as well as sacrifice; nay, in some cases, he
preferres the other before this) to be so much more mindful and apprehensiue
of all opportunities, for a sincere discharge of this much urged and honored
duty; as the wicked are malicious, and Pharisees forward, to charge upon them
the contrary.

For you know, that carnal men are extremely greedy of casting aspersions and
disgraces upon the innocence of religious Professors. No excellency of
parts, singularity of worth, eminency of zeal, height of holiness,
integrity and purity of life, can possibly privilege the best man that ever
breathed the life of grace in the bosom of the Church; from the scourge of
tongues. The only Worthies upon earth, Heb. 11. 36, 38.
of whom the world was not worthy, were vexed with cruel mockings: Paul, that
precious Pillar of Gods Church, was Acts 24. ^. Ioh. 7. 20.
called, A pestilent fellow: nay, Christ Jesus himself, in whom the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt bodily, was said to have a Devil. And no marvel though
they deal thus with his Children, that daily blaspheme the mighty Lord of
heaven and earth, blessed for ever. Daily experience tracts Quid mirum si
homines seruis Dei detrahunt, and qui eorum vitam peruertere non possunt, famam
dedecorare conantur, cum ipsum Deum, and Dominum little quotidie blasphemare non
cessant, cum eis displicet quicquid contra ^oru^ voluntatem iusto, and occulto
iudicio facit * Aug. Ep* 136.
them in five pestilent passages this way: It is their wont, with all their
cunning, and upon all occasions, 1. To lessen, disgrace, and disparage all they
can, the graces, worth, and good parts of good men. 2. To report true things
maliciously, and upon purpose to bring them into hatred and disestimation; so
Doeg dealt with David. 3. To charge upon them, with much credulity and
confidence, things they never did, never knew, never thought upon, or dreamed
upon. 4. With whorish foreheads, and very impudency of hell, to fasten upon
them by slanderous imputation, those sins and vices, in the contrary graces
and virtues whereof, they are many times very eminent and remarkable. Elijah
was 1. Reg. 18. 17.
slandered to be a troubler of the State; whereas in truth, he was the
strongest Pillar of the kingdom, the very chariots 2. Reg. 2. 1^.
and horsemen of Israel. 5. Nay, and which is yet more, to father upon them
those faults, wherein themselves, hateful hypocrites! are grossly and
notoriously guilty. Tertullus tells (...)
Felix, that Paul was a very plague: for so is the Original: whereas not only
Paul was one of the best men upon earth: but also himself, a cursed cutthroate
of all goodness, and furious opposite to the glorious Gospel. His lewd
Mistress charged Joseph with an assault upon her chastity; whereas not only
he was most free that way, but also her self notoriously naught. Ahab called
Elijah, a troubler of Israel, whereas not only that blessed Prophet was the
very strength of that State; but also himself, by his abominable covetous
Idolatrous villainies, brought confusion and misery upon the whole kingdom.

Now out of this cunning malicious humor, carnal men lie at the catch, and
are most eager to apprehend any shadow of occasion, or rather then fail, to
make matter in their own spiteful brains, or take it up from the lying
oracle of some frothy Ale-bench; whereby to stain the honor of Profession,
with the unworthiest imputations of covetousness, hard-heartednesse,
unmercifulness; whereas themselves, mere men of this world, are as covetous
as the skin will hold; fast nailed and glued unto the earth; never in their
life lift up a joyful thought toward heaven, neither dare think seriously
upon the world to come, without a great deal of slavish sadness and secret
terror. And in their grasping of worldly goods, they care not a button for
conscience, make no account at all of that most certain strict account at Gods
dreadful Tribunal: but only how to carry matters smoothly and plausibly in
the eyes of men, and dawbe over their unjust dealings, with close conueyances,
and tricks of wit.

I go not about here to Apologize for any uncharitable counterfeits, or those
most odious outside-Christians, who put on the glory of an Angel in outward
profession, that they may play the devils more vnobseruedly, in Usurious
practices, oppressions, and unconscionable griping; wear a cloak of zeal, in
conformity to the external forms of obedience to the first Table, upon
purpose to cover their cruelty and inhumanitie, in undermining and
ouer-reaching their brethren, and to prey the more inuisibly upon the
simplicity of those whom they deceive by Seeming.

But yet I must tell you, that many times, even some of Gods own best Children
are full falsely and foully charged, by foule-mouthed worldlings themselves, with
worldliness, covetousness, and imputations of that nature; who by Gods mercy,
are so far from doting upon earth, and the fading glory thereof, that in
their retired and advised thoughts, they would not loose the love and light of
Gods countenance, and testimony of a good conscience, to win the whole
world: they would not exchange their comforts of godliness, and interest in a
Crown of life, for ten thousand worlds, were they all turned into one
inualuable Pearl: They feel themselves incomparably more comforted and kindly
refreshed at the heart root, with one thought of heaven, and that endless
joyful rest above, through all eternity, then with a world of earthly
contemplations, though all composed of gold, pleasures, possessions, honors,
Diadems, and all the glorious and most desirable treasures under the Sun.
And who in respect of any inconsionableness, wrongs, injustice, or wicked
ways of getting, might with sincerity of heart, proportionably to their
states and callings, take up Samuels protestation: Behold, here I am, 1. Sam.
12. ^.
witness against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed: Whose Ox have
I taken? or whose* Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it. And sincere thoughts, resolutions, and
protestations to this purpose, are clear evidences of vnearthly-mindednes.
Blessed Job does pregnantly illustrate this point: His own friend charge him
with inhumanitie, covetousness, and cruelty; and thereupon infers that Gods
afflicting hand was heavy upon him: How much more think you, would the
children of fools, and children of villains, viler then the earth, of whom
he elsewhere complains, vex him slanderously? Is not thy wickedness great,
says Eliphaz, Job 22. 5. etc. and thine iniquities infinite? For thou have
taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, and stripped the naked of their
clothing. Thou have not given water to the weary to drink, and thou have
withholden bread from the hungry. -- Thou have sent widows away empty, and the
arms of the fatherless have been broken. Therefore snares are round about
thee, and sudden fear troubles thee. Whereas, in deed and truth, righteous Job
was right nobly minded, tenderhearted, charitable, bountiful; as appears by
his confident contestation to the contrary, Job 31. 16, etc. If I have withheld
the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail: or
have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless has not eaten
thereof: If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering: If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with
the fleece of my Sheep: if I have lift up my hand against the fatherless,
when I saw my help in the gate: then let mine arm fall from my shoulder
blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

Thus many times an imputation of worldliness, hardheartednesse,
vnhospitalitie, etc. is laid upon Gods children, without all cause, truth, or
conscience; occasioned, as I conceive, (for I desire to discover unto you a
depth of Satan's malice in this point,) partly from the parties accusing and
slandering; partly from the parties accused and slandered.

Occasions ministered by profane men, are such as these:

1. First, They many times, when they find their consciences disquieted, their
former courses controlled, their carnal humors crossed and contradicted, and
themselves much diseased and disturbed in the securefull pursuit of their
sensual pleasures, by the searching power of a conscionable Ministry: or
when they plainly see that their vnzealousnesse, lukewarmnesse, and formalitie
in Religion, is censured and condemned by the forwardness, and zealous
carriage and conversation of the Saints, they seek by all means, and labor
might and maine, to be meet with those Ministers which so vex them with
their faithful Preaching; and those godly Christians, which silently disgrace
them with their gracious life and zealous exercise of Christianity. And
therefore since many times, by Gods goodness, they cannot find any visible or
conspicuous matter or miscarriage, to charge them with truly; because the
Saints lie not in gross and notorious sins, such as are swearing,
drunkenness, lying, uncleanness, Sabbath-breaking, idleness, the vanities of
goodfellowship, etc. as themselves are wont; therefore, I say, they
audaciously diue into their hearts with unhallowed censures, and lay unto their
charges those invisible errors, which none can see but Gods All-seeing Eye;
and from which they cannot be cleared and acquit, but only by their own
consciences, and his highest Tribunal. So that they take order that such
imputations, though groundless and false; yet shall be sure to cleave to the
good name of Gods Children as certainly without redress or remedy, as they
were devised without truth or charity. We may see this clearly in the
present point, and the slander of hypocrisy, which is also the ordinary
portion of the best, from men of the world. When profane opposites unto grace
pry curiously into all the ways of Gods Child, and can find nothing so faulty
in his outward carriage, or reprooueable in the ordinary course of his life,
as they expect and desire; yet, left they should not show themselves the right
children of Satan, the Accuser of the Brethren; they will be meddling one way or
other; they will be nibling at his good name, with some such speeches as
these: Well, well, though he be an excellent Pulpit man, or a forward
Professor, yet is he not so, and so? is not he as well given unto, and
greedy of the world as other men? When they hear other men commend his zeal
and forwardness in Profession, these will be casting out such malicious doubts
as these; Go too, my masters, I fear me all is not gold that glisters. Now
how is it possible, or by what outward witnesses or compurgators may the
Christian clear and discharge himself of the imputations of worldliness and
hypocrisy; since the one lies in the greedy affections of the mind, and the
other lurkes in the hidden corners of the heart? The purity and secrets of
which, none can truly see and censure, but the Searcher of all hearts. Were a
man accused of Adultery, Drunkenness, or such visible notoriousnesse, there
might be means found for the manifestation of his innocence, by an exact
scanning of time, place, and other circumstances. But this is the malicious and
pestilent policy of Satan and his agents, when they see that the Saints, by
the mercies of God, are free from those gross sins and notorious
corruptions, which ordinarily reign in the children of darkness; they
spitefully and cunningly lay unto their charge, imputations of such nature,
from the which, though they be free, they cannot free themselves; and though
they be clear, yet by reason of the malice of men, and inuisiblenesse of the
matter, it will never so appear; until the brightness of Christ's coming
bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the
noonday; and of which they have none other ground in the world but this,
because themselves are such. For put a profane worldling to prove the slander
of worldliness and hypocrisy, which he puts upon the Christian, and he will
be able to give you neither probable reason, nor wise word to purpose. And no
marvel; for let the matter come to examining, and he shall find, that man
which he so miscensures, to be, both faithful toward God, and conscionable
toward man in all his ways: Not only innocent from oppression, corruption,
wrongful dealings, and all unlawful ways of getting; but also in a special
manner, with a most compassionate tenderness and love, right dearly affected
to every true-hearted Nathaneel, and the whole household of faith; (which no
unregenerate man can possibly be; and which is the truest and noblest issue of
sanctified charity) Nay, and besides, not any ways wanting (though it stand
not with the policy of profaneness to acknowledge it) in other charitable
passages with spiritual discretion, to any truly distressed and miserable. And
therefore there is no ground in the world left for such graceless lies, but
only this: Carnal worldlings carue conditions to other men, out of the
crookedness of their own nature; and cunningly put on the policy of
Cutpurses; who in throngs at Faires and markets, call upon others to beware of
Curpurses, that themselves being truly so, may with less suspicion and
observation, diue into the pockets and purses of true men. Many there are, who
being themselves truly worldly, and hypocrites indeed, call Christians so,
that the mask of their villainous hypocrisies may be less marked; and
themselves root in earthlinesse, until they reach the very bottom of hell,
and no man regard them.

2. Secondly, if a man would be irreligious and unconscionable, it is a very
easy thing to grow rich and into reputation with the world. If once he so
far harden his heart, sear his conscience, and abandon the fear of God;
that he resolves without remorse or shame, to defraud, dissemble, bribe,
oppress, put to Usury, serve the time, make use of all men for his own turn,
to cloak cruelty with conscience, pretend friendship, when he purposes to
deal like a Turk: In a word, to plot and practice any lewd device or
consciencelesse course, for his advantage and rising; I do not see how such a
fellow, in these griping days and times of confusion, should escape wealth,
preferment, and respect in the world. And as it is easy for fellows of such
ill conscience to thrive, and wicked men to grow wealthy; so methinkes it is no
great matter for such to make sometimes very goodly shows to the world, of
bountifulness, and liberal profusions in feasts, entertainments, and larger
doles to the poor, out of their superfluities, and heaps of ill-gotten goods.
But herein (though it be well, that such goods do good unto some) they are
like unto thieves, who having robbed some rich Merchant, and taken hundreths
from him, do scatter here and there by the way, some small pieces of silver to
the poor. But this is a very poor mends for their merciless bloodshed and
lawless robberies: This is, as they say, to rob Peter, and cloth Paul. Thus
many great men keep great houses; and that is well: it is fit, Greatness
should be accompanied with franknesse; but alas, they grind the faces of the
poor, and eat the flesh of Gods people, to uphold their hospitality. So some
Ministers heap living upon living, that so they may be enabled and furnished
to purchase a great name by keeping a great house; but alas, they maintain
their port and estate with the price of the precious blood of souls, and feed
the greedy humor of their Pharisaicall goodfellowship, with the fearful
Gangrene of spiritual bloodshed. So others may be sometimes good unto the
poor, and bountiful, as they say, in their own houses: but alas, they mar
all their almes-giuing, by unlawful getting; and turn that, which of it self
is one of those sacrifices Heb. 13. 16.
with which God is highly pleased, into Isa. 61. 8.
abomination and sin unto themselves. A goodly matter, sure, to scatter here
and there, now and then, some few drops of charitable devotions; whereas they
have many huge and headlong torrents of gain and goods coming in daily; by
oppression, violence, merciless enclosure, devouring widows houses, selling
the poor for old shoes, rackings, enhansings, gripings, vsuries, immoderate
takings, etc.

3. Thirdly, profane hypocrites are commonly Pharisaicall in their
almesgiuing; affect, and pursue observation, singularity, vainglorious
ostentations in their contributions of charity. Their forefathers the
Pharisees, when they gave their alms, made a Trumpet to be sounded before
them; So these fellows, their followers, and succeeding Actors upon the same
Stage of hypocrisy, lest their good deeds should die in the distribution, and
be obscurely buried in the bellies of the poor, they also get unto themselves
a kind of talebearing Trumpetters too. They cunningly observe those
opportunities, and single out such objects of their commiseration, and
charitable devotions, whereby they may soonest, and most compendiously purchase
a name of being good to the poor, and have their bountiful disposition blazed
abroad, with most circumstances, best advantages, and partial enlargements.
And thus it is a very easy thing for a Pharise to be famous in this kind:
for since he gives more for commendation, then for conscience; far more for
praise amongst men, then out of a true-hearted compassion to the party; he
dares dispense with a good conscience, and take liberty unto himself to place
his good turns there, where there is best possibility of being most spoke of,
and greatest hope of the richest return of applause and admiration. So that
such an one ordinarily in his open-heartednesse, and charitable distributions,
has a special eye and inclination to those that flatter him to his face; and
are like to prove the loudest trumpets of his bountifulness abroad where they
come. And he is so far from a right and seasonable apprehension of due
circumstances, difference of parties, and those spiritual discretions,
obseruable and necessary in such Christian exercises of love; and from the
practice of the Apostles precept, Galat. 6. 10. Do good unto all men, but
especially to them which are of the household of faith: that he would rather
afford his helping hand for the relief and raising up of a decayed goodfellow,
then of a distressed Christian.

4. Fourthly, though carnal men be so covetous, and hold-fast of earthly
contentments, that they would rather loose their precious souls everlastingly,
then leave them: yet if it might be, if they were possibly compatible, they
would give any thing in the world; both to serve and satisfy themselves in the
ways of vanity, and after to save their souls in the day of wrath; both to
partake of the pleasures of the present, and to be secured from the vengeance
that is to come. What would not the great Ones of the world give, to purchase
two Heavens; one here, and another in the other world? What would not sensual
worldlings part with, to redeem their sins, if they might have a
dispensation to continue in sin? to live the life of vanity and lust, and
after to die the death of the Righteous, and to receive their crown? In such
cases in their sober considerations (so that their present temporal happiness
sustain no hazard, or diminution; nor the delights of their sweet sin, any
disturbance) they would not stand upon any worldly good; though it were a
thousand Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil: Nay, they would give their
firstborn for their transgressions; even the fruit of their bodies for the
sin of their souls. Many there are which may be easily persuaded, and can
well find in their hearts, to give any thing toward the service of God, and
salvation of their souls; save themselves; I mean, their hearts and
affections, which the world and their darling-pleasures have principally
possessed. Hence now it is, that many rich Ones and men of the world, being
otherwise very guilty, and obnoxious in many respects, are very willing and
well content many times to contribute bountifully to good uses, and to make
good show of liberality toward the poor; that thereby less notice may be
taken of their other notoriousnesse; and with some kind of hope, so to cover
and conceal many gross corruptions from the wrath of God, and the worlds
censure. For I know not how, there is an inbred opinion and conceit seated in
the hearts of natural men and Papists, that almsdeeds, and such works of
charity make amends for other miscariages, though foul, and scandalous; and
be pleasing to Almighty God, though the parties from whence they proceed, be
polluted with secret impurities and reigning sins. Since therefore they
persuade their hearts, that charitable devotions and distributions have some
power, as it were, somewhat to appease divine wrath, and to satisfy for other
sinful exorbitancies and aberrations; and see plainly that it is the most
compendious way to purchase a great deal of credit in these cold and
compassionlesse times; and the only object to divert the eyes of the greater
from the observation of their other faults: I say therefore, they open their
hearts the more liberally, and enlarge their bowels to greater bountifulness;
which otherwise their covetousness would keep shut. Thus, many, to diminish
the horror and markeablenesse of their unmortified lusts and open lewdness,
exercise a good art without a good heart.

Occasions from the parties slandered, are such as these:

1. Christians, of all men in the world, are the special marks and ordinary
objects, upon which are discharged and exercised all kinds of malice and
mischief: not only the empoisoned arrows of spiteful tongues, the sword of
Tyrants, the flames of cruelty; but also many lesser and lessemarkt vexations,
as wrongs, oppressions, mercilesnesse, and many unconscionable vsages. Profane
men being seated in high rooms, or besotted with the worlds favors and
flatteries, do many times, out of their pride and malice, very contemptuously
roll down as from aloft, indignities, insolences, many hard and heavy
inhumanities, and iniustices upon Gods Children, as a number of neglected
underlings. So that as the Prophet speaks; He that refraineth from evil,
makes himself a prey. He that by the mercies of God breaks out of the bonds
of Satan, into the blessings and blessed estate of grace, shall for ever after,
not only be furiously persecuted by the rage of hell, and malice of
prophanenes; but also lie more open to the insultations, wrongs and oppressions
of his adversaries, and treacherous insinuations of false friends. Since therefore
Christians, by reason of their patience, the worlds discountenance,
disaffection of great Ones, their own resolute disallowance of all indirect
courses, of any base, and unconscionable advantage, are many times mightily
hackt upon, and oppressed by the greedy policies, expilations, and encroachments
of boisterous worldlings, and causeless opposites: and not only so, but
sometimes also cunningly, and insensibly preyed upon even by professed friends:
(For there are a kind of men, which putting on for the time, the glory of an
Angel, mix themselves with Gods people, and press into their company, only
because they see and find them to be such, as from whom, by reason of the
singleness and simplicity of their heartts, the vnsuspiciousnesse of their
charity, the equity and conscionablenesse of their dealing, in these
coozening, supplanting, and undermining days, they may the most fairly and
easily suck out the greatest advantage:) I say therefore, since Gods children
are most subject both to the wrongs of open enemies, and supplantation of
seeming friends, they are many times not so enabled in outward things, or
strong in their worldly state, to make such a flourish in dispersing their
superfluities, as those men which get without conscience, and disburse without
spiritual discretion.

2. A Christian dare not for his life so far enlarge his conscience, as to
gain by any unwarrantable means, or unconscionable course, as oppression,
corruption, coozening, violence, lying, unjust dealing, etc. and therefore in
this griping, and greedy age, in the highest noonetide of iniquity, or rather
darkest midnight of the works of darkness (though outward want be infinitely
counteruailed with inward comfort) he does not commonly come to that excess,
and superfluity of temporal things, which many times worldlings with wider
consciences, easily and immeasurably ingrosse. The largest consciences in these
last and worst days, are the only deuourers, and swallowers down of worldly
wealth. A religious resolution to save a man's soul, (more is the pity!) is
many times a notable curb to keep him from growing rich, and into reputation
with the world. Gods blessings even in temporal things, I deny not, are
sometimes very plentifully upon the right owners, Gods own children; and both
heavenly and earthly happiness have been wreathed together by the merciful
hand of God, and set upon their heads: but if we look upon the common courses
holden in the world that way; and in all forecast of carnal reason, he is
likeliest to grow rich and rise, who is resolved to damn his soul. In
ordinary conceit of profane policy, and apprehensions of worldly wisdom,
Joseph mist Genesis 39.
a great deal of earthly contentment, and in a precise humor put from him
much possibility of preferment, by not yielding to the impure solicitations
of his wanton Mistress. Micaiah, in not iumping with the four hundred false
prophets, 1. King. chap. 22.
in their lying flattery to please the two Kings: Jonathan, in not joining
with his father Saul, for the prevention and confusion 1. Sam. 20. 31, 32.
of David. Had a sensual worldling been in Joseph's case, an unsanctified
Minister in Micaiahs, an ambitious Absalom in Ionathans, assuredly they had all
yielded to the several temptations. The conscience of an unregenerate man will
marueilously stretch it self, and grant out very large dispensations,
especially when any special glory, profit or pleasure of the world is in
pursuit and possibility. It was so in all ages, and at this day many a good
man, many times, of great spirit, worth, and understanding, sits obscurely in a
very low room, and is kept under in mean estate by the worlds oppressions,
because he dare not displease God, or enlarge his conscience proportionably to
the vast gulf of the times corruptions. This is the very true reason why folly
is set in so great excellency, and sincerity seated in the low place: why so
many servants are on horseback, and so many Princes walking as servants on the
ground. Since therefore the Christian is happily restrained by the checks and
tenderness of a good conscience, from all unwarrantable means, and
unconscionable courses of getting; though his bowels be most compassionate,
his heart heated with true charity, and his desires enlarged to do good unto
all, and all the good he can; yet he is many times kept short, by reason of his
short pittance, from those outward real expressions, and effects of charity,
to which his tenderhearted zealous affection is inwardly, truly inflamed; and
from those more bountiful effusions and liberalities, which rich worldlings
may, out of the tithe, nay, the thousandth part of their ill gotten goods,
plentifully perform.

3. Thirdly, Christians know themselves bound in conscience to a careful
provision for their Families; to diligence, and faithfulness in their
callings; from all unnecessary expenses, and the prodigal effusions of
goodfellowship, from ambitious affectation of applause, and vaineglory, by
Pharisaicall ostentations: and therefore to the greedy observation of carnal
eyes, and undiscerning spirits of unregeneration, which want no malice to
mistake, or cunning to apprehend any shadow or show of any seeming advantage
for the disgrace of good men; they seem, and are miscensured to hold upon the
world, to feed upon earthlymindednesse, not to be so open-hearted,
good-natured, and charitably affected as other good fellows, as they call
them, which make no such profession of purity, and preciseness. And this
misconceit of Gods children is made more passable, by the profane
plausiblenesse of vaineglorious worldlings. It is sooner, and more easily
entertained; because unconscionable men take any compendious course of growing
rich; which their covetous humor suggests unto them; and by allowance and
exercise of unlawful means of getting, bring in many times great store of
wealth with much ease; and therefore need not toil so in their trades, or
follow the businesses of their proper callings with such attention and
exactness. And if at any time they resolve to be more bountiful and liberal,
they commonly make choice of those times, places, persons, and other
circumstances, whereby (as they think) their good natures may be most noted,
and their names grow greatest for extraordinary kindness and goodfellowship.

4. The Christian does incline, and enlarge the bowels of his special
compassion toward the necessities of the Saints, and conueyes the noblest
issues, and effects of his inflamed charity, into the bosom of Gods child.
And indeed he is so pressed by the commandment; Do good unto all men, but
especially unto them who are of the household of Faith. And there was never more
need: For howsoever worldlings may be bountiful one to another, and exercise
many mutual offices of kindness and carnal love among themselves; yet for
the most part, they are very vncompassionate, straitlaced and hard-hearted
toward distressed Christians. Nay, ordinarily, they are rather ready to combine
and contribute their malices, policies and purses, to throw them down lower
into outward want and misery; then to put to their helping hands for their
recovery, comfort, and enlargement; though it were in their sufferings for Gods
cause, and testimony of a good conscience. So that, as Christian distresses are
the principal object of the Christians compassion and bounty: So worldlings
are only heartily kind and openhearted to the men of the World. Now, that you
may rightly understand the point, you must conceive, that the good deeds and
commendable parts of an unregenerate man, are ever carried more boisterously
and with greater noise, are entertained of the World with a far more general
applause and notice, then the godly actions and divine Graces of Gods children.
The World deals with men in this case, says a worthy Divine, Greenham.
as it deals with Witches and Physicions; the Witch, though she fail in
twenty things, yet if she do some one thing aright, though it be but small,
the world loves, and commends her for a good and wise woman. But the
Physicion, if he work six hundred cures; yet if, through the waywardness of
his Patient, or for the punishment of his Patients sin, he fail but in one,
that one fail does more turn to his discredit, then his manifold, goodly and
notable cures do get him praise. In this manner, says he, does the world
deal with men: If a worldly man have but an outward Go^ children cover many
infirmities in others under one good gift: the ungodly bury many good gifts in
others under one infirmity.
gift of strength, of speech, or of comeliness, he shall be greatly praised,
and counted a goodly man, though he be an Idolater, or a profane person; and
though he swim and flow over in all manner of vices: But let the child of
God be truly zealous in true Religion, let him be honest and holy in
conversation, yet if there be but one infirmity in him, or if he have through
weakness fallen into some one sin, that one infirmity against which he
strives, or that one sin for which he is grieved, shall drown all the
Graces of God in him, be they never so great, and the World will account him a
most wicked man. It is just so in this particular: A profane man many times by
some one special markable act of bounty and contribution, or for some few
seasonable ostentations of good fellowship, and kind nature, gets the start
and precedence in opinion and reputation with the World, from many a gracious
Christian; who bears in his bosom a constant habitual tender-heartednes to
all true necessities, and as occasion shall exact, opens his heart, his hands,
and his house most joyfully and compassionately, to refresh and comfort the
needful exigents of any true-hearted Nathaneel. And the Worldling does the
rather, and more easily carry it, because in the dispersing of his doles and
largesses, he many times makes choice of such tale-bearing Trumpetters, who
knowing his Pharisaicall humor, are likeliest to blaze his bounty most abroad
in the World; whereas the Christian singles out specially for such purposes the
distressed Saints, from whom he expects no more but a secret and silent
blessing of God in their hearts, for his goodness conveyed unto them by such
an Instrument.

Thus I have discovered unto you a mystery of Satan's malice, and the cunning
despitefulnesse of profane men, who labor many times out of pure malice, and
wilful mistakings, to fasten upon Gods children, imputations of worldliness,
hard-heartednesse, cruel dealing, and such like.

The occasions, as I have largely told you, are such as these.

Upon the Worldlings part:

1. His hearty desire to disgrace Christians, whom, since by the Grace of God,
he finds free from open gross sins, presently grows to such speeches as
these: Why, but are not such and such given to the world, as well as other men?
etc.

2. He dare enlarge his conscience to courses of unlawful getting; and
therefore it is more easy for him to open his hand now and then to some
boisterous flourishes of liberalmindednesse; especially since thereby he hopes
to repair his reputation for his other indirections.

3. He is commonly Pharisaicall in an ambitious exercise, and more public
acting of his deeds of charity; and therefore whatsoever he does that way, is
for the most part carried abroad with special and remarkable noise and notice.

4. He would gladly still the cryings of his guilty conscience, and seem to
himself to redeem the sins of his soul, by a more bountiful disbursement
of outward things.

Upon the Christians part:

1. He is most subject to wrongs and weakenings in his outward state; both by
the violent encroachments of professed opposites, and covetous insinuations of
false friends. 2. He dare not for any gold, or good, undertake any
unwarrantable and scandalous course of gaining. 3. He finds himself bound in
conscience, to faithful diligence in his Calling, and Christian provision for
his Family. 4. He spends the best and most of his bounty and charity upon the
household of Faith.
But in this point, as I said before, I apologize for none but those, whom
their own consciences, and the merciful Tribunal of God do acquit. Let
Christians look unto it; the World is very watchful, and greedy with great
curiosity and cunning, to apprehend the least shadow of any occasions, for the
blaspheming of the ways of God, and the disgracing of his children. And
therefore ever and anon you shall hear the spirit of profaneness crying out,
and complaining: You see these fellows, which make such show of forwardness
and purity, what they are: none so covetous; none so uncharitable; none so
unmerciful, and cruel in their dealings as they; none so hard-hearted to the
poor, etc. Now although such bitter speeches as these, are often the mere
euaporations of pure malice, and ^low from no other ground in the world, but
only from the gall of graceless men: yet let all those which truly fear
God, take heed how they give just occasion thereunto. Assuredly it were far
better for him, whosoever he be, that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he were drowned in the depth of the Sea; then that by the continuance of
his cruel and unconscionable dealings in the world, he should minister just
occasion to any railing Rabshakeh, to revile the servants of the Living God, or
to slander that holy Profession. Me thinks, this one preservative should be
powerful enough, to keep the heart of every Christian from doting upon the
world, or suffering it to be possessed thereof. It is this: Every Christian by
a fruitful faith, may be assured of a Crown of life, either by assurance of
adherence, or evidence; or both. Now if but once a day he should take a
serious suruay of the glory, euerlastingnesse, and unutterable excellencies of
that Immortal Crown; me thinks it were able so to dull the edge, and
dissolve the drossinesse of all earthly desires; that they should never more be
able to heat, or harden his heart with immoderate or delightful repose upon
the vexing vanities of any worldly thing. I say it again; Me thinks, if a man
do but once a day cast the eye of his Faith upon that Crown of life; which
our dear Redeemer holds for us in his hand, ready to set upon our heads when
we shall be dissolved from this vale of tears; the goodly glory thereof should
be able to dispell these mists of fading vanities, and hurtful ^umes of
honors, riches, and earthly pleasures; which this great dunghill of the World,
heated by the fire of men's inordinate lusts, does euaporate and interpose
betwixt the sight of their souls, and the bliss of Heaven.

Worldliness, earthly-mindednesse, covetousness, does infinitely vnbecome an
heir of Heaven. Be fired then, and frighted from all inclinations and bent
that way, by such considerations as these:

1. It is a most base and dunghill distemper, which eats up, not only all
Religion and honesty, manliness and reason, natural affection and
discretion; but even humanity also and friendlinesse: So that a man had almost
as well converse with a Caniball for any ingenuous and conscionable dealing, as
with a truly covetous caitife.

2. Shall the immortal comprehensiuenesse of the divine and excellent Soul,
which is able to peruse and pass over Heaven and Earth in a moment; is capable
of the mystery of Christ, and the eternal vision of God; be unworthily
confined to a piece of ground, an heap of white and yellow clay? A vile
imprisonment, and inexpiable wrong to so noble a Nature!

3. It is a devouring Gangrene, an insatiable Wolf; which the more it has,
ever the more hungry it is. It is as fire which increases by that nourishment
which is given unto it. The barren womb, the Ho^eleeches daughter, the grave
is nothing to this gulf, and it holds the heart continually upon the rack of
selfe-vexation and carking: For three ravenous Vultures seize upon it
successively, and gnaw in their turns with incredible torment; care, fear,
grief; in getting, keeping, leaving.

4. All Gods blessed ones in all ages, embracing the promises of life in the
arms of their faith, willingly confessed themselves to be pilgrims and
strangers here upon earth, looking for a City in another Country, which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And good reason, besides Religion,
that they should grow into such resolutions; for all things here below are full
of transitorinesse, mortality and change; Vanity of vanities, all is vanity:
but above, is constancy and eternity of all excellencies, perfections and
pleasures. Besides, that thou shall have there a Body brighter then the Sun,
a Soul replenished with unutterable delights, the glorious company of Christ
Jesus, Angels, Saints, Christian Friends; the vision and fruition of God,
blessed for ever, wherein consists the Crown and Life of all celestial joys;
I say, to say nothing of these, but even the space of one foot upon the
pauement of the Empyrean Heaven, is incomparably more worth, then the great
Body of the whole Earth, were it all turned into Gold, and beset with as many
invaluable Pearls, as it is now with piles of Grass.

5. Nature, says a mere Moralist, seems in the first birth of Gold, and
womb from whence it proceeds, after a sort to have presaged the misery of
those that are in love with it. For it has so ordered the matter, that in
those Countries where it grows, there grows with it neither Grass, nor
Plant, nor any thing, that is worth any thing: as giving us to understand
thereby, that in those minds where the desire of this metal grows, there
cannot remain so much as a spark of true honor and virtue.

6. God is not only a Father, but also All-sufficient: Why Matthew. 6. 8, 9.
Genesis 17. 1.
should thou then fear want, that fear him? He prouides every day for
millions of Fowls; Will He then be wanting to a Man, to a Christian, to His
own Child? Christ himself pressing reasons to this purpose, tells us, that
our heavenly Father clothes the Lilly above Solomon's Royalty, Matthew. 6. 25,
etc.
and feeds the Fowls of the air, which neither sow, nor reap, nor gather
into barnes. What a cursed veil then of base distrust darkens thine hard
heart, that thou should either carke, or deal unconscionably?

7. One two hours fire will disperse, and consume the hoard of an hundred
years heaping together. And where art thou then? Thine heart then is seized
upon at once, with unutterable anguish, and the very horror of Hell, for the
loss of thine Heaven upon Earth; and with cries of blood, and furies of
conscience, for thy covetous, cruel, usurious, injurious courses for many
years. Thus many a worldling spins a fair thread to strangle himself both
temporally and eternally.

8. The Sun is a very glorious and contented creature; and yet it harbors no
golden Mine in its fair and refulgent Body. The blessed Angels are full of all
felicities; and yet they have no silver; they want no happiness, and yet they
want gold. Heaven, the chief and Royal Seat of Blessedness, is empty of
these treasures, there grow no Minerals; the Vein of silver and gold is not to
be found there. The Son of God himself, infinitely the most happy Creature,
I speak in respect of his Humanity, that ever issued out of the hands of God,
were there any such great matter, or excellency in riches, had never said of
himself: The Foxes have holes, Matthew. 8. 20.
and the Birds of the Air have nests: but the Son of Man has not where to
lay his head. Could a Bearing-mantle of cloth of gold, an empearled Cradle,
delicious fare every day, thousands a year, make a man truly happy; the right
and Royal Heir of all things, would never have chosen a Stable Luke 2. 7.
for his Birth-chamber, A Manger for his Cradle, Barleybread for the
entertainment of his Followers, a less fixed Ioh. 6. 9.
habitation for himself, then the poorest Bird, etc.

9. The Sun and Moon are far more glistering and glorious, then the
burnisht gold of Ophyr: and the poorest man has as large a prospect and part
in them, as the vastest Incloser, or most griping Usurer: but much more benefit
by them, then the rich worldlings by their golden heaps. For he is comfortably
warmed, and refreshed with the influence of their heat and light: but they, if
the Devil did not hoodwinke them, might see every time they look thereon,
that rust cleaving to their unrighteous Mammon, which Iam. 5. 3.
hereafter shall eat their flesh as it were fire.

10. One Star does incomparably exceed in beauty and worth a golden earth:
and if thou be truly Gods, and have thy foot already upon the Moon, as thou
ought, thou Revel. 12. 1.
shall hereafter tread everlastingly upon thousands of them. Disdain then in
the mean time, to let thy heavenly spirit dote upon those baser hoards of
shining earth, which are making themselves wings to fly away, as an Eagle
toward Heaven: for riches are like transitory streams, which posting by the
side of a City, no man can stay. Were it not a senseless and brainelesse
endeavor and expectation, for a Town to hope and assay to keep with them the
hasty current of a mighty River, which none of an hundred Towns before could
hold? And do thou expect any constancy of Erras, si mansuras putas tibi
diuitias, quae pe^ tot manus hominum transierunt.
abode with thee of that thick clay, which has passed through so many hands
before? Neither is it so much thine, as the Worlds. A Dog follows two men: it
is not known to whom he belongs, until they be parted. Upon the arrest of
death, thy wealth leaves thee everlastingly, and cleaues unto the World; and
therefore it was worldly wealth.

11. Moderation and conscionablenes in getting, may, by the mercy of God, draw
from His bountiful hand, a more special extraordinary gracious providence
and blessing upon posterity: whereas contrary carriage may bring an heavy
curse. The Prophet, who was husband to her who came crying to Elisha for
comfort, 2. King. 4. 1. did fear God, says the Text. Whereby he was happily
restrained from all wicked ways of gaining, and growing into wealth. Durst he
have Colligemus ex hac paupertate, virum illum fuisse constanten^ in vera and
sana religione: quia si deficere voluisset ad cultum Iezabelis, and impij
Regis, victus and iustae facultates ei non defuissent, Martyr.
enlarged his conscience proportionably to the corruptions of those times, and
shifted his Sails according to the sitting of every wind, as pillow-sowers
under men's elbowes, and preachers of smooth things are wont; I see no reason,
but he might have been advanced to Iezabels table, as well as the four hundred
flattering false temporizing prophets; and by serving the time also, have
risen, and enricht both himself and his. But this honest man would rather die
in debt, leave his wife and children in extreme poverty, and expose his two
sons as bondmen to the Creditour; then to put his hand to any manner of
iniquity in getting, or to raise an outward rotten estate, upon the ruins and
bloody desolations of men's precious souls. And what follows? Rather then the
wife and children of such a man shall want, God will have the Prophet do a
Miracle for their supply and comfort, as appears in the Story. But now on the
otherside, Gehazi in the very following Chapter, 2. King. 5. will needs by
Bribing make himself and his children for ever. And what is the issue? He pulls
thereby an horrible curse both upon himself and his posterity: The Leprosy
therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever. Verse.
27. Thou had better then, leave a wallet to thy child, to go from door to
door; then a cursed hoard of ill gotten goods.

12. But above all, to curb thine heart from covetousness, meditate much upon
such places as these: Mat. 6. 25. to the end. Phil. 4. 6. 1. Tim. 6. 9, 10.
Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3. Prou. 23. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 7.

VI. Lastly, concerning a right and comfortable managing of our spiritual
estate, a point of deepest consideration, and highest consequence; take notice
of two extremes, two dangerous Rocks, upon which the soul may run, and split
it self spiritually.

1. The one is a proud ouerprizing of our own graces, with a conceited
ouerweening selfe-admiration.

2. The Ista duo occidunt animas, aut desperatio, aut peruersa spes. August. in
Joan. Sermon. 59.
other, a dejected, distrustful vnderualuing of Gods mercies, the promises of
life, and those graces which we possess in truth and holy desire; though not
in that degree we desire.

I. Before I can seasonably and preparedly fall upon the first, to instruct
punctually, and arm the Christian against it, with whom I principally deal in
this whole discourse: give me leave to discover a mystery of spiritual
Selfe-deceit; by which Satan sits presumptuously in the darkened minds, and
deluded imaginations of those, whom with his cunning and malice he hood winkes,
and hardens to their endless confusion.

Many thousands even under the means, and in this glorious midday of the
Gospel, are groundlesly conceited, that they are right, when as in truth and
trial, they are rotten at the heart root; that they are sure of Heaven, when
they are as yet most certainly of the family of Hell. Neither is this any
strange thing: so deluded were the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 11, 12. and so are
all such outside Christians: Those, Luke 13. 26, 27. and so are all, who stand
only on the work wrought, and bare task of religious duties, without the
power of inward holiness: The young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 20. with that
generation, Prou. 30. 12. And so are all such civil Iustitiares: the proud
Pharise, Luke 18. 11, 12. who was so confident, that he gave God thanks for
his blessed condition; when he was but yet a cursed unjustified wretch; and so
are all of his formal strain: Those, Ioh. 8. 39 who held themselves to be
Abraham's children; whereas Christ tells them, the Devil was their father, Verse.
44. And so are all those, who build only upon the outward privileges of
Christianity, without personal Which Gods Book also requires, Mat. 5. 8. 1.
Ioh. 3 3. etc. And our Common Prayer Book in the Prayer immediately after
confession.
purity: Paul in the state of Pharisaisme; and so are all those, who wandering
out of the path which is called holy, swell with a proud opinionatiuenesse and
furious zeal, above the banks of Gods blessed Book, and bounds of all holy
discretion, and will needs so are aloft on waxen wings of selfe-conceitednesse,
and superficialnesse, to strange and uncouth heights of excellent fancies,
without having ever laid sound foundation in true humiliation for sin, and in
self-denial: the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3. 17. and all such lukewarm
Professors. Hence we have a taste, what a world of people are woefully
blindfolded by the Prince of this World; and through the insinuating imposture,
and unexamined delusion of spiritual selfe-deceit, are put into a fools
paradise, of being already safe and secure for Heaven; whereas as yet they are
mere strangers to the Mystery of Christ, and the New creation; and shall be
certainly damned, if they so continue: for that which is highly esteemed
amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, says Christ to the
selfe-iustifying Pharisees, Luke 16. 15.

And yet some sorts of unregenerate men are here to be excepted from this
general deluge of selfe-delusion; who lie not so grossly inwrapped in the
iuggling mists of the devils Angelical glory. Not that they are better then
those deluded Ones, or have any good assurance upon sound vndeceiuing grounds
of their spiritual well-being, (for such an humble true persuasion, is
confined only to true Conuerts) but it happens by accident, that by reason
either of the extreme villainy of their lives, or desperate positions of their
Antichristian doctrine, they see clear reasons stand like an armed man in
their convinced consciences; that if they continue in their forlorn courses,
they cannot possibly be saved; or feign reasons, and coin distinctions, upon
purpose to exclude all from any infallible certainty of salvation. They are
such as these:

1. Gross hypocrites, who deceive others, but not their own hearts, as Judas.

2. Those notorious Ones; who in their cold blood (...) stick to confess,
that they are yet quite wrong, and utterly wide from the way that is called
Holy; and will sometimes set a time when they purpose to cast off for ever, and
casheire their sensual courses, and swaggering company, and begin at length to
look toward Heaven, and learn the Art of saving their souls; and in the
mean time they make a covenant with death, and are at an agreement with Hell,
Isai. 28. 15.

3. Other sons of Belial; whose hearts by their obstinate wallowing in the
work of darkness, hardening their foreheads by their impudent vallanies
against the face of Heaven; and with their own soule-murthering hands, and
horrible cruelty pressing an hot iron upon their consciences, are grown at
length into such a prodigious Rock; that though See Romans 1. 32.
they know themselves to be posting toward the pit of Hell, yet they are
senseless, and fearelesse of that fiery dungeon.

4. Those, who being convinced of the truth, and goodness of the Gospel, and
approouing in their judgment and conscience, the power and practice of it, as
the only way to everlasting bliss; but then reflecting their carnal eyes
upon the furious entisings of their darling sins, and by the touchstone of
sense comparing the pleasures of these, which they presently graspe, with the
spiritual strictness, and promised joys of the other; stand infinitely
unresolved, and desperately obstinate, by no means, upon no terms to leave
the present sensual joys of their earthly paradise: but rather choose even in
their cold blood, to turn their backs upon God blessed for ever, his holy
truth, service, servants, and all the glory in the World to come. And then by
good consequence, having thus subscribed and sealed by an irreuocable
resolution, and sworn vassalage to be Satan's for ever, and for ever to stand
on his side, receive into their hearts an inward Neque dubito, quin sicut filij
Dei, propter fide^ in Christum testimonium certum accipiunt in animis suis suae
coelestis filiationis and aeternae vitae: sic eos qui occupati toti a Satana,
Christum cognitum abnegant, p^odunt, reijciunt ex animo, testimonium intus
accipere a spiritu Diaboli, de se actum esse in aetetnum, etc. Zanch. de pecc*
in Sp. Sanct.
certificate, that they are utterly forsaken of God, and shall be certainly
damned. Whereupon they turn even young devils; (they shall have their
perfection in hell) boil inwardly with much malicious blasphemous rage against
God, whom they have renounced; persecute with implacable spite, the blessed
Gospel and glorious ways of Christ, which they have so desperately rejected;
and gnash the teeth, like so many already hellish Fiends, against all those
happy Ones, whom they see walk with constancy and comfort in that holy way,
to innumetable joys; which they with certain knowledge of their heart, and
against the clear light of their conscience, have wretchedly abandoned for
ever: And so sin against the holy Ghost.

5. The Papists also, as upon the unblessed grounds of their Antichristian
doctrine, cannot possibly build any true persuasion of being in Gods favor; so
they are bound out by the tenor of their heretical Tenent, from thinking it
lawful to entertain any vnwauering certainety that way.

6. Nay further, some out of a Pharisaicall pretense of humility and modesty;
but in truth, from the secret suggestion of a guilty conscience, which
ministers unto them more then matter enough of true and just doubting, are
notable wranglers for Papisticall doubting. (...) Papistic^.


Thus you see, some there are also, who do not assure themselves of future
happiness, either upon true or false grounds. Yet I am persuaded, the greatest
part of those who live within the sound of the Gospel, are ordinarily
confident without cause, and secure of their salvation; when as in truth and
trial They have no surer interest or better claim to the kingdom of heaven,
then the foolish Virgins, and the rest of that deluded rank, which I mentioned
a little before. Let a Minister of some great Congregation, wherein there are
very few Professors, which is no hard thing to find, and where there is no
profession, especially the Gospel being peaceably preached, there can
ordinarily be no power of Christianity; shows there may be, indeed without
substance; but not the power of godliness, without visible appearance; as
appears in the Preparatiues: I say, let him interrogate, and ask the rest of
his people one after another, be they hundreths or thousands, what conceits
they hold of themselves for the world to come? what they think will become of
them after this life? what their present judgment is of their spiritual
estate? And I think he shall scarce meet with any, who will not in some kind
or other discover some groundless confidence of his wellbeing that way. Their
answer ordinarily would be to this purpose: We thank God, we have Just like
the Pharise, Luke 18. 11.
a good faith to Godwards: We have believed in Christ, ever since we may
remember: We hope God will be merciful; though we be not Scripture-men, nor so
forward as others, or such followers of Sermons, etc. yet we look to be saved
as well as the best of them all, etc. Upon the matter, and in sum: We doubt
not but we shall go to heaven. And if their Minister should reply: But I pray
you tell me, you that are so confident, Do you believe, and repent, and make
conscience of all our ways, etc? Yea, would they say, with all our hearts,
else it were pity we should live. When as, God knows, it is neither so nor
so: their poor frozen flinty hearts, never yet melted before the Ministry of
the Word; were never truly touched with remorse for their innumerable sins;
never warmed with any saving work of the holy Ghost; but ever thus far,
mere strangers to the mystery of Christ. (Those that are true of heart, are
not wont to contest for the integrity, but ever to complain of the
naughtiness and untowardness of their hearts.) And therefore if they become
not new men in the mean time, the veil of their selfedelusion Haec dico, ne
quis Ecclesiam propter multitudinem admiretur, etc. Quot esse putatis in
ciuitate nostra, qui salui fiant* infestum quidem est, quod dicturus sum; dicam
tamen: Non possunt in tot millibus, centum inueniti qui saluentur; quin and de
his dubito. A^ populum Antioch* Hom. 40.
and vain confidence, will most certainly at last be frighted and fired from
their blinded minds, with that terrible and dreadful doom; Depart from me, I
know you not. Chrysostom in one of his homilies, to his people of Antioch,
teaching them not to trust in multitude, speaks thus unto them: How many do
you think, are there in our city, which be in the state of salvation? It will
vex, which I am about to speak; yet I will speak it: There cannot amongst so
many thousands, an hundred be found, which are in that state: Nay, and I doubt
whether all those. Now had this good Father at the same time demanded of those
many thousands besides, what they conceived of themselves for salvation: do
you not think he would have found them all well conceited of themselves? Would
not they with much bitterness and heat, have exagitated his censure, as too
peremptory and unmerciful, and been ready to retort: Howsoever you dote upon
the Disciples you draw after you, and only approve and applaud the Ioanites:
(for so they were called, because his name was John:) yet we hope to do as
well as they, and come to heaven as soon as the precisest of those you have in
so high esteem.

Here then let me a little illighten and open in a word, as I promised, the
Mystery of this spiritual Selfe-deceit.

For which purpose know, that Satan first discouers in our corrupt nature and
crooked dispositions, a very pregnant ground, whereupon to practice this
notable imposture, I mean, the original poison of natural presumption,
whereby we are all apt to be fearelesse and senseless of our present
spiritual misery; and hand ouer-head to catch at any vain shadow of
counterfeit confidence for our future welfare: Secondly, he observes in the
party he intends to delude, the most plausible matter, and selfe-pleasing
apprehensions, which may make the fittest medium to mis-inferre a false
conclusion for his spiritual safety: Lastly, by some flashes of his personated
Angelical light, he sets upon it the glimmering flourish of a presumptuous
impression, and so seals up the deceived soul, with the spirit of slumber and
groundless security.

Now the insufficient matter, rotten grounds, false mediums, as we call them in
the Schools, which Satan by his Sophistry does cunningly and cruelly abuse, to
cast many thousands into a pleasing golden dream of imaginary spiritual
safety, and Selfe-deceit; and into a fools Paradise of a soule-coozening
conclusion, are such as these:

1. Measuring a man's self by himself: himself perhaps formerly, grossly
ignorant, and notoriously lewd: by himself now grown civil, and somewhat
illuminated with divine knowledge: but yet neither holy, nor ever truly
humbled.

2. Comparing himself with others, who are Satan's outrageous reuellers, in
respect of his moral moderation, and something more civil carriage.

3. Arguing Gods special love and saving favor, from his outward prosperous
state, and blessings in temporal things. So the fatting Ox might think with
himself, I shall surely live; because I feed in this green rich Pasture.

4. Concluding from crosses, that he is a son, and not a bastard; that he
has his punishment here, as they say, etc. whereas they are but the just
effects of Gods secret curse, blowing upon his counsels, dealings, and
undertakings; for his covetousness, inconsionableness, hatred to be
reformed; and except he truly turn in the mean time, will prove the very
foretastes, and pieces, as it were, of hellish torments.

5. Sometimes, nothing but selfeloue serves the devils turn, to lock up a
carnal heart in this security and causeless confidence; especially in some
extremely ignorant people; who easily believe that which they desire: and have
no other ground of their going to heaven, but because they would have it so.

6. Common conceits and corrupt Notions, compounded of gross ignorance, and
Popish folly; that a man's good meanings, and good doings, as they ignorantly
speak; nay, and as some have said, his day-labour will help him to heaven,
and serve his turn for salvation. And if any of these sottish cauillers be
questioned, and challenged for the unsoundness of his spiritual state; he
will be ready, with absurd rudeness and irksome clamor, to break out into
such brags as these: What tell you me of these high points, or trouble me
with this new learning? I was never asked thus much before in all my life, and
yet the time is to come that ever our Parson threatened to keep me from the
Communion: I do no man wrong: I pay every man his own: I am neither thief,
nor drunkard, nor whoremaster: I live peaceably amongst my neighbors, etc. I
know as much as the Preacher can tell me, though he preach out his heart: That
I must love God above all, and my neighbor as my self; and that I hope I do,
etc. whereas poor blinded soul! he is (...) (...) pride, ignorance,
profaneness, and impenitencie, as the skin (...), and is ^moothly carried
hoodwinckt by the devil to hell, without all noise, or any contradiction.

7. The work of Gods restraining Spirit: Which sometimes by its power and
terror, keeps in, and confines a man's inward corruption, that it breaks not
out into such open outrages and outward villainies, as in some other wicked
Ones: And that for the good and quiet of his own people, or some other secret
ends seen, and seeming good to his heavenly Highness. Now this restraint, by
the delusion of the devil, and deceit of a man's own heart, may be
apprehended as a great conquest over corruption, and so a conversion thence
vainly concluded.

8. Education in a religious family, thus: Some in such a place, being only
outwardly warmed with the heat of holy exercises about them; and by custom,
and for company, grown conformable to religious duties with some contentment;
depart thence with a ^aineglorious conceit and unsound persuasion, that they
are also of the right stamp, because they were so long amongst spiritual
tools; and at the fire, which might indeed have truly melted their yet too
frozen and flinty hearts. Put a Sow into a green meadow, and she will keep
her self as fair as the Sheep: but let her break out, and she will wallow
again in the mire as filthily as before: so it is with too many such.

9. Much knowledge, and noble defense of that blessed Orthodoxe Truth which we
profess, without a kindly saving impression of goodness and grace in the
heart. Many great men, and great Scholars, more is the pity, are empoysoned
with this conceit; they are self conceited, that if they be zealous Patrones,
and protectours of true Religion, they are safe enough for salvation; though,
alas! they be mere strangers, nay, too many times opposites to the power and
practice thereof.

10. The benefit of a better nature, and a constitution not so precipitant and
prone to some corruptions. For instance* A man hereby may see others l^e (...)
most abominable beastly sin of drunkenness; when his heart rises against
such swinish filth: others transported with furious and fiery passions, when as
his milder temper knows no such rage: others hunting after high rooms, with
the hazard of their souls, and certain ship wrack of a good conscience;
when as his solitary disposition affects retiredness and home. Thus when it is
many times the infirmity, impotencie, or deformity of nature, or at best, but
the natural moderation of a better complexion, that dis-inclines and disables
him from the acting of some grosser evils; he fondly conceiues, that it is the
power and soueraignetie of grace, which makes the difference betwixt himself
and other sons of Belial, who by natures impetuousnesse, are more prone and
provoked thereunto.

11. The heartlesse effects of slavish fear, which sometimes will curb some
kind of men from committing some notorious sins, and spur them forward to
the outward performance of some holy duties; yet they, not marking the motives,
manner, or end; nor taking to heart at all the gross exorbitancy of any of
them, but only eying the work wrought; may causlesly be too well conceited
of themselves, and so coozen their own souls. But let no truehearted
Nathaneel here mistake: I know some of Gods dearest Children, who make
conscience of all sin, and to please God in all things, yet in darkness of
their melancholy, or heat of temptation, may fear all is naught with them;
because they fear they do all for slavish fear. But their fears,
iealousies, hearty complaints, and holy desires to the contrary, may minister
comfort enough, if they will be counseled, until they come out of temptation.

12. Even the blessed Word of God, misunderstood, and wretchedly abused to the
devils advantage, and damnation of men's souls. For instance: Some suck poison
out of that heavenly flower, Romans 10. 13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord, shall be saved: collecting, and concluding thence, that if they can
say, Lord, Lord, though they be mere strangers to the life of Grace; yet they
shall live for ever. But such should know, that every one who in that saving
sense calls upon the Name of the Lord, must depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.
19. and must sauingly believe, Romans 10. 14. Now such a fruitful faith ever
purifies the heart, Acts 15. 9. and is inseparably attended with a glorious
train of heavenly graces, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness, charity, 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. I have heard with mine own
ears, that place, Romans 12. 1. sottishly perverted, to the maintenance of
lukewarmenesse, coldness in Religion, and goodfellowship: When purity in
heart, holiness of life, universal obedience, and other requisites to
salvation have been pressed; it has been replied in good earnest: I pray
you, why are you so hot? what needs all this? what needs so much ado, when a
reasonable thing will serve the turn? Is it not said, which is your reasonable
service? Now I often wonder what such men as these mean, who are Proctors and
pleaders for this Leodicean reserved mediocritie and politic moderation in
matters of heaven? what worship and service they would proportion out for the
All-powerfull God? Does any man of brain conceive, that the mighty dreadful
Lord, and Judge of all the world, who offers unto us by the Ministry, in the
mean time, his own dear Son, with all the rich purchases of his hearts
blood; and would give us the full fruition of himself hereafter, with all the
glory and endless felicities above, will be bobd off (if I may so speak) with
an heartlesse formal outwardnesse, with a cold rotten carcass of religion? It
cannot be: He is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in Spirit and truth. If men
will needs harden themselves in bitterness and blasphemies, against the purity
and power of godliness; if they will still browbeate and bear down their
brethren, for their zeal and feruencie in the affairs of God; let them tear
those sacred leaves out of Gods blessed Book, that sparkle out unto us the
holy fire of forwardness and heat; and press upon us punctually power,
spirit, and quickening in heavenly businesses, and the services of our most
bountiful and euer-blessed God. See Luke 13. 24. Romans 12. 11. Ephesians. 5. 15.
Matthew. 5. 29, 30. and 11. 12. 1. Cor. 9. 24. 1. These. 5. 22. Phil. 1. 10.

13. A bare speculatiue opposition, and verbal contradiction to the
corruptions of the times and controuerted ceremonies. For I doubt there are
some, who seeing some of Gods dearest Children, both godly Ministers, and other
Christians, only out of tenderness of conscience, stand unresolved about
these latter; are too well persuaded of themselves spiritually, for a mere
boystrous masterlike partaking with them in that particular; when as they have
no part at all in their holy graces and humble sanctification.

14. An ouerheady furious zeal in will worship, superstitious forms, and
selfe-conceited services: As in Paul, yet unconverted, and many ignorant
Papists, not so exactly acquainted with Antichristian Schoole-points: in the
pursuit of some religious distempers and spiritual exorbitancies, bred only
in some fantastical brain, given over, for horrible pride, to strong
delusion; yet tendered with many holy pretenses, and representations of highest
perfection; nay, sometimes seconded with strange revelations and raptures, the
mere iugglings of the devils Angelical glory in melancholic, or otherwise
deluded imaginations: and so Satan can put a Familist or Anabaptist even into a
trance of imaginary joy.

15. Serious meditation upon that quickening passage of Christ's holy Sermon, of
the fewness of those which shall be Mat. 7. 14.
saved, should properly and naturally keen our desires and endeauours to a
singular constant contention after an holy strictness, forwardness, and
fruitfulness in every good work, and all the ways of God; that we might be
sure to be in the number of those few: yet by accident it may confirm some
kind of men not so notorious, under the means, yet unconverted, in a false
persuasion of their good estate to Godward, and that thus: Some there may be of
larger capacity, and more understanding, who out of a contemplation of that
great universal deluge of Turcisme, Paganism, Iudaisme, and Infidelity, which
at this day does fearfully ouerflow the face of the Earth; scarce the fifth
part whereof now professes Christ: and also out of a nearer consideration of
the state of Christendom, wherein Popery, that foul sink and Hydra of all
heresies; besides too many other exorbitant giddy deuiations from the sobriety
and analogy of true Religion, and the path which is truly called Holy,
mightily prevail, and damnably empoyson innumerable souls: and which is yet
more, feeing so many amongst those who profess Christ truly, I mean, in
respect of doctrine, notoriously lewd, and profanely naught; so many Atheists,
Drunkards, Scorners, Swearers, Worldlings, etc. And then after this prospect
and survey abroad, reflecting a partial eye upon themselves, and their own
ways; and finding themselves in the bosom of the Church, and civil men;
think verily out of their extreme blindness and spiritual folly, that Heaven
would be unfurnished, and vnfilled, if they should be excluded; and that it
were a disparagement to the mercies of God, to rank and arraigne them amongst
Turks and Pagans at that last great Day. But if to their civil honesty, they
add a formal profession; why, then they think, they have a great deal of
wrong, if salvation be denied them: then already in conceit they knock and
bounce, as it were, at the Gates of heaven for entrance, with great boldness
and confidence like the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. 11. and those, Matthew. 7.
22. and with the Pharise, give God thanks for their good estate to Himward.
Alas, poor souls! Let no man deceive you with vain words, neither delude
your own souls with idle fancies. To whomsoever the glorious Gospel of
Christ shines sauingly, and breathes spiritual life, they must deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts; live Titus ^. 11, 12*
soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world. Mere civil honesty
never brought any unto Heaven. And every Heb. 12. 14.
lukewarm Professor shall certainly be spued out of the Revel. 3. 16.
mouth of Christ.

16. But amongst all the unsound grounds, insufficient matter, and false
mediums, upon which Satan, and the deceitful heart labor to erect their
rotten buildings of vain hopes in the credulous conceits of those, who are
carried hoodwinkt toward Hell; all which in the time of trial, and under the
tempest of Gods visiting wrath, will prove but a Spiders web. They shall lean
upon their house, but it shall not Job 8. 14, 15.
stand; they shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure. I say, amongst them
all, there is not any that does set on the counterfeit seal of this false
persuasion with more peremptorinesse and confidence, then a concurrence of
those excellencies, perfections, endowments incident to Temporaries, and
attaineable in the state of unregeneration; which I have touched in my
Discourse of true happiness, and may be collected from such places as these,
Matthew. 27. 3, 4. Mark. 6. 20. Luke 13. 26. and 18. 11, 12. Matthew. 12. 53. and
25. 1, etc. Heb. 6. 4, 5. 2. Pet. 2. 20, 22.

Now these and the like, are the unsound, seeming, and insufficient grounds
whereupon the Devil works; and does easily, by the aid of natural
presumption, and his own Angelical flashes, insinuate, and infer his
soule-coozening conclusions, and cunningly infuse the poison of spiritual
selfe-deceit thus, or in the like manner: (I will give instance only in the
last; he is wont also proportionably from the rest, to conclude such
groundless confidence, and false persuasions of a good estate toward God.)

Whosoever does with some penitent remorse tremble under the revenging wrath of
God for sin, and out of that horror confesses and makes restitution: (and yet
so did Judas, Mat. 27.) Whosoever reuerenceth a godly Minister, hears him
gladly, and does many things after his doctrine: (and yet so did Herod, Mark.
6. 20.) Whosoever does hold conformity in profession with the best, etc. (and
yet so did the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.) Whosoever is an hearer of the Word,
and that with quickness, and receives it with joy: (and yet so does the stony
ground, Matthew. 13. 20.) Whosoever is able to disclaim gross sins, gives
every man his due, fasteth, prays, and gives alms: (and yet so did the
Pharise, Luke 18. 11. 12. Matthew. 6. 1.) Whosoever is illightned, tastes of the
heavenly gift, etc. (and yet such may afterward fall away irrecouerably, Heb.
6. etc.) is sure enough to be saved at last.

But I, may the deluded Pharise, and formal Professor say, find and feel
all, or most, or many of these in my self: (For what any unregenerate man has
heretofore attained, it is not impossible, but that any now, or hereafter, may
attain the same.)

Therefore does he conclude falsely out of Satan's Sophistry, I am safe enough
for salvation.

And in all this, Satan, lest he should be wanting to his, labors by a lying
resemblance, to imitate the work of the holy Ghost, in the hearts of the
faithful. For that which the Devil, putting on the glory of an Angel of
light, puts upon his followers in this kind falsely and groundlessely; That
the blessed Spirit performs to those, who are true of heart truly, and upon
good ground.

For it is not the universality, and excellency of all natural, civil,
merely moral, politic, and learned endowments, and sufficiencies: but above
and besides all these, a supernatural, heavenly, and special work of the
Spirit, sanctifying the^ all for Gods glorious service. It is not a bare task
of holy duties, religious exercises, presence at the ordinances outwardly
performed: but the soul, as it were, of saving grace, animating and informing
them with spiritual life, reverent heartinesse, and fruitful improouement. It
is not the glistering blaze of a visible forward profession of Religion: but
the power of godliness, and sincere practice of works of justice, mercy and
truth. It is not a general participation of the Spirit, the Spirit only of
illumination, or largest speculatiue co^prehensions of sacred knowledge: but an
humble, fruitful, experimental skill, and dexterity in the mystery of Christ,
and of walking humbly with our God; which does soundly comfort the heart of a
man spiritually wise, about assurance of his happy estate to Godward. And
therefore the true Christian, when he would refresh his spirits with the sweet
contemplation of his spiritual safety, and comfortable being in a gracious
state, causes his sincere conscience to answer in truth to such like
interrogatories, as those which I have proposed for trial in such a case, in
my Discourse of true happiness, page 85. etc. Reuiew the place, and ponder
well upon them. He ordinarily has recourse unto, and runs over in his mind
with an humble rauishing commemoration, the heavenly footsteps, and mighty
works of the holy Ghost in his conversion; special watchfulness over his
ways; sincere-heartednesse, holy strictness, and sanctified singularities in
his conversation; which as they are peculiar to Gods people, so are the
mysteries and strange things to the best unregenerate man; and that thus, or in
the like manner:

Blessed be God, says he within himself, that ever it was so, yet so it was:
The holy Ministry of the Word sanctified, and guided particularly for that
purpose by the finger of God, happily seized upon me, while I did yet abide in
the arms of darkness, and the Devils snares, a most polluted, carnal,
abominable wretch; and effectually exercised its saving power upon my soul,
both by the workings of the Law, and of the Gospel. It was first as an hammer
to my Ier. 2^. 29.
heart, and broke it in pieces. By a terrible cutting piercing power, it
struck a shaking and trembling into the very center Hab. 3. 16.
of my soul by this double effect.

1. It first opened the book of my conscience, wherein I read with a most
heavy heart, ready to fall asunder, even like drops of water, for horror of the
sight; the execrable abominations of my youth; the innumerable swarms of lewd
and lawless thoughts, that all my life long had stained mine inward parts with
strange pollutions; the continual wicked walking of my tongue; the cursed
profanation of Gods blessed Sabbaths, Sacraments, and all the means of
salvation I ever meddled with. In a word, all the hels, sinkes and Sodoms of
lusts and sin, of vanities and villainies I had remorselesly wallowed in ever
since I was borne, I say, I looked Workings of the Law.
upon all these engraven by Gods angry hand upon the face of my conscience, in
bloody and burning lines. 2. Whereupon in a second place, it opened upon me
the Armory of Gods flaming wrath, and fiery indignations; nay, and the very
mouth of hell, ready to empty themselves, and execute their utmost upon mine
amazed, and guilty soul.

In these restless, and raging perplexities, wherewith my poor soul was
extremely scorched, and parched with penitent pain; His wrath, who is a
consuming fire, wringing Workings of the Gospel.
my very heart strings with unspeakable anguish; Jesus Christ blessed for
ever, was lifted up unto me in the Gospel, as an Antitype to the erecting of
the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness. In whom dying and bleeding upon the
Cross, I beheld an infinite treasury of mercy and love; a boundless and
bottomless sea of tender-heartednesse, and pity; a whole heaven of
sweetness, peace and spiritual pleasures. Whereupon there sprung up and was
inkindled in mine heart, an extreme thirst, ardent desires, vehement longings
after that sovereign saving blood, which alone could ease my grieved soul,
and turn my foulest sins into the whitest snow. So that in the case I then
was, had I had in full taste, and sole command, the pleasures, profits, joys
and glory of many worlds, willingly would I have parted with them all: and had
I had a thousand lives, freely would I have laid them all down; nay, with all
mine heart would I have been content to have lain for a season in the very
flames of Hell, to have had the present horror of my confounded spirit
comforted from heaven; and my spiritual thirst allayed and a little cooled,
but with one drop of Christ's precious blood; the darkness, desolations of my
woeful heart refresht, and revived, but with the least glimpse of Gods
favorable countenance. The edge, and eagerness of which inflamed affections,
made me cast about with infinite care how to compass so dear a comfort. Then
came into my mind, (the holy Spirit being my merciful Remembrancer,) those
many melting compassionate inuitations, more warming, and welcome to my heavy
heart, then many golden worlds, more delicious then delight it self, Matthew.
11. 28. Reu. 21. 6. Ioh. 7. 37. Isa. 55. 1. and 57. 15, 16. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31,
32. and 33. 11. So that at last, O blessed work of faith! staying my self,
and resting my sinking soul upon the Rock of eternity, and the impregnable
truth of these sweetest promises, sealed with the blood of the Lord Jesus, and
as sure as God himself, I threw my self into the merciful and meritorious
arms of my crucified Lord; with this resolution, and reply to all terrors and
temptations to the contrary; that if I must needs be cast away, they shall
tear, and rent me from the tender bowels of Gods dearest compassions, upon
which I have cast my self: If they will have me to hell, they shall pull and
hale me from the bleeding wounds of my blessed Redeemer, to which my soul is
fled. Whereupon I found, and felt (and I bless God infinitely, and will
through all eternity, that ever it was so,) conveyed, and derived upon me from
my blessed Jesus, the welspring of immortality and life, a quickening influence
of his mighty Spirit, and heavenly vigor of saving grace, whereby I became a
new man, quite changed, new created. By this vital moving, and incubation, as
it were, of the Spirit of Christ upon the face of my soul, all things became
new: mine heart, affections, thoughts, words, actions, delights, desires,
sorrows, society, etc. Old things passed away, behold, all things become new.
^. Cor. 5. 17.
And I am sure my change is sound, and saving; for it is not 1. A mere moral
change from notoriousnesse, to ciuility, and no further. 2. Nor a formal
change only, which adds to moral honesty, outward profession, and outside
conformity to the ordinances, holy exercises, most duties of Religion; and no
more. 3. Nor merely mental. I mean it thus: (for (...), Trans^entatio.
I know, true repentance is called change of mind, in another sense.) When the
understanding only is illightened with divine knowledge, gilded over, as it
were, with the dazeling splendour of general graces, not without some
speculatiue flashes of fleeting joy, swimming in the brain indeed, but not
rooted in the heart. 4. Not temporary only, such as that, Matthew. 12. 43. 2.
Pet. 2. 20, 22. when a man discontinues, and surceases from the outward
practice, perhaps of all gross sins for a time: out of terror; sudden
fright from some Son of thunder; or upon trial, whether by his own
strength, he be able to endure, and digest a divorce from his darling
pleasure; and the holy ways of those who walk toward heaven, without too much
coffeehouse; (for without too sore a crush to his carnal heart, he could
be content to look after a crown of life, and I wite him not.) Or for some
other by-end. But because his heart was not honest and good, neither did the
Word take an humble root in it, nor himself resolve upon a sincere, general
and constant self-denial at first, he falls again upon his former vomit,
and again wallowes in the mire of his sensual pleasures, with more rage and
resolution then before. 5. Nor partial, where there may be an outward
reformation in the most things; but yet there is still retained a secret
resolved reservation of an impenitent, entire enioyment of all the delights,
and full sweetness of the bosom sin; which is utterly incompatible, and
cannot possibly consist with a truly religious and regenerate state. I say, my
change (I only, and infinitely magnify, admire, and adore the free grace and
love of my most holy, and ever blessed God for it) was not only moral,
formal, mental, temporary, or partial, in the sense I have said: but
universal, both in respect of the subject and object, as they say; without all
reseruations, exceptions, sensual distinctions, Pharisaicall imposture,
partialities, hypocrisies, selfe-delusion. For my teachers have told me by the
touchstone of his pure and holy truth: That every true change is of the whole
man, from the whole service of Satan, to the living God, in sincere obedience
to his whole Law, in the whole course of our lives. That it is discernable, and
differenced from all partial, insufficient, hollow, halfe-conuersions: By 1.
Integrity of change: I mean, in all parts and powers of spirit, soul and
body: in the understanding, judgment, memory, conscience: in the will,
affections, desires, thoughts: in the eyes, ears, tongue, hands, feet: for
even as they were members of the body before employed wholly for Satan and
sensuality; so now are they also become instruments of righteousness unto
God. God begets no monsters, as they say: a child newborn has all the parts
of a man, though not the perfection of his growth: So a newborn babe in
Christ is thoroughly, and universally changed; though not yet a perfect man in
Christ. 2. Sincerity of change: as well in heart, and inwards parts, as in
life and outward carriage. O Jerusalem, Ierem. 4. 14.
says the Prophet, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? No external
privileges of Religion, though never so glorious; no exactness of the work
wrought; no Pharisaicall forms of devotion; no outward behavior, be it never
so blameless; no cost or contributions in the service of God, will serve the
turn, without sincerity of heart. Though a man should come before the Lord
with thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil: should be give
his firstborn for his transgression, the fruit of his body, for the sin of
his soul: should he bestow all his goods to feed the poor, and give his body
to be burned: were he able to comprehend within his brain the whole Book of
God, and with the largeness of his understanding devour all that holy sense:
should he eat, and drink up at the Lords Table, all the sanctified Bread and
Wine; were he plunged over head and ears in the Water of Baptism: nay, if it
were possible, washed outwardly from top to toe in the precious blood of
Christ; yet all this were more then all in vain, and utterly unavailable,
without uprightness of the heart, and purity in the inward parts. 3.
Spiritual growth. Unregenerate men at the best, grow but in the generalities,
flourishes, devout representations, and temporary forwardness of formal
Christianity. Which is like the growth of corn on the house top; or the seed
springing out of the stony ground; but the honest and good heart brings forth
fruit with patience. Spiritual stuntings there may be, and standings at a
stay for a time. But as good corn in a good soil being refreshed after a
binding drought with a grou^d-showre, springs up faster, and more freshly: so
it is with the soundhearted Christian, after a dampe in grace; to which he may
sometimes be subject. For being rowzed and awaked out of such a state, by the
quickening voice of a piercing ministry; the cutting sting of an heavy cross,
or some other special hand of God, he lays hold upon the Kingdom of Christ
with more holy violence then before, and labors afterward, by the help of
God, to repair his former spiritual decay, with double diligence in
watchfulness, zeal, and heauenly-mindednesse. Progress in Christianity is
resembled to the thriuing of a Child; which may fall into sickness; but 1.
Pet. 2. 2, 3.
it many times proves a growing ague: To a man in a Phil. 3. 13, 14.
race, who may stumble, and fall; but after his rising takes surer footing, and
runs faster: To the ascending of the Sun Prou. 4. 18.
toward midday, which may be ouercast with a cloud; but after he has
recovered a clear sky, shines more brightly and sweetly. 4. Self-denial. Of
which, see something before, page 52. He that would soundly comfort his
conscience with the true testimony of a true Convert, must at the first giving
his name unto Christ, and upon his proclaiming War, and entering the lists
against Satan, sound with a sincere heart, the depth of that fundamental
principle of Christianity, and Christ's own holy rule: If any man shall come
after Math. 16. 24. Mar. 8. 34. Luke 9. 23. and 14. 33.
me, let him deny himself, etc. As Soon as he resignes up himself to this
Royal service under the colors of the Lord Jesus, he must presently in our
Saviors sense, make over all his interest in liberty, life, liuelihood, all
earthly pleasures and treasures, without any reservation, or he will certainly
faint, and fall off in the day of battle. The necessity of this rule and
resolution, is intimated unto us in two Parables, Luke 14. 28, 31. A man that
will build, must count the cost beforehand, and make sure of means to defray
the charge. Otherwise to begin, and not able to make an end; were but to lay
a groundwork of his disgrace and scorn, in the loss of his cost and pains.
A Prince which would wisely make War, must first have a true trial of his
own, and dexterity to discover his enemies strength; otherwise to bid him
battle, were but to incense him more, and thrust a title into his hands, to
defeat him of all he has. He that seriously sets himself to seek God in
truth, and to save his soul indeed, must cast up his reckonings beforehand,
what will be required at his hands, and consult with his own heart, whether
willing to forgo all such contentments, hopes, pleasures, preferments, worldly
comforts which are incompatible with a good conscience, and the path that is
called holy: and to endure all those troubles; and indignities from the angry
world, which ordinarily are wont to crown the heads of all Christ's Soldiers;
else most certainly he will shrink in the wetting. He must resolve by the
invincible nobleness of his Christian courage, to digest the hate and
opposition of dearest friends, nearest kindred; the raylings, and reproaches of
men most abject and contemptible, in respect of those whom they revile: he must
be content to become the drunkards song, table-talk to those that Psalm. 69. 12.
sit in the gate, and the byword of basest men, viler then the Job 30. 8, 9.
earth, etc. In a word, he must prize, and prefer his sweetest Savior, His
truth, cause and service infinitely before the whole world.

Now besides my blessed change thus qualified, and this glorious work of the
Holy Ghost upon my soul; by the help of God, I have stood at the staves end
with the darling pleasure and minion delight of my former damned time ever
since I was newborn: I have ever since made conscience of all sin, and to
perform all holy duties: I have had respect to all Gods Commandments, and all
his Ordinances: I have loved dearly my blessed Lord, and all things that
belong unto him; His Titles, Attributes, creatures, works of Justice and
Mercy; His Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Ministers, Services, Children, Presence,
Corrections, Coming: I have since delighted in the Saints, the only excellent
Ones upon Psalm. 16. 3.
earth, whom I heartily hated before: I have daily, with as great earnestness
and feruency, as my poor dull heart could possibly, complained, and cried unto
my God in Prayer against mine own sins, passionate distempers, rebellious
risings, the malice of Satan, the allurements of the world, corruptions of the
times, the cruelties of strange iniections and horrible temptations, my many
and often faylings, frailties, and imperfections. Upon due and impartial
examination, I have happily rid mine hands of all that consuming pelf, which
any way crept into mine estate, by wicked and wrongful means in the days of
mine iniquity. (For scarce any man in the state of nature, but deals falsely
in one kind or other.) I have desired and endeavored to adorn my profession,
as well with works of justice, mercy, and truth, as by the outward acts of
piety: Herein I have exercised my self, to have Acts 24. 16.
always a good conscience, void of offense, toward God and toward man, etc.

And in all these passages and particulars, both of my conversion and
conversation, had I only reposed upon the outward act, and rested in the work
wrought, I had utterly fainted, and been quite undone in the day of
adversity. But truth of heart was the touchstone, and sincerity is the sinew
of all my assurance and comfort this way.

I have been, I confess, yet full sore against my will, and the hearty desire
of my soul, haunted, and hindered in passing through the pangs of my new birth,
and managing my Christian businesses; with the violent intrusion, and
insinuating mixture of many imperfections, distractions, temptations, wants,
weaknesses, infirmities, and faylings; privy pride, secret hypocrisy,
distrusts, and deadness of mine own naughty heart. I was much wanting, by
reason of the natural rebellion of mine hard heart, to those workings of the
Law and Gospel mentioned before. I have come far short of that sorrow for
sin, which I desired, and of that heauenly-mindednesse in performing holy
duties which was required. But then I have from time to time grieved, and
groaned under those too many frailties and defects, as under an heavy burden.
I have many a time bitterly bewailed them in secret: they have made me walk
more humbly before my God, and toward men. I have continually complained
heartily against them at the Throne of Grace. I have sincerely desired, and
endeavored after all those means which might restrain and mortify them, and
made conscience to discover and decline their unwelcome insinuations, and so I
have gone on still in the holy Path, with sincerity of heart, and in obedience
unto God; still upholding mine heart with consideration of the sweet and
merciful disposition of my dearest heavenly Father, who ever, if the heart be
upright and truly humble, takes the will for the deed; and accepts us 2. Cor.
8. 12.
according to that which we have, and not according to that which we have not.
And therefore I am most sure (neither, by the help of God, shall all the
devils in hell drive me from this hold) that they are all buried for ever in
the righteous and meritorious blood of my blessed Savior. And so I hold up my
head still against all contradiction of carnal reason, natural distrust,
Satan's cruel suggestions; being well assured: That hearty humiliation, and
grieuing under weakness in well-doing, is as true a fruit of sanctification,
and mark of true conversion; as spiritual ability to do well. It is not so
much the muchnesse and quantity, as the truth of grace, not so much the
exactness of the outward act in performing holy duties, as sincerity of heart,
which qualifies a broken heart, for comfort in the promises of life, and
assurance of Gods love. Though I know well, there was never any who tasted
truly grace, but he sincerely thirsted and endeavored after more. Never did
any man well in the worship and services of God, who did not bewail his wants
and faylings therein, and truly desire and labor to do better. It is the
property of Pharisees and formal professors, to conceive that they are
spiritually rich enough already, and have need Revel. 3. 17.
of nothing: but the better the Christian is, the more sensible he is, and
heartily complaining of his spiritual poverty, naughty heart, and manifold
imperfections.

Here now then may we see in this Discourse of the true Convert, comforting
himself in the point of his spiritual estate; other kind of stuff, sincere
matter, sounder grounds, more special workings of the holy Ghost; then any one
of the forementioned deluded Ones was ever practically and experimentally
acquainted with. Neither is this all. The true Christian has yet more noble,
immediate, and demonstratiue evidences, to strengthen his heart in the
assurance of Gods everlasting love unto him through Christ, and present
possession of his favor. For (with submission to better judgments, and the
spirit of the Prophets) I conceive that a sanctified man may be assured of his
spiritual safety, and sound estate to Godwards diverse ways.

1. By the evidence and single act of internal Vision. We 1. Cor. 2. 12.
have received, says the Apostle, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of
God, that is to say, say our Countrymen of Rhemes, Christ's Incarnation,
Passion, presence in the Sacrament, and the incomprehensible joys of heaven.
But it is clear in the Text, that the Apostle speaks of all the gifts
generally that are given us of God, whither serves the argument of comparison,
that as a man's spirit teaches him to know all his thoughts that are in him, at
the least, in some measure: so also the Spirit of God teaches the Believers to
know all that God has given them. He does not say, that we know Gods gifts;
but that we know the gifts that God has given unto us. See further to this
point and purpose, 1. Ioh. 5. 13. 2. Tim. 1. 12. By a secret and sacred
irradiation of the Spirit of faith, the sanctified soul is ascertained of its
personal and particular dependence, and reliance upon the promises of life,
and Gods mercies through Christ, by which it knows it has eternal life, Ioh.
3. 36.

As certainly as he that has a corporal eye, knows that he Quam certo is,
qui praeditus est oculo corporeo, nouit se videre: tam certo is qui perfunditur
hoc fidei lumine, nouit se credere: nam Spiritus adoptionis, per quem clamat
Abba Pater, conteflatur ipsi quod sit filius Dei. Romans 8. 15, 16. Til^n.
sees: so certainly, he that is illuminated with the light of faith, knows
that he believes. The glorious splendor of such an orient, and heavenly Jewel
cannot but show it self, and shine clearly to the heart wherein it dwells.
Like a bright lamp set up in the soul, it does not only manifest other
things; but also it self appears by its own light: when I see and rely upon
a man promising me this, or that, I know I see, and rely upon him: shall I by
faith behold my blessed Redeemer, lifted up as an Antitype to the brazen
Serpent, for the everlasting cure of my wounded conscience, and rest upon him,
and yet know no such thing.

Hear how clear learned Austin is for this internal vision. Menti no strae
fides nostra conspicua est. Epist. 112. cap. 3.
Our faith, says he, is conspicuous to our own mind. Fides ipsa mente
vtique videtur, Ibid. cap. 2.
Faith it self is seen in the mind, although that which is believed by
faith, is invisible. Eam fidem tenet certissima scientia, clamatque
conscientia. De Trinitate. Lib. 13. cap. 1.
A man holds his faith by most certain knowledge, and plain attestation of
conscience. Suam igitur quisque fidem apud seipsum videt: in altero autem
credit esse eam, non videt, and tanto ^irmius credit, quanto fructus eius magis
nouit, quos operari solet fides per dilectionem. Ibid. cap. 2.
Every man sees his Faith in himself, etc. Even Sed vult dicere, quod habens
fide^, ita certus est se habere fidem, sicut certus est de quocunque alio:
credens enim exper^tur se credere, and per co^sequens habere fide^: nihil autem
est certius experientia, ad quam fit resolutio alioru^, vt habeatur plenior
certitudo, lib. 3. D. 23. q. 7. History of the Council of Trent. lib. 2. page
106.
Durandus, taking upon him to expound one of those passages in the forecited
place of Austin, tells us: That he which has faith, is so certain that he
has it, as he is of any other thing: for he that believes, feels that he
believes, and by consequent that he has faith, and there is nothing more
certain then experience, etc. * Vegaes words also in the Council of Trent,
sound this way: As he that is hot, is sure he is so, and should want sense,
if he doubted: so he that has grace in him, does perceive it, and cannot
doubt, yet it is by the sense of the mind, not by divine revelation.

Ob. But if these things be so, how comes it to pass, that Gods dearest
children complain sometimes, that they have neither sight, nor sense of their
faith?

Answ. I speak of that which is ordinary, not ever. The Sun in a clear sky
discouers and manifests it self with a witness; though sometimes it be
ouercast with clouds, or eclipsed with the Moon. This heavenly lamp of Faith
shines, and shows it self clearly enough to the sanctified heart, in the
calmness of a Christian course, and serenitie of the soul; especially
freshly cleared, and purged with showers, as it were, of penitent tears:
though in the dampe of spiritual disertion, darkness of some stronger
temptation, eclipse of earthly-mindednesse, it may lie hid and obscured for a
time. And yet for all this, if Christians would be counseled, and believe the
Prophets; if they would not undervalue Gods infinite mercy, by looking upon
him through a slauishly dejected and melancholic humor, Format sibi I dola de
Deo, iniquitas; fingens ferum and terribilem, qui est amabilis. Bern. Sermon. 38.
Ca^t.
which is wont to represent him as terrible, fierce, and inexorable; whereas in
his own nature and sweetest disposition, he is indeed ever most
compassionate, tenderhearted, and melting over the bleeding miseries of a truly
broken heart: I say, if they would not thus mistake, but conceive aright of
that most adored mystery and bottomless depth of his free love, Hos. 14. 4.
Ezekiel. 16. 8. Ier. 31. 3. Cant. 2. 4. Ioh. 3. 16. and 17. 23. they might, even
in times of desertions, temptations, spiritual afflictions of soul, sweetly
uphold their hearts with assurance of There is in the Saints certitudo
eudent^ae, and certitudo adhaerentiae. The Saints in their greatest extremity,
may hau^ certitudinem adhaerentia, although they hau^ not certitudinem
euidentiae. Job says, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.
Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord, Psalm. 130. 1. In this cast he
must do a^ Pherecide^ the Athenian did, who held the ship on the shore with
his hands; and one of them being cut off, he held with the other; and both
being cut off, he held with his teeth: So should a true Christian d^ in the
time of his greatest dereliction. John Weemse of Lathoquar in Scotland,
Preacher of Christ's Gospel. In his Christian Synagogue, Lib. 3. ca* ^.
Adherence, though for the present they want the assurance of Evidence. For
such an assurance is intimated, Psalm. 22. 1. and 42. 5, 11* and 43. 5. For
instance: many a faithful soul, making conscience of all sin, sincerely
following the best things, resolved without reservation to do or suffer any
thing for Christ, would give a world to be sensibly assured of Gods favor, and
fully persuaded that his sins were pardoned. By reason of the want of sense
and feeling whereof, he slauishly languishes upon the rack of tormenting
fears and terrors, utterly without all cause; neither only so, but thereby
also gratifying the devil, dishonouring Gods free mercy; disabling himself
for a comfortable discharge of both his callings; and that which he little
thinks on, lying in the sin of not receiving comfort, and of not accepting
his own proper legacy which Christ left him, Ioh. 14. 27. For in the mean
time his heart does cleave unto Christ* as to the surest rock. He cries, and
longs after him, and would not part with him for all the world: He would
infinitely rather have his body rent from his soul, then his soul from his
Savior. Ask his affection and resolution this way; and for all his fears and
sorrows, he will tell you, that he will still rest and rely upon his Lord,
and euer-blessed Redeemer, let him do with him as he please; he will trust
in him, though he kill him. Now the internal vision, consciousnesse, reflexed
act, that I may speak in the phrase of the Schools, of this sincere adherence
unto Christ, and those exceeding precious promises of life, sealed with his
Blood, might, and ought to assure him of the everlasting safety and happiness
of his soul; and so by consequent, to comfort him infinitely more, then if he
had the Crown of the whole worlds sovereignty set upon his head. Justifying
faith, which gives infallible interest to eternal life, is not (to Ioh. 3. 36.
speak properly and punctually) to be assured of pardon; but to trust wholly
upon the mercy of God through Christ, for pardon. If there arise question in
thy fearful heart about thy spiritual state; sense and feeling is no
substantial ground whereon to build, being a separable accident to the graces
of salvation; but the truth and tender heartedness of Christ, in the promises
which can never fail, being as sure as God himself. If some wrangling fellow
should lay claim unto thy land, thou would not in such a case and
controversy consult with an ignorant neighbor; he perhaps out of his
weakness and want of skill, might raise doubts and dangers where there were
none, and put thee into a greater fright; but thou would have recourse to
some learned at the Law, who understandingly searching and surueying thine
Evidences, and finding no flaw, would put thee out of all fear. When in time
of temptation thou art terrified and affrighted with renewed scruples and
distractions about thy spiritual well-being; do not in any wise advise with
carnal reason, which is stark blind in the mystery of Christ; much less
with that evil One, who is a sworn enemy to thy soul, and father of lies.
They may tell thee, thou have no sense, no feeling, therefore all is naught:
but to the Word, and to the Testimony; let thy trembling heart cleave to the
impregnable truth of those sweetest promises; Matthew. 11. 28. Revel. 21. 6. Ioh.
7. 37. Isa. 55. 1, etc. and thou art safe for ever. For a more full impression
of this comfortable point, I would have you to refresh your memories with a
reuise of those four estates of faith, which I have heretofore distinguished,
upon purpose for the weakest Christians sake; and know, that the reflexed act
of the lowest degree and least measure then mentioned, might upon good ground,
if he do not wilfully and wickedly refuse to be comforted, fill his fearful
spirit as full with unspeakable glorious joy, as the Sun is of light, and
the sea of waters. These things laid together and well weighed, may confect a
precious and sovereign Antidote, against the slavish terrors, causeless
fears, and heavy walking of many which are true of heart, distressed in
conscience about their spiritual state: who while they labor, and long with
insatiable greediness (and I blame them not) for a sensible assurance, and
feeling apprehension of Gods favor; do too much neglect and disregard that
comfort which their faith might afford them upon good ground, in that,
notwithstanding their present distracting amazements and perplexity of spirit,
they are able still to commit their souls unto Christ, as a faithful
Redeemer, and their everlasting strength.

In this point, I have let some passages fall by the way, which may serve to
discover and dissolve the vanity and weakness of that Dilemma, wherein
Bellarmine plays the wilful egregious Sophister: it runs thus:

The Protestants teach, says he, that a man is justified by special Bell. de
notis Ecclesiae, cap. 11* Sect. Sectarij nostri temporis.]
faith, whereby he persuades himself, that he is just. Now then he reasons
thus: When I begin to believe that I am just, I am either just or unjust. If
just, then I am not justified by faith, by which I believe my self to be
just, because this faith is after my justification. If unjust, then this faith
is false, and so a man should be justified by a lie.

To this horned Argument we answer thus: There are sundry acts of special
faith: for my purpose at this time, take notice of two.

1. A fiduciall assent, resting upon the merit of Christ, an affiance,
dependence, adherence, reliance, or if there be any other word expressing that
act of an humbled soul, whereby it casts and reposeth it self only upon
Gods promise in Christ, for the obtaining of remission of sins, and
everlasting life. In this act, the poor soul illightened and affrighted with
sight and sense of its sin and misery, and seeing an infinite impossibility
of satisfying God for the one, or freeing it self from the other, by any
means or merit in heaven or earth; but only by the propitiatory mediation of
Jesus Christ: it throws it self into his arms, grasping fast about him,
hides it self in the clifts of this Rock, from the storms of Gods fiercest
and fiery indignation, apprehends in him plentiful redemption, and
all-sufficiencie of salvation; and therefore plyes him with strong cries and
tears for mercy; bespeaks him in all terms of confidence and affiance: My
Lord, and my God, my hope, my fortress, my rock, my strength, my salvation;
save me, or I sink; hold me fast, or I am lost for ever. You may see
sometimes a little infant, upon apprehension and approach of some sudden
danger, how heartily and hastily it runs into the mothers arms for succor
and safety: even so a truly wounded soul, pursued by the terrors of the Law,
and frighted with the dreadful sight of Gods frowning countenance, flies with
speed into the bosom of its blessed Redeemer, clings inseparably unto his
bleeding wounds for everlasting protection; and there rests upon the freeness
of his Love, merit of his Passion, and truth of his Promise, as upon a Rock of
Eternity, never to be removed: not the concurrent rage of all the Devils in
hell, or powers of darkness, being ever able to make a divorce. By this act
we are accepted for just before the Throne of Grace, for Christ's sake and
sufferings.

2. An act of certification, which quickened by the Spirit of Grace, when God
pleases for his own glory and good of his Child, reflecteth upon the soul
with a comfortable assurance that we are already in the arms of Christ, and
His for ever. The least glimpse whereof, a true heart would not exchange for
all the Kingdoms upon earth. The first act makes us just: The second finds us
just; and so certifies truly; not by a lie, as lying companions, and Satan's
Sophisters calumniate. It is the saying of an excellent Divine, both for depth
of learning and height of Holiness, To believe P. Bay^.
that my sins are now pardoned, and that I am saved: this is not the first
act of faith, but follows when now a man does see himself to be justified in
Christ.

2. By a secret application of the promises of the Gospel, in form of an Qui
fidei suae sensum in cord habet; hic ^cit Christum Iesum in se esse. Ambros.
in Epist. 2. ad Corint. cap. 13. v. 5.
experimental Syllogism, thus:

Whosoever believes and repents, is the Child of God: But I believe and repent,
therefore I am the Child of God.

The mayor or first proposition, is clear and evident in the very letter, and
by the immediate sense of Scripture. See John 3. 36. Acts 10. 45. and 13. 39,
etc.

But how do you know the minor, or second proposition to be certainly so?

By the certainty of internal vision, whereby we as clearly see our faith, as
our life, will, thought, knowledge, etc. as appears in the forecited place of
Austin. In his opinion, I say, Faith is as visible to the internal eye of a
sanctified mind, as is a man's life and will: Nay, and we are wont to discern
with a more eager eye and observation a Stranger, then an ordinary Domestic.
Our life and will are inbred, faith is aduentitious. By the testimony of a
renewed conscience, which is Conscientiae propriae sensus, mill testes
Conscientia domesticum, and verum Tribunal. Nazianz. Orat. de plaga Grand.
as a thousand witnesses. Now had I a thousand honest witnesses at the bar
before an upright Judge, to prove my cause, and justify my right against the
outfacings and periuries of a Knight of the Poast, as they say, well known to
be an infamous stigmaticall forgerer and murderer; I would little doubt but to
get the day. It is proportionably so in this present point; I mean, between
my regenerate illightned conscience and Satan. Nay, in this case, should all
the Devils in Hell swear the contrary, did carnal reason, natural distrust,
or any other adversary power cavil and contradict with never such irksome
tediousness; yet by the mercy of God, I will not withstand that heavenly light
standing in my conscience like an armed man: I will never take away mine
innocence from my self, until I die.

But how do you know, that you truly believe? We may know, perhaps, that we
have some kind of faith, but not that we have the true lively faith, which will
serve the turn for salvation.

I answer: Saint Paul bids us try, and prove our selves whether we have that
Faith, by which Christ dwells in our hearts, which is the faith of such as
are accepted with God, 2. Cor. 13. 5. Now it were strange, if the blessed
Spirit should bid us examine and search for that, which could not possibly be
found out.

Again, if a man cannot be certain, that he believes with all his heart, that
is, truly and sincerely; Philips interrogatorie to the Eunuch, Act. 8. 37. had
been in vain, and the Eunuchs reply rash and unadvised.

Austin was clearly of this mind, that a man may be acquainted with the
sincerity of his faith. Est quidam modus in conscientia gloriandi, vt noueris
fidem tuam esse sinceram, noueris esse spemtuam certam, noueris charitatem tuam
esse sine dissimulatione. In Psalm. 149.
There is, says he, a kind of glorying in the conscience, when thou know
thy faith is sincere, thy hope certain, thy love without dissembling.

But many, say they, believe, and are deceived; thinking they have that which
they have not; How then can a man be certain?

Answer. So thousands amongst us, by the false spectacles of presumption,
making the bridge of Gods mercy broader then it is, and larger then his truth,
which confines it only to broken hearts; are woefully deluded, and ready every
moment to be drowned in the dungeon of fire and brimstone: must therefore those
few who are sincerely humbled for their sins, truly believe, and upon good
ground have part in it, be also deceived? Because mad men, and men asleep,
know not well that they are asleep, and rage; must therefore men truly waking,
and wise, not know certainly they are awake, and in their wits? The common
people generally conceive of the Suns magnitude, that it is not past a foot
round; must therefore the certainetie of knowledge, that it is many times
bigger then the Earth, be denied to the skillful Astronomer? Some men dream
that they are rich, tumble themselves amongst their golden heaps, and it is
not so indeed when they awake; does no man therefore certainly know whether he
be rich or no?

Fidem suam quisque qui eam habet, videt in cord suo, and tenet certissima
scientia, and clamante conscientia, dicente Augustino: Proinde and
resipiscentiam, quae fidei verae, est indiuidua comes, atque effectus. --
Vtraque habetur -- certitudine visionis internae, seu testimonij proprij
cordis, and Spiritus Dei vna testificantis Spiritui nostro, quod simus silij
Dei. Romans 8. 16. Par.
Conceive proportionably of repentance, an inseparable companion and effect of
true faith, which is then saving, when it is serious, sincere, and without
hypocrisy; and that may be manifest and clearly discerneable to the heart
that has it. Do you think, the seriousness of the Ninevites repentance was
not certain unto them? We have received the Spirit of God, says Paul, that we
might know the things that are freely given us of God, which are not only life
everlasting, etc. but justification, sanctification, and such like. I say,
sauingnesse of repentance, as of faith, consists not in the measure and
muchnesse; but in the sincerity and truth, of which the true penitent may be
certain, as well as of his sorrow. But now whereas the Popish Doctors being
blind* guides, Richar. Palud: Almay Adrian. require necessarily to contrition;
Summum dolorem intensiue and gradualiter. Scotus and his followers, certum
intentionem soli Deo cognitam. Bell. and Valent. Summum dolorem appreciatiue.
Whereby these Locusts put the consciences of their blinded Ones, if waking and
working, upon the rack of incuitable and implacable horror, tormenting them,
as with the torment of a Scorpion, when he strikes a man.
lead their hoodwinkt followers into such perplexed mazes of uncertainties,
and indeed impossibilities about contrition, in respect of extension,
intension, appretiation, equiualence to sin; no marvel though they plead
pertinaciously for the point, and purgatory of doubting.

3. By the effects and fruits growing from the root of grace in the heart.

But there may be in the hypocrite, an exact outward conformity and obedience:

I answer: true it is, that for the outside and carcass, as it were, the
works of vnsactified men, may be like to those of the godly, but they are
without the soul, life and spirit; which is in the work of a true believer;
to which he is no less privy in his heart, then to the outward work which
passes through his hands. And we hold, that works done in uprightness of
heart, only, are they which truly testify in this case.

Let every true-hearted Nathaneel then comfortably conclude pardon and peace
unto his own soul, from all such fruits so qualified. For instance, in one.

We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. I love the Brethren: therefore I am translated from
death to life.

But is it possible for a man to know that he loves his Brethren as he ought,
and as the Apostle requires?

Saint John makes it a sign of our being so translated; therefore it may be
known. For signs manifesting other things, Magis enim nouit dilectionem qua
diligit, quam fratrem, quem diligit. De (...) lib. 8. cap. 7.
must themselves be more manifest. And Austin tells us, that a man knows more
the love with which he loves, then his brother whom he loves.

Thus may the Christian infallibly collect, the sanctifying Spirit, justifying
Faith, saving Grace to dwell in his heart, by all good deeds, holy duties,
inward or outward fruits springing from an upright heart. For as it follows,
and may be inferred infallibly and demonstratiuely from the effect, to the
proper cause in other things: For example: It is day; therefore the Sun is
risen, because day cannot be caused, but by the Suns rising: so in this point
also explained as before. If we pursue and ply with true hearts the whole
Trade of Christianity; If we be sincerely exercised in the works of holiness,
justice, mercy and truth, and walk humbly with our God; we may build upon it,
that we are truly blessed. All such sound fruits of Faith, are evident signs
and demonstrations of our spiritual safety, and standing fast for ever. If ye
2. Pet. 1. 10*
do these things, says Peter, ye shall never fall.

4. By the testimony of the Spirit, which sometimes; as in the time of more
fervent prayer* holy retyrednesse of mind, heavenly meditation; or in some
quickening exercises of extraordinary humiliation; or after some special
important service done to God and his Church with humble sincerity, and in true
zeal; or upon the soule-searching passage of some well grounded Sermon of
comfort, and seasonable application of mercy; or in the beginning of
spiritual, and end of natural life, as most needful times; or in the time of
martyrdom, and sincere sufferings for the Name of Christ, etc. I say, at such
times the Spirit may suggest and testify to the sanctified conscience, with a
secret, still, hart-rauishing voice thus or in the like manner; Thou art the
Child of God; Thou art in the number of those that shall be saved; Thou shall
inherit life everlasting: And that as certainly and comfortably, Quando vero
Spiritus testatur, quaenam relinquitur ambiguitas? Quod si homo quispiam, vel
Angelus, vel etiam Archangelus, autalia, certe huiusmodi quaedam potestas,
aliquid promitteret, merito quispiam dubita^erit: Suprema vero illa essentia,
quae and hoc ipsum largitur, quod promitti^, atque adeo orare etiam iussit,
testimonium nobis perhiben^e, quisnam de dignitate hac deinceps dubitare
poterit? Chrysostom* in v. 16. cap. 8. ad Romans
as if that Angel from Heaven should say to thee, as he did to Daniel, Greatly
beloved. And why should any Popish cauiller contradict this, since even
Bellarmine himself speaks proportionably in another case? Upon a passage in
Austin, acknowledging the interior efficacy of Gods Spirit, giving testimony to
our hearts concerning the truth of that which is contained in the Scriptures,
says Hoc igitur est lumen fidei, auditores, testimonium quoddam Dei, quo intus
in domicilio cordis dicitur nobis; Ita est: nihil haesites. In Conc. De lumine
fidei. Sect. Pelagiani quidem.]
he; This light of faith is a certain testimony of God, by which it is said
to the secret cogitations of our hearts, That is true; thou need not to
doubt thereof. Here is an immediate testimony of the Spirit granted for the
confirmation of the truth of the Word; why may not the like be expected for an
assurance of the work of the Word? Mighty and remarkable was the work of the
Spirit this way upon the heart of that Noble Martyr, Robert Glouer, upon the
first sight and representation of the Stake (so sweetly seasonable is God in
all his refreshings.) For two or three days before his death, he was full
heavily oppressed with the spiritual miseries of a dead heart, and spiritual
desertion. In which time no doubt he cried mightily unto God, and often
reflected the eye of his renewed conscience upon a truly, believing, penitent,
humble, holy and heavenly heart; resolved to sacrifice its warmest blood in the
merciless fire, for the testimony of Jesus; and yet no comfort would come. But
in the very nicke and needful time, as you may see in the Story, the blessed
Spirit did suddenly shine into his dark and desolate soul, with the glorious
beams of his own immediate comfort, and so sensibly filled it with such
ouerflowing Rivers of spiritual joys, that no doubt they mightily abated and
quenched the ragefull fury of those Popish flames, wherein he sweetly fell
asleep. It was a special and immediate springing of the holy Ghost in his
heart, which made Master Peacock, after many days of extremest horror,
profess, that The joy which be felt in his conscience, was incredible. We
feel and acknowledge by daily experience, that Satan does immediately iniect;
and shall not the blessed Spirit, after his holy and heavenly manner,
immediately also suggest sometimes?

Neither is this to be reputed an extraordinary revelation, or Fidelium (...)
non mititur reuelatione aliqua qua Deus ^rcana sui consilij nobis patesecerit,
led promissionibus Euangelij, and sensu interno, quo quis seipsum explorans,
sentit se serio in Christum credere, and testimonio intrinseco Spiritus
testantis in cordibus nostris, nos esse filios Dei. Molin. A^at. Arminia. cap.
46.
Enthusiasme, without or beside the Word of God (I heartily abominate all
Anabaptisticall fooleries and phrensies:) For that which the Spirit so reueiles
unto our consciences, we our selves may collect and conclude out of Gods Word,
upon the conscience of our faith, repentance, other saving endowments and holy
graces shining in our souls, and uprightly exercised in our whole
conversation. When we by these means have assured our souls, that we are the
children of God, which is the testimony of our own renewed spirits; the Spirit
of God, as another witness, secondeth and confirms this assurance, by divine
inspiration, and by sweet motions and feelings of Gods special goodness, and
glorious saving presence; and so acording to the Apostles phrase, Romans 8. 16.
bears witness with our spirits. Wherefore if any man presume upon, or
pretend any immediate suggestion or revelation, for his spiritual safety, and
everlasting well-beeing, and yet want utterly the testimony of (...) renewed
conscience to the same purpose; the testimony of universal obedience; of not
lying willingly and delightfully in any one known sin; of crucifying the flesh
with the affections and lusts, etc. I can give him none but this cold comfort;
he is cursedly coozened by the Devils counterfeit glory of an Angel, casting
into his abused imagination such groundless conceits, which in time of trial
will vanish into nothing, and fly away as a dream.

By the way let me tell you, that though this last manner of assurance be more
immediately from the Spirit; yet conceive, that the other also are not
effectual upon the heart, without the excitation, illumination and assistance
of the same blessed Spirit.

For the first, consider that forecited place, 1. Corinthians. 2. 12.

For the second; when the conscience, through the ministry of the Law, does
testify to a man his state in sin, and under the curse; it is, through the
spirit of bondage, that it does testify: then when it does testify to him his
state of grace, and freedom from the curse, it is much rather from the Spirit
of Adoption. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, 1. Cor. 12. 3.
but by the holy Ghost.

For the third, I doubt not, but the blessed Spirit, as a comfortable
Remembrancer, refreshed Hezekias memory, when he cried to the Lord, Remember
now, O Lord, etc. Isai. 38. 3.

But how shall a man discern, and difference a true persuasion, and the
testimony of the Spirit; from a groundless presumptuous conceit, and the
Devils delusion?

If Bellarmine ask me, I will easily stop his mouth:

First, by demanding him, how his Saint De i^stis. lib. 3. cap. 8. Sect. Quar^
ratio.]
Francis, and S. Antony knew assuredly, that their revelations of the certain
remission of their sins, were from the Spirit of God; especially since with
him they were revelations quite besides and without the Word. For Ibid. Sect.
Prima ratio.]
he holds, that this proposition, Francis is truly justified: Antony has his
sins forgiven; and so of other particular men, is not to be found in the
Word, either immediately, or by evident consequence; which we upon good ground
contradict, if the particular men be true believers.

Secondly, by that saying of Ambrose, urged by Histor. of the Council of
Tr^pag. 206.
Catarinus in the Council of Trent: The holy Ghost does never speak unto us,
but does make us know, that it is He that speaks.

But if the doubtful Christian truly troubled about it, would be taught and
informed in the point; or if it be possible that the Pharise, the deluded One
should heartily desire to be illightened; I advise that they would consider
upon these following marks of difference.

1. A sound persuasion upon good ground by the Spirit, is ever agreeable and
answerable exactly to the Word. The inward testimony of the Spirit, and outward
testimony of the Word, do always sweetly accord, and one answers to the
other, as face to face in water. And therefore, if that thy present state,
wherein thou conceiuest thy self to be sure and safe enough for salvation,
be disabled and condemned by Gods Word; thy confidence is vain, and Satan
deludes thee. The Scripture tells us, That whosoever is borne of God, does not
commit Sancti non operantur peccatum; and tamen non sunt sine peccato. Aug. in
Psalm. 118.
sin, 1. Ioh. 1. 3, 9. which is not to be understood simply of the act of
sinning; For who can say, My heart is clean? But in this sense: He makes not a
trade of sinning; he sins not with Vbi regnat propositum peccandi; ibi
fidueia mis^icordiae exulat.
purpose, pleasure and perseverance; he does not live, lie, and delight in
sin; he suffers it not to reign in him. If then thou allowest any lust in
thy heart, or go on in the willing practice of any one known sin, or
sensual course, and yet be well conceited of thy self for comfort in the
World to come; the Devil coozens thee: God will not Psalm. 66. 18.
hear the prayers, but Psalm. 68. 21.
wound the hairie scalpe of every such a one. For instance: If thou lie in
lying; (for its one thing to be overtaken that way out of fear, or ere thou be
aware, another thing to continue in it habitually and resolutely against an
illightned impenitent conscience) and yet look for Heaven, thou art deceived;
thou have made a lie thy refuge, and hid thy self under falsehood. And why?
because Gods Word says, that the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the
Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and S^rcerers, and Idolaters, and
all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death, Revel. 21. 8. Conceive proportionably of
lying in any other sin damned in Gods Book in the sense I have said. If thou
abidest in the state of mere civil honesty, and yet think with thy self,
that thou art thereby furnished sufficiently for future happiness, it is but a
false flash. And why? Because the Word says; Without holiness no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Which necessarily implies; That no mere Sit licet
ille Fabricius; sit licet Fabius; sit licet Scipio; sit licet Regulus; quorum
me nominibus tanqua^ in antiqua Romana curia loqueremur, putasti esse
terrendum. August. contra Iulia. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 3.
civil man can possibly be saved. If thou be a lukewarm Laodicean, and yet
conceiuest thou art rich enough spiritually, and look to be saved; thou art
deceived: And why? Because the Word says; That Christ will spew such a one out
of his mouth, Revelation 3. 16. Even as a filthy bitter vomit is to the
stomach, mouth and man that spewes it out; such are all lukewarm formal
professors to the Lord Jesus Christ, as himself there professes. A terrible
and flaming sentence uttered from the Judge his own mouth in the mean time;
which, me thinks, should horribly affright thousands in our days; who stand
for a frozen formality, heartlesse indifferency, reserved neutrality, and
politic moderation in profession, and practice of religion. Thus a true
restimony and sound persuasion of a good estate to Godward, ever holds
correspondence to the Word, and is infallibly grounded thereupon.

Object. Say you so? In spiritual cases and points of faith, how is it
possible, that a man should be infallibly certain of that by the Word, which
is not contained in the Word, either immediately, or by good consequence? But
Bellarmine affirms, that this particular proposition, Such De iustif. lib. 3.
c. ^. Sect. prima ratio.]
or such a man is truly justified; is not contained in the Word of God, either
immediately or by good consequence, etc.

Answer. To let pass at this time, that which some worthy Divines press in
this point, that such places as these, Psalm. 103. 3. Esa. 43. 32. Romans 10. 9.
Gal. 2. 20. etc. intimate and imply such a particular proposition immediately:
I answer that it is deduced by evident consequence out of the Word. For from
such general promises and propositions as these; He that believes on the
Son, has everlasting life, Ioh. 3. 36. Whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins, Act. 10. 43. And by him all that believe, are
justified from all things, etc. Act. 13. 39, etc. follow by good consequence,
these particulars: Paul, Peter, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bradford, or any other
particular man believing in him, receives remission of sins; is justified;
has eternal life. Even as it follows directly and infallibly, every man is
a reasonable creature; therefore John, Thomas, etc. is endewed with reason.

Though no word says expressly and immediately; Thou Thomas believing, shall
be saved; yet the same word which says, Every one believing, has eternal
life, says also; Thou Thomas believing, have eternal life, or shall be saved.
As on the contrary, this universal, He that believes not the Son, shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, includes vertually,
consequently, infallibly, as though they were writ in it, these particulars:
Judas, Bellarmine, or Bonner, etc. not believing, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him. Otherwise, if the general did not thus
sufficiently include and comprehend every particular; and an universal
proposition all subordinate singular propositions under it; the Law, Thou shall
not kill: thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor; would not belong to Faux blowing up the Parliament: to
this or that Priest polluting himself in hearing confession; to Bellarmine
lying voluminously; because its no where expressly writ; Thou Bellarmine shall
not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Thou shaueling, beware of self
pollution. Thou Faux shall not tear in pieces the Royal limbs of the Lords
Anointed.

If John or Thomas believing, be not bound to be assured of his salvation out
of the general promise; except it were said somewhere in Scripture; That
Thomas or John by name should be saved; it would follow that these particular
men, were not bound to be honest men; or to fear God; because it is no where
said in the Word; that Thomas or John ought to be honest men; or are commanded
to fear God, but only in the general.

In a word, let the Jesuit tell me, whether out of the Word, he be infallibly
certain that his body shall rise again at the last Day: He dare not for his
heart deny it. And I pray you, Bellarmine, tell me, where it is particularly
and expressly said in Scripture; That the body of Robert Bellarmine shall rise
again at the last Day? All particular infallible assurance in this kind,
springs out of the general proposition and promise that All shall rise, 1.
Cor. 15, etc.

2. That heart which does sweetly enjoy the Paradise of a true testimony, and
well grounded persuasion; that it presently lives the life of grace, and
immortality; is sincerely affected and inflamed with a reverent love, and
insatiable Or if this desire be (...)* (...), and disedgd, in (...) of
temptation, desertion, spiritual dampe; it heartily grieves, and importunately
contends by prayer, and all its spiritual power, to regaine and recover its
former forwardness and feeling. Which holy carriage, and contention of spirit
in its want and absence, may be conceived as equivalent in Gods acceptance to
a comfortable possession of it.
longing after the Word preached and read, prayer, singing of Psalms,
meditation, conference, vows, days of humiliation, use of good books, godly
company, all Gods ordinances, and good means appointed and sanctified for our
spiritual good. Because through them, as so many golden conduits, those
gracious saving operations of the holy Ghost are conveyed and continued unto
it; which minister sound matter and true grounds of such comfortable assurance:
and in the conscionable use and exercise of them also are wont sometimes to be
secretly and sensibly breathed into it, such heavenly real refreshings
themselves; which the joy of the whole worlds enioyment cannot possibly equal.
But now the affection this way of those who are Pharisaically puffed up with a
groundless conceit and vain confidence; is faint and formal; partial and
reserved; not accompanied with that universality and uniformity of reverence
and respect to all the blessed ordinances and means of grace* It is ever the
wont and wiliness of such, to qualify their countenance and correspondence
to these, with that moderation and temper which may be compatible, and
plausibly consist with the safety of their temporal happiness, and security
of their bosom sin. And no marvel though their affection in this kind be
not so hearty, and hold out; for they draw no special virtue and sweetness
from Christ, through them: And their conceit of being right, is not fed from
the breasts of the Bible, and with the heavenly Manna of a conscionable
Ministry; but built upon those insufficient grounds and rotten proppes I
discovered and disabled before.

3. A sound and vndeceiuing persuasion that thou art everlastingly locked in the
arms of Gods mercy and love, grounded upon the Word, seconded and set on by
the Spirit; is a most rare and rich Jewel, which does infinitely outshine and
ouerweigh in sweetness and worth any rock of Diamond, Cristall Mountain, or
this great Creation, were it all converted into one invaluable Pearl; and
therefore is infinitely envied, and assaulted mightily on all sides. It is
continually hunted like a Partridge on the Mountains by natural distrust, the
policy of Satan, and all the powers of darkness. There is not a wicked
spirit, but is transported with implacable indignation against that heaven upon
earth; and therefore rages and roares about thee still, to rob and bereave thy
humble breast of such an heavenly Iemme. Besides the two maine ends and general
aims; of all the malice and machinations of those apostated angels: 1. the
dishonor of God, and 2. the discomfort of men's souls; In this point they are
peculiarly enraged with extreme hellish anger; to see a mortal man, a child
of Adam, crowned by Gods merciful hand, even in this life, with right and
interest, and as it were, an earnest penny of the Inheritance with the Saints
in light, and of those blessed Mansions of glory and rest, of which, by their
Apostasy and pride they have unhappily and everlastingly deprived themselves.
Neither only so, but they employ also their Agents, envious to the grace of
God and thine own fearful heart, to charge falsely many times upon thee,
Hypocrisy and delusion, left that white Reave. 2. 17.
stone given thee by the holy Ghost; the splendour and As none can comprehend
the horror of an enraged guilty conscience, but the heart that endures it: so
none can conceive the sweetness of the Spouses kiss, but the soul that
receives it.
sweetness whereof, none knows but he that has it, should fairly shine
upon thy sad soul with that lightsomenesse and comfort, as it both may and
ought. Whereupon it must needs follow, that if thy persuasion be well grounded
and assurance true; it will be accompanied and often exercised with fears,
iealousies, doubts, distrusts, varieties of temptations, Satan's firiest darts,
iniected scruples, contradictions of flesh and blood, cauils of carnal
reasons, want of comfortable feelign, etc. which will many times necessarily
drive thee to cry mightily to God, and complain at the Throne of grace,
against all this hellish ordnance and assaults of thy unbelieving heart; by the
wrestling of faith to warm thy ^oule with meditation upon the promises, to re
examine and reuise thy grounds, to confirm thy watch, to resort for counsel,
strength and comfort to the quickening means, experience of former sweet
feelings, and motions of the Spirit; to truly judicious Divines, experienced
Christians, days of humiliation, books of best relish to a spiritual taste,
etc. But now on the contrary side, his presumptuous confidence and groundless
conceit, lies in the Pharisees bosom with much quietness and security; without
doubting, difficulty, contradiction, or any such ado. The reason is, his
carnal heart is well enough content, and meddles not, because it still feeds
upon the delights of his darling sin, without disturbance. Satan is too
subtle to interpose, tempt or interrupt, in such a case. For he well knows
that his foundation is falsehood, his hope of heaven but a golden dream; and
therefore in policy he holds his peace, that he may hold him the faster.

Take notice by the way; that, that very thing which makes many a truehearted
Christian to doubt of himself, and of the soundness of his spiritual state,
should put him out of all doubt; even often exercise with doubts, temptations,
multiplied attempts against his faith, and assurance of Gods love; prayed
against, humbly resisted, and opposed with cleaving unto the tenderheartednes
of Christ, and truth of his promises, though for the present he has little or
no feeling; no such joy and peace in so believing: And that very thing upon
which the deluded Ones do build, and many times boast themselves; to wit, that
they are untroubled, vntempted, in point of faith, and pretended assurance; may
return an infallible remonstrance to their own consciences, that they are
certainly deceived. For doubtless, that faith which is never assaulted with
doubting, is but a fancy. Assuredly that assurance which is ever secure, is but
a dream. Many a Pharise stands by the bedside of the sincere Professor,
visited with affliction of conscience, and many heavy temptations; secretly and
sinfully pleasing himself in the unblessed calmness of a groundless
confidence, and in his freedom from such terrors and spiritual troubles: when
as himself is like an Ox fatting in the green pastures of impunity and
outward prosperity for the day of slaughter: But the afflicted party is as
precious gold, purifying in the Lords refining furnace, that he may afterward
come out and shine more gloriously.

4. In that heart to which the Spirit of God testifies, that we are His
children, To. 8. 16. does the same Spirit create many fervent eiaculations,
strong cries and unutterable groanings, verse 26. The testimony of the Spirit
is ever attended with the Spirit of prayer. That glorious glimpse shining into
the soul, and assuring it of salvation, is so sweet, so heavenly, so
rauishing; so transcendent and incomparably above all earthly joy, that it
warmes the spirit of a man with quickening life and liberty, to power out it
self in the presence of his Lord and his God, before the Throne of Grace:
sometimes in more hearty triumphant, and as it were, winged prayers: at other
times, in those which are more faint and cold, yet edged with infinite desires,
that they were more fervent, and therefore by the way, as it were, mingled and
perfumed with the sovereign and satisfactory incense in the Revel. 3. 4.
Golden Censer, which the Angel of the Covenant holds in his hand, are
graciously accepted of him, which by an excellency and title of highest honor,
is styled the Hearer of Psalm. ^7. 2.
Prayers: or at least, with inexpressible Plerumque hoc negotium plus
gemitibus, quam sermonibus, agitur; plus fle^u, qua^ a^atu. August. Epist. 121.
Cogitatio tua clamor est ad Dominum. Idem in Psalm. 141.
groans and inward wrastlings, for preservation, recovery, and enlargement of
that same comfortable assurance it self, and of all other holy graces and
fruits of the Spirit, purity of heart, conquest over corruption, nearer
communion with God, spirituallmindednesse, and such other heavenly guests;
amongst whom it is wont to dwell with delight, and represent it self more
comfortably. But now on the other side; every deluded Pharise is a mere
stranger to the power of Prayer. His presumption and groundless confidence, is
but a weed which will grow of its own accord; and therefore is not sensible
of any necessity, neither feels any want of constant prayer from a broken
heart; universal obedience; or the holy preciseness of the Saints to support
it.

5 An assurance of Gods Love upon sure ground, does mightily quicken, keen,
and spur forward the ingenuous Christian to more holiness, hatred of sin,
resolution in good causes, watchfulness over his heart, walking with God:
Having these promises, says he, let me cleanse my self 2. Cor. 7. 1.
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God: Having this hope, I will labor to purify my self, even as He
is pure. To let the principal motive 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
pass, it is impossible but that the feeling consciousnesse that Gods free
love, through Christ, has freed us from eternity of torments; one hour
wherein, is infinitely more stinging and terrible, then all the tortures that
all mankind has, does, or shall endure, from the Creation, to the end of the
world; and certainly interessed us to eternity of joys, one hour wherein,
does incomparably surpass all the delights of this wide world, were they
collected into one lump of pleasure; I say, it cannot be, but that such an
assurance should stir up the blessed soul to do or suffer any thing for
Christ's sake; rather to die then turn Papist, to do worthily in Ephrata, and
be famous in Bethlehem. But now the other groundless confidence, being in
truth but a fancy, must needs be powerless, fruitless, inactive; and makes
the deluded rather secure, careless, presumptuous, only formal.

6. The blessed Spirit is wont to spring in our hearts, with heavenly
refreshing, and his sweetest testimony; especially at such times as these:
When we retire and recollect our selves to converse with God in a more solemn
and solitary manner; opening our consciences, breaking our hearts, and pouring
out our souls into his bosom: when we are preparedly and fruitfully
exercised in the ordinances: in our innocent patient sufferings, for good
causes and conscience sake: when we feel that we have conquered or well
curbed some corruption, by the power of Prayer; in the believing contemplation
and reuise of our change, and the infallible marks thereof: when we meditate
effectually upon the bottomless depth of Gods free love unto us, with which
he has loved us from everlasting to everlasting: upon days of humiliation,
etc. But that other counterfeit flash keeps a deluded Pharise in a fools
Paradise continually; he is ordinarily at all times alike peremptory in the
point of assurance. You shall not take him any week in the year, any day in
the week, any hour in the day, without a bold persuasion, and protestation,
if need be, That he hopes to be saved as well as the precisest. He is as
confident this way, when he is cauilling against the purity of the Saints and
power of Godliness; as when he is the deepest in his Pharisaicall devotions.

7. The presumption of the Pharise is ordinarily at the height, in his height
of outward prosperity; and when Gods Candle shines faireliest upon his head
with worldly blessings. But the persuasion of the Christian, is for the most
part then strongest, when the world most frowneth upon him for his
forwardness; and in heat of persecution.

8. Those that are deluded with a groundless confidence, have ordinarily been
so conceited of themselves, ever since they may remember, or had any thoughts
of heaven; and that without consciousnesse of any conversion, change, or
supernatural saving work upon their souls at all. For though the devil
seals it with more security upon their hearts, by his counterfeit Angelical
glory; yet he finds matter enough in our corrupt nature, ministered originally
for such a golden dream, and imaginary castle in the air. But the testimony
of the Spirit, and that other true persuasion is supernatural, and never felt
before conversion; nor ever to be found but in a regenerate soul. I doubt not,
but many Christians to their singular comfort and further assurance, can tell
their experience of both: Their bold peremptory ill grounded presumption in
their unregenerate time: and their now true, kindly, sweet persuasion, so much
envied and assaulted by Satan accompanying their conversion.

9. Natural presumption, gilded over with the devils delusion, ever shrinkes
in the wetting. Troubles of conscience, fiery trials, heavy crosses, the face
of the Prince of terror, disastrous and dismal times, dissolve it into
nothing. But the oher true testimony holds out like armor of proof, against
thickest haileshot of all adversary power: Nay, it is wont to shine and show
it self with united vigor and more lightsomnesse within; in the greatest dampe
of outward discomforts, and most confusions abroad.

10. The Christian can give sound reasons for his resolution, in the point of
assurance; from his conversion, holy conversation, love of the brethren,
universal obedience, etc. those means I mentioned before proper to the Child
of God. But put the Pharise to prove in this case, and perhaps he will not
be able to say so much as his formal deluded brother, Luke 18. 11, 12. Sure I
am, all that he can produce for that purpose, being tried by the Touchstone of
Gods Truth, will prove too light and inconsequent. Reuise the false mediums
and insufficient grounds discovered before, and you shall perceive, that none
of them can possibly infer a comfortable conclusion.

11. The Laodicean longs far more for gold, then growth in grace; thinks
himself already rich enough in Religion, and that he has attained that very
temper which every wise man should rest upon, without any more meddling; that if
he should stir forward, he should be too precise; if he should grow any
worse, he should be too profane; and therefore concludes, I have need of
nothing. But the illightened Christian, having truly tasted of the assurance
of Gods love; is infinitely greedy of growing in grace, of conquering
corruptions, of nearer communion with his Christ, of doing his God all the most
glorious sincere service he can possibly, before he go down into the pit,
and be seen no more. His performances, by the grace of God, are many, his
endeauours more, but his desires endless, and ever Semper tibi displiceas quod
es, ^ vis peruenire ad id quod nondum es. Nam vbi tibi placuisti, ibi
remansisti Si autem dixeris, Sufficit, and pe^isti. August. T^. 10. de verbis
Apostoli. Sermon. 15.
unsatisfied with his degree of well-doing, his present pitch of grace and
measure of obedience.

Thus having premised a discovery of spiritual self-deceit, whereby many so
ouervalew themselves, in point of their spiritual estate, that they conceive
they are very right, whereas in truth and trial, they are stark rotten at the
root: Their case herein, is like that man's, who lying fast asleep upon the
edge of a steep Rock, dreams merrily of Crowns, Kingdoms, and the very
confluence of all earthly contentments; conceiving that he wallowes himself
in the ouerflowings of all worldly felicities; but upon the sudden starting for
joy, breaks his neck, and tumbles into the bottom of the Sea. They are
lulled asleep by the deluding charms of the Devil, upon their beds of
presumptuous security, all their life long, dreaming of no danger at all, but
ever confident their case is good enough to Godward: but their consciences
being awaked upon their beds of death, or at farthest, at Gods Tribunal, they
are suddenly swallowed up of despair, and drowned in everlasting perdition. I
come now to forewarne and forearme the true Christian, that with all
watchfulness and constancy, he would ever labor to prevent and defeat the
secret assaults and insinuations of that white Devil, as a worthy Divine calls
it, Spiritual pride. A gilded poison, which Satan, that cunning Alchymist and
hellish Spider, does first extract out of the very sweetest and fairest flowers
in Christ's Garden; I mean, the most holy virtues and heavenly gifts emplanted
in his Childrens hearts; and then thereby so enuenomes and blasts them, that
they lose not only their own native splendor and gracefulness, but also
their fruitful communication to others, and comfortable acceptance with God.
I say, when he sees a man extraordinarily enriched with spiritual graces, he
seeks might and maine to make him swell with privy pride; and to puff him up
with an ouerweening conceit of his own worth; that so the Christian himself
may want the comfort of them; his brethren, the fruit of them; and God, the
glory of them. When the strong man can no longer keep goodness out of the
soul, but the holy Ghost with a merciful violence breaks in upon him and
dwells there; his next endeavor is, to abuse even Grace it self, as an unhappy
instrument, to weaken and wound it self: nay, so subtle is he, and endless
in his attempts, that if he cannot make a man proud of any thing else, he will
labor to make him Saepe homo de ipso vanae gloriae contemptu vanius gloriatur.
August. Sermon. l. 10. c. 38.
proud that he is not proud, and to glory vainly, because he is not
vaineglorious. The original and breeding of this canker in the sanctified
soul, I have discovered in my Discourse of true happiness, page 25. and there
made tender of some corrosiues and counterpoysons against it. To which at this
time I add these:

When thou beginnest with an ouerweening conceit to admire thy self
immoderately and above that which is meet, cast thine eye,

1. Upon the purity and piercing of Gods all-seeing Eye* ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun, and purer then purity it self; which sees sin to be
infinitely more sinful and loathsome then thou can possibly: whereby His
holy Justice is incensed with infinite indignation, and unquenchable severity
against it. Witness the turning into Devils, irrecouerable destruction, and
everlasting downfall of so many glorious creatures, the top and masterpiece,
as it were, of all Gods handyworke, shining once so fairly in the highest
heaven, and nearest unto his Imperial Throne: The curse which fell upon Adam
and all his posterity, for eating the forbidden fruit: The confusions which
came upon the first world by the flood: The burning of Sodom with fire and
brimstone from heaven; The fearful reiection of his own ancient people: The
horrors of a guilty enraged conscience, which is a hell upon earth, and
damnation above ground: The everlasting fire which is prepared for reprobate
men and angels, etc. Neither does this brightest Eye only see all thy sins
in their native foulness, but also in their truest number. Thou perhaps, for
want of more spiritual eye-salue, beholdest them but as stars in a gloomie
evening: but assure thy self He sees them, as moates in the Sun, and as
Stars in the clearest winters midnight. Methinkes, this mortifying meditation
should rather make thee grow into further detestation of sin, then admiration
of thy self.

2. Upon the incomprehensible perfections and absolute pureness of Gods most
holy nature: the splendor whereof does dazzle the clearest eyes of the
brightest Seraphims; Isa. 6. 2.
does drown, as it were, all Angelical glory; as the Suns presence, the
light of lesser stars; much more does it utterly darken the material beauty
of all the lights in heaven. Were the Sun which is made all of brightness,
and the euerspringing fountain of fresh shining beams, presented before that
vnapproachable Light which besets Gods sacred Throne; it would vanish away, as
a darkesome moate and lump of vanity. Where then would a frail sinful man in
a house of flesh appear? Behold, says Job, he put no trust in his servants;
and his Angels he charged with folly: how much less on them that dwell in
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the
Moth, chap. 4. 18, 19. Behold, he puts no trust in his Saints; yea, the
heavens are not clear in his sight: how much more abominable and filthy is
man, which drinks iniquity like water? chap. 15. 15, 16. Behold even to the
Moon, and it shines not, yea, the stars are not pure in his sight: how much
less man, that is a Worm: and the son of man which is a Worm? chap. 25. 5,
6. A glimpse as it were, of that highest glory, shining everlastingly in that
purest increated Essence, God blessed for ever, did make righteous Job to
abhor himself, and repent in dust and ashes: Holy Job 42. 6. Isa. 6. 5.
Isaiah to cry, Woe is me, for I am undone. And so if thou also turn thine
eye from the vanity of selfe-admiration, toward the infinite Sun of absolute
and incomprehensible purity; and then reflect upon thy self, as he that has
gazed too much upon our visible Sun, looking down again sees nothing; thou
shall behold the nothingnesse of thine ouerweened worth, and nothing but
darkness and deformity; and so shall find infinite more matter of
humiliation and abhorring thy self in dust and ashes, then of selfe-estimation
and conceitednesse.

3. Upon the clear Cristall of Gods pure Law, which can discover unto thee the
least spot that ever stained so much as any one of thy thoughts; shines with
that perfect light, that it would guide aright every step which thou make in
the way which is called Holy, and is of that latitude for prohibition of sin,
and leading to purity and exact pleasing of God: that though we may see an end
of all perfection, Psalm. 119. 96.
yet it is exceeding broad. And therefore though such as hate to be reformed,
especially, if their consciences be waking and working, are drawn to a
particular and punctual survey of themselves and all their ways in this pure
Cristall, even as a Bear to the stake, a Bankerout to his counting book, an
Elephant to the vnmudded water, a foul face to the Looking-glass: They are
well enough content to hear the Commandments read, restraining their
understandings only to the gross acts, Thou shall not kill, etc. and perhaps
justifying themselves Pharisaically thereabouts; but come to the holy
strictness of Christ's exposition, Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart, etc. and it
strikes full cold to their impure hearts, and causes them to cry out against
the men of God, Why do you torment us before our times? I say, though it be
thus with the unregenerate, by reason of their guilty and gauled consciences;
yet let it be thy delight, Psalm. 1. 2.
who art blessed with an everlasting impregnable protection, by the blood and
merit of Jesus Christ, from the curse and rigor of the Law, to peruse thy
self punctually by this heavenly Looking-glass, for the discovery of thy
defects and aberrations* and to diue with searching and serious meditation into
this adored depth of perfection and purity, to see how far thou come
short: and then thou shall find infinite more cause to press hard toward the
mark, then to look upon that which is behind, or proudly to prize any thing
that is past. Only I advise, when thou setst thy self thus solemnly to rip
up thy conscience, and ransacke thy heart to the root, to bring it down and
into the dust, for increase of humiliation and lowliness in thine own eyes:
as thou hold out in the one hand the clear Cristall of Gods pure Law, to
discover the crookedness of thy vile natural disposition, the villainies and
skarlet abominations of thine unregenerate time, the daily spots and stains
which light upon thy soul, etc. hold out also in the other hand, or rather lay
hold upon Christ Jesus by the hand of faith, hanging, bleeding, and dying upon
the Cross, for those very same sins; that thereby thou may utterly quench
all Satan's fiery darts, prevent drawing toward despair; nay, preserve thy
spirit in sweetest peace, and unconquerable comfort against, if it be possible,
the least distrustful intrusion of any slavish terror.

4. Upon the holiest men that ever breathed, the life of grace upon earth, and
the most renowned in the Church through all generations, for all spiritual
sufficiencies and excellencies; and thou shall find them ever most humble in
their own conceits, vilest in their own eyes, nothing in their own account.
Me thinks holy Paul's heavy complaint, O wretched Romans 7. 24.
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Heavenly
David's continual cry, I am a worm and no man: Psalm. 22. 6. and 38. 3. and 50.
3.
There is no rest in my bones, because of my sin. My sin is ever before me,
etc. Blessed Bradfords abasing himself, who was one of the worthiest Martyrs,
and the Heauenliest minded man that ever breathed out his last in the flames,
and ascended to heaven in a fiery chariot, as himself spoke at the stake: I am
as dry as a stone, says he, as dumb as a nail; as far Fox page 1663.
from praying, as he that never knew any taste of it. He sometime subscribed in
this manner to those Letters which were full of spiritual life, diuinest
streines, and demonstration of the Spirit: The most miserable hard-hearted
unthankful sinner, John Bradford. A very painted Hypocrite, I. B. etc. I say,
Me thinks, the humble deportment of these and all truly holy Ones should
rather make thee sink yet lower in thine own conceit, then swell with the
poison of Pharisaicall selfe-conceitednesse.

5. Keep in a readiness, and in fresh remembrance such considerations and
cooling cards, as it were, as these; when thy heart begins to swell
vaine-gloriously: That thou had thine hand in that fire-worke, which blew
up all mankind; I mean, in Adams transgression, that brought forth such a
bloody sea of sin and sorrow into the World; such a world of miseries and
mischiefs upon all the sons and daughters of Adam; all tortures upon earth,
and torments in Hell through all eternity: That thou came into this world, a
sink, a Sodom, a very hell of all filth and impuritie; of all corruption and
crookedness, even a little Devil for darkness and damnation: That thou
woefully lost and mis-spentst many years, perhaps the best of thy time,
strength of youth, flower of thy age in Satan's service, and upon thy own
abominable lusts: That now upon thy conversion, the mere work of Gods free
grace, thou being honored with part in Christ's Passion, with the presence of
the blessed Spirit dwelling in thee, with the highest advancement of being Gods
Favorite, the dearly beloved of his soul; yet the best Sabbath Ier. 12. 7.
that thou passest over, the holiest duty that thou performest, is distained
and distempered with so many imperfections, distractions, frailties, and
failings: That while thou yet inhabitest a house of flesh, thou have inherent
in thy bowels, secret seeds, and inbred inclinations to all sin, (Bless the
sanctifying Spirit for thy privilege and preservation) even to Atheism,
selfe-murder, Sodomy, despairing of Gods mercy, familiarity with wicked
spirits, sin against the Holy Ghost, etc. That whereas thousands about thee
go on in their sins, and perish everlastingly, thy self, it may be, before
thy change worse then most of them; yet now being sanctified, thou may be
assured, thy name was writ in Heaven, from all eternity; and therefore from
everlasting thou layest in the bosom of Gods love, and from the same
everlasting had the Lord Jesus, set apart to shead his blood in the fullness of
time, for the salvation of thy soul; and have patience but a little, and
everlasting refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: thou shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament for ever and ever. And in all this
who made thee to differ? Thou wast framed of the same mould, made, as it were,
of the same cloth, only the sheeres going between, with those that perish: It
was only Gods free grace, the good pleasure of his will. These and the like
considerations laid together, should infinitely rather move thee with all
humble reverence to adore the bottomless depth of Gods free love unto thee;
then conceitedly to magnify thy self above thy brethren, or proudly insult
over those that are without; to praise thy God with a never satisfied
admiration of his inconceivable bounty, then to plague thy soul, and, as it
were, empoyson thy graces with an humor of pride.

6. Thou must shortly be strictly accountable at the just Tribunal of God,
for the use and employment of all the good things he has given unto thee; of
thy life and every moment of it; of thy goods and every farthing of them; of
every word thou ever spokest; of every thought that ever sprung out of thy
heart; of every Sermon thou ever heardst; of every Sabbath thou have
solemnized; of every line thou have writ; of every glance of thine eye; of
every journey thou have made, etc. of thy wit, memory, learning; of thy
strength, courage, credit; of thine honor, power, and high place* In a word,
of every benefit or any good thing in any kind thou ever receiuedst from the
bountiful and blessed hand of Almighty God. And the more and more excellent
and extraordinary endowments, and gracious indulgences have been vouchsafed
thee from the euer-springing Fountain of all good; the more exactly must thou
be answerable, and in proportion accountable for more. Wherefore, since the
graces of salvation incomparably excel and outshine all other humane
abilities; all excellencies of nature, art, policy, learning, or what else can
be named admirable in the eyes of men; God looks that we should keep those
heavenly Jewels especially, orient, bright and shining; communicate them most
frankely and abundantly to our brethren; and with all watchfulness and wisdom
upon all opportunities, employ them to our Masters greatest and most glorious
advantage. Now there is nothing more hinders the fruitful improouement of them
then Pride: Nothing makes them more passable and profitable then Humility. A
proud man puffed up with an opinion of his good parts, does ordinarily, out of an
itching ambitious humor, single out such seasons for discovery of himself,
and ostentation of his gifts; when he may win most applause from men, and
show himself vaine-gloriously; and thereupon is more rare, dainty, and
reserved in exercising his talent. But a downeright humble Christian is in this
kind vnreseruedly and indifferently for all places, times, and persons; where,
and when he may bring glory unto God, good unto others, comfort to his own
soul in discharging a good conscience. He dares not for his heart, either out
of humor, or for fear he should make himself too cheap, as they say, or any
other vain respect, conceal any thing in his heart or brain, were it the
highest strain of his heavenly skill, or any experimental secret in the
mystery of Christ, from the meanest Christian, could he wisely and seasonably
thereby do him any spiritual good. Let us therefore infinitely abhor, by
filthy vainglory, to stain the glory, and blast the fruitfulness of our
graces; but rather with all humility and watchfulness observe and apprehend
all the ways, occasions and callings, whereby we may glorify God most with
them, and improoue them best for our Lords advantage; that so we may give up
our account at the great and universal Audite, with more favor, and enter
more comfortably into our Masters joy.

7. Let the fear and foresight of the many fearful effects, and much ill
that certainly follows, and is ever found where this white Devil, spiritual
pride, haunts, hunt it out of thy heart, and keep a continual narrow watch
against all its sly insinuations. Besides that it plagues the soul that
harbors it, with many spiritual miseries, distempers, disacquaintance with
God (for He is ever most familiar with those who are most humble) Pharisaicall
swellings, inflammations of furious zeal, and the like; it ever proves also of
pestilent consequence and prejudice to the common state of goodness, to the
honor and acceptance of Christianity. 1. A truly proud professor, puffed
up with his gifts and supposed sufficiencies; which wickedly aims more at
vaineglory, then glorifying God; at his own praise, then profiting others, is
for the most part very irksome, tedious and burdensome to the company of
humble, wise, judicious Christians. For ordinarily he is ouertalkatiue, swift
to speak, and too full of words; far more forward to overrule and
domineere, in opposing, moderating, resolving, then seven men that can render a
reason. An itching humor after applause, and of carrying away the credit, for
ability to discourse, and eminency above others, puts him on too often to
power out himself indiscreetly and impertinently in all companies, to press
and obtrude upon others with much verbal importunity, and unconquerable
stiffness, his master-like conceits, without due respect or seasonable
observation of the humble abilities and sufficiencies of bystanders, and that
many times when he has neither calling, fitnes, efficacy of matter, or power
of the holy Ghost. And if a man do not presently upon the bare and first
proposition, accord and accommodate his judgment to every circumstance of
whatsoever he holds, and square exactly to his Oracles; he begins to shake the
head as though he were a lost man, and is ready, ipso facto, to excommunicate
him out of his conscience. I speak not thus, to stop the current of
comfortable talk, edifying discourse, and fruitful conference, in any
true-hearted Nathaneels. There is infinitely more need to stir them up, and
quicken them to more forwardness and foorth-putting this way at Christian
meetings: but only to intimate the vainglorious, empty, opinionatiue
talkatiuenesse of such as are possessed with this white Devil. 2. Such an One
also is wont to be too austere, censorious, sour, and imperious in his
carriage toward those which are without; whereby he becomes; both a stumbling
block to them in their way to Christianity; and brings also an unnecessary,
scandalous, false aspersion upon the ways of God, and yoke of Christ, as
though they were harsh, heavy, and unpleasant; when as they are most sweet,
easy and amiable. I know full well, there is not the wisest, holiest,
humblest, discreetest Christian alive, can so possibly bear and behave
himself; but profaneness will plague him with slanderous imputations of any
kind. Jesus Christ our Master was not free this way; which of his servants
then can, dare, or will expect and desire exemption? Blessed be God, that our
good names are oyled, so that the ink will not stick which is cast upon them.
There is scarce a religious Professor, especially of resolution and spirit to
be found, but some men of the world will charge him with surlinesse and pride.
Whereas many times, not only the imputation is misgrounded, mistaken,
misse-imputed, fastened upon him for the most part, by reason of his 1.
inconformity to the courses of the world, and corruptions of the times, 2.
vnsociablenesse with profane men, 3. resolution and vndauntednesse in good
causes, 4. innocence and independency, which beget boldness and braveness of
mind, etc. but also those fellows themselves, who so slander him; because
their consciences were never illightened with sight, sense, and acknowledgement
of the foulness of sin, their own vileness, the exactness of Gods Law,
purity of his most holy Nature, severity and certainty of his Judgments;
cannot possibly choose but be passingly proud. Yet for all this, I would advise
all those who have in earnest given their names to Christ; that they would
walk warily, and so demean themselves, that they give no just offense in this
kind. For when they have tried both ways, they shall find, that
mercifulness and meekness to those which are without; humility and
humanity; affable, courteous, and loving deportment; and so becoming all
Colos. 3. 12. 1. Pet. 3. 8. 1. Cor. 9. 22.
things to all men in Paul's sense, and so far as we may with a good
conscience, is the better way, subscribed unto by the manifold experiences of
wisest and worthiest Christians, to win honor to our profession, to gain
more unto Gods side, and to preserve our selves in as much peace amidst a
naughty and crooked generation, as holiness will possibly permit. 3. God in
his just judgment gives over such an The euer-good conceit, and selfeweening
opinion, man has of himself, is the Nursemother of the falsest opinions, both
public and particular.
One sometimes to santasticall opinions, odd and absurd tenants, swaruing
brainelessely and senselessely from the holy harmony of confessions, and our
blessed pure Orthodoxe Articles of Religion; the truth whereof, every honest
Man, if need required, ought to seal with his blood: which when
superficialnesse, and its ordinary consort, selfeconceitednesse, have unhappily
brought forth, by the midwifery of a kind of spiritual wantonness; be they
never so monstrous and misshapen, yet some giddy heads will hearken and hanker
after them; so that many times many weak, ungrounded, unstable young beginners
in Profession, are limed, and woefully entangled, as we see too often in our
chiefest City, whence ensues an incredible deal of prejudice, hurt and
hindrance, even to the common state of goodness; to the honor and acceptance
of Christianity. For thereupon is raised a cry in all conuenticles of good
fellowship, and consistories of worldly wisdom: That these forward professors
will all turn fantastical, Familists, Anabaptists, Arrians, any thing. Which
cry awakes the eye of State-iealousie; and so by an unworthy consequent, draws
upon those who are true of heart, even Gods best servants, and the Kings best
subjects, discountenance, suspicions, if not molestations; unnecessarily,
causelessly. For so might ye root up your Rose-trees, because a worm
sometimes breeds in the sweetest bud. So might ye extinguish Monarchies from
the face of the earth, because they sometimes degenerate into tyrannies. So
might ye conceive ill of Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, because Judas
proved naught, etc. 2. Sometime he suffers him to fall into some gross
sin, in the face of the World, and before the watchful eye of scornful
enemies; the infamy and scandal whereof, being once on wing, fly abroad as
swift as the Eagles of the Heavens, over a whole Country, over a Kingdom; the
Devils and their drunken trumpetters are speedy Dromedaries to carry such
news: and this concurrent cry resounds from all places with much wicked
triumph and insultation: You see now what these professors are; One so famous
for his forwardness, is fallen into such a gross sin, and so notoriously;
They are even all alike, etc. Which by accident, and in the event redounds too
often, to the inexpiable disgrace of our holy profession, the strengthening of
the stubborn, the staggering of the strong, the stunting of those which are
coming on, the hindering of the weak, the hardening of the wicked, the
chaining of the scorner, far faster to his chair of pestilence. Woe unto him
by whom such offense does come; except by a remarkable repentance and
recovery, after blessed David's example, he reestablish himself in the hearts
of Gods people, and stop the mouths of the adversaries, who are equally guilty
of impenitency, as of far, perhaps, grosser impieties. Austin does
excellently express, and to the life, the wiliness of the wicked, and humor
of the world upon such unhappy occasions. There was, as it seems, some such
scandalous accident befell in his family. Whereupon he writes an Epistle to
the Ministers, Seniours, and whole City of Hippo; and heartily intreates them
all, Epist. 137. Hortatur omnes, ne temere iudicent, neue ob paucorum delicta,
vel ipsi deficiant a pietate, vel de omnibus male suspie entur, declarans
nullam fuisse tam foelicem societatem, in qua non aliquod flagitium extiterit.
Argument. Quantumlibet vigilet disciplina domus meae, Homo sum, and inter
homines viuo* nec mihi arrogare audeo, vt domus mea melior sit quam Ar^a Noe;
vbi tamen inter octo homines reprobus vnus inuentus est: aut melior si^, quam
domus Abrahae, vbi dictum est, Eijce Ancillam and filium eius: aut melior sit,
quam domus Isaac, cui de duobus geminis dictum est, Jacob dilexi, Esau autem
odio habui: aut melior sit quam domus ipsius Jacob, vbi lectum patris filius
incestauit: aut melior sit quam domus ipsius David, euius filius cum sorore
concubuit, cuius al^er filius contra patris tam sanctam mansuetudinem
rebellauit, etc. aut melior quam cohabitatio ipsius Domini Christi, in qua
vndecim boni, perfidum and furem Iudam tolerauerunt: aut melior sit postremo,
quam coelum, vnde Angeli ceciderunt. Cum de aliquibus, qui sanctum nomen
profitentur, aliquid criminis, vel falsitatis sonuerit, vel very patuerit;
instant* satagunt, ambiunt, vt de omnibus hoc credatur.
that themselves would not therefore either faint in that Christian course, and
holy profession; or fall foul with suspicions and censures upon all, for the
faults of a few: for there is no society so happy, which is not stained with
some villainy. Although, says he, discipline be exercised in my family with a
watchful eye, yet I am a man, and live amongst men; and therefore cannot
presume that mine house should be better then the Arc of Noah; then the house
of Abraham; then the house of Isaac; then the house of Jacob; then the house of
David, etc. In all which, some were naught; nay, then the family of Jesus
Christ, in which there was a traitor and a thief. Lastly, then Heaven it
self, from which the Angels fell. But that which I would principally have you
take notice of in that Epistle, and for which I specially mention it, is
Austins emphaticall, elegant, and effectual expressing the eager, itching,
ambitious humor of the wicked, to father and fasten the faults of some, upon
the whole generation of the just. Instant, says he, Satagunt, ambiunt; I
cannot express their full significancy in English: but part of his meaning is;
They every way, and infinitely labor, that when some professors of holiness
have foulely fallen indeed, or be only so slandered, the World would believe,
That they are all such. Do you not think in his time the World did thus
insult and exclaim, or in the like manner upon Lots fall: Here now you see The
Poet brings in the Sodomites thus speaking unto Lot: Base, busy stranger,
come thou hither thus, (Controler like) to prate; and preach to us? No
(Puritan) thou shall not here do so, etc. The Vocation, page 412.
Puritan Lot, who could not endure the good fellowship of the Sodomites; he is
now himself seized upon by Incest, They are all such, I will awarrant you. In
David's time: What, David? a man so precise, that he professes, a liar shall
not tarry in his sight, Psa. 101. Has he taken away another man's wife? You see
now what they all are, etc. Proportionably in these times, (and it will be the
humor of those that hate to be reformed to the worlds end, so to calumniate)
if any who have given their names unto Christ, be detected, nay, or suspected
of any notorious scandalous crime, it is a sufficient warrant for the wicked to
raise a general cry, and to proclaim every where; They are all alike. And
good fellows, as they call them, will think themselves wronged, if the World
thereupon do not conceive the only difference between them, and forward
Professors to be; that these carry things more cunningly, and have an art in
concealing their miscarriages. We, say they, are plaine-dealing men, and
appear, as we are; we are flesh and blood, and must have our pleasures; and
therefore refresh our selves at many merry and Iouiall meetings: we swear
sometimes, and drink, and game; and to tell you true, do a great deal worse;
but without hypocrisy: whereas these demure holy Ones bear themselves more
reseruedly, wear a vizor in their visible conversation, but assure your
selves, sin in secret as well as we. Just as Austin says in the forecited
place; The wicked watch and observe; and if they spy any of the betrer side to
fall, they would presently have the World to think, That the rest are all
such; a Omnes tales (...) credant, sed non omnes posse manifestari.
only they are not ever discovered. Now the Lord rebuke thee, Satan, who so
infatuatest the judgments, and blindes the understandings of men, otherwise of
good parts, and very worldly wise, whom thou woefully hoodwinkest and hardnest
to their endless overthrow. 1. That they should wickedly and absurdly condemn
Non perijt fraternitas pia propter eos, qui profitentur quod non sunt. August.
in Psalm. 13^. 1. Pet. 2. 17.
all for some, whereby they bar themselves everlastingly from the love of the
Brotherhood. 2. That they should erect Tribunals in other men's consciences
(which is Gods Royal prerogative;) and so miscensure their hearts, to their
own hardening. 3. That they should not be able to discern between being haled
and hurried, as it were, into some sin, against the general purpose of a
man's heart, and practice of his life, by the violence of some temptation,
passion, or impetuous sudden insnarement, which he after heartily bewailes
with much bitterness of spirit, and exemplary repentance, willing, if God were
so pleased, to redeem the scandal of his fall with the shedding of his blood;
taking occasion thereupon to walk more warily, and to do more nobly in the
service of his God, all the days of his life: and a resolved delightful
wallowing in variety of lusts, pleasures, and gross sins, without any
repentance or reformation at all.

I conclude the whole point, and a good part of my meaning in the words of an
excellent Writer, not much altered. I not only hold it lawful to rejoice in
those good things, wherewith God has blessed us in any kind whatsoever,
especially the saving gifts of the holy Ghost; but a note of much
unthankfulness, to entertain them with a sullen and unfeeling disposition.
Yet all humane affections and endowments, wherein due reverence to God is
wanting, are no better then obscure clouds, hindering the influence of that
blessed Light, which clarifies the soul of man, and predisposeth it unto the
brightness of eternal felicity. So that insolent joy and ouerweening which a
man in the pride of his vain imagination, conceiueth of his own worth, does
above all other passions blast our minds, as it were, with lightning, and make
us reflect our thoughts upon our own seeming inherent goodness; forgetting
the whilst Him, to whom we are indebted for our very Being: and besides, it
blows upon our gifts with such a malignant humor, that they also become
unfruitful, and unprofitable to others.

Thus much concerning the first extreme and error in managing our spiritual
estate, to wit, a proud ouerprizing of our own graces with a conceited
ouer-weening selfe-estimation. I come now to the second, which is, A dejected
distrustful undervaluing of Gods mercies, the promises of life and graces
which we possess.

And here I cannot hold, but must, even with some indignation, expostulate and
contest with many of Gods hidden Ones, Psalm. 83. 3.
about their heavy, pensive, and uncomfortable walking; for that they are so
far from entertaining and expressing that unspeakable glorious joy, which
upon their new birth, is their native portion and patrimony; their just and
due inheritance; as certainly theirs by an everlasting propriety and right
(if they would but open their eyes to see it, and enlarge their hearts to
graspe it) being a fruit of that holy Spirit which Galat. 5. 22. Romans 14. 17.
dwells in them; and a price of Christ's Kingdom established in their souls, as
their clothes upon their backs, their hearts in their bodies, and blood that
runs in their veins: I say, they are so far from walking in the strength,
and light of this joy, that they wickedly, I dare say, if not wilfully, abandon
and expose their spirits, freed for ever by the Lambs blood, from the hellish
fangs of any slavish horror, to the unnecessary rack of much fruitless,
unworthy, and slavish sadness. Whereby, besides their own needless sinful
selfecreated torment:

1. They most unworthily undervalue, abridge, and disparage the infiniteness
of Gods dearest and tender mercy; who is a thousand times more ready and
forward to bind up any broken heart, then it to bleed before him.

2. They unnecessarily disable and indispose themselves for the duties, and
comfortable discharge of both their Callings.

3. They gratify Satan, and satisfy his cruel humor; who if he cannot have
a man's company in Hell hereafter; (for if he were sure of that, he would make
him live as joyfully and Iouially, as he could possibly) he labors might and
maine, to hold him upon the rack of slavish distrustful terrors, all the
days of his life.

4. They are thereby many times occasions of discouragement, and disheartning
to those which are without, that they are more loath to enter into the ways of
life; preiudging them to be thorny and rough, dark and deep, full of dumps
and drooping, of heaviness and horror; whereas indeed and truth, they are all
paued with mercy and love, strowed with Violets and Roses, full of fresh
springs of spiritual comforts, and sweetly illightned even in the darkest
passages, with heavenly and healing beams of the Sun of righteousness. For
whether it be fit to believe the Spirit of all truth and comfort; or the
scornful spirit of impure drunkards, and Satan's Reuellers; judge you. This
precise and (...); Walk circumspectly, or precisely, Eph^. 5. 15.
strict walking, say they, which is pressed upon us with such importunatenesse,
and confidence, would not lead us to mopishnesse and melancholy; would
enchaine us to that abridgement of our pleasure, restraint from company; from
crowning our selves with Rose-buds, and former courses of good fellowship and
mirth, of which our generous and Iouiall spirits are most impatient, and
utterly incapable. But what says the blessed Spirit; Prou. 3. 17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness: and all her paths are peace. They give
them occasion to mis-conceiue, that the yoke of Christ is burdensome, and will
gaul their necks: whereas in truth and trial, it is Suscipite iugum Christis
nolite timere quod iugum est: festinate quod leave est. Non conterit colla, sed
honestat. Quid dubitatis? Quid procrastinatis? Non alligat ceruicem vinculis:
sed mentem gratia copulat, etc. Ambr. de Helia and ieiunio, cap. 22. Nolite
onus pertimescere, suauitatis enim eximiae plenum. Chrysostom. in cap. 11. Mat.
Mutantur gaudia. non tolluntur.
easy and light, and would prove a chain of heavenly Pearls to adorn their
souls; that after they have given their names to profession, they shall never
have merry day, but must necessarily bid adieu to all delight: whereas their
joys should not be taken away, but only changed, as one of the Ancients
speaks; and that most happily, and with an invaluable advantage. For the filth
and froth of their sensual bitter-sweet pleasures, fugitive follies, and
furious delights, which pass away in the act, as the taste of pleasant drink
dies in the draught, should be turned into that true unconquerable spiritual
joy, which the World cannot give, nor man, nor devil take away. Ecquandone
vidisti flammam stipula exortam; claro strepitu, largo fulgore, cito
incremento; sed enim materia leui, caduco incendio, nullis reliquijs? Such is
carnal mirth.
Their crashes of loud laughter amid their pots and pastimes, which are but as
the cracking of thorns under a pot, the Devils Wakes and Music for Hell,
should be converted into a sweet, constant, habitual contentment of mind. Nay
more; whereas before in the very height and ruff of their maddest meetings,
most roaring outrages and reuellings, their hearts upon remembrance of death,
their secret impenitent guiltiness, that strict account at Gods dreadful
Tribunal, at which they may be arraigned the next hour, etc. were full often
twitcht Vides conuiuium peccatoris: Interroga eius conscientiam, Nonne grauius
omnibus foetet sepulchris? Intueris laetitiam eius: and salubritatem mira^is
corporis; filiorum atque opum abundantiam: introspice vlcera and vibices animae
eius; cordisque moestitudinem. Ambr. offic. lib. 1. cap. 12.
and stung with many inward bitter gripings, and slavish foretastes of hellish
terror; yet upon their change, and change of joys, even in the highest tide
and torrent of their penitent Dulciores sunt lachrymae* orat^tium, quam gaudia
the atorum. August. in* Psalm. 127.
tears, and sorrow for sin, (and they should be sad for nothing else) their
spirits shall be refreshed and ravished with a Paradise of sweetest peace, and
heavenly glimpses of eternal light. In a word, if they would in earnest
abandon the Devils service, come out of Hell, give their names unto Christ in
truth, and try; I dare assure them in the Word of life and truth, they would
not exchange the saddest hour of all their life afterward, with the prime and
flower of all their former sensual pleasures; might they have ten thousand
Worlds to boot. Here then is no loss in the change. But in the mean time,
much to blame are they, who being truly Gods, yet out of weakness, want of
wisdom, wilful listening unto the father of lies, will not give way to the
counsel of the Prophets, that they may prosper in spiritual hearts-ease, and
so prevent such occasions.

Let those that hate to be reformed, hang down their heads: let swaggering
Belshazzars countenance be changed; let his thoughts trouble him; let the
joints of his loins be loosed, and his knees smite one against another: let
the hearts of all ambitious Nimrods, covetous Worldlings, swinish Drunkards,
filthy Whoremasters, cruel Usurers, lovers of pleasures; or whosoever live and
lie in any beloved sin against an illightned conscience, tremble as the leaves
of the Forest Job ^5. 2^.
that are shaken with the wind: Let a sound of fear be ever in their ears,
and sorrow seize upon their hearts, as the pangs Ier. 4. 31.
of a woman in travail; even as the torture of her that brings forth her
first child: Let trouble and anguish, and the cup Job 15 24. Isa. 51. 17.
of trembling in the hand of the Lord make them afraid; and let them every
hour look to meet their angry God, as a Hosea 13* 8.
Bear bereaved of her Whelps, to rent the very cawle of their hearts, and to
devour them like a Lion: Let sadness sit upon their foreheads as its proper
seat, and furies of conscience affright their spirits still with cries of
blood: Let no voice of joy or gladness be heard in their habitations, but the
most griezly apparitions of damned horror, dwell for ever in the eye of their
guilty consciences. For without repentance, this is their lot, and this is
their everlasting portion. And most happy were they, if any thing would fright
and fire them out of the arms of darkness and snares of the devil; I say,
let the aspiring Lucifers look heavily, upon foresight of their dreadful
downfall; for though they exalt themselves as the Eagle, and Obad. 4.
though they set their nests among the stars; yet thence will I bring them
down, says the Lord. Though their excellency Job 20. 6, 7.
mount up to the heavens, and their head reach unto the clouds, yet they shall
perish for ever like their own dung. Let all covetous worldlings cry out, for
so the holy Ghost commands them; Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for
your miseries Iam. 5. 1, 2.
that shall come upon you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments
motheaten, your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped
treasure together for the last days. Let all impure goodfellow-drunkards hold
down their heads, and howl for the horrible Woe which dogs them at heels:
Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Isa. 5. 11, 12. and 28. 1, 2.
1. Cor. 6. 10.
Ephraim. Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong One, which as a tempest of
hail, and a destroying storm; as a flood of mighty waters ouerflowing, shall
cast down to the earth with the hand, the Crown of Pride: the Drunkards of
Ephraim shall be trodden down under feet. Let the very heartstrings of all
lascivious wantons tremble at the terror of that cutting commination, Heb. 13.
4. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Let that stinging But, Eccles.
11. 9. strike cold to the hearts of all sensual Gallants and sons of
pleasure: Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes: But, know thou that for all these things God will bring thee
into judgment. Nay, let the heart of every man, whosoever he be, of what cloth
soever his coat be made, that goes on in the willing allowed practice of any
one known sin, fall asunder in his breast like drops of water, for the day of
horror that is at hand, and the sword of vengeance which hangs over his head.
For certainly, at length the Psalm. 68. 21.
Lord will wound the hairy scalpe of every one that goes on still in his
trespasses. In a word, wayling and wringing of hands, woe and alas, is the
merriest song that any wicked man upon earth can sing upon good ground, while
he yet abides in his unregenerate state. Who does not see and acknowledge it;
except he wilfully shut his eyes, or be grossly hoodwinkt Isa. 51. 17.
by the Devil or a rank Atheist? For there is a cup, which is called, a cup
of Gods fury, and a cup of trembling, in the hand of the Lord; whose little
finger is able to beat the greatest mountain to powder, and rent the hardest
Rock in pieces: and the wine is red; which intimates unto us the sharpness
and fierceness of Gods fiery indignation: it is full of mixture; brimfull of
stinging ingredients: and he powers out of the same; to stir up and quicken,
as it were, the bitterness and very bottom: and all the wicked of the earth
shall, will they, nill they, wring out the dregs thereof and drink them, Psalm.
75. 8.

But now on the other side, Let all those of the Brotherhood, 1. Pet. 2. 17.
I use the phrase of the holy Ghost; all those who have given their names to
Christ in truth, and are true of heart in his holy service, upon whose heads
everlasting light does rest, lift up their heads. Let the amiable aspect of
sweetness and peace ever dwell upon their foreheads: Let heavenly beams of
spiritual lightsomnesse and mirth shine fresh in their faces: Let never
uncomfortable dampe of any slavish sadness or touch of hellish terror, vex
their blessed hearts: Let them never more be afraid of any evil tidings, or of
destruction when it comes. In a word; Let them be infinitely and for ever
merry, and sweetly glad at the very heart root. And good cause why. It is the
charge and command of the Spirit of all truth and comfort, Be glad in the
Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in
heart, Psalm. 32. 11.

Oh therefore that the Lord would be pleased so to perfume and sweeten the
ensuing passages, with the refreshing glimpses of his glorious face, and dear
infusions of Divine Joy; that I might be vouchsafed that honor of being his
humble Instrument, to raise up, and quicken the drooping spirits of all that
are true of heart; of all that bear a sincere invincible affection to the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and power of Godliness; that they would be
everlastingly merry; that they would arise and shake themselves from the dust,
and put on their beautiful garments; that they would for ever, with a
resolution never to be shaken with all the powers of hell, banish and bar
out of their happy souls, all their unnecessary scruples, distrusts,
deiections, sad thoughts, and heaviness of heart; that they would out of
sensiblenesse of their present unutterable felicity, and strength of their
truly Heroical spirits, bear and behave themselves as heirs of heaven
indeed; and as the Favorites of the King of Kings! So should they infinitely
more honor the sweetness of Gods merciful disposition; the dearness of his
love; the tenderness of his compassionate bowels; the bottomless mystery of
his free grace; the preciousnesse and truth of his promises; the
vnualuablenesse of his Sons Blood; the pleasantness of the ways of grace;
and the glorious work of the holy Ghost upon their own blessed souls.

Let them ever keep fresh and strong in their minds for this purpose, such
causefull considerations as these.

1. True joy, the most noble, sweet and amiable affection, that ever warmed the
heart of man, is by warrantable propriety and rightful interest, only
peculiar and proper to honest, humble, and holy hearts. Such gracious and
golden Cabinets are only fit for this heavenly Jewel. The beauty and
deliciousness of it, are confined only to the communion of Saints, the sealed
Fountain, the Spouse of Christ. The Brotherhood alone is blessed with its
refreshments and 1. Pet. 2. 17.
rauishing influence. It never did, or ever will shine or sparkle out the least
glimpse upon the world, or to any earthly heart. The most ambitious eager
hunters after pleasures, the worlds greatest Favorites and dearest minions,
have only but ingrost and graspt a Bedlam Si dicam iucundi^a; incipit homini
occurr^re talis iucunditas, qualem solet habere in poculis, in prandijs, in
auaritia, in honoribus seculi. Extolluntur enim homines, and laetitia quadam
insaniunt: sed non est gaudere impijs, dicit Dominus. Est enim iucunditas
quaedam, quam nec oculus vidit, nec auris audiuit, nec in cor hominis asce^dit
August.
counterseit of it: I said of laughter, says, Salemon, It is mad. For the
truth is, no wicked or unregenerate man has any true cause or good ground at
all to rejoice, laugh, or be merry. I will make it plain in a word, even to
the scorner. Suppose a great man convicted and condemned for Treason, going
toward the place of execution a mile off: and let there a Table all along be
furnished with variety of dainties; let him tread upon Violets and Roles, cloth
of Arras, cloth of Gold, or what you will, all the way; let him be attended on
both sides with most exquisite music and honorable entertainments: Do you
think all this would make him laugh heartily, carrying this in his heart, that
he must loose his head at the miles end? I ^row not. As far less true cause
have thou to laugh, whosoever thou art, that walk on impenitently in any
wicked course, or lie delightfully in any beloved sin; as a temporal death
is less then endless torments. For he is but going to loose his head; but
thou* as an already condemned man also, art posting toward hell. He that
believes not, says John, is condemned already, Ioh. 3. 18. If we peruse
punctually the happiest estate of the most glorious worldling, and all his
ways; we shall find no matter at all for true joy* either to breed in, or
feed upon. Let v^ walk into his fools Paradise, and survey all the f^ding
^owres of his imaginary felicities. It may be we shall find wealth, power,
pleasures, honors, pomp, and magnificence of state; perhaps an Imperial
Crown, the top of all earthly happiness. And what of all these* Alas! Gold
and Pearl, a^ one says, are but shining dust, or excrements of the earth:
Power, is but a flash of lightning, that fears or strikes another, and forth
with it self is suddenly extinct: Pleasure, is but a bait, and yet passes
away in the act, as the taste of a pleasant drink dies in the draught:
Honor, is but a breath, and yet binds a man in gilded fetters, and blasts his
spirit with far more care and fear, then when he was most mean: Even as
highest boughs are most shaken by the winds, and the points of steeples beaten
most with storms and lightning. All worldly splendour and pomp, is but a Non
debet pro magne h^beri honor human^ quis nullius est ponderis fumus. Aug de
ciu^t. Dei. lib. 5 cap. 17. page 313.
smoke, which vanishes as it rises, and draws tears from the eyes. Even a
Reg^ll Diadem, in the sense and censure of an Heathenish King, is attended
with such a weighty irksome, and painful charge* that, says he, He who
foreknew the weight of a Scepter, should he find it lying upon the ground, he
would not deigne to take i^ up. And what is himself, the owner and Lord of all
these? A little walking earth, a colored piece of clay, a warm piece of dirt,
a very bag of choler, fleame, and other filth; to day a man, to morrow none:
his breath is in his nostrils; stop but his nose, and he is dead. And what is
his abode amongst these painted vanities and things of naught? For sudden
passage and change, it is like a Shepherds tent, a Weauers shuttle, or a water
bubble; like a hying Poast, or a flying cloud; like a ship under sail, or an
Eagle on her wings; like a fading flower, or a falling leaf; like foame that
is scattered, or dust that is driven with the wind; like a vapor, a thought,
a smoke, a wind that passes and comes not again; like a flying shadow,
yea, the very dream of a shadow, as one says, and that a morning dream,
which is even as soon ended as begun. But let us look into his inside, and
the state of his soul, and see if we can there find any more peace, comfort,
or constancy. No, there you shall behold a lively resemblance of the very
restless tumultuations of the raging sea; the neuer-dying Worm breeding and
growing big in the froth of his filthy lusts, and rottenness of his rebellious
heart: In a word, his poor soul bleeding to eternal death. Let us come unto
his death; from the inevitable stroke whereof, all the Gold and Pearl of East
and West can no more redeem him, then can an handful of dust; and there he
shall find despair and horror, like two evening Wolves, enraged with hellish
hunger; ready to tear his soul in pieces, when there is none to help. And
what follows? He must lay down his cold carcass among the stones of the pit,
at the roots of the rocks: his name, by reason of his former pride* luxury,
oppression, opposition to goodness, shall rot as fast, and stink as bad above
ground, as his body in the grave. And lastly, the only forethought whereof
should make him tremble all the days of his life; his immortal soul sinkes
irrecouerably by the weight of sin, into the bottom of the burning Lake;
where there are torments without end, and past imagination; exceeding not only
all patience, but all resistance; where there is no strength to fustaine, nor
ability to beat; that which there, whilst God is God, for ever must be
borne. And when they have been endured Si post tot millia annorum, quot
capillos habue. runt omnes, quicunque fuc^unt, and erunt* ^oenas suas ^rent,
multo leuius eas (...): sed quia spem non habent, nec habebunt, desperatione
deficient, and ad tormenta non sufficient. Aug. De spiritu and anim^ cap. ^6.
millions of years; yet are no nearer end^, then when they began; nor the
soul nearer out, then when it came in. Tell me then, I pray you, in all this,
is there any room for rejoicing? Is there any matter for true mirth? No more
then taste in the white of an egg, then strength in a broken staff of reed,
then sweetness in the apples of Sodom. Why then, it is a shame for the weakest
Christian that breathes but the spiritual life, even of holy desires ^ not to
be infinitely more merry then the most glorious and magnificent worldling upon
earth. Shall a graceless wretch, going toward hell, to whom God himself has
proclaimed, There is no peace, no joy, (...). Esa. 57. 21. Malihomines non
gaudere, sed g^stire dicsitur proprie. Non est gaudere impijs, dicit Dominus
Aug. de Ser. dom. in Mont. lib. 2. cap. 18.
as the Sep^uagints tender it; who is a mere. Thief, Robber and usurper, in
respect of all the joys upon which he intrudes; and which way soever he casts
his eyes, if he wear not false spectacles, or be blindfolded by the Devil,
can see nothing but the ugly face of horror, and true cause of trembling. If
he look backward upon the time past; he may see all the abominable lusts of
his youth, all the sins of his former life, registered with an iron pen in the
book of his conscience; and lurking there like so many sleeping lions; who
upon the very first touch of Gods visiting hand, will awake, arise, and rent
impieces. If he look upon his present state, through the clear Cristall of
Gods righteous Law: He may see Divine vengeance dogging him hard at the heels;
ready to strike him down into hell, upon the next riot and rebellion against
(...) patient Lord, That most horrible fiery tempestuous (...), Psalm. 11. 6.
ready to fall upon his head, even when he is warmest in his wealth, and in the
hottest gleame of his worldly prosperity: sudden destruction ready to seize
upon him unavoidably, as travel 1. These. 5. 3.
upon a woman with child, when he is singing the securest Requiem to his
soul of safety and peace. If he look forward to future time, he sees death,
the grave, Gods strict Tribunal, the last Judgment, and endless miseries of
the other world: the sting, poison, and terrors of which, he shall never be
able, either to avoid or abide. I say, Shall such a fellow fleere in the face?
And shall not a true hearted Nathanael, to whom Jesus Christ has bequeathed a
legacy of Ioh. 14. 27.
peace; whom the Spirit of God bids rejoice evermore; and who, which way soever
he looks, if he open his eye of faith, shall see nothing but matter of
sweetest contemplation; infinite cause of truest joy, and spiritual
rauishment: If he look backward upon the time, whilst he yet lay under the
^yranny of the Devil, and dominion of the first death; he shall see the
Catalogue of all his former sins, should it be as black as hell, as soul as
Sodom, as red as scarlet, fairly, and for ever washed away in that fountain
opened for sin Zech. 13. 1.
and for uncleanness, even the precious blood of that immaculate Lamb Jesus
Christ, the Holy and the righteous: If he look upon his present state, he
shall find himself preserved as a Jewel most safe in the precious Cabinet of
Gods dearest providence; environed with a glorious guard of mighty Angels; kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the
last time: If he look forward, he shall see death indeed; but the st^g taken
out of it by the death of Qui pro nobis mortem semel vicit, semper vincit in
nobis Cyp. ad Martyrs.
Christ; the grave perfumed to his hand, by his Saviors blessed Burial;
wherein he may lie down as in a bed of Down, fenced with the omnipotent arm
of God, for the glory of the Resurrection; the Throne of grace in Heaven,
standing upon pillars of mercy and love; where Jesus Christ sits as Judge, who
shed his hearts blood for him; and is his Qui Iudex tuus f^turus est, ipse is
hodie Aduocatus (...). Aug. in Psalm 51.
Advocate, while he yet abides in this vale of tears; the bosom of Abraham,
the arms of God Almighty wide open, and stretched out to receive him at the
end of his Pilgrimage into his Masters joy: I say, shall such a happy soul not
have an Heaven in his heart, but be heauyhearted? Shall a vassal of the Devil
laugh, and an h^ire of Heaven look heavy? Monstrous absurdity*

2. Every Christian, after his new creation, has ever incomparably more matter
of mirth the^ mourning; infinitely greater cause to be ravished with
spiritual joy, then to be dejected by grief. Though this may seem a paradox
to the clearest eye, and best apprehension of worldly wisdom* yet in truth it
is a true principle in the mystery of Christ. I do thus manifest it, and make
it good to the saddest mourner in Sion; if he do not give more care to the
lying malicious dictates of the Devil, and distrusts of his own heart, then
to the well-grounded counsel of the Prophets, and impregnable truth of Gods
blessed Word. In the right estimate and valuation, all the afflictions and
sufferings of this life* whether of soul, body, outward state, or any way,
are but dust in the balance, in respect of that exceeding excessive eternal
weight of glory, purchased and prepared for him by the blood of his dearest
Lord. In the (...). 2. Cor. 4. 17.
original it is, as a worthy Divine says well, a superlatiue transcendent
phrase of speech, which far passes the height of all humane Oratory, and all
the R^toricke of the most eloquent Heathens; because they never treated upon
such a Theme; they were not inspired with such a spirit. Whereupon says the
Apostle in another place, Ireckon, that the sufferings of this present Romans 8.
18.
time, are not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall be revealed in
us. Whence it follows, that a very fore-imagination of that most
inconceivable happiness to be had hereafter; to wit, the shining splendor
and sun-like glory of our bodies; the unspeakable perfections and excellencies
of our souls; the admirable beauty of the place; the glorious comfort of our
heavenly company; the beatificall fruition of the most blessed Trinity, etc.
and that which crowns our bliss with impossibility of further addition,
endlesnesse of all these: I say, a serious preconceit hereof, illightened and
strengthened by says, is able to hold up the Christians heart with infinite
strength, and to refresh it with a secret unutterable gladness, even amidst
variety and extremi^ie of all worldly troubles; and does minister as far
more matter of rejoicing, then these of mourning, as that forementioned
exceeding 2. Cor. 4. 17.
excessive everlasting weight of glory, is to be preferred before a little
momentany light affliction. Hence it is, that the holy Martyrs of Jesus were so
merry, and sweetly contented in the midst of all their outward miseries,
pressures, persecutions, and Martyrdom it self. I was in prison, says
Laurence (...)
one of them, till I go into prison. I feel no more pain, says Ba^nam.
another, in the fire, then if I were in a bed of Down; it is as sweet to me
as a bed of Roses. I believe, says a Adolphus Clare bacc^s.
third, there is not a (...) heart in the world at this instant then mine it.
To Faninus.
One obiecting to a fourth, Christ's ag^ny and sadness to his che^refulnesse:
Yea, says he, Christ was sad that I might be merry. He had my sins, and I
have his merit and righteousness. But specially let us look upon Paul, a
blessed and precious pattern for us to imitate in this point. He was troubled
on every side; Without were fightings, within were fears* He was in stripes
above measure: in prisons more frequent: in deaths ^t: Of the Jews five times
received he forty stripes save one: Thrice was he beaten with rods: Once was
he stoned: 2. Cor. 11. 23, etc.
Thrice he suffered Shipwreck: A night and a day was he in the deep: In
iourneying often, in perils of water, in p^ils of robbers, in peril by his
own countrym^n, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in
the Wilderness^, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren: In
weariness and painfulness, in watchings often: in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often: in cold and nakedness. He was called a pestilent fellow. He
Acts 24. 5. 1. Cor. 4. 13. 2. Cor. 12. 10.
was accounted as the filth of the world* and off scouring of all things: And
yet for all this, he professes of himself, that he O^nia illa, quae
commemotauit (...) and (...) and abundan^ (...); sed profect^ ade^ ei Spiritus
Sanctus, qui in exterioris hominis cor^ptione inte^iorem renouare^* de di^ in
^em; and (...) requie spiritual, in affluenti^ deliciarum Dei, in spe (...)
beatitudi^is, omnia praesent^a de (...), aspera and grauia omnia ^.
took pleasure i^ infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake. Nay which is more, and more punctual for my
purpose, he says in another place, That he was filled with comfort, and
exceeding joyful in 2 Cor 7. 4* (...). Abundo gaudio supra quam dici possit. I
do over abound exceedingly in joy.
all his tribulation. Now every sincere-hearted Professor is bound to
ouer-abound exceedingly in this joy, as well as Paul. Not so, says the weak
Christian; for Paul had a stronger faith then I* and more grace. It is true,
but yet thy faith is as true as his. And it is not so much the muchnesse, as
the truth of faith, which gives right and interest to a Crown of life, comfort
in all afflictions, and everlasting lightsomenesse. Therefore well said a
worthy witness to the truth, Paul and Peter were more honorable members of
Christ then I, but I am a member: They had more store of grace then I; but I
Francisc^ Uarlute.
have my measure; and therefore sure of glory. It is strange then, that any
true-hearted Nathanael having such good ground of rejoicing; sinning in that he
does not rejoice; and joy being so sweet and welcome a guest to the heart of
man; should wear out a few and wretched days in unnecessary heaviness, and
sinful sadness; whereby he highly dishonours Gods free love; hinders others
from the ways of life; hurts full sore his own soul, and only gratifies
Satan.

3. It is a constant mark of every regenerate man, to make conscience of all
Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6, Now the holy Ghost does not only in many
several places give us charge to rejoice, but is very earnest upon us in this
point: Nay, does so often double and treble with extraordinary emphasis and
elegant gradation, his entreatie and importunity in the same place. Let the
Saints, says he, be joyful with glory, Psalm. 149. 5. Let all those that seek
thee, rejoice and be glad in thee, Psalm. 40. 16. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye
righteous, Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice evermore, 1. These. 5. 16* Rejoice in the Lord
always: and again I say, Rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. Let all those that put their
trust in thee, rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, Psalm. 5. 11. Let the
righteous be glad: let them rejoice before God* yea, let them exceedingly
rejoice, Psalm. 68. 3. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous, and
shout for joy* all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32. 11. It is not an
arbitrarie or indifferent thing, as some may suppose, to rejoice, or to be sad.
But a comfortable commandment is sweetly enforced upon us, by the fountain of
all comfort, to rejoice; and we break a commandment, if we rejoice not. And
therefore we are bound in conscience to shake our selves from the dust, to
pluck up our spirits, to expostulate and be angry with our hearts, if they
grow heavy as David did: Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? For we must answer as well for not rejoicing, as for
not praying: for breaking this commandment, Rejoice evermore; as that other,
Thou shall not kill: (I know full well there are difference and degrees in
sin.)

But here a weak Professor being pressed to the intertainment and excellency
of this joy, may be troubled and tempted upon the survey of the definition and
nature of it. For this spiritual Christian joy, is a delicious motion of the
mind, stirred up by the holy Ghost, from the presence and possession of Christ
Jesus our Sovereign God, dwelling in the soul by faith; whereby the heart is
extraordinarily ravished and refreshed with a sweet, holy, unspeakable
delight. Now, says he, if it be so; I must tell you, I find and feel no such
sensible grasping of Jesus Christ, in the arms of my faith, or assured
possession of him, that I dare admit of this joy, or meddle with it.

But know, that in the time of thy spiritual infancy, temptations, desertions,
and other dampes and deiections of soul especially; let thy feeling or
acknowledgement be what it will; thou do most certainly enjoy the Lord
Jesus, even Matthew. 5. 5*
by a sincere hunger and thirst after him and his righteousness, and by thine
upright hearts adhering and cleaving unto him, as thy only and chiefest joy:
and by consequent art upon good ground, and by true right interessed to all
that joy, which the blessed Spirit does so importunately press upon thee inso
many places. Here refresh thy memory with the reuise of my former distinction
of assurance of evidence, and adherence.

4. What can thou think upon, or what can possibly befall thee; out of which
thou being turned unto God, and true of heart, may not collect matter of
comfort, and by the mighty help of faith extract some joyful meditation? 1.
If thou suruay thy graces, with which the free mercy of God has glorified thy
soul, thou shall see in them a sacred heavenly sunshine, which is able to
illighten the darkest midnight of all thine outward miseries; to disperse and
dissolve the blackest and most tempestuous clouds of temporal troubles. Thou
shall feel in the^ such an inexplicable excessive sweetness, which were the
world above thee a Sea of bitterness and gall, might turn it all into sugar.
Thou shall find in them such an impregnable mortal vigor, that will most
certainly uphold thy spirit vnconquerably, at thy dying hour, and before that
last dreadful bar; when all impenitent wretches shall roar like wild Bulls
in a net full of the terrors of God, and cry upon the Hills and rocks to hide
them from his unquenchable wrath; which they shall never be able either to
avoid or abide. Hence springs that abundant and vnexhausted matter of joy,
that the joy of Harvest Psalm. 126. 1, 2.
of dividing great spoils, and that which is of such rauishing temper, that
we think we are but in a dream, is but a toy and trifle, a type and shadow
to it; and which ever predominates and incomparably transcends all matter of
mourning. 2. If thou look out upon thine outward state; upon thy wife,
children, friends, health, goods, good name, Orchards, Gardens, possessions,
honors, or whatsoever thou have attained, or do enjoy with good conscience
and Deuteronomy. 26. 11. and 16. 15. Mat. 6. 33.
sanctifiedly; thou art bound to rejoice in them, as temporal tokens of Gods
eternal love; notable encouragements to do more nobly in his glorious service
and comfortable additions to thine hope of heaven; but so, and in such order,
that as thy clothes first receive heat from thy body, before they can
comfortably warm it: so some inward joy of reconcilement to the Creator, must
first warm thine heart, before thou can take any kindly comfort from the
creatures. 3. Concerning crosses, afflictions, troubles, persecutions; which
are wont to present themselves to the apprehension of carnal men with much
horror; even in the very bitterness and extremity of them, if thou cast the
illightned eye of thy soul upon such places and promises as these: 1. Cor. 10.
13. Heb. 13. 5. Romans 8. 28. Heb. 12. 6. 2. Cor. 4. 17. Esaias 63. 9. and the 43.
2. and then reflect upon thy afflicted self, thou may, by the marvelous
work of faith, draw a great deal of joy from them. A patient submission unto*
and fruitful exercise under Gods visiting hand, is an infallible demonstration
that thou art a son, and not a bastard. Is there then not more sweetness in
those Duos filios habet homo, alteru^ castigat, alterum dimittit. Facit vnus
male, and non corripitur: alter mox vt se mouerit, colaphis caeditur,
flagellatur. Vnde ille dimittitur; and ille caeditur, nisi huic caeso
haereditas seruatu^; ille autem dimissus exhaeredatus est? videt cum non habere
spem, and dimittit cum vt faciat quod vult. August. in Psalm. 91.
afflictions, which are evident marks thou art in the right way to Heaven;
then in worldly pleasures, which clearly remonstrate to thy conscience, that
thou art posting toward Hell? Hence it was, that the Apostles rejoiced, being
Si verbera, and vincula* quae omnium videntur tristissima, gaudiu^ pariun^;
quid nos aliorum malorum moestos efficere poterit? Chrysostom. in epist. ad
Philip. Hom. 14. Religionis nostrae Apostoli ibant gaudentes a conspectu
Concilij: quoniam digni habiti sunt pro nomine Jesus contumeliam pati. Nullus
ergo locus moeroris esse debet, vbi tanta laetitia succedit. August. de
conflict. vitior. and virt. c. 12. Tametsi flagella non gaudij sint occasiones,
sed tristitiae and moeroris: nihilominus flagella propter Deum, and causa
propter quam flagellebantur, gaudium ^is pa^iebant. Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Genesis
beaten, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Jesus:
that Paul and Sylas sung in prison at midnight: that Ignatius cried; Let Fire,
Rackes, Pullies, yea, all the torments of Hell come on me, so I may win
Christ. 4. Nay, even contumelies and contempt; reproaches and scorn from the
World for thy profession, which naturally much nettles a noble spirit, do
crown thy head, and should fill thy heart with abundance of glory,
blessedness and joy. If ye be reproched for the Name of Christ, happy are ye,
says Peter: for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you, 1. Pet. 4.
14. Blessed are ye, says Christ himself, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake; rejoice, and be exceeding glad, Math. 5. 11. 12. Scurrilities and
scoffs, all spiteful speeches, odious nicknames, lying imputations cast upon
thee in this kind, by tongues which cut like Psalm. 52. 2.
a sharp rasor, are in their due estimate, and true account, as so many
honorable badges (Let no cowardly Christian then decline them with wounding of
his conscience) of thy Christian magnanimity, and resolute standing on the
Lords side; and at the Throne of Christ will be certainly reputed as
characters of special honor, and remembrancers of thy worthy service, whereby
thou shall appear more acceptable and amiable in the eyes of Almighty God,
and all that glorious triumphant Church above. 5. If thou rightly temper, and
well weigh even thy sorest sorrow, and the very bleeding of thy heart for
sin; it should be so far from damping the lightsomnesse of thy spirit,
that it ought to open unto thee a wellspring of purest joy. For the penitent
melting of our affections, and kindly mourning over Him, whom we have pierced
with our sins, argues infallibly, and sweetly assures the presence and
sanctifying power of the holy Spirit. And what greater comfort, or sweeter
delight, then that which arises from a well grounded evidence, that the
Fountain of all comfort dwells in our souls? Such tears as burst out of a
heart oppressed with grief for sin, are like an April shower, which though it
wet a little, yet it begets a great deal of sweetness in the herbs, flowers,
and fruits of the earth. As even in laughing the heart of the wicked is
sorrowful: so contrarily even in such mourning, the heart of the true penitent
is lightsome and comfortable. For habitual joy may not only consist with
actual sorrow, and contrarily: but also even actual joy with actual sorrow.
This is no strange thing in other cases; when we see a good man persecuted for
a good cause, stand to it nobly; we grieve for his troubles, but rejoice in
his resolution and vndauntednes. As we ought then to grieve bitterly for our
sins; so let us Non est hoc gaudium luctul illi contrarium. Etenim ex illo
luctu nascitur quoque hoc gaudium. Qui namque sua ipsius mala luget, and
confite. tur, gaudebit. (...). Chrysostom. in epist. ad Philip. hom. 14. Semper
doleat poenitens, and de dolor gaudeat. August. de vera and falsa poeni^. cap.
13. Beati, qui sic lugetis, quia ridebitis in lachrymis. Scal. Parad. cap. 5.
rejoice immeasurably for such ingenuous grieuing. Let us lament heartily over
him, whom we have wounded with our abominable lusts; but let us also be
infinitely glad at the very heart root; that they are all pardoned by the
pouring out of his blood. Not the most exquisite quintessence and extraction of
all manner of Music; Sets, or Consorts; vocal or isntrumental; can possibly
convey so delicious a touch and relish to the outward ear of a man; as a
certificate brought from the Throne of mercy by the blessed Spirit sealed with
Christ's blood, to the bruised heart and grieved soul of an humble sinner, in
the very depth of his sorrow. 6. If thou be troubled with temptations, and
exercised even with variety of them, hear the holy Ghost: (...) I am. 1. 2.
Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. To let other
particulars pass. From the very foulest and most griesly suggestions of Satan;
Cum cogitatio mala, horrenda, grossa, turpis, n^fariai ^portune occurrerit; non
terreatu^, aut tristetur persona^ deuota propre^ea nimium: neque credat, ^se
propter talem, a Deo derelictum; etiam quantum cunque talis cogitatio
blasphemia videatur esse contra Dei honorem, au^ contra fidera. Sed maiorem
fiduciam se pertinendi ad Deum inde accipiat* Gers^ de (...), contra mala^
(...). Quid^m putan^ se esse desertos a Deo, quia non dat eis quietem a
tentationibus, quin potius tentatio signum diuini amoris sit. Multiplicatio
tentationum fig^um est, quod aliquis de manibus daemonum euaserit. Dum aliquis
est in c^rcere, vnicum habet custodem, vel duos: si vero euaserit, omnes eum
insequuntur. Sic dum aliquis captus est a Diabolo; non tantum eum daemones
perse^ntur, quantum quum euaserit. Illos puls^re negligit, quos iure quieto
possidere se sentit. Gregor. Cum ^ore debes esse, quando tibi been est, neque
te ad hoc parare, quasi nunquam tenteris. Si enim nunquam tentaris, nunquam
probaris. Nonne melius est tentari, and probari, quam non tentatum reprobari?
August in Psalm. 144.
thou may collect this common glorious comfort: That thou art none of his.
For as he is wont to keep unconverted men in as merry a mood, and fair a
calm of outward contentment, and inward security, as he can possibly;
retiring and reserving his most fiery darts and hideous temptations, until he
have them at some dead lift, and unavoidable strait: so all that are broke out
of his hellish prison, by the help of the holy Ghost, he ordinarily pursues
with deadly rage, and all the powers of darkness. He hunts them in his
fittest seasons like a Partridge in the Mountains, with troubles without, and
terrors within. The less peace thou have therefore from him, the more
pleasure may thou take in thine escape out of his clutches. The more
restlessely he follows thee with the fury and variety of his temptations; the
more sweetly and securely, if thou will give way to the counsel of the
Prophets, and the work of ^aith; may thou repose thy wearied soul upon the
comfortable assurance of being certainly Gods.

5. Every one that has part in Christ's death, is bound in conscience, and
bidden by the blessed Spirit to lead a most merry life, even to keep a Feast;
(...): Epulationis ergo praesens tempus est. Nam cum dixisset, Epulemur; non
quod Pascha esset, non quod Pentecoste, idcirco ep^landum intellexerit; sed
quod omne tempus exultationis tempus esset Christianis, propter collatorum
beneficior^m excellentiam. Chrysostom. in cap 5. ad Cor.
a spiritual Holyday, as it were, from all servile terrors, slavish sadness,
uncomfortable deiections of spirit: For even Christour Passover is sacrificed
for us, therefore let us keep the Feast, 1. Cor. 5. 7.

The sweetness and excellency of this Feast, is notably set out and amplified
by 1. the beautiful garments we put on and wear, when we are admitted unto
it: 2. The matter, and magnificent provision: 3. The music: 4. The frank and
bountiful entertainment and plenty: 5. The extraordinary pomp and
princelinesse.

1. For the first, meditate joyfully upon that rich attire, and those Royal
attributes, glorifying and crowning Christ's blessed Spouse, with most admirable
and rauishing beauty, Cant. 6. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the
morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, terrible as an army with
Banners? And know, that all the essential glory and fairness which is to be
found in the whole Church, the Woman Revel. 12. 1.
clothed with the Sun; as that of justification and sanctification, etc.
belongs to every member thereof, to every faithful Christian.

As the morning.] 1. The morning springs out of the greatest darkness; the
night is most dark, as they say, a little before day: the illuminated soul
arises out of the most darksome and damned grave of ignorance and sin. 2. The
beauty of the morning is principally seen in her Hence it is, that the Poets
call it (...). The Rosie-fingered morning.
ruddinesse: The soul that is newly delivered out of the horror of Egyptian
darkness, and hands of the hellish Pharaoh, is all ruddy with passing through
the red Sea of Christ's blood; that is the ground upon which all its beauty and
blessedness is built. 2. The glory of the morning after its first peeping in
the East, spreads fairer and fairer in all beauty and brightness, until the
midday, and full illustration of the World: Grace in the soul, after the
first plantation, grows stronger and stronger, shines fairer and fairer, until
it set in the bottomless Ocean of endless Glory. See Prou. 4. 18.

Fair as the Moone] 1. The Moon receives all her light and luster from the
Sun: all the graces, holiness, inherent righteousness, shining in a
sanctified soul, are the image and impressions of the Sun of righteousness.
2. The Moon has some spots in her face; but yet is a very beautiful creature
by her borrowed light. The Christian is somewhat black with the remnants of
original corruption, and by reason of his vnauoideable frailties and
imperfections; but yet comely as the curtains of Solomon, by the glory of his
new creation and gracious beams that shine upon his soul from the face of
Christ. 3. The further the Moon is removed from the Sun; the fairer she is,
and fuller of light: The more an humble soul, upon sight of that holy Majesty
and purest eye, ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, which cannot look on
iniquity; does retire with lowliest thoughts into himself, to abhor
himself in dust and ashes, as most vile, and far worthier to be thrown into
the lowest dungeon of the kingdom of darkness, then to be honored with the
love and light of his countenance; is more Tanto vnaquaeque a^ ^it pretiosior
ante oculos Dei* quanto prae amore veritatis despectior fuerit ante oculos
suos. Gregor. in cap. 1^. lib. cap. 20.
beautiful and amiable in the eyes of God.

Fure as the Sunne] The Moon shadows out inherent fairness; the Sun
resembles and represents our imputed purity: So that this Royal Robe, the
Sun of righteousness, the unspotted Justice of Jesus Christ, does glorify
the soul: 1. With an entire unstained beauty: our inherent holiness has
some spots and stains of imperfection like the Moon; but that imputed for our
justification, is much more spotless and orient then the Sun. 2 Universally:
We are washed as it were, from top to toe in the blood of Christ, and covered
wholly with his perfect righteousness. 3. Constantly: The exercise of
spiritual graces and sense of inward comfort, may sometimes ebb and wa^e for
a time; but the Robe of Christ's Royal Justice once put on by the hand of
Faith, is sure and the same for ever.

Terrible as an army with banners.] Besides this rich and royal attire; all
this abundance of spiritual fairness and beauty; we are to put on also,
le^t hellish Harpies, that I may so speak, snatch away our delicious and
divine dainties, that glistering Armor, thick se^ with heavenly Pearls,
described, Ephesians. 6. The glorious splendor whereof, is able to dazzle the
devils eyes, to daunt his courage, and Et quoniam de hoc bello licet etiam
foeminis triumphare, ^uscipe haec arma Pauli, and tanti hor^atione ducis certam
praesume victoria^. Haec enim si tu omnia instrumenta po^sideas, secure
procedas ad praelium spirituale, nec pauebis Diabol^m cum toto exercitu suo.
Aug* Ep. 142. Ad Demetriadem.
drive him out of the field. For he well knows it to be tried, and of
proof, worn by our Captain Christ Jesus, who foild him by the sword of the
Spirit, in that great combat in the Wilderness, Mat. 4. And it is that, by
which the weakest Christians shall shortly, by the blessing of the God of
Peace, Romans 16. 20.
bruise Satan under their feet.

The sum is; The heavenly attire of a sanctified soul, is far fairer and
more amiable then the exquisite concurrence of all earthly beauties and visible
Isa. 24. 23.
glory. Were the light of all the stars above collected into Suns (which
Out of the united light of the stars, exibunt soles 301. s^ith Casman. P. 1.
Astroi cap. 4. page 153. Vt in nullum numerum pona mus; aut Veneris, aut
Mere^ij sydera; nec computemus stellas nouem, quas obscuras, aut quinque, quas
rubeas appellant, vel nebulosas, nullo etiam numero habeamus infinitas alias,
quae sexto ordine sunt minores.
Astronomers say would make many) and added unto that great bright Body, the
Prince of all the lamps in heaven; nay, if besides, there were an accession of
all the orient splendor of all the Pearls and Jewels, of all the Crystal and
glistering things in this lower world; and all compacted into one beautiful
body, it would be but as a lump of darkness, to the glory and fairness of a
sanctified soul. For the beauty and amiablenesse of an holy soul, inflames
the heart and affections of the Son of God, with an extraordinary pang of
spiritual fervent love, Cant. 4. 9. whereas not all the glory of the world,
though represented to his eye with the fairest luster, and in the most refined
form, could move him ever a whit, Matthew, 4. 8, 9, 10. Plato was wont to say,
if moral virtues could be seen with the outward eye; they would stir up in
the heart extraordinary flames of admiration and love: what unspeakable
rauishments then would Christian graces enkindle, were they visible to the
carnal eyes? They would be able to make Persecutors, Professors; to turn even
Drunkards into Puritans, as they call them; the most sensual Epicure, into a
mortified Saint.

For the second: Let thy spiritual appetite seed merrily upon that sweetest
place, Isa. 25, 6. And in this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts, etc. Here is
provided, as we may see, a magnificent and glorious feast, composed all of
marrow and fatness, of most refined and purified wines; which shadow unto us,
spiritual delicacies, those golden dainties, digd out of the rich mine of the
mystery of Christ, by the hand of Faith, in the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
Communion of Saints, solemn humiliations, sweet Soliloquies, solitary
conferences with our God, feeling forethought of infinite joys through
eternity, etc. Every circumstance breathes out nothing but sweetness.

In this mountain.] It is dressed in Mount Zion, The perfection of beauty,
The joy of the whole earth, The glory of all Lands; which represents unto us,
by way of shadow and type, the ouerflowing glory of the Christian Church; the
very Heaven of all humane societies; our only Sun in this inferior world;
which though so much maligned, yet were it removed, there would be a little
hell upon earth; and nothing left, but a dark Midnight of villainy and horror,
for incarnate Devils to domineere in.

A feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees; of fat things full of
marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.] Hereby is intimated the matter of
the Feast, and Royal provision, amplified with extraordinary* Emphasis of
words, elegancy of phrase, and iteration of the same sense, with variety of
expression; which also argues its excellency. It is not enough to have said, of
fat things, but there is added, of fat things full of marrow, and so
proportionably of the wines; to intimate the most exquisite refined flower of
all delicacies and dainties. The marrow of the fatness; as if a man should
say, the spirit of the quintessence, the Diamond of the Ring, the sparkle of
the Diamond, etc. And yet all this comes infinitely short of what the holy
Ghost would shadow and show unto us by the most sumptuous materials of earthly
Feasts. But above all, that which makes the Feast most matchless, Interea^
gustus elementa per omnia quaerunt; Nunquam animo preti^s obstantibus.
is the Feast-maker; Jehovah, is the founder and furnisher of it: The maker of
heaven and earth, makes it. The Poets describing men of most ambitious
appetites after choicest dainties, say, that they rob all the Elements, to
please their palates. The Master of this Feast, the euer-blessed Iehoua, tells
us of his store and treasuries this way, Psalm. 50. 10, 11. Every beast of the
(...) is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills; I know all the fowls of
the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. But all these being
but only matter of corporal food, are yet nothing to the spiritual
sweetness of this heavenly Banque^. The secret and sacred delight of those
divine dainties intended here by the holy Ghost, being unspeakable and
glorious, does infinitely transcend the possibility of all creatures to
contribute, and the capacity of the largest natural understanding to conceive.
So must be construed, as a worthy Divine says truly, that Text, 1 Cor. 2. Not
of the joys of heaven, which here the spiritual man himself cannot tell
what they shall be; but of the Gospels joy, of the Wine and Fatlings ready
prepared, and now revealed to the Believer by the Spirit.

For the third. Hear the voice of sweetness and peace, Esa. 27. 2. Sing unto
her: A Vineyard of red Wine. Sing] sounds nothing but joy, lightsomnesse, and
mirth: Unto her] the sex of more amiablenesse, tenderness, and love. A
Vineyard] Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens, and such enclosed Plots, are, as it
were, the flowers, stars, and Paradises of the earth. Of Wine] as though the
Vine-trees of this Enclosure brought not forth the grosser and vncrushed
Grapes; but more immediately, the refined and pure blood of the Grape. Red] The
most generous sparkling delicious wine. A Vineyard is, as it were, the Diamond
of the Ring; wine, the sparkle; red, the splendor of the sparkle: all
excellencies, sweetenesses, transcendencies; where God opens and expresses his
heart and love to his Church, or any of his Chosen.

For the fourth. Let thy faith peruse with enlarged Meditations, those precious
passages of gracious inuitation and bountiful entertainment, Mat. 22. 3, 4.
Isa. 55. 1, 2. Pro. 9. 2, 3. Cant. 2. 3, 4. Thou shall suck and be satisfied
even with the breasts of consolations. Thy dearest and most glorious Mother,
which is clothed with the Sun, treads upon the Reu. 12. 1.
Moon, and wears on her head a Crown of twelve Stars; shall sweetly and
tenderly bear thee upon her sides, and handle thee upon her knees, Isa. 66.
11, 12.

For the fifth. It is compared to a wedding Feast, and that Mat. 22.
of a Kings son; which is wont to be honored and crowned with height and
variety of all magnificence and Majesty; joy and triumph, mirth and music.
When an humbled soul is first made sure to the Son of God; the joyful
harmony of all good hearts that hear of it, and the triumphant Halleluiahs of
the blessed Angels in heaven, concur in consort, as it were, of
congratulation, for so happy a match; in gladness and joy for so holy a
change. This Feast begins at thy first betrothing; when thou receiving a Ring,
as it were, beset with five precious stones: 1. Righteousness. Hos. 2. 19, 20.
2. Judgment. 3. Loving kindness. 4. Mercies. 5. Faithfulness. It is
afterward continued with many gracious passages of love and sweetest
entertainements on both sides, even in this life; as appears in Solomon's
Spiritual Loue-song. It shall at last be crowned with an everlasting Iubilee,
and pleasures more then the Stars of the firmament in number; when the Lamb
receives his wife into his nearest and dearest embracements; even into full
possession of the most blessed, neuer-ending Kingdom of heaven; bought for
her, full dearly, with his own hearts blood. Then, our Feast of grace ends in
the endless fruition of Glory. How merry then ought we to be in the mean
time, who are admitted and enrighted to this gracious and glorious Feast? Of
expressing which to the life, the finest fare and most exquisite delicates of
all earthly feasts, come as far short, as the dull earth comes short of the
glistering heaven; a gross mortal body of the preciousnesse of an everliving
soul: An inch of time, of the length of eternity. For corporal dainties fat a
frail body for a span of time, with earthly food, accompanied with a little
poor vanishing delight of sense: But spiritual food fills an immortal soul
with heavenly Ma^na, out of the mystery of Christ, attended with purest joy,
and sincerest pleasures through all eternity.

6. As thou do honor Gods Justice, in trembling at his threats, and
throwing thy self into the dust, as extremely vile, and fuel for hell under
his mighty hand, and the piercing Majesty of his pure Word; representing
clearly unto thy conscience, and pressing terribly upon it, the heinousness
of all thy lusts, iniquities, abominable prouocations of the eyes of his glory
and divine indignation flaming against them: so when thou find and feel
thy heart truly wounded by the sword of the Spirit, with remorse and sorrow for
thy sins, weary with the heavy weight and burden of them, possessed with
sincere hatred and lothing of every evil way; thou ought, and are bound in
conscience, and by the commandment of the holy Ghost, to glorify Gods truth
in his promises of mercy, by throwing thy self into the blessed arms, and
bleeding embracements of the Lord Jesus dying upon the Cross; in whom they are
all, yea, and Amen, with much assurance and peace; with unspeakable and
glorious joy. And the rather, because the special season and only opportunity
of thy magnifying and honoring the sweet influence of Gods dearest mercies,
tender-heartednesse, and truth upon humble souls, through the precious
promises of life, is in this life. In the world to come they shall all be
accomplished upon thee to the utmost, and crowned with a clear vision and full
fruition of that euer-blessed and most glorious Majesty. Then faith for ever
expires; and we see face to face.

These things being so, and most sure; let every truehearted Nathaneel be
heartily entreated, nay, justly charged in the name of Jesus Christ, by the
blessed Spirit, the fountain of all comfort; as he will answer it at the
glorious Throne of Mercy, erected in heaven upon purpose to make him
everlastingly merry, that he henceforth most resolutely and for ever cast out
of his conscience, sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb, and out of the
Kingdom of Christ, ouerflowing with Peace and Joy, now comfortably established
in his soul, those intruding usurpers Tyrants; only natural Lords over
natural men: I mean, horrors of guiltiness, false fears, slavish terrors,
damps and droopings; all uncomfortable pensiveness, deiections, and fear. And
leaving such Harpies as these, and heart-eaters, only to the grumbling and
guilty consciences of all those that hate to be reformed, and Satan's slaves, as
their proper furies; let him with an holy violence against the devils cruel
assaults and contradictions of his own distrustful heart, and with a
cheerful spirit, lay hold upon his just inheritance and everlasting portion,
purchased for him by the bitter and painful sufferings of the Son of God;
even floods and fresh successions of sweetest joys, shed and showred down
continually from the Throne of Grace upon his upright heart, in great
abundance; if he will but only vouchsafe to open the door by the hand of
faith, that the blessed beams of such lightsomnesse and comfort, shining from
the face of Christ, may come in. Let his soul, full fairly arrayed with its
heavenly roabes, to which, the beauty of the morning, brightness of the Moon,
and glory of the Sun are but a shadow; and listening sweetly to that melodious
Song, composed all of Peace and Joy, Pleasures and Pardon of finne, which the
mercy of God makes in the ear of its faith; fall to, and fill it self at the
Wedding Feast of the Kings Son, with those euer-springing rivers of
spiritual refreshing, out of the bottomless depth of Gods free love revealed
in the mystery of Christ, by the ministry of the Word and Sacramental grace;
as with marrow and fatness: Let it suck abundantly, and be satisfied with
the breasts of everlasting consolations. And since he is incorporated into Jesus
Christ, and upon all assayes has the wings of faith in a readiness, to
outsoare the height of all humane miseries: let Christianum and in hoc ab
infide libus differte oportet, vt omnia generose ferat: and velut alatus se
humanorum malorum impetu superiorem exhibeat. Supra Petram statutus est
fidelis: propterea and vndarum ictibus inexpugnabilis est. Si enim tentationum
vndae cleuatae fuerint, ad illius pedes non perueni^nt, hic om^i tali incursu
fubl^ior firmatus est, Chrysostom. Hom. 2. Ad pop. Antioch.
him for ever stand like Mount Zion, inexpugnable, and unshaken with the most
furious incursions of the floods and tempests of all worldly troubles,
pressures, and persecutions. Let all those monstrous and most abhorred
iniections, filthy temptations, and fiery darts, pointed with the very malice
of hell, ordinarily offered to the imagination of the best, be resolutely
repelled by the shield of faith, and retorted as dung upon the Tempters face.
Let all ungodly oppositions from man or devil, or fearful distrust be but as
so many proud and swelling waves, dashing against a mighty Rock; which the
Mat. 7. 25.
more boisterously they beat upon it, the more are they broken, and turned
into a vain foame and froth.

But to descend with thee more punctually to some particulars: Tell me truly,
thou which have given thy name to Christ in truth; what it is that troubles
thee? what is it that still detaines thine heavy heart, in the chains and
fetters of horror and sadness; and locks it up so long from the entrance and
entertainment of spiritual lightsomenesse and joy? And if I be not able to
confront and confound it, by some well-grounded counter-comfort and Antidote,
out of the Oracle of truth; if I be not able to discover it to be a
selfe-created cross; and to dissolve it into an imaginary and groundless
fancy, by the light of the Word; then walk heavily still. Only believe the
Prophets, and thou shall prosper. Thou must then be contented to be counseled
by the faithful Physicions of thy soul; who can show unto man his
uprightness, and are instructed unto the kingdom of heaven; especially
fetching all their prescriptions, receipts, and counterpoysons, out of the rich
Treasury of the Book of Life:

Thou must learn;

1. To put a difference between nullity of grace, and imperfection of grace.
Many good souls desire sincerely that their hearts were broken in pieces, and
bled at the root, for their many and heinous sins; grieuing much, that they
can grieve no more: They hunger and thirst for Christ's righteousness, more
then for the wealth of the whole world: They groan mightily in spirit for Gods
favor, pardon of sin, power over their corruptions, ability to pray better,
etc. But yet because they feel not that measure of sensible smart and anguish
of heart in lamenting their former life, as they desire; because they have not
their wished joy and peace in believing; because they cannot now pray as
fervently and feelingly as they, perhaps, were formerly wont; not with that
freedom and heartinesse as they would: in a word, because they are yet but
smoking flax, and bruised reeds, not full shining lamps, and strong Pillars
in the House of God; they will needs have all to be naught. Whereby they (I
will not say belie the Spirit) but most unworthily deny, and in their conceits
nullify his already wonderful glorious work upon their souls; to their, I
know not how great spiritual hurt and hinderance. For such intolerable
unthankfulness may be justly punished, and paid home with longer
detainement, upon the Rack of distrustful slavish fear, and under the
bondage of Legal terrors. It is a special point then of spiritual wisdom,
and of singular consequence for the souls quiet and welfare; to discern
weakness of grace from want of grace. Christ Jesus declaring in his heavenly
Sermon who are blessed, Mat. 5.
does not instance in the perfections, excellencies, and heights of
Christianity; though all that are true of heart, sincerely pray for, and press
after them: but in the least and lowest degrees; lest the smoking flax should
be quenched, and bruised reeds be broken. He does not say; Blessed are the
stong in Faith; the full assured: Blessed are those that take on for their
sins, as for their only son, and for their first borne: but, Blessed are
they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: Blessed are the poor in
spirit, etc.

2. Not always to make sense and feeling the Touchstone for the truth of thy
spiritual state. A man in a swoone or a sleep feels not his life, and yet is
a living man. It is one thing to have grace, another to feel grace. One thing
the life of faith, another the life of sense.

3. Not to disgrace thy own graces, by casting thine eye too deiectedly upon
other Christians perfections and precedencies. Let it not fare with thee in
this case, as it does with one gazing too much upon the Sun; who looking
downwards again, can see just nothing, whereas before he clearly discerned
all colors about him. Look upon them for imitation and quickening, not for
slavish deiection and selfe-blinding.

4. To acknowledge and expect, that heavenly graces, as Faith, etc. while they
inhabit these earthly houses, ebb and flow, wax and wane, faint and
flourish; by reason of the combat between the flesh and the Spirit. So that
if a man should tell me; that he has ever prayed alike, without temptation,
or dampes, without any sense at any time of deadness or spiritual distempers;
that he has ever believed alike, without those doubts and scruples, that
faintness and fear, of which most Christians so much complain; I durst
confidently reply, that then he never either prayed acceptably, or believed
sauingly. The Fathers Luna ipsa, qua propheticis oraculis species ecclesiae
figuratur, cum primum resurgens in menstruas reparatur aetates: tenebris noctis
absconditur: paulat^mque cornua sua comple^s, vel e regione Solis absoluens,
clari splendore fulgoris irru^. Amb. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 31.
fitly resemble the state of the Church to the variable condition of the Moon;
which sometimes shines more gloriously, sometimes not so: It is so also with
every true member thereof, in respect of the exercise of grace, comfort in holy
duties, sense of Gods favor, spiritual feeling.

5. To believe the Spirit of Truth, the Word of God, and voice of Christ,
before the father of lies, dictates of natural distrust, and suggestions of
flesh and blood. To which, methinks, thou should be easily persuaded, and
then all the mists of thy spiritual miseries would be quickly dispersed. It is
a mighty work, if not a great miracle, to get any softness at all, or true
remorse for sin, into the heart of a man; it is naturally so stony and
impatient of grief; and the devil such a stirrer against it, so that the most
are mere strangers unto it; yet for all that, when this penitent sorrow is
once sincerely on foot in an afflicted soul; so endlessely and on every side
are we pressed with the policies of Hell; it is too often too forward to feed
upon tears still, and still too wilful in refusing to be comforted. Satan
then will be ready to say; Thou see now, thy conscience being illightened,
thy sins are so horrible and hai^ous, that they are too heavy a burden for
thee to bear; there is no way with thee, but to sink into horror and
despair. But what says Christ? Nay now is the season: Come unto me thus weary
Matthew. 11. 2^.
and heavy laden with thy sin, and I will refresh thee. Here now if thou will
believe the sweet voice of Christ Jesus, rather then the murdering sophistry
of Satan; if in good manners thou will come when thou art called; and not retire
in a sinful and cruel modesty; thou shall be presently lightened. Yea but,
says the Tempter, thy heart has been so strangely hardened and soakt in sin
heretofore; now such an he^sh cloud of darkness has seized upon it; that
there is no hope Amos 5. ^.
nor possibility. But what says the Word? Seek him that makes the seven
stars and Orion, and turns the shadow of death into the morning. It is he
alone that can most easily change the dismal midnight of thy present
spiritual misery, into the glorious midday of sweetest peace, and
lightsomnesse of heart. Yea but, says he further, thou have lien long upon the
Rock of guilty horror; had much counsel, and been under the hands of many
spiritual physicians; and yet no comfort comes. And what then? Hear what the
Spirit of truth tells us: Since the beginning of the world, men have not heard
nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God besides thee, what
He has prepared for him that (...) Expectare, quod ad Heb. cap. 10. redditur
per (...), quod patientem expectationem sonat, qua duramus in malis. Pagni^.
waits for him. Isa. 64. 4. Waiting patiently for the Lords (...)
coming to comfort us, either in temporal or spiritual distresses; is a
right pleasing and acceptable duty, and service unto God, which he is wont
to crown with multiplied and ouerflowing refreshings, when he comes. See Isa.
40. 31. Nay and should thou die in this state of waiting, if thy heart in
the mean time sincerely hate all sin; heartily thirst for the mercy of God
in Christ; and resolve truly upon new universal obedience for the time to
come; thou shall be certainly saved; because the Holy Ghost says, Isaiah 30.
18. Blessed are all they that wait for him.

6. That defects, distractions, failings in our spiritual exercises, and
undertakings groaned under, grieved for, and striuen against, by an upright
heart; are so far from nullifying grace, that they should not bereave us of
peace of conscience, or interrupt our sweet communion and comfortable walking
with our God.

7. Not to confine, undervalue, and extenuate the mercies of God, promises of
life, the holy Spirits saving work upon thy soul; and the present graces thou
possessest in truth, etc.

These cautions premised, let us come to the examining and answering of some
complaints and counterpleas against entertainment of comfort, which are wont
to arise in troubled consciences, out of ignorance, and misconceite of the
merciful ways of God, and the mystery of his free love through Christ: and
do thou conceive, that proportionable sovereign Antidotes and
counter-comforts may be collected also in abundance out of Gods blessed Book,
against the rest, or any reply whatsoever.

And to begin with the first cries of a Christian in the pangs of his New birth.

I. A poor soul having wallowed long in vanity of villainies and vanities; of
lust and licentiousness; is now by divine blessing at this or ^e other Sermon
struck through by the Sword of the Spirit with penitent remorse; and his heart
broken into pieces, by the hammer of the Law. In this depth of heauiest
distress, and bleeding case; he casts his eyes upon Jesus Christ lifted up in
the Ministry as an Antitype ^o the brazen Serpent, for his comfortable
binding ^p, and everlasting cure. Those Messengers of God, who are able to
declare unto Man his uprightness, Job 33. 23.
assure him in the Word of life and truth, and charge him in His name who was
anointed by the Lord for that purpose, and appointed by the Father of mercies
to comfort all Mourners Isa. 61. 1. 2.
in Sion; that now being truly cast down under Gods mighty hand, thirsting for
the blood of Christ, and sincerely resolving upon a new course for the time to
come; He would turn his legal terrors, into Evangelical weeping, joy; put
on beauty for ashes, the garment of praise, for the spirit of heaviness; That
he might be called a Tree of righteousness, Verse 3.
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Oh no, says he, out
of the deep sense of his bottomless vileness, The news is too good to be
true, to wit, that now the blessed Son of God, and all the precious, rich
purchases of his invaluable passion should belong unto me, the sinfullest
wretch that the earth bears, who have desperately spent my days and strength
so long in the furious service of Satan, and mine own sensual lusts, etc.
whereupon he refuses comfort, and chooses rather to sink again and languish
under the horrors of guiltiness and fear. Whereas he should incomparably
more honor and please the God of all comfort, by trusting his mercy, sealing
to his truth; then by unseasonable suspecting his justice and power.

Here then he woefully fails and forgets himself in a distrustful
vnder-prizing Gods incomprehensible greatness, Almighty mercy, unlimited
liberality and freeness of his love. He is in this case, not so much to
consider, what is fit for him to receive, as convenient for the ability and
bounty of so great and good a God* as the mighty Lord of Heaven and earth to
give; who, as I told you before upon other occasion, does all things like
Himself. If he build, he makes a world. If he be angry with the world, he
sends a flood over the face of the whole earth. If he goes out with the Armies
of the Saints, he makes the Sun stand still, the Stars to fight, the Seas
to swallow up the most dreadful Armadoes. If he love; the precious hearts
blood of his own Son is not too dear. If he deliver any man, He pulls him
out of the hand of the Prince of darkness; and frees him from everlasting
flames. If any become his Favorite through Christ's mediation, He will make him
a King, give him a Paradise, and set a Crown of eternity upon his head.
Earthly Princes at their pleasures ennoble those they love, with Dukedomes,
Marquesdomes, Earledomes. What then, do you think, shall be done unto the
man, whom the King of Heaven desires, and delights to honor? Let us then, I
say, in such cases, consider not so much what is fit for us silly worms to
receive; as for so great a God to bestow. If we can once bring hearts bruised
and broken with the burden of our sins, bleeding and weeping unto his
Mercy-seate; He will think all the meritorious sufferings of his Son; all
the promises in his Book; all the comforts of his Spirit; all the pleasures in
his Kingdom little enough for us. If we look upon our selves, sinful
wretches, we might justly fear the extremest torments, fiercest flames, and
lowest dungeon in hell, infinitely rather then expect a Kingdom. But He loves
us freely, Hos. 14. 4. It is his pleasure to give us a Kingdom: Fear not,
little flock, says Christ; for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. If it be the good pleasure of the King of Kings, to
bestow a Kingdom upon a truly humbled soul, which he makes in the mean
time his Royal Throne here upon Earth, Isai. 57. 15. what can Man or Devil,
or any distrustful heart say against it? And why should thou, being such an
one, be so unmannerly and unthankful, nay, so unnecessarily cruel to thine
own heavy heart, as not to open the everlasting door of thy soul by the key
of Faith, to let the King of glory knocking with his hand of mercy, come in,
and crown it with grace and glory, with comfort and everlasting peace?

II. But alas, says he, my sins are more then any man's. Now when I am
searching into the sink of them, I can find neither bank nor bottom.
Unnumbered swarms of gross impieties and iniquities through my whole life; of
abominable impurities and pollutions, which have continually defiled my mind,
heart and affections, armed with several stings of terror, do so restlesly
press upon my wounded conscience, and oppress it; that I cannot, I dare not
think upon, or look toward any comfort.

Let them be what they are, and add thereunto all the Omnia namque peccata
illi perfect remittit* nec illi vnquam imputab^t, etiamsi tot essent,
quotomnes simul homines commiserunt; si tamen ex animo doleat pure ad gloriam
Dei, and ideo potiss^mum suae illi iniquitates displiceant, quod eas Deo
displicere intelligi^. Lib. de consolat. Pusill.
sins which have, are, and shall be committed by all the sons and
daughters of Adam from the Creation, to the end of the World; excepting sin
against the holy Ghost; and yet in an heart truly humbled under them, heartily
hating them all, coming with a sincere spiritual hunger at Mat. 11. 28.
Christ's Call to be disburdened of them; they can make no more resistance
against the mercies of God, then a little spark of fire against the mighty
Sea, rhrowne into the midst of it; nay, infinitely less. For all these sins
would still be finite both in nature and number; but Gods mercies are every way
infinite. Now between that which is finite, and that which is infinite, there
is no proportion, and so no possibility of resistance. Whence it is, that the
Prophet inuiting his people to repentance, Esa. 55. 7. by assuring them of Gods
sweet, merciful and gracious disposition, lest any too fearful and dejected
spirit undervaluing Gods mercy, should think thus within it self: Be it so:
yet alas, my sins are so many, and such a son of Belial have I been, and so
endlesly provoked the glory of his pure eye, that I can expect no mercy: the
pollutions of my youth have been so prodigious and infectious, that I have no
face to press unto his Throne of Grace; etc. God himself does there purposely
prevent the objection, and speaking to our capacity, which cannot comprehend
infinity, replies to this sense: Oh say not so! Stay all such despairefull
thoughts; do not cast the incomprehensiblenes of my mercy, in the narrow mould
of thy finite shallow conceit: do not so unworthily abridge and confine the
unlimited and boundless compassion of the mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth: For
my thoughts are not your thoughts, Verse 8. 9.
neither are your ways my ways: For as the Heavens are higher then the earth,
so are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts.
Many a bruised reed would not exchange the comfort, which the weakest faith
may extract out of this sweetest place, for all the Kingdoms of the earth. For
he says not, that his ways and thoughts of knowledge and wisdom; but his
ways and thoughts of mercy, are as far above ours, as the Heavens are above
the Earth: Indeed, as himself is above man, which is, infinitely. But take
notice by the way, that the mercies of God do exercise this infinite
irresistable power only in truly humbled believing souls; heartily hating,
and sincerely set against all sin. I say so, lest any impenitent should
pervert this precious point, or trample upon this Pearl. For as in such a
soul no sins either for number or notoriousnesse, can possibly withstand, or
stand before Gods infinite mercies: so not one drop of all those infinite
merceis belongs unto any that goes on willingly and delightfully, hating to be
reformed in any one known sin, or that he might know, and wilfully forbeares
to be informed. As the invaluable blood of Christ turns the very scarlet
sins of the truly broken believing heart into whitest snow; so it will never
wash away the least sinful stain, from the proud heart of any vnhumbled
Pharise. Let none therefore that goes on still in his trespasses, take up any
vain confidence, or mis-grounded conclusion of false comfort from hence, by
misconceiuing thus: Is it so, that the infiniteness of Gods mercy cannot be
resisted by the greatness, or multitude of sins, being ever finite both in
their number and nature? how is it possible then that I should miss of those
infinites mercies? Why may not I comfortably hope, that my sins also shall be
swallowed up in that bottomless Sea? I will tell thee why. As the power of
God, though it be infinite, yet is limited by his will: so the mercies of God,
though they be infinite, are regulated by his truth. He is able to make
millions of Worlds more, but yet we see, his Will was but to create one. His
mercies transcend with immeasurable distance, the height of Heaven, and depth
of Hell, and are indeed, as Himself, infinite: but his Truth has told us,
that none shall have part in them, but those alone who repent and believe. Gods
Truth revealed in his Word, must ever confine the current of his compassions,
and is the touchstone to try and qualify those, to whom his mercies belong.
See then what kind of people are partakers of Gods infinite mercies, by the
testimony of that Word of Truth, by which we must be judged at the last Day,
Prou. 28. 13. Luke 4. 18. Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 15. Ezekiel. 18. 21. Psalm. 147.
3. Isai. 55. 7. Psalm. 34. 18. Solomon says in the cited place; He that
confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy. How then can he expect
any mercy, who takes them not to heart, but lies in them still?

III. Of the pardonablenesse of my other sins, says another, I could be
reasonably well persuaded; but alas, there is one above all the rest, which now
upon discovery and remorse, I find to be full of rank and hellish poison; of
such a deep and damnable die; to have struck so desperately in the days of
my lewdness, at the very face of God himself; and far deepelier into the
heart of Jesus Christ, then the spear that pierced him, bleeding upon the
Cross; and thereupon at this present, stares in the eye of my newly awaked and
wounded conscience, with such horror and grieslinesse, that I fear me, divine
justice will think it fitter, to have this most loathsome, inexpiable stain,
rather at length fired out of my soul with everlasting flames; (if it were
possible that eternal fire could expiate the sinful stains of any impenitent
damned soul) then to be fairly washed away in the mean time with His blood,
whom I so cruelly and cursedly pierced with it. Oh! this is it that lies now
upon my heart like a mountain of Lead, far heavier then Heaven and Earth,
and enchaines it with inexplicable terror to the dust and place of Dragons.
This alone stings desperately; keeps me from Christ, and cuts me off from
all hope of Heaven. I am afraid, my wilful wallowing in it heretofore, has so
reprobated my mind, seared my conscience, and hardened my heart, that I shall
never be able to repent with any hope of pardon.

And why so? Is this sin of thine greater, then Manassehs familiarity with
wicked spirits? Then Paul's drinking up the blood of Saints? Then any of theirs
in that black Bill, 1. Cor. 6. 10. 11. who notwithstanding were afterward upon
repentance washed, sanctified and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of our God? Then E^s transgression, who opened the floodgate to
all the sins which shall be committed from the Creation to the end of the
World, and to all those torments which shall flame in Hell through all
eternity? Then that horrible sin of killing Christ Jesus? And yet the
murderers of that Just and holy One, upon Acts 2.
their true compunction of heart, were saved by that precious blood, which they
had cruelly spilt as water upon the ground. But be it what it will, a scarlet
sin, a crimsin sin, a crying sin; and add unto it Satan's malicious
aggrauations, and all that horror, which the deiectednesse of thy present
afflicted spirit, and darkness of thy melancholic imagination can put upon
it; yet Paul's precious Antidote, Romans 5. 20* holds triumphantly Sovereign
as well against the heinousness of any one sin, as the confluence of many,
Where (...).
sin abounded, grace ouer-abounded. It is indeed a very heavy case, and to
be deplored even with tears of blood, that thou should ever have so highly
dishonored thy gracious God, with such an horrible sin in the days of thy
vanity, and thou ought rather choose to be ^orne in pieces with wild
Horses, then commit it again; yet if thy heart now truly wounded with horror
and hate of it, will but cleave to the truth and tenderheartednesse of Jesus
Christ in his promises, and fall into his blessed and bleeding arms stretched
out most lovingly to ^ase and refresh thee; as the heinousness of it has
abounded heretofore; His grace will now abound to the Non aliter quam si quis
febricitantem, morbo non solum liberaret, sed and formolum efficeret, and
validu^ and conspicuum: aut esurientem, non pasceret solum, sed and multorum
constitueret Dominum; atque in maximu^ eueheret principatum. Chrysostom. in cap.
5. ad Ro^*
same proportion; and much more: Nay, I will show thee a Pearl. In this case,
by accident, Gods mercies shall be extraordinarily honored, in pardoning such a
prodigious provocation; because they are thereby, as it were, put into it, and
their dearness, sweetness and infiniteness improoued to the greater height
and excellency; and Magnitudo and redunda^tia gratiae diuinae per peccatum
abundans, fit magis conspicua. Quanto enim morbus est deploratior: tanto
medicinae vis, and praestantia sit euidentior. Sic quanto reatus peccatorum
nostroru^ lege factus est grauior; tanto gratiae, quae inde nos eripit,
immensitas, est reddita illustrior. Par.
the blood of Christ made, as it were, more orient and illustrious; and the
honor and preciousnesse of it advanced, by washing away such an heinous
hellish spot. If we bring broken believing hearts toward his Mercy-seate; it
is the Lords Name to forgive all sorts of offenses, Tollens iniquitatem,
peccatum and scelus. Sic enim exprimitur magnitudo clementiae: quod non leuibus
tantum delictis det veniam, sed grauissimis quibusque sceleribus. Calvin. Now
the Lord speaks of forgiving, names these three degrees; to show that there
is no sin so heinous, whether natural corruption, or outword transgression, or
stiffenecked presumption; but upon repentance, the mercy of God is able and
ready to remit it. Hieron.
iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus 34. 7. It is His Covenant to
sprinkle clean water upon us, that we may be clean, and to cleanse us from
all our filthiness, and from all our Idols, Exek. 36. 25. even from Idolatry,
the highest villainy against the Majesty of Heaven: So that a Papist, upon
repentance may be saved. It is His promise not only to pardon ordinary sins,
but those also which be as scarlet, and red like crimsin, Isai. 1. 18. It is
his free compassion to cast all our sins into the depths of the sea, Mich. 7.
19. Now the sea, by reason of his vastness, can drown as well Mountains as
Molehills: the boundless Ocean of Gods mercies can swallow up our mightiest
sins much more. It is his merciful power, to blot out our sins as a cloud,
Isai. 44. 22. Now the strength of the Summers Sun is able to scatter the
thickest Fog, as well as the thinnest Mist; nay, to drive away the darkest
midnight: the irresistable heat of Gods free love shining through the Sun of
Righteousness upon a penitent soul, to dissolve to nothing the desperatest
work of darkness, and most horrible sin far more easily. But this
mystery of mercy, and miracle of Gods free love, is a Jewel only for truly
humbled souls, and the sealed Fountain. Let no stranger to the life of
godliness meddle with it. Let no Swine trample it under his feet.

FINIS.

