The Kings MAJESTY'S Letter to the Lords Grace of Canterbury, touching
Preaching, and Preachers.
MOST Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and right entirely beloved
Councellor, We greet ye well.
Forasmuch as the abuse and extrauagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have
been at all times repressed in this Land, by some Act of Council or State,
with the advice and resolution of Grave and Reverend Preachers, insomuch as the
very licensing of `Preachers, had beginning by order in the Star Chamber, the
eighth of July, in the nineteenth year of King Henry the Eight, Our Noble
Predecessor: And whereas at this present diverse young Students, by reading of
late Writers and ungrounded Divines, do preach many times unprofitable,
unseasonable, seditious and dangerous doctrine, to the scandal of the Church,
and disquieting of the State and present Government: We, upon humble
presentation unto Us of these ill inconueniencies by your Self, and sundry
other Grave and Reverend Prelates of this Church; as of our Princely care and
desire, for the extirpation of Schism and Dissension growing from these
seeds; and for the settling of a Religious and Peaceable Government both of
Church and State: Do by these Our special Letters straightly charge and
command you, to use all possible care and diligence, that these limitations and
cautions herewith sent you concerning Preachers, be duly and strictly from
henceforth observed, and put in practice by the several Bishops in their
several Diocesses within your Jurisdiction. And to this end Our Pleasure is,
that you send them forth several Copies of these Directions, to be by them
speedily sent and communicated to every Parson, Uicar and Curate, Lecturer and
Minister, in every Cathedral and Parish Church within their several
Diocesses; and that ye earnestly require them, to employ their utmost
endeauours for the performance of this so important a business: Letting them
know, We have an especial eye to their proceedings, and expect a strict
account thereof both from you and every of them, and this Our Letter shall be
your sufficient warrant and discharge in this behalf.

Given under Our Signet at Our Castle of Windsor, the fourth day of August, in
the twentieth year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of
Scolland the six and fiftieth.
Directions concerning Preachers.
1 THat no Preacher, under the degree and calling of a Bishop, or Deane of a
Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and they upon the Kings days, and set
Festiuals, do take occasion by the expounding of any text of Scripture
whatsoever, to fall into any set discourse or Commonplace (otherwise then by
opening the coherence and division of his Text) which shall not be comprehended
and warranted, in essence, substance and effect, or natural inference, within
some one of the Articles of Religion set forth 1562. or in some of the Homelies
set forth by authority in the Church of England, not only for a help for the
Non-preaching, but withal for a pattern and a bundarie (as it were) for the
preaching Ministers, and for their further instructions: for the performance
hereof, that they forthwith peruse over, and read diligently the said Articles,
or the two books of Homilies.

2 That no Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, shall preach any Sermon or
Collation upon Sunday and Holy Days in the afternoon in any Cathedral or
Parish Church throughout the Kingdom, but upon some part of the Catechism, or
some text taken out of the Creed, ten Commandments, or Lords Prayer,
(funeral Sermons only excepted) and that those Preachers be most encouraged
and approved of, who spend these afternoon Exercises in examining the
children in their Catechism, and in expounding of the several points and
heads of the Catechism, which is the most ancient and laudable custom of
teaching in the Church of England.

3 That no Preacher of what title soever, under the degree of a Bishop or Deane
at the least, do from henceforth presume to preach in any populous auditorie,
the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation; of the
Universality, Efficacy, Resistabilitie, or Irresistabilitie of Gods grace,
but leave those Theames to be handled by the learned men, and that moderately,
and modestly, by way of use and application, rather then by way of positive
doctrine, as being fitter for the Schools and Universities, then for simple
auditories.

4 That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever, shall presume from
hence forth in any auditorie in this Kingdom, to declare, limit, or bound out
by positive doctrine, in any Lecture or Sermon, the Power, Prerogative,
Jurisdiction, Authority, or Duty of Sovereign Princes; or otherwise meddle
with these matters of State, and the references between Princes and the
People, then as they are instructed and presidented in the Homily of
obedience, and in the rest of the Homilies and Articles of Religion, set forth
as is before mentioned by public authority; but rather confine themselves for
those two heads, Faith and good Life, which are the subject of ancient Sermons
and Homilies.

5 That no Preacher of what title or denomination soever, shall causlesly, and
without inuitation from the Text, fall into bitter inuectiues, and indecent
railing speeches, against the persons of either Papist or Puritan, but
modestly, and gravely when they are invited or occasioned thereunto by their
text of Scripture, free both the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, from the aspersion of either Adversary, especially where the
auditorie is suspected to be tainted with the one or the other infection.

6 Lastly, the Archbishops and Bishops of this kingdom (whom his Majesty has
good cause to blame for their former remisnes) be more wary and choice in
licensing Preachers, and revoke all grants made to any Chancellor, Official,
or Commissary to license in this kind. And that all the Lecturers throughout
the kingdom (a new body severed from the ancient Clergy of England, as
being neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curate) be licensed henceforth in the Court
of faculties, only upon recommendation of the party from the Bishop of the
Diocese, under his hand and seal with a Fiat from the L. Archbish. of
Canterbury, and a confirmation of the great seal of England* and that such as
transgress any of these directions, be suspended by the L. Bish. of the
Diocese; in his default by the L. Archbish. of the province, ab Officio and
Beneficio, for a year and a day, until his Majesty by advice of the next
Convocation shall prescribe some further punishment.

The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Letters to the Bishop of the Diocese
of Norwich.
MY very good L.
I doubt not but before this time, you baue received from me the Directions of
His most excellent Majesty concerning Preaching and Preachers, which are so
graciously set down, that no godly or discreet man, can otherwise then
acknowledge, that they do much tend to edification, if he do not take them
upon report, but do punctually consider the tenor of the words as they lie; and
do not give an ill construction to that, which may receive a fairer
interpretation. Notwithstanding, because some few Churchmen, and many of the
People have sinisterly conceived (as we do here find) that those Instructions
do tend to the restraint of the Exercise of Preaching, and do in some sort
abate the number of Sermons, and so consequently by degrees, do make a breach
to let in Ignorance and Superstition: His Majesty in his Princely wisdom has
thought fit, that I should advertise your Lordship of the grave and weighty
reasons which induce His Highness to prescribe that which is done. You are
therefore to know, That His Majesty being much troubled, and grieved at the
heart, to hear every day of so many defections from our Religion, both to
Popery and Anabaptisme, or other points of Separation in some parts of this
Kingdom, and considering with much admiration, what might be the cause
thereof, especially in the Reign of such a King, who does so constantly
profess himself an open Adversary to the superstition of the one, and
madness of the other: His Princely wisdom could fall upon no one greater
probability, then the lightness, affectednes, and vnprofit ableness of that
kind of Preaching, which has been of late years too much taken up in Court,
University, City, and Country. The usual scope of very many Preachers, is
noted to be a soaring up in points of Divinity, too high for the capacities
of the people, or a mustering of much reading, or displaying of their wit, or
an ignorant meddling with Civil matters, as well in the private of several
Parishes and Corporations, as in the public of the Kingdom: or a venting of
their own distastes, or a smoothing up of those idle fancies, which in this
blessed time of so long a peace, do boil in the brains of unadvised people.
And lastly, by an evil and indecent railing, not only against the Doctrine
(which when the Text shall occasion the same, is not only approved, but much
commended by his Majesty) but against the persons of Papists and Puritanes.
Now the people bred up with this kind of teaching, and never instructed in the
Catechism and Fundamental points of Religion, are for all this aerie
nourishment, no better then abrasae tabulae, new Table-books, ready to be
filled up either with the Manuals or Catechismes of Popish Priests, or papers
and pamphlets of Anabaptists, Brownists, and Puritanes. His Majesty ever
calling to mind that saying of Tertullian, Id verum quod primum, and remembering
with what doctrine the Church of England in her first and most happy
reformation, did drive out the one, and kept out the other from poisoning and
infecting the people of this Kingdom, did find that the whole scope of this
Doctrine is contained in the Articles of Religion, the two Books of Homilies,
the less and the greater Catechism, which his Majesty does therefore
recommend again in these Directions, as the proper subject of all sound and
edifying Preaching. And so far are these Directions from abating, that his
Majesty does expect from our hands, that it should increase the number of
Sermons, by renewing upon every Sunday in the afternoon in all Parish Churches
throughout the Kingdom, the primitive and most profitable exposition of the
Catechism, wherewith the people, yea very children may be timely seasoned and
instructed in all the heads of Christian Religion. Which kind of teaching (to
our amendment be it spoken) is more diligently observed in all the reformed
Churches of Europe, then of late it has bin here in England. I find his
Majesty much moved with this neglect; and resolved, that if we which are his
Bishops do not see a reformation hereof (which I trust we shall) to recommend
it to the care of the Civil Magistrate, so far is he from giving the least
discouragement to solid Preaching, and Religious Preachers.

To all these I am to add, that it is his Majesty's Princely pleasure, that
both the former Directions, and these reasons of the same, be fairly written
in every Registers Office. To that end, that every Preacher of what
denomination soever, may if he be pleased take out Copies of either of them
with his own hand gratis, paying nothing in the name of Fee, or Expedition.
But if he do use the pains of the Register his Clerks, then to pay some
moderate Fees, to be pronounced in open Court by the Chancellor and
Commissaries of the place, taking the direction and approbation of any the
Lords the Bishops.

Lastly, that from henceforth a course may be taken, that every Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, or Lecturer, do make exhibit of these his Majesty's directions and
reasons of the same, in the next ensuing Visitation of the Bishops and
Archdeacons, paying to the Register by way of Fee two pence only at the time
of the exhibit.

And so wishing, and in his Majesty's Name requiring your Lordsh. to have a
special and extraordinary care of the pr(...)* I leave you to the Almighty.

From Croidon, Sept. 4. 1622. Your loving Brother, G. Cant.


