ORLANDO INAMORATO The three first Books of that famous Noble Gentleman and
learned Poet, Matthew Maria Boiardo Earl of Scandiano in Lombardie.

Done into English Heroical Verse, By R. T. Gentleman.

Parendo impero.
Imperando pereo.


Printed at London by Valentine Sims, dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of
the white Swanne. 1598.

As glorious Pearl the MArgaRITe
At shine of Sun does show:
So does she look, or very like,
To whom I duty owe.
R. T.

TO THE RIGHT VERTVous and worshipful Lady, the Lady MARGARITE MORGAN, wife
unto Sir JOHN MORGAN of Chilworth in the County of SVRREY Knight, and Captain
of her Majesty's horsemen in the same Shire.
GOOD Madam, the manifold courtesies, and exceeding great favors, which not
only mine elder brother, but also mine own poor self, have received and
found at Chilworth, is the occasion and cause we are so much bound and
beholding unto you: In sign whereof, I shall desire you to accept this small
testimony of my duetious good will, toward your worthy House, until better
satisfaction shall follow to make some amends for the same: It is a Novel
Matter, and therefore I send it unto you as a New-yeers gift these Hollidayes,
resembling herein the fashion of some cunning Drapers, who when they would
utter a badde piece of does, carry the same unto the falsest and darkest
window they have, thereby to make the badde color show thee better: So I,
desirous that this my simple Translation might pass the safer, have sent it
unto you these short days in Christmas, that reading the same by candle light,
you may the less perceive the faults thereof: yet howsoever it is, I doubt not
but your Ladyship will accept favorably of it, and at some idle hour or
other, read it over. And thus (good Madam) craving pardon for my boldness,
and favor for such faults as may be committed in the same, I wish unto you,
all such happy contentment, as either your worthy selfedoth desire, or your
virtuous Thoughts any way deserve: and so I humbly take my leave.

Your Ladyships most devoted. R. T.

THE FIRST BOOK OF Orlando Inamorato.
THE ARGUMENT.
Charles does a Royal Feast, and Ioust proclaim,
Where (with Argalia) comes Angelica,
Dares all to fight, and Malagigi's taken;
Being sent as Prisner to Cataia,
Astolfo runs, (but vanquished does remain)
And (as th'agreement was) does lose the day,
Ferraw does Ioust, and falls, yet will not yield,
And at the last, kills Giantes four in field.
I Sing of Him that Wonders wroght through Love,
That Monsters, Fiends, and Giants huge did tame,
And many a weary Iorny often did prove,
To seek, to find what lost had bin his gain,
A cruel Heart with pity mild to move
(Which he too faithless found unto his pain:)
So near and dear he loud her, and so well,
As (for her sake) distraught of wit he fell,
Famous ORLANDO was the Man I mean,
And fair ANGELICA that used him so,
These two must be the subject of my Theme,
If my Dear ALBA so much favor show,
Who in her hate to me is too extreme,
(Like sea that never ebbes, but still does flow)
My comfort's this, though high my Thoughts be placed,
If I obtain not, None shall She Is so chaste.
ANd thou fair BROOK, whence springs each sweet Conceit,
Where Beauty bides in her perfection,
Thy Gracious Aspect humbly I entreat,
(As happy Planet) me to shine upon,
Whilst I in Others, of thy self repeat,
Volumes of Praise due to thee long agon:
Help BRADAMANTA, whilst I write the praise
Of stout RVGIERO forth a broad to blaze.
Long since did sway the Scepter in the East,
A mighty King, and he Gradasso hight,
Whose dreadful name, from most unto the least,
Throughout the world with terror did affright,
This Prince by force, meant for to be possessed
Of Baiardo and Durindana bright,
As Monarchs use, who often in mind aspire,
"Things that are hardly got for to desire.
And to this end he through his kingdoms great,
An hunderd fifty thousand Knights most bold,
Does muster up, to bring to pass this feat,
Who expert were in martial points of old,
Yet meant not this proud King them to entreat,
To try their valor, though full feign they would,
For he (alone) himself thought with his lance,
Able great Charles to conquer, and all France*
Now whilst Gradasso, thrice invincible,
Conducts his hugie Army on the way:
Carlmagnus, that for curt'sie does excel,
Proclaims most solemn Iousts for many a day,
In Paris to be kept as Heraldes tell,
Where, any Knight (what ere) come thither may,
And of his valor show some perfect proof,
Mounted in Armor, best for his behoof,
By chance there were assembled at that time,
Within the royal City, and the Court,
The twelve chief Peers of France calde Paladine,
With diverse neighboring Princes of great port,
To show of virtue theirs, some wortie sign:
Pagans, as well as Christians there resort,
For all might safely come withouten fear,
Unless a Traitor false to the State he were*
This causde a number to ariue from Spain,
All valiant Soldiers, and of worthy prize,
No Caualire did then behind remain,
But ritchly did appear in sumptuous wise:
Amongst this martial crew that was of Fame,
Were these (whose Prowess sounds unto the Skies:)
Serpentine, Balugant and Isol^re,
With other Knights for Honor that aspire.
Paris resounds with Musickes Harmony,
With Trumpets, Drums, with Fiffes, and Bells for joy,
The barbed Steeds are trapt most gorgeously,
Each one has his Device and several Toy,
With Gold and Pearl, to please his Mistress eye,
As to rehearse the same your ears would cloye:
For all did seek (their Emprour for to grace,)
Who should as then, most Pomp show in that place.
And now is come the day, in which begin
They should their Solemn Iousts; when Charlemaine,
Attirde in Robes of poudered Etmiline
Inuites each Lord and Knight, that thither came,
In his great Hall to feast and feed with him,
Since they to honor him had took such pain:
The number of which Guestes, were as I guess,
Twenty two thousand and thirty, and no less.
King Charles himself with cheer (...)
In Throne of Gold sat at his Table round
Amongst his Peers, who blythe and merry were:
And ore against him right, the Sarasins on ground,
Who did on board or bench to sit forbere,
But lay along as Mastiues often are found:
On Carpets sat they (as their fashion is)
And I dare say, no small pride took in this.
Hard by his right side, and on his left hand
Tables were placed and set in fit degree:
At first sat none but such as did command
Over England, Britain, and over Lombardie,
Three famous Kings (as then) of Christen Land:
Otton, Solomon, and Desideri^ free:
The rest vnnam'de in order took their place,
As cu'ry Monarch does in such a case.
Dukes sat at second Board, and Marquises,
Earls (only) at the third, and Caualires;
Much graced were as then the Maganses,
And chiefly Gano, who himself proud bears,
Rinaldo storms, much it does him displease
Because he spies by signs those traitorous Peers,
Amongst themselves do scoff and jest at him,
For that as they he is not half so trim.
These Magansesi were noble House,
And next to Charles, mong'st Peers the chiefst of all:
Yet were they Cowards, base, and timorous,
Traitors, and pickthankes, envious, full of gall,
Few was there of them counted vallerous,
Or held for courage-worthy Knights and tall:
Yet Charles, them more then they deserved held dear,
Because of kin to him so nigh they were.
(...) he did smile,
Concealing inwardly his wrath in show,
But to himself he said; Base Rascals vile,
Ere long your Betters I will make you know,
I Will see how you can fit your horse the while
I charge against you, as your deadly foe:
For I not doubt (though now so proud you are found)
When we shall meet, to make you kiss the ground.
King Balugant, who saw his color often
To come and go, his meaning did divine:
And therefore by a Trunchman, of him sought
If that in Court, (among Christians, Chief and prime)
Men were for wealth or merit raisde aloft:
Because he being a stranger at that time
Desirde to know the custom, least he swerue
In honoring any, as they should deserve.
Rinaldo smiles, and with a cheerful look,
To Balugant his Messenger thus said,
Friend, tell thy Master, since that he can brook,
Christians by him with Honor should be paid,
Base Gulls at table, Queanes in bed are took
(For sport) often among us, and are much of made:
But where we come our valor for to try,
Each one receaues his Honor orderly.
Whilst thus this Message is delivered,
Sweet music soundes throughout the royal Hall:
The Emperor wills each Board be furnished
With dainty Cates to feast these Barrons tall,
Carowsing unto them whilst that they fed,
In cups of gold wrought richly over all*
Each oue he honors with this Gift or that,
Showing thereby, he them has not forgot*
They frolic, and are merry as may be,
Discoursing among themselves in voice but low:
King Pippins son, that now himself does see
Attended on with such a royal Show
Of Kings, of Dukes, of Knights in their degree:
The Pagans steemes as dust that wind does blow*
But see, a chance unlooked for did appear,
That made both him and all the rest to fear.
For on the sudden did appear in sight
Four Giants great and strong of limme and bone,
And in the midst of them a Damsel bright
Attended on with one sole Knight alone,
A star she seemde, so glorious was this Wight,
Like her no flower on earth has ever grown:
In brief the truth to tell, she all did pass,
Never before her, like for Beauty was.
Yet was sweet Galerana in that place,
And Alda wife unto Orlando bold:
Clarice, and Armelina fair in face,
And diverse other Ladies left untold,
Who beauteous were and full of lovely grace:
Beauteous indeed, framde right in Natures mould*
But when among them appeard this Flower so gay,
The prize of Beauty straight she reft away.
Each Barron brave, and Prince of Christendom,
On that rare Object do their eyes still cast,
The barbarous Pagans rise from ground and run
To honor her, who makes them all aghast,
Whilst with so sweet a smile shines this clear Sun*
As she is able, a stony heart at last
To melt for love, and to her self to win,
And thus to speak she smiling does begin.
Most mighty Lord, thy virtue more then great,
And wondrous valor of thy Peers of fame,
Whose prowess so far throughout the world does beat,
As any seas their utmost bounds contain,
Give me some hope; the travel, and the sweat
Of us poor Pilgrims shall not be in vain:
Since both thy Court and thee we comen are
To honor from the world his end afaire.
And that I may not hold thee over long,
Know this the reason is I came to thee,
This is Vberto (surnamde Leo) strong,
A Noble borne and Knight of chivalry,
Expulst from out his kingdom by much wrong,
(Wronged like him could never any be:)
And I that was banished with him that day,
His sister am, and called Angelica.
From hence 200 days journey at least,
At Tana (where our Country is) we have
Heard much of this thy royal Ioustes, and Feast
And of the assembly of these Gallants brave,
And that who best deserves, is not possessed
Of gold or pearl, (gifts for a servile slave)
But to enhance his virtuous honor more,
The Conqueror, a crown of roses wore.
This is the cause Vberto brother mine
Means for to try his force and valor here,
Among all the flower of Barrons of this time:
All will be try, although he buy it dear,
Be he a Christen or a Saracin,
Without the City gates he will appear,
Hard at the Pine within the meddow green,
Which Merlins tomb is called as I ween.
But yet with this condition will he ioust
As I Will repeat, that all may know the same;
Who shall unhorsed be, and from saddle thrust,
No more shall run his honor to regaine,
But yield himself as prisner to him must;
And who Vberto lays on sandy plain,
My person shall enjoy to him for pray,
And he with Giants his shall wend their way.
Thus having said, fore Charles she kneels on ground,
Expecting his short answer speedily,
Her feature rare does make them all astound,
And chiefly stout Orlando who draws nie
To her with trembling heart, through Loves deep wound,
Although it to conceal he had an eye:
Casting his looks often times on the earth below
As one ashamde thereof he well did show.
Alas fond man, he to him self then said,
Why give thou so large rain unto thy will?
Perceiu'st thou not in errors thou do wade?
And against thy God (as perverse) sinnest still?
Ah how am I by Fortune ouerlaide!
I see my fault, ^e cannot mend this ill:
I that the worlds great'st force did set at naught,
Am by a seelly girl overcome and caught.
To part from her sweet face I have no power,
My life upon her lovely looks does stay,
Withouten her I languish every hour,
And soul from out this body wends her way:
Now see I well no force, nor frowning shower
Can love withstand, whom I must now obey:
"Wisdom helps not, nor good advise to choose,
"What Is best I know, yet best I do refuse.
She is a Heathen, I a Christen borne,
Nor know I if she me will ever like,
May be she will other love, and me will scorn,
(And yet for him she is, that best can fight;)
I know not if my fortune be forlorn,
Yet for her sake, I Will try her brothers might:
My hop's that soon shall ended be this strife,
Either I Will win her, or I Will lose my life*
Thus to himself laments this Barron bold,
Of his new Love, uncertain of her grace;
The like Duke Namo did though he were old,
("Wood old and dry burns soon in such a case,)
He shakes as one troubled with agew cold,
And all his blood does run from out his face:
In brief, her pleasing beauty rare was such,
As Charles him self (with each one) likte her much.
All stood stone still as they were in a maze,
Staring upon her with no small delight,
But youthful Ferraw, whose heat was no blaze
But sparckling fire, thrice meant by force of might,
To take her from the Giantes, and thrice stays,
As ^oth the rest of Barrons to despite.
Therefore his first intent he soon let fall,
Least he should be condemned of them all.
He stamps and leapes as if he trod on brier,
He shakes his head, nor knows he what to do,
Rinaldo with the rest his hart's on fire,
As^oone as he began her for to view,
But Malagi that knew her, coming nigh her,
(Quoth he unto himself) I Will make thee rue
That here thou camst enchauntresse false and vile,
"For to deceive deceivers it is no guile.
King Charles a long discourse makes pleasantly,
Unto this Damsel whom he does adore,
The longer for to have her company,
He wondering talks, and talking wonders more,
Nor dares he (what she does request) deny,
But all confirms, though he repent therefore,
Swearing to keep what he fore her does say,
Wherewith she pleased wends with her troup away.
Scarce were they passed through the City wall,
But Malagigi takes his Book in hand,
Four devils from depth of hell he forth does call,
Whom (what shall hap) to tell he does command,
But soon his frightfull mind they did appall,
When he by them was given to understand,
King Charles no better was then one that is dead,
And all his court undone dishonored.
For this young maid surpassing beauty fair,
Sole daughter was unto King Galafron,
Full of deceit, in falshoode passing rare,
And of enchaunted spells knew every one,
Come was she hither for to bring much care,
To Christen Knights, and sent by that old crone,
With her brother, who Argalia had to name,
(And not Vberto) as she false did feign.
A wondrous horse this old man gave his son,
As black as cole, more swift then whirling wind,
A target and a breast plate fair that shonne,
With helmet such, and sword he him assignde,
All which by magike art were wrought and done,
(For dear he loud him, and to him was kind:)
Withal a launs he had of glittring gold,
Most rich and strangly wrought for to behold.
His Father sent him with this armor brave,
Thinking (through this) he was invincible,
Besides a precious Ring he to him gave,
Though he it used not, yet it did excel;
For being in ones mouth, it men did save
Unseen, and kept them as invisible;
Holding it on the left side, without harm,
And worn on hand, all witchcrafts did vncharme.
But chiefly that Angelica should go
With him in company was his devise,
Because he knew her flattering face as tho,
Each Barron bold to combat would entice,
Whom, when she could by witchcraft overthrow,
She should bring with her, as her beauties prise:
Bound fast in chains to Galafron, where he
Would use them worse then curs or ma^stiues be.
Thus do the sprites of Malagigi saine,
Whom we will leave his business to mine,
And to Argalia we will come again,
Who is to Merlins tomb come by this time,
Pitching a rich pauilion on the plain,
(Within the meddow) wrought with cunning fine:
Wherevnder he himself does strait repose,
For great desire to rest himself he shows.
Angelica not far from him does keep,
Upon the ground her golden tresses lay,
Under the Pine she by a spring does sleep,
The Giants four as Gardiants bout her stay,
An Angel, and no earthly creature leeke,
Whilst in a slumber sweet she smiling lay:
Her brothers ring whereof we spoke before,
Of precious virtue, she on finger wore.
Now Malagigi does a Devil bestride,
And softly in the Air does thither come,
Where he the Maid how she does lie has spide,
Hard by the Fountain that does trickling run:
The watchful Giants four he has discride,
Who (to their Charge to look) no labor shun.
Foul ugly Beasts (says he) ill you befall,
I Will catch you straight, saunce striking struck at all.
Your threatenings proud, your grim and ghastly look
Shall small avail, your darts not weapons strong:
I Will plague you all, you (sleeping) shall be took,
As Rascals base, that meant us thus to wrong*
And saying so, he forth does take his Book,
With other Tools, nor thus he stayed long:
But ere that he one leaf had well nigh read,
They all fell sound asleep as they were dead.
That done, he to the Virgin nigh does draw,
His sword unsheathing softly her to kill,
But when so sweet a dainty face he saw,
To murder her he had but little will:
To use her so, he thinks it is too hard Law,
At last he says, My mind I Will thus fulfill,
By Magic art to sleep I will her make,
And so my pleasure on her sweetly take.
Upon the grass he flings his naked sword,
And takes his boeke unto him once again,
Before he leaves, he reads every word,
But to what end? his charming is in vain:
The virtue of her Ring the same procurde,
But Malagigi who knew not the same,
Thinking she could not stir once in that place,
Begins her in his arms for to embrace,
She skriching out, a fearful noise does make,
Wretch that I am (cries she) I am betraide:
Poor Malagigi well nigh dead for fear does quake,
When he perceiues his cunning so to vade.
Argalia with her cry as then did wake,
When she was like strange sport to have assaide.
Who half awake, half sleeping as he was,)
Unarmed and nakte, out of his Tent did pass.
And seeing on the sudden in that place,
A fellow tumbling his fair Sister by,
He so amazde was at this uncouth case,
As he at first durst not approach them nigh.
But after coming to himself within a space,
He thought with cudgel to kill him presently:
Crying to him: Villain thou art but dead,
That have my Sister thus dishonored.
Nay, bind him first (cride she) good Brother mine
Fore him I let go, for a Coniurer
He ^s; and were not for this Ring of thine,
Thy force (as now) too weak against him were:
This said, the young man runs, and stayth no time,
Where as the Giants lay, but nere the near,
For though he cride, and pains therein did take,
Th'enchantment was so strong, they could not wake.
He shakes and tugs and pulls them to and fro:
But to no end, which when he does it see,
From out his Club he pulls a chain as tho,
And does return where as the other be,
Sad Malagigi binding, full of woe;
And fore he could do so, much pain had he,
His neck, his arms, his legs no chain did miss,
No part from head to foot, but fettered is.
As soon as he was back and belly bound,
The Damsel searches forth with in his breast,
And there the damned Book she straightway found:
Which Circles strange, and shapes of Fiendes expressed.
No sooner she some words therein did sound,
And opened had those damned leaves unblessed,
But Sprites of the air, earth, sea, came out of hand
Crying alowde, What is it you us command?
I will (quoth she) this prisoner you convey
Twixt India, and Tartaria, and him bring
Into that City calde Cataia:
Where Galafron my father reigns as King,
That I him sent as Prisoner, to him say,
And that I cause was of his prisoning,
Tell him, now I this man in Bonds have caught,
Charles other Barons I esteem as naught.
No sooner said she so, but that in the air
Carried was Malagi, fore Galafron,
Who under Sea, a prison did prepare
For him, within a rock of flintie stone.
And now through Ring the Giants wakened are
By fair Angelica through virtue shown,
They wondering at the same, do marvel much,
How they escapt vnkild from danger such.
Whilst thus abroad, this busy business goes,
Contention great in Paris does arise,
Because Orlando does himself dispose,
To be the first to tilt in martial wise:
But Pipins son unwilling hereof shows,
And as a thing against reason him denies:
So do the Paladines, so do the rest,
Each will go first, each man himself thinks best.
Orlando doubts lest that some other man
Should win his Mistress, whom he holds so dear:
For who unhorse her Brother (bravely) can,
May her (as Conquerers prize) home with him bear.
Now he that his own strength did rightly skan,
Thought her his own, (as if he conquered were)
Only it grieves him over long to stay:
"For Lovers think a year the shortest day.
A Counsel hereupon in Court they call,
And every thing is right examined:
Where every one to end this martial Brall,
What best he can for his behoof has sedd:
But in the end this is agreede of all:
That they by Fortune shall be ordered,
And he on whom the Lot shall first alight,
Shall have the honor first to go and fight.
Forth with the names of Every Palatine
Were taken, writ and placed secretly:
Each Christian Knight, and Barons Saracine,
And in a pot of gold put by and by:
Which done they call a little boy that time,
Who (one by one) does draw them orderly,
As to his hand chance, and the first that came,
Astolfo hight of England he did name.
Next unto him was Ferraw read alowd,
Rinaldo third, the fourth was Dudon bold,
Crandonio then, a Giant huge and proud,
Then Berlinger, and then King Otton old,
The paper next King Charles his name did shroud,
And that I may you here no longer hold,
Thirty were drawn before Orlanaoes turn;
Imagine then, how he did grieve and mourn.
Fore all was done, it grew near to be night,
Duke Aastolff with a bold and dauntlesse cheer,
Calls for his weapons and his Armor bright,
And though small time for to provide him were,
Considering that next morning he must fight,
Yet speaks he bravely; for naught did he fear:
Saying he quickly end would this proud war,
And at the first take Vbert prisonar.
One thing I now must tell you by the way:
No Baron was as English Astolfe fair
Courtlike and kind, and rich in his array*
But somewhat wantonly himself he bare,
Commend his valor yet not much I may,
For many times ill luck hapt to his share;
Yet would he say, it was chance, not want of skill,
He was unhorsed; such his excuse was still.
But for to come again unto my Tale:
By this time is he armed at his pleasure,
Bright Orient Pearl his Target does impale,
His Armor counteruailes a good Kings Treasure,
And all of Gold is wrought his shirt of male,
His Helmet costly is beyond all measure,
By reason of a Rubie therein put,
A rich one it was, as big as any Nut.
His brave Caparisons with Leopards
Embost were, sumptuously with glittering gold,
Alone he rides, nor company regards:
But like a Champion stout, his way does hold,
It Was early, therefore he stays afterward,
When Merlins tomb he came unto most bold:
Where he his horn puts to his mouth and blows,
And warning of his coming thereby shows.
Argalia hears the noise, and straight does rise,
For he did lie hard by the foresaid Spring,
To arm himself, he straightway does devise,
From top to foot, nor wantes he any thing,
And against Astolfo goes in warlike wise,
He and his horse in white show glistering:
His shield on arm, his golden lance in hand,
Which many Knights has east down on the sand.
Each one the other kindly does salute,
Their first conditions they again renew,
Angelica stands by with smiling look,
Whilst they to the end of Lists themselves withdrew,
Which done, they run with lance in wrest, that shook,
Striving who shall by force of stroke subdue:
But brave Astolfo at the encounter furst,
Was strait unhorsed and on the ground was thrust.
Upon the sand tumbling he lies along,
And chafing says, ah fortune false and sly,
Too partial still to do me mickle wrong,
My sadle was the cause I fell, not I,
For had I bin to keep my seat so strong,
The Dame had mine bin, and that presently:
Thou madst me fall, because I Christian am,
The more to raise this Pagans glorious fame.
The Giants strait as prisner take this Knight,
Conducting him to a Pauilion fair,
And when he was of armor spoiled quite,
To view him well the Damsel does not spare,
For he was comely, and a goodly wight,
Which was the cause she had of him some care:
As pitying him, commanding he should be,
Honored far more then with his state did gree.
He was not bound, nor any did him guard,
But at the fountain for his pleasure staide,
Angelica still looks upon him hard,
(Yet vnperceiude) for light the Moon displaide,
But when the gloomy night her seeing barrde,
He, in a stately bed to rest was laid:
Whilst with her brother, she, and Giants stout,
Kept watch their rich Pauilion without.
Now Ferraw comes when scarce it is break of day,
In complet armor bravely to contend,
And with his horn does sound so strange a say,
As if the world should at that blast have end,
The voice was such, as all men there did fray,
Who from that sound themselves sought to defend:
Only Argalia for it does not pass,
Quickly he rose, and soon he armed was.
On head th'enchaunted helmet he puts on,
And mounteth on his wooundrous flying steed,
His sword he places his right side upon,
And takes his shield, and lance, as he had need,
Nor flow in pace seems startling Rabicon,
But treades so light, and with such winged speed,
As in the gravel where he trampling goes,
No sign of any print of feet he shows.
Ferraw does long until Argalia come,
"For every Lover long delays does hate,
And seeing him, his talk with him's soon done,
He staith not much with him to parl and prate,
In steed of him saluting, he does run,
Against him with spear his foes best force to bate,
For he makes sure account, and durst to swear,
That he the Lady fair away shall bear.
But he no sooner with his enemies lance
Was touched, but he was mazde in wondrous wise,
No more with force he could him self advance,
For all his amourous heat on sudaine dies,
Neu^^ before was heard of such a chance,
For down he falls on ground: and there he lies:
Yet he not scarce so soon had touched the grass,
But that he strait reuiude, and lusty was.
"Love, heat of youth, the nature of some man,
Has many, often, through too much ire orethrowne,
And Ferraw loving much, as many can,
Was young, and proud, and over hasty grown,
And who with such converse, in danger stan,
He on his friend, for nothing would have flowne:
He was so froward and of so sauadge mind,
As for a fether to fight you should him find.
Anger and shame soon made him rise from ground,
He gets him up, and now reuengde he will be,
Forgot he has how he by oath is bound
To yield himself, his sword now draws he,
And toward Argalia running comes he round,
Who when to break his word he does him see,
Says thus to him, thou art my prisonar,
And both thy self and me wrongst thus to jar.
Ferraw hears not what he to him does say,
But means by force therewith for to dispense,
Which when the Giants see, hard by that stay,
They all come toward Argalia for defense,
And forth so great a cry aloud they braye,
As if it were some thunders violence,
So great a cry these roaring Giants make,
As two miles off the ground was found to shake.
This made Ferraw look back, but not to fear:
Argosto was the Giant first that came,
Monstrous in growth, Lampordo did appear
Next, clept Velluto, (so was his surname)
Because his body's all ore'growne with hea^e:
Vrgano was the third (for strength) of fame,
Turlone was the fourth, who was in heig^
Just thirty foot, when he stood bolt vp^^^
Lampordo first did greet him with a dart,
And had't not been his body woundlesse was
By Dest'nie, struck he had been at the heart,
With such great force it on his breast did pa^^
But never plaide a^ray-hound swifter part,
Nor whirle-winde whiskes in troubled seas with (...)
Nor thunderbolte comes half so soon from heaven*
As Ferraw for revenge sought to be even.
He hittes Lampordo on the rightest side,
And pates him off in midst hard at the thies,
The mortal wound cutts through his Navel wide,
Nor thinks he this brave blow must him suffice,
His sword each where about him he does glide,
For the other three beset him in sore wise:
Worthy Argalia vantage will not take,
But looks on to see what end they will make.
Ferraw leapes up full twenty feet at least,
To reach to the Grants, who were monstrous hie,
His sword by chance is on Vrgano seast,
Cleaueing his head to's teeth most furiously,
But whilst he bids them to this bitter feast,
Argosto does his iron club let fly:
And such a dangerous blow he does him give,
As blood from forth his nose and mouth does drive.
This made him fiercer then he was before,
As one that nothing fearde in such a case,
So as with strokes, that Giant down he bore,
Cutting his shoulders off to the girdling place,
But now he grew to be in danger sore,
For Turbon who was strongest of that race,
Caught him within his arms, though he did strive,
Meaning to carry him away alive.
But was it force, or fortune of the Knight?
I know not which, but soon from him he got:
The Giant then with iron Club does fight:
And Ferraw with his sword, who weyes him not:
Seldom they miss, hitting each other right,
And now the Fray begins afresh most hot,
And each of other, now his hands full has,
Striving to give each other harm and skath.
No dallying is there twixt themselves as now,
The Giant with all force that he can make,
Striking the Barons helmet off, does wound his brow:
Disarming quite his head he makes him quake:
But Ferraw makes him like an Ox to low,
So great a blow he does him rightly take
Upon the legs (though they in male were shut,)
As off from body his, he them does cut.
The One dying, the other falling in a sound,
Both (at one instant) fell as dead they were:
Argalia lights from horse, and from the ground,
The Knight does to the Spring most kindly bear:
And with fresh water which did there abound,
He him reuiues again, and does him chere.
That done, he lead him would unto his Tent:
But Ferraw to be prisoner, nill consent.
For what care I (says he) though The Emperor
Promisde that such Conditions firm should stand;
Am I his Vassal or his Seruitor,
That he unto my loss may me command?
I came to fight for Love (like Conqueror)
With thee, thy Sister fair for to have gaind:
And her I Will have (or else I here will die)
Less I have lost my wonted Chivalry.
Astolfo hearing such a noise and din,
Begun out of his heavy sleep to come:
Besides the Giants showte had waked him,
Whose Echo to his ears from Meade did run:
And seeing these two Champions to begin
A fresh to brawle (which he would have them shun)
Sought all the means, as friends to make them gree;
But Ferraw to it would not persuaded be.
Alas poor man, said then Argalia,
Perceiust thou not how thou unarmed art?
Perhaps thou think thy Helmet still does stay
Upon thy head, which broke's in many a part,
Then choose, if Prisoner thou will be, or slay
I shall thee, (though to do so grieves my heart:)
For if thou fightst and nothing have on head,
Thou can not escape, but soon thou must be dead.
Ferraw replide, and yet my mind me tells,
Withouten helmet, armor or with sword,
I shall thee conquer, though I naught have else,
Naked with thee to fight I can afford
For my dear Love (despite of charming Spells:)
Thus braude this Baron, not one foot thence sturd:
For Love had him so heated with desire,
He would for her have leapt into the fire.
Argalia now began to swear and stare,
Seeing so basely he of him did steeme,
As being nakte, (to combat) durst him dare,
And that being twice overcome before, does seem
Still prowder, nor for him at all does care,
But better then at first his strength does deem:
Well Knight (quoth he) I see thou seekst thy Bane,
And since thou do, I Will soon give thee the same.
Now do thy worst, and quickly take thy horse,
For I have used thee too too ouer-well:
Nor think once more in me to find remorse
For Helmet lost, which from thy head late fell:
Thou Have offered wrong, and find shall hardest force:
"Pity to thankelesse men I will not fell;
Look to thy self, and that full warily,
No way there is but one, thou needs must dye.
Hereat did Ferraw smile, his words he waide
As nothing, but to his horse himself did take:
That done, (Sr Knight, a word with you) he said,
Give me thy sister fair, and for her sake
Command me, and thou shall be straight obaid.
I will be friends with thee, and hands will shake:
But if to grant this: thou deny me now,
I Will send thee to another world, I make a vow.
Argalia was with anger so ore'come,
To hear these speeches arrogant and proud,
As to his horse, he in a rage does run,
Threatening he speaks he knowth not what alowde,
So fast it coms out of his roling tongue:
He draws his sword, and fiercely toward him bowde*
Forgetting (to his cost) his golden launee,
Which at the Pine tree he had left by chance.
Both storming thus, they meet with sword in hand,
And each does other turn from off his steed,
Stronger then these the world cannot command,
Nor lives there, that in valor them exceed,
Did here Orlando or Rinaldo stand,
Yet who would prove most valiant, doubt it would breed,
As by the sequel of the second song,
You hear shall, for this first has bin too long.
THE SECOND BOOK of Orlando Inamorato.
THE ARGUMENT.
Angelica from combat takes her flight,
Whilst Ferraw with her brother does contend,
Who follows after her on Courser light;
Ferraw, Rinaldo, and Orlando wend
To find her ont, with all their force and might,
And her to seek, in vain their labor spend:
Charles I ousts begin, where Pagans passing brave
Carry themselves: the ^oile the Christians have.
Honor and Love together here do fight,
Argalia his fair sister to defend,
Ferraw for sweet Angelica, his might
Does show; against Love, for love he does contend,
Of valor never was seen so rare a sight,
Thrice happy they that so their lives do end:
None honors, loves his Mistress more then I,
Yet I cashierd am most disdainfully.
I honor her and tender her good name,
More then the dearest apples of mine eine,
So much I love her, as her love to gain,
Gladly I would dispend this life of mine,
Yet she my chaste request quits with disdain,
Showing of pity not so much as sign:
My heart she seeks to tyranize and kill,
She borne to punish, I to suffer still.
(Before) I told you how our Champions were
Buckling together with despite and ire,
Argalia does revenge on Ferraw swear,
And Ferraw burns against him with like desire,
The one enchaunted armor strong does bear,
The others death by wound none can conspire,
Save in one place, with steel that covered was,
As hardly any weapon through could pass.
Who has two Lions seen combat in Wood,
When they together meet most furiously,
Or who two thundercraks to hear has stood,
Which flashing lightning does before descrie,
(Comparde to this strange fight) see nothing s^ud,
So desperate are they whilst their force they try:
Heaven seems to burn, and all the world to quake,
Whenas their sparkling blades encounter make.
They lay on load, with blows themselves to smother,
Frowning with sdainfull looks, and collor great,
The One thinking to be stronger then the other
Trembles for rage, and does with labor sweat,
And now Argalia ore his foe does houer,
And on his naked head his sword does seat,
Thinking, that with that stroke he him had given,
His soul from out his body he had driven.
But when he saw upon his sword most plain,
No blood to be, he was amazed so,
As hair on head upright began to remain,
It seemde to him to be so strange a show,
But Ferraw means to show to him like game,
Thinking to cleave his armor brave as tho,
Crying to Macon now I thee commend,
For with this blow I thee to him will send.
And saying so, his force he gathers round,
With both his hands at him he hard does strike,
As had it been a rock of diamond,
He at that stroke in twain had cleude it quite,
The well wrought Helm that was enchaunted found,
Was cause withouten hurt it there did light:
If Ferraw thereat wondered, judge but you,
He was so mazde, scarce what he did he knew.
But after they had breathed for a space,
(Pawsing a while) withouten striking stroke,
One wondering at the other in this case,
(For not one word as yet tweene them was spoke,)
Argalia first to Ferraw turns his face,
Baron quoth he (for now he silence broke)
This armor which I wear, I will thou know,
Is by enchauntment made from top to toe.
Then leave off with me, more thy force to try,
For naught hereby but danger thou can have:
So help me Macon, as I do not lie
(Says Ferraw) I no armor need, to save
My self, for what thou see on me with eye,
I carry but for show and flourish brave,
And not for need, for I unto the bone,
All ore am woundlesse, save one side alone.
Therefore Let me this council to thee give,
For, for thy good I now speak as a friend,
Seek not (as wilful) death, when thou may live,
For if thou will, this quarrel soon shall end:
Thy sister grant to me for whom I grieve,
Else thee the world from death cannot defend:
But if thou shall be found so kind to me,
I shall be bound for ever unto thee.
Courageous Baron then Argalia said,
Thy*oft mou'de motion well I understand:
I, for thy love, (not fear) am well apaid,
To have with thee a friendly kinsmans band.
But I will know before I further wade,
If with her liking good this bargain stand,
Else I Will do naught; Ferraw replies, Content:
Go, talk with her, to know if she will consent.
Ferraw, (though young,) hard favored was, not fair,
With morphew tand, his speech was full of pride,
A countenance grim and terrible he bare,
His eyelids quick, and like a Ferret eyde:
To keep his body clean he never did care,
For on his face great store of dust did bide.
His head like to a sugar loaf was sharp,
His hear cole-blacke, by nature curld, not Art.
Angelica mislikes him for this cause,
For she did love the Flaxen yellowish hear,
And to Argalia says, when he did pause:
Kind Brother, well I know you hold me dear,
Yet first I Will cast my self in swallowing jaws
Of these deep waters, or beg every wheare,
Then take for husband such a man as he,
"Better be dead, then with a madman be.
Therefore I pray thee for God Macon sake,
That thou be pleased, although I can not like:
Once more thy weapons against that Baron take,
Mean while by magic Art I Will work the slight,
My self to be conuayed home to make:
Follow me after thou may, by some fained flight.
I by Ardennas wood will take my way,
And there for thee until thou come will stay.
To the end we both may glad our ancient Sire,
Who longes for us: but if within three days
You come not to me, as I you require,
I through the winds as then will go my ways,
Through help of coniuring Book of that Dogde Squire,
Who (for he would have ravished me) dear pays:
And after you may come by land with ease
To me; the way you know if so you please.
Argalia back comes, nor to tell does miss,
How he his Sister cannot make consent:
Ferraw give over will not for all this,
But still to combat with him is he bent,
To win her, or to die, his mind it is,
And whilst to hold him still in fight he meant:
The Maid does vanish from them suddenly,
Which soon the ielous Lover does epsy.
For as he fought, he often looked her upon,
Thinking his force did double and not lack,
But after that he saw that she was gone,
He had small mind to keep him longer tacke:
Mean space Argalia with his horse is flowne
Like wind away, and from him turns his back,
Out of the Meddow he does spur apace,
Leaving the fight, and Ferraw in that place.
Th'ennamorde youth, gulld seeing himself to be,
(As mad) out of the Meade does run amain,
Into the Wood he goes to search and see,
Whilst in his face he read looks like the flame:
To think how he is mocked, grieude is he,
Vowing to be revenged for the same:
And still he runs, and pries, but all in waste,
For what he seeks, he cannot find in haste.
Now let us to Astolfo turn (that Knight)
Who as you know, alone stayed at the Spring,
Viewing with pleasure how those twain did fight:
And at their matchless Valor wondering;
He now is free, maugre all Fortunes spite:
And thanketh God that so released him:
And least delay with danger should him cross,
He being armde, betakes him to his horse.
But now a Spear wants our Pallatine;
For in his fall, his brake unhappily:
He looks about, and at foot of the Pine,
(Whereas Argalia's was) he does epsy;
A fair one it was, set out with gold most fine,
And all enammeled over curiously:
With this rich Lance furnished, he homewardes makes,
Nor any other thing with him he takes.
Thus as he forwards on his journey set,
Merry and blythe to think he scapte such Thrall:
Hard by the Wood side he Rinaldo met,
Reporting unto him what had befall.
Duke Aymons Sons stomach Love so had whet,
As in no place he rest him could at all:
Therefore he forth of Paris walls was come,
That he might know what Ferraw now had done.
But when he heard, the Knights into the Wood
Were run together, he no more does say,
But turns his horse, and spurs till forth coms blood,
And on Rayardos slownesse fault does lay:
His Lords impatience bears this Gelding good;
As if like tired Jade he led the way.
This Gelding good which with such haste does go,
As scarce does shaft when out it flies from bow.
But leave we now Rinald his love about,
And turn we to Astolf, who is to Paris come:
Whom soon pensive Orlando finds out,
And cunningly (Suspicion for to shun)
Demands of him the Battle that was fought,
But of Angelica he nothing said but Mum,
To talk with him of her he did refrain,
Because he knew he was a Pratler vain.
But when he heard the Lady with the rest,
Into the Wood one after other ran,
And that Rinaldo followed them in Quest,
He went his way, with countenance pale and wanne,
Flinging himself on Bed with grief oppressed,
As he no longer live for sorrow can,
This valiant Knight, true Valors chiefest Joy,
Weeps on his Pallet like a peevish Boy.
Woe's me (says he) that in this weakened corse,
I no defense against my foe can prove:
Why should not Durindana be of force?
Battle to wage against this Tyrant Love,
Since it my Soul torments without remorse,
As no such grief so much my sense can move:
What plague (compard to mine) can rightly be,
Who burn in Love, and freeze in Jealousy.
I know not if that favor Angelicke,
To me unworthy, so great grace will show,
For more then treble blessed is that Wight,
On whom she will daine such kindness to bestow,
And fore all Creatures he may vaunt aright,
Who can in credit with so sweet Saint grow*
But if in s'dainfull terms against me she stands*
I murder will my self with mine own hands.
Ah should Rinaldo in the wood by chance,
Meet with this lovely virgin secretly,
He would (his beastly hot desire to staunch)
Her maiden head enjoy, or he would die,
And now perhaps he leads her such a dance,
The whilst like to a puling woman I,
Lean with my hand upon my face with grief,
Easing my self with tears without relief.
May be, I think, if I conceal the same,
I cover may the heat which burns my heart,
But never I Will die for a little shame,
For by Gods grace from hence at night I Will part,
From forth of Paris for to find this Dame,
This Dame that does procure my deadly smart:
Whom (both by heat and cold) until I meet,
In earth, in sea, in heaven, in hell I Will seek.
So saying, up he leapeth from his bed,
Where he long time wailing his hap had lain,
He longes for night and with that hope is fed,
Now here, now there, does run his troubled brain,
To stay so long great grief within him bred,
And now heel take this course, and now that same,
But th'euening had no sooner banished light,
But secretly in arms himself he dight.
He had not then his usual colors on,
For now in blackish purple he is clad,
Brave Briliadoro he does ride upon,
Whilst forth alone from Paris he goes sad,
Unknown to all that he away is gone,
For, for the nonce his flight conceald he had:
Heavy he went, often sighing with pale look,
And toward Ardenna, he his iorny took.
A worthy Knight, as first Defendant came,
His sky coullour'd shield a Moon of silver bore,
Lord of Bordello, Angelin by name,
A Peer of France, and one well tried before,
Whom Serpentine him self to meet does frame*
And that so swiftly as no wind is more:
On the other side, stout Angelino's pressed,
Him to encounter with his spear in wrest.
On breast plate the Defendant Serpentine
Does hit, but yet he is not stricken down,
Stooping low, himself whilst he saves fine,
Running against his foe with furious frown,
And on the face so strikes the Paladine,
As up his heels fly, and he falls on groun:
Whereat the people showt alowd and far,
Saying the conqueror is the Knight with Star.
Riccardo next pricked forward full of might,
And Duke he was of fruitful Normandy,
A golden Lion bare this warlike Knight
In bloody field, and runs as he would fly,
But Serpentine at shocke did hit him right,
(As he half way to meet him fast did hie,)
Giving to him so shrewde and dry a blow,
That he his head on grauel pitched below.
This, Balugant made not a little proud,
To see his son so bravely him besteares,
Now comes he whose target Chesse does shroud,
And on his Crest a golden crown he wears,
King Solomon rushing from forth the crowde,
Seeking his Rival whom he nothing fears:
But Serpentine a counterbuffe him gives,
As to the ground both horse and man he drives.
Astolfo then does take the golden Lance,
Which late Argalia left in Meadow green,
Three golden Leopards in Shield he does advance
In a Vermilion field, fair to be seen:
Well ran he, yet unhappy was his chance:
Under his Courser he o'rethrowne was cleene,
He lay for dead, nor could he see the light,
Besides struck out of joint was his leg right.
Sorry were all for this his Fortune hard,
And Serpentine as much grieude as the rest:
For in the shocke he thought him to have sparde,
But could not: so his horse him forward pressed:
The Duke (to his lodging borne) but badly farde,
Yet soon reuiude, for quickly he was dressed,
And ere it was long, so well he tended was,
His leg was well, himself too in good case.
Though Serpentine the Devil thus does play,
Yet will Ogier the Dane buckle with him:
He flies on horseback like the winds away,
When from the Sea it comes with a swing:
A Target blew he had displaying gay,
Whereon a Wedge of gold was painted trim,
A Basiliske like Serpent he did bear
Upon his Creast, in sign he naught did fear.
The Trumpets sound, the Knights set spurs to horse,
The One meeting the other with strange fury fierce:
Two claps of Thunder join not with such force:
Ogier his enemies saddle through does pierce,
That longer it could not uphold his corse,
The stroke was monstrous truth for to rehearse,
So as he backward from his horse does fall,
Down tumbles he on the earth with head and all.
Thus Conqueror of the Field Ogier became,
Which he against all Comers must defend:
King Ballugant looked red as fiery flame,
Because his Son had made so badde an end,
And he will try if he can take like shame;
And him the Dane likewise to ground does send:
His place then takes the youthful Isolere,
Strong made he was, and stowte himself did bear.
Brother he was to Ferraw, his green Shield
Three golden Moons did show, which there did stand:
Forward he pricks to make Ogier to yield,
But is in midst of Course by countermand
Most rudely thrown down flat upon the Field,
Ogier against him had so shrewde a hand:
So sore the stroke was, that for seven whole hours
He lay stark dead, bereft of vital powers.
Then Gu^lter of Mount-Leon took his place,
And to the ground (as the other were,) was sent:
A Dragon did his purple Target grace,
And in a golden Field the same was pent:
Brave Christian Barons (then Ogier straight says)
Let not our force against our selves be bent:
Let us encounter against the Saracins,
Else who so tryumphs, little honor wins.
Spinello (D'Alta Monte) was a Pagan,
And to King Charles his Court came for to try
His prowess, and his Azurde Shield was plain,
In which a golden Crown you might epsy:
Who soon unhorsed was by this worthy Dane:
Whom Mattalista follows suddenly;
Brother he was to Fiordispina fair,
And on his horse, himself he stoutly bare.
His Shield was party gold, and party black,
And on his Creast a Dragon green he gave:
Down from his Saddle fell he on his back,
For he no way himself as then could save.
Now coms Grandonio (who no force does lack)
God and Saint George help Ogier weilde his Staue,
Great need he has, for among the Pagans all,
Than he, there is none more valiant, or more tall.
This King in height most Giants huge did pass,
Armed upon a Steed of monstrous size,
Black as a Cole his Sable Target was,
Wherein Macon his God, was drawn in curious wise:
No Christian Knight durst once to be so rash,
Scarce for to look on him with open eyes.
Gano of Pontiers him no sooner saw,
But from the Field himself he does withdraw.
Macario of Vsana did the like:
So Pinabel, so The Earl of Alta foglia:
Falcon amongst the rest does shun his sight,
And longes till he is from him got away:
Only remains behind Griffon that Knight,
And he (perhaps too) against his will did stay,
His Honor or his Shame withheld him so,
Or else he saw not when the rest did go.
Mean time in Field this Pagan terrible
Takes on, as he a whirling Tempest were,
His Spear, for greatness does a Mast excel,
So great a force he able is to bear,
His Courser is as monstrous (truth to tell)
Which with his foot the hardest ground does tear,
He breaks the hardest stones, and as he praunceth,
He goes so swift, as the earth does shake and daunceth.
With fury thus against the Dane he blows,
Whose Target he in midst just does split:
Ogiers great fall, his wondrous might, well shows,
For horse and man he to the ground does hit.
Forth of the Field Duke Namo with him goes,
Carried in arms, (on horse he can not sit,)
Keeping his bed, till that a Month did pass,
Before his arm and breast well cured was.
Great was his hurt, and All full sorry are,
Except the Saracins, who did not grieve:
Granaonio threatening stands, and naught does care*
Turpin of Rana, yet at him does drive,
But is in midst of his Course down bare,
And doubtful it was, if he would die or live:
(Good Bishop) be from saddle his was thrust
So rudely, as he sore was brusde and crushed.
Astolfo now was from the Ladies come,
And did bestride a Palfrie white as snow,
To court them pleasantly he did not shun,
And (save his sword) unarmed he did go,
Amongst those Dames that glistered like the Sun,
So blyth and sportfull he himself did show:
But whilst he trifling with them stands thus:
Grandonio does Griffon from horseback push.
Griffon was of the Maganseses House,
His bluish Shield a Falcon white did hold:
The Giant now his plumes begins'to rowse,
What? Christians is your courage now so cold?
Dares none of you against me be venterous.
Guydo (this hearing) coms resolude most bold:
A Burgon was he, Lion black he gave
In golden Shield, and from his horse was drove.
So Angelero falls unhappily,
He gives a Dragon with a maidens head,
Auin, Auolio, Otton, B^rlingero be
One after the other from their horses sped,
An Eagle black they give in Crest to see,
I mean those first four Princes vanquished:)
But he that does this shield in azure wear,
With Cheste of gold, is Duke of rich Bauere.
Grandonio still increases in his might,
And Hugo of Marcelleis he does meet,
Whom dead he strikes, he him does hit so right,
Ricciardet and Alardo at his feet
He lays along; against Charles he railes with spite,
Christians with name of Cowardes he does greet:
To hear him rail thus Charles it much astouns,
But see, now Oliuere the Marquis comes.
The sun then clear did show again to shine,
And all seemde ioyefull of his entering,
The Marquis came in show gallant and fine,
Whom Charles went forth to meet, and welcome him,
The people cry, live long, a happy time,
(While all the field with trumpets tantara ring)
Viennas Marquis Oliver the good,
Grandonio takes his mast, and laughing stood.
And now with fury both together run,
Whilst the beholders be as in a maze,
To see the event that hereof's like to come,
So earnestly they on the Tiltters gaze,
In field amazed stand both all and some,
And who does best, each one to mark assayes:
When in the encounter Oliver does show,
Like Paladine, that he his play does know.
Nine plates of steel thick was Grandonios shield,
Which he did pierce and break by force insunder,
He burst his breast plate through though surely steelde,
The spears point into his body struck like thunder,
The Giant then his spear so sore does wielde,
As (that good Oliver slain was not) it was a wonder:
Seven yardes he from his saddle at the least,
With furious stroke from horse was dispossessed.
There Is none that sees him, but thinks he is dead,
For in the midst his helmet cloven was,
None wistly looks upon his face, or head,
But swears that life out of his Corse does pass,
O how with this was Charles daunted, and sed,
Ah worthy Baron gone art thou alas,
Chief honor of my Court, dear as my son,
Why suffers God such mischief to be done?
If insolent this Pagan was before,
He Is now so proud that scarce on feet he goes,
Now Peacocke like he calls and threatens sore,
Where are these brauing Palatines our foes?
White hearted liuered Knights, base cowardes more,
More then to bib and quaffe my cunning shows:
Valiant no doubt is this their TABLE ROVND,
It threatens much, yet none to fight are found*
King Pipins son, heating this foul disgrace,
And that his Court was made a scoff and play,
Is much incenst and troubled in his face,
And looking angry bout him, thus does say,
Where are they that should homage in this place
Do to me now? they now are gone away:
Where Is Began of Pontiers now? Rinaldo where?
Orlando stout? All Traitors, none appear.
Son of a Queen base got, I promise thee,
If ever I do meet with thee again,
With mine own hands soon strangled shall thou be,
Thus, and much more said angry Charlemaine,
Astolfo being behind him, this does see,
Unseen on horseback he goes back amain:
Saying unto himself, what though I die,
Yet I Will appear in field most valiantly.
Nor does he think that ever he shall find,
The luck to ding the Giant on the ground,
But for to show his good and houest mind
To his utmost power as he to Charles was bound,
(He bravely mounted) turns, his armor shinde
As ventrous Knight at all points at that stound:
Yet those that knew him cride, now God us save,
If we than this, no better Champion have.
He bows himself fore Charles in lowly guise,
My gracious Lord (says he) before them all,
To unhorse this Pagan proud in valiant wise
I venture will, if so you please I shall,
The King knitting his brows* with angry eyes
Says, go thy ways, no doubt a fray most tall
Thou Wilt make; then turning to them that stood by,
Now quoth he, we shall shamde be presently.
Astolfo threats, the Pagan at first sight
To take prisuer, and as his Gallie slave
To use him; and these words so much him spite,
As he is mad for fury, and does rave,
And in the next song I Will describe the^t fight,
If so your wonted patience I may have,
To daine to listen with your gentle ear,
Where wonders strange nere heard of you shall hear
THE THIRD BOOK OF Orlando Inamorato.
THE ARGUMENT.
Astolfo wins in field the Prize at last,
Yet he (through treason) is in prison laid,
Rinaldo Merlins Fountain strange does taste,
Where love he bare Angelica does fade,
Ferraw once more Angelica has out traste,
Kills him, and drownes him, (for such suit he made)
That done he meets Orlando and does fight,
With him for fair Angelica the bright.
LIGHT of mine eyes, LIFE'S spirit unto my Heart,
That makst my fearful Muse, to mount so hie,
Thy sunshine beams, a while on me revart,
Whilst I thy praises sing most worthily,
For thou alone true honor do impart,
Unto my Verse by virtue of thine eye:
Since, who of such a worthy story writes
As is thy self? LOVE (Poet-like) indites.
LOVE framde the Heavens, and Harmonies sweet ground,
Love made the world, of sauadge to be mild,
Love, first delightful Poetry out found,
Love, peace did breed, and bloody wars exilde;
Ah then, where first thou hurtst, heal thou the wound,
DAIZIE of CHESSHIRE, view my heavy plight,
Who am Loves MaRTIre, torturde day and night.
(If you remember) but even now I told,
How brave Astolfo in most scornful wise
Taunted the Pagan, saying (Sitra) be not so bold,
Left I thee send, where never more thou shall rise:
What though thy strength our Barons has controld*
Yet (Rascal) I Will thee learn another guise
When thou art in Gallie, and Giant, since I see
Thou art so strong, my chief Slave thou shall be.
Grandonio, who used others for to brave,
But never for to take such words of skorne,
Began to swell for anger and to rave
As troubled Sea, that swells high through storm
When winds do force the mounting billows wave,
And every Ship, by waters vnderborne:
Grandonio so does rage with fury lead,
Gnashing his teeth, and shaking of his head.
Like to a Snake, for anger he does hiss,
And with Astolfo longs to grapple feign,
His monstrous Club to take he does not miss,
Thinking most sure, therewith to be his bane,
Either to make him dead, the ground to kiss,
Or for to strike him through the midst in twain,
Or for to pull him from his Steed perforce,
And quarter him in four without remorce.
Thus coms the Pagan with this furious mind:
Astolfo turns to mere him in the face,
Pale looks he, and fearful his heart does find,
Yet willing more to die, then take disgrace:
And both incenst run swifter then the wind,
Meeeting in surie with a desperate pace:
Grandonio falls, but Judge you if you please,
If such a violent Fall was with his ease.
The People showte, making a Noise and cry,
As if the earth were firde, or Heaven should fall:
There Is none that this has marked with his eye,
But whoopes for Joy, as well the great as small:
Each one commendes him, and that worthylie,
Whilst that the Saracens are daunted all:
Th'empror seeing the Pagan where he lies,
Though he it sees, believes not his own eyes.
The Giant falling, fell on his left side,
Which was the cause the wound he had before
Took, through Vienna's Marquess valor tried,
Was hurt far worse, and opened now far more:
So as half dead, he on the ground did bide,
The English Duke had wounded him so sore:
Pouring out blood from out his corse so fast,
As scarce a fountain does forth water cast,
Some say Astolfo's valor made him bleed
With Counterbuffe, and therefore him they praise*
Other report the truth thereof indeed,
Some I, some no, each as him likes, says,
Grandonio was conuaid away on Steed,
And Astolf for this Blow full dearly pays:
For (in the end) the Paynim did him give
His deaths wound, nor himself did after live.
Astolfo in the Listes as Conqueror
Stands, and yet he doubts if he be so:
Two Knights there were yet of the Pagans power
Only, that had not tryde their force as tho,
Kings Sons they were of Chivalry the Flowe^
Giasart as Brown, Pyliaz Flaxen did show:
Giasarts Father all Arabia won,
Through force of Army his, which he overcome.
The Sire of Pyliaz, all Russia
Had seizde upon and got into his hand,
Besides he held much of Tartaria,
And unto Tana's Confines did command:
These twain (no longer hereon for to stay)
Ran with Astolfo, him for to withstand:
And to be brief, so fiercely he them met,
That both of them from off their horse he fette.
Mean time, one went to Gano, and him told,
Astolf, Grandonio had discomfited,
But that by him so brave a Pagan bold
Should foiled be, it will never sincke in his head,
He rather does in his opinion hold,
That some ill chance to the Gyant's happened,
Never believes he that Astolfo's able
Him to unhorse, he thinks, it is but a fable.
Herewith, he hopes the Honor of the day
To get, and of the Ioust the royal prise,
And for to show more brave in his array,
That greater Glory unto him might rise,
Seven Armed Earls with him he bringes away:
With these (All of his House) toward Charles he hies,
Whom for to pardon him in humble speech,
For his so late coming, he does beseech.
The Emperor little said, but what he meant
I know not, yet he showde to him good cheer:
This done, straight Gano to Astolfo sent,
That (since no Saracin more did appear)
To run with him, hee'lde not be discontent:
And since his Courage known was every where,
He should deny none, for more Honor grew
Still unto him, the more he did subdew.
Astolf, who of this speech conceiude the sense,
Said to the man that brought the Message had:
Tell Gano, that I make no difference
T'wixt Sarasin and him, he is so bad
A foe to God and to man's excellence:
A Traitorous Lolard, Villain fit for stab:
Come when he dare, no more I him esteem,
Then of a filthy doung-cart I would deem.
Gano the Earl hearing him brave him so,
Said little, but with choler burnt like fire,
In haste to meet Astolfo he does go,
And to himself says, I Will pay thee thy hire
Dogbolt; whom I am, I will make thee know,
When I shall thee unhorse and cast in mire.
And truth to say, he thought so to have done,
For he (before times) better then he had run.
Yet now he reckon did without his Host,
For Gano was unhorsed presently:
Macario, then Astolfo does accoste,
And he (falling) bears Gano company:
Wound^s, may it be, this Dolt over us should boste
And shame us thus? then Pinabell did cry,
Shall be Magansa's Princelike House thus foil?
And us of Honor and of Valor spoil?
Yet he is from saddle thrown about that place:
Nor think not, but Astolfo lays about,
Crying alowde, Where is this damned Race?
Flat on the ground I Will lay that cursed Rowt,
County Smerilio coms with Spear apace,
But Astolf flinges him groueling on his snowt:
Sore was he hurt, and forth from thence was led,
For which Gano was much discomfited.
Then Falcon said, can fortune be so blind,
That such an Ass as this and scoffing fool,
Should dare to have so brave resolved mind,
So many Knights by force to beat and school?
So saying, he himself most fast does bind
Within his saddle, nor can he recule,
This done, to find Astolff apace he comes,
Unhorsed he cannot be, whilst that he runs.
The Duke just in the face encounters him,
And with such force his spear against him does wielde,
As he does bow from horse, now out now in,
As though he strait should dead his Goast forth yield,
All look when he from horse would topple trim,
Whilst some epsy how bound he came to the field:
Wherewith they with a noise the air do fill,
Crying, the Traitors bound, the Dastard kill.
Away his friends him carry with great shame,
Yet greater is his wound an hundred fold,
Astolfo knowth not how this courage came,
Yet does he say with dauntlesse visage bold,
Come who so list, I Will learn him loosers game,
Though he be bound, his seat surer to hold,
A Cowarde I will chastise being bound,
Better then if he losed should be found.
Anselmo della Ripa, County vile,
Thinks (in him self) reuengement for to take,
For his friends shame, by some deceitful guile,
Which was as soon as Astolf forth did make,
To any one (on sudden) he the while
Unawares would set on him: Rinard does shake
His spear first against him, Anselm comes behind,
And Astolff on his feet to set does mind.
Astolf meets Rinard, whom from saddle bow,
He with his legs wide open, strikes on grass,
And being not yet well settled through the blow
He gave Rinard; Anselmo straight does pass
To him, and traitorously him down does throw,
Giving no warning that he coming was,
Persuading him it was chance, and not his will,
That he had proffered unto him this ill.
Glorious Astolfo lies all along
Upon the gravel, and imagine you,
If heavy he took not this monstrous wrong;
He starteth up, his sword from side he drew,
And laid about him among that traitrous throng,
Thinking to make some for their fault to rue:
Against Gano and his kin, he bravely fights,
And meeting Griffon, on the head him strikes.
And did he had, had not his helmet fine
Saude him as then, and now they all take heart,
For Gano now, Macario, Vgoline,
Think for that blow to make Astolfo smart,
But Namo, Turpin, and Ricardo at that time
Seeing the ods, begin to take his part:
Together now one against another runs,
Mean space King Pippins son amongst them comes.
All those he meets, he stiikes, now here, now there,
(For thirty pates he broken had at least,)
Quoth he, where is this Traitorous rebel? where?
That to disturb presumes my Royal Feast?
He rides amongst the thickst with tronchion spear,
Nor though his sword were drawn, his fury ceast:
And now each makes place forth'Emperer,
Either for honor, or that they him fear.
To Gano and Astolfo thus he spoke,
What quoile is this? think you you use me well?
But Griffon, whose sconce was well knocked and broke,
Before King Charles for Justice crying fell,
Sending forth scalding sighs from breast like smoke,
And Justice still, he forth aloude does yell:
Justice (my Liege) for in thy presence, I
Am set upon, and spoilde most traitorously.
My Gracious Lord, to me be but thus kind,
To know of these, who first began the fray,
And if by me this English man you find
Assailed to be first in any way,
I yield that Traitor-like you me shall bind,
And in this field that quartered be I may:
But if this ill I do endure (sauns cause)
Let him be punished, that thus breaks your laws.
Astolfo was so angry at this tale,
That he forgot Charles presence, and his Grace,
Villain quoth he, this shall thee small avail,
Thou art a Spawne sprung from that damned race,
Thy heart I Will have, else of my will I Will fail,
Before that thou shall get from forth this place:
Griffon says, do thy worst and do not spare,
Were I from hence, for thee small would I care.
But now my self to reason I submit,
Not to disgrace my Sovereign Prince at all,
The Duke replies, base Rascal think by wit,
And by device, that I thee suffer shall?
Charles hearing this, scarce on his horse could sit
He was so chaft, and thus to him does call:
By heaven, if better speech thou do not give,
I Will make the to repent whilst thou shall live.
Astolfo to these words lends little heed,
But uses him in terms most spightfully,
(As one that wronged was in very deed,
Though not the rest thereof could right descrie)
At last comes in treacherous Anselmo sly,
Whose sight in Astolff does fresh collar breed:
The English Dukt no sooner does him see,
But that he with his blade at him does flee.
And doubtless with that blow he had been slain,
Had not he saude bin by the Emperur:
But every one does now Astolfo blame,
And apprehended is he for this stur,
To prison by the furious rowt he is taken,
Since he Charles Royal anger durst incur:
There, for his rashness did he dearly pay,
Kept longer then he thought by many a day.
Where we will leave him since he lives well,
And better's then those wretched Lovers are,
Which for Angelica feel second hell,
And night and day (to find her) travel far,
Each took his seuerallway (by chance as fell)
And now be to Ardenna come with care,
The first that there ariude was Aymons son,
Thanks to his spurs, Baiardo well did run.
No sooner was this Baron in the wood,
But he about him looks every where,
Where he espies a Grove that shadowed stood,
Enuiron'd with a Cristall River clear,
The sight whereof to him did mickle good,
And therefore to the same he enters near,
Where, in the midst he found a fountain fair,
As never wit of man framde one so rare.
This Fountain more then wondrous for delight,
Was carude with Alabaster passing fine,
Set out with gold, adorning it so bright,
As all the Meadow Sun-like made to shine:
MERLIN it built, (a famous coniuring Wight)
Because worthy Sir Tristram at that time
Drinking thereof, should leave that lovely Queen,
Who was in the end his utter ruin seen.
But luckelesse Tristram (his chance was so badde)
Never to that Fountain could ariue (alas)
Though often to find it he did venture sad,
And bout the Country, for the same did pass.
Now this same Fountain such strange Nature had,
That whatsoever Knight ennamored was,
Drinking thereof, should Love from thought exile,
Forcing him hate whom he had loud ere while.
The Sun was at the highest, the day was hot,
When Prince Rinaldo hyes unto this place,
(Sweating through travel, and great thirst had got)
When as longing to drink in such a case,
He lights from horse, and drinking, it is his lot,
His Love, and dryness both away to chase:
For when he tasted had this water cold,
He straight forgate the Dame he loud of old,
And now he thinks, what base a thing it is,
A woman vain to follow and esteem:
Nor now, that Beauty, countes he such a Bliss,
Which whilom, more then humane he did deem:
He does Recant; his mind is far from this,
Such force in this so wondrous Water's seen:
And now his Thoughts so changed are of late,
He worse then Toade Angelica does hate.
Forth of this Wood he coms with s'dainfull mind,
Shaming to think upon his Follies past:
Whilst musing thus, a River he does find,
Whose cristall Stream runs smoothly, trickling fast,
Along whose banks all flowers by Natures kind
(As if the Spring had been in prime) were plast,
And over the Foorde for shadow there was seen,
The Beechen tree, the Pine, and Olive green.
This River called was the BROOK of LOVE,
Merlin had not inchaunted this (as yet)
Who drinks hereof, to Love it does him move,
His Heart must subject be to Fancies fit.
Many brave Knights, (unstaking) this did prove,
And many have been quite undone with it.
Rinaldo tasted not of this, for why?
He at the other Fountain drank before being dry.
Yet he so well this pleasant place does like,
As here a while he means to repose:
From horse he lights, and him vnbridles quite,
(And for to feed Bayardo) lettes him lose:
Mean time in thickest shade this wearied Knight
(Not thinking any thing) to slumber goes:
Sleep does our Baron, and does take a nappe:
But now behold what Fortune did him hap.
After Angelica away did fly,
Where Ferraw with her Brother fought at furst,
She on this River chaunst, and being dry,
Did light and drank thereof to staunch her thurst:
But now (sweet Ladies) mark how worthily,
LOVE tamed that proud heart of hers so cursed:
No sooner she this Knight saw on the grass,
But that ennamored straight of him she was.
Her Palfrie white she to the Pine does rain,
And to Rinaldo stealing, comes near,
Gazing on him whose sight did breed her pain,
Nor has she power, one foot from thence to steer:
Within this Meadow did there store remain
Of Lillies, and of Roses every where;
These with her snowie hands she plucks apace,
Flinging them all upon Mount Albons face.
Wherewith he wakes, and she perceiving this,
Smiling, salutes him in most lovely wise,
Yet he her thanketh not, nor her does kiss,
But takes his horse, and quickly from her flies,
Her wooing words, deserved favor miss:
She him entreats to stay, but he dentes;
As he were mad, he flings from out the Wood:
And after him she spurs with gallop good.
She follows him, and after him does cry;
Ah stay sweet Knight, a little while but stay:
Why do thou from me (who thee follows) fly?
Ah do not her, that holds thee dear, thus slay:
I am not Ginamon of Baion I,
Who thee to kill in Forest did assay:
No Gano, nor Macario false that be,
Them and their Race I hate, so, love I thee.
More then my soul I swear that I thee love:
Yet do sthou fly from me with skornefull hate:
Look but once back, may be, I may thee move:
See if my face can thee so fearful make.
To hurt thy self, through fury do not prove:
This VVood is dangerous, and thou harm may take:
Ah, if thou love me, go a little safter:
And thee to please, I Will not so fast come after.
For (...) to thee any mischaunce should come,
Whilst thus thou headlong rid'st, or to thy Steed,
Small should I joy, my life as then were done,
And for thy hurt, my heart to death would bleed:
Turn back at last, my sight still do not shun:
Think whom I am, I merit better meede:
My Beautie's such, as none ought for to flee:
Rather if I fled, thou should follow me.
Thou have not slept enough, then light on grown,
And for thee I Will provide a Princely Bed,
My dainty Corse shall be thy Cowch of down,
My Skin shall serve for finest sheets in stedde:
Where thou, over ears, thy selte with joy may drown,
My soft Breasts, pillowes shall be for thy head:
Whilst Nymphs and Graces shall about thee keep,
With heavenly Music lulling thee asleep.
With such sweet sugared words the Maid entreates,
Running still after him, but all in vain:
Bayardo swift, the way like wind forth breaks,
Carrying his Master out from Woddie plain:
The Lady wearied, now her self down seats,
Wringing her hands, and crying out amain,
Upon the Heavens and stars she often does call;
Cruel she terms them, and unlucky all.
But she Rina'do does above the rest
More cruel call, and that in piteous wise:
Who would once think (says she) that in that breast?
In those fair looks of his no kindness lies?
Yet I of wit am not so dispossessed,
But that I know for him I am no Prize:
I have not worth enough him for to move:
Yet ought he not hate me, though he will not love.
At least he might have given me some leave,
For to have gazde upon his manly face,
And so perhapps I less then shoulden grieve,
If he had shewde me this small tiny grace,
I see by loving I my woes thread weaue,
"But where Love is, there Reason takes no place:
Cruel he is, a Cho^le, hard hearted still,
Yet what so ere he is, I love him will.
Thus wailing she tears some her eyes forth powers,
And turning to the Beech where (fore) he lay,
Thrice happy Herbs, and treble blessed Flowers,
That touched so sweet a Countnance she does say,
Far better is your fortune then is ours,
Since you have kissed whom not once touch I may,
Ah might I (as you had) such favor found,
I willing would be dead, low in the ground.
So saying, from her Palfray passing white
The Lady does dismount, and comes on ground,
And for to kiss those flowers she takes delight,
Which by the place where Rinald lay she found,
Thinking her heat to lessen by that sight,
When she therewith more deadly makes her wound:
She thinks being there less sorrows will her cumber,
Wherewith she lays her down and there does slumber,
So sweetly sleeps she, as she seems to smile,
And in her dream Rinaldo often dothcall
Whilst to embrace him, she her arms the while,
Stretches out wide, and sudden wakes withal;
But when she sees how fancies her beguile,
She pitious weeps, and tears like pearl lets fall,
Sighing, her stainles womb does pant and move,
Period of Joy, round Center of sweet Love.
(CHASTE CRVEL CHOICE) I know to you it is g^ason,
That yet Gradasso's not on Charles his Coaste
In all this while, you marvel what is the reason,
But not above three days he will stay at most,
And now to Spain, his ships are come in season,
But I must yet leave him and all his Host:
First will I tell you of our wandering Knights,
And first of Ferraw and his dangerous fights,
He walks searching up and down the Wood,
And mad for anger wellnie does appear,
Anger and Louelo heaten have his blood,
As he his life no more steemes then a hear,
Less he Argalia with his Armor good,
Or his fair Sister find a way to bear,
Might he but of her Brother be revenged,
He thinks his grief the sooner would be ended.
And whilst his way on horsbacke he does keep,
Thus thinking, and does watch him to epsy,
He sees whereas in shade a Knight does sleep,
And that Argalia it is does soon descrie,
Unto whose Steed Ferraw does softlly creep,
Being tide to a tree, him losing presently:
Then with a Bough he keeps revel rout,
Coursing the Gelding all the wood throughout.
That done, he to a Bay his own horse ties,
Under the shade of which he sits him down,
Expecting when Argalia would arise,
And hardly he forbeares with fretfull frown,
From taking sweet revenge in wrathful wise,
Yet he so much tenders his own Renown,
Although he might, he will no vantage take,
No not so much, as him from sleep to wake.
And long it was not, but wake did the Knight,
Who missing strait his Palfrie, chaseth sore,
You may imagine how it did him spite,
Since he upon his feet must go therefore:
But Ferraw soon appears in his sight,
Saying (Sir) it is in Vain, then grieve no more:
For thou or I must die here at this time,
Who scapes of us, shall have this horse of mine.
I let thine lose, lest thou should run thy way,
Again, and so escape from hence, and flee,
Therefore thy utmost force against me aslay;
Once, against all honesty thou got'st from me,
But for thy falsenes now I will thee pay,
Not on thy word, I more will credit thee:
Need have thou to bestirre thy self then brave,
If thou do mean thy life (condemnd) to save.
I Will not deny (replide Argalia) here,
But that in flying, I my self forgot,
But by this Arm and Heart of mine I swear,
For wound or shame, the fight I shunned not,
Nor that I wearied was, or thee did fear,
Only my Sisters love did make this blot,
Against my Promise from thee then to go,
My dearest Sister, me entreated so.
Then take it as thou list, and as thou please,
I nothing doubt but thou thy match shall miss,
It Is in thy Choice, if thou will war or peace,
Thou know ^ thee have tried before ere this,
And saying so, Argalia bold did cease,
But Ferraw resolute to combat is:
Fiercely he cries, come leave thy foolish charming,
Look to thy self, and say I give thee warning.
Together then they fly like Dragons fierce,
With fury great, and with a furious force,
Their hugie strokes the truth for to rehearse,
More then a mile were heard without remorce,
Argalia though he Ferraws body pierce
Cannot, yet hopes to bombast well his corse,
Saying, I doubt me him I cannot kill,
Yet on the ground for dead, I lay him will.
Thus thinking, he with his ore-heauie wait,
To load his bones, with fury toward him came,
But Ferraw first into him leapeth strait,
And so to graple they begin amain,
Argalia is the stronger, but in slaight
And quicknes Ferraw best is of the twain:
But in the end, though long it were before,
Ferraw, has under him Argalia bore.
Yet he as one that was surpassing strong,
So hard gripes Ferraw that he cannot get
Away from him, whilst (tumbling him along,)
He with his Gantlet, all his face sore beat,
Ferraw this feeling, his Dag placed not wrong,
For where he was vnarmde, there it he set,
Into his groine it passt through guts and all,
(Alack that such hard hap should him befall.)
For whilst this young man liude, a brauer knight,
Nor courteous more did ever live on earth,
Only the Christian faith he wanted right,
And now he sees he scarce can draw his breath,
Wherefore he turns in heavy dying plight,
And speaks to Ferraw thus before his death:
One only Boon let me entreat of thee,
Since now my soul, is fleeting hence from me.
This which I crave, I beg (for Knightship thine,)
(As thou a brave and courteous Baron art)
That me with all this Armor that is mine,
Thou will in deep'st of River next imparte,
Lest any chauncing on this Armor fine
Should say, (as if I wanted force or heart,)
Worse then a Coward was this Knight in field,
That (armed thus) himself would let be killed.
Ferraw hereat, for pity mild does weep,
Like thawing Ice that meltes against warm Sun,
And to Argalia says: dear Baron sweet,
Heavens know how I do grieve at this is done:
And how I for the same do sorrow deep,
It Was Fate (not want of force) thou could not shun:
Only for Honor, I with thee did try,
It Was not thy Death I sought, but Victory.
Let this suffice, I Will yield to thy demand,
And on my faith to keep the same I swear:
In sign whereof, I give to thee my hand:
Then nothing doubt hereof, (most valiant Peer)
But since now my abode's in Christian Land,
And that to be endangered I do fear
Being a stranger, if they should me know,
(Kind Baron) but this favor to me show.
Lend me thy Helm, which may stand me in stead,
(But for four days,) and then I Will drown the same,
Argalia dying, lists up his head,
Showing, he this request to grant did daine:
Ferraw stands by him till his breath's forth fled,
Weeping upon his liuelesse Corse amain;
And seeing him as cold as any stone,
He him embraces, making piteous moan.
That done, he (fighing) does him soon unarm,
And on his own head quickly puts on
The trusty Helmet, made by cunning Charm,
The Creast he leaves that was the same upon,
Because he (as unknown) would ride sauns harm;
He takes the Corse up, and away is gone
With it, which he unto next River brings,
Where into the midst, Argalia deep he flings.
And looking after him a pretty while,
Heavy and sad, from thence he forward wends:
But to Orlando now I Will turn my style,
Who searching in that Desert his time spends,
And yet Angelica does him beguile,
For which as wondrous wroth, he sighs forth sends:
And whilst he sought this Damsel with great care,
He coms upon her ere he is aware.
So sweetly lay she sleeping on the ground,
So lovely, and with such a pleasing grace,
As if the flowers had sproung about her round,
And that clear Brook had parlde of Love apace*
So fair a Creature waking never was found,
Never was any borne with such a face:
The glorious Sun, to her, seemde but a star:
She peerless was, All came behind her far.
The staring County pleasure great does take,
Standing as if he were deep in a maze,
Nor, for his life, once dares her to wake:
Whilst earnestly he on her still does gaze,
And to himself he whispering softly spoke:
Am I here, or in Paradise, he shyes?
Sure I her see, Oh no, I dream, Alas?
This is a Dream, and for a Dream must pass.
Thus looking on her, spends (...)
And to no end stands whispering all in vain:
(Poor Soul) he better far knows how to fight,
Then Ladies fair with Love to entertain.
"For who finds Time and cannot take it right,
Vnworthie's of such fortune and such game,
As to him hapt, who much himself did wrong,
Loosing sweet sport with gazing ouer-long.
"The Eye was made, rare Beauty to admire,
And (as an Object sweet) presents the same
To Fancy, Fancy straight the Heart on fire
"Does set, which seeks by means it to obtain:
The Fruits of Beauty to enjoy, more does requuire
Then looking on: To look on is small gain;
Unworthy he, to tread Loves dainty Maze,
That might be dallying, and yet idly stays.
Now Ferraw chaunst by hap to come that way,
Stumbling upon that River and the Meade,
And seeing there Orlando for to stay,
(Although Orlando he knew not indeed)
He wondered why he stood so at a Bay:
But when he of the Lady had took heed,
He presently did call her to his mind,
And glad he was, that he her so did find.
He surely thought, and did for certain hold,
This Knight (as Guardian) for to watch her was,
Wherewith, he with audacious voice and bold,
Turning to him, speaks thus to him over rash:
This is my Wench, already bought and sold,
If thou be wise, away from hence soon pass:
Leave me the Lady, or else lose thy life.
Else shall thou win her from me by mere strife.
(...) now too late begins to fret,
Seeing how he was troubled in his Joy:
Knight, quoth he, Hence away I pray thee get,
And seek not wilfully thine own annoy,
For I swear, never my mind was willing set
To iniute any, no, not the least boy:
But if thou here do bide, then against my will
Thou Wilt urge me so, as needs I must thee kill.
Why then I see, or thou or I must part
(As by thy speech I gather) now from hence,
But I Will assure thee once more, I Will not start,
And thou too weak art for me in defense,
For were a fire here, I (spite of thy heart)
Would throw thee in, before thou have my Wench:
Get thee then gone, whilst that thy bones be whole:
Thus Ferraw ( Brave like) does deal his dole.
Herewith the Earl incenst, waxt pale and wan,
His face did look as red as crimsen blood:
I am Orlando (says he) nor for any man
I care; although a World against me stood:
And thou as able art me to withstan,
As is a child newborn, or stock of Wood:
Base Ribald, son to a whore, unfit to breathe:
So saying, he Durindana does vnsheathe.
And now begins the greatest Battle fierce,
That ever fought was twixt two Knights of yore:
Their trenchant blades, their strongest armor pierce,
Haste to dispatch does make them strive the more,
One against the other, does their force reuerse,
And well they saw it did import them sore:
For should the Damsel once awake from sleep,
It was in vain for them this stir to keep.
And too too soon she waked for their ill,
Greatly amazed these strange sights to see,
Hewne harness all the meddow ore to fill,
And in so dangerous a fight to be,
Her Courser she leaps on with great good will,
Leaving them as they would for to agree:
Out of the wood from them she takes her flight,
Which when Orlando sees, he stays to fight.
Brave Knight, quoth he, vouchsafe now for this time,
This battle to defer in courtesy,
That I may follow after Lady mine,
And bound to thee I shall be wonderously,
For it is of folly great no little sign
For us to buckle thus, and know not why:
She Is gone for whom this quarrel we maintain,
Then truce, that I may after her amain.
Not so, says Ferraw bold, shaking his head,
For if of fighting now thou weary art,
The Dame by thee must be abandoned,
For this for certain I to thee imparte,
Only of one she must be followed;
As long as I have any power in heart,
And if I thee overcome, then I Will be he,
If me thou kil'st I Will leave my right to thee.
By Christ then I swear Orlando then does say,
By coping thus with me, thou small shall get:
Never was fought on earth so strange a fray,
As in the Canto following down I Will set,
Still are they bent their valor to assay,
Orlando that he thus is crossed does fret,
And think not but hot Ferraw chafes as fast:
But here a while my ship shall Anchor cast.
The Conclusion.
Fair Shadow of a Substance passing Fair,
The Picture of my Mistress Excellence,
Receive these lines impolished and bare,
For unto thee, and none else are they meant,
Daine to accept them what so e're they are,
Since for thy sake, few idle hours I spent:
So cristall-like still clear may run thy BROOK,
Worthy on whom, all eyes may gaze and look.
The time may come (Ah that t'wold not be long)
If my dread ALBA, leave in cruel wise,
My harmless heart (never stainde for faith) to wrong,
My Muse now dead, again to life shall rise,
Singing anew, ORLADOS lovely song,
Through virtue of those Diamond sparks, her eyes,
When her and thee LOVES TWINS borne of Delight,
I Will (Herrald-like) display, in Coullours right.
Il Disgratiato. R. T. G.

FINIS.

