A SHORT AND PRIVATE Discourse between Mr. BOLTON and one M. S. concerning
Usury.

Published by E. B. by Mr. BOLTONS own Copy.

DEVT. 23. 19. Thou shall not lend upon Usury to thy Brother.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER dwelling in Blacke-Friers, 1637.

To the Reader.
LOve (says the Wisest of Cant. 8. 6.
men) is as strong as death, the importuning whereof has made me break open
those bars and once more awaken the spirit of M. Bolton, by exposing to
public view these papers of his, written with his own hand, for the
convincing of the world of that profitable and wealthy sin of Usury; wherein
though he and others have bestowed much pains: Yet so sweet is the
gainefullnesse of that craft, as that it will never receive a final conviction
till the general judgment.

This small Tract was written to one M. S. a man of no great note, and of less
learning, occasioned upon a quarrel (...) took at a Sermon of his preached
against Usury, which afterward brake forth into a set battle, though it
prooved impar congressus to M. S. who by challenging M. Bolton, thrust himself
upon the greatest infelicity of war, as first to be disarmed, and afterward
to be killed in the field with his own weapons.

The gain that M. S. made by that Silver Acts 19. 24.
shrine, whetted his invention to maintain by humane argument, what he was
loath to part with by divine commandment.

Had this Author lived, it was his purpose to have made this little Tract of
Usury a complete Treatise, by stating the Question, by distinguishing it from
other contracts and bargains that are common amongst men (which though they
equal that other contract by Usury in point of gain, yet do not participate
with it in point of Crime) by handling the many cases of conscience touching
the point of restitution, wherein I know he was acquainted with many rare
experimen^s.

But death which determined his days, put an end to this labor. So that I now
present it to the Reader as I find it in his own copy without addition or
alteration, which can hardly be done to any thing of his without wrong to the
Work. Neither should I (had it been feosable) have given way unto it. For I
had rather put any imperfect work of his upon the Charity of the world, which
it usually affoords to such interceptions by death, then abuse it, or the trust
reposed in me, by publishing under his name any counterfeit stuff.

In this little Work I desire to put the Reader in mind of one or two things
remarkable in this Author. The earnest indignation of his spirit against any
manner of sin, especially gross sin as this of Usury. And then his sweet
melting and compassionate heart in freeing men from it, which if all other
instances which might be given of him in this kind should be lost and perish.
This one passage of his written in the last work that ever he put out, and
uttered a little before his death would make it good. For having in that book
Instructions for comforting afflicted consciences. page 108. etc. usque page 130.
proposed twenty considerations to keep men from sin (the best that ever I
read) He thus in conclusion breaths out his affectionate spirit, page 130. Now
my most thirsty desire and earnest entreaty is, that every one into whose hands
by Gods providence this book of mine shall fall, after the perusal of them,
would pause a while upon purpose that he may more solemnly vow and resolve,
that ever hereafter when he shall be set upon and assaulted by allurement unto
any sin, he will first have recourse unto these twenty considerations I have
here recommended to him to help in such cases, and with a punctual
seriousness let them sink into his heart before he proceed and pollute
himself. I could be content, if it were pleasing unto God, that these lines
which thou now read were writ with the warmest blood in my heart, to
represent unto thine eye the dear affectionatenesse of my soul for thy
spiritual and eternal good, so that thou would be thoroughly persuaded, and
now before thou pass any further sincerely promise so to do. So that I may as
truly say of him as was once said of Anselme, Nihil De vita Anselmi lib. 2. in
Oper Ans.
in mundo quantum peccare timebat, He feared nothing in the world so much as
sin.

Compare these times and the want of such a man in them, and then count how
invaluable his loss is. For so highly was he esteemed in that Country where
he bestowed his Ministerial pains, that many of his hearers who beheld his
white hairs could point at him, and say with that famous Leontius, That when
Sozem. Hist. Lib. 3.
that Snow melted there would be a flood: And so it prooved; For I dare boldly
write it, There was not a Minister in Norhampton-shire that ever lived there
more desired, or dyed more lamented.

I will look no further into his quiet grave, I only desire my Reader kindly
to accept of this work for the Authors sake who meant it much better. And for
my sake who merely for the Readers good have undergone the pains to present
it as it is. This is but Justice and all the reward I look for,

Middle Temple May 22. 1637. EDWARD BAGSHAVVE.

A SHORT AND PRIVATE Discourse between Mr. BOLTON and one M.S. concerning
Usury.
IT seems M. S. Saint Austin is in some request with you; for you place Him in
the Front of your Treatise, which you might easily have contrived into a few
lines, telling us: so says Jewel, Perkins, etc. in such a Book, such a page:
But will you stand to that Ancient Fathers Authority in your Point of Usury?
Hear Him I pray you: In Psalm. 36. Nolo sit is faeneratores, and ideo nolo,
quia Deus non vult. I would not have you to be Usurers, and therefore I would
not have you to be so, because GOD would not have you to be so. A little after:
Vnde apparet Deum hoc nolle? Dictum est alio loco. Qui pecuniam suam non dedit
ad Vsuram. Et quam detestabile sit, and quam odiosum, quam execrandum, puto
quia and ipsi faeneratores noverunt. How appears it, that GOD would not have
you to be Usurers? It is said in another place. He that puts not His money
to Usury. How detestable a thing it is, to give money upon Usury, how odious,
how execrable, I suppose, the Usurers themselves are not ignorant. And upon
Psalm. 128. Audent etiam faeneratores dicere non habeo aliud unde vivam. Hoc
mihi and latro diceret, deprehensus in fa^ce, etc. -- Hoc mihi and leno diceret
emens puellas ad prostitutionem, etc. The Usurers also, says Saint Austin,
dare say, they have not whereupon else to live: so (says He) may the Robbers
say, taken in the Thieves Haunt, etc. -- So may the Bawd say, who buyeth young
Women for prostitution, etc.

Or will you stand to the judgment of those Worthy Men, (for so you call them
at the bottom of your first page) which Saint Austin produced against Julian?
Hear them also. Saint Basil: in Psalm. 14. An ignoras, inquit, quod major tibi
peccatorum exurgat acervus, quam sit accessus opum, quem ex usuris venaris?
Know Thou not, that a greater heap of sins grows upon Thee, then is the
accession of riches, which thou hunts after by Usury. Saint Gregory Hom 4. in
Ecclesiast. Aiatis, inquit, dixit Deus; Crescite and multiplicamini: Auri autem
faetus, nempe faenus, ex quonam consistit matrimonio? etc. -- Hic est ille
partus, quem parturit qui them avaritia, parit autem iniquitas, and
obstetricatur inhumanitas. This is that young One (speaking of usury) with
which covetousness travailes; Iniquity brings forth; and Inhumanity plays the
Midwife.

Saint Ambrose, an other of those Worthy Men, has detested and discoursed
against usury very excellently, and eloquently in a whole Book de Tobia: in
the 9. Chap. whereof, He compares the Devil and an Usurer together. Chap. 14.
Silicitum est: cur vocabulum refugis? cur velamen obteris? Si illicitum est:
cur incrementum requiris? If usury be lawful, why do Thou decline the name?
Why puts Thou a veil over it? If it be unlawful, why receivest Thou any
increase?

Saint Hierom, In Psalm. 54. In lege usurae accipi prohibentur. Vsura est, plus
accipere, quam dare. Taking of usury is forbidden in the Law. And usury is to
take more, then was given. And in Ezekiel. Chap. 18. page 538. Repetens ab his
quibus tribuit, (meaning in the case of usury) amplius quam dederat, vivere non
poterit, sed in suo sanguine morietur. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Mat. page 38. Nihil
praesenti usura turpius, nihilque crudelius. Si quidem hujusmodi faenerator
negotiatur discrimina, and uberiores (ut putat) quaestus de alterius
infaelicitate consequitur, atque insuper quasi pietatis mercedem reposcit,
velut metuens ne immisericors fore videatur: cum profecto pretextu miserendi,
atque opem ferendi, majorem misero foveam crudelitatis effoderit, speciejuvandi
atterens inopem, ac manum porrigendo deijciens: and quasi inportum, ex
tempestate suscipiens, sed improviso turbine in multo magis crudele naufragium,
velut inter scopulos, ac latentia saxa demergens.

I have given you a taste of those Worthy Men, how worthily, They cut the
throat of your usury. I might quote many more of the Fathers to the same
purpose: but that it is not my purpose, but only to let you seee how you have
wounded your self at unawares, by writing those passages out of Saint Austin.
I mean in this respect: As Julian the Pelagian became Saint Austins and their
Opposite, in Point of Pelagianisme: So you prove Opposite to Austin and the
same Worthies in Point of Usury.

But you have, as you suppose, some late Divines on your side. And I will also
suppose so for the present: And oppose against them three hundred and
eighteen, the learnedest and greatest Divines in the whole Christian world,
congregated at Nicaea in the more Of whom Beza somewhere professes, that the
Sun never beheld a more divine meeting since the Apostles times.
pure and primitive times, See the same also in corrupter Times. Wet. Book page
61.
In the year of our Lord 325. or thereabouts condemning usury, from those
words Psalm. 15. Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad usuram: He that puts not His
money out to usury. Can. 18. I could name them every One unto you, and so make
a far larger Catalogue then yours. For here are 300. odds. Yours being but
18. Nay in a word; for any thing I can learn, or know, I may oppose in this
Point all other Counsels, that ever mentioned it, Fathers, all the Learned of
former Ages, the whole Current of the Christian World from CHRIST unto our age.
None of which have stood for Usury, for the space of fifteen hundred years
after CHRIST.

But these, you will say, are Humane authorities. And so are yours. Yet mark
the odds. I oppose to your few supposed Patrons of Usury of late times, the
general judgment of the Church for this fifteen hundred years. For the
covetousness of these times has made a controversy, which in former ages was
never doubted of. (...) page 7^.
Nay, (I imagine you know who has made it good) Authority of all sorts,
divine, and humane; Ecclesiastical, and profane; natural, and moral: Of all
Ages, old, new, midling: Of all Churches, Primitive, Roman, Reformed: Of all
Commonweals, Jewish, Christian, Heathenish: Of all Laws, Foreign and
Domestical.

Nay M. S. Will you hear the words of one of your own Men, whom you muster up
in your Catalogue as One of yours: I mean B. Jewel. These are his words: upon
1 Thessalonians. Chap. 3. ver. 6. page 80. But what speak I, says He, of the ancient
Fathers of the Church? (having produced many against Usury) There was never any
Religion, nor sect, nor state, nor degree, nor Profession of men, but they have
disliked it: Usury sc. Philosophers, Greeks, Latins, Lawyers, Divines,
Catholics, Heretics: All tongues and Nations have ever thought an Usurer as
dangerous, as a Thief. The very sense of nature prooveth it to be so. If the
stones could speak, they would say as much. These are the very words of One,
whom you pretend to be on your side.

But let us come to the Scriptures. And dare you indeed M. S. stand to the
trial of that pure and Heavenly Touchstone?

Consider then these places:

Exodus 12. 25. Levit. 25. 35, 36. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.

Psalm. 15. 5. Ezekiel. 18. 13, 17. And 22. 12.

Pro. 28. 8. Luke 6. 35.

Now M. S. against these many Places condemning Usury; bring you so much as
One, to allow it. You are not able to bring One rightly understood. Here is
then as great odds in Divine, as Humane Authorities. What will you do now?
Fall to your shifts.

In the Scriptures, say you,

1. Mention is made of the poor expressly; Ob. 1.
and therefore you conceive, and conclude, that if you forbear the Poor, you
may be an Usurer to the Rich. And for this purpose Usurers urge Exodus 22. 25.
Levit. 25. 35.

1. May you not M. S. as well reason thus from Answ. 1.
ver. 22. of the same Chap. Thou shall not afflict any Widow or Fatherless
Child: Here mention is only made of the Widow and Fatherless: therefore, if
these be forborne, Thou may afflict a married woman, or a child that has a
Father? May you not by the like reason prove it no sin to rob a rich Man:
because Prove. 22. 22. It is said: Rob not the poor, because He is poor. Then
all robbery is not forbidden, but only that toward the poor, (may you say)
and therefore we may rob the rich, because He is rich, and may well spare it?
You may clearly see the poorness and weakness of your collection, by these
three absurd parallel inconsequences.

Moses forbids to oppress an hired servant, that is poor and needy: Deuteronomy.
24. 14. therefore, if He be rich and wealthy, you may oppress Him. This is
Usurers Logique. See Psalm. 82. 3, 4.

2. In other places of Scripture, as Psalm. 15. 5. Ezekiel. 18. 13, 17. And Chap.
22. 12. Prove. 28. 8. Which are as it were Commentaries, and Expositions of the
Law, there is no mention of the poor, but Usury is absolutely forbidden
without respect of Persons. Nay to prevent this shift, and to demonstrate this
evasion to be very frivolous. In the very Text Deuteronomy. 2^. 19. there is no
mention of the poor at all, but the Law is delivered in general terms: Thou
shall not lend upon Usury to thy Brother. Now He is your Brother whether He be
rich or poor. The partition wall is now taken away, and both Jew and Gentile,
rich and poor are Brethren; and therefore we must exact Usury of none, except
we would be worse then Jews. Our Savior Christ Luke 6. 34. gives this
testimony to the very sinners of His time amongst the Jews, that they would
lend One unto an Other, that they might receive so much, as they lent. And
therefore not so much, as the least Usury was lawful toward a Brother,
whether He were poor or rich. If the Scriptures had put such a difference
between the poor and the rich, as between the Israelite and Cananite: To the
rich thou may; but to the poor Thou shall not lend upon Usury: Then the case
were clear. But Deuteronomy. 23. 19, 20. GOD makes opposition, not between the poor
and the rich: but between an Israelite and Cananite. For by stranger in that
Place, is meant the Hittites, the Gergashites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the
Perisites, the Hivites and Jebusites, and no other stranger as may be
collected, Levit. 25. 35. So also does Saint Ambrose De Tobia, cap. 15. Paulus
Fagius Annot. in Called. Paraphras. in Deuteronomy. 23. 20. See Fenton page 45.
Iun. Annot. Ibid. expound it. What these the Jews were commanded to destroy,
Deuteronomy. 7. 12. And Usury was as teeth given them, and allowed by GOD to eat them
up withal: Whence that of Saint Ambrose De Tobia, cap. 15. Ab hoc usuram
exige, quem non sit crimen occidere. See thou a man, whom Thou may lawfully
kill? take use of Him, but not of thy Brother.

3. In the laws of Usury, and other prohibitions of oppression, express
mention is made of the poor and helpless, Because 1. The poor are soonest,
and easiest oppressed of the Rich; as the lowest hedge is oftnest stepped over.
2. It is a more grievous sin to oppress the Poor. 3. Those only who have
need, have just occasion to borrow.

4. Shall a special Instance in some one Object, which makes the sin
forbidden extremely hateful, abridge and restrain the generality of a law?
Will the exageration of a sin in the highest degree make all those actions no
sin, which come not to that degree? Because it is an heinous offense to
steal a Cow from a poor man, is it not a sin to steal a Sheep from a rich
man, that can spare it full well, and perhaps never miss it?

5. Nay M. S. will you stand in this exception to the verdict of your own
Witness in the very Point for which you produce Him; I mean of the rarest
Jewel, that ever the English Church enjoyed. These are His words upon 1 Thessalonians.
Chap. 3. page 86.

Thus much says He, I thought expedient to speak of the loathsome, and foul
Trade of Usury -- I call GOD for a record unto my soul, I have not decived
you, I have spoken unto you the truth. If I be deceived in this matter, O GOD
Thou have deceived me. Thy word is plain. Thou say: Thou shall take no
Usury. Thou say, He that takes increase shall not live. What am I, that I
should hide the words of my GOD, or keep them back from the hearing of this
people. The learned old Fathers taught us, It is no more lawful to take Usury
of our Brother, then it is to kill our Brother, etc. Mark the last words. And
then look back, upon page 78. lin. 22. Where He says: He is thy Brother,
whether he be poor, or rich: And then conclude plainly, that the worthiest of
your pretended Patrons, condemns Usury-taking, either of rich or poor.

Aspidis morsui similis est pecunia usuraria. Qui ab Aspide percutitur quasi
delectatus Chrysostom. Hom. 12. Open. imper.
vadit in somnum, and sic per suavitatem soporis moritur. He that is bitten by
Usury, (says Chrysostom) is as He, that is stung of a Serpent: it lulls Him
asleep so sweetly and secretly, that the poor man is undone before he be
aware. 6. If Usury find a man rich, Hence that of Iunius. Nos itaque damnandam
esse, and intoleranda^ omnem Usuram non possumus adfirmare, sed eam solum quae
pauperes, egentes opprimit, aut pauperes facit. Appen. ad Expl. Levit. page 115.
yet it brings with it a pair of Canniballs chops, and many cruel teeth, to
eat out the very Heart of His estate, except He cunningly heal Himself by
some other covetous way, or unconscionable course. Hence it is that Saint
Chrysostom compares Usury to an Aspe, which together with the poison infufes a
delightful sleep, but in that sweet insensiblenesse takes away life: So the
Usurers money refreshes for a time, but by little, and little, sucks out the
very life-bloud of a man's estate. And that of Saint Basil to to those, that
objected, That many by the employment of money borrowed upon Usury, grew rich:
But I think, (...) Basil, Hom adu. Usur.
more says He, have come to the Halter. His meaning is, by paying Usury they
have grown poor, and so fallen a stealing, and at last come to hanging. To
speak more fitly to these sins: But I think more have prooved Bankerupts.
And again, How many of your Usurers are free lenders to the poor, except it
be in cunning, out of a deep Hypocrisy to color their usurious cruelty?

7. If the law of lending to the poor, without usury, should infer the
lawfullnesse of lending to the rich upon usury: How should GODS purpose in
those places, for the benefit of the poor have place? Because by this means,
it would come to pass, that the poor should very hardly, or not borrow at
all. For how few would lend to the poor for nothing, when as they might
lawfully lend to the rich upon usury. Now it were better for the poor, that He
might borrow upon Usury, then that He might not borrow at all.

The Scripture, says the Usurer, forbids Ob. 2.
only biting Usury: (...) Morsury, which comes of (...) Mordere, to bite.
There is, thinks He, a certain toothlesse, or not biting Usury, which is
tolerable.

1. What will not Covetousness catch at, to Answ. 1.
nourish its greedy, and cruel humor? Nesheck is the common, and ordinary
name whereby all Usury is signified in the Hebrew Tongue. And does
Metaphorically intimate, and import the aggravation of the sin, not a
distinction of the kinds of Usury. Epithets and Originals serve more to
amplify and exaggerate, then to distinguish. See T. page 53. Hence it is also
that Usury in the Chaldee is called (...) Chabulia, i. e. Perditio, quod omnes
opes perdat and devastet.

2. The Scriptures condemn not only Nesheck, but also Tarbith. And that not
only in the Comments of the Prophets: Ezech. 18. 17. And 22. 12. Prove. 28. 8.
But in the very Text of the Law it self, Levit. 25. 36. Vetarbith. And v. 37.
Vbemarbith.

Nesheck is the ordinary word in the Scriptures, to signify Usury. Which the
HOLY GHOST uses to expound by other two words Tarbith and Marbith, both
derived from the same root (...) to increase, So that he which exacteth an
increase, or gain above His principal, or requires more by covenant, then He
lent, He takes Tarbith, or Marbith, that is Usury. Which is condemned also,
says that most worthy Calvin, (whom you produce as a Patron) in Pentateuchum,
page 355. That He may cut off, says he, such cavills as these: Vtrumque nomen
conjungit -- ac generaliter damnat quamlibet sortis accessionem: He couples
both the words together -- And generally condemns any addition, or increase
above the principal. For why should Tarbith be added unto Nesheck, both in
the letter of the Law, and the Prophets? It must be added: either (...), to
make a gradation; as if not biting Usury only were forbidden, but any increase
whatsoever: Or (...), that is by way of exposition, and so of equal latitude
with Nesheck, only declaring what GOD meant by biting Usury, namely any
increase in that kind whatsoever. And therefore let not us distinguish these
words which the HOLY GHOST confounds, says a worthy man; and much less upon
this frivolous distinction, let us build our practice or hazard the eternal
salvation of our fowls. For we know Ezekiel. 18. 13.
who has said: He that puts forth to Usury, or takes increase; shall He
live? He shall not live, He shall die the death; and His blood shall be upon
Him.

3. All Usury biteth. Money so lent comes not empty home: but biteth off,
knaweth away, and brings with it some part of the borrowers wealth, and
substance. Who if He cannot lick Himself whole again, or heal His wound by
biting others, (as commonly they do) He finds and feels in the end, that
Usury has teeth.

Biting is individual, and essential both to the name, and nature of Usury.
It ever bites, and stings one, or other, less, or more, either the Borrower,
or the Commonwealth. Either like the morning Wolf, it sucks out the life, the
blood, and the marrow of a poor man: Or like a Mastive it snatches a piece and
portion out of the Borowers substance: Or like a Waspe or the Dog-flie, it
stings Him, one way, or other in His estate. All sorts of Usury, even from that
Centesima the hundredth part monthly, which Nehemiah complains of, which is
twelve in the hundred; unto that semiuncianum Foenus ten shillings in an
hundred pounds, has teeth. Some more empoisoned, bloody Fangs then other: but
all bite. In every Tarbith there is a Nesheck, (...) in every Usury.

But suppose the Borrower sometimes in respect of the event, or by accident, be
not so bitten, or damnified: yet the Commonwealth, and especially the
Communalty pay for it. Our Divines express the Point thus:

If money be lent to spend upon necessaries, there is no question made, but the
Borrower is sore bitten in paying Usury, when he has spent the principal: If
it be lent to lay out for gain, then must the Borrower first be sure of so
much clear gain, as will pay the use; which is a reasonable gain of it
self: For the Usurers of nine, or ten in the hundred do live richly of that
accursed trade: yea many honest Tradesmen, will confess, that if they could
with their own free stock, raise the like gain, one time with an other, that
the Usurer does with his money; and with the like security of the principal,
they would think, they had made a very good market, notwithstanding all their
care, and travel. This reasonable gain then, must first be raised by the
Borrower, to pay the Usurer; and over and above, He must exceed this reasonable
gain, to maintain Himself, and His Servants, because this gain is none of
His. If He do not exceed then, and that in some proportion, He has lost His
labor, and shall feel Himself sore bitten. And if the Borrower do exceed
the Usurers gain, to maintain Himself; I demand then who paieth this
excessive gain over and above that reasonable gain, of ten in the Hundred?
Who but the Commonweal? Not so, says the Usurer; For the Borrower must sell,
as the Market goes. It is very true. Therefore, say I, If He and His fellows
be not able to raise the Market, to their own price, they shall be loosers:
If they can inhaunce it, (as they may the more easily, because the number of
such Borrowers is great, and because the rest desiring to sell as dear as they
can, will most willingly join with them) then the Commonweal must needs
bear the burden, and especially the poorer sort, who buying all by
peece-meale, at the last hand, must be sore bitten, though they know not by
whom.

It is incredible, to consider how great the biting and burden of the
Commonwealth is in this Case. For who doubts, but that many millions of pounds
are put out to Usury in this Land yearly: partly in money borrowed upon Usury;
partly in wares taken on trust, whether by Merchants themselves, or by
retailers from them, or by the particular buyers from the Retailers: the Usury
of every million, which are many, after ten in the hundred, being an hundred
thousand pounds. Of which biting and burden the Commonwealth might be eased,
If Usury were abolished.

Hear your own Man, whom you produce as a Patron of Usury, that Reverend and
Worthy Jewel: upon 1 Thessalonians. 4. page 83. A Merchant takes up of his Neighbor
an hundred pounds, and must answer again an hundred and ten pounds. He
bestows it all in corn, and buyeth for his hundred pounds, an hundred
quarters of corn. He sends it to the Market, the people have need of it, and
buy it. If He sold it for eight groats a Bushel, he might make up his hundred
pounds, and be a gainer. But unless He make up an hundred and ten pounds to
discharge his Usury, He must needs be a looser, and undone. But undone He will
not be: He will rather undo many others. Therefore He sets price at three
shillings, and so makes His money, and paieth the Usurer, and saves Himself,
and is no looser. Who then paieth the ten pounds? Who is the looser? Any man
may see. The poor people which buy the corn. They find it and feel it in
every morsel they eat. Thus, says He, if the Merchant Borrower be not
hindered by the Usurer: yet the people that buyeth His wares are plagued. Thus
it is no hard matter to find, that howsoever Usury be used, it is always
dangerous, and beguileth the people, and is therefore the destruction, and
overthrow of the Commonwealth.

4. M. Dike tells us page 211. How full of subtle and sophistical wit our
hearts are in cunning distinctions for the confusion of our souls.

He instanceth in some Particulars.

1. If that pregnant Text, says He, 1 Cor. 11. 14. be pressed against long
hair: It is shame for a Man, to wear long hair. It will be replied: It is
only to be understood of such hair, that is as long as women's. 2. If the
negligence of Pastors be checked by that express Commandment: Feed the
flock: That is says the deceitful heart: Either, by thy self, or by
another. 3. I may add a third and a very fit Instance. If the Usurer be pressed
with this and other places. His most ordinary Answeris: They are to be
understood of Biting not of toothlesse Usury, etc.
But what, as he there intimates, if these, and the like, prove to be rotten
distinctions, and false Glosses upon their Beds of death, as indeed they are;
what is then their Case? As they have leaned in their life time upon such broken
staves of reed: Their confidence in that dreadful hour will be but as the
Spiders House.

The Law of Moses concerning Usury is judicial Ob. 3.
not Morrall; Political only, and proper to the Jewish Nation; not
perpetual, and binding all.

.1. Prohibition of Biting Usury, Usurers will Answ. 1.
confess, is Morrall, but, it appears in answer to the second Objection;
that, that Usury which is forbidden in the Law, is biting, Ergo, etc.

Or thus: That which is unjust and uncharitable is forbidden by the Morrall
Law: But when out of the uncertain negotiation of the Borrower, the lender
covenanteth for certain gain, and accordingly exacteth His covenanted gain;
as well out of the Borrowers loss, as out of His gain, which is the practice
of the Usurer, (For in the contract of actual Usury there is an absolute
covenant for certain gain, which the Borrower, whether He shall gain or
loose is absolutely bound to pay together with the Principal) is unjust and
uncharitable, Ergo, etc.

Great and certain gain accrewes to the Usurer: sometimes out of little
gain; sometimes out of no gain; sometimes out of loss; always out of
uncertainties; always out of labor and pains, out of care and cost, out of
hazard and peril to the Borrower. Is this conscionable?

2. The Law of free lending is Morrall, renewed by our Savior, Mat. 5. 42.
Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Luke 6. 35. Therefore the Law, which forbids Usury, or lending
for gain, is Morrall: For the same Law, which commands the Affirmative,
condemns the Negative.

3. The Holy Prophets raunge it amongst the greatest abominations, and most
heinous transgressions of the Morrall Law: with lying, backbiting, deceit,
wrong, bribery: Psalm. 15. with Idolatry, oppression, adultery, cruelty,
unmercifullnesse to the poor, bloodshed, and murder: Ezekiel. 18. With the
profanation of holy things, with the abomination of uncleanenesse, with the
unnatural sins of incest, Ezekiel. 22.

So does the Doctrine of our Church: Verily so many as increase themselves by
Usury, by extortion, by perjury, by stealth, by deceits and craft; they have
their goods of the Devils gift. Homily For the days of Rogation week, p. 2.
p. 3.

Excep. GOD permitted the letting out of Usury to the stranger, Therefore the
prohibition cannot be Morrall: For GOD is not wont to permit any transgression
of the Morrall Law.

Rep. Nay. Since the same Usury, which is forbidden in the Law is permitted
toward a stranger, therefore this permission of Usury is prooved to be
judicial, and the Prohibition Morrall. This permission rather prooves it to be
unlawful in it self: For if it were lawful in it self, it should not need
to be permitted. The putting away of a man's innocent wife, being a thing
simply, and in it self evil; was notwithstanding permitted to the Jews.

If by stranger, we understand stranger at large: I answer thus: As that
permission which gave leave to the Jews to put away their innocent wives with
a Bill of divorcement, does not disprove the Law forbidding Adultery to be
morrall, but prooveth it self to be judicial: so permission of Usury toward
strangers does not prove the Law forbidding Usury to be Morrall; but it self
is evidently prooved to be Judicial.

And there may be reasons also of this tolleration.

1. The hard-heartednesse, and covetousness of the Jews might be such, that
if they were not permitted to practice Usury toward strangers, they would
exercise it against their Brethren.

2. And the injustice of the Gentiles with whom they did traffic, such, as
they would be sure to exact Usury of the Jews.

Therefore, that neither the Gentiles, by inequality of negotiation should eat
up the Jews, nor yet the Jews should oppress one another by Usury, it might
be, that in these civil respects the LORD permitted it toward the Gentiles.
Which tolleration in civil respects might absolve the Jews in the external
Court, but not in the Court of Conscience: no more then the toleration of
divorce did dispense with that hardness of their hearts before Mat. 19.
GOD.

But if by stranger be meant only, the remnant of the Cananites, as Lib de
Tobia. cap. 15.
Saint Ambrose, and Lib. 6. in Ezekiel. 18.
Saint Hierome amongst the ancient: Iunius, and Tremelius of latter time have
expounded it: which I take to be the righter sense: See before page 2. Dow.
page 210. I answer thus: Permission of Usury toward the Cananite does no more
prove the Law against Usury not to be morrall, then the allowonce of
Manslaughter in war does prove the Law forbidding murder to be judicial.
For although the Law cendemning Usury be never so perpetual, or morrall; yet
notwithstanding as other Commandments of GOD; so is it to be understood with
this limitation, and restraint; namely, unless GOD otherwise appoint. All
other Theft, as well as Usury, is forbidden in the morrall Law, but if GOD, by
special warrant allow the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians at their
departure out of Egypt, they may lawfully do it. It is a fearful morrall
transgression, for a Father to kill His only Son: but if the LORD bid
Abraham kill His own Son; He is authorized to do it. Mortal Princes
dispense with their Laws, who then dare abridge this royal prerogative in the
mighty LORD of Heaven and Earth? Whose Holy Will is the Rule of justice.

GOD appointed His people to destroy the Cananites, Numb. 33. 51. And it was
fittest by little and little. See Exodus 23. 29, 30. Deuteronomy. 7. 22. Usury therefore
was a fit Consumption so to eat them out. Whereupon says S. Ambrose. Ab hoc
usuram exige, quem non sit crimen occidere. Lib de (...) obia. cap. 15.
Thou may lawfully take Usury of Him, whom Thou may lawfully kill.

But howsoever, the Partition wall is now broken down: And there is no such
difference of Brother and stranger. I am sure amongst those, that profess the
name of CHRIST: And therefore, it is execrable amongst us, without all
contradiction.

These three precedent, are the most ordinary starting Holes, the Usurers
haunt: Others are sometimes urged; but not with that pertinacy, and confidence.
Such as these:

I deal, says the Usurer, as I would be dealt Ob. 1.
with; and do as I would be done by: And therefore all that while, I hope I
do no wrong. I would willingly pay ten in the hundred, if I had need, and then
why may I not take so.

1. That royal Principle of Nature, Do as Answ. 1.
thou would be done by: must be expounded and understood according to the
Grounds of a good Conscience, Dictates of right reason, and Rules of a just and
rectified will: not out of the mists and miseries of a depraved and exorbitant
judgment. Otherwise, Abimelech, Saul, and others of that desperate Rank, and
resolution, might conclude that it were lawful for them to kill other men,
because they were willing to be killed themselves: See Judges 9. 54. 1 Samuel 31.
4. For they might say: They did but as they would be done by. It would also
follow very absurdly: The Magistrate being in the Malefactors case, would
gladly be pardoned; therefore He must pardon the Malefactor. Some man would be
content, villanously to prostitute His wife, whom He cares not for Himself, to
others; therefore He may abuse an other man's wife, whom He loves better. These
and the like absurd, and abominable non-consequents demonstrate the vanity of
the Usurers inference: And that, that Royal Law, and Rule of our SAVIOVR
CHRIST is not general, but restraineable to that will of man, which is ruled
by nature, and GODS Law.

2. We must then have recourse to this general Fountain of the second Table,
and fetch light and direction thence, when we have no express and special
word in GODS Book: but the Scriptures have clearly and directly determined
and resolved the point of Usury.

3. If the Usurer were in the Borrowers Case, He would not willingly, as He
pretends, give ten in the Hundred; I mean with an absolute and free will; but
of force and constraint; because without paying after that rate He cannot have
it.

If a man would borrow upon Usury, either to ingrosse or forestall, or to
compass some unlawful matter; that were a corrupt will, and no Hottom. de
Usur. 85. Arist. Eth. 1. 1.
Rule. But if His desire so to borrow were just and lawful, (as in some cases
it may be) then it is no entire will, but mixed and forced by some necessity,
for the avoiding of a greater Evil; and therefore deemed in the eye both of
Law and reason to be no will at all. He that would borrow; should have need to
borrow; for a needless desire is unlawful: And he who has need to borrow,
would not willingly borrow, but for need; much less, would He pay Usury, if
with convenience He might borrow freely. Therefore the will of the Borrower, in
this case, is either corrupt, or no will at all; and so consequently without
the compass of CHRIST'S Rule.

The will of the Borrower in this Case, is like the will of an honest
traveller, in giving His purse to the Arrant Thief, for fear He should loose
both purse, and life: Is this man willing, think you to loose His money? Or
like the will of a man, whose House being on fire, plucks down part thereof to
save the rest. Willingly indeed as the Case stands with Him, yet not simply but
upon necessity. So the Borrowers will is not free, but forced: and so will
against will.

Usury is not forbidden in the New Testament, Ob. 2.
therefore in all likelihood no such sin, as you say it is.

1. Though it be not forbidden by name in Answ. 1.
the New Testament, yet that prooveth it not to be lawful. An argument drawn
from the Testimony of some one part of the Scripture negatively, does not hold.
It is sufficient, that it is forbidden in the Old Testament, and namely, in the
Morrall Law of GOD which is common, and perpetual.

2. Biting Usury is not mentioned in the New Testament, and yet condemned, by
the Usurers themselves.

3. Neither are remooving the Neighbors mark, Polygamie, jealousy, treason,
tyranny, etc. by those very names censured in the New Testament, and yet are
manifest and gross transgressions of the Morrall Law.

4. Though Usury expressly and by name, be not censured in the New Testament:
yet by necessary consequence it is, which is sufficient. 1. Sometimes under the
affirmative, Mat. 5. 42. 2. Sometimes under the General, Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. 3. Sometimes by an Argument drawn from the greater, Luke 6. 35.
For if I must lend without respect of mine own profit, or without expectation
of any benefit, or gain thereby; as they most expound that place, then much
more must I lend without a Covenant, especially without an absolute covenant
for gain. And if I must lend without expectation of the principal, as others
understand it, then much more without expectation of an overplus above the
principal. 4. Sometimes by an Argument drawn from the less, Luke 6. 34. Do
sinners lend one to an other without Usury? And shall not Christians much
rather?

May not aman, as well take use for His money, Ob. 3.
as the Landlord rent for the ground which He lets? No. For:

1. The Land has a fruitful use in it self, Answ. 1.
answerable to the Rent: Both without man's help, as in Meadows, Pastures,
Woods, Mines, etc. As also with, as in arable grounds, wherein the rent is
proportioned according to the fruitfullnesse thereof. But money being spent in
the use thereof; How money is unlawful. See Fent. page 93, 94. Because it may
be subject to cavil. Ibid. page 65.
the gain that is raised thereby, is not the fruit of the money; but of His
skill, and industry, that does employ it, and therefore must needs be
uncertain. And what gain is raised, ought to belong to Him, by whose pains,
and industry, it arises. So Thou demandest thy gain out of the fruit of His
pains, and industry; not out of the fruit of the money. And it is a strange
Thing, that whereas an 100 lb. worth of land, which is fruitful by nature of
it self, will scarcely yield 6 lb by the year: yet an Usurer will have out of
His money, which has no fruitful use in it self 10 lb. etc. Thus He woefully
requires gain for an other man's pains, industry, hazard, cost, and charge.

2. The property of the ground belongs to the Landlord; And therefore the
profit belongs partly to Him; in respect of the fruitful use, of that which
is His own, partly to the Tenant, for his labor and charges.

3. In things let, the Letter alienating the use, and not the property is to
receive the selfsame particular, and individual Thing, after it has been
used, being for the most part, the worse, and impaired by using. And therefore
receives profit for the Thing hired. As in the letting of an house, wherein
they often instance, Saying, why may not a man, as well take 10 lb. for an
hundred in a year: As 10 lb. for an House in some great City, which cost Him
an 100 lb. The use of the house is habitation; And though it be kept
Tenant-able: yet it grows worse, and toward ruin in the more substantial
Materials. But in money it is otherwise. The very same is not to be restored,
but so much in value. Whence M. Greenham reasons: Recompense is to be made,
where the thing is the worse for using: but money is not the worse for lending;
therefore nothing is to be taken, for the lending of it.

4. He that lets any thing, bears the hazard of the thing He lets. As the
Landlord of the ground; not only of the Title: but also of all casualties,
and calamities any way incident: as overflowing by Sea, Invasion by enemies,
etc. In which Cases, He is as well to loose His Rent, as the Tenant His labor,
and charges.

A thing that is hired, if it perish without the Commodatorius non tenetur de
casu fortuito, nisi se adstrinxerit. Cod. lib. 4. Tit. 23. Leg. 1.
default of the Hirer it perishes to the Owner: 1. Because He is the Owner. 2.
Because it went for the hire. According to the equity of GODS Law, Exodus 22.
15. If the Owner thereof stand by (to wit, that it may appear, not to be the
Borrowers default) the Borrower shall not make it good. For if it be an hired
thing, it came for the hire.

But i^ money, the Borrower stands to all the hazard, in common equity:
because the Borrower See Dow. How usury differs from the lawful contract of
Location. page 158.
is the right Owner for the time, and in all right, every thing perishes to
the right Owner.

1. Now it is a Rule in Law: To whom the hazard appertains, to Him the fruit
and profit belongs. 2. And whereas the Principal may perish, without the
Borrowers default: To covenant for certain gain, for that which is
hazardable, is unjust.
But if there were nothing else, it is more then sufficient: That letting Land
to Tenants is not disallowed by GODS Word, or any other learning; in any time
or age, etc. But lending for use is condemned by GODS Book, and all other
learning; and in all ages.

But as the world goes now, says the Usurer, Ob. 4.
and as men's manners now are, Commonwealths cannot stand; Traffic cannot be
maintained, Tradesmen cannot live without it, Ergo, etc. Answ. 1.


1. By this Argument says P. 2. Loc. Com. page 462. Hoc argumento posset tota
Scriptura everti. Mundus enim non vult in via Manda t^rum Dei ambulare. Number
igitur ducendu^ est, non esse peceata, quae in Scriptura manifest damnantur?
Chemnitius, may the whole Scripture be overthrown. For the world will not
walk in the ways of GODS Commandments: Must we therefore say, that those are
not sins, which are manifestly condemned in Scriptures?

2. How then did the state of the Jews consist without it, which was of Gods
own constituting? To say absolutely, that Commonweales cannot stand without
it, is to derogate from GODS wisdom, in ordering His own people, amongst whom
He would suffer no Usury.

3. If the Jews had thus pleaded in those times of that toleration: that their
Commonwealth could not stand without the Bill of divorce: yet notwithstanding,
if any had put away His wife, save in the Case of Adultery, though He might
have escaped in the external Court: yet was He not absolved in the Court of
Conscience, and before GODS Tribunal. So though an Usurer were now able truly
to say, (which He cannot) that the Commonweal could not stand without Usury:
yet for all that, Woe unto them that put their hands unto that cursed and
cruel Trade.

4. If it were so; the Argument prooves no more then this; That Usury is a
necessary Evil: And this necessity argues not the lawfullnesse of Usury, but
the wretchedness of the world, which as Saint John says, lies in Evil.

A Drunkard has brought His Body into such an Habit, that unless He drink
abundantly, even to the turning of His brain, He is sick again. Is not
drunkenness in that Person sinful, because so necessary?

A Son of Belial, by profane education, and continual haunting wicked
company, has brought Himself to that pass, that it is almost, as necessary
to Him to swear as speak: is Blasphemy in this man no iniquity, because
custom has brought upon Him this cursed necessity?

Some men according to Saint Paul have so Romans 2. 5.
hardened their hearts, that they now cannot repent: Is impenitency in them no
sin, because their own corruption, and custom have made it necessary?

If this necessity, they talk of, were imposed by GOD, this reason were good:
Usury is necessary, therefore lawful. But since men and states have drawn it
upon themselves, by their corruptions, and custom of sin, it does rather
aggravate, then extenuate the fault.

And certain it is, Cities, Incorporations, and Towns have drawn upon
themselves this necessity by such Ca^t-ropes of iniquity, as these:

1. Hardness of men's hearts, and want of charity in those, who be well able to
lend, and will not, whereby many are forced to pay Usury. 2. The covetous
desire, and pride of Borrowers, who out of an insatiable appetite to compass
great matters, do take up great sums of money for money; that no money is to
be spared, for such as be true Borrowers indeed. 3. Falsehood and deceit in
disappointing One another of their moneys at the times appointed; so as missing
of their own, they are compelled to take up of others, or else to shut up their
doors, as they say.
Now if a pretended necessity springing from the hardness of men's hearts, and
corruptions of the times be sufficient to justify Usury; then by the same
argument may any other sin be defended.

GODS Law did ever intend, that men Luke ^. 34. (...).
should lend One unto an other: In charity to the poor; In friendship to their
equals, to receive the like courtesy again. Which Duty, if men would perform,
there were no necessity of Usury.

5. It may be, without taking up money of the Usurer, the Tradesman cannot live
in that bravery, and fashion, nor drive His Trade to that height, nor purchase
so much land, keep such a Port, and state, etc. But let Him know, that it is a
thousand times more comfortable to carry a lower sail, to content Himself
with moderate and lawful means of getting, to keep a good conscience; then
to enrich Himself by such practices, as be either forbidden, or doubtful.
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, Pro. 15. 16.
then great treasure with trouble; trouble of conscience, at the hour of
death. Whosoever lays this for his ground; that He will be rich: worth so
many hundreds within such a time, etc. must needs ensnare His conscience with
many necessary evils, whereof Usury is one. For they that will be rich, says
the Apostle, fall into temptations 1 Timothy 6. 9.
and snares, which drown men in perdition, and destruction.

But the Law of the Land allows it, says the Ob. 5.
Usurer therefore I hope it is lawful.

1. I deny the consequent, No Law of man Answ. 1.
can abrogate, or disanull the Law of GOD. It is not the Law of man, but the
Law of God, Accusatio enim potius, quam executati^, vbi mand^ti est a perta
transgressio Aug de Civit, Lib. 14. 14.
which is the Rule of our Conscience. The Law of Man may clear Thee from
civil penalties in the outward Court, and before the Magistrate: but it cannot
free Thee from the guilt of sin in the Court of Conscience, and vengeance due
by the Morrall Law.

2. But the truth is, the Usurer does grossly mistake. For Usury is branded,
and censurable both by 1. The Common Law. 2. Statute Law. 3. Ecclesiastical
Law.

1. The Common Law did anciently expose the Usurer wholly to the Censure of the
Church. But if the Usurer died in this sin, so that the power of the Church
could extend no further, because He died out of the Church: yet then the Common
Law discovered and dischargt its edge and hatred against this cruel sin; by
taking vengeance upon Him in His goods, and posterity. Omnes res mobiles, and
omnia catalla, quae fuerunt Vsurarij mortui, ad usus Domini Regis capientur,
penes quemcunque inveniantur res illae. Haeres quoque ipsius hac eadem de causa
exhaeredatur secundum jus regni, and ad Dominum, vel Domines revertetur
haereditas. Randulphus de Glanduilla, Hen. 2. lib. 7. cap. 16. His goods were
all forfeited to the King, and His Lands returned to the Lords of the fee.
Neither was this meant of any immoderate Usury above ten in the hundred. For
the same Glanvile, who was Lord chief Justice of England, in the days of
Henry the second, teaches, that Usury is committed, when a man having lent
anything, that does consist upon number, weight, or measure, does take anything
over, and above His loan, lib. 10. cap. 3.

Edvardo Rege. 1042. 37. De Vsurarijs. Leges boni Regis Edvardi* qui regnare
coepit Anno Salutis 1042. Pro Exlege For an Outlavv, and so deprived of the
Kings protection, and of His Laws.


Vsurarios quoque defendit Rex Edvardus, ne remaneret aliquis in toto regno
suo. Et si quis inde convictus esset, quod foenus exigeret, omni substantia
propria careret, and postea pro Exlege haberetur? Hoc autem asserebat ipserex,
se audisse in curia regis Francorum, dum ibidem moraretur, quod Vsura radix
omnium vitiorum esset

So detestable was an Usurer in the eye of the Common Law, before any thing was
provided by Statute.

2. As concerning the Statute Law now in force; Men (looking only upon the
practice of Usurers, and connivency of Magistrates; not upon the Act of
Parliament it self made Anno 13. cap. 8.) very much mistake, when they
conceive that Usury has any approbation thence.

For how can it be said to allow it? 1. Since the Title of it, is an Act against
Usury. 2. And the statute it self calls it a sin, and detestable, and
forbidden by the Law of GOD. These are the words: For as much as all Usury
being forbidden by the Law of GOD, is sin, and detestable: What security then
have Thou to thy conscience out of this statute, for thy practice of Usury?

Nay how does it permit it? Since all Usury above ten in the hundred is thereby
to be punished with the forfeiture of the triple value of the principal: Nay,
any at all, whether it be after the rate of ten in the hundred, or under,
though it were but of one in the hundred, is to be punished with the
forfeiture of the Usury or increase.

Hear the Proviso of that noblest Parliament of late. Jacob. 21. in their Act
against Usury.

Provided, That no words in this Law contained, shall be construed, or
expounded, to allow the practice of Usury, in point of religion or conscience.

3. Even the latest Canons, Can. 109. rank Usury amongst notorious Crimes.
Would have Usurers presented; severely punished; not admitted to the Holy
Communion, till they be reformed.

Hear Our Churches Doctrine. Verily so many as increase themselves by Usury,
by extortion, by perjury, by stealth, by deceits, and craft; they have their
goods of the Devils gift. Hom. For the days of Rogation week. P. 2. P. ppp.
jjj.

But both are gainers, may the Usurer say, Ob. 6.
both the Borrower, and the Lender. Here then is no breach of Charity, etc.

1. By the same reason, may a man justify the Answ. 1.
Officious Lie to keep His friend out of danger. But the truth is, both lying,
and Usury, whatsoever good, or gain come by them, are stark naught, because
forbidden in the Book of GOD. Wherein, It is a constant Rule. That we may not
do evil, that good may come thereof. Romans 3. 8.


Suppose a fellow sell an 100. stolen sheep to some of His Customers for 40
lb. Here they are both gainers: But yet for all that, there is notorious
villainy.

A Minister comes to a covetous Patron; gives Him an 100 lb. for a presentation
to a living of an 100 lb. per Annum. Here, they are both gainers: But yet for
all that, Here is execrable Simony.

2. If the Borrower gain by accident, in respect of the event, or any
accidental concurrence; It is no thanks to the Usurer: For His contract
nevertheless is unequal, and unconscionable: Because He covenanteth for
certain gain, out of the Borrowers uncertain traffic, from that, which
has no fruitful use in it self, but is spent in using, (I mean money:)
always out of labor and pains, care, and cost, hazard, and peril to the
Borrower. Whether He gain, or loose, whether He sink, or swim; or
whatsoever become of the principal, whether it be lost by fire, or be taken
away by thieves, or perish by shipwreck, or miscarry by any other calamity; He
having made an absolute covenant for the restitution of the principal with
Usury, is ready by virtue of the same to demand it, as well out of the loss of
the Borrower, as out of His gain. Now thus, Out of the uncertain negotiation
of the Borrower to covenant for certain gain, is not only uncharitable, but
also unjust, and unequal.

Exc. But the Borrower, will the Usurer say, is in a manner sure to gain.

Rep. Why then (say I) will you not adventure with Him? For if the Lender will
be content to hazard His principal; so that, He will not only look for no
gain, but when the Borrower gains; but also will be content to bear part
with Him in His loss, He shall not deal by Usury, but by partnership.

3. Where there is no justice, there can be no It is unjust to exact any money,
where there is no co^mutation: But the Usurer the principal being safe does
exact Usury, not for any thing else, but for the Duty of lending only.

Ergo, It is unjust to exact Usury.


charity: but Usurious contracts are unjust, therefore uncharitable.

An usurious contract including an absolute covenant for gain, provideth for
the lenders certain gain, as well out of the Borrowers loss, as out of His
gain, which is very unequal, and unconscionable. But see the injustice of
Usury punctually and plentifully prooved by M. Fenton. page 98, 99, etc.

It is against justice, because there is a certainty of gain exacted, where no
gain is, or can be certain.

4. There is a breach, and violating of charity, where an Act of charity,
liberality and mercy is turned into an Act of self-love, and covetousness and
cruelty: But in the exercise of Usury, The contract of mutation, which the Lord
has ordained, to be an Act of charity, Psalm 37. 26. and 112. 5.
and liberality, is turned into an Act of self-love, and covetousness and
cruelty, therefore it cannot be denied, but charity is thereby violated, and
liberality set to sale.

1. Into an Act of self-love: For whereas by the ordinance of GOD, and by the
Law of nature, lending is free, and charitable, intending the good of the
Borrower, and not of the Lender: Usury has made it illiberall, and
uncharitable, intending the lenders profit chiefly, if not only, and seeking,
yea covenanting for the lenders gain, as well out of the loss of the
Borrower, as out of His gain.

Lending was not ordained to be a contract of negotiation, but an Act of
charity, and liberality, wherein the Lender should not respect His own gain,
but the Borrowers good; Lending therefore upon Usury is made an Act of
self-love, wherein the good of the Borrower is sought either not at all, or but
in a secondary respect, as it serves or furthereth the Lenders gain.

2. Into an Act of covetousness: For lending has these three fountains:

1. Christian charity. When a man lends for the LORDS sake to His needy
neighbor, looking for nothing again. 2. Civil love, and humanity, when He
lends to pleasure His friend, looking for His own again. 3. Covetousness,
when He looks for more then His own.
3. Into an Act of cruelty. A good man, says David, is merciful and lends.
He then that perverteth this Act of Bounty and mercy to prey upon the want and
necessity of His Brother, by covenanting absolutely for gain by lending where
He bears no hazard, is unmercifull. He that increases His riches by Usury and
interest, gathers them for Him, that will be merciful to the poor. By which
Antithesis, it seems that Solomon sets mercy in opposition unto Usury. See D.
Fent. page 106. And In Decalog.
therefore Luther doubted not to call the Usurer a Blood-sucker of the people.

Neither does Usury only deprave the Duty of lending, but quite dry up the
Fountain of love, for all free loan. Whereupon says Bucer, A man may seem
now adays, to be very Append. in Psalm. 15.
impudent, That shall desire to borrow freely: for he that lends freely, does
for the most part make this account of His benefit, that besides the
forbearance of His money, wherewith He does pleasure the Borrower; He does as
much for Him besides, as if He gave Him the tenth part of the principal, out
of His purse.

There are two Acts of liberality: Dono dare, and mutuo dare. To give freely,
And To lend freely. And this latter, whereby one man does supply the
necessities of an other, is so necessary, that humane societies cannot stand
without it. Usury having stepped into the room of free lending, you shall have
Usurers, and Patrons of Usury not ashamed to say, that Commonwealths cannot
stand without Usury. Without lending indeed they cannot, but without Usury,
they both might, and ought.

See before more particularly, how Usury offends, both against private, and
public charity: And is ever hurtful either to the particular men that do
borrow, or else to the Body of the Commonwealth, whose common profit is in all
contracts especially to be regarded, page 4.

5. Charity is kind, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Usury cruel. Charity seeks not her own,
vcr. 5. Usury seeks an other man's: what conjunction then between Charity and
Usury?

6. Suppose the Borrower be sometimes helped by Usury, yet notwithstanding all
Usury is against charity: for the practice of it cannot stand with charity, and
our allegiance to GOD, who has forbidden it, denounced His judgments against
it, made gracious promises to them that will do the contrary: Nor with our
charity, and duty to our country, unto which Usury is in many respects noy
some: nor with that love, which we owe to our own souls; for whosoever
puts forth to Usury, or takes increase, He shall not live, but die the
death. Nay Usury is ever repugnant to charity, if not as a hurtful thing to
our neighbor, yet as an unjust thing in it self. As has been prooved.

But I hope, says the Usurer, I may take use O^b. 7.
of One, that is richer, and wealthier then my self, etc.

1. If thy Friend be rich and wealthy, and Answ. 1.
have means of His own, to supply His wants, Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8, 9
He ought not to borrow. The HOLY GHOST in the Borrower presupposes need. And
by lending in such a case to agreedy dealer in the world, that seeks to
ingrosse, and forestall commodities, and covetously to compass great matters,
Thou approoves thy self no good steward of GODS blessings; and may so make thy
self in some sort accessory to His ambitious, covetous, and irregular humor,
and practices; and may give Him weapons to do hurt withal.

But if thy wealthy friend have some present occasional need, (as the richest
may have) then if Thou can spare it, lend in kindness, and neighborhood, to
receive like courtesy again an other time. This in such a case, is
consideration enough for a Christian, because the Heathens desired no more but
(...): For even sinners, Luke 6. 34.
says CHRIST, lend to sinners to receive the like: the like kindness an other
time upon the like occasion. Humane society cannot stand without lending, and
borrowing, says Basil. And wherefore has GOD made men sociable creatures, but
to help one another upon such occasions?

In a word, To those, who have no need to borrow, we need not lend. But if we
do lend, we must lend freely: or if we will look to gain, by those, which
need not our help, we must deal with them, by some honest contract of
negotiation. For loan is such a contract, as GOD has appointed to be free;
and where it is not free, He has condemned it with fearful Loc. Com. de
pauper. cap. 2.
terms under the name of Usury. In humane societies, says Ch^mnitius, GOD
would not have all things set to sale; but He requires that some duties should
be free, which are deformed, and depraved, if either they be sold as things
saleable, or set to hire as mercinary duties.

2. Thou must wrong neither rich nor poor: but out of the uncertain
negotiation of the borrower to covenant for certain gain in that manner, as I
have said before; and to compound for profit only, and to pluck thy neck and
shoulder from all peril, and losse-bearing is unjust; Ergo, etc.

3. Thou shall not lend upon Usury to thy Brother, says the Law, Deuteronomy. 23. 19,
Now says Jewel, He is thy Brother, whether He be poor or rich. See before
page 3. And He is against you a witness of extraordinary validity, because you
pretend He is for you.

Is not the use of money for a time worth money? Object. 8.
And therefore if no more be taken, then the use is worth, there is no iniquity.

1. So money which was ordained to be the Answ.
price of all wares, and the measure of all bargains, is made a ware, contrary
to the nature of it. For Quod est medium venditionis, non potest esse terminus.
Kockermans distinction therefore of 1 Mensura acqu^rendi: and 2. Modus
acquirendi, is idle, and petitio principij: A begging of the thing in question.
For the question is whether money may be a modus acquirendi.

2. The Rule holds in buying and selling, but not in Acts of Charity; therein
it is no good Rule. Thou bidst, for the purpose, thy poor neighbors to
dinner: This is money worth, for it cost thee money, and saves them money at
home: yet Thou will not set a price upon it. Why? because it is a work of
charity. Thou bidst thy rich neighbor sometimes; that which He eats is worth
money: yet thou will take none, but think foul scorn it should be offered.
Why? because it is an Act of kindness, of neighborhood, of friendship. These
things may not be bought or sold, the nature of them is to be free. Lending is
a work of mercy to the poor, of kindness to thy neighbor, and therefore is
ever f^ee. It is an unjust thing to sell charity, or friendship, as it is to
sell justice: both are naught; this is bribery, and that is Usury.

3. I insinuated before, the reason why money cannot be lawfully let, as well,
as other things: none of those respects are incident unto money for which hire
is lawfully required. For

1. Things which may be let have a fruitful use in themselves, which a man may
let, and alienate for a time, reserving the property to Himself: But money,
and those other things, which are the subject of Usury, are spent in the use,
have no fruitful use, which either may be severed from the property, or
valued apart. 2. The Hirer after the enjoyment of the thing Hired, restores
the self same particular, being for the most part impaired in the use. The
Borrower of money restores not the same particular impaired in the use, but
the full value of the principal, rather with better then the worse. 3. The
letter to hire, as He retains the property: so He bears the hazard: but it
is contrary in Usury. 4. To say nothing of the cost and charge, the letter to
hire, is many times at, with those things He lets: whereas the Usurer is at
no cost at all.
But may not the Usurer as well receive 10 lb. Object. 9.
for His 100 lb. in a year, as the Merchant by imploiment of His 100 lb.
perhaps 20 lb. or above, nay I know not how much sometimes.

I justify none iniquity, or exorbitancy in Answ.
Traffic, or any other Trade. But for the present instance, there is great
difference. In the Merchants negotiation there is considerable: 1. Necessary
cost. 2. Industry. 3. Hazard. For all which, or any one of them, a
proportionable gain may be allowed. But in Usury none of these are to be
found, and therefore no gain should accrue thence.

Does the Usurer take any pains for the gain of His money? Nothing less.
Usury is a gainefull See F page 95.
idleness, whereby men do eat of the sweat of other men's brows. For
whether they eat, or drink; sleep, or wake; work, or play; be sick, or
whole, etc. Their gain by Usury comes in alike.

Is He at any cost for the bringing in of His gain? Not of a halfe-penny.

Does He bear any hazard? It is no part of His meaning. He requires a covenant
of the Borrower for the payment both of the principal, and also of the use, at
a certain time. For performance of which, before He will lend His money, He
will have what security He please: By bonds, statutes, pawnes, sureties one
way, or other: so that if the principal, or any part thereof be lost, it is
lost to the Borrower, but it is safe to the Usurer, by the very contract of
Usury, ratified by other securities.

But the use I take, may some of them say, is Object. 10.
moderate, and more reasonable, I take not above 8. in the 100. or under, etc.

1. Why then I say, Thou art like a kind Thief, Answ. 1.
who having taken 40 s. from a man by the hieway, throws back perhaps some ten
groates to bear His charges home.

2. By so doing, Thou sin'st less indeed then those cruel, and cutthroat
Cannibals that besides after 10. in the 100. must have a load of Coals or
some other gratuity. But for all that, thou art not freed from usurious guilt,
and greediness. Suppose a malefactor at bar should cry out unto the Judge;
that whereas His fellow prisoners, some of them had stolen Horses, others broke
houses, others robbed by the hie way, others killed men; He only had but stolen
a few sheep: would this acquit Him? Nay He would be burned in the hand for a
rogue at least.

Let no man bless Himself in the willing practice of lesser sins: Any lien in
willingly and delightfully will ruin the soul eternally. A Penknife thrust
unto the heart will dispatch a man as well, as all the daggers that stabbed
Caesar in the Senate House.

Modica sunt, says one, quae perdunt nos. They be those little Ones, that
undo us. A moate in the eye, if it be not got out in time, may grow to a pin
and web. A man's conscience may suffer shipwreck as well upon a sand, as upon a
Rock. A Rock is a great One, a sand is a heap of little Ones. See my
Exposition upon the Creed, page 134.

3. When men make question of moderate Vsura est peccatum non solum in se, sed
etiam secundum se, and ideo ex nulla circumstantia been potest fieri.
Schoolmen.
Usury, whether that be lawful or not: They might as well make question, says
Chemnitius, whether moderate adultery, or moderate lying, or moderate theft is
lawful: For as Adultery, as lying, as theft are things in themselves and
unlawful, so is Usury.

But the Borrower, says the Usurer, holds Object. 11.
Himself much beholding unto me, tells me that I very much releeve His
necessity, that I help, and pleasure Him exceedingly, and that He could not
tell what to do without his money.

1. Even so, suppose a poor man lying by the Answ.
high way, ready to die for hunger, and there comes a Baker by; from whom He
intreates a penny loaf: The Baker meaning, (as Usurers commonly doe^) to take
advantage of the poor man's extremity, seeemeth unwilling to sell Him any; will
not the poor man in this extreme necessity, be most willing to give twelve
pence, for that which is not worth two pence? Yes undoubtedly, He would in such
a case with all His heart give six pence for a penny loaf, and thank Him too,
and tell Him perhaps He saves His life by it. But for all this, the cruelty of
the Baker were much to be condemned, that would prey so unmercifully upon the
bleeding misery of His dying Brother. Semblambly, A poor man in danger to be
driven out of home, and harbor as they say, or in some other heavy distress,
would be ready to tell the Usurer, that He does Him an high pleasure, that but
for His money, He should be undone, etc. Yet for all this, the mercies of the
Usurer in such a case, were but cruelty, as Solomon says somewhere of all the
wicked.

2. Thou easest and pleasures Him indeed with the principal for a time, but
thou eatest Him up and plaguest with the use. Thou art in this point like Ioab,
who took Amasa by the beard to kiss Him; but secretly thrust His sword into
the fifr rib, and dispatched Him: Thou comforts Him for a while with the loan;
but by little and little, cuts His throat with the usurious lucre.

There is a worm in Latin called Teredo, that uses to breed in wood; which
is very soft to touch, yet has such steely teeth, that it eats into the hard
timber: So the Usurer is a soft Beast, at first to handle, but in continuance
of time, His Canniball chops devour both flesh and bone, marrow and life of
the Borrowers estate. The Ivy claspes about the Oak, as a lover and a friend,
as though it would keep it warm, and cherish it; but thereby it grows up,
overtops the Oak, and sucks out the juice and sap, that it cannot prosper: So
just does the Usurer pleasure the Borrower. See before page 3. And page 1.

3. The kindness and good Thou do to the Borrower in this case, is like
that, which Thou should do to a man in a burning Ague, in giving Him cold
water to drink: for the Oblatio quidem blanda, sed immanis exactio. De Tobia
Cap. 12.
present it refreshes Him, but after it doubles His pain, and increases His
danger. Whereupon says Saint Ambrose, The offering of the money is flattering
and pleasant, but the exacting of Usury is most cruel and unmercifull.

4. Hear Saint Chrysostom in His time: (For the same cunning, and cavilling
did also color Usurers covetousness then.)

Noli m^hi dicere, quaeso, gaudet, and gratiam habet, quod sibi soenore
pecuniam colloces: id enim crudelitate tua coactus fecit.

Do not tell me, says He, that He is glad, and gives Theethankes, because
thou will let Him have money to use: For He is constrained by thy cruelty to
do so.

But what say you to the case of Orphans? Object. 12.
What shall become of Fatherless Children, Widows, and distracted men of
their wits? Suppose all these, for their maintenance, have a stock of money
left them: They being not able to employ it, How shall they be maintained, but
by the use of it? For if they spend of their stock, what will become of them
when their stock is gone?

1. I might well be excused from answering Answ. 1.
this Objection, at this time, because our common Usurers, against whom, I now
purposely deal, and dispute are not Babes and mad men, except it be
spiritually, but many times of great understanding and wisdom in worldly
matters.

2. If Usury be sinful in it self, it is evil in all, though in some more,
in some less. If it be forbidden in GODS Book, as it is in many places
directly and clearly, what circumstances, good meanings, Motives, End, or any
thing can make it lawful? Except the royal Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
Prerogative of the mighty LORD of Heaven and Earth, who is the Lawgiver, and
whose holy Will is the Rule of Justice, interpose and declare it self
otherwise, as in the present point, in the ^ase of strangers for a time.

Though therefore, the relief of the fatherless, and widows be good, yet
must it not be done by Usury: For that is to do evil that good may ensue,
which is condemned by the HOLY GHOST, Romans 3. 8.

3. The Usurer should rather ask what shall become of those Orphans, and
Widows which have not stock; for whom not withstanding God does graciously
provide, though they use no unlawful means.

4. There were Widows, Fatherles, and men distracted amongst the Jews; in
that excellent Commonwealth, constituted by GOD Himself; and yet no allowance
of Usury unto them. If Almighty GOD in Wisdom had thought it meet to have
tolerated Usury in these persons, He might as well have mentioned the same, as
He does the toleration of lending to strangers. But it seems to have been so
far from GODS meaning, that in the very same place Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24.
where He makes a Law for the safeguard of Orphans, and Widows, presently,
and Ver. 25.
immediately upon it, is annexed the Law against Usury. Shall these then, who
are so well provided for, by a special Law of GOD, be transgressors of the
very next Law unto it?

5. Widow-hood, and Fatherlesnesse, in respect of the former state of having
Husband and Parents, are a state of Humiliation, for the outward condition of
this life: But by this unhappy Trade of Usury, they are made a state of
exaltation. For whereas, in the days of Husband and Parents, their stock by
honest, and lawful negotiation, was subject unto manifold perils; and by
peril unto great, and daily losses: The practice of Usury now, does provide by
sufficient Bonds against all these, with great increase of gain: bonds so
sufficient, and absolute, that except GOD dissolve them beyond all expectation,
they are strongly secured against any disaster, or danger. So against GODS
Ordinance, and intention, labor to turn a cross into Blessing.

6. The LORD has vouchsafed to Orphans, and Widows a singular privilege of
many very gracious promises peculiarly made unto them: Exodus 22. 22. and 23.
24. Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Chap 14. 29. Chap. 18. 11. 14. Chap. 24. 17. 20. Psalm. 94. 6.
Psalm. 146. 9. Esa. 1. 17. 23. Chap. 10. 2. Jer. 5. 28. Chap. 7. 6. Chap 22. 2.
Zach 7. 10. Mal. 3. 5. 2 King 4. Mat. 23. 14. Jam. 1. 27.
let them therefore, or their friends for them, depend upon the gracious
providence, and promises of GOD, in the use of lawful means: let them employ
their goods in some honest Trade, or negotiation, wherein they have as good
cause to expect a blessing from GOD, as any other; Or let them deal by
partnership: or by annuities for their lives; or purchase Lands, or Rents for
ever; Or let some other honest course be taken, which wise men can easily
devise, if they list, and were as hearty for GODS glory, as earthly gain. And
let not children be tainted and maintained with the contagious, and
insinuating sin of Usury.

Exc. Well then, says the Worldling, suppose for instance, the stock be
employed in Partnership, or any other course of Traffic, in which the
Orphans stand to the hazard of the principal; I would know in such a case,
what would become of the Fatherless Children, if the principal perish; were
they not quite undone?

Rep. I answer, who are we, that we should exempt Orphans from being subject
to GODS providence, and ordering. Do not all men's goods in the world depend
upon GODS disposing and blessing? Do not all men stand to His providence, and
must be subject thereunto? Shall Orphans then only be exempted, that GOD
shall have nothing to do with their stocks; but bless He, or curse He; they
must be sure to be provided for, to have still so much certain yearly; and to
have their principal secured? This ought not to be. Especially, since they are
honored with so many excellent particular promises of GODS providence, and
singular protection.

But some learned men allow it, etc. And so Object.
M. S. I come to survay your Hold for Usury, the weakest of many rotten Ones.
You have marshaled together eighteen.

1. Suppose all these were on your side, I Answ. 1.
oppose against them, many more, very Worthy, and Learned men in this Age, the
testimonies of all the learned in former Ages both Christian and Heathen, the
censures of Councels, the authority of the Word of GOD. See before, page 1, 2.
Nay hear your own Man, as you pretend. Worthy Jewel: But Jewel upon 1 Thessalonians
3. 6. page 80.
what speak I, says He, of the ancient Fathers of the Church, (having
produced many against Usury) There was never sect, nor state, nor degree, nor
profession of men, but they have disliked it: Philosophers, Greeks, Latins,
Lawyers, Divines, Catholics, Heretics: All tongues, and nations have ever
thought an Usurer as dangerous, as a Thief. The very sense of nature proves
it to be so, if the stones could speak, they would say as much.

The general Current, and consent of the Church for above this fifteen
hundred years without Opposition, has condemned it: what a weak hold then is
your Handful M. S.?

2. Divines pretended for Usury deal with it, as the Apothecary does with
poison, working and tempering it with so many cautions, and limitations, that
in the end, they make it no Usury at all. See in this point, Dow. posit. of
Usury page 53. Dow. page 273. etc. Fent. page 62.

After they have examined the point, and answered the reasons, as they think,
which are usually brought against Usury by the School; yet in conclusion put
all their limitations together, they agree upon no Usury at all, as it shall be
defined by and by. Single them out one from an another; there is not any one of
them, who dares defend any such ordinary Usury, as is amongst us practiced with
greatest moderation. Fent. page 144. And therefore in the third place, I say:

3. Though some have somewhat declined the beaten way in this point: 1.
Transported perhaps with some prejudice against the Truth, by reason of some
weak As that taken from barrenness of money 3 and the unnatural brood of
Usury, etc. See Fen. page 64, 65.
Arguments they have met with in the point. 2. Or because in detestation of
Usury, some lawful contracts also have been condemned by some for Usury,
which do but coast upon it: Yet where dwelt that Divine, that to this day
durst ever appear in print, a Patron of Usury properly and truly so called,
commonly practiced at this Day in this Land, and condemned in the Book of GOD:
Which only I ordinarily preach against, and at this time oppose. And thus
define: (For upon purpose, I deferred the definition to this place, as fittest
and most seasonable.)

Usury is a gain above the principal, exacted Usura est lucrum ex mutuo
pactum.
by covenant, merely for liew of lending. Or thus: Usury is gain upon
covenant, for loan. Or thus: A lending for gain by compact. See how this
definition distinguishes Usury from all other contracts: F. page 16, 17. Dow.
page 157. etc.

This I say, is Usury truly and properly so called, commonly practiced now
adays; forbidden in the Book of GOD, questioned by Covetousness, only in
this last Century past: And which I censure in my Book, and Sermons, and oppose
in this Discourse.

There is, as some call it,

1. A liberal Usury: Which is only a gratuity or free Gift, which the
Borrower finding Himself much benefited by the Lenders Si debtor usu alieni
aeris multum lucratus est, vel magnum aliquod damnum evasit, certe ex
gratitudinis Officio, and mutuo respectu Charitatis obligatur ad antidora.
Recte enim dititur in officijs charitatis, primo loco illis tenemur obnoxij, a
quibus nos beneficium accepisse agnoscimus. Nec peccat Creditor accipiendo,
quia differunt officia charitatis, and Usura. Sed sic levissima occasion
quaeritur praetextus Usurae. Si enim vel pactum, vel intentio precedit, quod
alias non erat mutuaturus, nisi ultra sortem gratitudinis loco aliquid
accipere^, revera est Usura, quocunque nomine appelletur. Chemnit. Loc. Com. de
paup. page 458.
courtesy, does of His own accord, in testimony of His thankefullnesse freely
give to the Lender, who neither intended when He lent, nor expected whiles He
forbore, any gain, much less covenanted for it.

But in this Case, although the Lender receive some allowance, above the
principal, yet He commits not Usury: Because neither the contract, which He
made, was lending for gain: neither is the overplus, which He receives
again, either covenanted, or intended, or required for loan: But a gratuity,
or thankful courtesy, which may with good conscience be given and received
from an able and willing Giver.

There is also, as some call it;

2. A recompencing Usury, Which is nothing else, but a just recompense, which
the Debtour, having through His default been the effectual cause of the
Creditors hinderance, does owe unto Him by the Law of nature. Understand it
thus:

A man lends for a time freely; that time being expired, His money is
retained longer against His will; for want whereof. He is damnified. If the
Lender receive an overplus in this case above the principal, answerable to
the damage, which He has suffered; this is no Usury, but due and just
satisfaction. No Usury, because increase is not taken for the loan. Forloane
is a voluntary Act: whereas this money was not willingly lent, but retained by
force after the time, it was due. If the Lender had been damnified, by the
forbearance of His money, during that time, which He lent it, He could in
strict justice have exacted no satisfaction, because it was His own voluntary
Act: Volenti non fit injuria. But the time being come out; to receive overplus
for His loss sustained, is no Usury; but a just recompense, Which is properly
termed interest: Which may grow due, say Divines two ways:

1. Ex damno emergente, By loss arising: For example; I lend Thee an 100 lb.
which Thou undertakest to repay at the end of six months: which time being
expired, and thou either through negligence, or unfaithfullnesse, failing of
thy promise, I incur a loss; as the forfeiture of a Bond, bargain, or
lease, etc. or by taking up money upon Usury, to prevent that loss etc. 2. Ex
lucro cessante, by gain ceasing. As when by missing my money at the day, till
which I lent it; I am hindered, of buying at the best hand, provision for my
house, wares for my trade, stock for my grounds, or some other certain or
very likely gain. (Where by the way we may see why it is called interest:
because one may say intersuit mea habuisse: It behoved me, It stood me upon to
have had it: And now by your default I sustain this loss, I am thus hindered)
Now in these two Cases, I may lawfully provide for mine indemnity, by exacting
an equal recompense at thine hands: and thou art bound in conscience to make
good this loss, or hinderance, which through thy default I sustain. But
herein observe such cautions and conditions as these.

1. That interest is to be rated, and proportioned not according to the gain
or Benefit which the Borrower has reaped, by the imploiment of the money; but
according to the hinderance, or loss, which the Creditor sustaineth through
the Borrowers default. 2. That Interest is not to be required, nisi post moram:
but only after delay, and default committed by the Borrower: For until then,
the Borrower, (unless He were such an One as could compel the Creditor to
lend) is not the effectual cause of the Creditors loss. 3. Neither is it ever
to be required after delay; but only then, when the Creditor has indeed
sustained loss, or hinderance, by the Borrowers delay. 4. That the Creditor
do not voluntarily incur any loss, meaning to lay the burden thereof on
the Borrower, but do His true endeavor to avoid it. 5. That He put difference
between Him that breaks day, through negligence and unfaithfullnesse: and
Him, that breaks day through want and necessity, which He did not foresee: and
let Him remember; that where is no fault there ought to be no punishment. 6.
That the estimation of the interest, be not referred to the Creditors own
arbitrament (For it is not fit, that every Creditor should be His own (...))
but committed to the judgment of some other honest and discreet men.
Such conditions as these, attended, and observed, It is lawful for the
Creditor, in the forenamed Cases, to require an overplus besides His
principal: which overplus notwithstanding, is not Usury.

For there is great difference betwixt them:

1. In Usury the Lender intends, and seeks gain: by interest, He only
provideth for His indemnity: Or thus: The Usurer seeks by lending to be a
gainer: But the receiver of interest truly so called, seeks only to be no
looser. 2. Usury is intended, or perhaps covenanted for, in the very contract:
Interest is not intended at the first, but happens after delay. 3. Usury is a
gain, which from the time of the contract, until the time of payment,
accrueth to the Lender: Interest is a recompense of the loss, which after the
Day appointed for the payment, the Creditor sustaineth through the Borrowers
default. 4. Usury is against equity, conscience, and reason: Interest stands
with them all.
When as therefore men pretend the honest Lib. de definit. appellat.
name of Interest to their gainefull Usury, it is pernicious Sophistry, says
Melancton.

Exc. But 1 may not I, may some Usurer say, expect consideration for the gain
which I might have raised from the imploiment of my money, all that time, which
I lent it; as well as (...) recompense post moram as they say after delay, etc.
2 I might have employed it my self, and perhaps have been a good gainer: 3.
And therefore I have forborne it to my hinderance, and by consequent deserve
recompense even for the time of lending before delay.

Rep. I answer in order to the three branches of this Exception: To the

First: By no means. For by the ordinance of GOD, and Law of nature, lending
is free and charitable, intending the good of the Borrower and not of the
Lender: and therefore ought not at all to become saleable and mercenary. An Act
of charity should not be bought and sold. See before in diverse pages: and Luke
6. 34, 35. Where lending is commanded, without providing for indemnity, in
receiving the principal, if so their Brothers need truly require: much more
without requiring an overplus above the principal: Which CHRIST says in the
same place even sinners would do. Now therefore, if there could no other
reason be given, why men should lend freely, and not for gain, yet this alone
were sufficient, because GOD would have us lend freely, and not for gain. It
ought to have been argument sufficient to our first Parents, to restrain them
from the forbidden fruit; That GOD had forbidden it; though they had had other
reasons to induce them to ear thereof. And as in that case, so in this, it is
sin, and folly, to enter into disputation against the Word of GOD, according
unto which, we shall be judged in the last day. The will of GOD, is the Rule of
justice, and whatsoever He wills, it is therefore good, and just, because He
wills it; and consequently simple, and absolute obedience must be performed
thereunto, whatsoever arguments, impediments, or inconveniences can be
pretended to the contrary.

Secondly, Thou might, say Thou, have employed it thy self. But how? By
negotiation and traffic? That Is not likely. Usurers love not to be
Adventurers; there is too much hazard in Traffic. But suppose Thou had,
it may be thou should have been a looser: And therefore, set Thy fear of
loss by adventuring, which Thou escapest by not hazarding the principal,
against thy hope of gain, which Thou looked to receive, if thou had
adventured: And let thy possible game, which Thou have missed, be recompensed
with the possible loss, which thou have escaped. And know this, that the
hinderance of uncertain gain is not to be allowed after delay, much less
before: Neither can uncertain hopes be sold with a good conscience for
certain gain, especially to those that do not buy them.

Thirdly, But thou forbearest thy money to thy hinderance. Lay aside usurious
pretenses. Can Thou not indeed without thine hinderance forbear thy money?
Consider then the state of Him that is to borrow.

1. Is He a prodigal, or riotous person? feed not His sensual humor and
vanity.

2. Is He a covetous dealer in the world, that seeks to compass great
matters; and to be an engrosser, or forestaller of commodities to the prejudice
of the Commonwealth? Make not thy self accessory to His covetous practices:
To such, thou ought not to lend.

3. Has the party no great need to borrow? To such, Thou need not lend: or
if Thou do; thine, hinderance, if Thou sustainest any, is merely voluntary,
and of such an hinderance, Thou can require no recompense of Him, who has
not been the effectual cause thereof.

4. Is the Party an honest man, and has need to borrow? Then if the LORD has
We are not bound to lend to any but to such as be in want:
enabled Thee to lend, Thou art bound to lend, Though thou shall sustain some
hinderance: yea sometimes, though thou should hazard the principal, Thou
must willingly And to such, if we be able, we must lend freely.
yield unto both, as imposed of the LORD: Neither must Thou seek gain out of
His need, but lend freely for the LORDS sake, who requires this duty at thy
hand. See Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Psalm 112. 5. Matthew. 5. 42. Luke 6. 35.

But before I pass out of this point, let me acquaint you with an
Hypocritical Trick of some cunning Usurers. Who if they hear a man preach,
or argue against Usury; and feel themselves touched: They presently labor to
dawbe and divert, by asking, whether He mean all Usury: And they hope all
Usury in general is not to be dislikt, etc. Is there not some Usury allowed by
some Divines, as liberal Usury, Recompencing Usury, etc. Whereas they cannot
but know in their own consciences, except they wilfully blind themselves, that
this is nothing to the purpose; that they meddle not these ways, that hence,
they get no patronage, or defense at all for their wretched Trade, and practice
of Usury truly so called; poisoned by the covenant for certain gain, where
it is uncertain, whether the Borrower shall gain at all or loose. Which
differs formaliter as they say, from these now mentioned. For they are only
called so improperly, and equivocally, as we speak in the Schools: If a man
should set out the excellency of a man, discoursing of the admirable faculties
of the soul, the goodly structure of His Body, etc.

Were not He ridiculous that should step out and say: But I hope He means not
all this of man in general. For a dead man has no such thing, etc So, etc.
The venom and poison of the unconscionable covenant and by consequent that
life of iniquity is not found in liberal, or recompencing Usury.


As a dead man is called a man.

I say the (...), (which is not to be found in liberal, or recompencing
Usury) empoisoneth. For it is said, Exodus 22. 25. (...) Non imponet is super
cum Vsuram, you shall not impose, or lay upon Him Usury. And works of mercy,
bounty, or favor, as giving, and lending; are in their own natures not any
ways capable of bargain, and sale. See before many reasons to this purpose
scattered here and there, as occasion was offered.

But lest any mistake, and deceive themselves, and others: Consider the
Latitude, which Divines give to this term of Covenant in the definition of
Usury truly so called.

It may be either 1. Real, by pawn laid in both for principal, and Use. 2.
Or literal, by writing without pawn, as by Bill, Book, or Bond. 3. Or
Personal, without writing, in taking an other Man for surety besides the
Borrower. 4. Or verbal, either by promise without surety before witness, or
by secret stipulation, between themselves without witness. 5. Or silent,
without word, witness, writing, or pawn. And this silence: either 1 Of one
Party, thus: An Usurer says: I will lend you thus much money; but so much use
you shall pay me: The Borrower takes it in silence: this silence is a promise;
and that promise a covenant. 2 Nay where there is silence on both sides, there
may be an Usurious covenant. A common Borrower comes to a common Usurer, to
take up an hundred pound for three months: there is neither Bill, bond,
promise, nor demand for any use: Only this: The Borrower knows, how that
Usurer never lends* His money but for 10. in the 100. Likewise the Usurer
knows, how that Borrower never takes up, but upon use. The very Act of
borrowing, and lending in these two Parties, by common intendment, is a
covenant for Usury: And every covenant whatsoever, whether it be silent, or
express; whether it be bare, and naked in promise; or invested by further
security, if it be a covenant for loan, it is Usury.

I know in this point of Usury, the wit of man, which will work like a Moale,
to get into the earth, is set on foot by Covetousness to spin out many fine
and subtle threads, and to put forth many curious, and intricate Cases, which
may seem at first proposition, to promise nothing but fair dealing and
conscionable contract, and so upon the sudden puzel and perplexe a good
Divine, not so experienced in worldly dealings, (For it is an easy matter to
cast a stone into a Poole, which seven wise men will hardly get out.) But such
Spiders webs, upon exacter search, proving envenomed with some ufurious bane,
are so far from disingaging, that they ensnare their covetous, consciences in
more deep, and damnable Hypocrisy.

Some Instances in cunning contracts palliated with honest pretenses, but upon
true search, and due inquisition poisoned with usurious cruelty.

I. A man having no charge to leave behind Him, or little care of them, lends
out an hundred pound upon condition to receive a 110 lb. at years end, if He
be then living; but if He die, His Executors shall receive but fourscore. This
cunning case is corrupted with Usury, say good Divines:

1. Because the gain is certain, in respect of the Lender, and that for the
loan only. 2. Because there is no respect had, whether the Borrowers gain
be lawful, or not: Nay, whether He gain any thing at all, or no. 3. Because
the Lender does not adventure the principal. 4. Because He does not rely upon
GODS providence, for disposing and ordering of His goods: but will be sure of
gain, if He live; Howsoever it goes with the Borrower.
In a word, His case stands thus: He See for this purpose, Claytons case
adjudged to be Usury. L. Cook p. 5. of Reports.
hopes to live many years; and when He dies, He is sure to die but once:
then shall His Executors pay twenty in the Hundred, of such sums only, as
then shall be abroad at use. Under color of this adventure, He lends His
money, and lives upon the (...) while He lives. And so takes a course, by
this covenant, to be an Usurer, if He live. No condition shall bar Him from
it, but only death. Then of necessity, He must die an Usurer by virtue of the
same Covenant. And does any such brainelesse Worldling think, that His
Executors, after His death can redeem His soul from that sin, wherein he
died, by paying so much in the hundred, of His wealth, which then shall be none
of His? What subtle snares are twisted by greedy wits, to strangle their own
fowls, more unobservedly? For in this case Usury is masked under the Habit of
hazard, and adventure.

Or let the same Case be put in respect of a man's Child: besides
proportionable iniquity, as in the precedent. It were seven to One, the Child
should be living at the years end. And where the adventure i^ not sensible
and proportionable, it is but a mockery.

II. A man ashamed of open, and visible Usury, does sometimes practice it
mystically, under the color of selling, thus: When the Seller exacteth an
overplus, more then the just value of the ware, only for the time of
forbearance, which Himself grants to the Buyer.

By just value] I mean an equality between the wa^e, and the price, according
to the common estimation, at the time of the sale. Which equality
notwithstanding has His latitude: Neither must we think presently, that
price to be unjust, which is but a little under, or over the precise
Arithmeticall equality. And therefore, the Seller who grants time, so long,
as He keeps Himself within the latitude or compass, of an ordinary, and
equal price, may not be thought guilty of Usury. And sometimes it may so fall
out, (But in such Cases let men take heed, lest the deceitfullnesse of their
own hearts ensuare them) that the Buyer will not be brought to give the
equal price, unless He have time for payment: In which Case, Though the
Buyer may perhaps think, that He pays the dearer for the forbearance, yet
there is no Usury; because the Seller does not sell the dearer for time.

Only for the time of forbearance] I speak so, because there may be some
other reasons, why the Seller granting time, may sell the dearer:

1. When He knows, that, the value of the thing, will be more at the day of
payment, then at the day of sale; He may sell it for so much more, as in all
likelihood, it will be clearly more worth; His charges, and hazard, (if there
shall be any) and the impairing, or diminishing of the thing, (if it be
subject thereunto) for the mean time being deducted.

2. If the Thing which He sells, has a fruitful use, and yet
notwithstanding, that use shall be in all likelihood of no less price at the
day of payment, then it was, at the day of the sale, He may take so much the
more, as the fruitful use of the Thing, is in the mean time clearly worth,
the estimation of the hazard, and charge, being deducted.

For the time, which Himself grants to the Buyer] I add this; because if the
Buyer detaining the price longer, then the appointed time, shall be an
effectual cause of loss, or hinderance, to the Seller, He is to allow Him
Interest, properly so called: And the Seller may with good conscience exact it
of Him, especially, if not through want, but through negligence, and
unfaithfullnesse, He uses delay.

But when a man sells His ware, for more then the just price, only because
He gives time to the Buyer, He does indeed sell time, which is not His to
sell: and so under the contract of selling, He commits Usury: For when the
Seller is content to grant time to the Buyer for the payment of the price
agreed upon, it is all One, as if He lent that money, for such a time: For the
voluntary forbearing of money due to Him for His ware, is all one with loan:
And upon such forbearing the Buyer becomes a Debtor, and the Seller a Creditor.
For example: Thou sellest (...) for 11. pounds to be paid at the end of six
months, which Thou would have sold for 10 lb. in present money. This men
may call what they will, but it is Usury, after the rate of twenty in the
hundred.

Some Divines more briefly thus: To sell wares for time, and in respect of
time, to fell dearer, may be free from Usury.

1. Either in respect of the rising of the commodity so sold; if by the
ordinary course of seasons, it will be worth more, at the day of payment of
the money, then it was, at the time of sale, and delivery.

2. Or in Case, a man can neither vent His commodity for present money, nor
keep it longer without corruption, or detriment to the ware; nor forbear the
money, without sensible prejudice to Himself. These may seem valuable
considerations, without compass of this Teane.

But admit a man will sell dearer of purpose, for the forbearance; and forbear
of purpose, only, that He may sell dearer; without pregnant likelihood of
the market rising, at the time of payment, or of damnifying Himself by keeping
His ware, or such like valuable considerations; that is Usury. For it is all
one, as if He lent so much money for lucre upon covenant.

III. Sometimes Usury masketh under the color of buying, thus: A (...) (...)
unto an other 100 lb. The principal to (...) (...) by 10 lb. a year in ten
years; and ten pound a year overplus, for the use of that money: This were
extreme Usury within the Statute. If therefore purposely to avoid the
Statute, He should agree with the Borrower, to alter the nature of the
contract, thus: With the same 100 lb. He will purchase an Annuity of 20 lb. foe
ten years of the same party: This is Though it be bargain, and sale: yet
upon the matter, the very same, under an other form of covenant: The very
intention makes it Usury.
bargain and sale, yet is it the very same Thing, in Truth; differing only in
the parchment, and manner of covenanting; subject to the same iniquity, and
inequality; poisoned with their joint purpose of avoiding the penalty of Usury,
by other conveiances. For if their purpose could by any precedent communication
of borrowing or other pregnant circumstances be discovered, the same Statute
would condemn them of Usury. But yet, if simply, without any pretense, such
Annuity of rent be bought, and sold, we cannot condemn it for Usury.
Howbeit, if it be an unreasonable bargain, or be injurious unto any by
circumstances, it may be a breach of justice, and charity in an other kind.
See ^. page 120. Down. 173.

I will give you a taste of the truth of my two latter Answers to the last
Objection, in some of the Worthiest of your supposed Writers of Usury.

1. Concerning your first Author, T. C. His Manuscript is punctually and
exactly answered by an Orthodoxe Learned Divine, who was ten See his Book
against Usury. page 46.
years Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in Cambridge, D. Pie; in His Book
called, Vsuries Spright conjured: published 1604. To which, for any thing I
could ever heard, not any Usurer, Ecclesiastique or Laick, or any of their
Proctors, Brokers, or Dependants any way, have replied any one word. And
therefore that Answer stands authentical, and impregnable, until some man say
something against it.

2. Concerning Bishop Jewel; I wonder at their foreheads, who offer to rank
Him amongst the Patrons of Usury. J never read in Papist or other a more gross
and unconscionable falsification. For Jewel, read Him upon 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. You
have Him here, or ought to have Him in your Churches: is as resolute,
plentiful, and mighty against Usury, as ever any I read in my life. He is so
punctual, and precise; so universal and absolute against it; that hear His
own words, Ibid. page 84. in the point of letting out the money of Widows,
Orphans and Men distracted.

He that takes money to Usury, says He, whether He gain, or lose, or
whatsoever happen unto Him, He must answer the whole stock He borrowed. And
this is it that undoeth so many, and makes them bankrupts. But this happens
not in this Case* He that occupies the Orphans money or stock, is changed
only to use it as His own, and no otherwise. If it perish or decay, or
miscarry without His fault, he is not bound to answer it. Therefore as I said
it is no Usury.

In the Sect. next before, thus: This is not Usury (says He) Why? Because He
that takes the stock of the Orphan, or of the mad man or of the diseased
Merchant i^ not bound to answer all adventures, and casualties that happen. As,
if to like use I take a stock in cattle, and they die without my default: or
a stock in money, or wares, and the wares be burnt by fire, or the money
stolen without my default, I am not bound to answer the principal: therefore
it is no Usury.

Here now M. S. come you in with your own woeful gloss: and will needs make
M. Jewel, (for so you call Him here) the most noble, resolute, powerful
confuter and confounder of Usury, that ever J read, to be on your side.

If a man be not bound, say you, to answer it, (as M. Jewel says) I pray you
in what case shall the poor Orphane, Mad man, or sick Merchant be in, if
their stock be gone? It had been better for them, to have had their stock
lying still in their hands, and to have lived of it, then when it is gone to
starve for hunger.

These are your own words M. S. Jewel makes no such Quere; therefore Jewel
is of none of yours; whom notwithstanding you put in your Catalogue, by such a
trick of falsification as I never read.

But what shall become of the Orphans, etc. say you if their stock be gone?
And what shall become of those, say J, that have no stock at all? whom
notwithstanding GOD graciously provides for, though they use no usurious, or
injurious ways of getting. Who are we that we should exempt Orphans or any
from being subject to GODS providence, and ordering? Let this be the pestilent
property of Usurers, to sow, as Saint Chrysostom said, without land, plow, or
rain; upon the matter not to trust GODS providence: See Fent. page 95. And
further about Orphans; See before page 48. etc.

3. As concerning Perkins. His third condition Vol. 1. page 63. upon the eight
Commandment: which is this: He must sometimes be so far from taking gain,
that He must not require the principal, if His Debtor be by inevitable and
just casualties brought behind, etc.

In the place quoted by you in His Exposition of CHRIST'S Sermon in the Mount:
He only approoves liberal and recompencing Usury, which I handled before;
not Usury truly and properly so called, commonly practiced in this Kingdom,
and that which J ever preach against and here oppose.

4. Willet is an other in the Catalogue. Hear His own words cutting the heart
of Usurers, and Usury properly so called, commonly practiced amongst us.

This consideration, says He, given for the loan of money must not be ex
pacto: it must not be agreed upon by any certain compact, and covenant: as the
words here are lo cesimun: non imponet is: you shall not impose, or lay upon
Him Usury. As it is not lawful to covenant with a man certainly to pay so
much: He may loose by using this money; He may be in hazard also of the
principal: For the Lender then to receive a certain gain, where the Borrower
is a certain looser, were not just: Such indifferency must be used, as that
the Lender be contented; as to be made partaker of the gain that comes by
His money, so also proportionably to bear part Nempe si Creditor saenus non
imperat turpiter, sed debtor boneste offert. Sin autem utilitas ad ipsum nulla
redierit, ut caveat Creditor, ne ex lalabore inutili debitoris sui, aut etiam
damnoso suam ipsius utilitatem inhumane captet. Appen. Ad Expl Levitici. page
115.
of the loss. Upon Exodus 22. page 52.

5. Iunius is an other in the Muster. But He also so tempers Usurious poison
with Cautions, and Conditions as He calls them; that He breaks the neck of
the common Usury practiced amongst us.

The first is in respect of the manner (The Transcriber says measure, falsely,
if not cunningly)* And what is that? That the Creditor do not impose it
unhonestly: but the Debtor honestly offer it.

In his third Caution He has this passage: If no profit be reaped by the
Debtor, let the Creditor take heed lest He cruelly covet and feeke after His
own commodity, from the unprofitable labor and loss of the Debtor.

6. Zanchius is also urged. But hear Him also so far from approoving our
common Usury, that He utterly confounds in these words: Imo hoc aio esse debes
O Creditor, ut si debtor non solum non fecit lucrum, sed etiam accepit damnum,
tu quoque damni aliquid cum illo patiaris: hoc enim postulat aequitas and
charitas. Jn 4. Ad Ephesians. page 446.

Nay thou ought says He, O Creditor to be of this resolution; that if the
Debtor, not only make no gain; but also has received loss, thou also must
suffer with Him some part of the loss. For this equity and charity require.

7. Your Virell allows that gain for lending, which is taken according to
order of Law. But our Laws, as appears clearly before, page 32, 33, etc.
take no order to take any Usury; Nay our Common Law abominates it; Our Statute
Law calls it a detestable sin and forbidden by the Law of GOD; Therefore we
of this Land must take no Usury.

8. That Polanus does not approove, but condemn Usury properly and truly so
called, commonly practiced in this Kingdom, seems manifest, by diverse
passages:

He makes three kinds of it: 1. Gainefull. 2. Recompensing. 3. Punishing.

The first, which is the same with our common Usury, practiced in this
Kingdom, He thus defines:

Usura lucratoria, est surtu^ quod committitur, cum quis lucrum accipit solius
mutuation is causa, nullo da^no accepto culpa ejus, qui mutuo sumpsit. Pol.
Syntag. Tom. 2. cap 63. page 4476.
Gainefull Usury is theft, which is committed, when any receives gain, only
in liew of lending, having received no damage, by any fault of the Borrower.

Under this kind He compriseth all Hujus species est Usura Usurarum, etc. item
omnis Usura, quae pauperes opprimit, aut pauperes facit. Ibid. Quia est ini.
qua, quum per eam Usur arius quaerat lucrum ex ear, cujus damnum, aut
periculum ad eum non spectat, sed ad debitere^. Injustum est exalterius damno
lucrum captare Ibid page 4477.
kind of Usury, which either oppresses the poor; or makes men poor. How
Usury bites, and makes men poor; See before, page 10. etc.

His reasons for which He damnes this Usury are many: The sixth declares His
meaning against that Usury which we pursue with just indignation, and is
commonly and cursedly practiced almost now every where. It runs thus:

This gainefull Usury is wicked; since by it, the Usurer seeks gain out of
that thing, the loss, or hazard whereof belongs not unto Him; but to the
Debror. It is an unjust thing to gape for gain, out of an other man's loss.

Mutuatio debet esse gratuita: i.e. absque alicujus lucri exactione, and
captatione, aut doni acceptatione. Ibid. page 4473.

Borrowing ought to be free, without exaction, and captation of gain, or
receiving of gain.

It seems by such passages as these; that Polanus was no Patron of Usury
properly so called.

At the Close, let me speak unto you; as Saint Austin did sometimes unto His
Hearers: Haec fratres charissimi, si vobis ego non dixero rationem pro animabus
vestris in die judicij redditurus ero. Quicunque autem magis mihi irasti, quam
se emendare voluerit, non habet unde per ignorantiam se possit ante tribunal
aeterni judicis excusare, ut dicat se non fuisse admonitum, nec a malis
prohibitum, nec ad ea, quae sunt DEO placita castigatione, and admonitione
frequentissima provocatum. Sed credimus de Domini misericordia, quod ita
negligentibus quibusque inspirare dignabitur, ut sibi magis, vel peccatis suis,
quam medicamentis sacerdotatibus irascantur. Et quomodo aegrotantes a carna
libus med cis requirunt sanitatem corporum, sic a spiritalibus medicamenta
desiderent animarum. August. De Tempore Sermon. 243.

Beloved Brethren, if I admonish you not of these things, I must give an
account for your souls at the day of judgment. But whosoever will rather be
angry with me, then amend himself, has no excuse for his ignorance before
the tribunal of the eternal Judge: as that he was not prohibited from evil,
or provoked to good. But our trust is in the mercy of GOD, that by His holy
inspirations He will so work upon all negligent hearers, that they will be
angry rather with themselves and their sins, then with the wholesome
medicines of the Priest: And as sick people desire health of body from their
carnal Physicians, so they will earnestly desire the health of their souls
from those that are spiritual.

FINIS.
Perlegi tractatum hunc de Vsura, in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate
imprimatur

THO: WYKES R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.


