A commyssion sent to the bloody butcher bishop of London, and to al couents of
Frers, by the high and mighty prince, lord, Sathanas the devil of Hell.

SAthanas king of sorrow / prince of darckenes and lord of Hell / Abbot of
apostasy, of the order of ypocresie / provost of pride / and prouincial
general of all mischief. Unto our true subjects of the order of al couentes
of liars, we do send our greting with as good welfare as we have our selves:
desiring and charging you upon your allega^ce that ye at al times be ready and
obedient unto this our will and commandment. Jesus Christ that miserable
person, the son of Mari has deceived us. For in time of his living upon the
earth, he fained in all things, using himself so sottellie and craftelie, that
we might not know surely what he was, he lived in great pouertye and
wretchedness without any worldly lordeshippes. If any were rich and wise,
he made them wret ches, beggars, and stark fools to al men's judgment, (...)
them to live only in charity and (...), to despise the world, and to refuse
the vanities thereof. So that he and his simple fools taught the priests and
clerks that (...) be their successors and Christ's disciples / (...) so to
live. And unto them he left certain foolyshe writings called the Pistels and
Gospels, wherein they should always know their masters simple living, and
how to live thereafter them selves. This wretched and simple Christ was not
only content to live thus peuishly himself, but he reproved the lords,
Bishops, high princes and priests our chaplains of honor, and all the scribes
and phareses, the executors of our daily service (because they were contrary
to his living and teaching) and the true fulfyllers of our high
commandments: they that were altogether given (as our eternal will was) to
covetousness and lordshippes. They had religious Abbotes, holy orders, perfect
commaundeme^ts of the law, with all other things that becomes our servants
to have. Which things seemed very holy and without deceit unto the eyes of the
unlearned people. Therefore this cursed Christ, reproved openly our hie Lords
and great clerks. In so much that both we and they were in danger and fear
of losing the mighty kingdom of this world which we have in peaceable
possession. And doutlesse if we had not (by our excellent learning) invented
and found a short remedy: we had clearly been undone. But we and our
faithful Lords, Priests, Clerks, Scribes and Pharases withal our mighty
parsons of our kingdom, found a means by our wisdom, might and power, to
put him to (...) after such a fassion and by the authority of the law: that no
man could find fault in his condempnacion, but every man judged him warthie
of death, saving a (...) foolish vagaboundes that had no dwelling place / who^
also he had deceived with his false doctrine. So that we thought our self /
and all ours to be out of danger for ever. But now that we knew not him to be
God / he has deceived us, and set us in worse case then ever we were before,
through the might of his Godhead. For he arose from death to life the third
day / and showed him self to his Disciples. Of this our soldiers which kept
the sepulcher were witness, he did also teach and preach the kingdom of heaven
to his friends which is contrary to our eternal lordships. And after. (...).
days he ascended up into heaven / commanding his apostles to preach his
gospel to every creature through out all the world. And ten days after he sent
them his holy spirit which both taught them all verity / and also
strengthened and boldned them, so that they nether feared us nor our mighty
power (though we put the^ to death) but went forth boldly and preached his
gospel unto al men. So that they withdrewe from our mighti lordships more
people the^ ever their wretched master christ did. In so much that the hie wai
and clergy of our mighty kingdom was ouergrowen and wore^ clear out of
knnwledge, where through we and our most eternal Lordshyps were almost
destroyed. Wherefore we perceauinge this (by our eternal wisdom) and many other
ieopardies that might have fallen to our excellent parsone / ordained a general
counsel of al Dukes, princes / barons, co^mens, with the cursed company of our
religions and lordships of hell, to set a redress in all things. And so by our
sage and wise counsel it was devised that every mischief must be destroyed by
his contrary. And where as the mischief and destruction of our kingdom came
by poverty, mekenes, and despising of Lordshippes (which al priests had
learned of Christ and his disciples) therefore our highness thought with our
wise counsel that our religion and true service must be recovered again
with riches of priests, by mighty power, by sottell learning / and by all
worldly honor For this our highness has devised and (...) that priests of al
de grees might be of a great multitude to have (...) without number, to have
also all manner of rule and worldly (...), and so great power over every man,
that no man might ouerface them. But to rule Lords and Kings and all the
world at their pleasure. And thus to come with more diligence to our service
and Lordships: and to bring this our high counsel the better to pass: we moved
the Emperor in Pope (...) his days by our (...) and prinye means to give and
(...) Priests and clerks with all worldly lordships which was co^ trary to ye
doctrine of our wretched (...) Christ. And for because we would not that it
should be perceived: we devised this to be given under ye color of an alms.
For Siluester was a little scrupulous and if we had not diligently entised him
under this color of alms, he would have forsaken it. We also persuaded him
to bestow it on holy Church, and so through our hie wisdom we brought to
pass that he took these worldly Lordshippes: and all his successors have
followed his steps and in that thing succeeded him most fastest, so that now
they have gathered so plenteously that they are lords and kings of the arth,
and are become our true and faithful chaplains of honor. And the^ not long
after we devised for them certain priuilegies that they and al theirs should be
exempte from al due obedience and from under the correction of any good law.
But that al other men should be rather unto them. Also because we could not be
served in poor and little churches, we devised large monastaries, proud saying
and piping with out heart. So that we made the^ honor our enemy christ with
their lyps, and honored us with their hearts, we also have ordained that
nothing should be mynistred in our temples without money wherewith they might have
welfare of body with delicate meats and drinks and gorgious apparel in the
sight of the world, and great places to maintain their lordships in: and
because we would not be proved contrary to Christ, we devised yt no man should
call any of his goods several or pro per to his own use, saii^g it is mine but
rather to say in general / it is ours / or the patrimoni of s. Augustine,
Dominike / Fran^ces / or some other such saint. And because that men would
think that we had devised these things of our own power, we by our eternal
wisdom have ordained also that you our trustye (...) of all the orders of liars
should come in to bear witness that (...) these things are lawful and good, and
that ye might be more in estimation in the eyes of the simple peo ple, we
devised that ye should come withal ypocresy and dissimulacion of living, simple
of raiment, loking rufully, speaking holyly, croking and ducking lowly unto
every man: no thing saying that ye have, but all thing willing to have /
making long prayers for money. We have given you a title of beggyng of every
man / and you to give no man whereby you may increase in riches and Iyue
easily. And to hyde all things from the syghte of the people (...) have given
you large Monastaries to take your pleasure in. In the which solitary places /
under the color of chastitye, ye may (...) in (...) bawdrye and commit most
(...) zodomitre. We have also devised that you should go to scoole under the
pretense of godly preaching / whereby you may come into more favor and power
to increase our service. (...) to bring you to world ly honor we have
ordained that you shall take all the degrees of scole, that men may give you
the more: and by this means you may com to worldly lordships and well fare,
which at your beginning you (...) utterly to refuse. Wherefore we perceauing
your faithful and (...) service that you bear toward us (in fulfyllyng of
our hye ordinance, and mainteining of our noble kingdom) have written unto
you a letter of the ordinance and statutes of our most increable (...) cel,
confirming you how they shall be continued and how our lordships shall be best
increased. First we will you to keep no pouertye nor meekenes in heart, but
in countenance only consider how we except you above al me^, you must al so
have meek words, and proud deeds, charitable outwardes, and envious inwards,
and se that you increase in riches and hate beggars, profess it in words, but
(...) in deeds. And that you may bring al these things to pass and allother
the better about: we have devised you to be confessors to lords and ladies to
the intent that ye may the more depely inspire the^ with the doctrine of your
God our Pope who^ in aniwise forget not to affirm to be Gods holy Uikar:
which as you know well is ye head Antechrist our faithful successor We have
given you al fained and worldly power to preach for money alleging always
great necessiti: therefore do thus much for us again, that ye preach nothing
that shall displease any great me^, but ra there yt which shall most delight the^
and their appetites: for those be they which may soon depose both you and us
if ye once displease them: and that our mortal enemies those beg gerly wretches
of our aduersarye Christ do once with his peuish gos pel utter unto the^ your
falshed and ypocrisy, and so prevail among the^. Se that you learn your young
noueses your precepts diligently. (...) pli your selves (...) please al (...)
rich me^, for so shall you mayntaine our true service. If any folish wret ches
will teach the gospel of our enemy Christ. See that you stand stiffly in our
name against the^, crying and saying: their manner of tea ching is (...)
doctrine, and heresy, and contrary to all that the fathers of our holy Church
taught. And see that ye be diligent to accuse the^ to the head Lords and
gouernoues, for the destruction of the worldly honor and riches of our carnal
(...) / and that under the color of the (...) of the holy Church. (...) if
any mighty Prince do manfullye maintain our worldly regiment. Se that ye
crown him with (...) vain glory of our famous title or other, and make him
believe that it is more worth to him, and that he has a greater treasure of
it, then of many thousand pounds. But if they once smell to ward the gospel
of our mortal enemy christ, whether it be by the reading of some of his
eluishe books, or else moved to pytye through the pacyent sufferinge of death of
his disciples whereby they then begin to suspecte your falsehed. Then run unto
the great bishops our true messengers, and cause them to turn the rulers
minds some other way by geuyng the^ money or corruptinge them with some gay
promises or great gifts And we on our part will do such diligence that against
you come to the bishops our ministers, we will move the matter before hand
telling them that if your ypocresye be once open, their pride and pomp cannot
long be hid. Se that among you with the help of our bishops without fail
against al tempests and storms that may happen unto out kingdom: ye set up or
cause to be set up of the temporal sort, of such as have the most subtyl and
practiced wits and will be corrupted with money at the least (...). or. iii.
proctours, for two causes The one because the blind lay people shall think
that me^ of small learning are (...) enough to co^ found such (...) opinions:
and as though ye your selves could do greater things. Another cause is this
that if our kyngedome chance to catch a fall in any region, you may yet say
that you prea ched not so, but the temporal men write so, and so leave your
proctours in the dich and escape quite your selves. Also if any crafty per
swasion of worldly wisdom or subtle sophistry by our secret insti gacion do
come unto any of your minds, that look you write always and send it, to
your proctoures. Be it provided always among you that if you chose but two
proctoures, let the one in any wise be much younger then the other, that he
may when the old is blind and weary, help forth with those things that the
other for age or blyndes could not finyshe and so may our church be well
defended. And then go to and be of good comfort, and take to you a lustye
courage, make a good face, babble, lie, and cry out apase: saying that al
makes on your side Christ, his holy apostles and all the old holy
doctoures with the use of the holy church this fyftene hundred years. If the
people would have (...) to (...): say the tongue that you speak (what language
so ever it be) is so corrupt that it cannot be in that tongue translated, if any
fool arise and translate it into any good language (better then ye your
selves ca^ do it) call him a new apostle and a stark (...) against the holy
church. If you see the people read it, and like it well, the^ say it is falsely
translated and more fuller of (...), the^ a net is full of holes and se that ye
(...) daily (or else let your proctoures write a (...)) that it is so hard that
no man can understand it: and allege the most hardest parables of the
scripture and those that may seem most obscure to be understand of men's ca
pacities and (...), lo masters how understand ye this, affirming that ancient
fathers which have studied all their lives in deuinitye, could never attain to
the understanding of them, and so by this so telty you shall make the rude
people think that it is much more impossible for them to perceive thein (...)
so drive them quite from the mind of readinge of scripture, If some busye
(...) will dye with (...) wreiched gospel (as he himself tought they should,
and alhis beggarly apostles gave the^ (...)) then labor to great men to get
out wrytes of execucyon that they may be burnt in or de (...) if it please your
grace, they (...) parsons and would have us and the faith of holy church
down first, and when they have a while (...) their carnal and (...) liberty,
they will have your grace down also, and by that (...) will make al (...): and
therefore if it please (...) highness, it is necessary that you give out your
write of (...) that such pernicious and pestilent members may be put out of
the hole and sound flock of the catholic and faithful people, we need to say
no more, ye are wise and dilygent enough in this our business, and your honor
and profit. But besure that ye cease not til those gospel bablers be brought
to the fire which they so long looked and labored for, and when they be
burnt, then send to one of your (...) (the youngest were most metest) to
garntshe invent and furnishe out some lies of them in wrytinge, yea al clean
contrary to that they said when they were alive, and let the proctoure tell in
his book of such things as the party that was burnte and he comoned (...)
together when no man was present by thein except one of is own company that
would say as him self has written or said: for so may he lie largely and no
man can reprone him, and this thing in aniwise sethat you do not in your own
name / lest the people should know and believe ye said it of envy because these
herelikes re proved in deed your false doctrine and naughty living. But let
your temporal proctour do it, to bleare the eyes of the commons withal, and
make them believe that he will be indifferent: yea or rather if it com so best to
pass, you may do it your selves in the name of some proud boy, and for his
labor call him a young gentilman, whom you may feign to have alleged against
those heretics as many strong reasons as you your selves could ymagine: and
let those your Proctoures never goo playnelye forth / too the proof of
any thing / nor dyspute the matter / but with (...), (...), you cannot lie,
calling these fools arrogant Heretics. And no we to conclude we (...) you,
that ye can do nothing to please us so highly, as to destroy (...) enemy
Christ / and his (...) Gospel / there fore above all other things / beware that
it proceed not forth: for if his Gospel go (...), we and al you are undone.
(...) least these lewd Loselles bear you down with their wretched bible,
for you have (...) of laws. (...) hundred years old to maintain your estate
with all, se that ye (...) fast to them, (...) to no other thing for (...) fall
to his Gospel, they will give you no more (...) as long as you be strong and
(...) / but will cry upon you to (...) / as that beggarly wretch Paul (...)
teach in his (...) she (...). But beware of that, for then every man will
despise you: we (...) in your wisdom, wherefore we write not many things to
you, but take and printe this our hie commyssio^ in your hearts and work
thereafter, as we trust in you, and ye shall have no less joy then our selves
have, fare you well: trust us as we do unto you.

Written in our brighte and burning chair, from our infernal kingdom
prepared to us and you with all our angels your lord and royal king Sathanas
under our seal manuell.

