A CORDIAL FOR CHRISTIANS IN THE TIME OF AFFLICTION.

OR,

A SERMON PREACHED At Kethering Lecture by Master ROBERT BOLTON, Bachelour of
Divinity, and sometimes Fellow of Brasen-nose College in Oxford.

Published by I. S.

LONDON. Printed by GEORGE MILLER dwelling in the Blacke-Fryers, MDCXL.

To the Reader.
AS nothing in the world makes a man so Act. 17. 11.
truly noble as Religion: So nothing to the world makes a man more Acts 28.
22. John 15 19. Wisdom 2. 18
liable to opposition and dis grace. And our mighty God that governes in
wisdom, and ever has an 1 Peter 5. 7
especial care of his people, suffers that so to be for some such ends as
these. 1 That the Hosea 5. 13 1 Peter 4. 13
graces of Gods Children may shine, the rust being scoured off. 2 That their
incense offerings in their several duties being broken and beaten Genesis 8. 20
may smell the more. 3 That their obedience may be discerned by the purblind
world not to be mercinary, but from some in ward principle unknown to nature,
etc. Now for the poor persecuted Saints to follow this way of Gods g 1 Cor. 4.
12
providence 1 Chro. 29. 17
kindly to obey with a willing yielding (...) rather then to be angry at them.
Acts 28. 26
They see only with a natural eye: If a man look upon GODS ways only with
the eye of Reason they are foolishness to him; and sure if a man look upon
GODS Word and Works through the false glass of worldly wisdom, he cannot
but imagine the thing promised in the one and in agitation in the other
impossible so to be effected as promised for his childrens good. If a man had
only so looked 2 Kings 20 11
upon the Exodus 14. 22
Sun standing still in Hezekiahs time, or upon the Judges 5. 20
Sea when the bottom became dry, and the waters stood as walls on each side;
or upon the Exodus 13. 21
Stars that fought in their courses against Sisera: Or upon the Daniel 3 22,
23, 27.
fiery Pillar which was sent to the Israelites, would they have thought these
should be a means to preserve GODS children and destroy the Enemies. Little
Heb. 11. 31
did Nebuchadnezar the va^iant men of his army think when they bound the three
children in their clothes to cast them into the hot fiery furnace that the same
fire thus prepared should burn and destroy them, and burn only the bonds to
set free the poor persecuted Saints not once to hurt either body or garment,
but to be a means to bring them to greater honor amongst their Persecutors. O
the infinite wisdom of our good GOD that can put such understanding into
senseless creatures thus to distinguish between the precious and the vile,
him that serves GOD and him that serves him not more clearly then the Devil
and natural men can discern: Now therefore to clear the Eye of Faith which
only Acts 16. 23
discernes such things and to help thee to get support against any such
Faintings or the least grumbling at such a providence, which is unbeseeming a
Paul (though in Prison with sore sides) for Religion.

1. Se^ Prayer a work, which works wonders in Heaven and earth, because that
sets GOD a work for us that is the hearer of Prayers and that he^ps his
servants out of several Persecutions and Afflictions when they pray by working
John 6. 26
wonders for them rather then they shall rest subject to continuail pressures
of wicked men.

2. Set Faith a work, a hard duty I confess, it being easier to obey then
believe aright. Faith being the Deuteronomy. 26. 6, 7
work of GOD, Obedience without Faith being the work of man. Therefore let me
entreat of thee to use the means that GOD affords, either to help thee out or
comfort thee in affliction, as if thou had no promise: And yet so believe and
depend upon the promise for thy being helped out or upheld in the affliction,
as if thou had no means at all to look after, that GOD may have all the
honor from thee, and then certainly He that gives a being to his promises and
a blessing to the means will prosper thee in the use of them: which of his
Mercy he grant to us all for the LORD CHRIST'S sake,

AMEN.
A CORDIAL FOR CHRISTIANS IN the time of Affliction*
MICAH VII. VIII, IX. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, yet
shall Irise again; when I sit in darkness, the LORD will be alight unto me.

I will bear the indignation of the LORD: because I have sinned against him,
until He plead my cause, and execute judgment for me, he will bring me
forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.


IN the former part of this Chapter, the Prophet in the Person of the Church
complains of the paucity of GODS people, of the fewness of those that truly
fear GOD, First, by way of resemblance, comparing them to the gatherings of
Summer, and the grape-gleanings of the Vintage, verse. 1. Secondly plainly, by
saying the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none upright
amongst men, they all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every one his Brother
with a net, v. 2.

Secondly, he complains of the plurality of the wicked, of the horrible and
universal corruption of the times. First plainly, That they may do evil with
both hands earnestly, the Prince asks, and the Judge asks for a reward, and
the great man utters his mischievous desire, so they wrap it up, v. 3.
Secondly, in a borrowed speech, resembling the best to a bryar, to a thorny
hedge- v. 4.

In the miserable estate of all things, it is the counsel of the HOLY GHOST
not to trust in man, or to rely upon the arm of flesh, v. 5, 6. For the
dearest, nearest, greatest, etc. will deceive and fail, and prove as broken
staves of reed, Psalm, 62. 9. The children of men are vanity, the chief men
are liars: to lay them upon a balance, they are altogether lighter then
vanity. But it is the LORD that does great things, and therefore in him only
rejoice, Psalm. 126. 3. Also Ier. 17. 5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man,
and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the LORD. For why,
Isa. 40. 15, 17. Behold the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted
as the dust of the balance, behold he takes away the Isles as a little dust,
V. 17. All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less
then nothing, and vanity; Thus does the Prophet wish man not to trust in man,
but in the LORD. And after this dehortation from trusting in man, the Prophet
in the person of the Church, does profess that he will look unto, and rely
upon the LORD, v. 7. which blessed confidence, and safe repose upon the
all-sufficient God, does beget this glorious triumph over the insolency and
insultation of their enemies in the time of their depression and disgrace, v.
8. And this excellent exercise of their faith, does repel and conquer very
sore and sharp temptations, which are wont to set upon the servants of GOD in
their sufferings under the pressures and oppressions of the wicked, the cruel
mockings and scornful insultations of the enemies to their goodness: Which
is bitterer (says Calvin) then the suffering it self; Neque tantum est
acerbitatis in ipso malo, quantum in ludibrijs improborum, ubi nobis petulanter
insultant, derident fidem nostram and ingenuis naturis semper est durior
contumelia, quam ipsa mors.

Immediately upon the Churches profession of her trusting the LORD; she bids
her enemies not rejoice against her, v. 8. and backs it with mighty and
invincible reasons, which proves they have no reason for it.

When I fall I shall arise:] 1.
If I were down without hope or possibility of recovery it were something on
their side, but as sure as my GOD is alsufficient, my head CHRIST above water,
the Angels my guard, all the creatures my friends; Sun, Moon and the Stars
for me, the prayers of all that blessed communion of my fellow Saints press
continually for me unto the throne of grace, all the promises in GODS Book are
in CHRIST Yea and Amen, etc. So certainly shall Jup again, sooner or later
gloriously for ever. Job was as deeply sunck into a comfortless pit of
outward affliction as ever any was, yet the arm of his GOD helped him out
again. We know what end the LORD made, Iam. 5. 11. David was fearfully
plunged into a dungeon of extreme horror, Psalm. 77. Yet the right hand of the
most high changed all this. So was Mistress (...) M. Peacocke and many more so
down and so delivered.
And it must needs be so, for the Almighty hand of GOD is under him, Psalm. 37.
24. though he fall he shall not be cast of, for the LORD puts under his
hand. Now must not he needs up again whom an omnipotent hand supports and
upholds? What man or devil, or world of creatures can keep him down, whom
the LORD of Heaven and Earth will raise, either let the malice of the wicked
manacle the Almighty arm of GOD, which is more then utterly and infinitely
unpossible, or as sure as that highest Majesty is in Heaven, every faithful
servant of JESUS CHRIST shall rise again out of the most desperate distress,
at the utmost, at that great day, which will be most illustrious, when their
clearing and exaltation will be in the presence of all the Angels in Heaven,
and all the sons and daughters of Adam that ever were in the face of Heaven
and Earth: Is it not therefore strange that any wicked man should insult at
their fall, that thus certainly shall rise; but the wicked themselves shall
stagger and fall and rise no more, for they want this only helping hand to
recover them.

When I sit in darkness the LORD shall be 2.
a light unto me.] Nay in the mean time in the darkest midnight of distress,
the LORD will blessedly shine into my heart with the beams of his favor, sense
of his love and presence of his Spirit; yea many times more gloriously,
specially and comfortably, then in the days of my peace, prosperity and rest.
For besides particular promises for that purpose, observe, Isa. 43. 2. When
thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, through the floods that
they do not overflow thee; when thou walk through the very fire thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flames kindle upon thee. For I am the LORD,
etc. GODS children in the time of their afflictions and sufferings are wont to
be most faithful, for then Faith is set a work only to find comfort in GOD.
2. Most prayerfull, Esa. 26. 16, 17. LORD in trouble have they visited thee,
they powered out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them, Like as a woman in
travail is in sorrow and cries in her pains, so have we bens in thy sight O
LORD; though they be prayerfull at other times, yet this sets an edge and heat
to their Prayers. 3. GODS children in time of their sufferings be most humble,
etc. and to such as be most faithful, prayerfull and humble GOD is wont to
reveal and communicate himself with much familiarity and love, no restraint,
no dungeon can hinder the ascending of our faithful, humble prayers unto GOD,
nor the influence of the love and light of his countenance from us; that
lightsomenesse came from Heaven that made Paul and Sylas sing at midnight in
the inner-prison, their feet being fast in the stocks. And so did all those
sweet exaltations of spirit which possessed our blessed Martyrs in Queen
Mary's time and all other Saints of GOD at any other times, in times of
pressure and persecution. For at such times the presence, freedom, and
comforts of the blessed Spirit are wont to enlarge, refresh and crown their
hearts extraordinarily.

I will bear the indignation of the LORD.] 3.
Those that are enemies to the Church and GODS children were they in the same
troubles they see the Saints of GOD in, would indeed yell and howl and roar
having no protection nor antidote against the sting and venom of their
sorrows and sufferings, and therefore they conceive, and thereupon out of
their cruel and dunghill dispositions insult, that Christians are paid home
horribly and plagued in such cases, no knowing poor souls that the Saints
have a sovereign inward virtue, and vigor, I mean, patience (to which
themselves are mere strangers) whereby they take off the edge, and extinguish
the poison of all afflictions, whether from GOD, man, or Satan, which would
eat up the hearts, and drink up the spirits, and double the sting in the
wicked, whenever they are sore vexed; as if Mordecai a better man then Haman,
do not crouch to him, it will not only vex his heart, but cause him to loose
all that sweet of his honor. How would wicked men have taken it, that such a
dog as Shemei should rail upon David being a King, and Kings you know are
impatient at opposition, yet David's patience takes away the sting and
spiritually answers, It may be the LORD has sent him, observe how grace
conquers, and that Faith in GODS children begets not only peace, but patience,
Romans 5. 3. We rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings forth
patience.

Because I have sinn^d against him.] 4.
The wicked in their sufferings do look upon the smart and the creatures, as
a dog upon the stone that is thrown. GODS children look upon the offense,
their own deserts, and the first moover, GOD himself, who corrects in love
and for his good, which causes a vast difference either to exasperate and
enrage, or to mollify and assuage the anguish of the cross, the bitterness
of the trouble. Thus did Job, Joseph, David, and so did all that truly fear
GOD procure a great deal of ease and patience to their souls, It is the LORD,
etc. looking upon their own deserts, upon GODS kindness, and their
ingratitude, etc. give some ease: As Mauritius an Emperor who might have saved
the lives of many of GODS people from the sword of the enemy, but did not; at
length an enemy came against him, and took him, and killed his children before
him, he having one little one at nurse it was sent for and also slain before
his eyes, then he cried out being sensible of his own sins, Just are thy
judgments O LORD. So holy Bradford in Queen Maryes time, cried out to the
LORD that he had deserved to die, because of his sins; but says he, Behold
LORD they punish not my sins, but persecute me because of thy Gospel, and for
standing for thy truth: So might all the Martyrs have said; so we may cry out we
have sinned, we have bin lukewarm, we have had a form of godliness and denied
the power thereof. Nay prodigious villainies, we have had sins rise up in the
Gospel, not before heard off, fitter for the dark nooks of hell, or midnight of
Popery. How may we therefore cry out, now we all are afflicted, thy judgments
O LORD are most just. The consideration of their deserts, and looking up unto
the LORD caused Job, David and Ely to be contented.

Until he plead my cause.] 5.
GOD will cert^inely and for ever plead the cause of his, Isa. 1^. 5, 6, 7.
Ashur was sent by GOD against the people of GOD, and was as the rod in GODS
hand to correct them, but he thought not so, but that it was by his own
strength, etc. Quoties nobis negotium est cum improbis, duo sunt consideranda.
1. Improbos nobis sine causa infer molestiam, and ideo justam esse causam
nostram ipsorum respectu. 2. Nos tamen just affligi divinitus; quia semper
reperiemus multas causas cur Dominus nos castiget. So may many a one tell the
LORD, that his sins are grievous toward him, But that his persecutors and
oppressors aim not at, but at his best part, the good that is in him they set
against, And therefore desire the LORD to plead their cause, But GOD will never
plead the cause of the wicked, but will witness against them, and so will all
his creatures, and their own actions help to condemn them. 6.


And execute Judgment for me.] Though the Church of GOD go down for a while;
yet at last most certainly the day shall be theirs. For this purpose GOD is
wont to improove his own Omnipotency, all the hoasts of Heaven and Earth, the
ordinary and extraordinary agency of his creatures, the Sun, the Sea, the
Stars, Haylestones, etc. must miraculously serve GODS turn for the executing
of this judgment for the Church. All the miracles of deliverances from the red
Sea, and drowning the Egyptians, to the swallowing up of the Spaniards in the
English Seas; and the deliverance from the powder plot were employed this way,
stay only GODS season and his own hour, and you shall see the salvation of
GOD. As Rochell when it was besieged, was saved miraculously, and shame fell
upon the opposers. So for us here, we or the Church beyond the Seas been
delivered a year or two since, it had not been so well in the last of time;
for that purpose GOD will certainly deliver, this is our hope, when Christians
are stirred up to Prayer, the time is approaching, but howsoever in the best of
time it shall be granted.

He shall bring me forth to the light.] 7.
After the execution upon the enemies and the darkness of distress dispelled
by the light of GODS countenance, arises upon the Church the Sun of
lightsomenesse, joy, and comfort, as we see in Moses song, Exodus 15. The song
of Deborah, Judge. 5. The feasting of the Jews after the hanging of Hamon, the
joy of the Kingdom after 88. The day of holy feasting for our Salvation from
the Powder Plot; The LORD has done great things for us, wherefore we are glad,
Psalm. 126. 3. And when the rod has corrected, it shall be burned, when the
fire has purified the gold, it ends it self in sinder and ashes: So when the
wicked have done their work for the good of Christians, they shallbe consumed
themselves, as the powder-Traitors were, for which we have a day, as if it were
in imitation of Deborah's song.

And I shall behold his Righteousnesse] 8.
In the merciful performance of his gracious promises unto his people, then
shall the Church find and feel the truth of these blessed promises, Genesis 15*
1. and 17. 1. of the promise to Abraham and to his Seed. So Exodus 6. 3. Josh.
1. 5. How sweetly might Joshua refresh himself with the sense of GODS mercy
and truth, in making good unto him that promise, Josh. 1. I will never fail
thee nor forsake thee. The Jews with the sweetness of that, Habak. 2. 3.
Though it tarry, wait for it, because it shall surely come and not stay, when
they returned so merrily homewards, Ps. 126. Queen Elizabeth of that 1 Samuel 2.
30. Them that honor me I will honor, when the great GOD of arms, with his
powerful arm had scattered like a heap of dust before the wind that mighty
and (as they called it) invincible Spanish-fleet.

Now look back upon all these eight particulars and consider the contrary
case of the wicked, and then observe the infinite vast difference between the
grounds and reasons of comfort in all troubles in the one and the contrary in
the other:

There are reasons also taken from the state of the enemies why they should not
rejoice in the troubles of the Saints, and why the people of GOD should be
patient in their pressures and persecutions.

Then she that is my enemy shall see it.] 1.
When the Church is delivered then the enemy must down: when the rod in GODS
hand has corrected his children, it must be cast into the fire: When the
wicked have refined GODS people, themselves must be cast into Hell: When GODS
children have drunk of the top of the cup of GODS wrath, the wicked shall
wring out the very dreggs, and drink them, Psa. 75. 8. Esa. 10. 12. When Ashur
had punished GODS people, and began to burst with pride, then GOD sets upon him
and destroys him. But observe here the persecutors shall see the rising again
and prosperity, which will burst their very heart with envy and make them gnash
the teeth, as a piece and beginning of that hellish gnashing of the teeth
hereafter, when they shall see those blessed ones, whom they have so hated and
persecuted, sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of Heaven
and themselves excluded.

And shame shall cover her.] 2.
And at this sight she shall be horribly ashamed, especially because in the
time of the Churches distress, disgrace, she did pestilently please and
applaud her self with such insulting words as these ( where is now the LORD
her GOD) she is now down she will never rise again, and now she sees those
over whom she so insulted, crowned with deliverance and joy, and her self
covered with confusion and shame.

My eyes shall behold her.] 3.
Which equally will rent the hearts of the enemies with selfe-vexing rage, as
refresh the affections of GODS faithful children with glorious joy, not
because their opposites are ruined; no such vile, revengfull spite must lurk
in any gracious heart, but because thereby the glory of GODS mercy and truth to
his, and his justice to their implacable and incurable enemies is made more
illustrious and admirable.

Now she shall be trodden down as the mire in the streets. 4.
Or as straw is trodden down for the dunghill, as it is, Esaias. 25. 10. A fit
end for such Devils, as had they might to their malice, they would swallow up
quickly the whole Israel of GOD Psa. 124. 3. Since the Church of GOD sees and
is so sensible of the scornful carriage of her enemies, and labors so
industriously to fortify herself with reasons against that temptation of
being troubled with their insultations in the time of her trouble; I observe it
is the wont of the wicked to rejoice when they see GODS children down: Let
this therefore be the point that first naturally does offer it self. Doct.


It is the wont of the wicked out of their dunghill, dogged, and divellish
dispositions, proudly to insult and bear themselves insolently against the
servants of GOD in the time of their sufferings.

The wicked rejoice in the distress and disgrace of GODS children. Proofs for
this you have, Ezekiel. 25. 3, 6. Because thou have cried aha, and rejoiced and
clapped thine hand when Israel went into captivity. Because* thou have clapped
thine hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy
despite against the land of Israel. ergo Eze. 26. 2. Tyrus said against
Jerusalem aha she is broken, Ezekiel. 36. 2. The Enemy said, Aha, the ancient high
places are oursin possession, ergo, etc. Zepha. 2. 8. I have heard the reproach
of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have
reproached my people and magnified themselves against their border, ergo, etc.
Psa. 137. 3. They that carried us away captive, required of us a song, and they
that wasted us, required of us mirth, etc.

Because they be limbs of Satan and he impoysons Reason 1.
them with all his ill properties, now he infinitely tryumphs and pleases
himself in the disgrace of goodness, distress of the Church, and misery of
every godly man, Affectus ex odio and gaudio mixtus (so the Greek word
signifies) cum odio impulsi, laetamur vel gaudemus in aliorum calamitatibus,
est affectus proprius Diabolorum: Propterea illi ipsi qui in aliorum
calamitatibus laetantur ad ipsum Diabolum accedunt. And they are like him in
this pestilent property, as if he had spit them out of his mouth; when a good
man is down they joy, when he flourishes they hate: Now tell me, for you know
your hearts, have you looked upon these, and seen some one discover himself
shamefully, are you glad of it; so would no good heart be (I dare say) this is
a certain mark thou art a limb of Satan, and this comes from the Devil, to
say, O see then what all these are, the Devil himself would join in this (if
he were amongst you) save this for the language in hell hereafter, begin not
now so soon, for this shows thou art a member of Satan, and he is the head and
thou tastest of him, else no man could rejoice at a good man's fall* when
therefore thou see or hereafter hear of any that do so; think of this,
he is like the Devil, in this no child is more like the father, then he to
Satan, to rejoice, to disgrace GODS children; why tell me if CHRIST should come
now (as it were happy if he would to end these miserable times) where would he
find his children, but amongst good and religious men, though some be
hypocrites, and wear vizards in their faces that we cannot discern them (whom
the LORD discover and unmaske) we hold not with them, nor for them, but for the
truth. And this I am sure amongst good men only GOD (...) especially if thus
qualified in these six Particulars.

1. Look to the cause and ground of thy sufferings, else all is naught, if that
be not good, 1 Cor. 13.

2. Thou must have a calling to suffer and not to thrust thy self into it
without a calling.

3. Thou must have a clear conscience lying in no known sin, or else thy
suffering may be as Ananias and Saphira, just upon thee for thy hypocrisy.

4. Thou must have an upright heart in it.

5. Thou may not aim at by ends to please thy self.

6. Thou must wait for GODS time of deliverance, he that believes makes not
haste to get out by ill means; if thou be thus qualified in thy sufferings the
37. Psalm. will afford variety of precious comfort for thee, and terrible
judgments against thy Persecutours. Also observe these.

1. These persecuting Belials shall (will they or nill they) glorify GOD
either in their conversion, or confusion. And the day is coming in the mean
time to clear thy innocence and to discover their malice: The Devil and thine
enemies be chained, they can go no further then they have leave from GOD. GOD
is about some extraordinary work, that he is thus fitting thee for it.

2. If GOD turn them not on our parts there is most cause we should pity
them, and not envy at their estate: Who would have envied at Pharaoh, when he
was persecuting the Israelites, and presently after himself and all with him
cast away: What became of him? and what befalls one may be fall all.

3. If thou desire revenge on any in the greatest manner, it is to have them
thrive in ill, and especially in persecuting the good, Ezekiel. 13. 18. etc.

4. When the wicked insult the whole Church is stirred up against them, Mala.
3. 13, 16.

5. These insulting Enemies are but as the Wine-presses to wring out the sweet
juice of Patience and Prayer out of Christians, they are but as the Shepherds
dog to keep the sheep out of the severalls, and from unwholesome places; and
therefore know the time shall come that you shall bless GOD for them, and
confess that you could not have bin without your sufferings under them.

6. The very Persons of the sufferers themselves do teach much sweetness and
comfort to others by their gracious carriage, and also from the nature of
affliction it self.

1. The general end of all affliction is to make grace shine, or purify the
soul.

2. GOD will glorify himself in the preservation of his, as of the three
Children, Dan. 3.

3. Afflictions will quicken and heat the heart; whereas many Christians are
cold, etc.

4. That it may appear, as unto Job, that Christians serve not GOD mercenarily.

5. That they may not be overvalued by others, some oppose them and get ability
for a time to prevail.

6. That weak Christians might not be dejected when they are troubled.

7. That it may appear felicity rests not in these outward things, which
Solomon calls vanity, empty clouds, nay vexation of spirit, bringing torment
unexpected.

8. That the virtues of Christians may be delighted in, and shine abundantly
in thee. Thus every way a good sufferer may receive comfort in the depth of his
misery, and support his heart against all dejections and discouragements.

When I fall I shall arise.] From this first reason, which is used by the
Church to dissuade wicked men from rejoicing at her fall, I observe,

The dearest servants of GOD may fall into the Doct. 2.
deepest distress. Because one sin will keep them down, much Reason 1.
more all their sins being so grievous to them. For when sin stirs and looks
grisly in their conscience, it terrifies them; when as on the other side,
wicked men care for none; no marvel than if they fleare in the face, when a
godly man looks heavily.

Satan the strong man procures all joy to the Reason 2.
bad; but not a Devil in Hell, but would do a Christian mischief, and the
LORD sometimes to punish some of his sins suffers Satan to afflict him.

All worldlings are kind one to another, but of Reason 3.
a world of good-fellows, not one of them is kind to a Christian, but would do
him a displeasure if he could.

GOD deals with his children as with the Reason 4.
blind man, that had not that punishment for the sin of his Parents or
himself, but that GOD may have glory.

2. For Christians trial, as Job.

3. Sometime in Judgment to harden the wicked, whom they could not win by
their goodness, they must now be hardened by their punishment.

He that refraines from evil makes himself a Reason 5.
prey to wicked men, Satan and his cunning worldlings, when he that refraines
not is contrary.

Many afflictions are proper to GODS children, Reason 6.
as temptations, doubting of Salvation, etc. Nay sometimes hideous suggestions,
as were to CHRIST, that no Christian is in that height, for the Son of GOD to
be tempted to throw himself from the pinnacle of the Temple: Nay he that
thought it not robbery to be equal with GOD, to be tempted to worship the
Devil, was more then ever any Christian had.

Because it is called a vale of tears to Christians, Reason 7.
though it be a fools Paradise to wicked men, for they have as much pleasure,
profit and honor as they can get: As Phareah in Egypt, when the Egyptians
were there the Jews were but slaves unto them, and this represented the
natural estate of man.

2. The bringing out of* Egypt was followed with a long being in the
Wilderness, which signifies their gracious state; in which they had many
troubles and wants, and after many terrors came to Canaan a type of Heaven: So
till they were there the best was a wilderness or vale of tears, because of
their several troubles.

To Comfort those that be full of troubles; Use 1.
when they see one affliction upon the neck of another, to conclude, they be
sons, not bastards, pure gold, not rubbish.

Let all Christians prepare for new sufferings; Use 2.
for till death set us free, we are not to look to be free from troubles, and
never more need to be prepared than now, when not only the Church beyond the
Seas, but many good men be in great troubles, observe therefore these helps to
take away the sting.

1. Get Patience, the natural weapon to help against all troubles, whither of
GOD, Satan, or men. Job by Patience bore all his troubles, the tithe of which
troubles would have made a carnal man hang himself, as Haman had no comfort
in wife or children, or outward honor, because he could not with Patience look
upon Mordecai who a little crossed him. A small cross will rob a man that
wants Patience of the comfort of all other outward things; let therefore all
Christians labor for Patience, and exercise it as Faith, or love, or any other
grace, for I know not whither Christians so much scandalize Religion by any
thing, as by impatience, when there is any opposition, especially for meum and
tuum.

Get your hearts to Heaven, for earthly mindedness undoes all.

3. Get spiritual Joy, which makes us stand as firm as mount Sion, it will
heat the heart and give us right to other delights: As the heat of the garment
comes from the heart, for the heart heats the body, the body the clothes and a
little reflects again, so all comforts we have come from spiritual Joy: for
carnal joy always makes the heart melancholy after, Whereas spiritual Joy
eats out the heart of worldly sorrow: Follow that therefore with eagernes and
observe the differences thus; O death how bitter is thy remembrance to those
that live in ease, in worldly prosperity and carnal joy, but it is contrary to
those that live in spiritual Joy, they had rather some of them have death than
sleep when they are weary. Let a Christian tell me (for he knows his state
was once as the natural man's, and he labored for joy, but found it madness)
now after he is gone on in a Christian course some few years, and sees his
privileges, and prizeth CHRIST before all things and allows no wickedness in
his heart, but has taken the yoke and will wear it for ever, then tell me
what joy has ceazed on his heart when he has CHRIST, from hence will spring
as much joy as the heart will hold and more: If a poor man that lived in want
a long time, had many thousands befalne him by the death of some great man,
with what joy would he embrace it? So when a scorched heart with sight and
sense of sin takes CHRIST and has Heaven and Earth, and takes possession of
the blessed Word and Promises, as far then as Heaven surpasses the Earth and
both these that man's estate; so this joy does outgo the other; therefore with
the Apostle I bid such a man rejoice evermore, showte for joy, etc. Saint
Chrysostom would have a Christians joy to be like the Sea, into which if a
spark fall, it cannot dry up all the moisture of the water, but is presently
extinct: So should the joy of a Christian extinguish all afflictions; and great
reason, does not CHRIST promise that what we loose here for him, we shall have
an hundred fold? What ever it be, GOD is All-sufficient and can give the
comfort of it to his, that we may have an hundred fold of the comfort of these
things here, and happiness hereafter: Labor than for this spiritual Joy in
having CHRIST, this will comfort in all the troubles that befall any, though
they be like the troubles of the Church beyond the Sea, that men have all
things taken from them, wives and children slain, or men banished with them
out of the Land, yet none can take CHRIST from us, he is our portion for ever:
labor therefore for him.

Is it so that the Church of GOD is in many Use 3.
troubles? the Spirit of GOD sees it needful to give Antidotes against trouble
for her.

Then this serves to trouble those that were never troubled, their state is
woeful, it argues they be bastards: Let none then bless themselves that they
were never troubled in mind, for I say if any man has not been troubled in
mind for his sin, nor be not hereafter troubled for sin to drive him from all
sin, he shall be sure to suffer everlastingly for it: I pray you let this sink
into your hearts, and when any is troubled say not: O these be the Hypocrites
that will grow mad, etc. But let no such word come from any but incarnate
Devils.

Object. Why, J have several crosses and losses in my estate, weakness and
sickness of body, etc. Therefore my spiritual estate is good and happy?

Answ. There are three things observable in affliction; for affliction here
meant is,

First, Sanctified Affliction to cause us to grow in the whole body of
Sanctification and decrease in sin.

Secondly, If thou allowest any sin these afflictions be the beginning of Hell
torments, as Christians spiritual joy argues the beginning of their joys of
Heaven.

Thirdly, All things fall alike to all outwardly, both the godly and the wicked
may have afflictions, they work in the one contrary to the other, in the one
they work brokennesse of heart and humility, in the other contrary: they are
forerunners of hell to the one, of Heaven to the other.

Object. But J have no such troubles here, therefore J am no Christian?

Answ. It may be thou art troubled that thou want trouble. Is not the sense
of the want of troubles now a trouble unto thee? but if thou have none inward,
thou have some outward, art thou not smitten with the ill tongues of the
wicked? Though a Christian may go so far (though very rare) as not to have
ill tongues against him, yet a Christian has cause then to be troubled for
that, and suspect himself (though he may be in good estate) when ill tongues
are not against him; for men may have the good word of ill men about them,
because of their faults, as

1. When they give too much liberty to their licentiousness.

2. Not to reproove them when they are called to it.

3. When they are spiritual cowards, and dare not show themselves for God.

4. When they desire the good word of all; because they think else, such
fellows will rail on them; these be base cowards, if not stark naught: ^et
such as are true hearted Christians say (as one said) what have I done that
such wicked men speak well of me: Saint Austin said, I will by no means be
commended by a man that lives ill, it is a corrasive to my heart, I cannot
abide it. When a man first rises to goodness, his outward virtue like the
Sun rising casts a great shadow; so is there much opposition to it at the
first: But when the Sun has come to his height, then but a little shadow: so
the height of grace and virtue may cause little or no opposition, this may be
by accident, by helps of good outward parts, and fair and courteous
carriages, not grace and goodness, for this will draw hatred from every wicked
man.

FINIS.

