THE ELEMENTS OF ARMORIES.



AT LONDON Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1610.

C. SALLVSTIVS CRISPVS.

Verumenimuero is demum mihi viuere, et frui anima videtur, qui aliquo negotio
intentus, praeclari facinoris, aut ARTIS BONAE famam quaerit.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, EARL OF NORTHAMPTON, BARON HOWARD OF
MARNHILL; LORD PRIVY SEALT; LORD WARDEN OF THE CINQVE FORTS; ONE OF THE LORDS,
COMMISSIONERS FOR THE EARLE-MARSHALSHIP OF ENGLAND; KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE
ORDER OF THE GARTER: VVORTHIE OF ALL THE HONORS DVE TO HIGH VVISDOME, VIRTVE,
AND LEARNING; HIS MOST HONORED GOOD LORD.

E. B. WILLINGLY, HVMBLIE, AND DESERVEDLY, DEDICATETH THESE HIS ELEMENTS OF
ARMORIES.

The Opinions, and Offices of sundry choice, and quallified Gentlemen, friends
to the Author, touching these his ELEMENTS of ARMORIES.
A Letter to the Author from the worthy, WILLIAM SEGAR Esquire, GARTER,
principal King of Arms.
SIR, I have viewed your Elementary Book of Armories, and, in my poor
judgment, do approve the same no less singular for the device, then general
for the matter, and absolutely the best of any in that kind. Your labors
deserve encouragements by how much they are written freely, and ingeniously,
and may be called as well the ALIMENTS as the ELEMENTS of ARMORIES, for that
they nourish the mind of the Reader with a profitable, and pleasing satiety of
excellent matter. Finis coronat opus, Your good Wine needs no Garland. Yet
because it was your pleasure I should deliver you mine opinion thereof, I have
adventured to say thus much. And with the same recommend my love unto you.

14. April. 1610. Your loving friend WILLIAM SEGAR, GARTER

A Letter to the Author from the excellently learned in our Antiquities and in
all other humane literature WILLIAM CAMDEN Esquire, CLARENCEVX King of Arms.
SIR, whereas your desire is that I should deliver my full opinion of your
Book which you lately sent, and submitted to my censure. I assure you if my
judgment be any (which I acknowledge to be very little) you have with that
judicious learning, and insight handled ARMORIE the subject of my profession*
that I cannot but approve it, as both learnedly, and diligently discovered from
his first cradle: And could not but allow it, if I were Censor librorum publica
authoritate constitutus, as you know I am not. Pardon me that I am so brief,
for neither my head, nor my hand can as yet perform that which they should,
and would, until the Almighty shall restore me to former (health) to whose
protection I commend you, and yours, resting

11. June. 1609. Your loving friend WILLIAM, CAMDEN, CLARENCEVX.

A LETTER TO THE AVTHOR FROM HIS LATE DEAR FRIEND the Grave, and Courtly
THOMAS BEDINGFIELD Esquire, late Master of his Majesty's Tents, and Toilz etc.
deceased.
SIR, your ELEMENTS of ARMORIES, I have seen, but censure them I dare not:
Blind eyes can judge no colors, and ignorance may not meddle with excellent
conceit. This only: I will admire your Work, and wish you to proceed. If you
permit these discourses to wander abroad, they shall meet with more men to
maruail, then understand them. That is the worst: I returned them in haste;
fearing to foul the paper, or injury the Inck.

From Clerckenwel. 27. Mar. 1609. Your very loving friend THOMAS BEDINGFIELD.
Postscr.
SIR, if you add, or write more, I pray you make me a partaker. I say with
PETRARK.

Stanco non satio may.

A LETTER TO THE AVTHOR, from the learned young Gentleman. I. B. of Grace-dieu
in the County of LEICESTER Esquier.
SIR, I have here with many thanks returned to you, your profound discourse of
the ELEMENTS of ARMORIES, which I have read over with great profit, and
delight: for, I confess, that till now I never saw any thing in this kind
worthy the entertainment of a studious mind, wherein you have most commendably
showed your skill, finding out rare, and unknown beauties in an Art, whose
highest perfection, the meanest wits, if they could blazon, and repeat
Pedigrees, durst heretofore (but shall not now) challenge. Our sight (which of
all senses we hold ye dearest) you have made more precious unto us, by
teaching us the excellent proportions of our visible objects. In performance
whereof as you have followed none, so have you left it at a rash, and desperate
adventure for any to follow you: For he, that only considers your choice copy
of matter without forcing, will find it an hard talk to equal your Invention,
not to speak of your judicial Method, wherein you have made your Workmanship
excel your Subject, though it be most worthy of all ingenuous industry.
Believe me SIR in a word, I cannot but highly admire your attempt so well
performed, and among many others will be an earnest furtherer of that benefit,
which this dull age of ours (in this our country, careless of al but gainful
Arts) claims at your hands. In which hope I rest.

29. Nouemb. 1609. Your most loving friend JOHN BEAVMONT.

H. C. To the Gentleman Reader.
IF thou desire to know the reason why,
Thou doo'st in Shield the Arms of honor bear,
This Book will say that they by nature were
The HIEROGLYPHICS of Nobility.
It shows beside, how Art does beautify
What Nature does inspire, and how each-where
All Arts conion'd in this Art do appear,
By structure of a choice Phylosophie.
GEOMETRY gives Lines in ordered Place,
Numbers ARITHMETIC, and thou may see
How all in OPTIC Colors honor thee.
But since that Virtue which adorned the race
From whence thou did descend was ground of al,
Have care to follow it, or all will fall.
Mr. HVGH HOLLAND To his learned friend Mr. E. B. the Author upon his ELEMENTS
of ARMORIE'S.
MY master CAMDEN, sacred King of Arms,
Who bounds with heaven, as well as sea our soil,
So prosed and so praised has thy toil,
As here no need is of my sorry charms.
To boast it though, my brains APOLLO warmes,
Where (like in JOVE'S) MINERVA keeps a coile,
Yet I a Drone shall but thy Honey spoil,
Thou art the E.B. per Anagramatismum vel Metathesin.
Master- BE of all the swarms.
Deep is his judgment, spacious is his wit,
And high his fame that can in Arms enfold
What either Sea, or Land, or Heaven hold:
Philosophers are in a grievous fit
To see (whilst Envy does with Reason Storm)
New ELEMENTS, new MATTER, and new FORM.
Another of the same by Apostrophe to PHOEBVS, finishing in a symbolicall
allusion, to the most noble Earl of NORTHHAMPTON.
ON, bolt on PHOEBVS, spend thy golden Shafts,
And guild these Papers with thy glorious rays:
Crown every leaf with leaves of flowring Bays,
And crown the Author with thy laurel grafts.
They treat the mystical'st of generous Crafts,
That shows what Arms were born in Antique days,
By whom, and where, why, and how many ways,
On Sheilds, and blades not set in dugeon haftes.
Thou, and MINERVA grace them in the sight
Of that great Lord, whose judgment they rely on,
For as no Eye dare face thy glorious light
When as Thou reignest in the golden Lion.
So dare no Curre against them open his Iaw,
Once seized into the SILVER LION'S Pawe.
The Author To the generous, and learned READER.
IN four books it seemed to me, that the matter of Armo'ries (never as yet
delivered in the better, and remoter parts thereof, but even until this day
(for ought that ever I could gather to the contrary) remaining altogether
untouched) was aptly (as in a PANDECT, or DIGEST) comprehensible. And those
Four (as I conceived) might be these:

Their 1. ELEMENTS. 2. FABRIC. 3. MYSTERIES. 4. VINDEX.


1. The ELEMENTS teaching the simple, abstract, pure, and remote materials, and
causes of Armo'ries, of which (as words of letters) they consist.

2. The FABRIC teaching the putting-together of those Elements, and how they
constitute Armorial bodies; with other speculations proper to the compositiue
part.

3. The MYSTERIES teaching what those Armoriall bodies so constituted do
purport, mean, or signify; all cleared with Rules, and Examples.

4. The VINDEX, Assertor, or Champion, teaching how this PHILOSOPHY may be
freed from contempt, and who is truly Noble, and worthy to be honored with
Armories.

But, generous, and learned Reader (for to such only does this part of humane
letters appertain) of those four in project (through manifold
Inter-turbations) there is only, and scarce performed unto thee the first: The
Elements of Armories; which here thou have.

My farther scope, and counsels thou shall be privy unto* if thou make the
tenth Chapter of the Book worthy thy thorough-view; whether I transmit thee.
Only I must not here forget, that (without respect to my private) I have, upon
occasion in all the course of my present youth spent much time, and coin, to
view in person the chief places of ENGLAND, and IRELAND, to converse the
better with our Antiquities in that kind, as well to perfect thereby mine own
speculations, as that I might (when opportunity would) deliver unto thee things
certain and pure, without abuse, or innouatio^.

Other things briefly to praemonish thee of are these.

1. That a competent Reader cannot lack so much language as may serve to
interpret between himself, and some few harder words, or places in the Book.

2. That language only, or common diligence can make no Armorist without
Genius, and a Master.

3. That the way to learn excellently, is to believe excellently, for a mean
conceit of a profession begets but a small proficience.

4. That in the delivery of Elementarie matter I have, for thy cause, rather
used interlocution, then set, or continuous speech, as more apt to enter a
Learner, for whose cause also at the end of the Book are annexed sundry Tables.

5. That at the first reading to lay them down, or away, either as too hard,
or as now too stale, does argue alike vanity, the one of too much abiection,
the other of too little steadfastness.

6. That if thou will use the pleasant objects, and condimentall parts thereof
to relish, and draw-on the rest the better, thou hold the right Rule of
profiting thy self.

7. That all is properly meant, and written herein to them that are filij
Artis, and willing to cooperate with the favor of the Armoriall Muse.

How thou (my READER) doo'st in present think of Armories, and what mind thou
bring with thee, as I know not, so (howsoever) I may yet say a little in
this place, notwithstanding that which is spoken throughout my whole Book, to
the same purpose, considering the general state of opinions touching them,
that thou mai'st the rather be induced to think thy diligence in perusal of
the whole, not ill-emploid; or I, in thy riper, and sounder judgment stand the
more justified, or at leastwise the less condemned for having taken so much
pain to pleasure thee.

Armories therefore occurring euery-where, in seals, in frontes of buildings,
in vtensils, in all things; Monarcks using them, mighty Peers, and in brief,
all the noble tam maiorum, quam minorum gentium, from Caesar to the simplest
Gentleman, yet all of them (for the more part) most vnknowingly, very few (even
of the most studious) do sildome go any farther then to fill up a wide
Wardrobe with particular Coats: whose zeal notwithstanding is worthy to know
the* better things thereof: that other being no more the thing, then books
not understood are learning.

For in them (I may without racking the value affirm) are all the Thems, and
Theorems of generous knowledges, from whence does breath so sweet an aer of
humanity as thy manners cannot but take, and mix thereby with true gentility,
and noblesse.

The outward parts of her palace are beautifide with infinite objects full of
all variety and comeliness: the walks* and mazes which she uses are those
enwrapped circles of ingenuous sciences which the learned do entitle
CYCLOPAEDIE: her Presence, and most inward retirements have all the most
CHRISTIAN, Haeroick, and Cardinal virtues, and for Handmaides excellent
affections, without which the arguments, and external testimonies of noblesse
are nothing worth.

He that in the trust of any auditories ignorance, or baseness shall say, All
this is vain, must be answered, that this is no otherwise vain then as Omnia
vanitas.

In any other good or honorable sense thou can not ( I think) but confess
that Armorie is a Majesty worthy thy service: whereunto if names of men, rather
then things themselves can persuade, thou can not be unknowing how many of
our late, and presently both greatest, and wisest have heretofore, and now in
present do honor it. Neither does She want her part also in our Co^mon-weal^^
and they, who sit chief in the primum mobile of state, be think themselves,
how to enlighten BRITAIN with the beams of restored Honor.

To praeocupate more satisfaction till thy mind be farther known, were
merely for me to divine of objections, but when thou expoundest thy self unto
Me, thou shall be most assured of my farthest diligence to keep thee Mine.

FAREWELL.
THE ELEMENTS OF ARMO'RIES.
The Contents.
1. The conference between two Knights, Sir EVSTACE, and Sir AMIAS, begun by
Apostrophe. 2. The motives thereof. 3. Single coats, and their Elements the
matter. 4. ULYSSES taxation of his Antagonist proper to our ignorant Gentlemen.
5. The Masters high persuasion of the study. 6. Wisdom in it. 7. Marbles,
coins, characterismes, Hieroglyphics, and the like, not so worthy of
observation. 8. The Master gives his laws of hearing, and is endented-with
for a familiar method.

CHAP. 1.
EVSTACE. But Sir, the happy confederacy of fit time, and place with my
desires, having brought you into those straits out of which there is no
evasion, save only by the abrupt of discourtesie; I must briefly press you
concerning the ELEMENTS of ARMOIRIES.


A. I perceive you are loath (good Sir EVSTACE) to be any longer ignorant.


E. How can I choose but be very loath, having accidentally the other day seen
at your hands a sample of the ware, and since found it full of rich metal, and
not to be base Marckasite, or stuff unworthy the garnish of honor: as also no
less, for that now I can never close up a letter, but my very seal, though
dumb, as it is, vpbraids mine ignorance, wherein when I behold mine Ancestors
peculiar coat of Arms, I must confess they have left me that, by which though
I claim to be a Gentleman, yet neither know I what it symboliseth, nor out of
what ELEMENTS, reasons, or grounds of Art, (your promised and singled
undertaking) mine or the like are composed.


A. And what though you know not?


E. Mary, I might very well resemble my self to one of those blew-gown'd
Targat-bearers, who in LONDON upon their Lord Mayors day, bear shields of
Arms, with as little knowledge what they are, as propriety in them: standing
dully thereby (as hitherto I have done) within full distance of that scorn, --
neque enim clypei caelamina-norit, wherewith the prudent GREEK taxed his
Antagonist, in the strife of ACHILLES shield.


A. Somewhat you say now Sir EVSTACE: and as for me, my youth, and leisure
have ever, I must confess (to deal ingenuously with you) been taken with the
study, as with that which seemed, even at first, the proper of noblesse, but
afterward, of wisdom also. Which speculation, as ordinary diligence can hardly
reach unto, so yet, if it shall not be found eccentrick to the Philosophers
greatest circle, but moving upon the self-same axell with universal knowledge
(I will not say comprehending it) neither may the speculation before-said seem
illusiue, nor he, who neglects their deeper sense (seeing arms have their
certain principles, method, use, and theorie) and yet will challenge the
honorable right of bearing them, disdeine to hear with the same Antagonist,
Postulat vt capiat quae non intelligit arma.


E. It can therefore be no unjust complaint, that no man has hitherto handled
this whole argument according to the dignity, as if the fate thereof, and of
our countries History were the same, which as yet has found no Muse.


A. An hard fate, you will easily confess.


E. A very hard, and very unworthy. If therefore I can be content for the
antiquities sake, to pore on a coin halfe-worne out, or (for like reason) on a
Marble, where (though the letters were whole, and undefaced) yet the antique
character would make it hard to read, why not then as soon on the
Hieroglyphics of arms, seeing arms, or armoiries, are no less properly the
cipher of true Armorists, then Hierogramms of the EGYPTIAN Sages?


A. True.


E. So shall it be my contentment (gentle Sir AMIAS) to obtain by your
friendship, the luster, and advantage which knowledge gives to them that have
it, above others.


A. Yet so, as still I submit my self, and judgment to theirs, that are indeed
true Masters of this mystery. Only look not here in the proof of
doctrines for vouchme^ts of many authors (which are but as rubs in a familiar
discourse, and the proper ambition of Scholars) but rather in a place by
themselves, if need require hereafter. For, seeing you will needs draw me
into this new, and perilous Sand, you are not as yet to hope any higher
privilege then as of a puny auditor, whose chief part is to believe. How-beit
(not altogether to tyrannize your obedience) take unto you the liberty of
demand, and, where I chance to be Magistrall, rest assured, that it is far
from imposture in me, or wilful negligence. Although you might look that I
should perhaps have been more exact, and punctual, had I made it the maine of
my course, and not Parergon, Landskep, and By-worke only; but much more, for
that misdoubting my youth, and judgment, I had laid the thought thereof aside
for the ninthe years censure. A rule not less important, and necessary for
him that shall dare so high, and new a way in this kind, as for those who
meditate matter for eternity in Poems.


E. I accept the law you give. Nevertheless, though it be not a Scholars
office to prescribe a method to the Doctor, yet, because it is a principal
rule of Decoru^ to speak to the understanding of the party, and I know best
what suits my self; use I pray so mere a catechizing method, as if you would
instruct me how to spell the crosse-row of Arms, for perhaps it may do good
the rather.


A. I am not afraid least my playnesse may be called insufficiency.


The contents.
2. What the Master understands here by Armoiries, and Gentlemen 2. Of their
supposed first deuisers. 3. That in God only their original is to be found. 4.
The notion of ensignement, natural.

CHAP. 2.
EVSTACE. WHat therefore mean you by Arms?


A. Such painted, hereditable, and Armoriall marks, as by which Gentlemen are
known, first from the ignoble, and then one from the other.


E. Why say you painted?


A. Because colors give them life, and they seem not alive, but (like the
PROMETHEAN man of clay) both blind, and dead as it were, till quickened with the
light of colors, as the other with fire from heaven.


E. Why hereditable rather then hereditary?


A. As well for that those Armoiries which are of the first bearing, as those
which escheat, or are buried with the Owners for want of heirs, are not
hereditary, though both of them are hereditable: For they of the first sort
came not from Ancestors, and yet may descend, (that is, may be inherited, if
the prime atchieuer, or purchasour have a line all successor) and if the other
do not descend, it is only through a fail, or fault in the bearer: But,
how-soeuer, if they answer not the rules of Armory (a word of large content,
and comprehension) and that also with such Analogy as the qualities of
circumstances do require (in which the reason of bearing lives, and whereof the
skill is properly an appurtenance of symbolicall philosophy, which handles the
causes and mysteries of Arms) all the rest are nothing.


E. Who is then your Gentleman?


A. Simply, and only for the present, the lawful bearer of such marks, or
tokens of Noblesse.


E. Who first ordained them?


A. Mean you what man, or woman?


E. I do.


A. You think that thing is known to Heralds, or to Armorists, but I suppose
it is not. For, neither OLYBION, nor ASTERIAL, nor any such cloud-borne
creature ever did, as I conceive, ordain them. Although, I cannot be ignorant,
that the glory hereof is given by HERODOTVS to the CARES (people of ASIA the
less) by others to the AEGIPTIANS: but both, with like proof, as the invention
of letters to the PHOENICIANS, unless we confess them more ancient then the
HEBREWS.


E. Indeed the Chiefes, and, as they are called, Coryphes in every profession,
are commonly blazed the founders, as ATLAS in Astronomy, AESCVLAPIVS in
Medicine, whose only fortune it was, to com after their forefathers
observations, with bettered wits, and more diligence. When as indeed, Sciences
have their foundations in nature, and neither grow, nor decrease, but only to
us, to whom time, and observation do unlock them.


A. Be that as it will, or may, I, for my part, know not him (to speak after
my manner, that is, plainly) who first bare Arms (to use the vulgar word) nor
do I acknowledge any primary author, but in almighty God, the Prototypon,
Arch-type, or original pattern.


E. No? how then?


A. Had Arms, or ensigns (like Heresies, or some mechanical crafts, as
printing, and artillery) any first certain author, it were a plain
demonstration against their primaeuity; but, if you will have me declare my
self, my opinion is, that the notion of ensignement is universal, and natural,
and that use in war did first deduce, or communicate distinguished sheildes,
from that notion, and (after bloody war) that ambition, to retain in peace
the honors, gotten by Arms, might take them down from their triumphant
Tholes, and sacred Trophaees, and so conueigh them to posterity; the son,
holding himself, no less the heir of his Ancestors glory, then of his
name, and lands, by which, things have in time grown so exact, and complete,
as now we see.


E. Your opinion leads mine, though it seems you strain the word Arms beyond
the proper use.


A. To march strong toward my Justification, I therefore added Ensignement, or
Ensign, which comprehends the other, being in it self equivocal to armories,
and all other notes of noblesse, honor, or praeeminence.


E. So as you would be thus understood, that Ensigns, or Ensignement, began
with the creation of things, and that the notion is imprinted in nature, though
the whole use, and limitation (as to the purpose of our present Armories) be
not.


A. You have taken the just height of my meaning.


The Contents.
1. The known use of Arms, as ancient at least as MOSES. 2. Unknown to the
Master, by what degrees they came to their present excellence. 3. Not very
much to be found of them in remotest antiquities. 4. The Masters opinion of
some shields in the famous old Poets. 5. About the time of CHARLES the Great,
they began to take a rule, and in these later ages perfection. 6. The Fucus,
and unsure gloss of doubtful, or forged antiquities disauowed.

CHAP. 3.
EVSTACE. Arms then, even in our sense, have been of long continuance.


A. They have: for they who, out of singularity, or waxen seals about the
NORMAN conquest, argue to the contrary, do make their flight but with ICARVS
wings.


E. When began they?


A. That also is to me unknown, but the eldest, and best record of their
general use, is in the sacred stories written by MOSES. But I can as well show
the growth of a flower, or the instances of motion in the shadow of a Dial, as
sodeinly how, or when they came by degrees to the present magnificence, and
flourishing estate wherein they are.


E. Has the increase been so insensible?


A. The want of written monuments makes it seem so.


E. Certainly, the GREEKS, with whom has bin the universal Staple of
antiquities (for, as for the LATINS (who but as it were a while since came to
be learned) they have not much, and the SYRIAN, CALDEAN, and more profoundly
learned EGYPTIAN (as the people, among whom the HEBREVVS, Gods own Scholars,
dwelt) have little obuious) do here, and there, make famous commemoration of
Shields, and Crests.


A. They do. But those devises were, for the more part, arbitrary, not
armorially formal. For, neither had ACHILLES shield in HOMER, nor that more
artificial one (if it be lawful to commit two such Poets together) of AENEAS
in VIRGIL, any thing, almost, of that which Armorists call a coat, and whereof
we entreat, but were rather, certain places of Art, for disposition, and
conueiance, where the Poets took occasion to utter some maiesticall invention,
by way, either of abridgment, induction, recapitulation, or the like. Nor let
any one imagine, that AGAMEMNONS devise (or other described by HOMER) was
precisely a fair coat of arms, unless you would take some one, or two
principal things of many; and the like is to be said of those in VIRGIL.
Neuerthelsse their examples do strongly convince the antiquity, or antienty of
arms, which from the time of CHARLES the Great have both grown more familiar,
Henricus Auceps say some.
and by industrious men from time to time (the care of CHRISTIAN honor then
most flourishing) been refined, laws established for their due bearing, and
finally augmented with observations, applied to the several dignities of
several persons. So that now I see not why we should not think them absolute
in all their numbers, as one of the things (among very few) reserved to be
finished in these our days.


E. The common opinion is, that arms had a more certain beginning.


A. Perhaps so; for there are not wanting, who do say that almost before the
flowd, such a Prince, commonweal, or Kingdom bare such, and such a Shield, or
painted Symboll. In so much, that I, for my part, have ever looked, when on a
sudden these marvelous men would as readily tell us what arms, or badge
NOAH'S Arc it self did carry in the stern, as we out of the Acts of the
Apostles written by S. LVKE, can inform our selves what name the ship which
transported S. PAVL was known by. And albeit I am exceedingly far from
dishonoring, or from not zelously honoring, any venerable moniments of wit, or
antiquity, yet am I as far from promiscuous subscription to uncertain glosses,
or of vouching them to make a Fucus.


The Contents.
1. The master is necessarily drawn back to demonstrate that the notion of
Ensignement (true fountain of Armoiries) is natural* 2. Scene in the heavens
and countenances of men. 3. Proved in natures own practice, marking out her
chief works with notes of noblesse, 4. Examples, ALEXANDER the Monarch,
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and our souereign, King JAMES him self. 5. Their native
marks. 6. Instinct, and common notion causes of like arms to TYDEVS, and
MIRAMAMMOLINE. 7. The like of CASPAR, and BALTHAZAR two of the Mages, or Kings
in S. MATHEWS Gospel.

CHAP. 4.
E. May I believe that arms and ensigns, and the notion of ennobling by notes
is universal, and so, primarily founded in nature?


A. I intend not, as I said before, to encumber the level of my present way
with many proofs; and yet it should seem, like one of the incredulous, you
crave a sign. ELEMENTS are the pole star of my voyage; ELEMENTS the subject
matter of my discourse, and you may safely, in the mean space, believe.


E. Yet a slight taste of this truth would do well.


A. Whatsoever is universally so taken up, as that it is found, and practiced
(at leastwise in proportion to their knowledges) among all nations, as well
civil as Barbarous, that (undoubtedly) has foundation in nature, and therefore
ennoblishment by external notes as well as embasements, or brandings: For of
contraries the reason is the same.


E. Your antecedent is granted, but, that ensignement is universal, and the
notion thereof (true fountain of armories as you pretend) natural, which you
assume to prove, how does that appear?


A. It will appear as soon as you but cast your eye (though without
enlarging spectacles) upon the goodly book of the world, the noble creatures
wherein are admirably distinguished, with signs of that nobility. The heavens
have their ensigns, and notes, their colors, and charges, and of them some
apparently more excellent then the other: And (not to make an exact enumeration
of parts) do but behold the countenances of men, how, like to several coats
of arms, by complexion, lineament, and a thousand alterations of aspect, they
are diuersifi'd, and that with degrees of dignity, one from the other. Nature
her self, for farther confirmation, shall present unto you figures, wrought by
her own hand, and penicill, as marking out by them her chief Maister-peeces.
For, of what other sort are (I beseech you) the genitiuall notes printed upon
some supereminent princes in their mothers womb? ALEXANDER the great was borne
with the impression of a Lion, if I mistake not the figure: Nor less to be
admired was that, which SVETONIVS writes of OCTAVIUS CAESAR, upon whose breast,
and belly Genitiuae notae. as he calls them, were so dispeirst, as they
imitated, both in their order, and number, the stars in the celestial Bear.
But I were too inofficious, if I should not here remember our own most renowned
King, with those two, the principal Majesty's of the former worlds, for so
much as, upon him also, the figure of a Lion was alike naturally set.


E. We have here (in mine understanding) natures Heraldry in her own works.


A. Which works as she has thus ennobled, so Common notion (derived out of
her) taught TYDEVS (if I mis-remember not his arms in AESCHYLVS) and
MIRAMAMMOLINE, a King of MOORS TYDEVS MIRAMAMMOLINE.
(if SPANISH Heralds say true) to bear, in their several sheilds, the
resemblances of the starry firmament with slender variations: Though men so far
in sunder as THEBES, and TOLEDO, farther in time, farthest in knowledge one of
the other. Their countries, their languages, their religions, their habits,
their manners, (the one a GREEK, the other a B^RBARIAN) being most discrepant.
Which effect of Common notion (having so celestial a pattern) is the more to
be wondered at, if two of the Kings (commonly called of COLEIN, for that
belike their relics are there) who guided by the oriental star came to
worship our SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST, bare the like arguments in their sheildes as
VIRGILIVS PICTOr the Norimberger, CASPAR. BALTHAZAR.
in his book of printed scucheons bears us in hand. The pictures of which
(more for pleasure in the variety, then for any canonical proof, although I
neither can, nor do disprove them) I have here bestowed upon you. And thus
much credit besides, must I needs do this tradition, that in the most noble
mother Church of our nation, CANTERBVRIE, you may upon a wall, on the left hand,
as you enter into the North I Will of the first Quire, behold in uery ancient
work, two armories like to these, plainly painted in the Banners of those
Kings, where the whole story of their coming to adore our LORD, then newly
borne, is pourtraid: which does sufficiently discharge that Norimberger from
having first devised them, those paintings being undoubtedly far older then
his Grand-great-grand-father.


The Contents.
1. The state of things, in their first rudeness, surest Test to try the
former proposition. 2. The necessity shows their universality. 3. How far we
are to extend the word barbarous in speaking of the BARBAROVS, or SAVAGES. 4.
The Analogy of outward distinctions, with the persons by them distinguished.
5. Names among the BARBAROVS. King HOLATA OVTINA his distinctiue notes. 7. The
Nobles of MEXICO. 8. A secret fountain of true Armories.

CHAP. 5.
EVSTACE. IF I saw the use universal I could not but believe that the Notion
were natural.


A. The universality of the use of Ensignements, or of ennoblishing by outward
notes, is not hardly proved. Let the civil worlds, and people pass, as in the
which it may truly be objected, that there (like other ornaments) they might be
perhaps excogitated, and reflect we but upon Tramountain antiquities, or the
state of people, and things such as they were in their first rudeness, as the
surest Test, and Touch to try this proposition by, nothing then will we be
more demonstrable. For, from pole to pole, and over the whole globe ordaind for
the dwellings of men, no people is so forlorn, which affords not proof to
this point, nor that as it were by a contagion, or taking from one and other,
but merely out of Common notion, which concluding the necessity of outward
distinctions (for how otherwise shall the Sovereign be known from the
subject, or one worthy subject from another? and my hope is that no man will be
so super-paradoxall, as to deny a subordination in nature among men, and
differences of degrees, and states, as there are of use, and merit) by that
Natural light disposes of those shapes which imagination tendreth for
useful, and that also with some Analogy between the quality of the person
bearing, and the ensign borne. For when we talk of Barbarous nations, no man
of any judgment depriues them of their reasonable part, though they want
elegancie, and civil forms, or knowledges. This therefore being a matter
falling necessarily into common sense, and use, he were very unmindful of
the honor of our creation, who should imagine that any people (how brutish
soever) could be without ensignement, and several external notes, and those
also (out of the same natural ground) not wanting the Analogy, and proportion
whereof we formerly spoke. Which we may gather by the names among the savage
INDIANS, those of their Princes, and peers being found to bear lofty
significations, but the vulgar not so. And so far forth does nature instruct
men to be obseruant hereof, that the very CANIBALS (Anthropophages, or
Men-eaters of AMERICA) are called among themselves by the names of cruel
beasts. Hence it is that you shall not truly read, or hear, that among any
barbarous, the Lions skin, or like spoils of the nobler creatures, are the
indument of an ordinary groom; or that every common soldier does wear such
feather, color, or other distinction with those of prime quality. So, HOLATA
OVTINA (interpreted (I think) King of Kings) in FLORIDA was painted red, and
none but he were so colored, save only some such choice young soldiers as
were of principal agility. Common sense tells the rudest nations, that names
of high signification (such as glorious star, light of the world, lamp of
glory, or as of there Gods themselves, as was used in MEXICO, where all the
noble had denomination of some one, or other of their Idols) do no way sort
with a worthless groundling, or ignoble companion. But of this (as a secret
fountain of true Armories, and not the least mystery in the wisdom of nature,
taught us in Symbolicall Philosophy, in which the matter of arms is truly
comprehended) elsewhere. Hereby it is (as I conjecture) cleared, that the
notion is universal, and therefore natural, and again (turning but as it were
the tables) we may say natural and therefore universal. Many fest examples
whereof it were not hard to depourtray unto you out of the Barbarous worlds;
the same being no less verifiable in the civil. And from this common notion;
impressed in nature, Arms, or Armories (the present matter of our conference)
claim their parentage.


The Contents.
1. Things Elementary to the Elements of Armories. 2. The Master refuses not
farther to demonstrate their universality, 3. Without help of examples from
the HEBREWS, GREEKS, or ROMANS. 4. INDIAN Anthropophages, FLORIDIANS, and
VIRGINIANS. 5. Their marks. 6. Notes of vassallage no original of arms. 7.
The Master beginns his universal Survey. 8. The BRIGANTS, and other BRITANNS.
9. Resembled by a famous ancient writer to the old worthies at TROY. 10. Blew
color symbolicall to the BRITANS. 11. The AGATHYRSIAN Paintings. 12. GILDAS
vouched. 13. Probable that the BRITANS had figures as well as colors upon their
bodies, and Bucklers, 14. And the PICTS, or PIGHTIAD. 15. TOMITANS, or GETES.
16. Of the GERMANS, and SAXONS. 17. A famous place in TACITUS of the GERMAN
shields, seconded with some other from thence of strange seeming purport. 18.
Our HENGIST the SAXON his name, and probable arms. 19. In the rere of
examples, CIMBERS, AMBRONS, TEVTONS. 20. A CIMBRIAN pauis, or targat. 21. The
devise of a CELT. 22. The GALLS had peculiarly painted arms. 23. The shield of
a SAGVNTINE. 24. From EVROP into AFRICA.

CHAP. 6.
EVSTACE. SHall I deal ingenuously with you (Sir AMIAS) for mine own better
instruction?


A. In any wise I beseech.


E. First, Sir then I must needs confess, and do, that these are very sound
sinews of argument for so much, but because the farther handling of the
natural original of ensignements seems to me a matter of very special moment
rightly to enduce your future speech of the Elements of Armories, as being
Elementary even to those elements, I could desire a more spread, and dilated
proof, altogether suitable to mine ignorances, did I not fear your to much
trouble.


A. You mean, it should seem, by a more spread, and d^lated proof, the view
be like of some particular examples of Ensignement in all ages, and places.


E. I do indeed. For so I may behold not only the infancy, and cradle-age of
armories, but also what they were in their Embrion, nay, what they were in
their seed.


A. You hope to much Sir EVSTACE. Nevertheless I may not envy some touches of
example unto you out of the Barbarous, and less civil worlds, as most
forcible: Sequestring the HEBREWS, GREEKS, and ROMANS, as to polit for that
purpose, and as reserved for some more eminent uses: Though you turn me
thereby to the University again as it were, for that I cannot satisfy your
allowable desire, but by the use of some such picked flowers, as heretofore, in
that sweet noursery of generous knowledges, came to my hand howsoever.


E. They can hardly be better employed.


A. The new worlds therefore (as is said) are instead of all, as presenting to
us the prime simplicity of our creation, where, upon the first discoueries,
nothing being super-induced by commerce, were not yet the said Barbarous, and
more then Barbarous CANIBALS, or TOVOVPINAMBAVLTS found with distinctions among
them, and (in their kind) cognisances upon them? The shoulders of the naked
FLORIDIANS are badged with the marks of their Lords. But I had rather (for
that they are known unto us by the noble travails of our ENGLISH) exemplify
the like out of the descriptions of VIRGINIA.



This mark consisting of three parallel Arrows trauersed barre-wayes as you
see, is the branded badge of sundry principal men in SECOTA, and set upon the
backs of their vassals there. And this of the chief Lords in POMEIOOC, and
AQVASGACOCK. The like usage was among the ROMANS, and others of old (who yet
never heard, nor dreampt of AMERICA, neither do all of us (as I suppose)
believe, that PLATO his ATLANTIC Island was it) as may most authentically be
proved. Let any one now show to me what other ground can be given for this,
but common notion?


E. These (by your favor) seem to countenance Merchants marks, rather then
the arms of Gentlemen.


A. I imagined by your smiling that you had some such conceit. But Sir (by your
favor) in these rude skores I truly see the seed of arms, for nature (like a
raw Scholar) began in these to practice her notion. Neither are they of so
diverse form from Arms, or Armories in their perfection, as an excellent
piece of Architecture from the first elements of Geometry, out of which
notwithstanding it rose. As for the countenance you think may come from these
sorry liueries to Merchants oker-marks, if it be any, let them enjoy it.


E. Indeed they cannot give much, for they are notes of vassallage, not of
honor, therefore Arms (I hope) have no such original.


A. As they are such notes I give them not to you for an original of Arms.
But, if from hence you grant, that in nature there are notes of dishonor, it
follows indiuisibly, that in nature there are notes of honor, and then the
game, and set is up. For (as I said not long since before in this very case of
Ennoblishments, and Brandings, or Embasures) Of contraries the reason is the
same. Nevertheless, that you may not suspect the cause bare, or barren by the
thrift of my dealing upon so spare, and thin proofs, I will for honor
thereof briefly see what the dusty private cabanet of my former Muses keeps in
store of their Vniuersity-gleanings, according to late promise, beginning with
EVROP, and at home. In our BRITAIN the nation of the BRIGANTS (beside
whatsoever their Ensignements else) had shields painted blew, according to the
known -- Caeruleos Scuta Briga^tes*
verse in SENECA his deification of CLAUDIUS NERO, as the GERMAN ARII (says
CORNELIUS TACITUS) had shields painted black. And by all antiquity it is
apparent, that blew was not the color of the BRIGANTS only, but of all the
BRITANS: perhaps for that (as Ilanders) they were environed with the like
colored OCEAN, so (when place shall be for such conjectures) it were not vain
to pretend that they also bare shields distinguished with marks of honor, as
the TROJANS, and at TROY they did. If at leastwise it be true (as DIODORVS
SICVLVS to the great glory of the BRITANS does write) that they lived after the
manner of the old heroes at TROY, giving for instance thereof their fighting
out of chariots, as those Demigods, and ILIAN worthyes did. Which gallant
Chariot-fights of the BRITANS, CAESAR himself does set forth as a form of a
battle very dreadful, brave, and ieopardous. Blew therefore being Symbolicall
to the BRITANS, and granting to them (to whom the renowned DRVIDS were
preceptors, and Priests, as BARDS their Poets) which cannot be denied to the
meerest Savages, that is, but the power of that natural, and infused Analogy
which was spoken-of not long before, what can be more probable then that they
had several figures, or tricks of painting? The naked INDIANS (though but in
one color, and upon their bodies) had so of late, and the AGATHYRSIANS of old.
Of whom though VIRGIL says only they were painted, yet AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS
shows the manner how. Poor, and silly was the devise indeed. For their noble
(says he) had broad, and thick spotts painted on their bodies, their ignoble,
small, and thin. How else could blew from blew (as among the BRITANS)
distinguish one from another in a multitude? or black from black? as among the
ARII of GERMANY. To avoid all this, you will perhaps deny they could draw,
or trick, how rudely soever. GILDAS, the grave BRITAN writes, that some of the
old BRITISH Idols drawn upon walls, which he names Patriae portenta, --
lineamentis deformibus. were in his time (being above one thousand years
since) seen remaining. Therefore they had drawing (such as it was) before
their birth in CHRIST, which was with the soonest. Spelling all together now,
it seems somewhat hard to deny, that they used figures as well upon their
sheilds, as superficies, of their bodies (and that it may be was only among
the vulgar) to ennoble, or distinguish themselves with, as upon their walls to
honor their Gods. Certainly, if the GERMANS, and GALLS did (which we shall
see afterward) it were then cursed heart to bar the BRITANNS. Theodore de
Brye, in his Prints of VIRGINIA, gives us two antique figured PICTS (old
inhabitants of BRITAIN) a man, and a woman. Of what credit they are I know
not, if they be of none, yet should a Poet stumble at Decorum to present them
otherwise, for so much as ghastly, and affrighting forms correspond to the
male, roses, and pleasant vinets to the female. So in AMERICA the cruel
Savages (as is said) took appellations to themselves by natural instinct from
beasts of prey, their women from pleasant birds, fruits, blossoms, and like
Sommer-workes. It now appears to me that we can suppose no otherwise of the
BRITAINS paintings. But I rather seem to dispute then teach. This verse of
OVID, Sed loca, vel gentes formatae mill figuris, though written by him, from
among the TOMETANS, or GETES, in his banishment, seems to concern all the
barbarous, and confirms me in my conjecture, that the BRIGANTS, and other
BRITANNS, nay all other like nations, though but using one color only (if any
did) were yet in that one, -- Formatae mill figuris. Neither is there cause of
wonder why the BRIGANTS were famous for their blew, it being no vnfamiliar
matter to have a nation noted more for one thing then another. That JULIUS
CaeSAR, describing the BRITANS in general, should say they did dye, or stain
themselves (for he graceth them not with the more artificial term of
painting) with woad, and not set down the manner how the Noble among the^ were
distinguished in that smearing, or otherwise, who can marvel? seeing he
speaks not a word of the form of their weapons, nor whether they had
sheildes, or no, as commending to posterity such things only, as were rare
and singular in them from other nations, as this, which they used to appear
more terrible in battle, who were otherwise generally fair, and comely with
yellow locks (for so I think you will understand LVCANS epithete of the
BRITANS, where he says, -- Sequeretur GALLIA curtus
Nobilis, et flauis sequeretur mista BRITANNIS)
They as yet do boast a TROJAN original, which could not but afford them
somewhat of their ancestors forms, neither are they new in that claim, or
singular; for-somuch as the ARVERNOIS in NERO'S time made the like challenge of
a descent, being a rude people upon the Maine of GALLIA, and of a far obscurer
note then the BRITANS, of whom the same Poet sung ARVERNIQVE ausi LATIO se
fingere fratres,
Sanguine ab ILIACO populi --
CAESAR himself grants, that the BRITANS had coin, or money of brass, and if
engraven stamps, why not figures upon their bodies, or bucklers? Certainly some
ensignments, or other must be assigned. Otherwise the famous CASSIVELLAVNVS,
chief Commander in those BRITISH wars, should with other his associate Kings
be shuffled out of the coat-cards of an Army, all being meddled together, and
put as it were in rout. As if it might be thought that such, and so tall
resistance, as was then made when CAESAR lost LAIERIVS could be without
military order, external variations, and ensigns. The honor of the BRITANS
(our predecessors in ALBION) has made me almost a little eager; but not so far
yet, as to accuse great CAESAR of an ambition to deliver us the most grizly, and
coursest shapes only; though glory, we all know, was with him no ordinary
Goddess, and such would best serve his turn with the people of ROME, for the
honor of his attempt, and triumph, which I will not like a POMPEIAN extenuate
with Territa quaesitis ostendit terga BRITANNIS. Notwithstanding, had it
pleased him but to have described to us LVGOTORIX, whom he calls a noble leader
among the CANTIANS (and the rather perhaps calls so, for that he was the only
BRITAN of note, which was taken in both his invasions) though it may be he wore
a glib, or bush of hair on his head, and a beard only upon his upper lip (a
national trimm, or difference of the BRITANNS as CAESAR notes (and was also
besmeard with that blew-colouring weed, Yet some sign else, declaring his
Nobility, would have appeared which CEASAR minded not. And to deny this, he
granting them so many points of a nearer approaching to a more civil
institution (as subordination of petty Kings to a superior, Esseds (chariots
for fight, of a peculiar form) housen built like the GALLICK, coin, and
(besides al other things) such Physiologers, Astronomers Cosmographers, and
Wisards in Theology, as (in their kind) the DRVIDS were (of which order our
BRITAIN was reputed foundresse, and then also the chief Schoole-mistres even
to the GALLS (were an unreasonable stiffness. The chafe, and dregs of the
more vplandish people, and such as he calls the interior, might be little
different from meerest Savages, which cannot deprive the honourabler sort of
due, and inevitable variations. Pardon victorious CEASAR if he should be
willing to enlarge his renown by presentation of the wildest forms, and
omission of the Nobler, for it was no small matter (though with a preparation
made, and transported in a fleet of no fewer then eight hundred sail) first
of his, to show BRITAIN (like another world) to the ROMANS, which is the honor
antiquity does vouchsafe to his attempts, and not the conquest. His stiling
four chief Lords in C^NTIVM with the titles of Kings, being repulst by the
garrison of his Sea-campe only, may seem a little to taste of the
amplificatory figure, not doubting but that ROME should have heard of it in
laureated letters, and seen them with all their rude ensigns of sovereignty
(now left unremembered) nor that in a private manner, had he lighted upon any
of their persons, as CLAUDIUS afterward did upon CARACTACVS. Concerning the
ancient GERMANS (in whom we also speak of our renowned SAXON ancestors, their
most certain progeny, for which cause we likewise marshal them next, rather
then the GALLS) most manifest is that place in the book which CORNELIUS
TACITUS left unto us of their Manners, where, in their general description, as
a matter common to the whole DVTCH name is written of them Souta lectissimis
coloribus distinguunt. The sense whereof appears to be this, that their
sheildes had Arguments; which whether consisting of plain lineary ductures, and
divisions (as now also is in use upon some Armories) or representations of
creatures, or of whatsoever else, were (such as they were) peculiarly
diuersifide with the light, and luster of most fresh, or choycest colors. For
which cause I can believe, that HENGIST (our Founder, and a Prince of GERMAN
race) bare for ensign an Horse both as his name did signify, and as tradition
teaches. And my opinion of the ancient GERMAN sheildes, grounding upon
TACITUS, is such, as right-wel agrees with their natural industry, and felicity
in mechanical studies. Whereas, not long after, the same great author shows,
that among this martial people none were licensed, Arma sumere, till in their
Folkmote, Diet, or Council, some of the Princes, or the parties father, or
kinsman had adorned him with shield, and spear, a forward Diuinour would not
stick perhaps from thence to affirm, that (beside the order of Knighthood)
the whole present use of Arms or Armories, were declared thereby; and to
solder, or tacke the conjecture together, would add, that Insignis Nobilitas,
Which TACITUS in the same passage sets down as a cause (the other being
only for his admission to bearing of Arms) for the Prince to bestow some
honorable office, or command. As if the epitheton Insignis were superfluous
(which is a thing hardly found in that most press acute, and solemn Author)
unless it did carry a sense marking out the bearer for noble by some peculiar
ensign, or devise: Though it is a word which does often signify no more then
famous, or very special; But had Insignis been insignita the mist had wholly
been removed. Surely those sheildes of the GERMANS (whither painted before they
were delivered to their bearers, or afterward upon occasion of some merit)
being not assumed but solemnly, and then, either at the Princes own hand (as
when perhaps the party had no Armories, but was to receive them of his gift) or
at the hand of a father, or a kinseman (as where perhaps the right of bearing
signs of honor was hereditary) it were very strange not to grant, that those
sheildes, distinguished with choicest colors (as is said already) had not some
peculiar, and set devises; as well as, or rather then in general Tenues, et
fucatae color tabulae Which are the words by the same TACITUS elsewhere used.
Many books might be put upon this place (to use a mooting phraze) but that I
greatly affect breuity, so much of EVROP alone, beside the other huger parts
of the world, remaining still to be ouer-viewed, and when that great flight is
made, yet our ELEMENTS of ARMORIES are not begun. PLVTARCH in his MA^IVS aids
with many testimonies at once, touching the ensignments of the CIMBERS,
AMBRONS, TEVTONS, and the like which came to waste ITALY. In this picture of a
CIMBRIAN Pauis, or Targat, found upon ROMAN monyes, you may in bordure see a
few devises. The most learned IVSTVS LIPSIVS, of immortal memory, has
delivered it upon his credit. Trust it. The shape answers VIRGILS description
of GALLICK sheildes in this his three-quarter verse -- Scutis protecti corpora
longis. That the barbarous (so reputed by the GREEKS, and ROMANS) wore painted
armours is very ordinarily found among the old Poets, so the PHARSALIAN writer
mentions of the LINGONS -- Pictis LINGONES armis, but VIRGIL the most
learned, happy, and judicious of all ROMAN Poets in his -- Picti scuta LABICI,
comes to the very point and purpose of modern Armories, being (some few
consideratio^s added) the payntings of sheilds, and their arguments. I could
out of SILIVS ITALICVS give you now a GALL, named CHRYXVS, in embossment of
whose targat the sackage of ROME was gloriously pourtraid, but being only an
historical picture I leave it with mine Author.

That which DIODORVS SICVLVS reports of the GALLS (the most probable
Forefathers of the BRITANS) I may not omit, as coming nearest to the quick
of our purpose, for they (says he) had sheildes (...), which whether by way of
superior assignation, private assumption, hereditary deuolution, or howsoever,
were variously painted with some devise peculiar to the bearer. Our GREEK
Master made it in LATIN, word for word, thus: Variegata proprio modo.

The SAGVNTINE in SILIVS, bare in his shield the semblants of an hundredth
snakes. His words are Centum angues idem caelatum insigne ferebat. But many
years before that Poet was borne, VIRGIL had those Centum angues -- in a
shield, which devise, and words the other does rather seem to transcribe then
imitate. And here, for that from SPAIN (where famous SAGVNTVM once did stand)
the cut is short out of EVROPE, we will waft over into AFRICA.


The contents.
1. AMAZONS, their helmes, and sheilds called Pelts. 2. Other AFRICANS in
general, their helmes, and crests. 3. CARTHAGINERS. 4. BARCHINVS ASDRVBAL his
image in a silver shield of great weight. 5. Ancient AEGIPTIANS. 6. ARMS had
not their original from HIEROGLYPHICS. 7. Ought to relish of HIEROGLYPICKS as
well as, or rather then Impreses. 8: PROTEVS his transfigurations. 9. The
ancient, and modern AFRICAN sheilds. 10. Referment to the late discoueries.
11. From AFRICA into ASIA.

CHAP. 7.
EVSTACE. WE are now therefore in old AFRICA.


A. It is anciently written (in DIODO^VS) that the LYBIAN AMAZONS went armed
with the scaly skins of serpents. If you suspect that it was for defense,
not distinction, doubt you not but that the noblest Ladies among them had the
most dreadful helmets. The AMAZONS had also a peculiar kind of round shield
called Pelta, and, we should be very strict, if allowing to them of LIBYA the
like, we should deny them distinctiue notes. CLAVDIANVS (most neat, and courtly
Poet) reports in general of the AFRICANS, that their caskes or helmes were of
such stuff, Serpentum gestant patulos pro casside rictus. The words in him
sound thus much; that they armed their heads with the heads of those hideous
monsters. But I could rather suppose that they were the crests of their Nobles,
and that the shutting-vp of the wearers heads in the sloughs, spoils or cases
of serpents, is but a Poetical finenesse. STATIVS (most near imitator of
incomparable VIRGIL) says of the PARTHIANS Ore ferarum,
Et rictu horrificant galeas --
which being rightly marked confirms my conjecture, for it seems they drew
the skins flead from the heads of savage beasts, over their helmets, to make
them appear more terrible: For otherwise I should suppose that the scalp of a
gaping beast, would prove both a brittle, and uneasy head-peece, and their
hides a worse. In this part of the world stood the dangerous great rival
City to ROME, CARTHAGE, whose Citizens, and subjects were so magnificent,
and sumptuous in the matter of ensignments, as that in ASDRVBALS Camp, when
he was slain, and the Camp was spoild by the ROMANS, there was found an
honorary shield of pure silver, with the image of BARCHINVS ASD^VBAL upon it,
which (says LIVIVS) weighed one hundredth, thirty and eight pounds. The
ancient EGYPTIANS (sharers in AFRICAN foil) afford so great proof for our
purpose, as some learned (PIERIVS for one) have held that we deduce our
armories from their Hieraticall figures, or sacred sculptures, though it be
far otherwise: Yet is it not to be denied that some Armories have been even
copyed by Hierogrammes, or coined out of them, and armories indeed, as well as,
or rather then Impreses ought to taste of them, for that they are mute bodies
only without any Mott, or Word to enspirit them. The famous transfigurations of
PROTEVS King of AEGIPT, were not fained upon other ground (witness all
Mythologers) then his frequent shifting of crestes, and ensigns of Majesty.
Nor was it singular in him, if (as SVIDAS writes) GERYON was fabled to have
three heads, for that he wore three crestes. But the AFRICANS in general had
painted sheilds, and by a proper name called cetrae, as the AMAZONIAN were
named pettae. Of these AFRICAN discolored sheilds, the noble-borne, and
thrice-honorable SILIVS sung, Versicolor contra cetra -- which sheilds, only a
little changed, they at this day retain, and engraue, or paint with sundry
forms. To be short, examine the first state, and face of things in CONGO, and
all the Provinces of AFRICA lately discovered, and you shall easily track out
among them these effects of natural instinct concerning Ensignments, one or
other.


The Contents.
1. Somewhat about the holy land. 2. Sir AMIAS his uertical point to inflame
with love of honor to a truly CHRISTIAN end. 3. Force of examples drawn in
ASIA. 4. The BABILONIANS. 5. Their ensigns. 6. The place of the Prophet
JEREMY conce^ning SEMIRAMIS. 7. Her arms, and name agreeing. 8. CVROPALATES
of the ASSYRIANS ensign. 9. XENOPHON of the PERSIAN. 10. Symbolicall images in
holy scripture. 11. The fiercer ASIATICK nations. 12. The TVRKES ensigns. 13.
The CHESELBAS, or modern PERSIAN. 14. A rare example of arms out of CHINA. 15.
Sparkles of divine essence. 16. From ASIA into AMERICA.

CHAP. 8.
AMIAS. PALESTINE (once gemme, and eye of ASIA) may not be ouer-past without
tears, for that in stead of the most triumphal Cross (glory of so many
crestes, and coats of right CHRISTIAN arms) a lewd TVRKISH Ensign stands.
Which one day yet (o God) thou will raze by the martial arms of some zealous
Prince, who shall bear it in the canton of his royal coat armor for
perpetual memory of the conquest. To such a most glorious enterprise the love
of honor must needs be very auaylable, toward the kindling of which so noble,
and excellent affection I wish my labors could but give the hope of a little
spark. Thereunto certainly shall both this our conference, and all other our
like indeauors (as unto their vertical point) aspire, there being no
felicity, but as we may, to seek the glory of God.

The rest of ASIA (for PALESTINE is but a very little specke) would answer the
hugeness of her comprehension with the multitude of examples fit for our
purpose, but I will not surbate your attention too much.

The BABILONIANS (ancient Citizens of ASSYRIA) walked not (as says HERODOTVS)
without their scepters, or rods, on the tops whereof some symbolicall Images,
or other (as of a bird, a fish, a flower, a star or the like) were fixed,
which as you may in them (being noted for such studies) take to be some
superstitious rite, so I could rather incline to think them ensigns, borne
after that manner in times of peace to distinguish the honorable from the
vulgar. The terrible dove in JEREMY, whose words are Facta est terra eorum in
desolationem a facie irae COLVMBAE, is taken (as I have heard) to be meant by
SEMIRAMIS, Queen of that BABYLON, whose symboll, or Arms (as they are in
tradition) were a Dove, which also her name signifies, for SEMIRAMIS (says
ancient DIODORVS) is in the SYRIAC a Dove. It were pleasing but not much
pertine^t here, out of one authentike Author to declare that the ASSYRIANS bare
a Dragon, out of another that CYRUS the PERSIAN Monarck bare a golden Eagle,
and the like innumerable. Many prophesies of holy Scripture are full of
allusions concerning the Princes, and people of ASIA, painted out unto us in
symbolicall images, which yet I do not say were their Arms. More for our
present purpose are the ancient fiercer nations of ASIA; SCYTHIANS, PARTHIANS,
BACTRIANS, HIRCANS, SOGDIANS, and the like in great numbers, to whose
antiquities I refer you, and those which yet retain their whole barbarisms,
as the TARTARS which are still a puissant people. The TVRKS (a crooked slip of a
SCYTHIAN crabbe) have their golden Globes, their crescents, their Colored
Horse-hairs (a most ancient ornament for crestes) and the like ensignements,
into which whether you will account the red caps, which the PERSIANS have taken
up to wear, and of them are called in their own tongue CHESELBAS, to
distinguish them from their contrary sect in MAHVMETISM, I leave to your self.
Not to be any longer, but to quit ASIA (CHINA is in ASIA) look upon this
shield.




E. I do behold it.


A My friend Master CAMDEN, CLARENCEVX, showed it to Me out of MARCUS
VELSERVS (a learned, and a principal Gentleman of AVGSPVRG) who delivers it
for Armories belonging to a CHINOI, having in it for the main charge a
Panther, and besides that, Helm, Crest, and mantle, in a manner resembling
ours of EVROPE. At which a man may worthily wonder, for that VELSERVS is
plain, that it never proceeded from imitation, but from wise nature, or more
immediately, and truly from almighty God himself, as planting in his best
mortal work, but not in his mortal part, certain sparks of the divine
inteligence to Enlumin the Microcosm. By the only light whereof, nations most
distant touch often upon the same things, without having the least
correspondence one with the other. As these of CHINA do not only concur
with us in the notion of ensignement, but also in the regularity, and whole
complement of Arms. Which yet were the more to be admired, if (as is
constantly reported) they had not already been before us in our two most
eminent, and principal late inventions, Artillery, and Typography.


The Contents.
1. Examples of special moment in AMERICA. 2. Of PARACOVSSI in BRASILIA. 3.
The INGVA'S Kings of PERV, their Arms. 4. Of ACAMAPIXTLI, first king of
MEXICO. 5. The MEXICAINS (once NAVATALCAS) were not from EVROP. 6. Pengwin an
AMERICAN bird with a WELSH name. 7. Whole books of the MEXICAIN Armories. 9.
The ensign of their City, and the cause why it was borne. 10. The ARTICK,
and ANTARTIC worlds. 11. A strange kind of Inlayes, and embossements on
sheildes. 12. The Survey ends.

CHAP. 7.
EVSTACE. EEVROPE, AFRICA, and ASIA being thus with great pleasure glanced
over, we may now almost ferrie into AMERICA.


A. AMERICA, that rude new found world, I am to tell you, affordes wonderful
stuff to our purpose: for what if som-where, there they not only have those
external distinctions, which (as I said) no people wants, but seem also to
have Arms, or Armories? Sure if ANDREW THEVET; or his cutter, de not impone,
PARACOVSSI, naked King of PLATE, had such, which for the rude, and strange
prettiness thereof deserves here to be viewd. The mark, or charge is
PARACOVSSIES, the colors mine, the stuff of the targat, a beasts hide
braced-vp with thonges to an ouall ring, or hoop. I dally.

Those therefore of PERV, and MEXICO had very Armories as JOSEPHUS ACOSTA
diligently notes, and as in sundry other books is most apparent. One, or two
of a multitude I will spare you for the rarity, and at which you may justly
maruayle. INGVA was the hereditary name of the PERV Kings, and the gentilitial
arms of the INGVAS were a rainbow with two snakes extended.



The name also of the first MEXICAN King being ACAMAPIXTLI, and signifying an
handful of reeds in the MEXICAIN tongue (as the same ACOSTA writes) they
carried in their public ensigns in memory of that great Prince, an Hand
holding many arrows of reeds, as the ENGLISH version of that author has,
which I hope is faithful, for at this present I have no other. True it seems
to be that the MEXICAINS were a later nation, coming from Countries very
Northerly (Seminary indeed of new plantations, but not of civil inventions) as
true also that the OTTOMIES, and CHICHEMECAS dwelt-there before, and by the
NAVATALCAS (now MEXICAINS, whom a man by their civil fashions would judge to
have been a Colony long since out of CHINA) were displanted. But for all this
they cannot be charged with the suspicion of imitating us, no print remaining
among them of an EVROPEAN original; unless, with some few, we will have the
Pen-guin (a bird with a white head, which the name in WELSH does signify)
because it was found in AMERICA (they say with that name) upon the first
discoueries, beewray such a secret, and as it were retain possession for
EVROP, which neither by book, nor fame, nor any diligence of our age could
ever be discouerd, or coniectured, their laws, their language, their hellish
rites, and all other important marks utterly, and with one consent
disclaiming. To return to our present matter. There are whole books (as I am
very credibly informed) of the Ensigns, Symbols, or Arms of this once-noble
people, therefore I will here now only give you the Arms of MEXICO, which had a
local cause of bearing, being this. In the marshes, and every place where
MEXICO was afterward built, these NAVATALCAS found an Eagle houlding in one
foot a bird, the other standing on a Cochinello tree, or T^NAL, the said tree,
or shrubbe growing out of a stone. This was the sign which the Oracle gave
them where to settle, and rear a city, which should (as it was) be Queen of
many nations. They did so, and for perpetual memory advanced the picture for
their public ensign.



Here we will take leave of AMERICA, and return: For, to make farther
demonstration of the universality of ensignements (to convince the naturalnesse
of the notion) out of those icie worlds which lie under either pole, it is
meet we stay till they be discovered, but as little as yet they are known,
they will not fail to concur. So confident I am that no people which had any
form of commonweal, and that did but worship any thing what-soeuer, were it
but SLATA BABA, the Idol of the golden witch (with the Hords of hors-fed
TARTAS) or a square red cloth for the Sun (with the furred Savages near to
the icie, and Hyperborean Sea,) either did, or could be destitute of the notion
of ensignement, and external variation. And neither they, nor other barbarous
having sheildes, but are likely both to use EMBLEMS (taking the word with
LVCILIVS for Inlayes, or Marquetry) and embossments also, that you may not be
ignorant of their Elegancies. For they who know not how to draw lines, or
temper colors, can beat grains of gold, or other glittering stuff into them,
or fix the heads, or paws of conquered beasts upon them. Thus having in a
less time then DRAKE, or CANDISH compast the whole terrestrial Globe, we are
returned.


The contents.
1. An external sign set upon man almost before mankind. 2. The rainbow
after the Flood. 3. Sir EVSTACE sums the survey. 4. The less proved in the
more. 5. Praeoccupation of some foreseen reproves. 6. VITELLIVS his new
MINERVA'S shield, and PLAVTVS his epistles, fit Arms, and study-books for
whom. 7. Some principal common places of discourse belonging to the present,
briefly touched. 8. The value of heroical literature depends not upon opinion.
9. Satisfaction tendered for refusal to expatiate farther. 10. Sir EVSTACE
confesses his former doubts cleared, but maintains their causes were just.
11. The Masters short conclusion of the praemis^es, and Simile of painting.
12. What of Arms remains with art and use. 13. Elephantine births. 14.
Indentment for a familiar method renewed.

CHAP. 10.
EVSTACE. YOu have super-abounded (Sir AMIAS) in your performances, having
brought the whole world as it were, out of the gloom of Antiquity to witness
with you not only for the universal practice of rude Ensignments, but somewhat
also for Armories.


A. Yet have I not put you in mind of one instance of personal outward Marks,
even before NOAAHS flood, nay almost before mankind.


E. May it be?


A. God him self set a mark upon CAIN. But you perhaps will say, that was
Stigma, and not Digma, a brand, not an ornament. Whether it were or no, it
valews alike much for our purpose, according to the rule of contraries. And
that, whose examples are drawn from God (the author of nature) is much the more
in nature. The rainebow set in the clouds immediately after the Deluge (from
which some derive an authority wherewith to grace Impreses, and heroical
Devises) was indeed a sign, but of a far different kind from these of ours,
and therefore not at al to be screwed into our discourse for farther countenance
or confirmation.


E. It were absolutely needless. For what can be more apparent, after so many
most lightful demo^strations, then that the notion of Ensignment is universal,
and consequently natural? Give me leave now, as well for settling my memory, as
for crowning your assertion, summarely to bind up into a garland the
principal of those cul'd flowers which out of the Paradises of Antiquity, you
have strewn the threshold, or porch of honor with. To this purpose the names
of the barbarous answring the Analogy of nature in their significations, and
the brands of the VIRGINIANS pointed unto by you, suting the practice of the
ROMANS, are very pertinent. In EVROP I see the azure targats of the BRITANS,
and allow your well-grounded diuinations, that they had other, and those
lineamentall, or figured distinctions. Much the rather, for that you have
inuincibly confirmed unto me, that the GALLS, and GERMANS had. The rest of
proofs which troup-vp close to their quarter, and which you produce out of the
shrines of EVROPEAN moniments, who can but embrace? The famous CARTHAGENIANS
rise with honor, and allowance thereunto. Nor are the most ancient MIZRAIM,
or EGYPTIANS, second to any, and PROTEVS cannot there so disguise, and
transfigure himself as to escape the use you put him to; all AFRICANS
subscribing. In spacious ASIA (where your piety took occasion to express it
self) the BABILONIANS, sundry great Princes, and other ASIATICK nations make a
strong squadron for your party, not meanly flankred by the rare example out of
CHINA. As for AMERICA, it exceedes all expectation in her INGVAS, and
MEXICAINS, and I most willingly allow your conjecture of barbarous Elegancies,
touching Inlaies, and Embossements. The whole sum being sealed-vp with the
most authentike antiquity of the marks of CAIN.

In all which, this is worthily to be accounted rare, that no example there,
is so young as a thousand years, excepting those of the new worlds, in whose
nouelty we do not only see Antiquities of a thousand years, but Antiquity it
self.


A. Your memory deals truly with you in your rehearsal. But whereas our
intended matter is of the Elements of armories, that is to say of such
ensignements as now are in use, and the maine difficulty lying between your
sight, and their original, being only the doubt of the universality of
ensignement in general, for bailing you from that doubt I needed not (so as I
have don) to have made my demonstrations so much wider then the last, as to
have given you the^ out of examples, which are in a sort of the same kind with
perfect Armories. Yet I hope I shall not stand accused of excess, or failing in
the point, it being most true that the less (to weet, those rude first
draughts, natural essays, and ouertures of true Armories, which you (and not
improperly) called elementarie to our elements) is fully proved in the more,
that is to say, in showing honorable marks upon sheilds; they being among the
most perfect bodies that are made according to Symbolical doctrine.
Nevertheless that I may not stand accountable for wilful wast, having so far
exceeded in my proofs (the charge which lay upon me urging no farther then to
make plain that Ensignements in general, of what kind soever, were universal)
that use may be drawn from those scattered shadows, and limbs of our
elements, as by planting the eye at the true place of sight, may give a fair,
and complete body in Perspectiue, answerable in all the lineaments to the Idaea
which I follow.


E. It is a noble use, and the Art not common, considering that those shadows
(as you call them) and praeceding examples are dispersed among so many worlds,
and in so different ages. But why make you a sudden pause, or stand? or what
may be the reason of your almost frowning silence?


A. The fear least that some, seeming, and affecting to seem wise, will
censure all our diligence vain, though imployd in the proper subject of
honor, which the most high, and noble Philosopher PLATO rightfully calls
Diuinum bonum.


E. Trouble not your self (good Sir AMIAS,) for I have found out a new
MINERVA'S shield for such Censors, which will be more gracious to them then any
coat of Arms, or point of Noblesse. SVETONIVS is mine Author, that in one
consecrated dish, or charger (which the gluttonous Emperor VITELLIVS for the
vast bigness thereof called MINERVAS shield) such strange, and costly
delicacies, fetched from the utmost bounds of the ROMAN world, were serued-in,
as that this one salad royal (or salad BELIAL, whither you will) was judged to
have gone far beyond his brothers feast of welcome, wherein (it is said)
there were two thousand choicest fishes (wonder you Gourmons) and seven
thousand fowls. And for the use of their more retired studies, and profoundest
meditations, I could assign those -- Literatas fictiles epistolas
Pice signatas --
which the smart, and sauourie PLAVTVS puts into the mouth of SYNCERASTVS in
his POHNVLVS, that is to say, notable deep pitchers, and court-iacks full of
wine.


A. In very faith (Sir EVSTACE) you have found out an Arms will better please
then the resplendent Targat of PALLAS, and such a library as, I dare
undertake, they had rather toss then to be Deipnosophists in ATHENAEVS, or
glowe-wormes in the MEDICAEAN, or VATICAN, the most renowned armaries of books
in all the world. But Epicures (O good Sir EVSTACE) are not the only renegados
to the dignities of their creation, by eschewing the natural splendour of
testified virtue, and the shine which the studies of honor do illumine the
soul of man with. There are many factions besides. Some of which might deserve
to be recalled, but that in the compass of life they constitute a false
center, as if wisdom were always to grouell with them in immoderate cares
for things of present use, and they never to aspire to her high throne with the
humble service of all they have; and finally, for that they mask their neglect
of Arms, and of heroicke virtue it self (the only competent weilder of arms)
under the goodly visours of accidental debasements, such as vulgarization,
disproportion, and like moss grown upon them in tract of time, by a fortune
not more fatally theirs, then other noble knowledges. By which prejudice they
mingle sacred, and profane, and proclaim new tables as it were, to all
goodness, and glory. Admit that precious metal were dropped in into the
cynders; who throws away gold for the dross it is wrapped in? If the mysteries
of honor lie contemned in the husk, and bran of vulgarity, or of other casual
debasement, which setts foot on the neck of glory: must they to whom the
protection, and profession thereof belongs run madd with the multitude? The
holy, and most maiesticall name of GOD almighty has fallen in our days, by
manifould deuolutions of impiety, into such blasphemous abuses, as we all of
us have lately seen it feign to be rescued from those indignities (or
sacriledges rather) by main act of Parliament. Should that rule then be the
mesure of worth, in an age so blancke, and famously bare of all heroic
qualities, as, ours where should any beam, or smallest timber of the whole
frame of virtue be seen to stand? should not Angels, Men, and Things detorted,
or degenerated from their first institution, be so cast of? And should not so
an utter voydnesse be brought upon humanity? Therefore the rise, or fall of men's
opinions concerning things which borrow not their value by estimation, as
Pearl, and Stone, but contain it in themselves, as Wisdom, and Virtue, are
but a very Carpenters beuill, a false, leaden, and LESBIAN rule to mesure by,
and the ready way (in constituting multitudes our judges) to assubiect our
selves to the worst tribunal of the world, mere popularity. As for the rust,
or fog of contempt which sitts thick upon this, and all other generous science,
Honor has long supplicated Majesty for an hand to mount by, and cannot be
ever without it. Mean while, no iniquity of men, or times can give from us, to
enjoy the secret nourishment of noble thoughts, without imprudently slightng
the present sway (though of most corrupted judgments) or without frailty
contemning our selves. For we are such, and so taught, as must not like
chap-men ask how the market goes, thereby to lay out our time upon a parcel
of virtue, or honor, so, as we may in a mount-banke fashion gain an opinion
by retaile thereof above our value, but really embrace it for it self, and
earnestly favor, and foster it in others, that (if cause require) we may
afford to our country, and to other our obligers, true offices, and not
deceiuable. As for one ordinary cavil used by many, concerning the
vulgarization of notes of honor, that certainly does not trouble me, for Good
(simply such) is bettered in proportion to the community thereof, and how happy
were the nation which had as many noble in parts, as in marks? But it is
far otherwise, God knows, whose, and the work of sovereign Princes the
reformation is, and not of a Satyr, wherein I have no kind of skill, and much
less, will. In present let not any suppose (for I will make a short turn out
of moral discourse into Armorial) that I create these Elements of my self.
For they who first skored the heavens with Mathematical and imaginary lines,
made not the heavens, nor any part of them, no more then he made speech, who
first devised Grammar; both they, and these having their true state, and
condition of being in their several subject matters, though to us eclypst, and
shadowed: Much less ought it be conceived, that in the farther, and final
prosecution of this affair, I ought be tied to quotations, where never Author
has gone before: seeing frequent, and filed observation is the only proper key
to enlarge these Elements out of their Chaos, and imprisonment, and not variety
of readings, where (for any thing is known to me on the contrary) all books
fail. Which whether it shall happen to be imputed as an youthly
ouer-hardinesse, or reputed for praise-worthinesse, I must put in hazard.

The things themselves, that is to say, innumerable Armories, duly, and
perpetually considered, and not any Master, have been the flint, and steel to
hammer out this what-souer light; a Genius (with the stay, and lamp of the
acuter knowledges) being thereunto more auaylable, then infinite volumes.


E. I acknowledge it, and therefore long to be under sail.


A. You shall immediately, as soon, as I have taken a little farther order
with you, for answering some objections, or expectations rather, of Methodists,
least not having discharged custom answerable to the parcels requisite in such
a cocquet, I be laid aboard by critical searches, or raked through the sides
with their shot. Our conference therefore being of such quality as you see to
weet, concerning the Elements of present and complete Armories, they will
perhaps contend, that I ought not put into the deep, til I had gone farther in
their pedigree, bringing it down from those first rude draughts to the
present: Which they may suppose not to be altogether the most impossible, for
that the face (or remains at least) of symbols do continually glimmer in
histories, though sparingly, because the records of the proper Officers of
Arms among the Ancients, are quite lost, and al sorts of learning maimd in the
irrecouerable decays of infinite volumes, which has settled a notable
darkness upon the greater, and better part of Things, the riches of obliuio^
surmounting those of memory. They may also farther allege that we should
parallelize our Arms with those of the HEBREWS, GREEKS and ROMANS, hitherto
of purpose by me omitted, as more exact in their institutions, then stood with
the necessary proof of the assumed proposition (best maintained by examples
out of rudest nations) or at least wise show of what nature they were, and how,
wherein, and when dissonant, or co^cording with the modern; they might also
expect sundry other things, as logical divisions, and subdiuisions of
symbolical notes, comparisons, or parellelisations of ancient seals among
those three politest nations with sheildes, their several stuff, figures, uses,
with inumerable other points sufficient to moor-vp our discourse to an
unreasonable tarriance. To al which I answer briefly, and truly, that every one
of these being in a manner an whole work, and the Masters intention, not
other men's expectations, being the proper limit of voluntary undertakings, I
acknowledge my self to have already trespast in the excess, and out of this
plain praeocupation I pray excuse me to your self. Mary, if you as yet be
entangled, or unsatisfied in any of the dilated praemises, let me know, for I
mean not to take you into the Armorists ARGO till you see the weather unlike to
ouer-cast, at leastwise in that coast which we leave behind.


E. There is no clowd in that particular horizon which you have not cleared my
prospect from. Nevertheless I hold, that my scruple concerning the
naturalitie, and universal practice of Ensignements was at first just in me,
for they (as I my self did) who at a glympse, or inconsiderately view the
present multitudes of Armories, their formal elegancies, and settled order,
which all speak nothing but Art, would verily think that they were even at
the first but the work of wit, without any springhead to be found for them
upon so high an ALP, as God himself.


A. I grant, and think you justify your self, very seasonably. But let no
man be troubled (good Sir EVSTACE) when he beholdes the wondrous work of
Arms, (so DAEDALEAN, and so various) raised out of that one true natural
ground, as if it were not the ground, for all the lights thereof are kindled
(as you see) at that one ray of universal notion. Which nevertheless to weak
eyes seems wrapped up, or rather lost in the many foldes of Art, but will most
readily appear if thus sought. For as to imitate is generally impressed in the
nature of man, so picture (derived from that property) was yet at first
(notwithstanding the naturality, and universality thereof) but of that kind
only which the GRECIANS call Monogrammos, or lineary, and afterward from
Monogrammos spread it self into that which PLINY calls Monochroma, that is
to say, from consisting of one line, to consisting of one color, and from
Monochroma did by degrees ascend to such excellence, as rather more then
moulding, or imagery contended with spirit, or life it self, and is productiue
of as many several forms, as the eye, or imagination has objects. He
therefore, that by example of Picture, or of any other like flourishing
invention, which has complement from Art, but original from Nature, shall
lift his sight over to the first state of things, must confess, that the
present glory, and method of Armories, no more then of those other can take
away the grant of a ground, fountain of the one and of the other. But in Arms
we owe nothing more truly to nature then the very light of differencing worths
by outward notes. The invention, application, and disposition notwithstanding
of those notes are merely with Art, and Use; which two mighty Powers after a
very long space of time (for excellent things are of Elephantine birth) did at
last with infinite labor, and like felicity, first gather the
scattred-materials, such as that universal notion of ensignement had rudely in
several ages afforded, and afterward so admirablie wrought-out perfect
Symbols, and absolute Armories as we now behold. Our next step is into the
maine of our business, GOD permitting.


E. Never too soon, so as you but hold the course for which at first I
capitulated with you, that is to say, so mere a catechizing method as if you
would instruct me how to spell the very crosse-rowe of Arms.


A. Though it may seem a great stoop from the high pitch, which contemplation
lies at to the nearer points of practice, and that the tenor you exact, will
but appear like the bare Skeleton, or cage-worke of ribs, and bones, before
any flesh, or fashion be ouer-laid, in regard as it were of the sanguin
complexion, and complete body of a full discourse: Yet for so much as those
nearer points of practice are the Lists more proper to enter a young beginner,
in the noble study of Armorie, and that the aspiring to other more mounted,
and towering eminencies of speculation, comprehending innumerable mysteries, in
any other sort then as by the due degrees of the Elementarie, compositiue, and
other parts thereof, is but to cast a man up into the wind, there to houer
emptily like one of those flying, or floating paper-birds, (not made with that
Art as the Automs of DAEDALVS which hung aloft by means of equal poises) but
which we have seen boys raise by a string (after they are once mounted) to
an incredible height in the air. Therefore (presupposing with-all, that you
forget not what in the beginning of our conference I delivered to be my sense
for the present, concerning ARMS, and GENTLEMEN) I will (according also as at
first I yielded) gratify you with the course for which you capitulate, without
fearing least my profitable, and needful plainness take a rub, or twenty,
at the suspicion of insufficiency.


The Contents.
1. This part peeced to the beginning with repetitions concerning Arms, and
Gentlemen. 2. Blazon. 3. The two first considerations. 4. The Continent of
Armories. 5. The Triangular, or SAMNITE shield ours. 6. The ancient usual
stuff of shields. 7. The black Princes honorarie Targat at CANTERBVRIE. 8.
FROISARD cited. 9. A zealous digressio^ to our Prince. 10. JOHN of GAVNTS
honorarie Shield in Saint PAVLES. 11. The like in antiquity. 10. Blazon makes
nothing to the present purpose.

CHAP. 11.
EVSTACE. I Forget not what you delivered in the beginning, and think it worth
the labor to approve my memory unto you therein by repetition. ARMS (speaking
in the vulgar, and aequiuocall extension of the word) were, you said, certain
painted, hereditable, and Armoriall marks of honor, by which Gentlemen were
distinguished first from the vulgar, and then one from the other: and GENTLEMEN
(simply, and for the present only, for it is to be supposed that you would
give a more exquisie Idaea, did you depourtray him unto us in his perfection)
were the bearers of such marks, or tokens. To these, if you think good to
add for me the knowledge of what BLAZON is before you proceed any farther, I
shall seem to have the whole praeparatorie generalities of matter to ensue.


A. BLAZON is the description of Arms, and their appurtenances, by the
received terms, or other apt expression of things by words.


E. To blaze then is in Armory the same, which in other faculties is to
describe, and BLAZON, and description are univocal.


A. So I suppose, though some Masters teach, that we must not before a
sovereign Prince use the term (blaze) but (descriue) so as then an Armorist
shall not be said to blaze, but to descriue a coat.


E. What things are first now in the name of GOD, to be considered?


A. Two. The Continent and the Content.


E. Are there any such terms in Armory, or do you only borrow them to express
your self.


A. Borrow them only, as I shall perhaps be enforced to do many others. Which
all men that write either new things, or newly of old matters will not only
pardon, but approve.


E. What do you call the Continent in Armories?


A. The very same which the word imports, and no other, that is, the shield,
or containing part of it self considered, without any mixture or mark.


E. What form has the shield?


A. It has as many as Caruers, or Painters please, but this triangular is
become most usual, and in a sort the proper, for that the shield in general,
being invented for defense of the body of man, and applied thereunto, carries
a three-cornerd, or triquet-figure, the body of man decreasing as it were in
latitude from the shoulders downward. And as the chief of ROMAN historians
(SALLVST) writes, that his nation borrowed their arms, and military weapons
from the SAMNITES, so was this the peculiar figure of the SAMNITE shield, as
the noble Author TITUS LIVIVS PATAVINVS describes it, and gives the reason of
that shaping, to be Mobilitatis causa. The ROMANS digrest notwithstanding from
this pattern, rather using Oual, Imbricate, and other figures. Here I could
create a new Work, did I take occasion to dilate of the figures of Sheilds,
which were scarce the same in any two nations. POLYBIVS, and other famous
writers make it clear, that the hides of beasts were the common couerings of
sheilds, the ordinary stuff underneath being some tough wood, or other, as
Sallow, and some-time for the more lightness, twiggs wouen, for so I
understand that of LVCAN. -- nuda iam crate fluentes
Inuadunt clypeos --
Our SAXON ancestors used shields of skin, among whom for that the Artificer
put sheep-fells to that purpose, the great ATHELSTANE King of ENGLAND, utterly
forbad by a law such deceit, as in the printed book of SAXON laws is extant
to be seen. With this usage of agglewing, or fastening hard tanned hides for
defense, agrees their Etymology, who derive Scutum the LATIN of a shield, from
the GREEK word (...), a skin. The Triangular (or SAMNIT) was universally
among us the ancient fashion of shields for men of Arms, but not the only.
For assurance whereof, I will delight you with two diverse proportions, the one
of an honorary belonging to the most renowned EDWARD, Prince of WALES, the
other (an honorarie also) appertaining to his third brother, King of CASTILE,
and LeON, Duke of LANCASTER. The said victorious Princes toombe, is in the
goodly Cathedral Church erected to the honor of CHRIST in CANTERBVRIE: There
(beside his quilted coat armor with halfe-sleeues, Taberd-fashion, and his
Triangular shield, both of them painted with the royal Armories of our Kings,
and differenced with silver labels) hangs this kind of Pauis, or Targat,
curiously (for those times) embost, and painted, the Scucheon in the bosse
being worn out, and the Arms (which it seems were the same with his
coate-armour, and not any peculiar devise) defaced, and is altogether of the
same kind with that, upon which (FROISARD reports) the dead body of the Lord
ROBERT of DVRAS, and nephew to the Cardinal of PIERREGOVRT was laid, and sent
unto that Cardinal, from the battle of POICTIERS, where the Black Prince
obtained a victory, the renown whereof is immortal. I can hardly here
contain my self from offering up a duty of praise to the remembrance of this
matchless Gentleman, Lamb in peace, Lion in war, and of all the world in
his time the most martial Worthy, and most fortunate General. Aspire right
excellent HENRY (o let it need no expiation, that thy great Fathers most
lowely subject should thus presume) by his example (to whose Title, and
Principality thou art lineall successor) to things greater then the example.
That as thou art the proper blossom of all the royal HENRY'S, and EDWARD'S of
this thy Fathers inheritance, so we may in thee acknowledge the sum of all
their CHRISTIAN virtues, proouing thy self thereby a greater Thing then to be
the Monarch, not only of all great BRITAIN, but of all the World.

The other honorarie shield is in the most magnificent Temple dedicated to the
memory of the glorious Apostle Saint PAVL in LONDON, where it hangs at the
said Dukes Moniment, and is far different from the first. In the curious
near view, and handling whereof, as I took singular delight, so was it worthy
no less diligence, and therefore I will here show you both the Figure, and
Fabric. It is very conuex toward the bearer, whether by warping through age,
or as made of purpose. It has in dimension more then three quarters of a yeard
of length, and above half a yeard in breadth; next to the body is a canuas
glew'd to a board, upon that thin board are broad thin axicles, slices, or
plates of horn, naild fast, and again over them twenty and six thick pieces
of the like, all meeting, or centring about a round plate of the same, in the
navel of the shield, and over all is a leather clozed fast to them with glue,
or other holding stuff, upon which his Armories were painted, but now they,
with the leather it self, have very lately and very lewdly bin utterly spoild.
Now as some learned understand that old GREEK adage (...) (meant of such as are
astonished at the sudden sight of a thing) of the ugly fearful figures limn'd
upon sheilds covered with them, so certainly in the rare fabric hereof, their
Etymus is approved, who with VARRO (the most learned ROMAN) derive Scutum from
sectures, slices, or pieces, of which we behold the strength of this massy
shield belonging to the said great Prince, JOHN surnamed of GAVNT, does
consist. The like was also among the Ancient. AMMIANVS MARCELLINVS writes that
IVLIANVS (before he was Emperor) in an exercise of war at PARIS shook his
shield so sternely, that Axiculis queis orbis erat compaginatus -- the axicles,
plates, or pieces of which it was compact, flew abroad into the field, leaving
nothing but the handle in his gripe.

The figure of sheilds now used in painting is (as has been before declared)
Triangular, which we intend not to vary from.


E. I understand you, and know now what the Continent in Armories is, and the
usual figure of present sheilds in painting. But what is the Content?


A. You shall know before long.


E. Mean you not at all to instruct me in Blazon?


A. No indeed, as well because the particulars are innumerable, and either now
are, or will shortly by some other be so taught, as little help will serve,
but principally for that it is only conversant in descriptions of the
superficial, and mechanical parts of Armories, which set no sharp edge upon
the wit, as having little in them abstract, or deep.


The contents.
1. Of beginning at the Cross. 2. Figured in CONSTANTINE the Great's shield 3.
A conjecture concerning our ENGLISH cross. 4. The three legs in the Arms of
the I Will of MAN, and the old GREEK coins of SICILIA. 5. The Cross improper to
the Elementary part which deals with no Charges.

CHAP. 12.
EVSTACE. HAd you been so pleased I could tell where I would have had you
begun.


A. Where?


E. At the CHRISTIAN sign of the Cross.


A. So GERARD LEIGH harh done very commendably, as well because we are
CHRISTIANS, as also because (his discourse or book being of Arms borne, and
how they were to be blazed) that sign is in CHRISTIAN Armories most honorable.
Nor know I a better omen to begin with, for it was an happy presage to great
CONSTANTINE, who therefore in the silver bosse of his imperial shield, bare a
Cross, as NICETAS CONIATES writes, the color of which Cross though NICETAS
name not, yet was it in likelihood of none other then of the same which is now
in the flag of ENGLAND (red in white) where (when it was old BRITAIN) himself
a BRITAN was borne.


E. It may be thence it is that ENGLAND bears it in honor of him, casting the
title erroniously upon S. GEORG.


A* I say not absolutely so, though it is evident (according to EVSEBIVS one of
CONSTANTINE'S Bishops) that it appeared to him very miraculously when it was
now a little past noone, and above the sun, consisting wholly of shining light,
with a GREEK sentence importing victory against MAXENTIVS, and his other
enemies, and that in religious, and grateful memory thereof, he bare it in his
imperial Standard, or LABARVM, as also in like memory of CHRISTE'S appearing to
him in a vision the same night, he caused his moneys to be honored with
symbolicall characters, as by his coin yet extant may be collected, being (as
here you see) a stamp compounded of the two first GREEK capitals in CHRIST'S
name.

With more vehemence of likelihood we may affirm, that the Armories of the
I Will of MANN were derived from the semblable figure which the GRECIANS in
SICILIA did long since use upon their coins.


E. I remember to have seen them not without some wonder.


A. The cause in them was elegant, but nothing agreeable to the Kingdom, or
I Will of MANN, though som-what to the three Realms (ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
IRELAND) which it respects.


E. What was the cause?


A. The three Legs meeting so in the center did symbolize, or signify the
three corners, capes, or promontories of that Island, which was therefore called
TRINACRIA.


E. The cause was apt indeed, and would well correspond to our Penile of
ENGLAND, which is triquet or triangular.


A. It would. But surely in those monyes this was also strange, that in the
very iuncture of the Legs, you should sometime see a MERCVRIES head, betokening
(as it seems) the witty arts of the Ilanders, sometime the head of CERES to
signify the fertility, or rape of PROSERPINE, and some-time other things. Yea,
the imitation of the like in Armories to that public devise of legs has crept
into private families, for the TREMAINS (a CORNISH, or western house of
Gentlemen) bear three arms so disposed, the hands directed toward the angles
of the Shield. But we have once again almost lost our selves.


E. the time so spent is not lost, but gaind.


A. As for beginning at the Cross (which were, I yield, not only auspicious,
but pious) we have a great journey thither, because it falls not to be handled
till we come (if we do come at all) to treat of Charges or Armorial
bearings, and is the last part of this argument, save the mystical which
opens the significations.


The Contents.
1. The Content of Armories. 2. BRVTE. 3. The Continent, and Content explaned
in MOVBRAY'S coat. 4. A seeming contradiction crept-out-of by the Master. 5.
Imagination, the organon here of understanding. 6. Continents distinguished. 7.
The Bounding line or Perimeter in a coat of Arms.

CHAP. 13.
EVSTACE. ABout what most is your present doctrine conversant?


A. About the Content of Armories, and subject of blazon.


E. What (good Sir AMIAS) is the Content of Armories?


A. That which it is in other things, to weet, the thing contained. For
example. In the Armories credited for BRVTE'S, by VPTON following ARCHITRENIVS,
and other, who in those days were so far from making doubt of BRVTE, as that
they, and he affirm, there were eight Kings lineally from him descending, and
farther, that the Lions in the Armories both of SCOTLAND, and WALES, were
contrived out of this, being, Or, a Lion passant gardant gules. Howbeit,
because we deal upon demonstration, which is ever of certainties, let this
be the example.




E. Whose coat is this?


A. It belonged to the noble name, and family of MOVVBRAY, Dukes of NORFOLK,
and quartred at this day by the illustrious, and Princely house of HOVVARDS.


E. Which is the Continent, and which is the Content herein?


A. The Continent is left to imagination, being only so much as the Content
couers, which is here the matter of the Armories, to weet, the Field, and the
Lion. And you must understand, once for all, that I speak not any where of an
Arms, as it is only painted on a paper, but do always suppose a subject
shield.


E. You taught me before, that the Continent was the shield, or thing
containing, and now you say that the Field, and the Lion are the Content, which
being so, then are the Content, and the Continent (because the Field contains
the Lion) either confounded, or there are two Continents, one which comprehends
the whole Armories, and the other which contains a part.


A. My assertion is true. For the field (that is the superficies) is no part of
the Continent in my meaning, but is it self contained, as the Lion is: And yet
your auerment is not absurd, for, seuering the Charge from the Field (which
here is red) you may, and that not altogether the most improperly hold, that
the Field is the Continent of the contained body, be it Lion, or whatsoever
else.


E. I do not fully conceive it.


A. Reflect but upon the description which I gave you of the Continent, and
there you shall learn to bring with you an abstractiue, or Mathematical
consideration, for although a Shield, being a solid, and Geometrical body,
has in it three dimensions, yet know with-all that it has a superficies as of
it self, which is nothing to the making up of Armories, because there-vpon may
be painted any thing else, and a shield of any matter what-so-euer, timber,
metal, horn, shell, has nothing of a coat but only potentially, and in
power.


E. This I apprehend.


A. Let me here how.


E. We must (Sir) by imagination sever the Content of Armories from the matter,
or thing whereupon they are, yet so, as by the being of Armories upon it, the
shield immediately becomes the containing part of the whole arms.


A. True, as I suppose. For let an Arms painted on a Surcoat, Tabard, or
Shield be blotted out, the privation of the Armories, makes no privation of the
Continent, though not as the Continent of Armories, but as a substance of it
self, and if the blazon of the coat be known, though by reason of that
privation it appear not to the eye, yet to the intelligent it abides, and
preserues the notice both of the matter, and form in the mind, though so I do
no more take it to be an actual Arms, then the dream, or Idaea of a
building is an house.


E. It is clear then that the Content of a painted arms is all that whereof
the eye takes view within the bounding line, whereof that line is a part.


A. I say not so. For whither you thereby understand the purfle, or visible
line, which circumscribes the whole, as a perimeter, and is drawn with Pen,
Penicil, or howsoever: or whether you only mean that invisible, imaginary
ducture, having neither breadth, nor depth, nor is separable from the thing in
which it is imagined, I cannot directly affirm, that it is any more a part of
an Arms, then a communis terminus is of that which went before, or of that
which came after; or then the inexpressible point of time which diuides the new
year from the old, is a portion of the new, or of the old: The bounding line
(in my conceit) being common as well to the Continent, as to the Content.


E. How then?


A. Where the error breeds no danger, it is best there to follow common
opinion, and seeing these things are not wont to be so narrowly sifted, it is
enough to take it, as it is most usually taken.


E. How is that?


A. As a part of the Coat.


E. Then have we a bounding line, or perimeter, to be added to the Content of
every Armories.


A. I easily grant it to your sharpness.


The Contents.
1. Great odds between Parts, and Elements. 2. Elements of Armories what. 3.
LVCRETIVS his note of Grammatical Elements. 4. Armorial Elements four. 5.
Demonstrated in the given example, and infallibly holding in all.

CHAP. 14.
EVSTACE. THus far we are proceeded happily. What shall I now be to you next
endebted for?


A. If you call it a debt, then for that which is next in the nature of our
subject, so far as the nature of this place will bear, which is only to
show you in general, that the parts in the Content of arms are diverse.


E. Unfold that I pray, so far as you think good.


A. The parts in the Content of Arms are diverse, but between the Parts, and
the Elements of a body, there is great difference. For the parts of a man are
the head, the neck, the arms, the hands, and so forth, and again, those parts
have their parts, as the head has eyes, ears, nostrils, lips, etc. and those
parts have yet again their parts similar, and dissimilar, or (as they speak
in Schools) Homogenean, and Heterogenean: but the Elements are another thing,
and common with man to all other breathing creatures in the world. It is
therefore absolutely necessary, before we come to entreat of the total, and
partil, similar, and dissimilar parts of Armories, that we first deliver the
Elemental.


E. What are Elements then I pray?


A. The Elements of Armories are such, as into which all Armories may be
resolved, as into their common principles, grounds, or beginnings.


E. The Elements then are the common grounds, and beginnings of Armories.


A. They are, both as the word imports, and as it signifies in other things. So
syllables may be resolved into letters, their Elements (of which all voices
under heaven consist, Tantum elementa queunt permutato ordine solo) and all
compounded things into their simples.


E. Which then are those Elements of Armories?


A. These LINES of all sorts, simple COLOVR, or tincture, in which words I
comprehend as well the two metals in Arms, as all armoriall colors. To which
you must add NVMBER, or rather unity (which is the fountain of number) for
to it may all Charges, whereof there is any numeration in Arms, be reduced,
and lastly POSITION, that is, the manner of setting, disposing, ordering, or
placing tokens of honor in their proper subject, a Shield.


E. LINES, COLOVR, NVMBER, and POSITION, are then the Elements of Armories,
which in their Quadruple number are equal to the natural, fire, air, earth,
and water, or to the humors in an humane body. But can you for examples sake
show them to me in the most noble coat of famous MOVVBRAY?


A. Most easily, for they hold infalliblie in all. Lines, and Color you
confess are therein apparent, and in that the Lion is single, and not more
then one, the Element of number is manifested, and whereas lastly he is
rampant, or erected, and neither passant, couchant, yssant, or of any other
sort, position is most evidently Elementall.


The Contents.
1. A flitting eye sees little the more herein for seeing. 2. Lines the first
Armoriall Element. 3. Why. 4. Lines in Arms, as Place is in the Physics. 5.
Of Purfles, of the word filum in ancient LATIN poesy, and other Synonimas of
Armoriall lines. 6. The first distribution of lines. 7. The second. 8. The
third. 9. A necessary provision about the true understanding of Armoriall
lines. 10. Mathematical subtilitie in speaking of our lines avoided. 11.
Armorie Queen of liberal knowledges. 12. As incentiue to Virtue as Statues.
13. Arms well read, fittest books for the noble. 14. Some Methods rather
Mazes. 15. Armories, the only remaining customarie evidences of honor. 16. The
Earl of NORTHAMPTONS piety to our Sovereign Lord King JAMES at GREENEWICH
Towr. 17. Blazon the least, and meanest part of Armorie.

CHAP. 15.
EVSTACE. THe mystical chain, in which all four are linckt together, I cannot
but acknowledge, for it is (as your self have said) most apparent. But do you
not purpose (good Sir AMIAS) to handle all four severally?


A. How else? For if I did not, you would takein but small store of light at
this casement, and even then also a flitting eye (howsoever it may idly sooth
it self) shall see little the more, but all shall still be to him, as it were
Sub aenigmate, Or (as the very great Philosopher wrote in excuse, or defense of
himself for publishing his works) they shall remain as if they were not
published, though published. LINES therefore are the first Element of the
four, as (taken in the vulgar sense, not in the more Mathematical, and
penetrating) they praecede colors in work, as that kind of drawing before-said
which the GREEKS called Monogrammos, was before coloring, as coloring it self
was before light, and shadow in artificial painting, as also light, and shadow
were before those things which PLINY says the GRECIANS called Tonos and
Harmoge, the former being the heightning of light, and the other the
commissure, slide, or passing of colors into other colors, or by what name
soever our modern Artists know them by. And all Painters we see do first make
a rude draught with chalk, coal, lead or the like, before they limn a
Picture, or lay a Color.


E. Notwithstanding, how I pray are Lines an Element of Armories? or why?


A. Because a coat can be no more without lines, then without color.


E. Lines then do form an Arms, and give them to be.


A. Certainly.


E. Is there any known number, or set fashion of lines required?


E. You know right well (Sir EVSTACE) how in few words to demand enough. Your
question is perplex, and cannot be satisfide without some diligence. First
therefore of Armorial Lines in general.


E. I harken curiously, therefore on I pray.


A. There is nothing infinite in the works of Art, or Nature, but there must
of necessity be limits, terms, extremities, or bounds.


E. Undoubtedly.


A. Which limits, or extremities are either understood, and by imagination
comprehended, or made subject to the eye by lines. Those lines are that in
Armories which place is in the Physics: Armories then, and the figures,
portions, or proportions in them being artificial bodies, or semblants of
bodies, must needs have limits, bounds, or circumscriptions.


E. The necessity is apparent.


A. Nor can those limits, rightly put, be transpassed, or exceeded, but the
limited thing it self must be monstrous, and deformed, and as those ductures,
or draughts of lines are shapen, so are the figures (which they circumscribe,
and limit) well, or ill.


E. Nothing is more evident.


A. The painters of Arms do call these lines (as I think) the purfle, or
perfil (which also the SPANIARDS blaze, as a several part of the Armories) and
soundes as if it were per filum (which word filum LVCRETIVS does use for the
outermost bounds, or ductures of lines in figures, or for the figures
themselves; Debent nimirum non omnibus omnia prorsum
Esse pari filo similique affecta figura)
They also call it quartering when they put the last hand to the work, drawing
the black lines, which give the shape, and lastly they some-time call it a
Trick, and Armorists in other cases call them Vmbratures.


E. Of how many sorts are Armoriall lines?


A. The doctrine of lines in armories distinguishes first of their form, and
secondly of their number.


E. What says it concerning their form?


A. Armorial Lines are in their first division Straight, or Crooked. Again the
Straight are either Direct, or Oblique; Direct as in the first example, Oblique
as More-ouer the Oblique are either straight, or crooked. The Crooked are
sub-diuided infinitely, but the more usual, and universal may be reduced to
these heads, that is, circular, angular, wauing, and mixed, and briefly are all
such as are not straight. But before you proceed any farther, my charity cannot
forbear to give you here a cautel for prevention of straying from my sense,
and one error not met-with in the beginning, multiplies it self into
innumerable. Therefore when we speak of Armorial Lines either here, or any
where, I do not mean of them otherwise then as of terminations, or common
limits of Armorial bodies; and when we say lines are straight* or crooked, of
this, or that form, I pray understand that I mean the Armorial bodies which
they terminate are such. For though Lines are the inseparable circumscriptions
of forms, or figures in sheilds, as of sheilds themselves, giving them (at
leastwise to our sight) to Be, yet it is the body, or space comprehended
which casts them out into the extremities, whereby they become their visible
limits, which albeit we are enforced in flat pictures, and plain tables to
express by lines, yet in carved, or embossed objects of arms, no other lines
are drawn then such, as the body it self so cut, embost, or carved,
terminates our sight with, which lines shift with our station. Doubtless, in
the Idaea, or mental shape before it come as it were into act, by being
painted, cut, or carved, those terminating, and truly Mathematical lines,
abstractedly considered, are manifest, adhering (or inhering rather) without
any possibility of separation from the conceived Image. Whereas also the lines
drawn in the former coats (for they are coats of Arms, very fair, and good,
as well as examples of Lines) seem to apportion the said coats, yet are they (I
mean the parted, and diuers-colour'd moities of the several sheilds) but
several solid pieces, or faces of differently colored bodies, meeting in such
a seam of separation (in my conceit of them) as necessarily produce, and
present unto us such, or such a line. Nevertheless for more familiar
perspicuity in teaching, I am to retain to speak as the vulgar, without daring
to use the more penetrating point of spirit, it being also not in the skill of
man to draw a line (how admirably small soever) without any latitude, such as
the subtility of the Mathematics does require.


E. I am well satisfied.


A. You shall be else for the honor of so Gentlemanly science, which just
Antiquity would have enstiled Mistress, and Queen of liberal knowledges. For
that in it all the fair Arts seem to assemble, and every Grace, or (as the
LATINS speak) every VENUS of invention (not blurred with obscuring
commentaries) glitters there in open manner, with much significancy, ornament,
and vtility. For albeit the sense be som-what abstruse, and hidden, yet, who
(specially with any interest in them) can behold the renowned Armories of
HOWARD, TALBOT, or the like great Worthies, who presently reflects not upon
the Bearers? or is not (so as instruction, or capacity want not) stirred up
thereby to virtue? Because (as it is in that most excellent Historian SALLVST)
if FABIVS, if SCIPIO, and other heroic ROMANS were wont to say, that their
minds were most vehemently set on fire with noble thoughts, when they beheld
the Images of their renowned ancestors, not for that the stuff, or workmanship
had any such efficacy, but for that the memory of their immortal actions,
reviving thereby, enlarged the flame of honor in courageous breasts; Then
surely, as those Conquerors (for it is indeed the noble temper only which can
be apt to kindle at such objects) were so stirred at the view of those dumb
statues, what able man should not as fruitfully from a coat of Arms take
occasion to describe, and blaze to a young Lord his own particular offices, and
expected habits of Noblesse?

So much the rather, for that the pleasing aspect of Armories, and signs of
honor in them representing some meaning or other, the spectators readily know
not what, procures a delight, and so prepares the mind with a willingness to
be instructed. Why might not also the same able man repeat (upon like
occasion) the whole memories of his forefathers? showing that these Armories
of theirs have these, or these Elements, and parts, were displaid in standard,
banner or howsoever, in such a battle, such a siege, or service, that this or
that color, figure or devise therein came thus, or thus, and well fitted such
a person of the family, such a virtue, such a fortune in him, with innumerable
other branches of discourse springing from such an opportunity, as from a root.
And yet farther, if the Tutors skill would serve him to interpret the Coat it
self, and to deliver out of it those divine, moral, natural, and liberal
notions, tending to sharpen wit, and enoble mental habits, O! how easily might
he bring al Princely knowledges within the sphere of his actiuity? how easily
avoid the iading of hopeful spirits with the torment, and rack of new devised
methods, (mazes rather) and saples docume^ts?


E. He should greatly bind me to him that would give me the copy of such a
lecture, the bare mention whereof has so enflamed me.


A. Undoubtedly in the due time (that is, when by former necessary instructions
you are enabled to conceive) you may. Howsoever (as I said at first) my youth
has ever held these considerations in Armories very worthy the study, and
leisure of a freeborn man, and the rather to, for that Arms are in a sort the
only remaining customary evidences, or testimonies of Noblesse, now that
neither Statues, Arcks, Obelisks, Tropheas, Spires nor other public
magnificent erections are in use, neither can be recalled into practice by
one, though most commendable, and noble example at the Tower of GREENVVICH.

Our age therefore, affecting compendious ways of eternization, all
testimonies, are in a manner reduced to this one of ARMS, or ARMORIES, which
also are indeed worth them all. But if (as some very foolishly suppose) the
Terms, and use of Blazon, which (as is already said) comprehends but the
description of the mechanical parts, were all; who would not then think but
that a Nomenclator, or Musician, that knew but the words most frequent in his
own profession, did deserve as great applause as our blazoner? which is as far
from the thing (nor does affection abuse me herein) as signs from substances.

This short excursion (Sir EVSTACE) I call mine, which pardoned, shall
trusse-together all desire to exspatiate farther, and settle us from
henceforth closely to our business, not only till the intricate matter of
Lines be sufficiently explaned, but til the rest of the Elements, and the whole
intended argument be discust, in proportion to the present uses.


E. You do not only merit pardon, but many thanks, for such a repast, given
to us upon the way, and not by going out of the way.


A. Which you shall the more grace, (admit we have forsaken the Bias of our
course, and run out a little) if you be pleased to remember that our last
talk was of Crooked lines.


The Contents.
1. Of crooked lines. 2. They improper to Geometry. 3. Are exemplifide. 4.
VPTONS Blazons of some of our crooked lines antiquated.

CHAP. 16.
EVSTACE. WHat Circles, Angles, and the like, are in Geometry, I do already
partly understand; But what are they in Armorie?


A. Here are examples of the four kinds of our crooked lines, with which
Geometry has nothing to do.




E. Are these their names in Armorie?


A. Nothing less, for they have other very different: They are all parted per
pale, or (to use SCOHIERS word) mi-partie, that is, parted longwise in the
midst, or perpendicularly parted, but yet severally affected in the partings,
for which I refer you to GERARD LEIGH, and other blazoners: Only this I will
note, that whereas the second partition of the four is now blazed endentee,
Antiquity (or at leastwise VPTON about two hundredth years since) blazed that
rasee, and this which is with us embatteled, he called per pale endentee, and
not embatteled.


The Contents.
1. Another distribution of lines Armoriall. 2. Much of the doctrine of Lines,
put over to their more proper place. 3. The totum compositum of Arms. 4. A new
division of integrall lines into Pertransients, and Pertingents. 5. Saint
OSVVALDS Banner. 6. Both sorts of lines described.

CHAP. 17.
EVSTACE. PRoceed I pray, for I understand thus much.


A. Lines by a second division are one in a coat of Arms, or more, which is a
division, the handling whereof belongs to the Arithmetical, and Compositiue
part. Therefore to set down what sorts, and parts of lines are in Shields, and
how one of them stand with the other, be altogether points of another text, as
where those Elements are made use of, and the totum compositum (to weete a good
coat of Arms, what good coat of Arms soever) is described, or dissected as
in Anatomy. Nevertheless for your farther light, I will not stick summarily
to deliver somewhat more concerning lines Armoriall: which, first, are either
Entire, and Pertransient, or Entire and Pertingent, or parts of them.


E. Which is the Entire Pertransient?


A. The whole, or Entire Pertransient, is that which crosses the middle of the
Shield, and runns diametrically the longest way of her position, as here in
this example following, and such other. Here I cannot but by occasion of this,
remember what our countryman, venerable BEDE, writes (in his History) of King
OSVVALDS banner, which, says he, being of Gold, and Purple, was hung over his
toombe, and (as I think) is the eldest authentic record of honorable
Ensigns in that kind among us, and in my opinion not unlikely to be of this
sort, party per pale, Or and Purple, rather then of any other. This by the
way. The entire Pertingent is that which passes from one side of the
comprehended space, but not through the midst thereof, as the Entire
Pertransient, which passing, or not passing through the midst, or center, is
the true difference between the Entire of one sort, and of the other.


The Contents.
1. Entire Pertingents subdistinguished. 2. Their sorts described. 3. An
obscure blazon out of SCOHIER. 4. How Pertingents come to be Pertransients.

CHAP. 18.
EVSTACE. Have Entire Pertransients any other member of division?


A. No, for they are single, pure, and immutable, fully answering in their
nature to Dimetients, or Diameters: But Entire, or whole Pertingents have, and
are subdistinguished in their longitude: For they run the longest way of
their position, or not the longest.


E. Which are the Entire Pertingents that run the longest way of their
position in the Shield, without touching, or piercing the Center, and are
Entire Pertingents of the first sort?


A. These. for they cross not the midst, and yet are drawn the longest way of
their position, obliquely shooting from the Angles in chief, and meeting in
point base. Therefore both those Lines are Pertingents of the first kind, and
the partition it self is the only one of all partitions, which touches all
the points of the Escucheon, as you may see this does.


E. Which is the Entire Pertingent of the second sort, that shootes not forth
the longest way of his position?


A. That which shootes not forth to the full length of an Entire Pertingent,
(as straightned by the narrow limmits of the Shield in that place, where it is
situate) can rarely be found single in any Coat: But SCOHIER gives us
examples, as here in a direct line, which (somewhat obscurly) he blazeth a
Sinister, and again of an Oblique line in this. which he (how clerckly soever)
calls Emmanche au dextre. Both which lines are Pertingents of the second
sort, entire, integral, continuous or whole, and passing withal from one side
of the shield to the other, yet not by the longest way of their position, as
diameters: For if they did, then the one should be party per pale or
Mipartie, the other Party per bend sinister, as is most apparent, the longest
ways of their positions being through the midst, or center of their
comprehending spaces, the first perpendicularly, the other laterallie, as here
you may behold.


The Contents.
1. The more essential differences of lines entire among themselves. 2. The
quality of Pertransients. 3. The more noted properties of Pertingent lines.

CHAP. 19.
EVSTACE. WHat can be said more concerning this lineary element.


A. Incredibly to much for this place. Let it therefore suffice in present, that
out of the most spacious storehousen of glorious Arms I sparingly afford you
somewhat, and rather as a taste then a feast.


E. What then are the more noted properties of these Armorial lines?


A. Your question is apt. For having thus in general described the sorts of
Integrals, or lines entire, as well pertransient as pertingent, it is
secundarily convenient that I should instruct you a little in those properties,
wherein more essentially they differ among themselves. I will therefore breefly
show you first the quality of lines pertransient, as those which are of most
honor, and state. Pertransients (the chief of lines entire) do either touch
some one Angle of the shield, or touch not, none of them touching two, or more.


E. Which of the Pertransients touch?


A. Or rather which do not? For as there are but four sorts of Pertransients,
armorial Dimetients, or Diameters, so the touching of an Angle, one, or other,
is inseparable to all of them, excepting to one only, and to no more, for any
thing I remember, which is in party per fesse, and this Pertransient (as you
see) passes in breadth of the Shield through the vmbilick, or middle point, as
an Entire Pertransient ought, yet without touching any Angle thereof.


E. What are the more noted properties (now) of lines pertingent?


A. The quite contrary property to the other. For as all pertransients (only
that one excepted which I have already showed to you) pass ye Ce^ter, and
touch one Angle, or other, and never but one, so no Pertingents do either
cross the midst, or touch an Angle: But the more essential property of
Pertingents is not to cross the midst: Though in both respects there want not
exceptions, there being a Pertingent (and but one) which crosses the Center,
as the Pile-line (a Pertingent also) touches an Angle.


The Contents.
1. Another division of lines entire. 2. An exemption of circular lines from
that division. 3. A Pertingent of a singular property. 5. EVCLIDS Elements not
much more perplex.

CHAP. 20.
EVSTACE. Have Integrals, Entire, or Whole lines, any subdiuision?


A. They have. For Integrals (such I mean as are bounded in the perimeter, or
extremity of the shield) do either touch the Directly opposite parts of a
Coat, or the Obliquely opposite, as the former examples partly show.

From which rule not-withstanding this arching line does differ, and makes a
notable exception, for it terminates it self in the same side where it began,
not withstanding it be not interrupted, but continuous, and entire. Which
Arching lines are of two sorts, for they either touch an Angle, and touch not
the Center, but withal do terminate themselves in the same side, according
to the rule formerly given, or else they touch not an Angle. Of both kinds
that one shall be enough to exemplify the exception by, if it may be called an
exception, which is not of the selfe-nature of which the rule is, the rule
being meant of Straight lines only, so as Arching lines do rather exact a
particular handling, and place.


E. What line is that which being a Pertingent partakes not with the common
quality of lines Pertingent, which ought not to touch the midst in passing, nor
determine in an Angle?


A. Lo here.




E. What is this?


A. A Line Pertingent you confess, for that it goes not the longest way of
the position, but touches not the Opposite sides, and yet, (which a pure
Pertingent should not do) it crosses the midst: And as the pile-lines (before
exemplifide) balk the Center, but touch the Angle-lines, so this balks the
Angles, but not ye Center. But were it set upon the same Axel as now it has,
and extended the longest way of his position, it should one way be a partion
per pale, and the other a partition per bend. This line it-selfe is seen in a
Gyron of od pieces, but never single, and therefore being in composition only,
I may yet demurr upon the admittance thereof, as an exception against the rule
of Pertingents in general.


E. The matter of Lines in Arms does (I see) extend it self far, and (as
pertaking the subtilities of EVCLIDS Geometrical Elements) is inuolued, and
manyfold.


A. You may well say so, for that we have all this while handled only certain
single, and more principal Lines.


The Contents.
1. Parts of lines pertransient, and pertingent. 2. Their more common causes.
3. And chief properties. 4. A line for every day according to that of APELLES..
5. Sir EVSTACE stayed a while from analyzing the premises. 6. Casualty, and
Fortune in Armories. 7. Blazon referred to blazoners. 8. Single Lines not
subject to that casualtie. 9. Double Lines divided. 10. Parallels, Diallels,
and Neuters.

CHAP. 21.
E. It remains now that you teach me (if you please) the doctrine of the
other member, or branch in your first distribution, concerning the parts of
Pertransients, and Pertingents.


A. The Doctrine is short, and easy, for such Lines have one chief property,
that they ever make an Angle in the shield, as here: But being drawn through,
they for the more part discover themselves to be but parts, or beginnings of
other Armorial bodies, by imitation, defect, or redundance. As, draw the
half-lines or semidiameters of the first quite through the shield, they beget
this first mixed partitio^, and then (in the second) by extending the
cheuern-lines into the chief-points party per saltoir, is produced, as
follows.




E. In this place therefore you make these semidiametrs to be parts of Lines,
which meeting in the Escucheon, and near some part of the midst thereof, or in
the midst it self, bring forth an Angle, or rather a quadrangular, or
triangular Proportion, as the place will bear.


A. So as these parts of Lines entire (contrary to the nature of
Pertransients, and Pertingents) do each of them touch his side only of the
Shield, and withal, either settle in the very midst of the Arms, or fall short
thereof, or other-wise shoot by it, or lastly touch an Angle: which is a
property only seen (so far as I remember) in a Gusset, or a Gyron, which
Gyron is half a Cabe, or quarter cut off by an oblique or diagonall line, as
follows.




E. There is no part of this your last Paragraph, or Section, which needs not
very particular demonstration, before I can be made capable thereof, it has so
many foulds, for which I doubt not there will be a time. In the mean season I
perceive that this doctrine will afford a line for every day in the year, so
as none need pass contrary to the great Painters precept, who bad no day
should pass without a line.


A. Here then shall be the period of my present handling the Element of
lines, so far as they are Elementarie in the first degree, for you seem
weary.


E. At no hand (good Sir EVSTACE) unless the matter stretch it self no
farther. But to let you understand how I profit, I will draw a Table or
Analysis of this which you have already delivered.


A. Do that hereafter when you come to the cloze, which now after a short
strain, or two, will be presently. Now that you may understand how casualty
works in all things, behold it spares not Armoriall lines, which are cut off
some-time, before they can arrive at any side of the Shield.


E. Fortune (as the vulgar phrase is) which sports her self with the Owners,
and Lords of Coate-Armours, may very well make bold with the notes of honor
which they bear: Nor abludeth it from conueniencie, that if men suffer her
force in their lives, Sheilds and Armories should not claim a privilege above
them.


A. Of that maimed, or truncked kind, are this, and the like.




E. What call you this?


A. Remember I protest against encroachment, but refer you for Blazon to
Blazoners, the terms of that Art being of no use in considerations such as
these, which set not down the things themselves as they are Armories, but by
abstraction of Elements from Bodies, do give examples as they primitiuely
concur to their making, which subtilize the wit, and formalize the object:
Therefore to comprehend the Particulars of one nature under their more
general, subalterne, or other kinds, does exact words fit for such
purposes, which wanting (as they are) must of necessity be devised, and
imposed, or the Art be lame in that point. Blazoners call that Bearing, or
Charge in Arms, an Haumed, or Humet. But Single Lines are never subject to
this violence, or casualtie, whereof we spoke before, but only the double,
which are either Parallel, Intersecant, or neither.


E. Which double Lines are Parallel, or fellow in Armories?


A. Those which are such in other subjects, as in the Sphaere. In Armories they
are these, and the like which side one by the other without meeting according
to the true property of Parallels, which may in other words be called geminels
or twins*


E. Which Armorial lines are Intersecant?


A. As Parallels are commonly Pertingents only, so single Intersecants are
generally Pertransients, so in the former examples which I gave you of
Paralels, you see they are Pertingents. Intersecants be Pertransients which
cross one the other, and are these, or the like.




E. But are there some entire armorial Lines which be neither Parallel, nor
Intersecant, and yet are pairs?


A. There are, as in the former example of party per pile in points you may
perceive, for there the Lines meet, and therefore are not parallel, though
pairs, and yet cross not one the other, and therefore are not intersecant,
which considerations belong to the generation, or composition of Armories, and
are there, not here, to be entreated off.


The Contents.
1. The Master called back to english himself about the causes of some
Armorial bodies. 2. A Canton one of them. 3. A Pile another. 4. Sir EVSTACES
supposal of an abortion in Art.

CHAP. 22.
EVSTACE. Sir, I pray let me call you back to english your self, where
teaching the parts of Lines you said that the Armoriall bodies which they made
were parts, or beginnings of other Armorial bodies, or deduced how-soeuer one
out of the other.


A. Your self will easily be able to answer your self when you shall hereafter
know what figures, and proportions the skill of commendable Armories does admit.
For what is a Canton but a Quartar contracted, or abridged? And this, as I take
it, is an Armoriall body drawn from a Quarter by defect, or imitation, or
both ways.


E. How is one of those less Armorial bodies whereof you spoke made by
redundance?


A. That may appear unto you in a pile, as I conceive, for the pile-lines
shooting on either side, and beyond the fesse or middle point, and meeting
afterward together under the nombril, or base of the fesse, yet not extended to
the lowest, or base point of the shield, creat a new Armorial figure by
redundance.




E. Of what Armoriall body seems this a redundance?


A. Of a Gyron, or the like.


E. It seems to me that it may be by defect, as well as by redundance. For
where (like nature failing of her end) these lines fall short of the lowest
point of the shield, called the base, or last point, and clozing before their
time beget this figure, which (otherwise) running Parallel, and equidistant
from their beginning would produce a pale, so may this pile appear, in the
final intention of failing Art, to be a pale abortiue, or miscarrying.


A. Saving the honor of your witty error the pile is an Armoriall body of it
self.


The Contents.
1. The intended matter of Lines at an end. 2. All their sorts not regularly
comprehensible. 3. The linearie premises begun to be recapitulated. 4.
Complemental passages between the two Knights. 5. The Master finds fault,
and supplies the wants. 6. The soft-wax table of memory. 7. The necessary use
of certain marks upon the Slate, with sundry methodicall considerations alike
necessary.

CHAP. 23.
EVSTACE. THe matter of Lines is now, it should seem, at an end.


A. The intended matter (that is, to show how they are elementary to the lineal
part of the faculty) is at an end. But these Lines of which hitherto we have
entreated, are only some of the maine, for examples sake brought hither, and
which the SPANISH Herald very often blazeth by the name of Perfill (as is said)
or as we say Purfle, Or, Argent, Sable, or so forth.


E. Then belike there are more Lines of al sorts in Armories?


A. There are more, and those not comprehensible within these rules. For
neither can Lion, nor Eagle, nor Tree, nor Flowers, nor any other distinct
representation be expressed in Armories without Lines, either drawn or
conceived, according to that which we have heere-tofore delivered.


E. Shall I now recapitulate the points of this as it were Geometrical
Element of Armories?


A. Very willingly, and as you go make demonstrations upon this Slate.


E. First therefore it is plain that Lines are a principal Element of
Armories, in which they are either straight, or crooked. The straight are
direct, or oblique, and again, the oblique are either straight, or crooked.


A. Thus far your memory can sustain no reproach.


E. Crooked are manifold, as thus, and thus, and thus.


A. Hitherto the mute Slate shall witness with you against forgetfulness.


E. Lines by a second division of yours are one, or more then one in an Arms.


A. Show how.


E. O (Sir AMIAS) did you not adiourne the demonstration of that part to
another time? and I am but your spring water which naturally can mount no
higher then the head from whence it came.


A. You have too great a memory not to be dangerous.


E. For all that you will not me thinks forbear to speak things worthy of
table-books, and the next mornings meditation.


A. Meanwhile (for I acknowledge no such happiness) run over the rest of
the lecture of lines, if you please.


E. As ambitiously, assure your self, as if the Chair became my skill.

Lines therefore, you farther said, were either Pertransient in the nature of
diameters (and of those Pertransients you remembered no greater a number then
four) or else Pertingent, as thus, and thus. You also touched some special
properties of them all, handling by the way some other things, and concluding
that Lines in composition (which part you did also put over, as more proper to
be taught in another place) were either parallel, intersecant, or neutral.


A. Here like a young Courser that has no certain pace, you shuffle. If
therefore you will render your self sufficient for the understanding of
moniments Armorial, it would behoue you to spell, and conne them thoroughly, and
often, and that you may do it with the more effect, my self will not fail to
give you my best furtherance. As for the present, I will once more view the
Slate, whereupon you have cyphred your remembered parts of the lecture, and
therein supply what is wanting, that you may have all the passed examples
together, and in sight at once upon one Plane, and by them (as by so many
places of artificial memory) both call them to your mind the better, and hold
the depending doctrines the surer.




E. It is a singular good course, and a sure, for the soft-wax table of memory
retains not without sealing, and nothing is worth attention which is not worth
remembering. But why have you noted some with Asterisks, or Starrulets? some
with hands pointing? and others with trefoils slipped?


A. Every Starrulet shows a passing, or transition from one different matter
to another, according to our discourse it self, where were sundry branches,
exceptions, and theorems. The marginall hands show, that at the Escucheon to
which they severally point, begins a general comprehension of all the
particulars of one nature, which follow between that hand, and the next, and
is a more light then in the handling was given. For of those Elementary Lines
(and primely Elementall are none but the single) which we have exemplified, the
first sort are Elementall, and considerable in regard of their form, as
straight, crooked: Those of the second degree are Lines considerable in this
Element in regard of their position, or manner of placing in Escucheons, as
direct, and oblique, or, as in the more, or less length of their ducture. The
third, and last are lines considerable in regard of their plurality, and
therefore worthily adiourned to be discourse for the Fabric, or compositiue
part of Arms, or Armories, in which they mix, and concur to the enshaping
of proportions and figures upon Shields.


E. Wherefore serve the Trefoils?


A. To signify such examples as are occasional, and come in but upon the by:
As party per pale embatteled (for so much therein as concerns the forms, or
affections of lines) is comprehended within the Angular, and is not a sort of
it self: So the two Escucheons which do immediately follow the two Pertingents
of the second sort, that is to say parts of Pertingents, are to show (as before
they did show) how they become Pertransient. Yet the former divisions hold: For
all between hand and hand are in one praedicament of Armory, and every
Starrulet is the sign of a different matter: The exceptions, and incidencies
beforesaid, being most aptly notwithstanding comprehensible under their
several heads.


E. The Element of lines thus happily finished, the most beautiful Element of
colors, does next present it self to handling.


The Contents.
1. Admired PLATO vouched for entrance into the Element of colors. 2. Why
colors are elementall to Armories. 3. Armoriall colors twofold. 4. The
vulgar error of bearing in proper. 5. Seven chief Armoriall colors. 6. The
Master doubtful how to marshall them. 7. Antiquities for the honor of White
color out of PLATO and SVETONIVS. 8. Rare scorn of humane pride out of
colors, one very late of ABDELA the Morisco Emperor. 9. National as well as
personal respects in the use of colors. 10. Two considerations in the
marshalling of Armorial colors. 11. JULIUS SCALIGER bowld with ARISTOTLE. 12.
The Arms of Doctor BARTOLVS one of the first gowne-men which bare any. 13.
Certain scales of colors. 14. The differences between two Authors cited in
those scales, and the reason. 15. Concerning the place of Gules, and Azure.

CHAP. 24.
AMIAS. WHite (says PLATO) is the fittest color for GOD. Having here but
named PLATO, it seems to me that I have withal let in a great deal of light,
and gracefulness, and therefore gladly use that sentence of his as a garland,
to adorn the entrance of this part of our discourse concerning Armorial
colors.


E. You have done well, and I rise up in honor of his memory.


A. The beautiful, and vital Element of color is in hand. But before (either
with PLATO, or any one) we define which color is best, let us not unskillfully
ouerslip the handling of such matters as ought necessarily praecede.

You are therefore (as a general rule) to remember that by the word Color, I
understand all sorts of colors in Arms, as well as those which are called
metalls, as the rest. For gold, and silver do but in better stuff express
the tinctures which they hold, and yellow has precedence of white rather for
the dignity of the metal which sets it forth, then as it is a color, in
respect whereof it is not comparable to the chaste, and virgin purity of white.


E. Why are colors elementall to Arms?


A. For that as lines give them shape, or circumcsription, so without Color
(as has been said) they neither have life, nor distinction.


E. Has the natural Philosopher, who teaches the causes, and generations of
colors any employment in this subject?


A. What liberal profession has not? but yet not in every time, or place, and
therefore not now, nor here, no more then their materials, as cerusse,
lamp-black, vermilion, and the like: Because those colors are only for our
turn which already have their being, and are agreed upon in common practice.


E. How many Armoriall Colors are there then?


A. All colors upon occasion be used in Armories, as the thing which is to
be painted does require. Therefore all colors are armoriall in the largest
sense, which you may easily perceive in those sheildes, where the Charge being
of several colors (as a Peacock, a Culuer, a Cameleon, a Rainbow, or the
like) is set forth according to life, which as seldom, so it is of little
grace in Armory, whose liking is chiefly of those which being principal, and
Colors as it were of themselves are withal most different one from the
other. Of them (as the humors of this artificial body) it is enough if we
deal only with such as are most noble, and usual, which are seven. For that
the bearing of things in their proper colors should be best, as it is I
confess somewhat commonly held, so is it a common error, and but among the
Commons, because those of the Vpper-house of skill know it is far otherwise,
the reasons of Arms, and Nature being so different. A blew, or green Lion
(which are as improper colors for that beast as can be) are of better bearing
then a natural: How-beit if that vulgar conceit have any ground, it is in the
use of the praedominant color of a creature whose image is borne in Armories;
as a golden Lion rather then any other, because Yellow is praedominant in him.

So that at most it can be said, That creature is best borne, or borne in his
most dignity, which is advanced in the praedominant color thereof, which also
I must demurre upon, for I believe it not yet, and the reason will appear
elsewhere, for this is but by the way,


E. Which then are the seven chief Armoriall Colors?


A. I am troubled at your question, as not knowing which to set down first,
the order in naming them is so diverse, and in the march of Arms to rrespasse
against true Marshalling is an error which I am not willing to commit. To
make Antiquity arbitresse of this difference will perhaps not serve, because
custom (which has dominion over matters of this kind) has prevailed to the
contrary, our whole speech being but of the chief armoriall colors. PLATO
(laying White aside, as a sacred color, and symbolicallie reserved to the
service of powers divine) leaves all the rest unto us for military Ensigns.
Among the ROMANS it had signification of sovereignty it self, for (as it is in
SVETONIVS) a crown of laurel bound-vp with a label, or riband of white, and
set upon a statue of the first perpetual Dictator JULIUS CEASAR, the Tribunes
commanded the said lace, or label to be taken away, and the fellow to be put
in prison, as one who had therein gone about to erect a King, and so far as was
in him proclaimed CEASAR; a matter as then high treason against the State.
DOMITIAN in like sort for that his brothers son in law had Albatos ministros.
took it very haynously, as if by the use of that color were ambitiously
implide a pretense, or right to share in imperial dignity, chastising it
therefore with HOMER'S (...) inferring that as many Kings marred all, there
ought to be but one, so that his Nieces husband meant to make one.

Of these and the like were no end, and yet the present controversy of
praecedence in colors should rest undecided.Which if any man shall despise,
he does not know that nothing is of so small moment (which I speak not as a
matter for men to be proud of, or wherein they have cause to glory) which is
fit for us Mortals to contemn, whose most weighty enterprises by a color, a
shadow, or less, are not seldom interuerted, or swaid, to the singular scorn
both of humane wisdom, and of what their other force so-euer.

We have heard of a King who seeing the ship wherein his son went upon the
dangerous adventure of encountering the MINOTAVR of CRETE, return with black
sails, as it went forth (the colors of victory being forgotten to be
displaid, as was agreed) impatiently, and suddenly destroyed himself, as
supposing him to be slain.

Fresh accidents are most forceable.

Very lately in BARBARY a white skarcrow was enough to start an Emperor from
his imperial seat, and make him to fly. Thus it happened. In the late famous
furies of that country between the three brethren, HAMET BOSONNE their cousin
made head for himself, and drew toward MAROCCO or MORVECOS the principal
city, not far from from which, ABDELA lay in camp, from whence a fellow being
seen upon an hill with a spear in his hand, and a white linen upon it as a
flag, the Emperor ABDELA thought HAMET BOSONNE to be at hand with his whole
force, whereupon in all have taking up some of his Tents, but the greater part
left standing, he fearfully ran away: And what was this terrible apparition
do you imagine? a poor MORE washing his napery, and for the speedier drying
thereof using his spear to hang it in the sun. Let examples pass: who sees
not the natural effect of colors? At the approach of light whose senses are
not cheared? In darkness who feels not a kind of horror? Have the White of a
delicate face, and the blackness of a NEGRO alike admittance to our eye? or
allowance in the mind? What innumerable affections are raised in the soul by
colors, all admirers of beauty can tell, and I see not what the pride of life
is more ambitious in, or studious for, witness the maruaylous valuations of
pearl, and stone (chiefly for the various shine of their colors, their luster,
or water as they call it) ye pomp of clothes, the ornament of building, and
innumerable other: All which are unto the blind worth nothing indeed, but to
those who have the use of sight, a maine cause why they desire to live and be.

Symbolical philosophy will teach us wonders concerning these, and other
matters. Who dares in TVRKIE wear green, the color of MAHOMET, but the SVLTAN
himself, or those of his blood? He that had lived when red, and white in the
like-colour'd roses were fatal to the royal families of ENGLAND, would have
been very loath to have encountered with his contrary color upon
disadvantage. White, and black long harrased some parts of ITALY in the famous
factions of B^ANC^I, and NERI. It was but only a false fear which COMMINES in
his eighth book writes that his FRENCH were put into by the white banner of a
principal Leader of theirs, the same having been used by the MARQVES of
MANTVA their enemy. The particular praeference which is given to this, or that
color, above the rest by several persons, how, or whence does it come? That
there is a national as well as a personal respect cannot be denied, and
colors rather then other are vulgarly appropriated to special uses, as
symbolical to them, so far forth as a kind of superstition is grown upon the
avoiding, for you shall seldom see a Bridegroom wed in yellow, or a forsaken
Lover walk in blew. To mourn in black is as national a custom, as for the
grave, and civil to go therein. Who sees not what a religion there is, as it
were, in the use of colors? At a Saint GEORGES feast, a tilt, or triumph no
man will usurp his Majesty's known colors, yellow and red.

Is there a gracious servant in Court who will dare to mount any other Color
into his hat, then that which his Lady, and Mistress best approues, and uses?
There is scarce any Noble person who does not affect one color, and prefer it
before another in his fancy, though himself can render no reason for it.

In the marshalling of armorial colors two considerations therefore I recommend
unto you: The first is as they are colors naturally, the second as they be of
estimation in respect of things represented. In the first consideration white,
and black are by all the more learned, agreed upon as chief: So PLATO, so
ARISTOTLE, so to conclude, all Physiologers teach; But I teach not you with
JULIUS SCALIGER to tax great ARISTOTLE, for saying that black was the
privation of white. These two colors, as they are most different, so have they
their several excellencies awarded, as the heads, or common parents from which
all the rest are distant in greater, or less proportion, answerable to their
participation with either. In the second consideration, colors are to be
respected as they represent other things, in which regard white has not
praecedence. This distinction is insisted upon by the most renowned Ciuilian,
BARTOLVS, in that little treatise which he lest unto us of Arms, and Ensigns,
occasioned perhaps for that himself had this coat armor given to him by the
Emperor Carolus Quartus of whose privy Council he was, and is the first of
Gown-men whom we shall readily find (as I believe) that had honor done unto
him in that kind, which was but in the year of our Lord God, MCCCXLVII. To
swearue from his authority upon greater reason, or authority, can carry with
it the less note, for that he was a Lawyer, not an Armorist, and for that
himself suruiued not the publication thereof, which was done by his
sonne-in-law after his death, and therefore may seem to have wanted the last
perusal. And this (for honor of the man) I thought to fore-warne, least (as may
fall out) we should in some things decline his judgment, as not only in
marshalling the seven chief Armoriall colors, but in other things likewise,
wherein (we presume) his speculations were not beyond all others. Come we now
at last to the present matter of their order, which according to the former
considerations, is among the Masters very diverse.


E. As how? or among which of them?


A. VPTON a Canon of Sarum and Wells, in his learned work of Arms, dedicated
to his Lord, and Patron HVMPHREY Duke of GLOVCESTER, cites them otherwise then
GERARD LEIGH, who simply has the most, and best collections for Blazon, and
(notwithstanding his Pythagoracisms in affecting certain numbers, and his no
good choice in matters of Antiquity) does best apply himself to the
capacity of a learner, who is ignorant in other good letters. BOSVVELL in one
place follows GERARD LEIGH, but JOHN de Scohier Beaumontois differs from them
all, and other Masters (as Sir JOHN FERN Knight) have their peculiar
marshallings. The three first I have thought good to comprehend in this figure
of sundry scales.




E. But what say you?


A. First, observe wherein they differ, and wherein they agree. About the place
of metals there is no altercation, for all give praecedence to gold, as to the
more worthy metal, but about the colors they vary: For VPTON assigns the
third place to Azure, which LEIGH, and SCOHIER do post into the fourth: VPTON
enstalleth gules in the fourth; LEIGH, and SCOHIER in the third: Purple,
according to VPTON is fifth, but according to LEIGH and SCOHIER, seventh. In
Vert, VPTON, and LEIGH do accord: Sable is put last by VPTON, which LEIGH
thinks worthy to be fifth.


E. May VPTON, and LEIGH be reconciled or no?


A. The matter is to be fetched som-what farther of, that is, you must first
consider them simply, and as of themselves for colors, in which sense VPTON
rather speaks, then as they are in Armories, in which sense GERARD LEIGH: and
so, they two having their several reasons, their several marshallings may be
defended.


E. How do you consider them as they are colors?


A. White certainly is in his proper nature most excellent, as being most pure
and splendent. For it is plain that Yellow has som-what in it less pure, and
is a degree (though yet the next degree) to white, and as for the third place
which is by VPTON given to blew, and by LEIGH to read, VPTON, who knew much
better the reasons, and causes of colors, did see that a bright blew had more
of white in it then read had, and read, though a very bright color, yet
participated more yellow then blew has, yet because it has most of the second
color, and consequently not any thing of White but secondarily, therefore did
VPTON following the order of nature marshall blew third, and GERARD LEIGH
having reference to the dignity of Yellow, as it is expressed in metal, placed
read, where far more learned VPTON puts blew, which is in the third
place, as also renowned BARTOLVS, though not in respect of it self (as VPTON
does dispose thereof) but in regard of the aer which it figureth.


The Contents.
1. Concerning the place of Purple. 2. VPTON in one respect preferred before
LEIGH in the matter of colors. 3. Yellow not advanced above white, in regard
of it self. 4. Caesarean Lawyers commended. 5. Doctor BARTOLVS not diligent,
nor exact in armoriall colors. In how many sorts their praecedency is
considerable. 7. Sir EVSTACE spared as a learner.

CHAP. 25.
EVSTACE. I Am satisfide in this, so far as concerns the reconciliation, or
reason of those two first Authors VPTON, and LEIGH in their first difference.
The second difference is about Purple, which in VPTONS Obelisk, or Scale is
fifth, but in LEIGHS seventh.


A. There is no doubt but that VPTON with good judgment did marshall it so,
considering his persuasion of their order in nature. For read being with him
the mean, and equidistant color in the said order, between the two extremes
of white, and black, what can be more aptly placed then purple next to red?
for so much as purple has in it a kind of deepnesse, which makes it incline to
a degree of black.


E. Do you think that VPTON had as good reason for the other particulars in
his Scale of colors?


A. Altogether as good, considering his persuasion of the order of colors in
nature.


E. Then you prefer his judgment before LEIGHS in the first consideration,
though it should seem that even his Scale also does not merely, and purely
answer the said consideration, for so much as white, being according to nature,
the most excellent of colors, has not priority of yellow, which it ought to
have, being of it self pondred, VPTON respecting the honor of the metal
which yellow represents, or in which it is represented, and therefore his
marshalling is not simply natural.


A. Your observation is true, and by the leave of Ciuilians (an order of men
which rightly instituted is able and worthy to govern the world) I will add
somewhat farther concerning BARTOLVS: who making his distinction of colors as
we have done, and first (which also factious methodists would carpe as
preposterous) declaring which colors are in his opinion most noble in respect
of things which they represent, instead of prosecuting the other member of his
division, that is to say, instead of showing which colors are most noble in
respect of themselves, makes some of us doubt whether he has therein
performed any thing at all, or not confounded the second member with the
foremost. For coming to that point thus he disputes, as light is most noble
(says he) so her contrary, which is darkness, is most base, then in colors
as they are to be considered as of themselves, (for that is the point) Color
albus est nobilior quia magis appropinquat luci.

If therefore (o renowned BARTOLVS) white is more noble, (as you affirm) for
the more nearenesse which it has to light, then it is not in respect of it
self more noble, but in respect of that more neerenesse (that is, in respect
of another) and so we seem to be forsaken by you in this second point: For
neither is light, nor darkness a color, nor measuring causes of the dignities
of colors, nor was it the question which of them two was most noble, but
whether this, or that color. Yea, a curious sister might hazard all the first
division by this, or make a fight between them, I mean between the first,
and this: For if there be but one rule of praecedence in colors, as they are
considerable in respect of things which they resemble, or allude unto according
to the first division, then either white is chief even in that respect, and to
be preferred before golden, purple, and azure, contrary to the collection
which he makes, or this is no apt resemblance which is brought by him of
light, and darkness. But if there are two rules of such praecedencie, then
certainly, colors as they are considerable in respect of others, are to be
considered after a double manner, even according to the first division, the one
manner superior, the other inferior, and the second consideration which is of
colors as they are of themselves is to be sought out in natural Philosophy,
not in resemblance, nor allusions. But I may not entangle you at first with
these subtilities.


The Contents.
1. The Masters great opinion of Purple. 2. The wonderful honor which
Antiquity had it in. 3. Conjectures why that color has now lost the
praecedence. 4. The admirable beauty set forth by Hyperbole. 5. The Masters
wish for restoring it to the ancient glory. 6. The two vegetous souls of
Armories.

CHAP. 26.
EVSTACE. YOu favor me therein (good Sir AMIAS) therefore if you please, and
that the Entrance, Qu, and Turn thereof be yet, I would be glad to
understand somewhat concerning colors as they are in Armories.


A. I affect not the maintenance of forced paradoxes in matter concerning them,
nevertheless before I entered farther I would gladly that purple were restored
to the own place.


E. Indeed I maruayle seeing the best, and most ancient Authors speak of
purple, as of an Imperial, and most reserved color, peculiar to the CEASARS,
and other Sovereign Princes, how it has lost the praecedence?


A. You may well say it was peculiar indeed, when in the phrase of IVSTINIANS
CODE, the shel-fish wherein it grew is called sacer murex, and the crime of
using it in cloak, or other garment by an imperial edict dated at
CONSTANTINOPLE equalled to treason, and the appropriation thereof to them of
the blood only, is honored therein with no meaner, nor less holy a word the^
Dedication, which yet is but according to the Analogy of the whole use, if the
color were sacred, nay; if I forget not greatly, the State therein grew so
precise, that to use but guards, laces, or strings dipped with that die was
capital, though the great and glorious Emperor JUSTINIAN remitted the rigor
of those Edicts made by his praedecessors.

The reason why it has lost praecedence is because we have lost the color
it-selfe, since (as some think) the TVRKS have come into possession of the
fishings at TIRE, and other places where the Welks or Shel-fish grew in which
purple was found, or because though the fish be not extinguished, yet the Art
it self of drawing, and keeping it is utterly perished: For it is not (GOD
knows) that bastard die which is in Grocers turnsol, a mixture of vermillion,
and blew-bysse, or cynaber, or the color in violets, but a most precious,
bright and admirable; which (says PANCEROLLVS) is now to be only ghest at in
the ITALIAN ielliflowre, and seems not in some judgments to be that of the
Amethist, but that of the Rubie, Pyropus or Carbuncle, or (as says BARTOLVS)
of Elementall fire, or rather of the Empyraean heaven it self.

If the true, and TYRIAN purple were not lost, I perceive you would not fear
to advance it in dignity above white and yellow, that is above the metals in
Armories, gold and silver.


A. I durst certainly. But for so much as those colors are in the Court of
honor exempt from the name, and nature of colors, being the vegetative
souls of Armories, and so reputed, we put them apart as agreed upon for the
purpose of Armorie.


The Contents.
1. Of sable and white the two extremes of colors. 2. Their order in nature
not the rule of their dignity. 3. BARTOLVS wherein ignorant. 4. SCALIGER'S
scale of colors. 5 which are the bast Armories. 6. The reason of Arms, and
nature is diverse. 7. Of the Roman Eagle. 8. The same imperial Bird with two
heads found borne in-remote Antiquity. 9. The dignity of Sable. 10. Praecedence
captious. 11. Reflections upon the humors of the Time. 12. Of Azure and the
place thereof.

CHAP. 27.
EVSTACE. OR and Argent, and their co^lours yellow and white being agreed
upon (as you say) and their places resting out of controversy, the dignity of
metal carrying it from the priority in nature, or excellency in that respect,
seeing also that the true SIDONIAN, or TYRIAN purple is lost, though yet it
retains an opinion of royal estate, or Majesty, what is your conceit of the
rest in the scale of colors, that is to say, Sable, Azure, Gules, and Vert, or
how-soeuer otherwise you or others please to marshal them?


A. I will tell you. Nothing is more plain (as I suppose) then that black is,
as it were, the basis or pedestal of colors, and white the crown-point, or
top, there being a kind of leuitie, beside purity in the one, and an
heaviness, or obscurity in the other, white (according to books, and reason)
being capable of all colors, and black containing all. And if in this
speculation we may feign a sursum, and deorsum, an ascence, and descence, an
aspiring, and rest, a center and a summitie, the same must needs hold very well
in black, and white, and in the relations which intermedious colors have in
their distances, and mixtures with either. VPTONS scale therefore (saving in
the praecedence of yellow before white for the cause before said) is best
fitted to the order of Nature. You might ask now why the order of Nature
should not also be the order of Honor, and Dignity.

But if that were so then among al other incongruities, sable as it is the
basis, or foot of colors, so should it also be the basest in Armories, which
BARTOLVS (ignorant of Armorial speculations, for now I am compelled to go so
far) does not stick to affirm.


E. And why is not I beseech you?


A. For your better understanding thereof put VPTONS scale into a line, thus.
or if you will (with great learned JULIUS SCALIGER in a philosophical, sharp,
and clearkly manner disputing of colors) thus.




E. I think it best.


A. Grant now that there are two terms, or extremes of colors.


E. It is granted.


A. Grant also that the reasons of Arms, and Nature are several.


E. Be it so.


A. Then, as in nature there is no excellency but in extremes, and as the
final cause of Arms is one principal rule of excellence in Armorie, white
being the one extreme, black the other; More-ouer the final cause of Arms
borne openly in the field, or elsewhere, being manifestation, where black for
the solemn deepnesse thereof is a color altogether as far to be seen, if
not farther then white, for which cause also black, and bright in composition
are held the sovereign superlatiues: our understanding therefore must
necessarily be convinced, that in the Armoriall placings of colors, sable,
next to the metalls, is best, no Herald (as I take it) doubting that these the
present Armories of the ROMAN Empire are for such and other good reasons,
according to Blazon, chief.


E. I could with a very good will step aside here into a question, or two if
you would allow thereof, upon occasion of this double-headed Bird, for that
though you hold it so excellent, yet to me (in the rudeness of my nouiceship)
it seems monstrous and unnatural.


A. I marvel not if it do: But this example may confirm unto you that
saying which I but lately used, to weet, that the reasons of Armorie, and
Nature are several, in the one signification is looked for, propriety in the
other. You cannot but have heard the cause of this Bearing. The Eagle was the
Ensign of a Legion, and as you may say the Standard, under which many signa,
or inferior (Banners we cannot call them) but Ensigns did march, as belonging
to the several bands, or companies of Soldiers comprehended in that Legion.
The Eagle was also the Symbol, and received Hieroglyphick (so to say) or Arms
of the Empire, which being divided by the Emperor CONSTANTINE (upon the
translation of the Imperial seat from ROME to CONSTANTINOPLE) into the East,
and West Empire, gave cause (as it is in tradition) of bearing this JOVIAL bird
thus augmented with the addition of a neck, and head, as looking to the two
opposite coasts of the ROMAN world. Howbeit I do not wonder if to you it seem
unkindly, and prodigious, having read in an Epistle of BEATVS RHENANVS, that
some did heretofore labor the Emperor MAXIMILIAN, to abolish the bearing of
the double-headed Eagle for ever, as a monster, but that (as the Proverb is)
some were found wiser then some, whereby the sacred ROMAN Empire was preserved
from being spoild by the ignorance of a few, of an Ensign, or Symbol so
renowned. I could rather wonder at this Shield, wherein also is an Eagle like
to the former, and found engraven in the column of ANTONIUS at ROME, which
column was raised long before CONSTANTINE was borne, or any such division of
the Empire thought upon, or thought more tolerable then it was in the old
commonweal to leave old ROME for ALBA.

IVSTVS LIPSIVS thinks that the soldier (for it was a private devise) who bare
this shield, was of a Legion made out of two, for that two Eagles seem mixed as
it were in one, nor have I in present any better conjecture to bring, though I
would he had delivered his conceit what the Crown over it might mean.

Nevertheless it should appear, that the motion which RHENANVS speaks of,
was not then first made, for the Armories of FRIDERICK the second, revived
among the rest at WESTMINSTER and there written Emperor, have it but with one
head, and the same seems alike anciently painted, or stained in the glass
window over it, and this was in the reign of HENRY the third King of ENGLAND,
about four hundrerh years past: Other take it to proceed out of the engrauers
error, or that he was only King of ROMANS at the time of the Armories there
cut, or painted, and consequently in right thereof had only the Eagle with the
single head, but afterward (the writing being more easily changed then the
sculpture) the Armories remaining still the same, he had the title of Emperor
added, as that which had accrewed to him after their affixation, or setting
there. But I may not tolerate these or the like digressions: You see therefore
(contrary to Doctor BARTOLVS) the cause why Black, though the basis of colors,
is not yet the basest color, but shares with white, or has the next room
thereunto.


E. If you were marshall in the court of Armorie, I perceive there would be
some little alteration.


A. Sir, the matter of praecedence is captious, and I would be loath to make a
Grammar-warre in Heraldrie.


E. Is there any cause of fear?


A. That note of a degenerous mind, is not too much mine; howbeit, no man
thinks it safe to offend many.


E. Will any be offended?


A. May be that some for their own Coats sakes will complain of injury done
to their colors.


E. Indeed with as much cause as a Poet may be challenged for his Idaea, by
such as acknowledge their own part of vice in a figured person.


A. What may not men fear in so sickly a judgment as the worlds? But, if I
should put gules after azure, what could you pick out of that? you perhaps will
answer, nothing.


E. I should make that answer, for I could pick nothing out of it.


A. No? were it not to embase ENGLAND, and to ouer-glorifie FRANCE, because the
ENGLISH field is gules, and the FRENCH field azure? Or should I not do wrong
to Camps, and Parliaments, robbing soldiers, and vpper-house men of their
color? would it not be said I were malicious?


E. O poor construction!


A. Poor indeed: But what so foolish that is not among men? But azure being
the color of the starred heaven, and showing more clearly then any of the
other with either metal, and (according to BARTOL) figuring the aer, might
warrant such a praeference: yet I could discover another dangerous exception.


E. What is that?


A. That in putting azure before gules, I should plainly prefer speculation
before practice, the civil contemplator before the martial commander, and so
renew the old Theomachie of HOMER, setting debate between MINERVA, and VENUS,
or rake out of vrnes, and cinder the ancient quarrel of Cedant arma toge --
which conspiracy against common quiet, I will not be guilty of for a colors
sake.


E. Then azure you could wish were fourth?


A. If there be prescription to the contrary, I will not contend against
custom.


The Contents.
1. The great honor of Gules. 2. Of Vert, and Purple, neither of them usual
in ENGLISH Armories. 3. The superfluous understand not the value of time. 4.
The judgment of the places of colors is hard. 5. Colors in Arms to be
understood of the best in their several kinds. 6. A throne of Armoriall
colors according to the Masters conceit. 7. Why Gules has prioritie of
Azure. 8. CHAVCER, and the Lord MANVVOOD for red color in gold. 9. Why vulgar
Purple is put after Vert.

CHAP. 28.
EVSTACE. YOu have been very silent concerning gules, and vert.


A. They have their Turns, and I forget them not. Certainly the credit of
gules has worthily been very great among the ancient, and (I believe) more
used then any other of the colors, excepting those of the two metalls:
Witnesses hereof are all the ancient lists, and rolls of Armories, in which
there are scarce any two, or three together which have it not, and this was
chiefly (as among martial Gentlemen) in regard of the resemblance it had to
blood, and battle, there being also in it a kind of glowing brightness like
to fire. As for vert (in which word (as in the other of sable, azure, gules,
are only, and properly understood the black, blew, and read peculiar to
Armories only) is meant the green used in armes-painting, or which ought to
be used, and is the very best) that is as rarely found in Coat-armours, as
gules is often found: and yet Purple, as well for the reasons beforesaid, as
because (for so it seems) the whole honor thereof was transferred to gules,
more rarely in our ENGLISH bearings, hachments, or notes of honor: Which is
notwithstanding no disreputation to either. Vert in Armories has always had
the betokning of a joyous, youthly, fresh, and flourishing state of bearing,
and is therefore in that respect advanced to the honor of a superlatiue, uert
in or, being entitled most joyous. I can apprehend no greater reason of the
raritie, then the stern, rough temper of the former Worlds, which delighted
not in amorous, or pleasant devises, as a-symbolous to the use of war.


E. Afford me now I pray a Scale of colors, according to your particular
opinion of their civil dignity, without regard either to custom, or nature.


A. It were a curiosity of little use, and I might do it with as little
allowance of others. For I should not therein doubt to call up purple to the
highest end of the table, setting Or, and Argent beneath, but (that we may not
seem not to understand the price of time) let us be compendious, and consider
colors as they are in present Armories.


E. Vouchsafe then to me a scale which best answers both the order of nature,
and the order of dignity, according to the which I may make a rule to my self
concerning the use of their prioritie, or posterioritie in Armories.


A. Or, and Argent are yielded unto for the two first places, and (upon the
warrantie of such reasons as you have heard) I have worthily restored sable to
the third. The controversies then that are, rest between azure, and gules, and
between vert, and vulgar purple, and in the decision of those controversies a
doubt arises, which, or what shall be the rule to decide them by, authority?
arguments? or common opinion? All which being full of uncertainties, I will
therefore place the seven principal Armoriall colors, which are every one of
them understood to be the best of their several kinds (as the brighest
yellow, purest white, deepest black, and so forth) upon a throne of four
steps, according to my present conceit, and judgment of their order, leaving
others notwithstanding to their particular opinions, which I do the more
willingly, because I would not tire your spirits in the maze of scruples, and
not (were there any authentic, or set form for ordering them) for that I
would imitate the license of the age wherein we live, in rejecting whatsoever
stands not with present use, and fantasy, and the reason of this my
marshalling may partly be gathered out of the premises. The throne of colors
is this. Or, Argent, and Sable, admitting (in my opinion) no controversy, I
have yielded gules a place before azure. Not for that azure has not more of
white then gules, if the order of nature were the only rule of Armoriall
dignity, or for that it represents not a nobler body then it (and that azure
is borne out of white appears, for that white mixed therewith, does but
weaken the blewnesse, abating it to a watchet, and so to other degrees of
palenesse, as the mixture bears) but therefore gules praecedes, for that true
purple is lost, into all whose honors gules seems to succeed, is more often
observed in ancient Armories then any other of the colors, participateth much
of gold, or yellow, gold it self, as well among the learned, as unlearned,
being not rarely called red, with the Poets, rutilum is a familiar epithete, or
attribure of aurum, and for our vulgar, CHAVCERS rhyme of Sir THOPAS, shall give
you an authority, where it is said, His shield it was of gold so red, And this
common conceit made MANVVOOD Lord chief Baron, call golden coin (as I have
heard reported) by an alluding by-name Ruddocks; and finally, gules therefore
is suffered to praecede, for that most properly it resembles MARS, and is most
aptly appliable to martial behoofes: That it is a child, or near cozen to
yellow (as azure is of white) may be manifested thus, for so much as to abate,
and allay the fullness of red, we do not see white used (as a color too
remote) but rather yellow, and that so farre-forth as some do grind a Chiue
of Saffron with Vermillion, to make it the more pleasant, whereas white in like
proportion mixed, would dimne, and decay it, as yellow would spoil azure, and
turn it green, these in Armorial speculations seeming to be of their kind,
which in Natural are by the learned, called (...) And so, admitting yellow to
be the chief of Armoriall colors for the metalls sake which represents it,
rightly is gules preferred before azure, in that it partakes so much of yellow.
Lastly, I have put vert before vulgar purple, for that vert is simply, and
indeed, a color reputed as it were of it it self, and coming such to us out
of his mineralls, or materials, whereas vulgar purple is not (I presume) found
in any one single substance, whether mineral, or other material, but is made
by mixture, in like sort as Orenge-tawnie is of certain quantities of yellow
and read mixed together. And this is the Table of Armoriall colors, wherein all
respects, as well natural, representative, or customary, so far as I can
presently collect, are best satisfide, which likewise I intend to follow, being
thus marshalled, Or, Argent, Sable, Gules, Azure, Vert, and vulgar Purple.


The Contents.
1. The, as it were, complections of Armories. 2. One color cannot be an
Arms. 3. Physical disputes of colors omitted. 4. Atomies are colourlesse. 5.
The old term of Claurie in blazon. 6. Reasons why one color cannot be an
Arms (7.) Examples to the contrary (8.) out of the Prophet NAHVM (9.) and
Pearlesse VIRGIL, (10.) Of ALEXANDER Magnus (11.) AUGUSTUS CAESAR, (12.)
TAMORLAN (13.) the ancient banner of PORTVGALL, (14.) the Auriflamb of FRANCE,
(15.) The old banner of ARAGON, with the memorable cause of read Pallets
therein. (16.) De la BRECTE under EDWARD the first. (17.) The Master easily
puts by the point of these exeptions, ( 18.) of honorable Additions, ( 19.)
Admirable modesty of old, in assuming Armories. (20.) The white Knight in
IRELAND, (21.) The old banner of NAVARRE (22.) What we are to judge of a
blancke or empty superficies ( 24.) No good Armories without metal. (24.)
ROKESLEYS coat, ( 25.) Extrauagants, ( 26.) Metal the vegetative soul of
Arms. (27.) Armoriall Harmony.

CHAP. 29.
EVSTACE. YOu have been bountiful to me in this delightful argument (worthy
Sir AMIAS) and greatly opened mine understanding of them.


A. It would require much more, even as colors are Elementall unto Armories.


E. As how I beseech you?


A. In respect of their conjunctions one with another, by which (in proportion
of the quantities of colors in those conjunctions) the, as it were, complexion
of a Coat is made up, whereas here the Armoriall colors are only
considered as they are single, and of themselves, and as single notes are no
concords, nor proportions in music, so single colors have no Armoriall
harmony. In which respect they neither are, nor can be in Arms, for of one
color only no coat can consist. We will not here touch at the subtilities
of the Physics concerning colors, nor dispute whither LVCRETIVS his atomicall
Elements, or seeds of things have any color, a matter by him forbidden to be
credited, saying -- color cave contingas semina rerum.


E. Wherefore then cannot a coat of Arms consist of one color?


A. For innumerable causes. First to mainetaine the matter of the Elements now
in hand, for if we admit such an absurdity as the subsistence of a coat, being
barely a shield of one color (which kind of bearing the ancient Armorists
called Claurie, as I think of the clearness) without any other distinction,
we utterly make void the whole doctrine of Armoriall Elements, at leastwise
two of the^ (that is to say number, and position) are decarded. Then, for that
a coat of Arms is an artificial distinct, and compounded body and can no more
consist, or be of one color, the^ a man of one Element. And to be breife, for
that a coat of one color is no coat at all, but a color only, or such as
SCOHIER says are Tables d' attentes, for the color thereof being metal, it
is nothing but, as it were, all light, without shadow, or life without body,
and being not metal but color only, it is all nothing but as it were shadow
only, and a soule-lesse body.


E. Yet are there some examples to the contrary?


A. Examples are not proves, and I can call to mind some particulars, wherein
this rule seems to be infringed after several manners. In the Prophecy of
NAHVM, among the books of holy scripture it is said, that the sheildes of the
mighty were become read, as some translate. In profane authors, that of the
ROMAN Poet (whom by IVSTINIANS imperial rule, when no name is added to
signify which of the Latin Poets we mean, can be none but incomparable
VIRGIL) is worthily most memorable, where HELENOR son to the King of MEONIA,
stolen from his friends by the servile LICYMNIA, and sent to the wars of
TROY, was -- parma inglorius alba. ALEXANDER Magnus also (as it is in IVSTIN)
in a certain triumphant journey of his, bestowed Shields of white-plate
(Siluer-shields) upon his Soldiers, whom he therefore called (...)

It is farthermore in learning that AUGUSTUS CAESAR, after a victory by him
obtained in the SICILIAN Sea, honored MARCUS AGRIPPA with an azure Banner, --
vexillo caeruleo. TAMORLAN the SCYTHIAN (if that be any thing to the purpose)
hung out (as some report) upon several days flagges of several colors,
Symbolicall to his designs. We may not in this number forget what ANDREAS
RESCENDIVS is said to write, that is, that the Arms of the Kingdom of
PORTVGALL, were nothing at first but a white flagge, till by occasion of a
victory obtained by King ALPHONSO, against five Moriseo Kings, the five
Escucheons azure were added. The celestial auriflamb so by the FRENCH admired,
was also but of one color, a square read Syndon Banner. What can we do
less then report the Arms of ARAGON, as they were said long since to have
been? to wit, only, or, that is, a field, or rather a superficies or, not
charged with pallets, as they now are Blazed, which happened at such time as one
of the Kings thereof dipping his fingers in the blood of new slain SARACENS,
or (as others say) LEWIS Emperor in the wounds of il Conde de BARCELONA,
fighting on his side against the NORMANS, ennobled that yellow standard, by
drawing upon it those bloody marks which now it has. Many the like examples
might be found, and I have seen an old record in FRENCH verses, that at
KARLAVAROCK in SCOTLAND in the time of King EDWARD the first, EVMENIONS de la
Brecte, (so is he there named) bare Gules, and no more: The words are, Mais
Eumenions de la Brecte,
La Baniere eut toute rougecte.



E. And do not all these examples which affront your proposition move you?


A. Were their files doubled, and trebled with the like to these, they could
not move me, for of all these there is not one Coat of Arms, and so I have
no reason to move, or to remove. For first the place in NAHVM belongs but to
the description of a dreadful conquering host there meant, and had nothing
private but national to the ASSYRIANS. HELENOR in VIRGIL was but a nouice in
Arms, without having achieved any honorable note, and therefore his shield
was White. As for ALEXANDERS Argyraspides, who sees not it was a ryotous
ostentation, no assignatation of peculiar notes of noblesse? AGRIPPA'S azure
Banner here depainted, as it was given him for a Symbolicall argument of
manhood showed at sea, so was it but in the nature of other military graces,
and signs of service valiantly performed, and if these were yielded to be in
the nature of an Arms, then would one man be found among the old ROMANS that
had a multitude of Arms given him as testimonies of his heroic virtues,
contrary to their very nature, use, and institution, which is to be but single
and one unto one person, and that also to dessend unto posterity. Though I am
not ignorant that for more honors sake an whole Coat has been given to a Name
as an augmentation beside the original Coat, as that which in the quarterings
of the CLIFFORDS, Earls of CVMBERLAND is borne second, in which
notwithstanding it has, and bears but the nature of a Chief, or a Canton, or
the like additions of honor in the same Armories, or Shield: No more then this
empalement, which his Majesty gave to Sir JOHN RAMSEY, now Vicount HADDINGTON.
The supposed flags of TAMORLAN at his leaguers, or sieges, were no otherwise
any Coats of Arms, then at this day flaggs of truce, or bloody colors. That
the white-banner of PORTVGALL was but a symbolicall Color, not an Arms,
appears in this, for that then first it changed the inglorious state thereof,
and came to be Armorial, when it had those notes of honor added: As first, the
said five Escucheons in cross charged severally with plates in Saltoir, and
afterward eight golden Castellets in a border Gules, in remembrance (say some)
of the Kingdom of the ALGARBES, wherein were so many principal cities, al
annexed by conquest from the MOORS to the Crown of PORTVGAL, or (as my worthy
friend Master CAMDEN admonished me) in respect (say others) that PORTVGAL was
feudum CASTILIAE, and held thereof, the Armories of CASTILE being a Castle
triple-towred, and of like colors with the others border, that is to say, Gold
in Gules. To the famous Auriflamb of FRANCE, though recorded to have bin sent
from heaven (in a more celestial manner the^ the Ancile of ancio^t ROME) as a
sanctified banner to lead the FRENCH hosts fortunately while they lived well, I
have nothing here to say, for that it presses not the place with any forceable
argument, or other, which by the same reasons with the former is not fully
satisfied. The objection countenanced under the Standard of ARAGON is answered,
and avoided as that of PORTVGAL: without calling into the least doubt that the
Ensign of the one nation was wholly yellow, and the other wholly white, til
occasionally they thus became distinguished with signs of Noblesse; Only I
may not ouerslip one observation for the honor of Arms: For if these two
Kingdoms (which may also be presumed to have laid down their ancient
Ensigns, as foiled, eclipst, and shamed by the ouer-running of Infidels, and
BARBARIANS) made such a religion (upon coming to new heads) of taking unto
the^ any devise of Arms to distinguish themselves by, that they had rather
ingloriously advance a single color, then not attend an occasion of worthily
assuming them, O! who can enough admire the truly ingenuous and liberal state
of minds in divine Antiquity? In the rere-gard, and as it were last hope of the
battle, appears the Example of EVMENIONS de la BRECTE, which what-soeuer it
means, certainly I deny not but that a Gentleman in exercises of Arms may
upon a private conceit (as de la BRECTE) not only paint his Banner and Shield,
but his whole Armor with Vermilion, or any other color, leaving off his own
Coat of Arms for the time, either upon vow, singularity, or otherwise: And
of such disguizes we have heard, and from thence perhaps at first descended to
MAC GIBBON the title, who lately was white Knight in IRELAND, and is an
hereditary by-name to that house of the GERALDINES, but could he show no
other, nor more significatiue note of honor, he would never among the learned
be registered a Gentleman of Arms. As de la BRECTES, so also was the Banner of
NAVARRE all Gules, and (as is written) continued such till SANCHEZ le fort,
King thereof, added those golden ornaments which now do shine therein: But I
can no more call the one, or the other a Coat of Arms, without extreme
impropriety, and abuse of speech, then a plain piece of Virgin-wax a seal, or
a sheet of unwritten paper a letter, or a maid a wife.


E. So then if it fortune us to meet with some other such examples, we are
taught hereby to hold them but like PLATO his abrase tables, which are
indifferently capable of any form, till when, they are as certain embrions,
rude proiections, or things in power. To induce, and settle which form two
colors are absolutely necessary, or more then two.


A. Most true: and according to the received grounds of the knowledge, of those
two colors one must be a metal. Contrary to which grounds though there may
be some examples eue^ in Antiquity, and of those specially where color is upon
color, yet enlumined nevertheless with metal in one part, or other, as in
this, borne by the name of ROKESLEY, and quartred by PAVLET, L. Marquess of
WINCHESTER, they notwithstanding may pass like Heteroclits, and Extrauagants
into a place by themselves, as not triable by the general Test of Armories:
For metal is their vegetative soul, and as no body can move of it self
without life, so no Armories are proper without it, or can be said to live
being destitute of that as it were vitalitie, and quickening clearness which
from thence it borrows.


E. The number therefore of the chief Armoriall colors; their order according
to several marshallings, and your own; how the differences are reconciliable;
many other particular matters concerning particular colors, and things, as I
well understand by the premises; so in one matter which you did but touch at,
I conceive nothing except ye bare name; for thus you said, as single notes are
no concords, nor proportions in Music, so single colors have no Armoriall
harmony. Is there then any Armoriall harmony?


A. First learn that there are elements, and so you may come to the harmony
the better, for (to answer you directly) there is such a thing, not only in
marriages, or alliances of one color with another, as they are matched in
Arms (which show well, or ill, according to their distances, and degrees of
lightness, or sadness) but also in the quantities, and proportions
themselves, wherein they stand honored with no less diversity, then the
countenance of man: Which as it is fairly apparent in every particular good
Coat, so much the more, where multitudes stand together as in painted tables,
rolls of Arms, and Lig^er-bookes, or Hachments, where many fair are quartred:
The pleasing and wondrous varieties whereof, to such as did ever study the
secret, and reason of those concords, are not only (as to the unlearned) an
entertainment of the eye, but a food, and music to the mind: The skill
whereof being abstruse, but very demonstrable, some other greater Clearks may
teach.


The Contents.
1. Of the furre Ermin. 2. The strange property of furs in Armories. 3.
Vulgar conceits about Ermin. 4. The Coat of BRITAIN, and short Blazon thereof.
5. Sir JOHN FERN'S conceit of Ermin. 6. Of PLATO'S Hermes, and of Hermathenes.
7. Doctor red SMITHS fine allusion to Ermin. 8. GERARD LEIGH. 9. Sir EVSTACE
reproved for Criticisme. 10. The Masters judgment of Ermin. 11. TACITUS for
it. 12. The native soil of Ermin, and most ancient use thereof in GERMANY.
13. The Rational soul of Armories.

CHAP. 30.
EVSTACE. BEfore you altogether cease to speak of this second Element, I would
be glad to hear som-what of furs in Armories, and what they are.


A. Honorable, and ancient, but because they all consist of more colors then
one, and therefore want that simpleness of being, which single colors have,
they refuse to be handled here, or are refused rather. The two principal
furrs are Ermin, and Vary.


E. Are furs neither metal, nor color?


A. It is said of the Planet MERCVRIE, that he is affected as the celestial
bodies, with whom he is; good with the good, and bad with the bad: So (by a
kind of Antithesis) the furs in Arms, are as metal with color, and of the
nature of color when the rest is metal.


E. You report a strange property. Princes, and great States, in Caps of honor,
robes, and mantles use Ermin, is it that which is used in Armories?


A. I see your drift Sir EVSTACE is to make me deal upon a commodity of
skins. To satisfy you, it is the very same.


E. They are commonly called polwdred Ermin, and both the white, and black in
them are skin with the hairs on, for I have seen a royal satin mantle, the
furre whereof was the whole cases of Ermin, their tail-tips (all that was black
in them) not stitcht in, but Pendent, and Dangling, and the Dukes of BRITAIN
Armorick did give (as I hear) nothing else for their Arms: And (to utter all
my little commodities of learning, or observation in this kind at once) I must
tell you also that I have heard Pellions say that there is a counterfeit sort,
which notwithstanding is very rich, made of the soft white bellies of Squirrel,
Mineuer, and the like, drawn-in, and powldred with little specks of black
ITALIAN budge. The form of true Ermine I have often observed in old clothes of
ARRAS, and the like Court-hangings, and were such as these:


A. The Coat of BRITAIN in FRANCE is as you say, and (as VPTON writes) taken
for Arms, because (says he) Ermine were much found there, commending the
Coat it self for one of the best, as well for that it is of shortest Blazon
(for in the word Ermin is all) is soonest made at need, and being made is
farthest decern'd. As clear notwithstanding as we make it, all do not agree
in the quality of the stuff, or in this furre. For Sir JOHN FERN (out of
CASSANAEVS) says, that they are called Hermines (aspirating the word) of
Hermae, which worthily admired PLATO in his HIPPARCHVS does say, were erected,
by PISISTRATVS the son of PHILEDONICVS, in every three-way-leet, and Tribe of
ATHENS, and engraven with moral verses of most excellent sense: MARSILIVS
FICINVS upon this place says, that these Hermae were certain squared stones in
manner of a statue without an head, set in public ways, and dedicated to
MERCVRIE: But they (as some more probably report) did resemble MERCVRIES head,
and were of HERMES (another name of his) called Hermae, as Hermathenae had
their names from the heads of MERCVRIE, and MINERVA joined, as their names are
joined in the word; ATHENE signifying the same that MINERVA, as HERMES does
MERCVRIE; and these Hermae were used as well in the adorning of libraries, as
sepulchers. So as in this hardy deriuation, every spotte of Ermin in an Arms,
should stand for a several Herm, or shadow thereof, turning thereby a painted
Targat into a ROMAN Atrium, which containd the Images of Ancestors: Very pretty
was that conceit, which my friend Master SEGAR, GARTER, principal King of
Arms, related to me as Doctor RED-SMITHS, concerning Ermin: For (said he)
seeing colors are resembled to planets, Ermin ought to be Hermoys, of HERMES;
for Quicksilver (being so appropriated to MERCVRIE as it bears his very name)
breaks into drops, resembling Hermin in Armories: But we that are no
scholars must not (least we should cum ratione insanire) sore so high into
learning for a thing before our eyes, and palpable. GERARD LEIGH holds that the
Ermin is a ltttle beast in the land of ARMONIE (so he soundes it) and is from
thence denominated, so Ermin should according to him be Armin of ARMENIA;
certainly as I cannot control this Etymology, so among the RVSSES, it is not
the word as it seems, for they (If I mis-vnderstand not the book of the RVSSE
commonweal) call them Gurnstais, so In our old English, Ermin, signifies poor,
but ask Verstega^ how that agrees with Armorial Ermin.
as Ermin is plainly a word of another root.


E. It should seem that the propinquity of the words, Ermin, Hermae, Hermes,
Armenia, gave occasion of those other opinions. Therefore I marvel that none
have added that Ermin were called Heremins of woods, and desert places as
Heremites are.


A. You must not (Sir EVSTACE) play the Censor so soon: PYTHAGORAS would have
set a fine on your head, and made you expiate for it to his goddess Silence.
The conicctures of Masters are to be reverenced of beginners: And yet I hold
your conceit not the most absurd: the word now used in Armorie is Ermin, and as
I think of the beast it self so called. CORNELIUS TACITUS shows them to us
among the old GERMANS. His words are these: Eligunt feras, and detracta
velamina spargunt maculis, pellibusque belluarum quas exterior Oceanus and
ignotum mare gignit.

By them it is plain that the choice skins only were by those GERMANS
pouldred with spots. They cull, or choose (says the most profoundly prudent
Historiograper) and powder with spots, and not only with spots but with skins,
so as they pouldred those choice skins with other skins. And this I take to
be our Ermin. The place seems also to point out their native soil, for by
Exterior Oceanus, and ignotum mare, he means such countries as lie between
GERMANY, and the Northermost sea, that is to say the huge vast Provinces of
MOSCOVIA, RVSSIA, and the rest of that icie world, whence all our excellent
furs come, from even as far as PERMIA, which bordereth on that Exterior
Ocean, and uncouth Sea. Thus far have you trainde me forth to hunt the
Ermin, whose skin is not often found in ancient Armories, but in Cantons, or
other additions of honor, and rewards of service.


E. The Element of colors is then at an end, and we are now to be acquainted
with Number, the next of four. But before you pass the Musiue, or pleasant
Mosaic work of colors, as you have been very satisfactorie in furre, and
royal Ermin, as in all the other, so help me I pray out of a special
scruple. You said, that metal was the vegetous soul of Arms: Have Arms any
other soul then vegetative? as either sensitive, or rational?


A. It has a rational soul, in a borrowed, and alluding sense, for as metal
quickneth an Arms to the eye, so the reason, meaning, proportion, and apt
correspondence of parts, is to Arms, as a reasonable soul is to man: And now
once more I must become a suter to you, that you would forbear to draw me
into digressions, as in the last question, which is merely a part of
Symbolicall Philosophy, and I am now content to be thought not unwilling to
draw toward my port.


The Contents.
1. Number an Element. 2. Demonstrated in a Pertransient. 3. A division of
Armoriall Elements. 4 Position or Place another of the Elements. 5.
Demonstrated in the remove of the same Pertransient. 6. The rare effect of
Position.

CHAP. 31.
EVSTACE. NVmber, and Position, are the two remaining Elements, now that Lines,
and Colors are discust, but why, or how come Number, and Position to be of
the Quorum in this discourse?


A. As no Armories can be without lines, and colors, (the first of which
Armoriall Elements gives circumscription, the other conspicuitie) so neither
can they want Number, and Position: For example: In a Coat Armor where there
is but one Pertransient (which is the plainest, purest, and most primitive
bearing) as in party per fesse, this line being a Pertransient, and not two,
or more, but single, causes a partition, and two colors to be in the Coat,
which otherwise should be no Armories at all, wherein Number is most evidently
Elementall, yet so, as that Lines, and Colors may be said to be primarily
such, but Number, and Position secundarily, for that Lines, and Colors are as
it were of the matter of Armories, but Number and Place are of order, and
disposition.


E. It is undeniable.


A. And as for Position, or the necessity thereof, the only drawing of the
single Pertransient beforesaid over the field in trauerse, and not in bias, is
the very cause why it is party per fesse, which line being once removed,
either upon, or from her center, begets another nature, and blazon to the
Coat. So much it concerns to observe how many things for their number, and
in what manner for their position, they are, or ought to be in Arms.


E. What mean you by remoouing it upon the Center?


A. I mean the middle-most point of the Eschucheon, from which if you lift it
higher, mutation of the place, as here makes that which was a Partition to be a
Chief, the Pertransient being turned by such a remove to a Pertingent, so
great power there is in position as to the purpose of Arms, which can no more
Subsist, or be at all without Position, then without lines, colors, or number.


The Contents.
1. A question moved about Number, and Numeration. 2. Ciphers in Armories as
well as Letters. 3. The more any thing is one, the more it is excellent. 4.
Numbered things in Armory divided. 5. Finite which. 6. Indeffinite. 7. Infinite
difference betwixt Infinite and Indefinite. 8. Nothing Infinite in Arms. 9.
Finite and Indefinite subdivided. 10. The odd number principal. 11. Even
articulate Number is best. 12. A reuersed Pyramid. 13. Which even- digit-number
is chief. 14. Fifteen, how the most of Finite. 15. Of the Odd and their
graduation. 16. Even not so capable of diverse forms as Odd. 17. Delivered in
a Rule. 18. Rare examples out of VPTON and the Gallery at THEOBALDS. 19. Rule
defended against them. 20. Dignity thereof.

CHAP. 32.
EVSTACE. WHereas you say that number is an Element of Armories, mean you that
the figures of Arithmetic are in Arms, or the use of Numeration only?


A. Numeration only, as one, two, or more of this or that kind, and yet the
figures, or characters themselves may (I do not altogether deny) be in Coats
of Arms, so well as Letters, or the like, though with little grace.


E. Lead me I pray into this other Reuestrie, or secret place of Armories.


A. Unity is perfection, and the more any thing is one, the more it is
excellent: But we are to let that pass which concerns excellency, and
finish the matter of our Elements. Number, or rather numbered things in Armories
are finite, or indefinite. Finite are such whose number is certain, as two,
three, or more: Indefinite, whose number is uncertain: Between which, and
finite, is infinite difference. For though indefinite be uncertain, yet is it
numerable, but nothing infinite can be in Arms, no more then in Nature, for
infinite is incomprehensible.


E. How are finite, and indefinite subdivided in their Armoriall use?


A. As they are in their own kind, according to which they are either even,
or odd, of which the odd are best.


E. You will come within the verge of forbidden Magic shortly, which
altogether works upon the odd.


A. To the purpose (Sir EVSTACE) to the purpose. Of what nature therefore,
condition, or state soever Armories be, whether composed of Lines only, or
filled with resemblances of things, or both, number is always in use, and
makes one; Art marshalling that number. Of the even the most Armoriall, and
harmonious is that, which decreasing in every file, or rank one to the base
point, produces an Odd.


E. Which even number is that?


A. The first, and chief is the number of six, which (according to the
description I gave) decreaseth in every rank one to the base point, and
produces an Odd, imitating in Geometrical proportions, a reuersed Pyramid,
as follows, which no other articulate number can effect, for which reason
also they are not used of themselves in principal good Armories, but either
with, or upon other things.


E. Why should Six be the best of even numbers? Or rather why is the Odd in
the point base so requisite?


A. For decency, because it falls most aptly with the figure of a triangular
Shield, and for that there are manifold, and worthy speculations in number, and
position.


E. What other even numbers, or even numbered things do admit the like?


A. The first of digit numbers is Ten, as ensues, which also partakes those
excellencies whereof the number Six does bost.




E. What other even number have you observed?


A. Seldom any but Six, and Ten, unless accompanied with some other things,
as in MEMORANCIES coat, wherein with a Cross are sixteen Eaglets: And I also
think it a true Theorem, that no even number is capable of those forms which
diversity of Position gives to the Odd.


E. Which are the Armoriall Odd?


A. One is odd, and One is only best: next to that the Trias, Ternio, or
number three, and so the rest of the Odd to Fifteen: For I have not observed
any things of one kind in one Arms, not being semi, above that number
without some other charge or counterchange. But in some such manner you shall
perhaps meet with a few; as I remember one in the Northeast window of the
Cathedral church of BRISTOL, which the sacriledges committed upon Moniments
has not defaced, and seems both ancient, and honorable in the owner, for
that it is there mounted among Benefactors of note, wherein are eighteen
Lillies after a strange way, as 44.4.3.2.1.




E. Which is the first of the Odd that decreaseth according to your
description?


E. The number Three, which being placed two, and one, and thereby cast out
toward the Angles of the Shield is called an Armorial Triangle.


E. Which next to the Ternio, or Three, of all the Odd decreaseth in every
rank one to the point base? being that form which seems the most amiable,
and comely comportment of things in one kind, in one Arms.


A. It seems, and is: But from Three to Fifteen there is no number of all the
Odd so happy, and that you may find among the royal bearings of this our
country in the Armories of the Duchy of CORNVVAL, now a parcel of the
inheritances of the Crown.




E. But why is not the even number capable of so many forms of Position as the
Odd?


A. The reason belonges to the mystical part, but I will show it is not so
capable, and give you my rule thus: No even number in things of one kind,
possessing the whole field only, and alone, and keeping all of them one state,
or way, with requisite distance, can be capable of such diversity of forms in
position, as the odd be. An even number therefore cannot be disposed into a
Cross, or Saltoir, as the odd can, and is. But if the same state, or way of
placing be not maintained, then I can demonstrate in an example or two, that
the number four, being the first, and sovereign of square, or cubick numbers,
may be capable of like forms as the Odd, as in the coat which NICHOLAS VPTON
does say was put unto him at LONDON by an Herald of BRITAIN ARMORICK, or little
BRITAIN, and which has since I perceive bin given to a family in CHESHIRE,
for borne it is as both by the painted tree of that County in THEOBALDS, as
otherwise is apparent: The Coat is very rare, and of a strange invention, to
the which we will add for varieties sake another called TRVBSHAVVES being
quarterly gules and vert, four pheons argent in cross, their points in the
fesse point of the shield


E. The Coats though the number of their charges be even are very odd, and
altogether such as any man would think were likely enough to be exceptions
against Rules so soon as he saw them. But your Rule holds good against them,
because they keep not one state, position, or way.


A. It does, and yet the quality of the Charge may be such as that the rule may
be infringed in that point, as in this Bearing


E. How can you keep it off then, from entering upon your Rule?


A. It could draw small forces after, did it enter, and no bar is commonly so
general, which some particular, or other will not transcend: Yet this does not,
for when you suppose it is gotten in, it is kept off with the end of the former
rule, for want of requisite distance. And though in the last Arms there are
indeed four of one kind, wherein the number, and quality are great, yet being
not dispierst into the Shield, they are but in the nature of a single Lorange,
or Rhombus, which figure they produce, though placed in Cross.


E. I must therefore yet once again entreat to know some little cause of this
effect, that is to say, why even numbers are not so fairly capable of different
situations as the odd?


A. The reason is plain: For the midds of the Shield must not be empty, nor
yawning, and in that respect, place things of one kind in Cross, in Saltoir,
in Fesse, or after any form, or other of the honorable ordinaries, as in Bend,
in Pale, and so forth (so as you place them armorially) and assure your self
the even number is excluded. If you demand why the middle may not be empty,
destitute or yawning? I answer, because that part being possessed, all the rest
may be ye rather vaca^t: For the fesse-point, or millieu of the Shield (as
HIEROME BARA calls it) is the glory thereof, and dispierceth beams into every
part about, as the center, heart, or axell of all Armoriall beauties.


The Contents.
1. Mysteries in Armorial numbers. 2. Concords, or Discords in Armories. 3.
Visible Music. 4. Reason must give laws to examples. 5. The measuring rules
of Concords, or Discords in Armories. 6. Of the number Three. 7. The causes of
Armorial Beuties, Fullness, Distance, and Idemtity. 8. Exemplified.

CHAP. 33.
EVSTACE. THere are, no doubt, many excellent observations in armoriall
numbers, not without mystery.


A. Most true: specially in the finite. For of them some exercise, as it were,
an Antipathie, or war with fair Armories, when they only occupy the whole
Field. The dual, or number of two is such.


E. Is it for that discontinuance has taken it away? or is there a reason in
nature?


A. In the nature of Armories there is. As the proportion, or disproportio^ of
distances in sound make concords or discords in Music (whence it is that an
Unison, or Diapason, because of that proportion in the distances of notes, is
called an eighth, Diapente a fifth, Diatesseron a fourth, and so of the rest)
so those, and other musical proportio^s it were not impossible to show in
Armories. In which there must not only be a proportion in the number, but also
in the number with the figure of the Shield, ye comely filling whereof with
comely arguments is like a full stroke wherein all the strings are sweetly
touched together: As therefore the duall, or number Two having nothing between
cannot be said to have any distance, much less proportion, and for default
thereof cannot decently possess the whole Field, it is, by necessary sequel, a
discord in that kind, and cannot sympathize of it self with perfectly fair
Armories, unless somewhat, though of a different sort, or condition be
interiected, or in company, and this as of it self, that is, where no other
thing does possess the Field.


E. If you did nothing but run division upon this one ground only, there
were no music to match it, for this is visible music, and not only audible.
But are there not examples to infringe these, and the like considerations?


A. Reason in these things must give rules to examples, and not examples to
reason. I stay not therefore at such, because the ignorance of many men has
checked and fallen upon the breaches of rules, which to countenance with credit
above general grounds were absurd. I say, that Distance, Fullness, and
Idemtitie (pardon these, and other words where the matter enforces) are the
measuring rules of Concords, or Discords in Armories, which I would not have
you be ignorant of, and therefore shall think it time well spent, voluntarily
to interpret my self. A Trias, Ternio, or the number of Three in Armory is
second in honor to One, yet without Distance it were but a discord, as if two
Croslets formee (as Blazon speaks) were in chief of the field, and a third in
Caeur of the same, yet for want of spredding Distance it were but harsh, and
nothing graceful, for that the Arms are deprived of Fullness thereby, as you
see. Again, let all three be in chief, as here, though the Coat be
warrantable, and good, as having requisite Distance in regard of themselves,
yet (destitute of Fullness in respect of the whole Shield) it fails of
complete beauty. And the reason is strongly drawn from a final cause of
Arms, which is manifestation. The more extension therefore, or dilatation that
there is of things in the Shield, the more manifest it needs must be, and
there the dilatation is most, where every point or angular portion of the
Coat, can answer the eye with an object: In other bearings of that kind there
still seems somewhat wanting.


E. But what imports the other thing which you call Idemtitie?


A. Let things in Armories have Distance, and the Coat Fullness, yet if they
be not of one sort, which state I call Idemtitie, I hold it a discord, and
eclypse, let the several Charges be never so noble, whereof you may make your
eye judge in this, and the like. But Distance, Fullness, and Idemtitie are but
causes of Armoriall beauties, and not elements: Therefore here I will mark
the chase, and change a side.


The Contents.
1. Indefinite in Armories defined. 2. Of the term Semi in Blazon. 3.
Exemplified. 4. A second kind of Indefinites. 5. Gerattings. 6. A third sort
of Indefinites. 7. Semi, and Sans number. 8. Exemplified.

CHAP. 34.
EVSTACE. IT remains now (Sir AMIAS) that you would be pleased to show what
Indefinite is, the second part of the Arithmeticall Element of Armories.


A. Indefinite, as also the word imports, is that whose number is uncertain,
and undefined, and has in Blazon the name of Semi, which, whether derived from
the LATIN verb seminare, or from the word, which both of it self, and in
compositions does signify the half of a thing, as in semisomnis, semissis, or
the like (in the first deriuations sense, for that the Charges are sown over
the field of the Coat as seed, and in the other, for that the half parts of
such things appear in the sides of the Escucheon, or in both respects, as both
are true in such Armories) shall be the task of curious Etymologers. The
thing it self is as follows, in this Coat quartered by RATCLIFF Earl of
SUSSEX, as heretofore belonging to the name of MORTIMER of NORFOLK, and blazed,
Or* semi of lillies sable. Another kind of the Indefinite there is, when beside
the main charge, the Field is scattered over with other smaller things, which
Blazoners term Gerattings, and is a bearing goodly, and ancient as in
PERPOINCTS Coat. or in any other the like, where the number, and order of the
Gerattings are not taught: and where the number is counted, there their order
must be blazed: But the unlike rule takes place, where (without a principal
Charge of another kind as in MORTIMER'S Armories beforesaid) things are
seminated over the field, and neither set, nor blazed to be set in Orl, or
other certain order; For there no regard is taken of their number, and they
are altogether left to the will of Art to scatter them so in painting as may
best become the superficies of Sheilds. Now as Indefinite is in Powlders, or
Gerattings, so is it sometime also in those Charges which represent no living
creature, or natural thing, as in the diminutiues of honorable ordinaries,
whose pieces when they are not counted, as in this, the ancient Armories of the
HODLESTONES, and the like, neither are they termed semi, but sans number. The
famous Armories of AIMERIE de Valence, anciently Earl of Pembroke, is thought
also to be of this kind in the pieces of it, which (without declaring their
number) the Sages in blazon used to term Burrulee. I will demonstrate to you
both the kinds of Indefinites (semi, and sans number) in one Coat borne by
the name of THORNTON, and quartred (as I remember) by the Lord LVMLEY. An
Armories very fair, and goodly, showing to you semi in the cinquefoils, sans
number in the frets.


The Contents.
1. Of Position, or Place. 2. Demonstrated in a little moveable Instrument. 3.
Round bodies cannot be reuerst. 4. Use of the Armoriall Mill The rare effects
of Position. 6. Sir AMIAS pitcheth down one of his Columns.

CHAP. 35.
EVSTACE. LInes, Color, Number, thus prosperously overcome, there only
remains the Element Position, last of four.


A. Concerning Position it shall suffice (instead of all other demonstrations)
to give you the use, and admirable effects thereof in a little mooueable
instrument of mine own devise.




E. How does this Mill show the use of Position? or why have you chosen to set
round bodies therein, rather then any other of the Armoriall?


A. Round bodies cannot be reuerst, and therefore in the turning no deformity
can follow. The use is briefly this. Open, or display the Instrument one way,
and it produces five Cinque foiles in Cross. Open, or display it another way,
and they present five cinque foils in Saltoir. Move them clozed, and without
displaying, if toward the fesse-point they tender to you three cinquefoils in
fesse: Shift their station from thence upward into the dexter obliquity they
are three cinquefoils in Bend. Bring it about to a perpendicular position they
are in pale. And yet a little farther into the sinister point, we are lastly
afforded three cinquefoils in bend sinister.

Thus much for Position, the last Element of the four: And here (by your good
favor) I will pitch-vp one of my Columns.


Deo gratias.
A Short Table of some hard words and phrases, with a few brief notes.
I Have so nearly as I could, and even as much as TIBERIUS CAESAR himself (who
would not endure the word Monopoly, because it was not LATIN) avoided all
endenization of words: which has moved me in most places of my Book to add
other more clear, to interpret by them such as may seem to thee obscure, as
thou may euery-where observe: for albeit (as in my Epistle) I wish such a
Reader as need not an Interpreter, yet I must not neglect such as I have.
Though there are scarce any words of mine (howsoever they may perhaps seem
strange) which other writers in our language have not formerly made familiar,
and those few which are not altogether so (for the which also I have more then
once asked pardon in my Book it self) I have here for thy uses, collected,
and (by conference with the learned) so far only interpreted, as is
necessary to understand my meaning in the places where I use them: for to
interpret them at large and in all their senses were to take SCAPVLA'S, or
THOMASIVS offices out of their hands. My care is chiefly to have thee know
mine. FAREWELL.

A.
APOSTROPHE. An abrupt, or sudden turning of our speech from one matter or
person to another. Poets and Orators, are full of that vehement kind of
figure: and Strophe, and Antistrophe (in the GREEK Lyricks) do signify other
turnings, or changes of speech, and station, as we are taught. GR. ANALOGY.
The just proportion, correspondence, and measure which the object, or subject
holds with the true reason required therein: An agreement, harmony, or apt
answering of the Thing to the considerations proper thereunto. GR. ANALYSIS. A
resolving or distribution of the whole into the parts. GR. ANTITHESIS A
contrary position, or an opposition. GR. AVTOMS. The word imports artificial
bodies made by DAEDALVS, or by any other of like skill, which move alone, or
houer of themselves in the air, without the support of any other thing. Such
were not the Horti pensiles, or Hanging gardens of SEMIRAMIS, for they stood
upon pillars: Nor the ICARVS in OVID, or in SVETONIVS; for the one was but (as
the fable of PHAETON) a picture of unfortunate ambition; the other the true
story of the breakneck fall of SIMON MAGVS the Sorcerer, under the name of
ICARVS, at ROME: Nor MAHOMET'S iron coffin at MECCA: for that (as the fame, or
fable is) it hangs in the Temple, by reason of certain proportionable
quantities of Lodestone which hold it up by equal attractions. The perpetual
motion (when it is found) is such. ATOMIE. As Anatomy is a resection, or such
a cutting-vp as Surgeons use in humane bodies at their Hall, so Atomies are
those things, of which, by reason of their inexplicable smallness there cannot
be any section. The LATINS call it Indiuiduum, and LVCRETIVS semen rerum:
Indiuiduum, because it was so little as it could not be parted, or divided,
and semen rerum (seed of things) for that they were (according to the conceit
of EPICVRVS) the common matter of all things. ARTICK. That which is of, or
appertains to the Northern sign of the Caelestial Bear. So the ARCTICK
Circle is the bound of the Cold Zone upon Earth, and of the Northern
constellations in Heaven. The whole North is denominated of that imagined
figure. The fable of that Bear is famous among Poets. So the Arctick
Hemisphear is that half of the world which is between the North Pole, and the
Aequinoctiall Line. GRE. * ANTARCTICK. * Contrary, or opposite to Arctick.
Southern, GR. ARGO. The name of the Ship, or Argose, in which JASON sailed to
CHOLCHIS for conquest of the golden Fleece, and which by the power of Poesy is
turned to an Asterism, or a Caelestiall figure of Stars in the South-sky. The
Armorists ARGO, is in my meaning, no more, but the business of Armorie which
is in handling, and in which Sir AMIAS is shipped, or embarked. ARRAS. Cloth of
Arras, Tapistrie, or hangings wrought at the City of ARRAS in ARTOIS, one of
the seventeen Provinces, and at this present is under the ARCHDVKES ALBERTVS
and his wife ISABELLA.
B.
BASIS. A word in Architecture. The bottom-part of a Column, or Pillar, and
figuratively the supporture, stay, groundwork or foundation of any thing.
BEVIL. Every Carpenter can tell you what it is. Being a Squire, or Square of
two equal pieces, and moving upon a joint, or pin from the Angle wherein
they are joined.
C.
CHAOS. OVID calls the rude, and undigested first heap of natural Elements,
Chaos. In the Impresse, Symbol, or Devise upon the front of my Book, I have
followed the common placing of the four common Simples, and Elements; about
the which, in so many Scucheons, are set the seven chief Armoriall Colors,
which men may observe in the natural Elements. In fire, yellow, read, and
Purple: In aer; white: In water; blew: In earth, green, and sable. The
sentence is is out of some the first verses in the Metamorphosis, where it is
said Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orb,
Quem dixere CHAOS --
The sense of the whole Imprese is plain. COCKET. A certificate from the
customer of a Port that the parcels comprehended in that Certificate, or Bill
have been customed, or have paid custom. The word is dearly wel-knowne to
Marchant-venturers. UNEQUAL. Conuexity is the outside of an hollow body, as
concauity the inside. In a painted Globe of the world the descriptions are
upon the conuexitie thereof, and that face is conuex, the rest is belly or
concaue. CORYPHAE. The Chief, or principal in any kind. GR.
D
DIALLELS. As Parallels are lines running one by the other without meeting, so
Diallels are lines which run one through the other, that is, do cross,
intersecate, or cut. G.R. DIAGONAL. Is a line which passes from one corner or
one angle of a Geometrical body to another corner or angle of the same. GR.
DEIPNOSOPHISTS. ATHENAEVS his great learned books carry that title, importing a
conference, discourse, or Inter-speach among wisemen at a supper. DIAMETER.
EVCLYD (who best knew) defines it thus. The diameter of a circle, is a
certain straight line drawn through the center, and of both sides bounded in
the compass of the circle, which cutts, or deuides the circle into two
portions.
E.
EQVIVOCAL. An Equiuocal word is that which conteyneth more significations then
one, or that which in the sense, or meaning thereof does equally extend it
self as well to one as to another. As the word ( Arms) in our vulgar use
thereof does equally signify those parts of our body so called, or weapons, or
tokens of honor, and with an aspiration (which is an ELENCK or deceit in the
Accent) Harms. EMPYREAN Fiery. It is among the old Divines taken for the
Sphaere of the blessed, or the Heaven of the triumphant.
F
FOLKMOTE. A meeting of the people, which the LATINS called Concio, and in a
more spacious word Comitia. For Concio was any auditory before, or unto whom a
speech was used, as well as the speech it self, both which Concio signified;
but Comitia did import a general assembly of the people of ROME to make laws
etc. Or FOLKMOTE may be either.
G
GEMINELS. Twins, Pairs, Matches, or Likes. GOVRMONS. Great eaters; Gluttons,
Norman, Gourmon, is a speech (I hear*) by which the Normans are taxed for
great feeding, and gourmondize. GRAMMAR. Who knows not that this word
signifies the Art of letters, and speech: Yet it is mere GREEK in the
original; but now so familiar in our tongue even in the most vplandish
countries as it need no Interpreter.

Those who will persuade us to turn back to our old language for avoiding the
loan of words, and phrases, may from hence learn, that use makes all things
familiar; Frivolous it is to wish (when things are daily new) to dream of a
certain state of words, or speech; that is, That the number of ENGLISH words
should be definite, and certain.

And what shall we say of reviving old and forgotten words? That cannot avoid
obscurity but will induce it rather, our helps being fewer to understand them,
then the GREEK, LATIN, or other famous languages: It is our sloth which
suffers so many of our own words to live only among the Arts, and Mysteries
where they are commonly known, like DVTCH coins which are not current out of
their own Cities, or Territories* Industry, and Wisdom would that we
should not borrow till our own store were empty, or worn bare, which is to
our selves unknown for want of observation. Therefore I could wish there were
a Tribunal, and Magistrate for words, that it might not be in every
witts-will, donare ciuitate ANGLIANA, to make words, phrase-free of ENGLAND.


H
HIEROGLIPHICKS. Hallowed Engrauements, or sacred Sculptures; as Hieraticall
figures are sacred figures; and Hierogramms sacred letters or writings. In all
which words the mystical ciphers or records of the AEGIPTIAN rites, and
Philosophy, were signified to be comprised. HYPERBOREANS. Septentrional. Due
North: Under the North Pole. HORD. A TARTARIAN word: and as (I think) does
import a Clan, Race, or Family under some one Chief or other, which conducts
the troup after their barbarous usage from county to country. HONORARY HORD is
the whole company of so many TARTARS flitting, up and down where they can find
new feedings. That which is made for honor, more then for use.
I
IMBRICATE. Square, and bent like to a Roofe-tile, which the LATINS call Imbrex.
INLAYES. At St. OLAVES in SOVTHVVARK you shall learn among the Ioyners what
Inlayes and Marquetrie mean. Inlay (as the word imports) is a laying of
colored wood in their Wainscoat works, Bed-steds, Cupbords, Chayres and the
like.
L
LANDSKEP. The same that Parergon, which in one word I call By-work; wherein
though I render the GREEK Parergon fully, and truly, yet (for that it is not
received in such a sense among us) it does not show the thing.

All that, which in a picture is not of the body, or argument thereof, is
LANDSKEP, Parergon, or By-work. As in the table of our Saviors passion; The
picture of CHRIST upon the Rood (which is the proper ENGLISH word for Cross)
the two Thieves, the blessed Virgin MARIE, and Saint JOHN, are the argument:
But the City JERUSALEM, the country about, the Clouds, and the like are
By-work.

LAVREATED LETTERS. Leters bound about with laurel, which the ROMAN Generals
sent to the Senate when their contents were victory, and conquest newly by them
obtained. LABARVM. EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS in his first book of the life of great
CONSTANTINE describes this peculiar Standard very curiously. The common form
thou may behold in the 163. page of my Elements. In the LABARVM these things
are more. First the Banner was of Purple, where the pictures of the Emperor
and his Children were wrought in gold, and stone of wonderful value and
beauty; above the crosse-beam, or trauerse-staffe of the banner stood those two
first GREEK Capitals of CHRISTE'S name which you may see in my Elements, and
on the point, or top of the Lance, or Staff imperial, was advanced a
crown of gold set with precious stone. All in honor of his miraculous
conversion upon the apparition of the CROSS. Which as it consisted of shining
light, and was seen abooue the Sun, it being now past Noone, so there was
very lately in our time seen by honorable personages, and others at Saint
LEONARD'S by NEVVARKE upon TRENT, the like figure of the Cross above the Moon
at night, in color brighter then the Moon, whose paler body was between
their sight, and the lower part of the long beam of the Cross.
M.
MOTT. Is (in general) FRENCH for (a Word) but in a restrained sense is
properly now among us the Word, or Sentence applide to an Impresse, or Heroic
Devise. MYTHOLOLOGERS. Moral Interpreters of Poetical Histories, or of the
wise Fables of AESOP, which sort of invention the GREEKS call an Apologus. GR.
MIZRAIM. The Hebrew, or MOSAICAL name of the EGYPTIANS, which I use, the
rather to signify thereby those EGYPTIANS that were of the oldest times. HEB.
MATHEMATICAL. Sciential. Mathemata are generally all sorts of liberal
knowledges, but for their excellency appropriated more specially to these
four, ARITHMETIC, MUSIC, GEOMETRY, ASTRONOMY. GR. MARQVETRY See INLAY.
N.
NOMENCLATOR. An officer among the ROMANS whose it was to call, cite, or
rehearse every one of the Senators, Guests, etc. by their several names. LAT.
NEGRO. A black Moore, whom the DVTCH call a Swart, and NEGRO'S in the plural,
Swarts.
O.
OVAL. A figure round like an Egg, an oblong round.
P.
PERIMETER. The out-most line of any solid body, or other figure. The Compass,
or bounding Tract. PYTHAGORACISM. In my sense is an imitation of PYTHAGORAS his
superstitions in numbers; to the which PYTHAGORAS attributed too much.
PHYSIOLOGERS. Natural Philosophers; or discoursers of natural matters.
PHYSICS. Natural Philosophy. Natural.

The word Physician we do vulgarly abuse (as we do very many other) for a
Leech, or Medicus, but not altogether intollerably, because it is a trite, and
a true saying, that Vbi desinit Philosophus incipit Medicus, where the
Naturalist (for there the word Philosopher stands for a Physiologer) ends,
there the Medicus begins; so as if an expert Leech must needs be expert in the
Physics (that is, in those speculations which concern the works of nature)
the nearest word to fall with our tongue, yet not far from the thing, was
Physician, for Medicus could not well brook any flexion among us.


R.
RENEGADO. One that renyes, or renounceth the faith, that is (in the received
sense of the word) the CHRISTIAN faith. An Apostata: by which word the Emperor
IVLIANVS for his special malice to CHRISTIANITY, was surnamed.
S.
SAND. Here it signifies that famous place which the ROMANS by a LATIN word of
the same signification called Arena, for that it (being the ground within an
Amphitheater) was sanded over both for sure footing, and the sooner to drink
up the blood of men, and beasts their shed in fight for entertaintment of the
people. Figuratively, it is taken for any subject of Trial, as Province for a
business. SYMBOL. Of all our ENGLISH words, none comes nearer to express it,
then TOKEN, so as we understand thereby such a TOKEN, as in which there is
always some pourtraict, figure, or image. Symbol (in my sense) is a figure, or
shape which relates to some cause, reason, quality, nature, or History,
proper to this, or that Bearer, or family. To symbolize, is so to beetoken, or
so, and in that sort, to answer, or agree-with. Many frauds you shall read in
PLAVTVS, plotted, and acted by counterfetting, and sly conueiance of these
Symbols, or Tokens, wherein there was ever some image, or other. So the Symbol
of AMPHITRVON in that Tragicomedie was, Sol cum quadrigis, The Sun in his
Chariot drawn with four horse, PYRGOPOLINICES, the bragging Soldier, had his
own lovely self with great Decorum, drawn in his Signet for a Symbol.
Symbolical Philosophy therefore is that kind of learning, and wisdom, which
knowing the causes, and proprieties of of things natural, and supernatural,
does teach how to make, or to expound those mystical, and artificial bodies,
called Symbols, of what kind soever. SKELETON. Is that which the vulgar call
an Anatomy: Skeleton is the whole Fabric, or dry frame of humane Bones. The
dry carcass of a man, or woman, without Arteries, Muscles, or other natural
appurtenances.

Skeletos in GREEK is bony, or dry as a Bone.

SVRCOAT. A Coat of Arms to were over Armor.
T.
TABERD. VERSTEGAN'S words in his ancient ENGLISH Alphabet are these. A Tabert,
anciently a short gown, that reached no further then to the mid-legge, In
ENGLAND it is now the name only of an Heralds Coat. THOLES. Places in Temples
where Donaries, and such gifts as are presented there, be hung up.
FINIS.
Erratata.
In my Epistle to the Reader, for Haeroick, read Heroic. In Master Hollands
Sonnet line. 8 for thou art, read, that art. Page 55. l. 17. dele in p. 56. l
23. for frailty, read fraily. P. 144 the strings of Colors false placed, the
highest for lowest. p. 148. The Cutter has in the Schucheon for S. put A. and
for V. put O. The Coat of the Duchy of Conwall, is, Sable, fifteen Besants.
54.3 2.1. p. 177. for Heremins, read Eremins, and for Heremites, Eremites. p.
187. for Lorange, r. Lozange.

A TABLE OF MATTERS, THOSE PRINcipally which are not in the Contents of the
Chapters.
A.
ABstractiue considerations in Armories. page 79 Antiquity not the only
arbitresse of Armorial colors. p. 128. Antiquity in nouelty. p. 52. Armorie a
Gentlemanly science. p. 91. Armorie a word of large content. p. 6. Armories
have their certain principles. p. 3. Armoriall marks described. page 6.
Armories very ancient. p. 9. when they grew to a perfection. p. 10. are
absolute Symbolicall bodies. p. 53. Arguments in ancient GERMAN Armories. p.
30. Armories not the mere work of Art, p. 60. mental, or actual, p. 80,
their notions sharpen wit. p. 91. the only remaining evidences of Nobility.
p. 92. Auriflamb of FRANCE. p. 166.
B.
Banner of CONSTANTINE'S standard. Table of words, in LABARVM. BARTOL wrote not
exactly of Armorial colors. p. 139 Barbarous people, and their notes. p. 20.
wore painted Arms. p. 34. Bearing in proper not the best kind of bearing. p.
127. Beauties Armoriall. p. 193. Blazon blazed. p. 64. Black the basis of
colors, p. 149. Black sails tragical. p. 129. Blew Shields. p. 23. Blew
color symbolicall to what. p. 131. Bodies Armorial. page 115. 116. 117.
BRITANS painted. p. 131. less barbarous then CAESAR writes of them. p. 27.
their Chariot-fights. p. 23.
C.
Censors deserving censure. p. 53. Center of moral life. p. 55. CHRIST'S Church
in CANTERB. shields there. p. 15. 66. CHRIST'S appearing to CONSTANTINE. p. 73.
Coats of Arms cannot consist of one color. p. 159. Color an Element
Armorial. p. 126. vital, and beautiful, p 125. Colors Armoriall seven
principal. p. 127. 157. Colors without metal, a body without soul. pa. 160.
colors strangely affect the soul. p. 130. 131. A twofold consideration of
colors. p. 132. Gules and Azure examined. p. 136. Of Purple. 138. 140. 141.
153. of Sable. p. 144. of Vert. 152. captious points about colors. page 151. a
treble respect in their marshalling. p. 157. Contraries have the same rule. p.
22. Continent, and content in Arms what. p. 64. 70. Crosses, CHRISTIAN
Symbols. p. 39. 72. 73.
D.
Devises heroic in HOMER not Armorial. p. 9. Descriue, a Term of royal
blazon. p. 64. Demonstration deals upon certainties. p. 77. Diameters
Armorial. p. 120 Diuinatio^s of the author. 51 Distance armorial what. 190
Discords in Armories. ibid. Diminutiues of honorable Ordinaries. p. 195.
Double-headed Eagle monstrous in nature but not in Arms. p 146. 147. Dragons
heads for helmets. p. 37.
E.
Eagle in the MEXICAIN Ensign. p. 48. Elements of Armories, what. p. 82. and
how many. p. 83. Elements Armorial primarie, and secundany. p. 177. Elements
abstract from bodies. p. 112. Elementary discourse in Armory concerns not
charges, p. 48. Empalement given for honor, p. 165. Empire symbolised by white
color. p. 128. Ensignements in general. 50 Ensignements there, where any
Religion, or Government. p. 48* Ermin. 171* their true form 172. skins of
beasts. p. 175. Even numbers in Arms. 181 Extrauagants armorial. 168
F.
Fabric of a rare shield in PAVLS. p. 69. Final cause of Arms. p. 143.
Fifteen the most of odd Armorial numbers. 183. Finites in Armories. p. 180.
Fingers dipped in blood, used for penicills. p. 161. Flaggs of TAMOR LANE. 165.
Forms of Shields. 65. 66. 67 Four in Armories. p. 185. Furs Armorial. p.
171. Fullness in Arms, what. 190
G.
Gentlemen in the largest sense. p. 6. 63. GERARD LEIGH rightly judged of. p.
134. Saint GEORGES Arms for CONSTANTINE'S. p. 73. Glory, CAESAR'S goddess. 27
God, first author of Armories. page 7. his holy name vindicated of late by
Parliament. page 55. Gules familiar in Antiquity. p. 152.
H.
Hanging Gardens. Table of words, in AVTOMS. Harmony Armorial p. 169. HENRY
our most noble Prince. p. 68. Herms, and Hermathenes. page 173. Heteroclyte
Armorial. 168 HODLESTONE'S Coat. p. 196. Honorarie Targats. 67. 69. Humane
image on a Shield. page 38.
I.
ICARVSSES two. Table of words, in AVTOMS. Idemtitie In Arms, what. page 190.
Ignorance falls upon breach of rules. p. 190. Imitation no cause of
Ensignements. p. 46. Improper to call a single color a Coat. p. 168. Imprese
of the author expounded. Table of words in CHAOS. Indefinits Armorial. p. 180.
193. 194. 195. Inlanders of old BRITAIN savage. p. 29. Intersecant lines in
Armorie. p. 114.
K.
Kings of COLEIN, and their Armories. p. 15. Knighthood coniecturallie in C.
TACITUS. p. 30.
L.
Laterall Lines. p. 101. Lines an Element Armorial. p. 85. their first sorts.
87. 88. doubly considered. page 89. four crooked sorts. p. 93. considered
again in their number. p. 96. and longitude. p. 97. 98. Lines of most honor,
and state, which. p. 102. parts of lines, p. 108. double, or twofold lines
divided into three sorts. p. 112. extraregular. p. 119. Lions in the Coats of
WALES. p. 77. Lists proper to enter a learner. p. 62. Local cause of Armories.
47. Love of honor auailable to high designs. p. 40.
M
MAC GIBBON, white Knight of MOVNSTER. p. 167. Marcks of Merchants. p. 22.
Manifestation a final cause of Arms. p. 192. MAHOMETS hanging Coffin. Table
in AVTOMS. Many Kings mar al. 129. Marriages of colors. p. 169. Materials of
Armories collected by Art. p. 61. MEXICO founded by oracle. 47 Metal without
color like a body without soul. p. 160. Metal the vegetative soul of Arms.
p. 168. Middle of the shield not to be vacant. p. 188. MOSAIC or MVSIVE works.
page 176. MORTIMER of Norfolk. 194 Mysteries of honor not to be contemned for
the abuse. 55
N
Natural Analogy. p. 17. Natures Heraldrie. p. 13. Natures Maister-peices. 12.
NORTH, Seminary of new plantations. p. 46. Notion of Ensignement natural. p.
12. Number an Element Armorial. p. 177. of even, and odd. p. 185.
O
Observation the key of these Elements. p. 57. One only BRITAN of note taken
in both JULIUS CAESAR'S invasions. p. 27. Oldest Record of ENGLISH bearings. p.
97. One Arms to one man. 164. Od numbers in Armories. 181 Outward personal
Marks before NOAH. p. 50.
P
Paintings of AGATHYRSIANS* p. 24. and of other rude nations. ibid. Parallels
in Armorie. p. 123. Praecedency of Armorial Colors. p. 137. Praedicaments of
Colors Armorial. p. 124. PERPOINCTS Coat. p. 195. Pertingent line of a rare
kind. p. 106. Pertransients only 4. p. 103. Perfection in unity. p 180.
Proportions Armorial. 189. Position an Element of Armories. p. 178. Published
works not published, which p. 85.
Q
Quadruple number. p 83. Quicksiluer drops resembled by Destor SMYTH, called
Doctor red SMYTH p. 177
R
Rainbow, after the flood* 50 Rainbow in an INDIAN shield. p: 45 Reason wherein
to suspect JULIUS CAESAR'S reports. p. 28 Reason of Arms, and nature not the
same. p. 143 Religion in assuming notes of honor. p. 167 Rites of EGYPTIANS
how recorded. Table, in HIEROGLYPHICS. Rite of first taking Arms in GERMANY.
p 30 Rome to be left for ALBA intolerable. p. 148
S
Salad roial, or BELIAL. p. 54 Satyr no fit reformer of Arms. p. 57 Scale of
colors according to several authors. p. 135 Secret fountain of true Armories.
p. 18 Semi in Arms. p. 193 SEMIRAMIS* her Gardens. Table of words in AVTOMS.
Ship in heaven. Table of words, in ARGO. SIMON MAGVS an ICARVS. Table, in
AVTOMS. Single color constitutes no Armories. p. 155 Slate a table of
recapitulation. p. 123 Studies of honor enlumen the soul. p. 54 Symbolical
images in Scripture. p. 41
V
Vegetative souls of Armorie. p. 142 Vert in Armories. p. 152 Virtues ualue in
it self. p. 56 Universality of ensignements. p. 60. Volumns decayed cause of
great obscurity. p. 58. Use of Recapitulation. p. 123.
W
Wainscoat works: Table of words in INLAYES. White color. p. 125 White
capable of al colors. p. 144. symbolical to things divine. 128 Wishes for an
HOLY WAR. p. 40 Wonderful things of Arms in the INDIES. p. 42. 44. 45. Words
like DVTCH coins. Table, in GRAMMAR. Words need a Magistrate. ibid.
Y
Yellow hairs of the BRITANS. p. 26
FINIS.

