



This present book shewyth the manner of hawkynge and hunting: and also of
diuysynge of Cote armours / It shewyth also a good matere belonging to horses:
with other commendable treatyses. And ferdermore of the blasynge of armies: as
here after it may appear.

IN so much that gentylmen and honest persons have great delight in hawkynge
/ and delyre to have the manner to take hawkys: and also how and in what wise
they should guide them ordynatly / and to know the gentle terms in comynynge
of their hawkys / and to understand their syknesses and infirmytees / and also
to know medycynes for them according: and many notable termys that been vsyd
in hawkynge / both of their hawks and of the fowls that their hawks shall
slay. Therefore this book following in a dew four me shewyth very knowledge of
such pleasure to gentylmen and persons dysposyd to se it.

This is the manner to begyn^ to keep hawks / but not all manner hawks: but
only goshawkes and tercellis of goshawkys and spare hawks / and in what
manner they shall be take.

The manner to speak of hawks fro an egg till they ben able to be taken.

FOR to speak of Hawks / First they ben eggs And afterward they ben
dysclosed hawkys. And comynly goshawkis ben disclosyd as soon as the choughes
and in some place more tymely after the country is of hete and tymely
bredynge. And we shall say that hawkis done: eyer: and not bread in the
woods. And we shall say that hawkis done: draw: when they beer tymberyng to
their nestis / and not they: build: ne make their nestis: And in the time of
their love they: call: and not: cauke: And we shall say that they: treede:.
And when they ben vnclosyd and begyn^ to feder any thing of length: anon by
kind they woll draw somewhat out of the neste: and draw to bows and come
again to their neste. And then they ben called: bowesses:. And after saint
Margarytes day they will fle fro tree to tree. And then^e they ben called:
braunchers:. And then it is time for to take them. And.vij. nyghtes before
saint Margarites day and.vij. nyghtes after: is best taking of spare hawkis.

How ye shall demean you in taking of hawkis and with what Instrumentis: and
how ye shall call them.
WHo so woll take hawks he must have nets which ben called Vrynes / And
those must be made of good small threde. And it had need to be dyed other
grene or blewe / for espyenge of the hawke. And he must take with him nedyll
and threde to ensile the hawks that been taken. And in this manner they must be
ensiled. Take the nedyll and threde and put it thorough the over eye lydde /
and so of that other. and make them fast under the beck that she se not / and
then^ she is ensiled as she ought to be. Some use to ensyle them with the
nether eye lydde above the beck on the heed almost / but yt is the worste way.
For of reason the over eye lidde closes more justly than the nether by cause
of the largeness. when she is ensiled beer her home on thy fyste and cast
her on a perch: and let her stand there a night and a day. And on ye other
day toward night: then^ take and kytte easily the thredes and take them away
softly for breking of the eye lyddis. Then^ soft and fair begin^ to feed her:
and deal easily with her till she woll sytte well upon the fyste. For it is
dread for hurtyng of her wings. And then^ the same night after the fedinge
wake her all night and the morough all day. then^ she woll be preuy enough to
be reclamyd. And the first mete yt she shall ete let it be hoar. and give her
enough thereof.

when your hawke may be draw to reclayme: and the manner of her dyete.
ANd if your hawke be hard pennyd: she may be drawn to be reclaymyd. For all
the while that she is tender pennyd she is not able to be reclaymyd. And if she
be a goshauke or tercell yt shall be reclamed: ever feed her with wasshe meet at
the drawing: and at the reclaymynge / But look that it be hot. And in this
manner wasshe it Take the meet and goo to the water and stryke it up and down
in the water: and wrynge the water out / and feed her therewith and she be a
brauncher. And if it be an eyesse ye must wasshe the meet clener than ye do to
the brauncher / And with a lynnen clothe wype it and feed her. And ever more
the third day give her casting when she is fleenge if she be a goshawke or
tercell in this manner. Take new blanket clothe and kytte.v. pellettes thereof
of an ynche longs: and take the flesh and kytte.v. morcelles / And with a
knives point make an hole in eueri morcell: and put therein the pellettys of
clothe / And take a fair dysshe with water and put them therein. Then take
the hawke and give her a morcell of hot meet the quantyte of half her
supper. Then take that yt lies in the water and feed her for all night.

How ye shall feed your hawke and to know her Infyrmytees: and there ben many
diverse of them.
IF your hawke be a spare hawke: ever feed her with vnwasshe meet / And look
that her casting be plumage. Then look that it be clean under the perch.
And on ye next day ye shall find the casting under the perch. And there ye
shall know whether the hawke be clean or no. For some piece will be yelowe:
and some grene: and some glaymous: and some clear. And if it be yelowe: she
engendryth the Frounce / which is an evil yt woll rise in the mouth or in the
cheke. And if it be grene: she engendryth the Rye. The condycyon of this evil
is this: It woll arise in the heed and make the heed to swell / and in the eyes
all glaymous and derke. And but it have help it woll down in to the legs
and make the legs to rancle. And if it go fro the legs in to the heed again
thy hawke is but lost. And if it be glaymous and ropynge: she engendryth an
evil called the Cray / that is when an hawke may not muteyse.

Mark well your medycynes here following
A medycyne for the Frounce in the mouth: Take a silver spone and put the
small end in the fire till it be hot. Then^e let hold the hawke: and open^
her beke and bren^e the sore / and anoint it with the merry of a gose that has
lain long: and she shall be hole. And if the Frounce be wexid as great as a
notte Then there is a grubbe therein. which ye shall kytte with a rasure in
this manner. Let hold the hawke and slytte ye olace where the sore is / and
ye shall find there in as it were the mawe of a pegeon. Take it out all hoole
/ and take a pair o^ sheerys and kytte the hole of the sore: and make it as
fair as ye may with a lynnen clothe. And whype clean the blood away And
enoynte the sore with bame four days suyngly: and afterward with Papylyon
till it be hole.

How the Frounce comyth The Frounce comyth when a man fedyth his hawke with
porke or cattys flesh four days together. How the Rye comyth For defawte of
hot meet this syknesse the Rye comyth. How the Craye comyth The Craye comyth
of wasshe meet which is wasshe with hot water in the defawte of hot meet.
Also it comyth of thredes which ben in the flesh that the hawke is fed
with. For though ye pyke the flesh never so clean: yet ye shall find
thredes therein.


When your hawke shall bathe him
And ever more each third day let your hawke bathe him during the Somer if
it be fair weder. And onys in a weke in Winter if it be fair weeder and not
else. And when ye bathe your hawke: ever give her a morcell of hot meet
vnwasshe though she be a goshawke.

How ye may cause your hawke to fle with a courage in the morning.

If ye woll that your hawke fle in the morough tide: feed her the night before
with hot meet. And wasshe the same meet in vryne: and wrynge out the water
clean. And that shall make her to have lust and courage to fle in the morning
in the best manner.

How ye shall guide you if your hawke be full goorgyd and ye would soon have a
flyghte.

If your hawke be full goorgyd: and that ye would soon upon have a flyghte /
Take four corns of whete and put them in a morcell of flesh: and give the
same morcellys to the hawke: and she will cast anon all that she has within
her. And a none after that she has cast: look ye have a morcell of hot mete
to give her. And if your hawke be ouergorgyd: give her the same medycyne.

A medycyne for the Rye
Take daysees leuys: and stamp them in a mortar / and wrynge out the Iuse:
and with a pen putt it in the hawkys nares ones or twies when the hawke is
small gorgyd. And anon after let her tire: and she shall be hole as a fysshe
/ Or else take percely rotes and serve her with them in the same manner /.
And when she tyryth: hold Rewe in your hand with the tyrynge: and that shall
make her void / But it is peryllous te use it often that the Iuys fall ne
spring in to her eyes.

Also and ye give your hawke fresshe butter or the merry of hoggys that is in
the bone of the butte of porke: it shall make her to cast water well at the
nares / And it will keep the nares open / But it woll make her hawteyne and
proud.

A medycyne for the Craye: and moo follow
Take and chauf with your hondys the fundement of your hawke with warm water
a long time. And after that take ye powdre of Saxifrage: or else the powdre
of rewe: and a quantyte of May butter / and tempre it well togider till they
ben even meddled / Then put it in a little box and stop it fast. And as
often as ye feed your hawke an hoole meele: anoint her meet a little therwyth /
and that shall make her to love meet the better: for love of the oynement. And
it shall save her fro the Craye and from many other syknesses yt gendre often in
an hawke.

Also take the hot heart of an hog or of a pygge: and feed her two days
therwyth: and she shall be hole.

Also take porke and weete it in hot milk of ^ cow and feed the hawke
therwyth / and that shall make her muteyse at the best wise.

Also porke with the merry of the boon of the butte of porke shall make her
muteyse / and feed her with both together.

Also use her to fresshe butter and it woll do the same.

Also one meele or two at ye most of the hot liver of a pigge shall make her
to muteyse well. Bewaar ye give her not to great a gorge thereof: for it is a
peryllous meet.

Also take the white of an egg: and labor the same in a spou^ge as well as ye
would make glayre for read ynke till it be like water. Put ye same in a
vessel: and let the mete yt shall be for her soper lie a stepe therein all the
day before / and at night feed her there with. And yt which shall be for her
dinner in the morning let it lie all the night. but in any wise that ye have
always fresshe gleyre. And of her fedynge be porke it is the better. That is
prouyd.

The kyndly termys that belong to hawkys.
IN the beginning of kyndly ^peche of the termys that belong to hawkys here
ye may find them. The first is Hold fast at all times / and specially
when she batyth. It is called batynge: for she batyth with herself most often
causeles. The second is Rebate your hawke to your fyste. and that is when your
hawke batith: the leest meuynge that ye can make with your fyste: she will
rebate again upon your fyste. The third is Feed your hawke / and not give her
meet. The fourth is An hawke snytyth: or sueth her beck. and not wipyth her
beke. The fyfth Your hawke Ioukyth / and not slepyth. The syxte Your hawke
proynyth / and not pyckyth. And she proynyth not but when she begynnyth at her
leggys: and fetchith moisture like oil at her tayll: and bamyth her fete / and
strikes the feders of her wings through her beck. And it is called the Note:
when she fetchith such oil. And ye shall understand that an hawke would not
be let of her proynyng For at such time as she proynyth she is liking and
lusty. And when she has done she woll rowse her myghtly. A^^ ^ome time your
hawke countenauncyth as she pyckyd her / and yet she proynyth not. And then
ye must say She refourmyth her feders / and not pyckyth her feders. The
seventh Your hawke colyeth / and not beckyth. The eyghte She rowsith / and not
shakes herself. The nynthe She streynyth / and not claweth ne cratchyth. The
tenthe She mantellyth: and not stretchyth when she puttyth her legs from her:
one after a another: and her wings follow her legs. Then she does mantyll
her. And when she has mantyllyd her and bryngyth both her wings together over
her back: Ye shall say your hawke warbellyth her wings. And yt is one term
dew therefore. The enleuenth ye shall say Your hawke mutessyth or mutyth / and
not shiteth. The twelfyth ye shall say Cast your hawke to the perch / and
not set your hawke upon the perch.

Here ye shall understand ferdermore other manner of terms yt belong unto
hawkis for to commend them for diverse of their proprytees

First ye shall say This is a fair hawke And huge hawke A long hawke A
short thycke hawke. And say not This is a great hawke. Also ye shall say
This hawke has a large beck or a short beck / And call it not byll. An
huge heed or a small heed fair seesenyd. Ye shall say: your hawke is full
goorgyd: and not croppyd. And your hawke puttyth over and endueth. and yet she
does both dyuersly.

How your hawke puttyth over
An hawke puttyth over when she remeuyth the meet from her goorge in to her
bowellys. And thus ye shall know it: when she puttythouer she trauersyth with
her body / and specially with the neck as a crane does or a another bird.

when ye shall say Enduth and Embowellyd
An hawke Enduth never as long as her bowelles ben full at her fedynge / But
as soon as she is fed: and restyth / she enduth little and little. And if
her goorge be wide and the bowell any thing stiffyd: ye shall say she is
Embowellyd and have not fully Endewed. And as long as ye may find any thing
in her bowelles it is right peryllous to give her any meet.

Mark well these termys following
Say an hawke has a long wynge: A fair long taylle with.vi. barrys out: and
stondyth upon the seventh. This hawke is enterpennyd: That is to say / when
the feders of the wings ben between the body and the thyghes. This hawke has
an huge leg or a flat leg / or a round leg / or a fair enseryd leg.

To know the mayll of an hawke
Hawks have white mayll: Canuasmayll or read mayll. And some call read
mayll Yren mayll: white mayll is soon known. Canuasmayll is between white
mayll and yren mayll And yren mayll is very read.

Plumage. and: cast: your hawke.
A goshawke nor a tercell in their soore aege have not their mayles named / But
it is called their plumage. and after the cote: it is called their: mayle. And
if your hawke reward to any foul by countenance for to fle thereto / Ye shall
say: cast: the hawke thereto. and not let: fle: thereto.

Nomme or seesyd.
And if your hawke: nomme: a foul / and ye foul break away fro her: She
has: dyscomfit: many feders of the foul / and is broken away. For in kyndly
speech ye shall say your hawke has: no^myd: or seesid a foul / and not:
take: it.

wherefore an hawke is called a: ryfelere:
And often times it happith many an hawke for egrenesse wha^ he should nomme a
foul he seesith but the feders. And as often as he does so he ryflyth. Therefore
such hawks ben called: ryfeleres: if they do often so.

How ye shall name the members of your hawks in couenable terms.
NOw ye shall understand the names of the members of hawks: to begin at
their fete and goo upward / as knights ben harnessyd and armyd. And so we
shall enarme her.

Talons First the great clees behind / that strenyth the back of the hand:
ye shall call them: talons: Pounces The clees within the foot ye shall call
of right her: pounces: Long: sengles: But certainly the: clees: that are upon
the myddill stretchers ye shall call the: long sengles: Pety sengles And the
vttermest clees ye shall call the: pety sengles: The keye or closer Understand
ye also that the: long senclees: ben called the keye of the foot: or the
closer. For what thing soever it be that your hawke streynyth is upon ye
sengle. and all the foot is thereupon. For the strength thereof fortifyeth all the
foot. Seris of watery or waxy color Know ye that the skin abowte your
hawkys leggis and her fete is called the Serys of her leggis and her fete /
whether they ben watery hewed or of waxy color yolowe. The Beme feder: full
Summyd: full Fermyd and reclaymyd. AN hawke has.xij. feders upon his tayll.
And one pryncypall feder of the same is in the myddys. And in manner all the
other ben coueryd under the same feder. And yt is called the Beme feder of the
tayll. And there gooth black barrys ouerwhart the tayll. And those same barrys
shall tell you when she is full summyd or full fermyd. For when she is full
barryd she stondyth upon.vij. and then she is perfyt ready to be reclaymyd. Ye
shall understand that aslonge as an hawke stondyth under ye nombre of.vij.
barrys: and she be in her soore aege / it must be said That she is not full
summyd. For so long she is but tender pennyd whether she be brauncher or eyes.
And if she be a mewyd hawke and stand within.vij. barrys: ye shall say She is
not full fermyd. For she is not able to be reclaymyd: by cause she is draw to
soon out of the mewe: for she is not hard pennyd no more than a soore hawke.
Braylles or Braylfeders Degowtyd To know ferthermore of hawkys. An hawke has
long small white feathers hanging under the tayll from her bowell dounwarde.
And the same feders ye shall call the Brayllys: or the Braylfeders. And comynly
every goshawke and every tercelles braylis ben bisprengyd with black speckes
like armyns And for all that they ben accountyd never the better / But and a
spare hawke be so ermyned upon the brayles / or a Musket. ye shall say She is
degowtyd to the uttermost brayle. And much it betokenyth hardness. Breast
feders: Plumage / Barbe feders: Pendaunt feders. The feders abowte the formore
parties of an hawke ben called the Breast feders. and the feders under the
wings are Plumage The feders under the beck ben called the Barbe feders. And
the feders that been at the Joint at the hawks knee they stand hanging and
sharp at the ends. Those ben called the Pendaunt feders. Flagge or flaggis
feders. The feders at the wings next the body be called ye Flagge or the
Flaggis feders. Beme feders of the wynge Sercell. And the long feders of the
wyngys of an hawke ben called the Beme feders of the wynge. And the feders that
some call the pynyon feder of a another foul: of an hawke it is called the
Sercell. And ye shall understand if an hawke be in mewe ye same sercell feder
shall be the last feder that she will cast. And till that be cast: she is
never mewed / Yet it has be seen yt hawks have cast that same first as I
have herd say. But that other rule is general. And when she has cast her
Sercellys in mewe. then and no soouer it is time for to feed her with wasshe
meet and to begin to ensayme her Ensamye Ensayme of an hawke is the greeys.
And but if that be take away with fedynge of wasshe meet and otherwise: as it
shall be declared here after: she will gendre a panell / which may be her
uttermost confusyon: and she fle therwyth and take blood and cold thereupon.
Couertis or Covert feders There ben also feders that close upon the sarcellis.
And those same ben called the Couertis or the Covert feders. And so all the
feders ben called that been next over the long beme feders and the fagge
feders upon the wings. Back feders The feders upon the back half ben called
the Back feders Beke: Clape: Nares: Sere The Beke of the hawke is the upper
part that is crokyd. The nether part of her beke is called is ye Clape of ye
hawke The holes in the hawkis beke ben called the Nares. The yelowe between the
beke and the eyes is called the Sere Crynettis There be on an hawke long small
black feders like heeres abowte the sere. And those same ben called Crinettes
of ye hawke Soore aege Ye shall understand that the first year of an hawke:
whether she be called Brauncher or Eyesse / that first year is called her
Soore aege. And all ye year she is called a Soore hawke. For and she eschape
that year: with good fedynge she is lykly to endure long.
To reclayme an hawke.
IF ye will reclayme your hawke ye must depart one meele in three meeles unto
the time that she woll come to reclayme. And when she woll com^ to reclayme:
encreece her meeles every day better and better. And or she come to the
reclame make her that she soore not. For though she be well reclamed it may
hap that she woll soore so high in to the air that ye shall neither se nor
find her.

And if your hawke shall fle to the pertryche: look that ye ensayme her or she
fle. whether she be brau^cher or eyesse or mewyd hawke.

Why an hawke is called an Eyesse
An hake is called an Eyesse of her eyes. For an hawke that is brought up under
a bustarde or a putrocke: as many ben have watery eyes. For when they ben
dysclosed and kept in ferme till they ben full sommyd: ye shall know them by
their watery eyes / And also her look woll not be so quycke as a Braunchers
is. And so by cause the best knowledge is by the eye: they ben called Eyesses.

Ye may also know an Eyesse by the palenesse of the seres of her legs of
the sere over the beke: and also by the tayntys that been upon her tayll and her
wings / which tayntes cord for lack of fedynge when they ben eyesse.

what a Taynt is
A taynt is a thing that gooth ouerwharke the feders of the wings and of the
tayll like as it were eren with wormys. And it begynnyth first to bread at the
body in the pen. And that same pen shall frete asondre and fall away
through the same taynt / And then is the hawke dysparagyd for all that year.

Medycynes to ensayne your hawke
Take the rote of Rasue and put it in clean water: and lay your flesh therein
to tempre a great while. and give it to your hawke to ete. And if she ete
thereof: dread not but it shall abate her greece. But within.iij. days she shall
not greatly abate.

Also take pulyall and garlyk and stamp it well together / and wrynge out the
Iuce in a dysshe. And then wete the flesh therein. feed your hawke therwyth.
And but it tempre your hawke: that is to say Ensayme your hawke within four
days I merueyll But look every day that ye make new Iuce. And when ye feed
her wete your mete therein.

Also take the Iuce of percelly morys: other wise called percelly rotys: and
those same of Ysoppe. And wasshe your flesh therin^ / and your hawke shall be
ensaymyd kyndly: and no great abate to the hawke.

Some use to lay their flesh in water almoost a day: and give the same to
the hawke at supper. And that yt lies all night to give to her in the
morning. And thus to feed them in mewe or they ben drawn abowte a month or.vi.
wekes / and to ensayme them or they come on fyste. And as soon as they cast
their cercell: then is the time to begyn^ to feed them so.

How your hawke ensaymyth
Understand ye for certain: that aslonge as your hawkys fete ben blackysth and
rough: she is full of greece. And ever as she ensaymyth: her fete woll wax
yelowe and smothe.

How ye shall guide you when your hawke is ready to fle. Also ye shall say Put
up a pertryche.
When ye have ensaymyd your hawke and reclaymyd her and that she is ready to fle
to the pertryche / Ye must take a pertryke in your bag and goo in to the
field: and let your spanyels find a Couy of pertryches. And when they ben up
and begyn^ to scatre: ye must have markers to mark some of them. And then
cowple up your hounds. when ye have so done let some fellow of yours preuely
take the pertryche out of your bag: and teye it by the leg with a creaunce
/ and cast it up as high as he can^. And as soon as the hawke sees her she
woll fle thereto. And if your hawke seesyth the pertryche above: give her a
reward thereupon. And goo after that by laysur to the pertryche that been markyd
and do as I shall tell you here following. If ye have a chastysyd hounde that
woll be rebuked: and is a retryuer. Uncouple him and no moo of your houndys:
and go to a syngler pertryche of the couy so sparclyd. And be as nyghe as ye
can to the rysinge thereof. And if your hawke desire: cast her to. And if she
take it: then^e is your hawke made for that year. And of the same pertriche
that she sleeth: thus ye must reward her as it shewyth here next following.

How ye shall reward your hawke.
Take a knyfe and kytte the heed and the neck from the body of the pertryche.
And strype the skin away from the neck. and give ye same to the hawke. And
couere the body of the foul with a bonet or an heart: and lay the said heed and
the neck thereupon. And if she woll forsake the foul that she plumyth on and
come to the reward: Then preuely take away the pertryche and reward your
hawke with the brain and the neck. Beware that she ete no bonys: for that is
evil to endewe. And it woll make her unlusty for to fle. And thus ye must
serve her of as many as she sleeth. But let her reward be the less: For
else she may be soon full goorgyd. And then she may fle no more a great
while.

How your hawke shall rejoice
And when your hawke has slain a foul: and is rewardyd as I have said / Let
her fle in no wise till she has reioycyd her: that is to say Till she has
sewyd or snytyd her beke. or else rowsyd her. And when she has done any of
thise: or all. Go and retryue moo and she woll nymme plente.

When your hawke has nomme a foul how ye shall do that ye rebuke not the
hawke. Learn well do thing: and beware thereof. when your hawke has nomme a
pertryche / stand a good way of: and come not to nyghe her / And drive away
your hounds for rebukynge of her. For many hawkys love no houndys. And also
many hounds woll benymme them their game from their foot. and that is
peryllous. And while your hawke plumyth: come softly toward her always nere
and nere. And if she leave plumynge and look upon you: stand still and cherke
her: and whystyll her. till she plume again. And thus serve her till ye be right
nyghe her. Then soft and layserly fall upon your knees. And preuely while
she plumyth: set your hand and be sure of the guess And then ye may guide
all thing as ye will. And if ye do ye contrary she woll for fere carry her
game: or let it goo quycke And that is but loss to you and your hawke also.

A medicyne for to make an hawke to cast that is acombryd with casting within
her body. Take the Iuys of Salandyne: and wete a morcell of flesh therein / to
the quantyte of a notte. And give that morcell to the hawke. And that shall
make her for to cast her old casting. and the hawke shall be sauf.

A medycyne for an hawke that woll soore
Wasshe the flesh that your hawke shall be fed with in the Iuce of Fenell.
And that shall take away that pride from her: and make her to leave her
soorynge whether she be lene or fat And many times an hawke woll soore when
she lackyth bathing.

A medycyne for an hawke that is lowse.
Take quycke silver and put it in a bassen of brass: and put there to Saladyne
and ashes: and meddle it well together till all the quycke silver be deed. And
meddle thereto fat of bonys: and anoint the hawke therwyth. And hang it abowte
her neck till it fall away / and that shall slay the lies.

Also powdre of Orpement blown upon an hawke with a pen shall slay the lies.

Also take a dagon or piece of rough blanket vnshore: and hold it to the fire
unto time it be through out warm: and wrappe the hawke therein. And then hold
her softely and stylly for hurtynge in your hondys. and the wermyn^ woll crepe
in to the clothe.

Also hold her in the son on a fair day / and ye shall se the vermyn^ crepe
out upon her feders. Then take a knyfe and wete the one side of the blade
thereof with your mouth. And always as they appear lay the wete side of the
knyfe to them: and they woll cleue thereto. And then ye may slay them.

The opinion of Ostregiers
After the opinion of many Ostregiers / and ye feed your hawke contynuelly with
Porke: with Iayes: with Pyes / Or in especyall beer her much in reyny weder /
she shall be lowse.

Ostregeres: Speruyteres: Fawkeners.
Now by cause I speak of Ostregeres / Ye shall understand that they ben called
Ostregeres that keep goshawkes or tercelles. And those that keep spare hawkys
and muskettys: ben called Speruyteres. And kepers of all other hawkys aren
called Fawkeners.

The length of the Guess: Lewnes: Tyrettys. And how they ben fastnyd: And
Bewettys.
Hawkys have abowte their leggys Gesses made of ledder most comynly / some of
sylke. which should be no longer but that the knottys of them should appear
in myddys of the left hand between the long fyngre and the leche fyngre / by
cause the Lewnes should be fastenyd to them with a pair of Tyrettys. which
Tyrettys should rest upon the Lewnes and not upon the Gesses: for hanging and
fasting upon trees when she flees. And those same Lewnes ye shall fasten
them abowte your little fyngre slackly: in compassynge the same in four or
five fold as a bow string unoccupied. And the Tyrettes serve to keep her
from wyndinge when she bathyth.

Also the same lethers that been put in her belles to be fastnyd abowte her
legs: ye shall call Bewettys.

Creaunce.
Also ye shall call the long line that ye do call your hawke to reclayme
with: your Creaunce: what so ever it be.

A medycyne for an hawke that woll cast flesh.
Put the flesh that your hawke shall ete in fair water. And feed her
therwyth three days. And she shall hold her flesh in the best wise.

A medycyne for an hawke that has lost her courage.
An hawke that has lost her courage a man may know if he woll take good
head. For such is her manner: When she is cast to a foul: she flees
awaywarde as though she knew not the foul. Or else she woll fle a little
way after: and anon he yeuyth it up. and for such an hawke this is a good
medicyne.

Take oil of Spain and tempre it with clear wine and with the yolke of an
egg: and put therein beyf. And thereof give to your hawke five morcelles. And
then set her in the son^e / And at even feed her with an old hot coluer.
And if ye feed her thus three times: that hawke was never so lusty nor so Ioyly
before as she woll be after: and come to her own courage.

Other make poudre of Mecles that stynke: and put the poudre on the flesh of
a pecok: and meddle the blood of the pecok among the powdre / and make her to
ete the flesh.

A medicine yt an hawke shall not lie in mewe for vnlustynes

Take fern rotes that growith on an oak and oak apples and make Iuce of them:
and wete her flesh therein / and feed the hawke three times or four: and that
shall make her to leave that.

A medycyne for an hawke that has the Teyne.
An hawke that has the teyne a man may soon know if he take heed: for this
is her manner. She woll pante more for one batynge than a another for four. and
if she should fle a little while: she should almost lose her brethe / whether
she be fat or lene and always she makith heavy chere. And for yt this is the
medicyne

Take a quantyte of the redness of Hasyll with the powdre of Rasne and peper:
and somewhat of gynger / And make thereof in fresshe greece three pellettes and
hold the hawke to the fire. And when she felyth the hete: make her to swalowe
the three pellettes by strength. And knytte fast her beke that she cast it
not out And do so thryes: and she shall be sauf.

Also take Rasne and Rubarbe and grynde it together: and make Iuce thereof / and
wete the flesh therein: and give it her to ete And she shall be hole.

Also take Alisaundre and the rote of Pryme roses and the rote of Grognauteles:
and sees all in the butter of a kowe. And give her three morcelles every day
unto the time that she be hole. And look that she be void when ye give her the
medycyne.

How a man shall take an hawke fro the Eyrer
WHo so takyth an hawke from the eyrer: him byhouyth to do wisely: in bringing
him easily / and to keep him well from cold: and from hurtynge of his bonys.
For they ben full tender: and they must have great rest. And they may not
have stynkyng and fylthy air: but as clean as can and may be thought. And ever
more give him clean meet and hot / and a little and often. And change often
their meet: but look it be hot And kytte her meet in to small morcellys:
for they should not tire on bonys till they might fle. Then after when she
begynnyth to pen: and plumyth and spalchyth and pykyth herself. Put her in a
close warm^ place that no fulmertys nor fecheus nor other vermyn come not in to
her. And let the place be sure from wind and reyne: and then she woll preue
herself. And ever more give her good hot meetys. For it is better to a man to
feed his hawke while she is tender with hot meetys: to make her good with some
cost: than to feed her with evil meetys to make her unthrifty with little
cost. And look when she begyn^yth to ferme: then^e give her bathing.

A medycyne for wormys in an hawke. which syknesse is called the Fylaundres.
Mark well this sickness: and bewaar thereof. This is the medycyne therefore. Ye
shall take an herb that is called Neppe and put it in a small gutte of a
capon or of an hen^e. And knytte it with a threde: and let her receive it
hole. And she shall be hole and sauf. Thus ye shall know when your hawke has
wormys in her bowke. Look when she has casting: and ye shall find one or two
obowte her casting place if she has any

A medicyne for an hawke that castyth wormys at the foundment: what wormys that
they ben.
Take the Lymayll of pren and meddle it with flesh of porke. And give it two
days to the hawke for to ete. And she shall be hole.

A medycyne for an hawke that has a syknesse the which is called the
Aggresteyne.
When ye se your hawke hurt her fete with her beke: and pullyth her taylle:
then she has the aggresteyne. For this syknesse take the dounge of a douue
and of a sheep / and of an allow and strong vyneygre / and do al softly in a
basyn of brass. And meddle them well together to serve three days after. And
give her flesh of a coluer with honey and with powder of peper. And set her
in a derke place: and so do.ix. days. And when ye se new feders in the
tayll: wasshe her with Eucrose: and she shall be hole and sauf.

A medycyne for an hawke that has the Crampe in her wings: and how it comyth.
For this Crampe take a white loof of breed somewhat colder than it comyth out
of the oouen: and let hold the hawke softly for hurtynge. And kytte the loof
almost through out: and dysplaye the wynge easily. and hold it between the two
parts of the loof. and let it be hold so the space of half a quarter of an
hour / and she shall be hole.

The Crampe comyth to an hawke with talking of cold in her youth. Therefore
it is good for a hawke to keep her warm young and old. And this medycyne is
good at all times for her whether she be young or old.

Let not an hawke be put in mewe to late: but in this manner as folowyth if ye
love your hawke.
If ye love well your hawke: keep her well. and put her not late in mewe. For
who so for couetysenesse of fleenge lesyth the time of his hawks mewyng and
wythholdyth her tolonge there fro: he may after put her in mewe at adventure /
For then^e a part of her mewynge time is paste. who so puttyth his hawke in
mewe in the beginning of Lent: if she be kept as she owyth to be: she shall
be mewyd in the beginning of Auguste.

How ye shall dyspose and ordeyne pour mewe
Set and dyspose your mewe in this manner: so that no wesel nor polcatte nor
none other vermyn enter thereto / nor no wind / nor no great cold / nor that
it be over hot.

Let that one part of the mewe be tornyd toward the son: so that in the
most part of the day the son may come in.

Also ye must se that she be not auexyd nor greuyd with much noise nor with
song of men. And that no manner folkys come to her but oonly he that fedeth
her.

It behouyth that your hawke have a fedynge stock in her mewe / and a long
string teyed thereto to fasten her meet with. For else she woll carry it abowte
the house and soylle it with dust And perauenture she woll hide it till it
stynke: and then feed upon it. and that might be her death. And therefore when
it is bo unden to the said fedynge stock: she shall nether at fedynge nor at
the tyrynge ne at the lyghtynge ne at the rysynge hurt herself. And when she
has fed take away the remenaunt if any leeue. And in any wise that she have
clean meet. And at every meele fressh. For of stale meettis and evil meetys
she shall engendre many siknesses. And look ye go never to your mew but when ye
shall give your hawke meet: Or else to bring water to bathe her. And suffer
no reyne to wete her at no time and ye may. And as for her bathyng: that
shall no thing hinder her mewynge.

The manner how a man shall put an hawke in to mewe And that is to be well
notyd.
Of one thing ye must beware well if she have any syknesse that ye make her
hoole or ye put her in mewe. For as I understand: a syke hawke shall never mewe
well. For though she mewe she shall not endure but while she is great and fat.
For at the abatynge of her astate she may no longer endure.

Sometime without any medycyne many men deuysen how they might mewe their
hawkis: for some put hawkys in mew at high astate / and some when they ben
right low / and some when they ben full / and some when they ben empty and
lene / and some when they ben miserable lene: but thereof is no force if she be
hole. Ne theles I shall say mine aduyce as I have seen and lernyd.

Who so puttyth a goshawke or a tercell or a spare hawke in to mewe so high
yt she may be no higher: she woll hold her long in the point or that she
lose or lent any feders. And who so puttyth her in mewe lene: it woll be long
or she be remountyd. And who so puts her in mewe to hungry and to lene: if
she have mete at her will: she woll ete tomoche by cause of hungre And
perauenture she may be deed thereby: as has often ben seen.

But who so woll that an hawke endure and mewe kyndly: My counseyll is that she
be not to high another to low / another in great dystresse of hungre: but like
as she should fle best. Then^ take heed the first day of tomoche etynge /
unto time yt she be staunchyd. And after that a man may take her such meet
as I shall tell more plainly here after.

In what manner and how a man shall feed his hawke in mewe.

Look with what meets she has be most vsyd to be fed and feed her
therewith.viij. days contynuelly. and tho.viij. days give her birds enough:
both morrow and even. And let her plume upon them well. And take casting of
the plumage. and that shall talaunt her well / and cause her to have good
appetyte. And it shall cleanse well her bowellys. And when she is well clensyd:
ye may give her what meet that ye woll: so it be clean and fresshe.

But the best meet to make an hawke to mewe most soon without any medycyne:
is the flesh of a kydde or of a young swanne and of a chekyn. And specially
ratons flesh: So they ben not assawte / none like to it / And of a young
gose. For such meet is hot of itself.

And take pecys of great fresshe elys: and specially the colpen next the
navel. and wete it in hot blood of moton: It is good to make her to mewe: But
specially it shall make her wight after her soore aege.

These said flesshes ben good to mewe an hawke and to keep her in state. but
look she have good plente every day: so that she rather leave part than lack
any. And every third day let her bathe if she list.

And when she wexyth nyghe ferme: give her hennys and fat porke: and of an
hounde is passing good.

An hawke is never full ferme nor ready to draw out of mewe unto time her
sercell be full grown. Yet have I seen some folks take them out of mewe when
the sarcell were but half spronge: and that is peryllous. for they are not
then hard penned.

Some folkys use when an hawke has cast her sercell to be begyn^ and wasshe
her meet: and feed her so in mewe with wasshe meet a month or.vi. wekys or ever
they draw them.

But of all flesshes after she is mewyd / a reasonable george of an hot hare is
best / and also of a crow hot / But it must be wasshe in water / and then
it is the better. For that woll not be nymme them hastily their greece: nor put
them in no great feblynesse. For it duryth somewhat with her.

To make anhawke to mewe tymely without any hurting of her.

Now I shall tell you very true medycynes to mewe an hawke hastily that ye
shall believe for troth and ye woll asaye them.

There ben in wodys or in hegges wormys called adders yt be read of nature:
and he is called (Vepera) And also there be snakes of the samekynde: and they
ben very bitter. Take two or three of ye ym and smite of their heedes and the
ends of their tails: then^ take a new earth pot that was never vsyd: and
kytte them in to small pecys: and put those same therein / and let them
sethe strongly a great while at good layser. And let the pot be coue rid that
no air come out of it nor no brethe. and let it sethe so long that the
same pieces seethe to greece. Then cast it out and do away the bones and
gadre the greece / and put it in a clean vessel. And as often as ye feed your
hawke: anoynte her meet therein / and let her ete as much as she woll. And
that meet shall mewe her at your own will.

A another medycyne.
Take whete and put it in the broth that the adders were sodden in. And when ye
se the whete begyn^ to cleue: take it out and feed hennys or chekyns therwyth.
And feed your hawke with the same polayn.

who so woll that an hawke mewe not nor fall none of her feders: therefore here
is a medycyne.

Take powder of Canell and the Iuce of Frank costs and the Iuce of Paranye.
And take morcelles of flesh three or four if ye list and wete them therein.
And make the hawke to swalow them and serve her so many times. Also take the
skyn^e of a snake or of an adder and kyt it in to small pecys: and tempre it
with hot blood. and cause your hawke often time to feed thereof and she shall
not mewe.

For the Gowte in the throat
when ye se your hawke blow often times. and that it comyth of no batynge: ye
may be sure she has the gowte in the throat and for yt. Take the blood of a
pecok and encense mirabolana and clowys of gelofre and canel and gynger. And
take of all these euenly and meddle them with pecoks blood: and sees it till it
be thick And thereof make morcelles: and give the hawke thereof every day at
mydmorn^ and at none.

For the gowte in the heed and in the reins.
when ye se your hawk may not end where meet nor remou^te her astate: she
has the gowte in the heed and in the reins.

Take Momyan otherwise called Momyn: among Poticaryes ye may have it: and the
skin of an haare and give it to your hawke to ete.ix. times with the flesh
of a catte. And if she may hold that meet she shall be sauf.

A medycyne for a syknesse called the Fallera.
When ye se that your hawkys clees wexe white: then she has the Fallera. For
this siknes: take a black snake and kitte away the heed and the tayll / and
take the myddyll and frye it in an erthen pot. And take the grees and save
it: and anoint the flessh of a pecok therewith / and give it to the hawke for to
ete.viij. days. And ye have no pecok give her flesh of a douue. And after
the.viij. days give her a chekyn / and wasshe it a little: and give it her to
ete. And take the tendrest of the breast with the fros shell boon and let her
ete it. And if she amend any thing she shall be hole.

A medycyne for the Crampe in the thygh in the leg and in the foot of an
hawke.

When ye se your hawke lay her one foot upon her other foot: she is take with
the Crampe. Then draw her blood upon the foot that lies upon that other
foot: and upon the leg also / and she shall be hole.

For the Cough or the Poose
Take powder of bays and put it upon the flessh of a douue and give it often to
your hawke. and without doubt she shall be hole.

A medycyne for the Podagre
when your hawkys fete ben swollen she has the podagre. Then take fresshe
May butter and as much of oil olyue and of alyn: and chauf it well together
at the fire and make thereof an oynement: and anoynte the fete four days. And
set her in ye son: and give her flesh of a catte. And if that avail not:
sees the kyttynge of a vine: and wrappe it abowte the swellynge: and let her
sytte upon a cold stone: And anoint her with butter or fresshe greece. And she
shall be hole.

A medycyne for a syknesse within the body of an hawke and it shewyth not
outward how she shall be helped. and in what manner.

A man may know by the chere and vngladnesse of an hawke this infyrmytee. But
yet it is strange to know things that a man may not se in what syknesse and
what manner they ben greuyd / and specially when a man wot not whereof it
comyth.

Feed your hawke well upon an hen and then make her to fast two days
after: to avoid well her bowellys. The third day: take honey sodden and fill
her body full. And bind her beke that she cast it not out of her body: and
then set her out in the son. And when it drawyth toward night feed her
with an hot foul. For as I herd my master say: and she be not hole hereof:
look never other medycyne.

For the passion that goshawkys have fasting.
Take the rote of small Russhys and make Iuce of them: and wete your flesh
therein / and make her to ete it.

For hawkys that been woundyd.
Take away the feders abowte the wound: and take the white of an egg and
oylle of Olyue and meddle it together: and anoint the wound / and keep it with
white wine unto time ye se deed flessh. And then^ put in the wound Escompe
sall unto time the deed flesh be wastyd. After take encence: and cleue
asmoche of ye one as of that other: and meddle it together. and when ye woll
anoint the sore: hete your oynement: and anoint it with a pen till the time
the skin grow again. And if ye se deed flesh thereon and would have it away
/ Take Venecreke and then anoint it with this oynement aforsayd and she shall
be hole.

A medycyne for an hawke yt has the Artetyk.
When ye se your hawke fat about the heart: trust it for truth she has the
Artetyk. Therefore let her blood in the orygynall vein: and after that give
her a Frogge for to ete. and she shall be hole.

A medycyne for an hawke combryd in the bowellys.
when your hawke is encombrid in ye bowellis ye shall know it by her eyes. For
her eyes woll be derke: and she woll look vngladly. And her mutessing woll
defoyle her foundement. Then^ take the hawkys mete and anoint it with the
powdre of canel And give it her to ete: and she shall be hole.

A medycyne for an hawke that has the Gowte
Feed your hawke with an Irchyn ones or twyes. and it shall help her.

A medycyne for an hawke that has Mytes.
Take the Iuce of wormewode and put it there as they ben and they shall deye.

That an hawke use her craft all the season to fle or leave. when ye goo to the
field in the latter end of hawkynge and desire that your hawke shall use her
crafre: do to her in this manner. Let her slay a foul and let her plume
upon it asmoche as she woll. And when she has plumyd enough: go to her softly
for frayenge: and reward her on the foul. And after that ye may cast her on
a perch. And as well she may use her craft: so as that she slew all the year.

A medycyne for an hawke that has the stoon.
Anoint her foundement with oylle: and put the powdre of Alym with an holow
straw.

Also take an herb called Crystis ladder: and anoint her mouth within and she
shall be hole.

Also take small Flambe rotys and Polypody and the corns of Spourge and
grynde it well: and sethe it in butter. And draw it through a clothe: and make
thereof three pellettis of the gretnes of a notte. And put it in his mouth in the
morrow tide: and look that he be void / and then let him fast till
euensonge. and feed him little and little / and he shall be hole.

A medycyne for Vermyn^.
Take the Iuce of the rote of Fenell and do it where the vermyn^ be: and they
shall deye.

A medycyne for the Rewme that hawks have.
when ye se your hawke close her eyes and shakyth her heed: then^e has she the
rewme in the heed. Therefore give her larde of a got the first day. And the
second give her Epatyk with the flesh a chekyn: and she shall be hole.

A medycyne for hawkys that been dry and desire to drink to keep them moist
in kind
Take the Iuce of Haarhounde and wete thyn hawkys meet therein. And feed her
therwyth onys or twyes. and she shall be hole.

For syknesses that hawkys have in their entreyllys.
AN hawke that is seek within thentraylles: is of a another array than in other
siknesses. For if she hold not her mete but cast it: that is token of the
foul glet: for surfeit of feders yt ben given to hawkys in their youth. And
afterward when they came unto traueyle: and ben anoyed of the river / then^
they wexe slow to fle and desire for to rest. And when thauke is upon her
perch: then^ she woll sleep for to put over: and the entering. And if she
hold flesh any while in her gorge: it woll look as it were sodden. And when
she is waking she assayeth to put over at thentryng. and it is agluttyd and
kelyd with the glette yt she has engendered. and if she should escape she must
put over or else she must dey: or cast it. And if she cast it she may be
help with the medycyne.

A medycyne for the Entreylles.
Take yolks of hegges raw: and when they ben well beten together: put thereto
spanyssh salt and asmoche honey thereto. And wete therein thy flesh: and feed
thy hawke three days therewith. And if she make danger to ete it. let hold
thy hawke: and make her to swolowe three or four morcelles in a day: and
sykerly she shall be hole: Yet I shall to you a another thing: Take honey at ye
chaungynge of the moon and a sharp nettyll: and thereof make small poudre. And
when it is well ground: take the breast boon of an hen and a another of a
coluer: and hacke it small with a knife. And do away the skin: and do thereon
the powder. And all hot with the poudre feed her / and so do thryes and she
shall be hole.

For syknesse of swellynge
If a wicked felon be swollen in such a manner yt a man may heel it yt the
hawke shall not deye: thus a man may help her strongly and length her life.
But the hawke woll be very egre and grievous of the siknes. And therefore ye must
take the rote of Co^fore and sugre ylyke much: and sethe it in fresshe greece
with the third part of honey: and then draw it through a fair clothe. and
often give it to the hawke: and she shall amend.

For blaynes in hawks mouths called Frounches
Of the Frounches it is dread for hawks: for it is a noyous siknes and drawyth
her to death: and wtholdyth her strength. For men say yt it comyth of cold: for
cold does hawks much harm: and makyth flewme fall out of the brayen: and
the eyes woll swelle and empeyre in her heed. And but she have hastily help it
well stop her nosethrilles. And therefore take Fenell Mary all and Rerses
ylike much: and sethe them and draw them through a clothe. And other while
wasshe her head therwyth: and put some in the roof of her mouth and she shall
be sauf.

A medycyne for an hawke that castyth her flesh.
Wete her flesh in Sarsoyll / or else sees Rasne in water and put her
flesh therein when it boyllyth.

A medycyne for the rewme called Agrum.
When thou see thy hawke upon her mouth and her chekes blobbed: then she
has this sycknes called Agrum. Therefore take a nedyll of silver and heete it
in the fire: and brenne the Narelles through out: Then anoint it with oil of
Olyue.

For to make an hawke great and fat.
Take a quantyte of porke and honey and butter ylyke much and purgyd greece: and
do away the skin / And sethe them together. and anoint the flesh therein:
and feed your hawke therwyth / and she shall encreace myghtly. Else take the
wings of an Eued: and feed her and keep her fro traueylle. And do so often
though the Eued be never so fat. And if your hawke be not passing fat
within.xiiij. days wonder I think.

For botches that grow in an hawkys Iowe
Kytte these botches with a knyfe and let out the matere of them. And after
cleanse them clean with a silver spone: or else fylle the hole with a powdre of
Arnemelit burnt. and upon that poudre do a little larde that is resside: and
so it woll away.

Here is a good medycyne for an hawke that woll not come to reclayme.
Take fresshe butter and put thereto sugre and put it in a clean clothe and
reclayme her to that and keep it in a box in your bag.

A medycyne for hawks that been refreynyd.
When ye se your hawke nesynge and casting water thorugh her nosethrelles on
her nares: then^ dowteles she is refreynyd.

For that syknes take the greynes of Chaffelegre and of peper and grynde it
well / And tempre it with strong vyneygre and put in her nares and in the roof
of her mouth / and give her flesh to ete: and she shall be sauff.

A medycyne for hawks yt have pain in their croupes.
Ye shall take fair Morsum and poudre of gelefre / and meddle it together: and
give it to your hawke to ete. And if she hold it paste the second day after:
she shall be hole.

A medycyne for the stone in the fundement
When your hawke may not muteyse: then she has that lyknesse called the
Stoon. And for this syknesse: ye shall take ye heart of a swyne and the greece
of a swyne: and kytte it with the flesh of the heart: and she shall be help.

A medycyne for the dry Frounce
For this syknes: take the rote of Pillypody that growyth upon oaks and sethe
it a great while. Then take it fro the fire and let it stand and wexe lewe
warm / Then wasshe your flesh therein: and feed your hawke three times / and
she shall be hole.

A medycyne for worms called Anguelles
Take pressure made of a la^be yt was endyd in vntyme: and make thereof.iij.
morcelles. and put it in a gutte of a coluer and feed her therwt. and look
thawke be void when ye give her this medicyn^

Also take Iuce of dragons and put full the gutte of a pegeon. and then kytte
it and depart it as the hawke may ouerslowe it. and put it in his body: and
knytte his beke for casting.

Also give her the balockes of a bucke as hot as they be kyt out: and make
powdre of the pyntyll and cast it upon the flesh of a catte: and feed her
therwyth and she shall be hole.

An hawke Tyryth: Fedyth: Goorgyth: Bekyth: Rousith: Enduyth: Mutith: Perchyth:
Ioykyth: Puttithouer: Proynyth Plumyth: she warbullyth and Mantellyth.

She Tyryth upon rumpes. she Fedyth on all manner of flesh. She Gorgith when
she fyllyth her gorge with meet. She Bekyth when she sewyth: that is to say:
when she wypyth her beke. She Rousyth when she shakyth all her feders and her
body together. she Enduyth when her meet in her bowelles fall to dygestyon.
She Mutyth when she auoydyth her ordour. She Perchith when she stondyth on any
manner bow or perch. she Ioykyth when she slepith. she puttythouer when she
auoydeth her meet out of her gorge in to her bowelles. She Proynyth when she
fetchyth oil with her beke over her taylle: and anoytyth her fete and her
feders. She Plumyth when she pulls feders of any foul or of any thing and
castyth them from her. She war belyth when she drawyth both her wings over
the myddys of her back: and there they mete both and softly shakyth them and
let them fall again. And she Mantellyth when she stretchith her one wynge a
long after her leg. and afterward that other wynge. And most comynly she
does that before or she Warbelyth her.

The names of a Spare hawke as Ostregers and Sparuyters have determynyd.
THere is a questyon axed whether a man shall call a Spare hawke or a Spear
hawke: or an Aspere hawke.

And Ostrigers and also Sparuiters say she may be called al three namys / for
thise reasons? she may be called a Spare hawke / for of all the hawkys that
there be she is most spear: that is to say most tender to keep. For the
leest mysdyetynge and mys entendynge sleeth her.

Also she may be called a Spare hawke of sharpness of her courage: and of her
lokyng quyckly / and also of her fleenge. For she is most asper and sharp in
all thing that belong unto her of any other hawks.

She may also be called a Spare hawke for two reasons. one is she spares
goshawkes and tercelles both: such as ben in their soore aege unto time they
may be reclaymyd and made ready to fle. As goshawkes and tercelles that been not
fully mewed: unto time they may be clean ensayned and ready to fle. For all the
while they ben unable: the spare hawke ocupyeth the season / and sleeth
pertriche well. that is to say from saint Margarytes day unto it be Lammas.
and so forth in the year.

And she woll sle well young fesauntes: young heth cocks in the beginning of
the year. And after Myghelmas when pertriche pass their danger: I have seen
them made some to slay the pie: some to slay the teele upon the river at the
Iutty: some to slay the wodcocke: and some for ye black bird and the thrusshe

The wodcocke is combrous to slay but if there be craft. The refore when ye
come to a wood or a queche of busshes: cast your spare hawke in to a tree and
beat the busshes then^e. and if any woodcok arise she woll be sure thereof. Ye
must first make her to a foul cast up out of the busshes / and your hawke
must sytte on lofte as ye make her to a pertriche.

Also as I said ye may call her a Spare hawke for a another cause / For and
there were a ship fraught full of hawks and no thing else: and there were
a spare hawke among them: there should no custume be paid by cause of her.
And so for the most common name they ben called Spare hawks for the resons
aforsayd.

An hawke flees to the Vewe: to the Beke: or to the Toll (Nota (Crepe: Querre
Fer Iutty. etc.
AN hawke flees to the river diverse ways / and sleeth ye foul dyuersly. That
is to say: she flees to ye Vewe or to the Beke: or to the Toll. And all is
but one: as ye shall know here after. She flees also to the Quarre: to the
Crepe / and no moo ways but those three. And she nymmeth the foul at the fer
Iutty or at the Iutty far.

Now shall ye know what these terms betoken and moo following. As Huff: Iutty
ferry Mount: Raundon: Crepe: ennewed.
A Goshawke or a tercell that shall fle to the Vewe: to the Toll: or to the
Beke in this manner she is taught.

Ye must find a foul in the river or in a pit preuely. and then set
your hawke a great space of upon a moll hill or on the ground / and crepe
softly toward the foul from your hawke streyghte way. And when ye come
almost there as the foul lies: look backewarde toward the hawke. And with
your hand or with your tabur stycke beck your hawke to come to you. And when
she is on wynge and comyth low by the ground and is almost at you. Then
smite your tabre and cry (Huff: Huff: Huff) and make the foul to spring. And
with that noise the foul woll rise: and the hawke woll nymme it.

And now take heed / If your hawke nymme the foul at the far side of the
river or of the pytte from you / then she sleeth the foul at the fer Iutty.
And if she sle it upon that side yt ye be on: as it may hap diverse times:
then ye shall say she has slayen the foul at the Iutty ferry.

If your hawke nymme the foul alofte: ye shall say she took it at the Mount
or at the Souce.

And if the foul spring not but flee a long after the river and thawke nym^
it: then^ ye shall say she slew it at the Raund on

Crepe
And your hawke flees at or to the Crepe when ye have your hawke on your
fyste and crepe sofly to the river or to the pytt and stelyth softly to the
brynke thereof: and then^e cry (Huff) and by that mean nym^e a foul: Then^ it
is slain at the Crepe other at the far Iutty: or at the Iutty ferry: as
above is said.

And if it hap as it does often times the foul for feere of your hawke woll
spring and fall again in to the river: or the hawke sees her / and so lie
still and dare not arise: Ye shall say then Your hawke has ennewed the
foul in to the river. And so ye shall say and there ben moo fowls in the
river then that your hawke nymmyth if they dare not arise for fere of your
hawke.

A theyf
Understand ye that a goshawke should not fle to any foul of the river with
belles in no wise. And therefore a goshawke is called a theyf.

Querre
And your hawke flees to the querre: when there ben in a stobyll time Sordes
of mallardes in the field. And when she espieth them and comyth couerte
herself: and fle preuely under hegges or low by the ground: and nymme one of
them or they rise: then ye shall say yt the foul was slain at the querre.

Mark this term Draw
Some folk mysuse this term Draw: and say that their hawke woll draw to
the river. And that term Draw is properly assignyd to that hawke that woll
sle a roke: or a crow: or a rauyn upon a land littynge. And then it must be
said that such an hawke woll Draw well to a roke.

Now ye shall understand if a man woll make an hawke to the querre: in this
manner he must do.
Take a tame malarde and set him in a fair plain: and let him goo where he
woll. Then take your hawke upon your fiste and goo to that plain: and hold
up your hand a praty way of from the malarde. And look if the hawke can^
espyrit by her own courage. And if she have found the foul and desire to fle
thereto: let her sle it / and plymme well upon her and serve her so two or
three times. And then she is made to the Quarre. I have known gentylmen that
when someuer and whersoeuer they se any tame duckes. And if their hawks would
desire to them. then they would let fle to them in couragyng their hawks
to be well fleenge to the quarre a another time

A praty craft to take an hawke that is broken out of mewe / and all manner of
fowls that sytte in trees if a man woll.

Look where an hawke perchyth for a night in ooy manner place / and soft and
leyserly clyme to her with a sconce or a lantern that has but one light in
your hand / and let the light be toward the hawke so that she se not your
face and ye may take her by the legs or other wise as ye list. And in like
wise all other manner fowls.

Of hawkys belles
THe bellys that your hawke shall were look in any wise that they be not to
heavy over her power to were. Also yt none be heuyer than a another but like of
weyghte. Look also that they ben sonowre and well soundynge and shyll: and not
both of one sown / but that one be a semytoyn under a another. and that they
be hole and not broken / and specially in the soundynge place. For and they be
broken they woll sown full dully.

Of spare hawks bellys there is choce and lityll of charge of them: for there
ben plente. But for goshawkes sometime bellys of Melayne were called the best.
And they ben full good. for they comynly are sounden with silver: and sold
thereafter. But there ben now vsyd of Duche land bellys: of a town called
Durdryght / and they ben passing good: For they ben well sortyd: well soundyd:
sonowre of ryngynge in shylnes. and passing well lasting.

Here ends the process of hawkyng: and now folowith the names of all manner
hawkys / and to whom they belong.
These hawks belong to an Emperor. THise ben ye names of all manner of
hawks / First an Egle. a Bawtere. a Melowne. ye symplest of thise three woll
slay an hynde calfe: a Fawn a Roo: a Kidde: an Elke: a Crane: a Bustarde: a
Storke: a Swan^: a fox in the playn^ ground. And these be not enlured ne
reclaymyd: by cause yt they ben so ponderous to the perch portatyf. And these
three by their nature belong unto an Emperor. These hawks belong unto a
king. A Gerfawkon: a Tercell of a Gerfawkon are dew to a king For a prince
There is a Fawkon gentle: and a Tercell gentle. And these be for a prince.
For a duke There is a Fawken of the rock: and that is for a duke. For an earl
There is a Fawken peregryne: and that is for an earl. For a baron Also there is
a Bastard: and that hawke is for a baron. Hawks for a knight There is a
Sacre and a Sacret: and these ben for a knight. Hawks for a Squire There is a
Ianare and a Lanrell: and these belong to a squyre For a lady There is a
Merlyon: and that hawke is for a lady. An hawke for a young man There is an
Hoby: and that hawke is for a young man. And these ben hawks of the toure /
and ben both illuryd to be called and reclaymyd.


And yet there ben mo kinds of hawks. There is a Goshawke / and that hawke is
for a yoman. There is a Tercell: and that is for a poor man. There is a Spare
hawke: and she is an hawke for a priest. There is a Muskyte: and he is for an
holy water clerk. And these ben of a another manner kind. For they fle to
Ouerre and to Far Iutty and to Iutty Ferry.

Explicit.
Like wise as in the book of hawkynge aforsayde are written and noted the termys
of playsure be longing to gentylmen: having delight therein. In the same manner
this book following shewyth: to such gentle persons the manner of hunting
for all manner of bestys / whether they ben bestys or Venery or or Chase or
Rascal. And also it shewith altermys conuenyent as well to the hounds as to
the beestys aforsayd. And in certain there ben many diverse of them: as is
declared in the book following.

Bestys of Venery.
WHere so ever ye fare by fryth or by fell:
My dear child take heed how Trystam do you tell.
How many manner bestys of venery there were:
Lysten to your dame and she shall you lere.
Four manner bestis of venere there are:
The first of them is the heart: the second is the hare.
The boore is one of tho: the wulfe and not one mo.
Bestys of the Chase
And where that ye come in plain or in place:
I shall you tell which ben bestys of enchace:
One of them is the bucke: a another is the do:
The fox and the marteron: and the wild roo.
And ye shall my dear child other bestys all:
Where so ye them find Rascal ye shall them call.
In fryth or in fell: or in the forest I you tell.
Note here the aege of an heart
And for to speak of the heart if ye woll it lere:
Ye shall him a Calfe call at the first year.
The second year a Broket so shall ye him call:
The third year a Spayad lernyth thus all.
The fourth year a Stagge call him by any way:
The fyfth year a great Stagge your dame bydde you say.
The syxte year call him an heart.
Does so my child whiles ye ben in quarte.
To know the heed of an Heart: and that is diverse.
And of the horny that he then beryth abowte.
The first heed shall be Iugyd without.
Therein fynden we such dyuersyte.
Netheles the syxt year evermore at the leest.
Thou shall well Judge the perch of the same be.
when he has auntelere without any let:
Ryall and suryall also there I set.
And that in the top so when ye may him ken:
Then ye shall call him forchyd an heart of ten.
And when he has in the top three of the selue:
Then ye shall call him trochyd an heart of twelve.
And afterward in the top when there four been:
Then shall ye call him sommyd an heart of syxtene.
And from four forward what so befall:
Be he never of so many ye shall him sommyd call.
Right of the nombre even that he is:
Callyth him from four sommyd Iwys.
Also have ye seele: an heart heeded we will /
An Herd. a Beue. a Sounder: a Rowte
My child callyth herdys of heart and of hynde:
And of bucke and of do where ye them find.
And a beue of rooes what place they ben.
And a sounder ye shall of the wild swyne:
And a rowte of wulues where they pass in /
So shall ye them call as many as they ben.
A Little herd. a Myddyll herd. a Great herd.
Twenty is a little herd though it be of hyndys:
And three score is a myddyll herd to call hem by kyndis.
And four score is a great herd call ye them so:
Be it heart be it hynde bucke or else do.
How ye shall say a Great heart: and not a Fair and other
A great heart when ye him se so shall ye him call:
But never a fair heart for no thing that may be fall.
A great hynde a great bucke and a fair do:
My sons where ye walk call ye them so.
So ye should name such dear: and do as I you lere /
What is a Beuy of rooes great or small.
And six is a beuy of rooes on a row:
And ten is a myddyll beuy full well I it know.
A great beuy is twelve when they together be:
And so call them sons where that ye them se.
The more nombre than ywys: the gretter the beuy is.
What is a Sounder of swyne great or small
Twelve make a sounder of the wild swyne:
^vi. a medyll sounder what place they ben in.
A great sourde of swyne.xx. ye shall call.
Forgete not this lesson for no thing that may befall.
Think what I say: my sone night and day.
Of the Roo hunting: brekynge and dressynge.
When ye hunte at the roo then^ ye shall say thore:
He crossyeth and tresonyth your hondes before:
A great roo bucke ye call him not so:
But a fair roo bucke and a fair do.
With the bowellys and with the blood:
Reward ye your hounds my sons so good.
And each foot ye shall kytte in four I you kenne:
Take the bowelles and the blood and do all together then.
Yeuyth it then to your hounds so:
And much the gladder then they woll goo.
That to your hounds a reward is named:
For it is eten on the ground and on the skin dealyd.
The roo shall be herdelyd by venery I wene.
The two forther legs the heed laid between.
And take one hinder leg up I you pray:
And that other forder leg right as I you say:
Upon that other forder leg both ye them pytte:
And with that other forther leg up ye them knytte.
On this manner thus when ye have wrought:
All hole to the kechyn then^ it shall be brought.
Save that your hounds ete: the bowelles and the fete.
Now of the aege and vndaynge of the boore
Now to speak of the boore the first year he is:
A pygge of the sounder called as have I blys.
The second year an hog and so shall he be:
And an hoggestere when he is of years three.
And when he is of four year a boore shall he be:
From the sounder of the swyne then departyth he.
A synguler is he so* for alone he woll goo.
when ye have slain the boore and woll do him right:
Ye shall undo him vnflayne when he shall be dyght.
Thyrty bredys and two of him ye shall make:
By the law of venery I dare undertake.
Through your houndys by strength if that he be deed:
They shall have the bowelles boyllyd with the bread.
Cast upon the ground there the boore was slain:
And that is called a reward so hunters it said.
Upon the earth so have I blys: for that so eten is.
Now of the haare
Now for to speak or the haare my sons sykerly:
That be king shall be called of all venery.
For all the fair speaking and blowynge that is their:
Comyth of sechynge and finding of the hare.
For my leyf chyldern I take it on hand:
He is the merueyllou^t be that is in any land.
For he fymayeth and crotyth and roungeth ever more:
And beeryth talowe and grees: and above teeth has be fore
And other while he is male: and so ye shall him find:
And other while female and kyndlyth by kind.
And when he is female and kyndlyth him within:
In three degrees he them beryth or he with them twyn^.
Two rough and two smothe who woll them se:
And two knottys also that kyndelys will be.
when he is female: so tell I my tale.
The reward for hounds
when your hounds by strength have done her to deed:
The hunter shall reward them with the heed.
with the sholders and the sides and with the bowelles all:
And all thing within the womb save oonly the gall.
The paunche also: give them none of tho.
which reward when on the earth it is dealyd:
with all good hunters the (Halow) it is named.
Then the loins of the haare look ye not forgete:
But bring them to the kechyn for the lords mete.
And of this said be to trete: here it shall be let.
which beestes shall be flayne and which strypte.
Now to speak of the beestes when they ben slain:
How many be strypte and how many be flayne.
All that beer skin and talowe and rounge leave me:
Shall be flayne sauf the hare for he shall strypte be.
And all that beryth grees: and pyles thereupon:
Ever shall be strypte when they ben undone.
On this manner play* thus ye shall say.
which bestys shall be reryd with the Lymer.
My dear sons echoon now woll I you lere:
How many manner beestys as with the lymere.
Shall be vpreryd in fryth or in field:
Both the heart and the bucke and the boore so wild.
And all other bestes that huntyd shall be:
Shall be sought and found with Ratches so fre.
Say thus I you told: my chyldern so bold.
The dyseryuynge of a bucke
And ye speak of ye bucke the first year he is:
A fawn soukynge on his dame say as I you wys:
The second year a Prycket the third year a Sowrell:
A Sour at the fourth year the troth I you tell.
The fyfth year call him a Bucke of the first head.
The syxte year call him a Bucke and do as I you read.
Of the hornys of a bucke
The horns of a great bucke or he so be:
Must be su^monyd as I say herkenyth to me.
Two branches first pawmyd he must have:
And four auauncers the soth if ye woll save.
And.xxiiij. espelers and then ye may him call:
where so ye be a great bucke I tell you all.
Of the Roobucke
And if ye of the roobucke woll know the same:
The first year he is a kydde soukynge on his dame.
The second year he is a gerle: and so ben such all:
The third year an hemule look ye him call.
Roobucke of the first heed he is at the fourth year:
The fyfth year a Roobucke him call I you lere.
At saint Andrews day his horns he woll cast:
In moore or in most he hydyth them fast.
So that no man may them soon find:
Else in certain he does not his kind.
At saint Iamys day where so he goo:
Then shall the roobucke gendre with the roo.
And so boldly there as ye soionrne:
Then^ he is called a roobucke gooynge in his turn.
And if ye may a roobucke slay without any fail:
And ye find that heavy greece at his tail.
As some roobuckes have when ye it find:
Then^ shall ye rere it as ye do of heart and of hynde.
Also the roobucke as it is well kyde:
At holy Roode day he gooth to ride.
And vsyth the byt: when he may get it.
Now of the heart and of the hynde
Sons of the heart and the hynde learn yet ye may:
There they draw to the herd at holy Rode day.
To the stepe then^ they goon: each hot day at noon^.
which stepe they use my chyldern I you say:
Till it be Mydsomer at the least way.
The cause of the stepe is to keep him fro the fly:
who so comyth to that place may it well spy.
A another thing they use my child also:
The same season of the year to soil to go.
Of the cryenge of these bestys
An heart belowyth and a bucke groynyth I find:
And each roobucke certain bellyth by kind.
The noise of these bestys thus ye shall call:
For pride of their make they use it all.
Say child where ye goo: your dame taught you so.
Merke well these seasons following.
Time of greece begynnyth at Mydsomer day:
And till holy Rode day lastyth as I you say.
The season of the fox fro the Natyuyte:
Till the Annuncyaco^n of our lady free.
Season of the roobucke at Ester shall begin:
And till Myghelmas lastyth night or she blynne.
The season of the roo begynnyth at Myghelmas:
And it shall endure and last until Candylmas.
At Myghelmas begynnyth hunting of the haare:
And lastyth till Mydsomer there will no man it spare.
The season of the wulfe is in each country:
At the season of the fox and ever more shall be.
The season of the boore is from the Natyuyte:
Till the puryficaco^n of our lady so fre.
For at the Natyuyte of our lady sweet:
He may find where he gooth under his fete.
Both in wodes and feldes corn and other fruit:
when he after food makyth any suit.
Crabbes and oak corns and nottes there they grow:
Hawys and hepes and other things ynow.
That till the Puryfycaco^n lastyth as ye se:
And makyth the boore in season to be.
For while that fruit may last: his time is never paste.
Of the hunting of the haare
NOw to speak of the haare how all shall be wrought:
when she shall with hounds be founden and sought.
The first word to the hou^des yt the hunte shall out pit
Is at the kenell door when he openyth it.
That all may him here: he shall say ( Arere)
For his wounds would come to hastily:
That is the first word my sone of venery.
And when he has couplyd his hounds echoon:
And is forth with them to the field goon.
And when he has of cast his couples at will:
Then shall he speak and say his hounds till.
( Horse de couple auaunt se auaunt) twyse so:
And then ( So ho so ho) thryes and no moo.
And then^ say ( Sa cy auaunt So ho) I thou pray.
And if ye se your hounds have good will to run:
And draw awaywarde fro you say as I you kenne.
( H^rt how amy) again them call so:
Then^ Sweff mon amy sweft) to make them soft thoo.
And if any find of the haare there he has goo:
And he hight Richard or Bemounde to him cry so.
Dies a Bemounde le vaillant and I shall you auowe:
Que quida trou^ la cowarde on la court cow.
That Bemounde the worthy without any fail:
That wenyth to find the cowarde with the short tail.
And if ye se where the haare at pasture has been:
If it be in the time of the corn grene.
And if your hounds chase well at your will:
Then^ three motes shall ye blow both loud and shyll.
There one and there a another there he pasturyd has:
Then^ say (Illoques illoques) in the same path.
So say to them in kind: unto time that ye her find.
And then^ cast a sign all the field abowte:
To se at her pasture where she has be in or owte.
Other at her form for gladly to be she is not not lefe:
There she has pasturyd in time of relefe.
And any hounde find or musing of her mace:
There as she has be and is goon out of that place.
(Ha cy touz cy est ill) so shall ye say:
(Venez arer so how sa (also loud as ye may.
(Sa cy ad est so how) after that:
(Sa sa cy auaunt and thereof be not lat.
And when ye se unto the plain her at the last:
In field or in erable land or in to the wood paste.
And your hounde woll find of her there then^:
Say (La douce amy la est a) and do as I you ken^.
That is to say: sweet friend there is he come low:
For to dry here. and therwyth ye shall say (So how).
(Illoques ey douce ey vayllaunt so how so how then^ twyse
Thus may ye now dear sons learn of veneryce.
And when ye come there as ye trow he woll dwell:
And so semyth to you well: then^ say as I you tell.
(La douce la est a venuz) for to dwell thore:
And therwyth thryes (So how (say ye no more.
And if it semyth well you to find all in fere:
And wene so to do then^ say Douce how here how here)
(How here douce how here how here) he syttyth:
So shall ye say my children and for no chynge lettyth.
All manner beestes that ever chacyd be:
Have one manner of word (So how) I tell the.
To fulfill or vnfyll each manner of chaas:
The hunte ever more in his mouth that word he haas.
And if your hounds at a chase run there ye hunte:
And the beast begyn^ to run as hearts ben wont.
Or for to hanylon as does the fox with his gyle:
Or for to cross as the roo does otherwhyle.
Other dwell so: that your hounds can not out goo
Then^ shall ye say (Hoo sa amy sa la)
(A couples la arere so how) such is the play:
And (So how) as much is as (Sa how) to say.
But for (So how) is short in speech when it is brought:
Therefore say we (So how (but Sa how)) ^aye we naught.
And if your hounds chase at heart or at the hare:
And they run at defawte thus ye shall there tare.
(I cy so how assayne assayne stou hoho)
(Sa assayne arere so how) these words and no moo.
And if your hounds run well at fox or at do:
And so faylle at defawte say thus ferder or ye goo.
(Ho ho ore swef aluy douce a luy) that they here:
(Ho hoy assayne assayne sa arere)
So how so how venez a coupler / and do as I you ken^:
The more worship may ye have among all men.
Your crafts let not be hid: and do as I you bydde.
All my sons in same: and thus may ye know of game:
The boste that the master hunter makyth to his man now here following ye may
here.
THe master to the man makyth his boste:
That he knowyth by kind what the heart cost.
At hunting evermore when he gooth.
Quod the man to his master that were good lore:
For to know what he does the hounds before.
what does he quod the master to the man.
He does quod he even as thou may se:
((...)) and so does no be but he.
when brekyth he quod the man what is that to say:
with his fete he opens the earth there he gooth away.
what is the cause quod the man master I the pray:
That the heart before the hounds when they him hunte aye,
That then to the river he wyllyth for to goo:
Quod the master to the man there are causes two.
For two (...) the heart desires to the river. And ^o^e w^^ ^^y^^e terms
following Descend and other.
Oone cause for the river Descend he is ay:
And so he is to the water when he takyth the way.
why callyst thou him ( Descend) master I the pray:
For he peyryth of his might the sothe I the say.
A another is to the water why he gooth other while:
The hounds that him sewen to purpose to begyle.
Yet of this heart quod his man master I would ken^:
In to the water when he lepyth what he makyth then^.
He proferyth quod the master and so ye shall say:
For he wot not himself yet how he woll away.
whether over the water he woll forpas.
Or torn again the same way there he first was.
Therefore it is ( Profce) as these hunters said.
And ( Reprofce) if the same way he torn again.
At that other side of the water if he up sterte:
Then^ shall ye call it the ( Soul) of the heart.
And that is for the water of his legs wete:
Down in to the steps there fallen of his fete.
Again the water his way even if he hent:
Then^ brekyth he water thereto take you tent.
And if with the water goo algate you it shall:
( Defoulaunt) the water an heart so him call.
Now of the Nomblys merke well the terms.
The man to his master spekyth full blyth:
Of the nombles of the heart that he would him hyth.
How many ends there shall be them wythinne:
Quod the master but one thycke nor thynne.
And that is but the (Gargylyon) to speak of all by dene:
And all thise other (Crokes) and (Roundelles) been.
The Auauncers. the Forchers.
Yet would I wit and thou would me lere
The crokes and the roundelles of the nombles of the dear.
One croke of the nombles lies evermore:
Under the throat bolle of the beast before.
That called is ( Auauncers) who so can them ken^:
And the hyndermest part of the nombles then^.
That is to say the ( Forchers) that lain even between:
The two thyes of the best that other crokys euene.
In the mydref that called is the roundell also:
For the sides round abowte coruen it is fro.
My dear sons bold: say of game I thus you told.
Yet would I wit master why these hounds all:
Bayen and cryen when they him seche shall.
For they would have help that is their skyll:
For to slay the beast that they run till.
Tell me master quod the man what is the skyll:
why the haare would so feign run against the hill.
Quod the master for her legs be shorter before:
Than behind that is the skyll thore.
what is the cause quod the man that men^ say of that best:
That the haare syttyth ay when she takyth her rest.
And other bestes lie as comynly men said:
For two causes quod the master I tell the plain.
One is for she hurclys upon her houghes ay:
And all other bestes can the side to the groude lay.
A another cause there is and that is no lees:
For she beeryth both sewet and pure grees.
Yet would I master quod the man feign wit more:
where lies the suet of the hare behind or before.
Over the loyne quod the master of each hare thou take:
Bytwyxe the tail and the chynne even on the back.
Yet would I master quod the man these at the lere:
when thou walk in the field with thy lymere.
There as an heart pasturyd has or that thou him se:
To know fat or lene whether that he be.
I can quod the master well tell the this caas:
wait well where he lay: and where he fumeyed haas.
Yolowe and englaymyd if that it be:
Then^ he is fat I the tell learn these of me.
And if it be both black and hard and clean:
Then^ he is meegre larbre and lene.
And of this same thing if thou leave not me:
Take heed in the winter and then thou may it se.
Yet master of the hare feign would I wit more:
what he does when he gooth the hounds before.
He Sorth and Resorth there he gooth away:
Pryckyth and Repryckyth the soth for to say.
But what is that quod the man when they so done:
That shall I quod the master tell the full soon.
In the feldes where he gooth no ways ben:
There he sorth when he steppyth and it may not be seen.
And after when he dowblyth and tornyth again:
Then^ he resorth as good hunters said.
And when he rennyth in the way dry or wete:
Then men may find Fostalx of clees or of fete.
That Pryckyth the hare ay when he does so:
And Repryckyth then if he again goo.
A Vauntelay. a Lay. and a Relaye.
Master yet quod the man what is this to say
That shall I tell the quod he: for a little byzete:
when the hounds are set an heart for to mete.
And other him chasen and folowen to take:
Then^ all the (Relays) thou may upon them make.
Even at his coming if thou let thy hounds go:
while the other that be behind far arn^ him fro.
That is (Auauntelay) and so thou shall it call:
For they are then^ far before those other hounds all.
And an hyndrynge great all other until:
For they may not that day no more sewe at will.
And hold thy hounds still if that thou so do:
Till all the hounds that be behind be come thereunto.
Then^ let thy hounds al together goo:
That called is an (Allay) and look thou say so.
And that hyndrynge is yet to them that been behind:
For the restyd woll ouergoo the weary by kind.
A Relay is after when the hounds are post:
Far before with the heart that hyeth them fast.
To let thy hounds far after them goon:
And that is then a fortherynge to them echoon.
For and thyn hounds have overtake these other by dystres:
Then^ shall they all follow him of one swyfnes.
what is a forloynge.
Yet master would I feign thus at you lere:
what is a forloynge for that is good to here.
That shall I say the quod he the soth at leest:
when thy hounds in the wood seche any be.
And the beast is stoll away out of the fryth:
Or the hounds yt thou haste meten therwyth.
And any other hounds before: than may with them mete:
These other hounds are then^ forloynyd I the hete.
For the beast and the hounds are so far before:
And the hounds behind ben weary and sore.
So that they may not at the beast come at their will
The hounds before forloyne them and that is the skyll.
They ben ay so far before to me if thou wylt trust:
And this is the forloyne lere it if thou lust.
which three things causyth the hounds to endure.
Yet would I wit master if it were thy will:
when thy hounds run an heart until.
And ay the ferder they goo the gladder they ben:
For three causes quod he often times is sen^.
One is when the heart rennyth fast on a rees:
He swetyth that it renneth down through out his clees.
The hounds when they find of that it is sweet:
Then are they lever to run and lother to let.
A another cause when the heart nigh no more may:
Then^ woll he white froth cast there he gooth away.
when thy hounds find of that then^ are they glad:
In hope they shall him have and run so radde.
The third cause is of the heart when he is nyghe deed:
Then^ he castyth out of his mouth froth and blood read.
The hounds know that he shall be take soon then:
And ever the ferder they goo the gladder they run.
These are the causes three: that causyth them glad to be:
which be a slow hounde takyth as soon as a swyft
what be yet master I axe it for none ill:
That most hoole all hounds run until.
And also soon the slowest shall him over take.
As the swyftyst shall do what way so ever he take.
That be a bausyn hight: a brok or a graye:
These three names he has the soth for to say.
And this is cause thereof: for he woll by kind:
Go through thorns away the thyckest he may find.
There as the swyftest hounds may no ferder go:
Then^ the slowest of foot be he never so through.
why the haare Fumays and Croteys
Yet master would I wit why that men sayn:
That the haare fumays and croteys both plain.
And all other manner bestes that huntyd be:
Femyon^ or Fenon^ as we well it se.
That shall I well tell the quod the master then:
For why that he fumays and croteys well I kenne.
He femayth for he beryth talowe this is no lees:
And he croteys men sayen for he beryth no grees.
And roukys on his houghes when he lettyth it goo:
And bestes of such kind find we no moo.
How many bestes Femayen^ master feign I would lere:
And how many Fenon^ that were good to here.
All this to tell quod the master I hold it but light:
All bestes that beer talowe and stand vpryght.
Femayen^ when they do say as I the kenne:
And all other Fenon^ that rowken down then.
How many manner bestys of Venery releue
How many manner beestys yet master me tell
Of venery releuen by fryth or by fell.
To this quod the master I shall the answare:
Of all bestys but two the heart and the hare.
From the Annunciaco^n of our lady day:
The heart then^ releuyth the sothe for to say.
Till saint Peter's day and Poul and the hare right:
From the Puryfycaco^n of our lady bright.
Till the Translaco^n releuyth leave ye me:
Of saint Thomas tide of Caunterbure.
To undo the wild boore.
Yet my child of the boore for to speak more:
when he shall be undone I tell you before.
Two and thyrty bredes ye shall of him make:
Now will you my sons wit where ye shall them take.
The first of them is the heed what ever befall:
A another is the colere and so ye shall it call.
The sheldes on the sholders thereof shall two be:
Then either side of the swyne departed in three.
The pestelles and the gambons depart them two:
And two felettes he has forgete not tho.
Then take his legs and his fete and show your sleyght:
For they shall of his bredes be countyd for eight.
Depart the chyne in four pieces and no mo:
And take there your bredes thyrty and two.
And fair put the greece when it is take away:
In the bledder of the boore my child I you pray.
For it is a medycyne: for many manner pyne.
How ye shall break an heart
And for to speak of the heart while we think on:
My child first ye shall him serve when he shall be vndon^:
And that is for to say or ever ye him dyght:
within his horns to lay him vpryght.
At thessay kytte him that lords may se:
Anon fat or lene whether that he be.
Then^ kytte of the coddes the belly even fro:
Or ye begyn^ him to flee: and then shall ye go.
At chaulys to begin as soon as ye may:
And slytte him down even to thassaye.
And fro the assaye even down to the bele shall ye slytte:
To the pyssyll there the codde was away kytte.
Then^ slytte the lift leg even first before:
And then^ the lift leg behind or ye do more.
And these other legs upon the right side:
Upon the same manner slytte ye that tide.
To goo to the chekes look that ye be pressed:
And so flee him down even to the breast.
And so flee him forth right unto thessay:
Even to the place where the codde was kytte away.
Then flee the same wise all that other side:
But let the taylle of the beast still thereon bide.
Then^ shall ye him undo my child I you read:
Right upon his own skin and lay it on bread.
Take heed of the kyttynge of the same dear:
And begyn^ first to make the Erbere.
Then^ take out the sholders: and slyttyth anon:
The belly to the side from the corbyn bone.
That is corbyns fee: at the death he woll be:
Then^ take out the sewett that it be not lafte:
For that my child is good for leche craft.
Then^ put thyn hand loftly under the breast bone:
And there shall ye take out therber anon.
Then^ put out the paunche / and from the paunche taas:
Away lightly the Rate such as he haas.
Hoole it with a fyngre. do as I you ken^:
And with the blood and the greece fill it then^.
Look threde that ye have and nedyll thereto:
For to sewe it with all or ye more do.
The small guts then^ ye shall out pyt:
From them take the mawe: for yete not it.
Then^ take out the liver and lay it on the skin:
And after that the bledder without more dynne.
Then^ dress the nombles: first that ye recke:
Down the anauncers kerue that cleuyth to the neck.
And down with the bolthrote put them anon:
And kerue up the flesh there up to the hach bone.
And so forth the fyllittes that ye up arere:
That fallyth to the nombles: and shall be there.
with the nerys also and sewit that there is:
Even to the mydryf that upon him is.
Then^ take down the mydryf from the sides hot:
And have up the nombles hole by the bolle throat.
In thyn hand then them hold. and look and se:
That all that longyth them to: together that they be.
Then^ take them to thy brother to hold for tryst:
whiles thou them dowblest and dress as the list.
Then^ away the lyghtis / and on the skin them lay:
To abide the querre my child I you pray.
Then^ shall ye slytte the slough there as the heart lies:
And take away the here is from it and by slyeth.
For such heeres has his heart: ay it upon:
As men may se in the beast when he is undone.
And in the mids of the heart a bone shall ye find:
Look ye give it to a lord. and child be kind.
For it is kind for many maladies:
And in the mids of the heart ever more it lies.
Then^ shall ye kytte the skyrtes the teeth even fro:
And after the ragge boon kyttyth even also.
The forchis: and the sides even between:
And look that your knyues ay whettyd been:
Then^ turn up the forchis. and frote them with blood:
For to save the greece. so do men of good.
Then^ shall ye kytte the neck the sides even fro:
And the heed fro the neck kyttyth also.
The tongue the brain the paunche and the neck:
when they wasshe ben well with water of the beck.
The small guts to the lyghtis in the derys:
Above the heart of the beast when thou them rerys.
with all the blood that ye may get and win:
All together shall be take. and laid on the skin.
To give your hounds. that called is ywys:
The quyrre. above the skin for it eten is.
And who dressyth him so by my counsel:
Shall have the left sholder for his travail.
And the right sholder where so ever he be.
Yeuyth to the foster for that is his fee.
And the liver also of the same be:
To the fosters knave yeuyth at the leest.
The nombles trust in the skin. and hardyll them fast:
The sides and the forches together that they last.
with the hinder legs. be done so it shall:
Then^ bring it home. and the skin with all.
The nombles. and the horns. at the lordis yate:
Then^ boldly blow the price. there ate.
Your play for to mynne: or that ye come inn.
Explicit dame Iulyans Bernes doctrine in her book of hunting.
Bestys of the chase of the sweet fewte and stynkynge
THere ben beestis of the chase: of the sweet fewte. And tho ben the Bucke: the
Do: the Beer: the Reynder: the Elke: the Spyccarde: the Orre: and the
Martron. There ben bestys of the chase of the stynkynge fewte / And they ben
the Roobucke: and the Roo: the Fulmarde: the Fyches the Bawd. the Graye: the
Fox the Squyrell: the whytrat: the Sot: and the Pulcatte.

The names of diverse manner hounds
These ben the names of hounds. First there is a Grehouna Bastard: a
Mengrell: a Mastif: a Lemor: a Spanyel: Raches Kenettys: Teroures: Butchers
hounds: Dunghyll dogs: Tryndeltaylles: and Pryckeryd currys: and small
ladies popees that bear away the flees and diverse small fawtes.

The propritees of a good Grehounde.
A grehounde should be heeded like a snake: and neckyd like a drake: fotyd like
a catte / tayllyd like a ratte: syded like a teme: and chynyd like a beme. The
first year he must learn to feed. The second year to field him led. The
third year he is fellow like. The fourth year there is none syke. The fyfth
year he is good enough. The syxte year he shall hold the plough. The seventh
year he woll auaylle: great bytches for to assaylle. The eyghte year
lyckeladyll. The nynthe year cartsadyll. And when he is common to that year:
have him to the Tannere. For the best hounde that ever bytche had: at nynthe
year he is full badde.

The proprytees of a good horse.
A Good horse should have.xv. proprytees and condyco^ns. That is to wit. three
of a man. three of a woman. three of a fox. three of an hare: and three of an
ass. Of a man: bold: proud: and hardy. Of a woman: fair brested: fair of
here: and easy to lip upon Of a fox: a fair taylle: short eeres with a
good trotte. Of an haare: a great eye: a dry heed: and well rennynge. Of an
ass: a bygge chyn^: a flat leg: and a good houe.
Well trauelyd wym^en nor well trauelid horse were never good

Arise erly / serve god deuowtly: and the world besily. Do thy work wisely /
give thyn^ alms secretly: goo by the way sadly. Ansuere the people demurely
/ goo to thy meet appetydely. Sytte thereat dyscretly / of thy tongue be not to
lyberally: arise therfrom temperatly. Goo to thy souper sobrely / and to thy
bed merely: be in thine Inn Iocundly. Please thy lone duly / and sleep surely.

Merke well these four things
There ben four things pryncypally to be dradde of every wise man. The first
is the curse of our holy fader the pope. The second is thyndignaco^n of a
prince (Quia indignaco^ regis vell principis mors est) The third is the favor
or the will of a Judge. The fourth is sclaunder and the mutaco^n of a comynalte.

Who that makyth in Crystmas a dog ^o his larder:
And in March a sow to his gardyner.
And in May a fool of a wise mannys counsel:
He shall never have good larder. fair gardyne / nor well kept counsel.
Far from thy kynnesmen cast the:
wrath not thy neighbors next In a good corn^ country threste the
And sytte down Robyn and rest the.
who that buyldeth his house all of salowes:
And pryckyth a blind horse over the falowes.
And suffryth his wife to seek many halowes.
God send him the bliss of everlasting galowes.
If these be not dyrectyd then goo they at adventure.
There ben four things full hard for to knawe:
which way that they woll draw.
The first is the ways of a young man:
The second the course of a vessel in the sea.
The third of an adder or of a serpent sprent.
The fourth of a foul sitting on any thing.
Two wives in one house, two cattys and one mons:
Two dogs and one bone / these shall never acorde in one.
who that mannyth him with his kynne:
And closyth his crofte with cherytrees:
Shall have many hegges brokynne.
And also full little good seruyes.
The companyes of bestys and fowls
AN Herd of hartys an Herd of all manner dear an Herd of swannnys an Herd
of cranys an Herd of corlewys an Herd of wrennys an Herd of harlottys. a Nigh
of fesauntys a Beuy of ladies a Beuy of roes a Beuy of quayles a Sege of herons
a Sege of bytourys a Sorde or a suit of malardis a Mustre of pecockys a walk
of snytes a Congregaco^n of people an Exalting of larkys a watch of
nyghtyngalys an host of men a Felyshyppynge of yomen a Cherme of goldfynches a
Cast of breed a Couple or a payr of botellis a Flyghte of douues an Unkindness
of ravens a Claterynge of choughes a Dyssymulaco^n of birds a Rowte of
knights a Pride of Lions a Slewthe of beerys a Cete of grayes a Bery of conyes
a Riches of martrones a Business of ferettes a Brace of grehoundes of two a
Lece of grehoundes of three a Cowple of spanellys a Couple of rennynge hounds a
Lytter of whelpys a Kyndyll of young cattys a Synguler of boores a Dryfte of
tame swyne an Harrasse of horse. a Ragge of coltys or a Rake a Baren of malys a
Tryppe of get a Tryppe of haarys a Gagle of geys a Broad of hennys a Badelynge
of dokys a Noonpacyens of wives a Scate of princes a Thongh of barons a
Prudence of vycaryes a Superfluyte of nonnys a Scole of clerks a Doctrine of
doctors a Converting of prechers a Sentence of Iuges a Dampnynge of Iuryours
a Dylygence of messengers an Obeyssaunce of seruauntis a Cete of vssherys a
Draught of Buttelers a Proud showing of taylers a Temperaunce of cokys a
Stalk of fosters a Boste of sadyours a Laughtre of ostelers a Glosynge of
tauerners a Malepertnesse of pedlers a Thraue of throsshers a Squatte of
dawbers a Fighting of beggars an Untruth of sompners a Melody of harpers a
Pouuerty of pypers a Subtyltee of sergauntes a Tabernacle of bakers a Dryfte of
fysshers a Disgysynge of tayllours a Bleche of sowters a Smere of coryours a
Clustre of grapys a Clustre of chorlys a Rage of maidens a Rafull of knaves a
Blusshe of boys an Vncredybylyte of cocoldes a Couy of pertryches a Spring of
telys a Desserte of lapwynges a Fall of wodcockes a Congregaco^n of plouers a
Couerte of cootes a Duel of turtylles a Tygendis of pyes an Oost of sparowes a
Swarm of bees a Cast of hawkis of ye toure.ij. a Lece of the same hawkys.iij.
a Flight of goshawkys a Flight of swalowes a building of rokys a Murmuraco^n
of stares a Rowte of wulues a Lepe of leberdes a Shrewdenes of apys a Skulke of
theuys a Skulke of foxes a Nest of rabettys a Labor of mollys a Mute of houndys
a Kenell of rachys a Suit of a lyam a Cowardnes of currys a Sourde of wild
swyne a Stood of maarys a Pase of asses a Drove of nete a Flock of sheep a
Gagle of wymen a Pepe of chekyns a Multyplyeng of husbondes a Pontifycalyre of
prelates a Dygnyte of chanons a Charge of curates a Dyscreco^n of prestys a
Sculle of frerys a bomynable sight of monks a Scoll of fysshe an Example of
masters an Obseruans of heremytes an Eloquens of laweyers an Execuco^n of
officers a Faith of marchauntis a prouysion of steward of house a Kerff of
panteres a Credens of seweris an Vnbrewynge of keruers a Saufgarde of porters a
Blaste of hunters a Thretenynge of courteyers a Promise of tapsters a Lyenge of
pardoners a Mysbyleue of paynters a Lasshe of carters a Scolding of kempters a
wondering of Tynkers a waywardnes of haywardes a worship of writers a
Neuerthri^uyng of Iogolers a Fraunch of myllers a Feast of bruers a Gorynge of
bouchers a Trynket of coruesers a Plocke of shoturners a Dronkenshyp of Cobblers
a Sculke of foxes a Clustre of nottes A rage of the teeth a Rascal of boys a
Dysworshyp of scotts
Explicit
Here follow the dew termys to speak of brekynge or dressynge of diverse
beestys and fowls. etc. And the same is showed of certain fysshes
A Dear broken a Gose reryd a Pygge hedyd and sided a Capon sawsyd a Chekyn
frusshyd a Cony vnlacyd a Crane dysplayed a Curlewe vnioyntyd a Fesaunt alet a
Quayle wynggyd a Plouer mynsyd a Pegeon thyghed Brawne leechyd a Swanne lift a
Lamb sholderyd a Kydde sholderyd an hen spoyllyd a Malarde vnbracyd an Heron
dysmembryd a Pecock dysfygured a Byttoure vntachyd a Partryche alet a Raale
brestyd a wodcocke thyghed an Egg tyryd a Fire tymberyd Now of fysshes A Samon
chynyd a Pyke splattyd an Hadoke sydyd a Cheuen fynnyd a Sole loynyd a Gurnarde
chynyd a Tenche sawcyd an Ele trousonyd a Breme splayed a Barbyll tuskyd a
Trought gobettyd Ye shall say thus An Heart herbouryth a Bucke lodgyth an
Esquyre lodgyth a Roo beddyth a Yoman beddyth an haare in her form should
ring or lenynge a Cony sitting a wodcocke brekynge
HEre now following shall be showed all the shyres and the bysshopryches of the
realm of England. And ye shall understand yt the shyres ben written before /
and the bishop riches of the same are written following next after. and then
afterward are showed the prouynces of this land.

Kent) Canterbury) Rochestre Southsex) Chychestre Haampshyre) Surrey)
wynchestre. Wylteshyre) Barkeshyre) Salisbury. Somersete shyre) Dorset shyre)
Bathe. Deuen shyre) Cornewayle) Exastur. Essex) Myddylsex) London. Northfolke)
Southfolke) Norwyche. Cambrydgeshyre) Ely. Laycetre) Huntyngdon) Northampton)
Hertforde) Bedford Bokyngham) Oxenforde) Lyncoln^) Lyncoln^.

Gloucetre) worcetre) wygorn^. Herfordshyre) Herdforde. Chesshyre) Shropshyre)
part of Lancasshyre) Chestre. Yorkeshyre) Stafforde shyre) Darbyshyre)
Notynghamshyre. and other as part of) Lancastreshyre) York.

Prouynces of England.
Caunterbury: York: Stafforde: Derby: Notyngham: Northumbrelonde: Durham:
westmerlonde: Tyndale: Karlyle.

A Faithful friend would I feign find
To find him there. he might be found
But now is the world. wext so unkind
y^ frenship is fall. to the ground (Now a friend I have found
That I woll another. banne ne curse
But of all friends. in field or town
Ever gramercy. mine own purse
My purse it is. my preuy wife
This song I dare. both sing and say
It partyth men. of much strife
when every man. for himself shall pay (As I ride in rich array
For gold and silver. men woll me flouryssh
By this matere. I dare well say
Ever gramercy. mine own purse
As I ride with gold so read
And have to do. with londys law
Men for my money. woll make me speed
And for my goods. they woll me knawe
More and less. to me woll draw
Both the better. and the wurse
By this matere. I say in saw
Ever gramercy. mine own purse
It fell by me. upon a time. As it has do by many one mo
My horse my nete. my sheep my swyne
And all my goods. they fell me fro
I went to my friends and told them so
And home again. they badde me trusse
I said again. when I was woe
Ever gramercy. mine own pursse
Therefore I read you. syres all
To assaye your friends. or ye have need
For and ye come down and have a fall
Full few of them. for you woll grede
Therefore. assaye them euerychane
Both the better and the wurse
Our lord that shope. both son and moan
Send us spending. in our purse
AMEN
HEre in this book following is determined the lygnage of Cote armures: and how
gentylmen shall be known from vngentylmen. And how bondage began first in
angel and after succeeded in mankind. as it is showed in process both in the
children of Adam and also of Noe. And how Noe dyuyded the world in three
parties to his three sons. Also there ben showed the.ix. colors in arms
figuryd by the.ix. orders of angels. And it is showed by the forsayde colors
which ben worthy and which ben ryall, And of rigalytees which be noble and
which ben excellent. Also ben showed here the virtues of chyualry and many
other notable and famous things to ye playsure of noble persons shall be
showed as the works following wytnessen who some ever lyketh to se them and
read them: which were to long now to reherce. And after these notable
things aforsayd follows the blasynge of all manner armies in latin: frensshe:
and english.

Incipit liber armorum.
Being in worthynesse arms for to beer by the ryall blood in ordinance all
noble and gentylmen from the highest degree to the lowest in this book shall be
showed / and to deseuere gentylnesse from vngentylnesse / In so much that all
gentylnesse comyth of god of heaven. At heaven I woll begyn^e where were.x.
orders of angels: and now stand but.ix. in cote armures of knowledge
encrowned full hye with precious stones: where Lucyfer with myllyons of angels
out of heaven fell unto hell and other places / and ben hold there in bondage.
And all were created in heaven of gentill nature. A bond man or a churl woll
say all we ben comen of Adam / So Lucyfer with his company may say all we
ben comen of heaven. Adam the beginning of mankind was as a stock vnsprayed
and vnflorisshyd. and in the branches is knowledge which is totyn and which
is grene.

How gentylmen shall be known from churles: and how they first began. And how
Noe dyuyded the word in three parties to his three sons.
Now for to dyuyde gentylmen fro churles in haste it shall be preuyd. There was
never gentylman nor churl ordenyd bikinde but he had fader and mother. Adam and
Eve had another fader nor mother. And in the sons of Adam and Eve were found
both gentylman and churl. By the sons of Adam and Eve: Seth Abell and Cayn
dyuyded was the ryall blood fro the vngentyl A brother to slay his brother
contrari to the law: where might be more vngentylnesse. By that did Cayn^
become a churl and all his ofsprynge after him by the cursynge of god and his
own fader Adam. And Seth was made a gentylman thorugh his fader and moders
blessing. And of the ofsprynge of Seth Noe came a gentylman by kind.

Noe had three sons begoten by kind. By the mother tweyne were named Cham and
Sem. And by the fader the third was named Iafeth. Yet in these three sons
gentylnesse and vngentylnesse was found. In Cham vngentylnesse was found to
his own fader doon^ to dyscouer his preuytees and laughyng his fader to
scorn. Iafeth was the youngest and repreuid his brother. Then like a gentylman
take mind of Cham: For his vngentylnes he was become a churl: and had the
cursyng of god and his fader Noe. And when Noe awoke he said to Cham his sone:
Know not you how it became of Cayn Adams sone: and of his churlysshe blood.
All the world is drowned save we eyghte / And now of the to begin
vngentylnesse and a cause to dystroye us all: upon the it shall be. and so I
pray to god that it shall fall / Now to the I give my curse wicked caytyf for
ever. and I give to the ye North part of the world to draw thyn Inhabytaco^n
/ For there shall it be: where sorrow and care cold and myscheyf as a churl
thou shall have in the third part of the world: Vhiche shall be called
Europa. That is to say the country of churles.

Iafeth come hither my sone thou shall have my blessing dear instead of Seth
Adams sone I make the a gentylman. to the weste part of the world: and to the
Occydent end where as welthe and grace shall be: there thyn habitaco^n shall
be: to take that other third part of the world which shall be called Alia
That is to say: the country of gentylmen.

And Sem my sone also a gentylman I ye make to multyplye Abellys blood that so
wickydly was slain. Thorient thou shall take that other third part of the
world: which shall be called Africa: That is to say the country of
temperaunce.

Of the ofspringe of the gentle Iafeth came Abraham: Moses: Aaron: and the
prophets. and also the king of the right line of Mary / of whom that gentle
Ihesus was born^ very god and man after his manhede king of the land of Jude
and of Jews gentylman by his mother Mary prince of Cote armure.

How long cote armures were begone before the Incarnaco^n of our lord Ihesu
Christ.
Iafeth made first Barget / and therein he made a balle in token of all the
world. And after two thousand year and eyghtene before the Incarnaco^n of
Christ / cote armures was made and fyguryd at the syege of Troy: where in
gestys troianoru^ it tellyth. Yt the first beginning of the law of armies
was. the which was effygured and begon^ before any law of the world: but the
law of nature. and before the.x. co^maundementis of god.

And this law of armies was groundyd upon the.ix. orders of angellys in heaven
encrownyd with.ix. diverse precious stonys of colors and of virtues diverse.
Also of them are fyguryd the.ix. colors in armies. as in nombre to begyn^ the
first stone is called Topasion.

Primus lapis The first stone is called Topasion sygnyfyenge gold in armies.
This stone Topasion is a semy stone: and gold it is called in armies. The
virtue thereof is: that the gentylman the which this stone in his cote armure
beryth a sure messager in his kyngis battle shall be. The which stone is
reserved in the angels crown that was a true messager and a sure in his kyngis
battle of heaven when they faughte with Lucyfer.

Secundus lapis The second stone is called Smaragdus a gravely stone:
sygnyfyenge vert in armies
The second stone is called Smaragdus: a gravely stone. and vert it is called
in armies. The virtue thereof is: that the gentyl man the which in his cote
armure it beeryth: kene and hardy in his kyngys battle shall be. The which
stone is reseruyd in the archangelles crown that was kene and hardy in his
kyngys bacayse of heaven when they fought with lucyfer.

Tercius lapis And this stone is calde bruske color in armies
The third stone is calde an Ametisce a dusketly stone brusk i^ is calde in
armies The virtue thereof is: that he the which be rich in his Cotearmur that
stone. fortunable of wictory in his kings battle shall be. which stone is
reserved to the virtutis crown that was fortunable and victorious in his
kyngys battle or heaven when they fought with lucyfer:

Quartus lapis And this stone is calde plumbi color in armis:
The.iiii. stone is calde a Margarete a clowdy stone Plumby it is calde in
armies. The virtue thereof is what gentylman that in his cotearmure that stone
beryth great governance of chivalry in his kyngis battle he shall have. the
which stone is reserved in ye potestatis crown yt was cheualrous of
governance in his kyngys battle of heaven when they fought with lucyfer

Quintus lapis A loys is calde synamer or sanguein in armis.
The:v. stone is calde a Loys. a sanguein stone or synamer it is calde in
arms. The virtue thereof is. the gentymen that in his cote arrmure this stone
beryth myghtyfull of power in his kyngis battle shall be. the which stone was
reserved in dominacionis crown that was mightiful of powere in his kyngis
battle of heaven when they faught with Lucyfer

Sextus lapis And this stone is calde gowlys in armies
The.vi. stone is called a Ruby a redly stone. gowlysit is called in armis. The
virtue thereof is. the gentylman that in his Cote armure that stone beryth hot
and full of courage in his kyngis battle shall be. the which stone is
reserved in the princypatis crown that was hot brennynge as fire in his
kyngys battle of heaven when they faught with Lucyfer.

Septimus lapis A blewe stone it is and it is called asure in armies
The.vii. stone is called a Saphyre a blewe stone Asure it is called in armies.
The virtue thereof is the gentilmen that in their cote armure beer yt stone
wise and virtuous in their werkyng in their kyngys bataylle shall be. the
which is reserved to Tronus crown that was wise and virtuous in his kyngys
bataylle of heaven when they faught with Lucifer.

Octauus lapis This stone is black and it is called Sabyll.
The eyghte stone is a Dyamond: a black stone / Sable it is called in armies.
The virtue thereof is: what gentylman that in his cote armure that stone
beeryth: durable and vnfaynt in his kyngys bataylle shall be. The which stone
was reseruyd in ye Cherubyns crown yt was durable and vnfaynt in his kings
bataylle of heaven: when they faughte with Lucifer.

Nonus lapis A shynynge stone and is called silver in armies
The nynthe stone is called Carbuncle a shynynge stone. silver it is called in
armies. The virtue thereof is: what gentylma^ yt in his cote armure this stone
beeryth: full doughty glorious and shynynge in his kyngys bataylle he shall be.
The which stone was reseruyd in ye Seraphyns crown: yt was full doughty
glorious and shynynge in his kings bataylle of heaven when they fought with
Lucifer.

Of the diverse colors for the field of cotearmurys five ben worthy and four
ben ryall.
THere ben.ix. diverse colors for ye field of cote armures v. worthy and.iiij.
ryall. The.v. worthy ben these: Gold Verte Brusk Plumby and Syname. And the
four ryall ben these: Gowlys Asure Sable and Silver. But now after blasours of
armies there ben but.vi. colors of ye which.ij. ben metal and.iiij. colors.
Gold and silver for metal. Verte: gowles: asure and sable for colors. And
these ben vsyd and no moo.

Of.ix. precious stones.v. ben noble and.iiij. of dygnyte
There ben.ix. precious stones.v. noble and.iiij. of dignyte. The v. noble
stones be thise Topasion Smaragmat Amatisce Margaret and Aloys. The four of
dignyte ben these: Ruby Saphyre Dyamond and Carbuncle.

Of thorders of angels.v. ben Ierarchy and.iiij. Tronly
There ben.ix. orders of angels.v. Ierarchye and.iiij. Tronly The five
Ierarchyes ben these: Angels Archangels Virtutes Potestates and Dominaco^es.
The four Tronly ben these: Principatus Trony Cherubyn and Seraphyn.

Five of the dygnytees of regalyte ben noble and four etc.
There ben.ix. dygnytees of regalyte; five noble and four excellent. The five
noble ben thise: Gentylman Squyre knight Baron and Lord. And four excellent
ben thise: Earl Mark Duke and Prince.

Nine virtues of precious stones
Nine virtues of precious stones ben there: five general and four special.
The five general ben these. A sure messager kene and hardy: fortunate of
vyctory: cheualrous of governance and myghtfull of power. The four special
ben these: hot of courage: wise and ready: and virtuous in werkinge: durable and
vnfaynt: full doughty and glorious shynynge.

The four virtues of chyualrye.
Four virtues of chyualry ben there. The first is Just in his byhestes:
clennesse of his person: pety to have of the poor to be gracyous to his
prisoner: to be reverent and faithful to his god. The second is yt he be wise
in his battle: prudent in his fighting: knowing and having mind in his
wits. The third is yt he be not slow in his werres: look before yt his
quarrel be true: thank god ever of his vyctory: and for to have mesure in his
sustynaunce. The fourth is to be strong and steadfast in his governance: to
hope to have the vyctory: and void not fro the field: and not to shame his
cotearmure. Also yt he be not to bostefull of his manhood. Look yt he be
curteys lowly and gentle and without rybawdry in his langage.

Here shall be showed the.ix. artycles of gentylnesse five of them are amorous
and four sovereign.
There ben.ix. artycles of gentylnesse: and of them.v. ben amorous and four
sovereign. The five amorous gentylnesse ben these. Lordly of countenance
Tretable in langage Wise in his answer Perfyghte in governance: And cherefull
to faythfulnesse. The four sovereign gentylnesse ben thise: Few oaths in
swerynge Boxom to goddys bidding Knowing his own birth in beeryng. and to
dread his sovereign to fend

There ben.ix. vices contrary to gentylmen.
There ben.ix. vices contrary to gentylmen of the which.v. ben indetermynable
and four determynable. The five indeterminable ben these: one to be full of
slouthe in his werres: a another to be full of boste in his manhede: the third
to be full of cowardenes to his enmye: the fourth to be full of lechery in his
body. and the fyfth to be full of drinking and dronkelewe. There ben four
determynable: one is to revoke his own challenge: a another to slay his prisoner
with his own hondys: the third to void from his soueraynes baner in the
field: and the fyfthe to tell his sovereign falls tales.

There ben.ix. inestymable reioyenges in armies.
The.ix inestymable reioyenges of armies ben these First is a gentylman to be
made a knighte in the field at battle: The second is lyuelode of him to
receive after manhood: The third is chyualry to do before his sovereign: The
fourth is ambassate to be put in his hand for wisdom: The fyfth is proves of
knyghthode done before alyens in honor of renown. Thise ben called in arms
the.v. antentyke: now folowyth the four ending stremytallis personal: The
first is a poor knight to be married to the blood ryall: The second is to
have thank of his sonerayne perpetual: The third is to keep his cotearmure
vnshamed in trial: And ye fourth is to keep al points of his knyghthode as
(gestis troianoru^) declaryth.

Know ye that these two orders were. first wedlok and then knyghthode: and
knyghthode was made before cotearmure was ordeynyd
There was none other order but two: wedlock first and knyghthode after. A
knight was made before any cotearmure. and Olybyon was the first knight that
ever was: Asteryall his fader came by the right line of that gentylman Iafeth
and saw the people multiplye and had no gouernoures and the cursyd people of Sem
werryd against them: Olybyon was the strengest and the manlyest man in his
time. And the people cried on Olybyon to be their master and their governor.
A thousand men were then^ multiplied of Iaphethis line. Asteriall made to his
sone a garland about his heed of.ix diverse precious stonys in tokening of
chyualry to be a governor of.M. men / and to this day ye kings have his name
in latin: that is to say: ye governor of.M. Olybion knelyd to Asteryall his
fader and asked his blessyng Asteryall took Olybyons sword that was Iaphethes
fawcon that Tuball made before the flood: and smote flatlynge.ix times upon
the right sholder of Olybyon in tokenynge of the.ix. virtues of the foresaid
precious stones: and gave him his blessing with a charge to keep the nine
virtues of charytee now following as ye shall here /

These ben the charges or artycles that every knight should observe and keep
by the dignyte of his order / and they ben nine: five temporal and four
ghostly /
There be five temporal virtues and four ghostly virtues of charity / ye five
temporal virtues ben these / He shall not torn his back to his enmye for to
flee / The second is yt he shall truly hold his promise to his friend and
also to his foo. The third is he shall be free of meet and drink to all his
meyne about him / The fourth is he shall uphold maidens right. The fifth is
that he shall hold up wydowes right / These ben the four virtues of charity
ghostly / The first is he shall honor his fader and his mother / The second is
he shall do none harm to the poor / The third is he shall be merciful / The
fourth is he shall hold with the sacrefyce of ye great god of heaven. And then^
Asteryall did make to Olybyon a targette of olyue tree with three corners: two
above his face and one down to the ground ward / in tokenynge that this
Olybion was the cheyf of all the blood of the three sons of Noe / By the olyue
tree he understood vyctory for to wyn^ / By the point of his targette to the
ground the cursyd brother Cham / By the corner of his target above fertherest
that other brother Sem / That other corner next to himself betokenyth that
gentylman Iapheth the blessid brother of whom god and man came by right line /

The manner of knyghthodes ben two: one with ye Sword a another with the Bath /
There ben two manner of knyghthodes one with the sword and a another with the
bath / The bath is the worthyest by cause of four ryaltees. One is when an
vnagyd prince is made knight or be crownyd king / The second is when a king
or an Emperor is crownyd / The third is when a Queen or an Emperese is
crowned. The iiii. is when a King or an Emperor comyth to speak with an other
of diverse lands /

Nine manner of gentylmen there ben.
There is a Gentylman of Auncetre and of blood And there is a Gentylman of blood
There is a Gentylman of Cootearmure: and thoos de.iii. Oon of the Kyngys bage.
An other of lordshyp. And the third is of the killing of a Saryson And there
is a gentylman vntryall And there is a gentylman Ypocrafet And there is a
gentylman Spyrytuall There is also a gentylman sperytuall and temporal and all
theys ben more plainly declared in this book: Gentylmen be calde.iiii. manner
of wise one of awncetrees and.iii. of Cotearmure. There be.iiii. diverse manner
of gentylmen Oon his agentylman of awncetrees. which must nedis be a gentilman
of blood. There be.iii. gentylmen of Cotearmure and not of blood one is a
gentylman of Cotearmure of the kings bag that is to say his advise by an
herawd I gouen. An other gyntylman of Cotearmure is and not of blood a king
geuyng a lordshipp to a young man under his seall of patent to him and to his
heyes for evermore he may were a Cotarmure of the same lordshipp: The third
his a yoman cristenyd if he kill a gentylman sarsyn he may were the sarsinys
Cotarmure and no sarsyn a sarsynis cotarmure neither crystennys cotarmure by
fighting in no wise Yet some men say that a christian man ouercomynge a christian
man fighting in the list shall bear the cotarmure of him that is ouercomyn.
Or if a souereyne king make of a yoman a knight the same knight is a gentylman
of blood by the royalte of the king and of knyghthood.


A gentylman spyrytuall.
There is a gentylman a churl sone a priest to be made and that is a spiritual
gentylman to god and not of blood / But if a gentylmannys sone be made preeste
he is a gentilman both spiritual and temporal. Criste was a gentylman of his
mother be halue and bare cotarmure of au^seturys. The.iiii. Evangelists beryth
witness of Cristis warkys in the cospell with all thappostilles. They were
Iewys and of gentylmen come by the right line of that worthy conqueror Judas
Machabeus. But after by succession of time the kynted fell to pouertee after
the dystrucco^n of Judas Machabeus. And then^ they fell to labors: and were
called no gentylmen. And the four doctors of holy church. saint Ierom:
Ambrose: Augustyn: and Gregory were gentylmen of blood and of cote armurys.

Also the dyuysyons of cote armures ben.ix. / That is to wit. five perfyte:
and four imperfect
THere ben.ix. dyuysyons of cote armures. five perfyte. and four imperfect.
The five perfyte ben thise. Termynall Collateral: Abstrakte: Fyxall: and
Bastard.

Dyfference Enbordynge.
Termynall is called in armies all the brethern of right line hither by fader or
by mother may beer the right heirs cote armure with a dyfference called
Enbordynge

Dyfference Iewmews
Collateral is called in armies the sons of the brethern of ye right heir
berynge the cote armurys of their faders with a dyfference Iemews.

Dyfference molet
Fyxall in armies is called the third degree by the right line fro the right
heir by line male. They may beer their faders cote armure with a dyfference
molet.

Dyfference Countertreuys
The bastard of fixall shall beer his faders Cote armure to untertreuys. That
is to say what so ever he beryth in his field he shall bear in the colors
diverse and no more.

How there ben four cote armurys inperfyte and ben born^ without dyfference.
There ben four cote armures imperfect. and ben born^with out dyfference. The
first cote armure is if a lordshyp aforsayd be given under patent by the
king. and if he deye without heir his cote armure is done.

The second is the cote armure of the kyngis yefte if he dey without heir his
cote armure is done. And if thise.ij. cote armures have yssewe forth. the fyfth
degree of them beryng line by male ben gentylmen of blood by law of armies.

The third cotearmure of ye sarrasyn if the christian man dey without yssewe his
cotearmure is done. And if he had yssewe forth unto the fyfthe degree from him
by right line of yssewe male he is a gentylman of blood.

The fourth coteamure of the chief blood if he deye without any issue the hole
cotearmure is lost / then it fallyth to be a cotearmure of thymperfyte
berynge with a dyffrerence.

All the bastardys of all cotearmures shall bear a fesse / Some call it a
baston^ of one of the four dygnytees of colors. except the bastard of the
fyxiales and the bastard of the brethern of the cheyf blood where therytaunce
is departed to eueryche brother ylyke much: these bastardes shall add more
bagy to their armies or take away a bagy of armies.

Note here well who shall give cotearmures
There shall none of the.ix. orders of regalyte but al only the souereyne
king give cotearmure. For that is to him impropryd by law of armies. And yet
the king shall not make a knight without a cotearmure before.

Every knight cheyfteyn in the field may make a cotearmure knight.
In how many places a knight may be made. A knight is made in five diverse
places. In musturyng in land of werres. In semblynge under baners. In lystys
of the bathe. And at the sepulcre.

A lassyd cotearmure is on the moders part
A lassyd cotearmure is called the cote of a gentylwoman having lyuelode
weddyd to a man having no cotearmure. her sone may were her cotearmure with a
dyfference of armies during his life by the curteysy of the law of armies. And
his sone shall none bear but so be that the gentylwoman be heir or next of
blood to ye cotearmure. Or else being her birth of ye blood ryall: and then^
shall her heir bear her cotearmure.

How gentylmen ben made of gromys that be not cotearmure neither blood: and
they be called vntryall and apocryfate as it shewyth following.

There ben two diverse gentylmen made of gromes: that been not gentilmen of
cotearmure another of blood. One is callid in armies a gentylmen vntryall: that
is to say made up among relygious men: as pryours abottes or bisshops. That
other is called in armies a gentylman Apocryfate: yt is to say made up and
given to him the name and the lyuerey of a gentylman.

In armies ben.vi. dyfferences: that is to say two for excellent and four for
noblesse.
There ben.vi. differences in armies: two for thexcellent and four for the
nobles. Labell and Enborduryng for lords. Iemwes. Molett / Flourdeluce and
Quyntfoyles for the nobles.

In blasynge of armies ben.ix. quadrattys: that is to say.v. quadrate fynyall
and.iiij. ryall.
IN blasynge of armies there ben.ix. quadrattes for to consydre.v. quadrat
finiall and.iiij. ryall. V. quadrate finiall ben these: Gereri: Gerundi:
Fretly: Geratly: and Endently. Gereri is callid in armies when cotrarmures
are.ix. quarters diverse colors. Gerundi is called in armies when the cote
armure is of.ix. diverse colors: and a fusitarget within the cotearmure of what
color that it be of. Fretly is callid in armies when the cotearmure is
countersesyd. Geratly is called in armies when ye cotearmure is powdryd. But a
blasour shall not say he beryth ermen: silver powdryd with ermen / But he shall
say he beryth ermen: or else in some armies he must say demi ermen: which is
to say whytly ermen. In somoche that in the fyfth quadrat finiall it is
determined of the tokens of arms: or I proceed to it is showed what manner of
token a gentylman may were. A gentylman may not were tokens of armies but of
steynynge color: that is to say his cotearmure ynyat or else I gerat with
precious stonys. Gerattyng have.ix. bags of cotearmures. First with
croslettys. And of them there ben four diverse. and those ben these. Cross
fyxyly. Cross paty: Cross croslettys: and Cross flory The second bage is
flourdelyce. The third bage is roslettys. The fourth bage is prymarose. The
fyth bage is quynfolys. The syxte bage is diaclys. The seventh bage is
chappelettys. The eyghte bage is molettys. And the nynthe bage is cressauntys /
that is to say half the moon. These ben powderegys of cotearmurys. The fyfth
quadrate is called Endently of three diverse ways / that is to say Bebally
Lentally and Fyesly. Bebally is called in arms when a cotearmure is called
Endentyd of two diverse colors in the length of the cotearmure Lentally is
called in arms when the cotarmure is endentid with two diverse colors in the
berde of the cotarmure. Fyesly is called in armies three manner ways: Fesy bagy:
Fesy target: and Fesy general. Fesy bagy is when tokens of armies be disceueryd
from the cheyf of the cotarmure to right spleyer in the field. Fesy target is
when a scogion or an engislet is made in ye mydyll of the cotarmure. Fesy
general is called in armies when the cotarmure is endentyd with two diverse
colors from the last point of the cotarmure to the spleyer. The cheyf is
called in armies the mids of the cotarmure of the right side. Q^uadrat is
called in arms when the field is set with some token of armies. A quadrant
fynyall is called in armies when the field is dyscoloryd with tokens of armies
having no be in the field. A quadrant ryall is called when the field
occupyeth the token of a be or any other token set within the cotarmure to
the nombre of.v. The first quadrant is one token of armies allonly set and what
after his birth he beeryth. The second quadrant ryall is beryng in his
cotarmur three things called the tokens of armies / that is to say three flower
delyce: three phylcyals: three roses: three chapplettes: three lebardes three lions.
And so the fourth quadrat ryall is to beer a be raunpande: bebally:
letally: and fessely.


Here shall be showed what cotarmures Restriall ben / and where the blaser
shall begin to blase.
Three cotarmures ben there called restryall in armies. One is whan^e a cotarmure
is barry of diverse colors to the point. and what color the point be of the
point is the field. There the blaser shall begin. The second cotarmure
restryall is called in armies when a cotarmure is paly of diverse colors to the
point. And what pale meddle in the point: that color is ye field. The blaser
shall blase from that color to the next color pals. The third cotarmure
restryall is called in armies whan^e a cotarmure is sentry of diverse colors to
the point. And what sentry mydyll in the point that color is the field. The
blaser shall blase from that color to the next color of the left side of
the cotarmure and blase the color sentry.

Merke what sentre: fixall: mangis: gorgys and other diverse here now following
ben called in armies.

A sentre in armies is called staker of tentys. Fyxiall in armies ben called
myllars pykes. Mangys ben called in armies a sleue. Gorgys ben called in armies
water bowgys. Elynellis ben called in armies four quadrantis tr^^ch^ll^. Ogys
ben called in armies gonstonys. Tortlettis ben called in armies wastell. Dyaclis
ben called in armies scopprellys. Myrris ben called in armies myrrours or
glasses. Feons ben called in armies broad arow heedys. Tronkes ben called in
armies any beestys heedes or nec^es kytte chaungykly asondre. Demi is called in
armies half a be in the field. Countretreuys is called in armies when half
the beast is of one color and that other half of an other color. Any
cotarmure that beeryth a cross to the point: the point is the field. As saint
George beeryth gollis four anglettes of silver. But against this rule some
blasers of armies repungne as it is showed in the book of blasynge of armies.
These three terms Of and. with. shall not be tehercyd in arms but onys any of
them.


There ben three diverse beerynges of feldys.
Diverse beerynges of feldys there ben. One is beerynge h^le field. It is called
in armies Claury.

The second is beerynge two feldys. It is called in armies Counterly.

The third is beerynge two feldes in four quarters. It is called in armies
Quarterly.

There ben three cotarmures grytty
Three cotarmures grytty there ben in armies. One is called Checky / that is when
the field is chekyrde with diverse colors.

The second is called Wyndy / that is to say: when the field is made like
wawes of one color: or of diverse colors.

The third is called Werry: when the field is made like go bolettys of diverse
colors.

In armies ben two pynyons. Also it shewyth sawtry: clawry: counterly. and
quarterly ben with other.
There ben in armies called two pynyons. One is when the field is a sawtry Saint
Andrews cross may be clawri: counterly: quarterly. Clawry is called plain
of one color. Counterly is when colors quarterly ben two colors set in two
quarteris.

The second pynyon is called Cheffrounce: that is a couple of sparys. And that
may be: clawry: counterly: quarterly: gerery. and byally.

Gereri is when three cheffrounce ben together or moo.

Byall is called when a bar is between two cheffrounce.

Here we shall make an end of the most special things of the book of the
lygnage of cote armurys: and how gentylmen shall be known from vngentylmen.
And consequently shall follow a compendyous treatise of fysshynge with an angle
/ which is right necessary to be had in this present volume: by cause it
shewyth before the manner of hawkynge and hunting with other diverse matters
right necessary to be known of noble men and also for it is one of the
dysportes that gentylmen use. And also it is not so labororyous ne so
dishonest to fysshe in this wise as it is with nets and other engynes which
crafty men done use for their daily increase of goods.
Here begynnyth the treatise of fysshynge with an Angle.
depiction of angling

SAlamon in his parablys says that a good spyryte makyth a flourynge aege /
that is a fair aege and a long. And sith it is so: I ask this questyon /.
which ben the means and the causes that enduce a man in to a merry spyryte:
Truly to my best dyscreco^n it seems good dysportes and honest gamys in whom
a man Ioyeth without any repentance after. Then folowyth it yt good
dysportes and honest games ben cause of mannys fair aege and long life. And
therefore now woll I chose of four good disportes and honest gamys / that is
to wit: of hunting: hawkynge: fysshynge: and foulynge. The best to my simple
dyscreco^n which is fysshynge: called Anglynge with a rod: and a line and an
hoke / And thereof to treat as my simple wit may suffyce: both for the said
reason of Salamon and also for the reason that phisyk makyth in this wise (Si
tibi deficiant medici medici tibi fiant: Hec tria men's leta labor and moderata
dieta.

Ye shall understand that this is for to say / If a man lack leche or
medicyne he shall make three things his leche and medycyne: and he shall need
never no moo. The first of them is a merry thought. The second is labor not
outrageous. The third is dyete mesurable. First that if a man will ever more
be in merry thoughts and have a glad spyryte: he must eschew all contraryous
company and all places of debate where he might have any occasyons of
malencoly. And if he woll have a labor not outrageous he must then ordeyne
him to his her tys ease and pleasaunce without study pensyfnesse or traueyle a
merry occupacyon which may rejoice his heart: and in which his spyrytes may
have a merry delight. And if he woll be dyetyd mesurably he must eschew all
places of ryotte which is cause of surfette and of syknesse / And he must
draw him to places of sweet air and hungry: And ete nourishable meets and
dyffyable also.

NOw then woll I dyscryue the said dysportes and gamys to find the best of
them as verily as I can^ / all be it that the right noble and full worthy
prince the duke of York late callid master of game has discryued the myrthes
of hunting like as I think to dyscryue of it and of all the other. For
hunting as to mynentent is to laboryous / For the hunter must always run and
follow his hounds: traueyllynge and swetynge full sore. He blowyth till his
lyppes blyster And when he wenyth it be an hare full often it is an hegge hog
Thus he chasyth and wot not what. He comyth home at even rayn beten pryckyd:
and his clothes torn wete shode all myry Some hounde lost: some surbat. Such
greues and many other hapyth unto the hunter / which for dyspleysaunce of
them yt love it I dare not report. Thus truly me semyth that this is not the
best dysporte and game of the said four. The dysporte and game of hawkynge is
laboryous and noyouse also as me semyth. For often the fawkener leseth his
hawks as the hunter his hou^des. Then is his game and his dysporte goon.
Full often cries he and whystelyth till that he be right evil a thirst. His
hawke takes a bow and list not ones on him reward. when he would have her
for to flee: then woll she bathe. with mys fedynge she shall have the Fronse:
the Rye: the Cray and many other syknesses that bring them to the Sowse. Thus
by prouff this is not the best dysporte and game of the said four. The
dysporte and game of fowlynge me semyth most simple For in the winter season
the fowler spedyth not but in the most hardest and coldest weder: which is
grievous. For when he would goo to his gynnes he may not for cold. Many a
gynne and many a snare he makyth. Yet soryly does he fare. At morn tide in the
dew he is weete shode unto his taylle. Many other such I cowde tell: but
dread of magre makith me for to leave. Thus me semyth that hunting and hawkynge
and also fowlynge ben so laborous and grievous that none of them may perform
nor by very mean that enduce a man to a merry sp^^^te: which is cause of his
long life acordynge unto ye said pr^^^^be of Salamon. Dowteles then^e folowyth
it that it must needs be the dysporte of fysshynge with an angle. For all other
manner of fysshyng is also laborous and grievous: often making folks full wete
and cold / which many times has be seen cause of greece Infirmytees. But the
angler may have no cold nor no disease nor anger / but if he be causer
himself. For he may not lose at the most but a line or an hoke: of which he
may have store plentee of his own making / as this simple treatise shall
teache him. So then his loss is not grievous. and other greyffes may he not
have / saving but if any fisshe break away after that he is take on the hoke /
or else that he catch naught: which ben not grievous. For if he faylle of one
he may not faylle of a another / if he does as this treatise techyth: but if
there be naught in the water. And yet at the leest he has his holsom walk
and merry at his ease. a sweet air of the sweet sauoure of the meede flowers:
that makyth him hungry. He hereth the melodyous armony of fowls. He sees the
young swannes: heerons: duckes: cotes and many other fowls with their brodes.
/ which me semyth better than all the noise of houndys: the blastes of hornys
and the scrye of foulis that hunters: fawkeners and foulers can make. And if
the angler take fysshe: surely then is there no man merier than he is in his
spyryte. Also who so woll use the game of anglynge: he must rise erly. which
thing is prouffytable to man in this wit / That is to wit: most to the heel
of his soul. For it shall cause him to be holy. and to the heel of his body /
For it shall cause him to be hole. Also to the increase of his goodys. For it
shall make him rich. As the old english proverb says in this wise. who
so woll rise erly shall be holy helthy and zely.

Thus have I prouyd in mine intent that the dysporte and game of anglynge is the
very mean and cause that enducith a man in to a merry spyryte: Which after the
said parable of Solomon and the said doctrine of phisyk makyth a flourynge
aege and a long. And therefore to al you that been virtuous: gentle: and free
borne I write and make this simple treatise following: by which ye may have
the full craft of anglynge to dysport you at your lust: to the intent that
your aege may the more flower and the more longer to endure.

IF ye woll be crafty in anglynge: ye must first learn to make your harnays /
That is to wit your rod: your lines of diverse colors. After that ye must
know how ye shall angle in what place of the water: how deep: and what time of
day. For what manner of fysshe: in what wedyr How many impedymentes there ben
in fysshynge yt is called anglynge And in special with what baytys to every
diverse fysshe in each month of the year. How ye shall make your baytes bread
where ye shall find them: and how ye shall keep them. And for the most
crafty thing how ye shall make your hokes of stele and of osmonde / Some for
the dubbe: and some for the flote: and the ground. as ye shall here after al
these find expressed openly unto your knowledge.

And how ye shall make your rod craftly here I shall teache you. Ye shall
kytte between Myghelmas and Candylmas a fair staff of a fadom and an half
long: and arm great of hasyll: wylowe: or aspe. And bethe him in an hot
ouyn: and set him even Then let him cole and dry a month. Take then
and frette him fast with a cockeshotecorde: and bind him to a form or an
even square great tree. Take then a plu^mers wire that is even and streyte
and sharp at the one end. And hete the sharp end in a charcole fire till it
be white: and brenne the staff therwyth thorugh: ever streyte in the pythe at
both ends till they mete. And after that brenne him in the nether end with a
bird broche / and with other broches each gretter than other. and ever the
grettest the last: so that ye make your hole aye tapre wexe. Then let him
lie still and kele two days. Vnfrette him then^e and let him dry in an house
roof in the smoke till he be through dry In the same season take a fair yerde
of grene hasyll and beth him even and streyghte. and let it dry with the
staff. And when they ben dry make the yerde mete unto the hole in the staff:
unto half the length of the staff. And to perform that other half of the
croppe. Take a fair shote of black thorn^: crabbe tree: medeler. or of Ienypre
kytte in the same season: and well bethyd and streyghte. And frette them
together fetely: so that the croppe may justly enter all in to the said hole.
Then shave your staff and make him tapre wexe. Then vyrell the staff at
both ends with long hopis of yren or laton in the clennest wise with a pyke
in the nether end fastnyd with a rennynge vice: to take in and out your
croppe. Then set your croppe an handful within the over end of your staff
in such wise that it be as big there as in any other place above. Then^e
arm your croppe at thouer end down to ye frette with a line of.vj. heeres.
And dubbe the line and frette it fast in ye top with a bow to fasten on your
line. And thus shall ye make you a rod so preuy that ye may walk therwyth:
and there shall no man wit where abowte ye goo. It woll be light and full
nymbyll to fysshe with at your lust. And for the more redynesse loo here a
figure thereof in example.:

depiction of fishing rod

AFter that ye have made thus your rod: ye must learn to color your lines
of here in this wise. First ye must take of a white horse taylle the lengest
here and fairest that ye can find. And ever the rounder it be the better it
is. Depart it in to.vj. parts: and every part ye shall color by himself in
diverse colors. As yelowe: grene: brown: tawney: russet. and duske colors.
And for to make a good grene color on your here ye shall do thus. Take small
ale a quarte and put it in a little pan: and put thereto half a pound of
alym. And put thereto your here: and let it boylle softly half an hour. Then
take out your here and let it dry. Then take a potell of water and put it
in a pan. And put therein two handful of ooldys or of wyxen. And press it
with a tyle stone: and let it boylle softly half an hour. And when it is
yelow on the scume put therein your here with half a pound of coporose betyn
in powdre and let it boylle half a mile way: and then set it down: and
let it kele five or six hours. Then^ take out the here and dry it. And it
is then the fynest grene that is for the water. And ever the more ye put
thereto of coporose the better it is. or else instead of it vertgrees. A
another wise ye may make more bryghter grene / as thus Let wood your here in
an woodefatte a light plunket color And then sethe him in old or wyxin like
as I have said: saving ye shall not put thereto neither coporose ue vertgrees.
For to make your here yelow dyght it with alym as I have said before. And after
that with oldys or wyxin without coporose or vertgrees.

A another yelow ye shall make thns. Take small ale a potell: and stamp three
handful of walnot leaves and put togider: And put in your here till that it be
as deep as ye woll have it.

For to make russet here. Take strong lie a pynt and half a pound of sote
and a little iuce of walnot leuys and a quarte of alym: and put them all
together in a pan and boylle them well. And when it is cold put in your
here till it be as derke as ye woll have it. For to make a brown color. Take
a pound of sote and a quarte of ale: and seth it with as many walnot leuys as
ye may. And when they wexe black set it from the fire. And put therein your
here and let it lie still till it be as brown as ye woll have it.

For to make a another brown. Take strong ale and sote and tempre them together.
and put therein your here two days and two nyghtes and it shall be right a good
color. For to make a tawney color. Take lyme and water and put them
together: and also put your here therein four or five hours. Then take it out
and put it in a Tanners ose a day: and it shall be also fine a tawney color as
nedyth to our purpoos The syxte part of your here ye shall keep still white
for lines for the dubbyd hoke to fysshe for the trought and graylynge: and for
small lines for to rye for the roche and the darse.

When your here is thus colourid: ye must know for which waters and for
which seasons they shall serve. The grene color in all clear water from
Apryll till Septembre. The yelowe color in every clear water from Septembre
till Nouembre: For is is like ye wedys and other manner grass which growyth
in the waters and ryuers when they ben broken. The russet color seruyth all
the winter unto the end of Apryll as well in ryuers as in poles or lakys The
brown color seruyth for that water that is black dedisshe in ryuers or in
other waters. The tawney color for those waters that been hethy or morysshe.

NOw must ye make your lines in this wise. First look that ye have an
Instrument like unto this figure portrayed following. Then take your here and
kytte of the small end an ho^^^ull large or more / For it is neither strong
nor yet sure. Then torn the top to the taylle eueryche ylyke much. And
depart it in to three parties. Then knytte every part at the one end by
himself. And at the other end knytte all three together: and put ye same end in
that other end of your Instrument that has but one clyft. And set that other
end fast with the wegge four fyngers in all shorter than your here. Then
twyne every warpe one way and ylyke much: and fasten them in three clystes
ylyke streyghte. Take then out that other end and twyne it that way that it
woll desire enough. Then streyne it a little: and knytte it for undoing: and
that is good. And for to know to make your Instrument: loo here it is in
figure. And it shall be made of tree saving the bolte underneath: which shall
be of yren.



When ye have as many of the lynkys as ye suppose wol suffyse for the length of
a line: then must ye knytte them together with a water knotte or else a
duchys knotte. And when your knotte is knytte: kytte of ye void short ends a
straw bread for the knotte. Thus shall ye make your lines fair and fine: and
also right sure for any manner fysshe. And by cause that ye should know both
the water knotte and also the duchys knotte: loo them here in figure cast
unto the lyknesse of the draughte.

YE shall understand that the most subtle and hardyste craft in making of
your harnays is for to make your hokis. For whoos making ye must have fete
fyles. thyn^ and sharp and small beten: A semy clam^ of pren: a bender: a
payr of long and small tongys: an hard knyfe somdeale thycke: an anuelde:
and a little hamour. And for small fysshe ye shall make your hokes of the
smalest quarrel nedlys that ye can find of stele / and in this wise. Ye shall
put the quarrel in a red charkcole fire till that it be of the same color
that the fire is. Then take him out and let him kele: and ye shall find him
well alayd for to fyle. Then reyse the berde with your knyfe / and make the
point sharp. Then alaye him again: for else he woll break in the bendyng.
Then bend him like to the bend fyguryd herafter in example. And greeter
hokes ye shall mabe in the same wise of gretter nedles: as broderers nedlis: or
taylers: or shomakers nedlis spear points / and of shomakers nalles in
especyall the best for great fysshe. and that they bend at the point when
they ben assayed / for else they ben not good When the hoke is bendyd beat the
hinder end abroad: and fyle it smothe for fretynge of thy line. Then put it
in the fire again: and give it an easy read hete. Then suddenly quench it
in water: and it woll be hard and strong. And for to have knowledge of your
Instruments: lo them here in figure portrayed.

depiction of contents of angler's tacklebox Hamour.
depiction of hammer Knyfe.
depiction of knife Pynsons.
depiction of pincers Clam^
depiction of clamps Wegge.
depiction of wedge Fyle.
depiction of file Wreste.
depiction of turning key and Anuelde.
depiction of anvil

When ye have made thus your hokis: then must ye set them on your lines
acordynge in gretnesse and strength in this wise. Ye shall take small read
silk. and if it be for a great hoke then^e double it: not twynyd. And else
for small hokys let it be syngle: and therwyth frette thycke the line there as
the one end of your hoke shall sytte a straw bread. Then^ set there your
hoke: and frette him with the same threde ye two parts of the length that
shall be frette in all. And when ye come to the third part then torn the
end of your line again upon the frette dowble. and frette it so dowble that
other third part. Then put your threde in at the hose twys or thries and
let it goo at each time round abowte the yerde of your hoke. Then wete the
hose and draw it till that it be fast. And look that your line lie evermore
within your hokys: and not without. Then kytte of the lynys end and the
threde as nyghe as ye may: saving the frette.

NOw ye know with how great hokys ye shall angle to every fysshe: now I woll
tell you with how many heeres ye shall to every manner of fisshe. For the menow
with a line of one here. For the waxyng roche: the bleke and the gogyh and the
ruff wit a line of two heeris. For the darse and the great roche with a line
of three heeres. For the perch: the flou^der and bremet with four heeres. For
the cheuen chubbe: the breme: the tenche and the ele with.vj. heeres. For the
troughte: gray lynge: barbyll and the great cheuyn with.ix. heeres. For the
great troughte with.xij. heeres: For the samon with.xv. heeres. And for the
pyke with a chalk line made brown with your brown color aforsayd: armyd
with a wyre* as ye shall here herafter when I speak of the pyke.

Your lines must be plumbid with led. And ye shall wit yt the next pu^be
unto the hoke shall be therfro a large foot and more / And every plumbe of a
quantyte to the gretnes of the line. There be three manner of plu^bis for a
ground line rennynge. And for the flote set upon the ground line lyenge.x.
plumbes Ioynynge all togider. On the ground line rennynge.ix. or.x. small.
The flote plu^be shall be so heavy yt the leest pluck of any fysshe may pull
it down in to ye water. And make your plu^bis round and smothe yt they stycke
not on stonys or on wedys. And for the more understanding lo them here in
figure.

depiction of fishing tackle The ground line rennynge
The ground line lyenge.
The flote line
The line for perch or tenche.
The line for a pyke: Plu^be: Cork armyd with wyre


Then shall ye make your flotys in this wise. Take a fair cork that is clean
without many holes* and bore it through with a small hot yren: And putt therein
a pen just and streyghte. Ever the more flote the gretter pen and the
greter hole. Then shape it great in the myddis and small at both endys. and
specially sharp in the nether end / and like unto the fygures following. And
make them smothe on a gryndyng stone: or on a tyle stone. And look that the
flote for one here be no more than a pese. For two heeres: as a been. for
twelve heeres: as a walnot. And so every line after the proporco^n.

All manner lines that been not for the ground must have flotes. And the
rennynge ground line must have a flote. The lyenge ground line without flote.

depiction of fishing floats

NOw I have lernyd you to make all your harnays. Here I woll tell you how ye
shall angle. Ye shall angle: understand that there is.vj. manner of anglyng.
That one is at the ground for the troughte and other fisshe. A another is at ye
ground at an arche / or at a stange where it ebbyth and flowyth: for bleke:
roche. and darse. The third is with a flote for all manner of fysshe. The
fourth with a menow for ye troughte without plumbe or flote. The fyfth is
rennynge in ye same wise for roche and darse with one or two heeres and a fly.
The syxte is with a dubbyd hoke for the troughte and graylyng And for the
first and pryncypall point in anglynge: keep ye ever fro the water fro the
sight of the fysshe: other far on the land: or else behind a busshe that
the fysshe se you not. For if they do they wol not byte. Also look that ye
shadow not the water as much as ye may. For it is that thing that woll soon
fraye the fysshe. And if a fysshe be afraid he woll not bite long after. For
all manner fysshe that feed by the ground ye shall angle for them to the
botom. so that your hokys shall run or lie on the ground. And for all
other fysshe that feed above ye shall angle to them in the mids of the water
or somdeale byneth or somdeale above. For ever the gretter fisshe the nerer he
lies the botom of the water. And ever the smaller fysshe the more he smymmyth
above. The third good point is when the fysshe bytyth that ye be not to hasty
to smite nor to late / For ye must abide till ye suppose that the bayte be
far in the mouth of the fysshe / and then abide no longer. And this is for
the ground. And for the flote when ye se it pullyd softly under the water: or
else carried upon the water softly: then smite. And look that ye never
ouersmyte the strength of your line for brekynge. And if it fortune you to
smite a great fysshe with a small harnays: then ye must led him in the
water and labor him there till he be drownyd and overcome. Then take him as
well as ye can or may. and ever bewaar that ye hold not over the strength of
your line. And as much as ye may let him not come out of your lines end
streyghte from you: But keep him ever under the rod / and evermore hold him
streyghte: so that your line may sustain and beer his lepys and his plungys
with the help of your croppe and of your hand.

HEre I woll declare unto you in what place of the water ye shall angle. Ye
shall angle in a pole or in a stondinge water in every place where it is any
thing deep. There is not great choice of any places where it is any thing
deep in a pole. For it is but a prison to fysshe. and they live for ye more
part in hungre like prisoners: and therefore it is the less maystry to take
them. But in a river ye shall angle in every place where it is deep and clear
by the ground: as gravel or claye without mudde or wedys. And in especyall if
that there be a manner whyrlynge of water or a covert. As an holow bank: or
great rotys of trees: or long wedes fletyng above in the water where the
fysshe may couere and hyde theymself at certain times when they list Also it
is good for to angle in deep styffe stremys and also in fallys of waters and
wears: and in floode gatys and mylle pyttes. And it is good for to angle where
as the water restyth by the bank: and where the streme rennyth nyghe there by:
and is deep and clear by the ground and inony other placys where ye may se any
fyssh houe or have any fedynge.

NOw ye shall wit what time of the day ye shall angle From the beginning of
May until it be Septembre the bytynge time is erly by the morrow from four of
ye clock unto eyghte of the clock. And at after none from four of the clock
unto eyghte of the clock: but not so good as is in the morning. And if it be
a cold whystelyng wind and a derke lowrynge day. For a derke day is much
better to angle in than a clear day. From the beginning of Septembre unto the
end of Apryll spare no time of the day: Also many pole fysshes woll byte
best in the none tide.

And if ye se any time of the day the trought or graylynge lepe: angle to him
with a dubbe acordynge to the same month And where the water ebbyth and flowyth
the fysshe woll byte in some place at the ebb: and in some place at the flood.
After yt they have resting behind stangnys and archys of brydgys and other
such manner places.

HEre ye shall wit in what weder ye shall angle. as I said before in a derke
lowrynge day when the wind blowyth softly. And in somer season when it is
brennynge hot then it is naught. From Septembre unto Apryll in a fair sonny
day is right good to angle. And if the wind in that season have any part of
the Oryent: the wedyr then is naught. And when it is a great wind. And when
it snowith reynyth or hayllyth. or is a great tempeste / as thondyr or
lightenynge: or a swoly hot weder: then it is naught for to angle.

NOw shall ye wit that there ben twelve manner of ympedymentes which cause a
man to take no fysshe. with out other common that may casuelly hap. The first
is if your harnays be not mete nor fetly made. The second is if your bayees be
not good nor fine. The third is if that ye angle not in bytynge time. The
fourth is if that the fysshe be frayed with the syghte of a man. The fyfth if the
water be very thycke: white or read of any floode late fallen. The syxte if
the fysshe styre not for cold. The seventh if that the wedyr be hot. The
eight if it rain. The nynthe if it hayll or snow fall. The tenth is if it be
a tempeste. The enleuenth is if it be a great wind. The twelfyfth if the wind
be in the Eest / and that is worste For comynly neither winter nor somer ye
fysshe woll not byte then. The weste and north wyndes ben good but the south
is best.

ANd now I have told you how to make your harnays: and how ye shall fysshe
therwyth in all points. Reason woll that ye know with what baytes ye shall
angle to every manner of fysshe in every month of the year / which is all the
effect of the craft. And without which baytes known well by you all your
other craft here toforn auayllyth you not to purpose. For ye can not bring an
hoke in to a fyssh mouth without a bayte. Which baytes for every manner of
fyssh and for every month here folowyth in this wise.

FOr by cause that the Samon is the most stately fyssh that any man may angle
to in fresshe water. Therefore I purpose to begyn^ at him. The samon is a
gentle fysshe: but he is comborous for to take. For comynly he is but in deep
places of great ryuers. And for the more part he holdyth the myddys of it:
that a man may not come at him. And he is in season from March unto
Myghelmas. In which season ye shall angle to him with these baytes when ye
may get them. First with a red worm in the beginning and ending of the
season. And also with a bobbe that bredyth in a dunghyll. And specially with a
souerayn bayte that bredyth on a water docke. And he bytith not at the ground:
but at ye flote. Also ye may take him: but it is seldom seen with a dubbe at
such time as when he lepith in like form and manner as ye do take a
troughte or a gryalynge. And these baytes ben well prouyd baytes for the samon.

THe Troughte for by cause he is a right deyntous fyssh and also a right
feruente-byter we shall speak next of him. He is in season fro March unto
Myghelmas. He is on clean gravely ground and in a streme. Ye may angle to him
all times with a ground line lyenge or rennynge: saving in lepynge time. and
then with a dubbe. And erly with a rennynge ground line. and forth in the
day with a flote line. Ye shall angle to him in March with a menew hangyd on
your hoke by the nether nesse without flote or plumbe: drawing up and down in
the streme till ye feel him fast. In the same time angle to him with a ground
line with a red worm for the most sure. In April take the same baytes: and
also Inneba other wise named.vij. eyes. Also the canker that bredyth in a great
tree and the red snayll. In May take ye stone fly and the bobbe under the
cow torde and the sylke worm: and the bayte that bredyth on a fern^ leyf. In
Iuyn take a red worm and nyppe of the heed: and put on thyn hoke a codworme
byforn. In Iuyll take the great red worm and the codworme together. In August
take a flesh fly and the great red worm and the fat of the bakon: and
bind abowte thy hoke. In Septembre take the red worm and the menew. In
Octobre take the same: for they ben special for the trought all times of the
year. From April till Septembre ye trough lepyth. then angle to him with a
dubbyd hoke acordynge to the months which dubbyd hokys ye shall find in
the end of this treatise: and the monethys with them.:

THe grayllynge by a another name called vmbre ia a delycyous fysshe to mannys
mouth. And ye may take him like as ye do the trought. And these ben his
baytes. In March and in Apryll the red worm. In May the grene worm: a
little breyled worm: the docke canker. and the hawthorn worm. In June the
bayte that bredyth between the tree and the bark of an oak. In Iuyll a bayte
that bredyth on a fern^ leyf: and the great red worm. And nyppe of the head:
and put on your hoke a codworme before. In August the red worm: and a docke
worm. And all the year after a red worm.

THe barbyll is a sweet fysshe / but it is a quasy meet and a peryllous for
mannys body. For comynly he yeuyth an introduxion to ye Febres. And if he be
eten raw: he may be cause of mannys death: which has often be seen. These be
his baytes. In March and in Apryll take fair fresshe chese: and lay it on a
board and kytte it in small square pecys of the length of your hoke. Take
then a candyl and brenne it on the end at the point of your hoke till it be
yelow. And then^e bind it on your hoke with fletchers sylke: and make it rough
like a welbede. This bayte is good all the somer season. In May and June take
ye hawthorn^ worm and the great red worm. and nyppe of the heed. And put on
your hoke a codworme before. and that is a good bayte. In Iuyll take the red
worm for cheyf and the hawthorn^ worm together. Also the water docke leyf
worm and the hornet worm together. In August and for all the year take the
talowe of a sheep and soft chese: of each ylyke much: and a little honey and
grynde or stamp them together long. and tempre it till it be tough. And put
thereto flower a little and make it on small pellettys. And yt is a good bayte
to angle with at the ground And look that it synke in the water. or else it
is not good to this purpoos.

THe carpe is a deyntous fysshe: but there ben but few in England. And
therefore I write the less of him. He is an evil fysshe to take. For he is so
strong enarmyd in the mouth that there may no weke harnaysholde him. And as
touching his baytes I have but little knowledge of it And me were loath to write
more than I know and have prouyd But well I wot that the red worm and the
menow ben good baytys for him at all times as I have herd say of persons
credyble and also found written in books of credence.

THe cheuyn is a stately fysshe: and his heed is a deyty morsel. There is no
fysshe so strongly enarmyd with scalys on the body. And by cause he is a
strong byter he has the more baytes / which ben these. In March the red
worm at the ground: For comynly then he woll byte there at all times of ye
year if he be any thing hungry. In Apryll the dyche canker that bredith in the
tree. A worm that bredith between the rynde and the tree of an oak The red
worm: and the young frosshys when the fete ben kyt of. Also the stone fly the
bobbe under the cow torde: the red snaylle. In May ye bayte that bredyth on
the osyer leyf and the docke canker together upon your hoke. Also a bayte that
bredyth on a fern^ leyf: ye codworme. and a bayte that bredyth on an hawthorn^.
And a bayte that bredyth on an oak leyf and a sylke worm and a codworme
together. In^ June take the creket and the dorre and also a red worm: the heed
kytte of and a codworme before: and put them on ye hoke. Also a bayte in the
osyer leyf: young frosshys the three fete kitte of by the body: and the fourth
by the knee. The bayte on the hawthorn^ and the codworme together and a grubbe
that bredyth in a dunghyll: and a great greshop. In Iuyll the greshop and the
humbylbee in the meadow. Also young bees and young hornettes. Also a great
brended fly that bredith in paths of meadows and the fly that is among
pysmeers hyllys. In August take wortwormes and magotes unto Myghelmas. In
Septembre the red worm: and also take the baytes when ye may get them:
that is to wit / Cheryes: young myce not heeryd: and the house comb.

THe breeme is a noble fysshe and a deyntous. And ye shall angle for him from
March unto August with a red worm: and then^e with a butter fly and a
grene fly. and with a bayte that bredyth among grene read: and a bayte that
bredyth in the bark of a deed tree. And for bremettis: take maggotes. And fro
that time forth all the year after take the red worm: and in the river brown
breed. Moo baytes there ben but they ben not easy and therefore I let them
pass over.

A Tenche is a good fyssh: and heelith all manner of other fysshe that been
hurt if they may come to him. He is the most part of the year in the mudde.
And he styryth most in June and July: and in other seasons but little. He is
an evil byter. his baytes ben these. For all the year brown breed tostyd
with honey in lyknesse of a butteryd loof: and the great red worm. And as for
cheyf take the black blood in ye heart of a sheep and flower and honey. And
tempre them all together somdeale softer than paast: and anoint therwyth the red worm: both for this fysshe and for other. And they woll byte much the
better thereat at all times.

The perch is a daynteuous fysshe and passing holsom and a free bytyng. Thise
ben his baytes. In March the red worm. In April the bobbe under the cow
torde. In May the slothorn^ worm and the codworme. In June the bayte that
bredith in an old fallen oak and the great canker. In Iuyll the bayte that
bredyth on the osyer leyf and the bobbe that bredeth on the dunghyll: and the
hawthorn^ worm and the codworme. In August the red worm and maggotes. All
the year after the red worm as for the best.

The roche is an easy fysshe to take: And if he be fat and pennyd then is
he good meet. and these ben his baytes. In March the most ready bayte is the
red worm. In Apryll the bobbe under the cow torde. In May the bayte yt
bredyth on the oak leyf and the bobbe in the dunghyll. In June the bayte that
bredith on the osyer and the codworme. In Iuyll house flies. and the bayte that
bredith on an oak. and the notworme and mathewes and maggotes till Myghelmas.
And after yt the fat of bakon.

The dace is a gentle fysshe to take. and if it be well refet then^ is it good
meet. In March his bayte is a red worm. In Apryll the bobbe under the cow
torde. In May the docke canker and the bayte on ye slothorn^ and on the oken
leyf. In June the codworme and the bayte on the osyer and the white grubbe in
ye dunghyll. In Iuyll take house flies and flies that bread in pysmer hills:
the codworme and maggotes unto Mighelmas. And if the water be clear ye shall
take fysshe when other take none And fro that time forth do as ye do for the
roche. For comynly their bytynge and their baytes ben like.

The bleke is but a feeble fysshe. yet he is holsom His baytes from March to
Myghelmas be the same that I have written before. For the roche and darse
saving all the somer season asmoche as ye may angle for him with an house
fly: and in winter season with bakon and other bayte made as ye herafter may
know.

The ruf is right an holsom fysshe: And ye shall angle to him with the same
baytes in all seasons of the year and in the same wise as I have told you of
the perch: for they ben like in fysshe and fedinge / saving the ruf is less.
And therefore he must have ye smaller bayte.

The flounder is an holsom fisshe and a free. and a subtle byter in his
manner: For comynly when he soukyth his meet he fedyth at ground. and
therefore ye must angle to him with a ground line lyenge. And he has but one
manner of bayte. and that is a red worm. which is most cheyf for all manner
of fysshe.

The gogen is a good fisshe of the mochenes: and he byteth well at the ground.
And his baytes for all the year ben these. ye red worm: codworme: and
maggotes. And ye must angle to him with a flote. and let your bayte be nere ye
botom or ellis on ye gron^de.

The menow when he shynith in the water then^ is he byttyr And though his body
be little yet he is a ravenous biter and an egre. And ye shall angle to him
with the same baytes that ye do for the gogyn: saving they must be small.

The ele is a quasy fysshe a rauenour and a deuourer of the broad of fysshe.
And for the pyke also is a deuourer of fysshe I put them both behind all
other to angle. For this ele ye shall find an hole in the ground of the
water. and it is blewe blackysshe there put in your hoke till that it be a foot
within ye hole. and your bayte shall be a great angyll twytch or a menow.

The pyke is a good fysshe: but for he deuouryth so many as well of his own
kind as of other: I love him the less. and for to take him ye shall do thus.
Take a codlynge hoke: and take a roche or a fresshe heering and a wyre with an
hole in the end: and put it in at the mouth and out at the taylle down by the
ridge of the fresshe heeryng. And then put the line of your hoke in after.
and draw the hoke in to the cheke of ye fresshe heeryng. Then^ put a plumbe of
led upon your line a yerde long from your hoke and a flote in mydwaye
between: and cast it in a pytte where the pyke vsyth. And this is the best
and most surest craft of taking the pyke. A another manner taking of him
there is. Take a frosshe and put it on your hoke at the neck between the
skin and the body on ye back half: and put on a flote a yerde there fro: and
cast it where the pyke hauntyth and ye shall have him. A another manner. Take
the same bayte and put it in Asa fetida and cast it in the water with ^corde
and a cork: and ye shall not fayll of him. And if ye lift to have a good
sport: then tie the cord to a gose foot: and ye shall se god halynge
whether the gose or the pyke shall have the better.

NOw ye wot with what baytes and how ye shall angle to every manner fysshe.
Now I woll tell you how ye shall keep and feed your quycke baytes. Ye shall
feed and keep them all in general: but every manner by himself with such
things in and on which they bread. And as long as they ben quycke and new
they ben fine. But when they benlin a slough or else deed then ben they
naught. Out of these ben excepted three brodes: That is to wyre of hornettys:
humbylbees. and waspys. whom ye shall bake in breed and after dip their
heedes in blood and let them dry. Also except maggotes: which when they ben
bredde great with their naturell fedynge: ye shall feed them ferthermore with
shepes talow and with a cake made of flower and honey. then woll they be more
great. And when ye have clensyd them with sonde in a bag of blanket kept
hot under your gown or other warm^ thing two hours or three. then^ ben they
best and ready to angle with. And of the frosshe kytte ye leg by the knee. of
the grasshop the leggys and wings by the body.

These ben baytes made to last all the year. First been flower and lene
flesh of the hepis of a cony or of a catte: virgyn wexe and shepys talowe:
and braye them in a mortar: And then tempre it at the fire with a little
puryfyed honey: and so make it up in little ballys and bayte therwyth your
hokys after their quantyte. and this is a good bayte for all manner fresshe
fysshe.

A another take the sewer of a sheep and chese in like quantyte: and braye them
togider long in a mortere: And take then flower and tempre it therwyth. and
after that alaye it with honey and make ballys thereof. and that is for the
barbyll in especyall. A another for darse. and roche and bleke. take whete and
sethe it well and then put it in blood all a day and a night. and it is a
good bayte.

For baytes for great fyssh keep specially this rule. When ye have take a great
fysshe: undo the mawe. and what ye find therein make that your bayte: for it is
best.

These hen the.xij. flies with which ye shall angle to ye trought and
grayllying / and dubbe like as ye shall now here me tell.

March.
THe done fly the body of the done woll and the wyngis of the pertryche. A
another done fly. the body of black woll: the wings of the blackyst drake:
and the Iay under the wynge and under the tail.

Apryll.
The stone fly. the body of black wull: and yelowe under the wynge. and under
the tail and the wings of the drake. In the beginning of May a good fly.
the body of roddyd wull and lappid abowte with black sylke: the wings of the
drake and of the red capons hakyll.

May.
The yelow fly. the body of yelow wull: the wings of the red cock hakyll
and of the drake lyttyd yelow. The black louper. the body of black wull and
lappyd abowte with the herle of ye pecok tail: and the wings of ye read
capon with a blewe heed.

June.
The done cut: the body of black wull and a yelow list after either side:
the wings of the bosarde bound on with barkyd hemp. The maure fly. the body
of doske wull the wings of the blackest mayle of the wild drake. The tandy
fly at saint Wyllyams day. the body of candy wull and the wings contrary
either against other of the whitest mayle of ye wild drake.

Iuyll.
The waspe fly. the body of black wull and lappid abowte with yelow threde: the
wings of the bosarde. The shell fly at saint Thomas day. the body of grene
wull and lappyd abowte with the herle of the pecoks tail: wings of the
bosarde.

August.
The drake fly. the body of black wull and lappyd abowte with black sylke:
wings of the mayle of the black drake with a black heed.

These fygures are put here in ensample of your hokes.

depiction of fishing hooks

Here folowyth the order made to all those which shall have the understanding
of this forsayde treatise and use it for their pleasures.
YE that can angle and take fysshe to your plesures as this foresaid treatise
techyth and shewyth you: I charge and require you in the name of all noble men
that ye fysshe not in no poor man's several water: as his ponde: stewe: or
other necessary things to keep fysshe in without his license and good will.
Nor that ye use not to break no mannys gynnys lyenge in their wears and in
other places due unto them. Ne to take the fysshe away that is taken in
them. For after a fysshe is taken in a mannys gynne if the gynne be laid in
the common waters: or else in such waters as he hireth / it is his own propre
goods. And if ye take it away ye rob him: which is a right shamfull deed
to any noble man to do yt that theuys and brybours done: which are punysshed
for their evil deeds by the neck and otherwise when they may be aspyed and
taken. And also if ye do in like manner as this treatise shewyth you: ye shall
have no need to take of other men^ys: whiles ye shall have enough of your own
taking if ye list to labor therefore. which shall be to you a very pleasure
to se the fair bright shynynge scalyd fysshes dysceyued by your crafty means
and drawn upon land. Also that ye break no mannys heggys in going abowte
your dysportes: ne opyn no man's gates but that ye shytte them again. Also
ye shall not use this for said crafty dysporte for no couetysenes to
thencreasynge and sparynge of your money oonly / but pryncypally for your
solace and to cause the health of your body. and specially of your soul. For
when ye purpoos to goo on your disportes in fysshyng ye woll not desire
greatly many persons with you. which might let you of your game. And then
ye may serve god deuowtly in saying affectuously your custumable prayer. And
thus doing ye shall eschew and void many vices as ydylnes which is
pryncypall cause to enduce man to many other vices. as it is right well known.
Also ye shall not be to ravenous in taking of your said game as to much at one
time: which ye may lightly do if ye do in every point as this present
treatise shewyth you in every point. which should lightly be occasyon to
dystroye your own dysportes and other mennys also. As when ye have a
suffycyent mese ye should coueyte no more as at that time. Also ye shall besye
yourselfe to nouryssh the game in all that ye may: and to dystroye all such
things as ben deuourers of it. And all those that done after this rule shall
have the blessing of god and saint Petyr / which he them grant that with
his precious blood us boughte.

And for by cause that this present treatise should not come to the hondys of
each idle person which would desire it if it were enpryntyd allone by itself
and put in a little plaunflet therefore I have compylyd it in a greter volume of
diverse bokys concerning to gentle and noble men. to the intent that the for
said idle persons which should have but little mesure in the said dysporte of
fysshyng should not by this mean utterly dystroye it.
Here begynnyth the blasynge of arms
I Have showed to you in this book before how gentylmen began. and how the law
of arms was first ordained. and how many colors there ben in cote armours.
and the dyfference of cotamours with many other things that here need not to
be rehercyd. Now I entende to proceed of signs in arms and of the blasyng of
arms.

But for to reherce all the signs that been borne in arms: as Pecok Pie Back
Dragon Lion and Dolfin / and flowers and leeues it were to long a taryenge:
ner I can not do it: there ben so many. But here shall shortly be showed to
blase all arms if ye entende dylygently to your rules. And by cause the cross
is most worthy sign among all signs in arms / at ye cross I woll begin.
in which the noble and mighty prince king Arthur had great trust / so that
he left his arms that he bare of.iij. dragons. and over that a another shield
of three crowns and took to his arms a cross of silver in a field of verte /
and on ye right side an image of our blessed lady with her sone in her arm.
and with that sign of the cross he did many merueyles after. as it is wreten
in the books of chronicles of his ded is Also I have read this sign of ye
cross to be send from god to ye blessed man Marcuri / as Vincencius says (in
spcl^o historiali) of ye merueylous death of Julian thappostita
emperor.lio.xvo. he says: thangel brought unto the foresaid Marcury all armor
necessary with a shield of asure and a cross flury with.iiij. roses of gold. as
here in this shield. blazon or coat of arms And I fond never yt ever any arms
were send from heaven: but in them was the sign of ye cross. Eexcept in
tharmes of the king of France / the which arms certainly were sent by an
angel from heaven / that is to say: three flowers in manner of swerdes in a
field of asure. as it shewyth here. blazon or coat of arms ye which certain
arms were given to the foresaid king of France in sign of everlasting
trowble and yt he and his successors always with battle and swerdes should be
punysshyd /

I ask here mo questyons of the crossys sign
NOW I torn again to the sign of the cross and ask a questyon: how many
crosses ben borne in arms. to the which question under a certain nombre I dare
not anwere. for crosses innumerable are borne now daily. but decendynge to
every cross ye which before time I have seen as far as I can I entende to
discryue. among whom first the plain cross shall be discryued / of the which
cross mo dowtes ben made than of many other crosses. for asmoche as wise men
in blasyng of arms hold for a very rule: yt ye must begin to blase at the
lowest point of the shield. if the point be of one color and so ye color yt
is in the point of the shield is the field of the arms. But in that rule to
remeue away all doubts. ye must mark dylygently: that. ye rule is true with
a little addyco^n. yt is to wit that in arms to be blasyd it is always to
begin at ye point of the shield: if the point be of one color / that is true:
if the color of the point be more copious or gretter in those arms. and
then without doubt ye shall begin there. or else not. And where the colors
be equal parted other one length or over whart then^ evermore ye shall begin
to blase those arms in ye right side. and in yt case ye shall have no respect
to ye point And if it be asked how beereth saint George. it is to be known
that ye must say (Latin) Portat vnu^ scutu^de argento cu^ quadaz cruce plana
de rubio (Gallice (Il port dargent vne croys plain de geulles (Anglice (He
bears a field of silver with a plain cross of gowles. as here it it apperyth
in thise arms blazon or coat of arms And the same manner of wise are all
crosses having a plain cross to be blased Therefore they err yt say saint
George beerith the field of gowles with iiij. quarteres of silver of whom ye
reeson I low not. for by those reesons a plain cross should never be found
in in arms ner welny no difference in arms /

Of a cross of an equal length on every part.
A Plain cross is found in arms dyfferyng from ye first cross. and it is of
an equal length on every part / as it apperyth here. blazon or coat of arms
and thise arms ben harder than theother to blase as it is open. For thendes of
this cross to wchyth not the he^mys or the utter part of the shield in no
part: in the which ye shall say yt he yt beeryth thise arms ( Latin in) Ille
portat de asuro cu^ vna cruce plana aurea equal^ longitudi^s ex om^i perte (
Gallice (Il port dassur vne croys plain dung longeur per tout ( Anglice) He
beryth asure with a plain golden cross of equal length on every part. and
this is the dyfference in blasynge. yt all thendes of this cross are of equal
length / ye which may not be in the plain cross before. for the foot is the
lengest part and it be well made. And this difference shall apere better in a
cotarmour than it does in a shield. And so there is an evident difference
betwyx the two crosses aforsayd /

Of a plain cross streyte
THere is a another cross equal streyter in ye mids than in thendes with
open corners as here: blazon or coat of arms not towchyng ye vtterest part of
ye shield in any part thereof. and it is called a cross patent. And ye shall
say yt he yt beryth this cross beryth in this manner (Latin sic (Ille portat
vna^ cruce^ argentata^ pate^te in ca^po nigro ( Gallice (Il port de sable vne
croys patee dargent ( Angelice sic) He beryth sable a cross paty of silver /

Of a cross patent fixibyll.
THis cross patent is made diverse in the foot of the same as it aperyth here.
blazon or coat of arms and then^e it is called a cross patent fyxible. for in
the end such a cross may be pitched in ye which cross three of ye hyer
parts are open in the corners and brother than in the mids. and his foot is
dysposed to pytche in therth ( Latin (Ille portat de rubio cu^ vna cruce
figitiuade albo ( Gallice (Il port de geulles vne croys patee fichee dargent (
Anglice) He bears geulles and a cross paty fixible of silver. And know ye yt
there be many crosses the which may be made fyxible as it shall be showed here
following in dyuersly /

Of a plain cross corded.
Among other crosses is one found the which is called a corded cross / as
here it is showed in this cross the which is called a corded cross: blazon
or coat of arms for it is madeof cords. which certain cross I saw but late
in tharmes of a noble man: the which in very deed was sometime a crafty man a
roper as he himself said. And ye shall say of him yt beeryth thise arms:
Latin: Ille portat gowlles cu^ vna cruce plana cordata de argento: Galice sic:
Il port de geulles and vne croys plain cordee dargent: Anglice sic: He
beeryth geulles and a cross plain corded of silver.

Of a cross plain perforated
THere is a another cross plain which merueylouly fro the plain cross of
saint George dyfferyth as here apryth. blazon or coat of arms and here it is to
be merkyd: ye thoppynyon of some men's saying is. yt thise arms be checkred
arms. And this opinion is utterly to be repreuyd / for arms may not be
checkred but at ye leest in the no^bre of.iiij. and in a gretter no^bre they
may well be made. as afterward shall be showed. Therefore it is to be said: Latin
sic. Ille portat vna^ crucez argentea^ perforata^ in campo nigro: Gallice sic:
Il port desable vne croys dargent partiee: Anglice: He beeryth sable and
acrosse perforatyd of silver.

Of a besantyd cross.
OVer these crosses we have a another cross which I saw late in tharmes of a
certain Ianuens: as here it shewyth blazon or coat of arms And this is called a
besant cross / for it is made all of besantes. And such a cross may be made
as soon with little cakes as with besantes. For besantes and little cakes
dyffere not but in color. For besantes ben ever of golden color. ne the
color of the besant shall be expressed in blasynge of arms.for it nedyth not
to say: a besant of gold. for there ben no besantes but of gold Therefore it
is to be said: Latin sic: Ille portat vna^ crucem talentata^ in campo rubio:
Gallice sic: Il port de geulles vne croys besauntee: Anglice sic: He beeryth
gowles and a cross besanted.

Of a cross flurry
NOw folowyth a another cross flurry. which is so called as it aperyth here.
blazon or coat of arms And therefore it is called a florysshing cross. for it
has flowers in every end upward / that is to say save the foot. This
cross flurry sometime is borne in arms fyxabyll. And the end is called in arms
a cross flurry fyxabyll For in three of his ends he is florysshyng and in ye
foot pitchablyl or fyxabyll. Therefore it is to be said of him that beeryth it:
Latin: Portat vna^ crucem auream florida^ in campo asored: Gallice: Il port
de asur vne croys flouretee dor: Anglice: He bears asure and a cross flurry
of gold.

Now here shall be showed of a cross flurry patent in arms.
NOw folowyth a another cross which is called a cross flurry patent. as here
it apperith / blazon or coat of arms And it is called a cross flurry patent /
for he has his ends openand in the mids of every end apperyth a another
third in ye manner of a flower as it is openly showed in this cross. Therefore
it shall be said that the berer of these arms: beryth in this wise as
folowyth: Latin: Portat vna^ crucem floridam patentem de auro in campo asureo:
Gallice sic: Il port de asur vne croys flouretee dor: Anglice: He beeryth asure
with a cross patent flurry of gold.

Ye shall understand here of a plain watery cross.
MOrouer ye shall understand that there is a another plain cross: which
certainly is called a watery cross. and it is called a watery cross / for it is
made by the manner of water troubled with wind. as here it shall be showed in
these arms. blazon or coat of arms Therefore he that beeryth these arms bears
in this wise as it shall be showed: Latin: Portat vna^ crucem plana^ vndosam
de argento in ca^po rubio: Gallice sic: Il port de geulles vne crois plain
vndee dargent: Anglice sic He beeryth gowles and a plain watery cross of
silver.

Also there is a cross that is called inueckyd
IN arms also are found mo crosses which are made of colors inueckyd or
indentyd as here in this cross apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And it is
called a cross inueckyd forcause that it has two colors / one put in to a
another. And of him that beeryth thise arms ye shall say thus: Latin: Portat
vna^ crucem planam inuertam de coloribus albis and nigris in campo rubeo:
Gallice sic: Il port de geulles vne croys plain verre dargent and sable:
Anglice: He beereth gowles and a cross of silver and sabled inueckyd.

Of a another manner cross yt is called a cross croslet.
YEt follows a another cross which is called a cross crossit or croslet. and
it is called cross it for in every end it is crossid as here apperyth. blazon
or coat of arms But this cross is not soofte born in arms by himself as other
crosses / nevertheless many times it is born in dyminutiues that is to say in
little crosses crossyd / And then^ tharmes are powdryd with little crosses
crucyatyd. And ye shall say thus of him that beeryth these arms: Latin: Ille
portat vnam crucem cruciatam de argento in campo afored: Gallice sic: Il port
de asur vne croys dargent: Anglice sic: He beeryth asure and a cross crosset
of silver. And when such crosses are born and put in arms as I said before in
dimynutyues and without any certain nombre / then they are called in frensshe
crossettes

Morouer there is a cross masculatyd as here folowyth.
Wit ye well yet that there is a another cross which is called a cross
masculatyd as here it apperyth. blazon or coat of arms and this cross is
called a cross masculatyd / for he is made of mascules of which certain
mascules ye shall se afterwardein the chapter of fusyllys masculyd and
losynges: where this matere shall be more plainly treated. And he yt beeryth
thise arms beerith as it is showed here after: Latin sic: Portat vna^ crucem
masculataz de argento in campo asereo: Gallice: Il port dasur vne croys
masculee dargent: Anglice: He beeryth asure and a cross masculatyd of silver.

Also there is a cross masculatyd and perforatyd as here.
BE it know: yt this cross masculatyd sometime is perforatyd in the masculys /
as it is open in the persynge here following. blazon or coat of arms And thus
ye must blase him. Latin sic: Ille portat vnam cruce^ masculataz perforatam de
rubio in scuto argented: Galice sic Il port dargent vne croys de geulles
masculee persee: Anglice sic: He beeryth silver with a cross of gowles
masculatyd persyd.

There is a myllars cross as here it shall be showed
HEre folowith a another cross which is called the cross of a myller / blazon
or coat of arms for it is made to the symylitudeof a certain instrument of yren
in mylles which beryth the mylstoon / by the which instrument ye stone in his
course is born equally yt he declyne not over much on ye right part ne on ye
left part: but mynystrynge to every part that yt is his equally and without
frawde. and this is given to Iuges to bear in their arms: and to those that
have Iurisdicco^n under them / That is to say: as the foresaid Instrument is
dyrecte to the mylle stone equally and with one gyle / So those Iuges are
bound to give equally to every man his right. And it is to be said that the
possessour of thise arms beereth in this wise: Latin: Portat vnam crucem
molendinarem argenteam in campo rubeo: Gallice: Il port vne croys moleyne de
argent: Anglice: He beeryth gowles and a myllars cross of silver.

Now it shall be showed of a cross yt is tornyd again.
Certain we have a cross which is called a cross tornyd again. and this
cross is called retornyd: for the cause yt thendes of this cross on every
side are returned again by the manner of a ra^mys horn. blazon or coat of arms
and he yt beryth these arms beryth in this wise first Latin: Portat vnam
crucem aurea^ inuersam in scuto alured: Gallice sic: Il port de asur vne croys
reuersee dor: Anglice: He beeryth asure with a cross reuersyd of gold.

Of a cross forkyd
Understand ye that there ben other men which bear in their arms a certain
forkyd cross as this is. blazon or coat of arms And it is called forkyd: for
asmoche as that all thendes of it are cloven and forkyd. Therefore it shall be
said of those men that beeryth these arms in this wise: Latin: Portat vna^
crucem furcataz de auro in campo alereo: Gallice: El port de asur vne croys
dor: Anglice: He beeryth asure with a cross forkyd of gold.

Of a cross engraylled or engradyd
ALso there ben certain noble men which beer a cross engradid or engraylid.
as it apperyth here following. blazon or coat of arms And it is called a cross
engraylyd: for it is not playnin any part of him but engraylyd also well over
his length as over his bread. Nevertheless this engraylyng is no propre langage
after the sight of this cross: but rather an endentynge as truth is But it is
the common manner of spekyng in these arms. Therefore ye must say as I said
before / and ye shall say of him yt beeryth these arms in this wise: Latin:
Portat vna^ crucem ingradatam de albo in ca^po rubio: Gallice: Il port de
geulles vne croys ingradee dargent: Anglice: He beryth gowles and a cross
ingralyled of silver.

Of a cross cutoff.
I Find yet a another cross which is born many times in tharmes of noble men.
the which is called a cross tru^catyd. and it is called tru^catyd for it is
madeof.ij. trees the bows cut away: as here. blazon or coat of arms Therefore
it is to be said yt the possessor of thise arms beeryth: Latyne: Portat vna^
crucem truncata^ de argento in campo rubio: Gallice: Il port de geulles vne
croys recopee dargent: Anglice He beeryth gowles with a cross truncated of
silver.

Of a knotty cross.
Know ye yet after these crosses there is a another cross which is called a
knotty cross: the which in certain is called so for it has in every end
certain knottes as here. blazon or coat of arms And it is to be said of him yt
beeryth thise arms: Latin: Portat vna^ crucem aurea^ no dulata^ in scuto
asoreo: Gallice: Il port dasur vne croys bouto^nee dor: Anglice: He beeryth
asure with a cross knotty of gold. And this cross is found otherwhile
pytche or figitiue in arms / and then his foot is figitiue as I said before.

Of a cross flurry knottyd.
OVer thise crosses we have a certain cross flurry of the which it is spoken
before. the which cross flurry is found knotty as here. blazon or coat of
arms And that is as I said aforewhan knottes are found in thendes and thangles
of ye said cross. and the berer of the said arms (Latin) Portat vna^ cruce^
nodulata^ florida^ aurea^ in ca^po de asuro (Gallice sic) Il port dasur vne
croys flouretee bouto^ne dor) Anglice) He beeryth asure and a cross flurry
knotty of gold.

Of a cross dowble pertited /
A Cross double is found in in tharmes of diverse noble men? ye which certain
cross is called a dowble pertited cross. For if it be diuyded or parted after
ye long way or the broad way: yet there abides one double cross / as we may
se here. blazon or coat of arms Yet I have seen many noble men dowtyng of this
cross more than of any cross aforsayd: the which nevertheless after long
disputaco^ns in thoppinyon aforsayd rested and concluded. Therefore he yt
beerith these arms (Latin sic) Portat vna^ cruce^ duplicata^ argentea^ in
ca^po nigro (Gallice sic) Il port sable vne croys double party dargent
(Anglice sic He beeryth sable and a cross dowble partited of silver.

Of a cross dowble partited florysshed
THis cross double partited is varyed sometime: and then it is called a
cross double partited florysshed as here. blazon or coat of arms netheles it
is called a cross flurry inproperly as somemen say: for it faylyth the mids
of ye flower as anon it shall follow in the next arms. ye which certain
mids by no manner of wise in ye cross double partited may be. as anon it
shall be showed. But he that beereth these arms (Latin Portat vna^ crucem
duplam pertita^ auream in campo rubio / Gallice / Il port de geulles vne croys
double partiee floretee dor. Anglice. He beeryth gowles and a cross dowble
partyted flurry of gold /

Of a cross tripartited florisshyd.
But as is showed before this cross is called a cross double partited
florisshed for there fails ye mids of ye cross by the which the cross
florysshed is made perfyt. as here it is open. blazon or coat of arms ye which
certain mids put thereto: it shall not be cailed a cross dowble pertited
florisshed: But rather it shall be called a cross three fold pertited flurry.
and then^e it is well blased. for and it be diuyded after ye longnes or after
ye brodenes. always one part shall abide tripertited in ye mids of the cross:
as it is open in tharmes before wreten. And therefore he yt beeryth these arms
(Latin) Portat vna^ crucez tripertito de argento in ca^po de asuro (Gallice)
Il port daseur vne croys troyffoys pertiee flouretee dargent (Anglice sic) He
beeryth of asure with a cross tripertited floree of silver /

Of a Myllars cross shadowed or vmbrated.
A Doubt there is yet of a certain shadow of a Myllars cross as it shewyth
here following. blazon or coat of arms And know ye yt it is callid a shadow of
a cross / for evermore this shadowis made of black color. of what someuer
color the field be of. the shadow is made of black. and the body of the same
shadow is of the same color with the field. And he yt beeryth thise arms
(Latin (Portat vna^ crucem vmbrata^ in ca^po aureo) Gallice) p Il ort dor vne
croys mo^nyer vmbre (Anglice) He beeryth of gold with a Myllars cross
vmbratyd or shadowed.

Of a cross floree patent vmbratyd /
A another sample is seen of thu^braco^n of a certain cross, and this cross is
called a cross floree vmbrated: as apereth here. blazon or coat of arms but
truly speking and properly it is no cross: but a shadow of such a cross and
the reason is. for ye body of the said shadow is of the same color with the
field. And so the color that is in the field shewyth by all the body of the
said shadow And those that beer these arms ( Latin (Portant vnaz crucem
floridam patentem vmbratam in campo rubeo ( Galice sic) Il port de geules vne
croys patee floretee vmbree ( Anglice sic) He beeryth of gowles and a cross
patent flore vmbratyd /

Of a cross flory patent vmbratyd and perforatyd /
Nevertheless after some men this shadowed cross otherwhyle is percyd
merueyllously as it folowyth here: blazon or coat of arms and then it is
called a cross flory patent vmbratyd and perforated: for it accords with the
cross precedyng except the percynge in the mids of the said shadow. And
then it shall be said that he the which beeryth this cross ( Latin)
Portat vnam crucem floridam patentem vmbratam perforataz cum rubio in campo
aureo ( Et gallice sic) Il port dor vne croys patee floretee vmbree and part
de geules ( Anglice) He beeryth of gold a cross patent flurry shadowed and
percyd with gowles.

BLasours must beware of these arms vmbratyd / of the which many rules ben
showed before. But for the blasyng of these certain arms some ygnoraunt men of
this craft take the rule going before: that it to wit of the colors
transmuted as ye saw before. But there ben certain nobles and gentylmen in
England the which beer shadows diverse in their arms: as Lion Antlop and
other. and they that beer these arms / and it be a lion: ye shall say in
latin (Portat vnum leonem vmbratum in campo aureo) Gallice Il port dor et
vnglyon vmbree ( Anglice) He beeryth of gold and a lion vmbratyd. And men say
that such persons as bear these vmbratyd arms had their progenytours
beerynge the same not vmbratyd but hole But the possessions and the patrymonyes
descended to other men. then the neuewes or kynnesmen living in good hope and
trusting to have the possessions of their progenytours: bear their arms
vmbratyd. all other dyfference aforsayd leuynge. for when they have that
patrimony: yt they they trustyd on. soon they may beer that lion or other
be of the same color the which their progenytours bare. and it is better
to beer those arms vmbraryd: than holy to leave their progenytours arms.

Yet here folowyth a another cross he^myd or borderyd as apperyth
A Great doubt yet remains against blasours of arms in difference betwyx
this cross fimbratid or bordryd. as here now aperyth blazon or coat of arms
and the foresaid cross vmbratyd.in somoche that they are much like. and it
apperyth in the first syghte yt they ben but one but and a man behold well
there is a great dyffere^ce. for the bordre of this cross is varied as well fro
the color of the cross as fro the color of the field. and else there is no
doubt. Therefore it shall be said of him that beeryth these arms in this wise:
Latin sic: Portat vna^ crucem nigraz perforatam florida^ patentem fim briatam
sieve bordurata^ cu^ argento in campo rubio: Gallice sic Il port de gulles vne
croys flouretee patee periee de sabull bourde dargent: Anglice sic: He bears
gowles with a cross flurry patent persyd of sable borderyd with syleuer.

Now folowyth an ermyn cross as it shall be showed.
FOr certain there is an ermyn cross. and it is a merueyllus cross / of the
which there was a dysputaco^n at London by a certain Heroude of Brytayne. And
it was determyd that these arms may be in none other color but as here it
apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And this cross is called an ermyn cross. And
it shall be said of him yt beryth thise armies in this wise as it shall follow:
Latin: Portat vna^ crucem ereminalem: Gallice sic: Il port vne croys arminee:
Anglice sic He beeryth a cross ermyn. And here ye must note yt the color in
these arms shall not be expressyd / for this cross neither these arms may
not be made but of these colors. that is to say allone of black and white
the which are the propre colors of these arms.

Suffycyently is spoken of Crosses before. now folowyth an other treatise of
diverse arms quartryd as here shall be showed
OF armies quarteryd some arms quarteryd plain Some quarteryd engradyd. Some
quarteryd irrasid. Some quarteryd inueckyd. Some quarteryd indentyd of ye
which it shall be spoken eueryche one after other. and first of the arms
plain.
It shall be showed first of arms quarteryd plain.
Three manner of wise arms may be quarteryd. The first manner is open: when two
diverse arms are borne quarterly / as it is open and plain in the arms of the
king of France and of England. blazon or coat of arms And ye shall say of
him that beeryth these arms thus as folowyth: Latin: Ille portat arma regis
francie et anglie quarteriata: Et gallice sic: Il port lez arms de Frannce et
de Angleterre quarteles: Anglice sic He beereth the arms of France and
England quarterly. And it shall not be tedious to no man that France is put
before England in blasynge / but ye cause is this: for the arms of France in
arms ben put before. And we have a general rule / that when someuer in arms
be two colors or moo in the point of the shield then ye shall not begin at
the point to blase: but in the right part or side of those arms. that same
color there found in ye right side of the shield is not the field of the
arms / for it may fortune it is not the gretest color in tharmys aforsayde:
but less or with other equal And nethelesse ye shall begin toblase there.

Of armies quarterly borne now it shall be showed
blazon or coat of arms THe second manner of wise of berynge quarteryd armies
is when four diverse arms quarterly be born^ / as here is showed. And he yt
beryth these arms bears four diverse armies quarterly: Latin sic: Ille port
at quatuor arma diusa quarteriata: Gallice sic: Il port quatre arms diverse
quartelees: Anglice: He beereth four arms diverse quarterly. And then if it
be asked how these armies should be blasyd.

The blaser must begyn^ in the highest corner over the right side procedyng to
every arms. tharmes in the right side blasyd: ye must goo to the other side:
and then to the third side / and after to the last. And ye must know that
these armies rehercyd before ben plain arms quarteryd.

blazon or coat of arms THere is a another manner of beeryngof armies quarteryd /
when ij. arms quarterid ben born^ quarterly. and it is borne most in tharmys
of queen's / And so bare that noble queen of England: queen Anna wife to ye
ryall prince king Richard the second / which bare tharmes of England and of
France and of the emperor of Almayne quarterly: and in.xvi. parts / yt is to
say in the right side of the shield in the first quarter she bare tharmys of
France / three flourdeluces of gold in a field of asure. And in the second
quarter three lyberdys of gold in a field of gowles. And in the third quarter
an egle with two necks. And in the fourth a lion rampynge in a field of
gowles. And so changeably she bare thise armies in.xvi. quarteres which seldom
is seen in any armies.

Of armies quartryd and engraylyd now it shall be showed.
NOw I show you that some time we have armies quarteryd and engraylyd. that is
to wit when every armies in his quarter is engrayllyd: as here apperyth. blazon
or coat of arms And it shall he said of him yt beryth these armies thus:
Latin:Ille portat de auro et rubio arma quarteri ata and nigra data: Et
gallice sic: Il port dor et geulles quarterlee engraylee: Anglice sic: He be
rith of gold and gowles quarterly engraylyd. And they are called armies
engradyd for they are made of two colors: the which gradydly are brought
together one color in to a another color.

Of armies quarteryd and irrasyd now I woll speak.
Certain armies there ben quartryd and irrasyd: as apperyth. blazon or coat of
arms the which certain arms are dealed quarteryd arms irrasyd. For the
colors ben rasid out as one color in rasyng were take away from a another. And
it shall besayd of him ye bears thise arms: Latin sic: Portat arma
quarteriata irrasa de albo et nigro: Gallice Il port dargent et sable quartlee
irrase: Anglice sic: He beryth silver and sable quaterly irrasyd.

Of arms quarteryd inueckyd now here it shall be showed.
THere ben yet found arms quarterly inueckyd: or as some say they ben army
quarteryd of colors inueckyd: as here aperyth / blazon or coat of arms which
forsooth are called arms quarteryd inueckid or of colors inueckid. For in
them are two colors quarterly put: the one in to ye other. And so one color
is inueckid into a another Therefore it is said of him that beryth these armies in
this wise: Latin: Ille portat quateriatim de asurio et auro inuectes: Gallice:
Il port quarterlee verre dasur et dor: Anglice: He beryth quarterly inueckyd
of asure and gold.

Now of armies quarterid indentyd it shall here be showed
QVarteryd arms be found diverse which are called indentyd: as here apperyth
/ blazon or coat of arms and they are called indentyd for two colors one in to
a another by ye mane of teeeth are indentyd: as it is open in the shield. And
thus ye shall blase them: Latin: Portat arma quarteriata indentata de rubio
et auro: Gallice: Il port quartelee endentlee de geulles et dor: Anglice: He
beryth quarterly endentyd of gowles and gold

Of armies partyd after the long way here (...)
I intend now to determyn of armies partyd after the long way: which certain
partyng after the long way or on length is made many manner of wise. The
first pertyco^n forsooth is of two colors in armies after the long way in ye
plain manner. There is also a partynge of armies of two colors ingradyd. And
also there is a partynge of two colors irrasyd. And also forsooth there is a
partynge of two colors inueckyd. And there is a another partynge of two colors
indentyd. There is also a partynge of two colors clowdyd or nebulatyd. And
more over there is a partyng of two colors watery.

First I showed to you that there ben certain armies partyd after ye long way
of two colors in ye plain way as here apperyth in thise arms. blazon or
coat of arms And they are called partyd armies for they ben made of.ij. colors
equally partyd. And he yt beryth these arms bears thus: Latin: Ille portat
arma pertita plana scdm longu^ de asorio et albo: Gallice: Il port dasur et
dargent plain partiee: Anglice sic: He beryth asure and silver plain partyd.

Of armies partyd the long way ingraylyd I will show here.
ALso there is a pertycyon of armies engraylyd the long way as is said before
by engraylyng of two colors together / as here apperith. blazon or coat of arms
And these armies are called armies engraylyd partid after the long way of
siluerand sable. And it shall be said of him yt beeryth thise armies: Latin
sic: Portat arma pertita secundu^ longu^ ingradata de argento et nigro /
Gallice sic: Il port dargent ingraylee et sablee partice du long: Anglice sic:
He beerith silver and sable ingraylyd parted after the long way.

Here now it shall be showed of armies partyd and irrasyd.
THe third manner of wise are found armies partyd of two colors and irrasyd:
as here. blazon or coat of arms of the whycheit is to be said as before of
quarterid armies irrasyd. and he yt beryth thise armies: beryth in this wise as
follows: Latin sic: Portat arma pertita scdm longu^ irrasa de argento et
rubio: Gallice sic: Il port partiee du long dargent et de geulles ralee:
Anglice sic: He bears arms partyd on length of silver and gowles irrasyd.

Of arms partyd ye long way and inueckid now I woll speak

THe fourth manner armies partyd are born after ye long way of two colors
inueckyd: as here apperyth. blazon or coat of arms and thise arms ben called
inueckid / for ye colors be put one in to a another round wise. And these
armies dyffere much fro tharmys next being before irrasyd. wherefore it shall be
said of him which bears these armies thus as it shall follow: Latin: Ipse
portat arma pertita scdm longuz de coloribus albo et rubio inuectis: Gallice
sic: Il port pertiee verree du long dargent et de geulles: Anglice: He beryth
partyd inueckyd on length of silver and gowles.

Of armies partyd on ye long way and indentyd here shewyth.
Certainly a another manner of partyd arms there is which is called the fyfth
manner partyd after ye long way of two colors. and these armies are called
partyd indentyd: for this cause / ye two diverse colors are put together: that
is to say: white and black put together after the manner of mennys teeth / as
it is said before in ye quarteryd armies indentyd. blazon or coat of arms and
therefore ye shall say of him which beeryth these armies in this wise: Latin:
Portat arma pertita scdm longu^ de argento et nigro indentata: Gallice sic: Il
port pertiee endentiee du long dargent et sable: Anglice: He beryth armies
partyd indentyd on length of silver and sable.

Of armies partid after the long way clowdy or nebulatyd
IN the syxt manner of wise there ben armies born partid after ye long way
nebulatyd / as here it shall be showed in this scochon. blazon or coat of arms
And these armies ben called innebulatid: for two colors are put together by the
manner of clouds. Therefore the possessor of these armies beeryth in this wise
as it shall be said: Latin: Portat arma pertita scdm longu^ de argento et
asorio innebulara: Et gallice sic: Il port pertiee du long dargent et dasur
innuee: Anglice sic: He beeryth armies partyd on length of silver and asure
innebulatyd.

Of armies partyd watery of silver and gowles this scochon is
MOre over after these armies aforsayd yet there ben born armies partid after the
long way. and they ben watery as here in this scochon it aperyth. blazon or
coat of arms And these armies are called watery / for two colors are incaryed
one in toa another by the manner of water trowblyd with wind. And ye shall say
of him yt beeryth these armies in this wise as folowyth: Latin: Portat arma
pertita vndosa scdm longu^ de argento et rubio: Gallice sic: Il port party du
long dargent de de geulles vndee: Anglice sic: He beeryth armies partyd the
long way of silver and gowles watery.

Now here I begin to speak of armies partyd ouerwhart
HEre now follows to se of arms partyd ouerwhart. ye which certain pertyco^n
ouerwharte is made as many wise as is the pertyco^n on length. yt is to say
on ye plain way ouerwhart. ingraylid irrasid. inueckid. indentyd. innebulatid.
and watery wherefore of these certain shall beshewed by signs. And first I
begin at plain armies ouerwhart: as here it shall be showed. blazon or coat of
arms And it shall be said of him that beeryth these armies in this wise: Latin
sic: Portat arma partita extransuerso plana de auro et asorio: Et gallice sic:
Il port party transuersie dor et dasur: Anglice He beeryth gold and asure
partyd ouerwhart. Know ye that here is no doubt of that first rule: that is
to say / that a man shall begin at the point of the shield to blase. for here
is as much color of gold as of asure.

Of arms irrasid ouerwhart now here it shall be showed.
NOw of a another manner of partico^n of colors in arms ouerwhart I will speak.
and it is called irrasyd: as here it shall appear in this scochyon. blazon or
coat of arms of which it is to be said yt the gentylman which beeryth thise
armies beerythin this manner as folowyth: Latin: Portat arma partita
extransuerso irraso de auro et rubio: Gallice sic: Il port partiee transuersee
irrasee dor et de geulles: Anglice: He beryth arms partid ouerwhart irrasid of
gold and gowles

Now of armies partyd ouerwhat ye shall have ensample.
Armies there be also endentyd ouerwhart and partyd. And they ben called
indentid for their colors as is said before are put one in to a another by the
manner of mennys teeth. blazon or coat of arms And it shall be said of hm yt
berth thyise armies in this wise: Latin: Portat arma pertita extransuerso
indentata de auro et asorio / as before is rehercyd: Gallice sic Il port pertiee
de trauers dor et dasur endentee: Anglice sic: He beeryth arms partyd
ouerwhart indentyd of gold and asure. And to reherce more of partyd armies
ouerwharte it nedyth not / for it is rehercyd suffycyently in the rules next
before in arms partyd on length. Therefore it shall not be rehercyd here again (
qr inutil' est repetico^ vnius ad eiusde^) And yt is to say / It is an
vnprouffytable rehercynge of one thing to reherce ye same again in ye next
sentence / Therefore to speak more of armies partyd and figure them: other of
ingraylyd or irrasyd: inueckyd indentyd nebulatyd and vndatyd: it nedyth not /
for they ben taught suffycyently in the long way. And I believe it shall be
hard to find many moo armies partyd after the long way or ouerwhart than are
rehercyd before / Nevertheless if any be found or seen: in them that same rules
shall be obseruyd as is rehercyd before. And is enough for all arms on that
manner to be blasyd that any gentylman beeryth partyd.

Of armies which are called Cheyf or an heed I woll show
Sothly certain men would that these arms after rehercyd should be callid armies
partyd. which certainly for yt that there is no very pertyco^n of the colors
or any lyknes of diuysion of colors. Certainly in arms partydit is required
always that the parts of the colors be equal. and that is not true in this
figure / for the more part by much is silver. blazon or coat of arms Therefore
ye shall say of him that beryth thise arms thus Latin: Portat de argento et
capud scuti de asoreo cum duabus maculis perforatis de auro: Gallice sic: Ill
port dargent vne cheyffe dasur et deux molettes parties dor: Anglice sic: He
beeryth silver a cheyff or a chefrayne of asure and two molettes perforatyd of
gold. And ye shall know that in thise arms the rule before wreten must be
consydred / that is to say: that at the Coon it is to begin to blase if that
color of the Coon be gretter or more copyous color in armies as it is said
before. And more over it is to be markyd yt no arms owe to be called partyd
armies but if they be made of two colors one partyd and no more. for armies
pal^d are not called: nor owe not to be called partyd armies although they ben
made of two colors. for those colors not all only ones but diverse times are
partyd: as here apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And these armies ben called
partyd armies / for they ben made by the manner of palys. And it shall be said
of him that beeryth these arms: Latin sic: Portat arma palara de auro et
asoreo: Gallice sic: Il port pale dor et dasur: Anglice sic: He beeryth pale
of gold and asure.

Of armies palyd vndatyd now here it shall be showed.
PAlyd armies oftyme are found vndatyd / that is to say watery: as here
apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And these ben called palyd armies vndatyd to
the dyfference of barrydarmes vndatyd. the which arms barryd may also be
vndated as here after shall be showed. And it shall be said of him yt beeryth
thise arms thus Latin. Portat arma palata vndata vl vndosa de rubio et
argento: Gallice: Il port palee vndee de geulles et dargent: Anglice: He beryth
paly vndatyd of gowles and silver.

Of armies palyd crokyd and sharp now I woll speak.
Look and behold how many manner of wise these palyd arms ben borne dyuersly
/ as it is showed in this book. blazon or coat of arms And thise arms now
showed here ben called palyd crokyd and sharp. For in these armies two colors
paly are put together one in to a another crokyd and sharp. Therefore it shall be
said of him ye which beeryth these arms in this wise: Latin: Portat arma
palata tortuosa acuta de nigro et argento: Gallice sic: Ill port pale dansete
de sable et dargent: Anglice sic: He beryth pale crokyd and sharp of sable and
silver.

Of armies barryd plain now here it shall be showed
HEre in this chapitre before is determined of palid arms and in this chapitre
now following it shall be determynyd of barryd arms. for ye which it shall be
know yt arms may be many manner of wise barryd. And the first manner of
wise is plain barryd. as here appears. blazon or coat of arms And ye shall
know yt there ben certain arms barryd plain. and then^ ye shall not need to
say in the blasynge of these arms: he beerythplayne arms barryd. But in all
other disperyng arms barryd: ye must nedys declare ye blasynge of them how
those barryd arms dyffere fro plain. For some ben barryd with a lion rau^pyng
or a greehounde or other beestes / And some ben barryd and some powdryd with
cross croslettes molettes scresentes small birds or other dyfference / But as
for thise plain arms before ye shall say: Latin: Portat arma barrata de
argento and nigro: Gallice sic: Il port bar de argent et sable: Anglice sic:
He beeryth barry of silver and sable.

Of barryd armies vndatyd now I will show as apperyth.
Know ye for certain yt arms barryd otherwhyle be barryd and vndatyd: yt is to
say watery / as here it apperyth. blazon or coat of arms and they ben called
barryd vndatyd: for theyben made of two colors metynge together in manner of a
flowinge water as it is open before. And ye shall say of him yt beereth thise
arms in this wise: Latin: Portat arma barrata vndata de nigro et albo:
Gallice sic: Il port bar vndee de sable et dargent: Anglice sic: He beeryth
barry vndatyd of sable and silver.

Of arms barryd and inueckyd ye shall have example
BArrid arms inueckid are born of diverse gentle men as here is showed. blazon
or coat of arms and they are called inueckid: for in every bar.ij. colors
are put inueckid in manner of a round way as is said before. And he that bears
these arms berech in this wise: Latin sic: Portat arma barrata de coloribus
rubeo et inuectis: Gallice sic: Il port barree verree de geulles et de argent:
Anglice sic: He beerith barry inueckyd of gowles and silver. And I begin with
gowles / for ye color is the first in the right corner.

Of arms barryd crokyd and sharp as here after is showed.
Gentle men there ben certainly which beer arms barryd crokyd and sharp as
here it apperyth in these armies. blazon or coat of arms and they ben called
arms barryd for dyfferenceof arms the same manner of wise pasyd and they ben
called crokyd and sharp. for as it is said before two colors are put together
crokidly and sharp^. Therefore it shall be said that the lord yt beryth these
arms beryth in this wise: Latin: Ille portat arma barata tortuosa et acuta de
nigro et auro: Gallice sic: Il port baree dantelee acute de sable et dor:
Anglice sic: He beeryth barryd crokyd and sharp of sable and gold.

Now it shall be showed of arms that are bendly barryd.
THere ben forsooth certain arms bendly barrid. and they ben called bendly
barryd. and for this cause they ben called bendly barryd. for two colors are
together in every bar bendly as it is open here in thise arms. blazon or coat
of arms And therforeit shall be said of him that beereth these arms in this
wise as folowyth: Latin sic: Ipse portat arma bendaria de rubio et auro:
Gallice: Il port bar bend de geulles et dor: Anglice sic: He beereth barry
bendy of gowles and gold. But nevertheless ye must dylygently attend in the
blasyng of such arms: as palyd barryd and bendyd. for and they ben not
subtylly conceived a man suddenly answeyrnge may lightly in those arms be
dysceyued. For certainly those arms ben called palyd arms in the which are
found so many palys of one color as are of a another. And if the palys of
both the colors ben not equal those arms ben not palyd.

In diverse armies of gentylmen ben found two palys of one color and three of a
another / as here in these armies following it shall be showed. blazon or coat of
arms That is to say: there ben threpales of gowles and two of gold / for of
the color of read appears three parts in the shield / and but two allone of
the color of gold. Therefore the gentylman that beeryth these armies beeryth
in this wise. And thus ye shall say of him: Latin: Portat duos palos aureos
in campo rubeo: Gallice sic: Il port de geulles et deux palles dor: Anglice
sic: He beeryth gowles and two pales of gold.

Here ye shall dilygently mark armies barryd and lees barryd
YE must also dilygently attend to the nombre of both two colors in armies
palyd barryd or lees barryd: of ye which barrys ye must beware when they be
found in armies: as here it is showed in these armies / blazon or coat of arms
Forsuche lines ben called little barrys to the dyfference of little barrys. And
it shall be said that ye gentylman which beryth these armies: beeryth in this
wise: Latin: Portat vna^ barram et du as barulas de albo in ca^po rubio:
Gallice: Il port de geulles vne bar et deux barrelettes de argent: Anglice
sic: He beereth gowles one bar and two little bars of silver.

Now I will speak of armies barryd and little bars florysshyd
Behold how the foresaid little bars areother while made florisshingly: and
then^ they ben called florysshid / as here in this scochon. blazon or coat of
arms And they ben callid flourisshyd / for they be in manner of a flourdeluce.
And ye shall say of him that is possessor of these armies in this wise as
folowyth: Latin sic: Portat vnam barra^ et duas barulas floridas albas in
scuto sieve campo blodio: Gallice sic: Il port dasur vne barriee et deux
barrelettes florit de argent: Anglice sic: He beeryth asure one bar and two
little barrys florysshyd of silver.

Now I entende to speak of bendys in armies: as here.
OTherwhyle there is born^ in armies a bend as is found ^n diverse arms of
certain noble gentylmen: as here now it shall be showed. blazon or coat of arms
And ye must know that it is called a bend the which begynnyth at the right
corner or the horn of the shield: and decendith to the left side of the same
shield / to the dyfference of fyssures or of little stauys / of the which it
shall be spoken after. And of him that beeryth these armies ye shall say thus
as folowyth: Latin sic: Portat vnam bendam de rubio in campo aureo: Gallice
sic: Il port dor vne bend de geulles: Anglice: He beryth gold and a bend of
gowles.

Of little bendys in arms now here is an ensample.
Know ye how before it is said that certain little barrys are borne in armies
many times. On the same manner of wise are born^ little bendes: as here it
shall be showed. blazon or coat of arms And they be called bendyllys to the
dyfference of great bendys: as it is open. And of him that beryth thysethus it
shall be said first as here folowyth: Latin: Portat vnam bendam et duas
bendulas de auro in campo blodeo: Gallice sic: Il port de asur vne band et
deux bandelettes dor: Anglice sic: He beryth asure a bend and two bendyls of
gold. And these bendyls are otherwhile florysshyd: as is showed in the figure
before in barrys. And in diverse armies they ben found that they ben chenyd. And
some ben powderyd with molettys. and some with other dyfference the which
needs not to be fyguryd here.

Of armies palyd and bendyd now here it shall be showed.
THe best manner of wise certainly of berynge of diverse armies in one shield is
in thise bendis beryng / for a man that has a patrimony left by his fader:
and other certain lands by his mother coming to him / to the which lands of
his moders are apropred armies of old time. For it may hap that these armies
came to her by the way and descent of her progenitors. Then may the heir
and he list bear the hole armies of his fader in the hole shield. And in such
a bend he may bear his moders armies: as here in ye scochon before aperyth.
blazon or coat of arms And it shall be said of him yt beryth these armies:
Latin sic: Portat arma palata de argento et rubio cum vna benda de nigro:
Gallice sic: Il port palee dargent et de geulles et vne bend de sable: He
beerith palee of silver and gowles with a bend of sable. And other while in
such a bend there is found three molettes or macules of gold.

Of armies bend fusyllyd here now I will exemple.
Moreover there ben found in arms other certain bendis to some man strange
from these. And here I will show to you a bend the which is called a bend
fusyllyd: as here apperyth in this scochon. blazon or coat of arms And it is
called fusyllydfor it is made all of fusyllis / of the which certain fusylles
more shall be spoken afterward. But he the which has thise armies bears:
Latin sic: Portat vnam bendam fusillatam de auro in campo asorio: Gallice sic:
Il port dasur vne bandee fusillee dor: Anglice sic: He berith asure a bend
fusyllyd of gold. And this bend many times is borne with strangers: and
specially in Burgoyne.

Here now it shall be spoken of diverse bordurys in armies.
BOrdures many and diverse are found in armies / and are borne of many noble
men. Of the which some ben plain some ingrayllyd: some talentyd: some plain
pouderyd some checkeryd: some gobonettyd: some inueckyd of the which it shall
be spoken eueriche one after other. And first of plain bordurys I will speak
as it aperith. blazon or coat of arms And the bordureis called plain: when it
is made plain of one color allone / as here in this scochon. And it shall be
said of him that is possessor of these armies: Latin sic: Portat tres rosas
rubias in campo argenteo cum vna bordura de rubio: Et gallice sic: Il port
dargent trois roses de geulles et vne bordure de geulles: Anglice sic: He
beereth silver three roses of gowles and a bordure of gowles.

Of armies borduryd and ingrayllyd now here folowyth example.
Armies with a bordure ingralyd other while are borne of certain noble men: as
now here is shewid in this scochon. blazon or coat of arms and such a bordure
is called a bordure engraylid for the color of him is putt gree by gree to
thefelde of tharmys: as it is open here. And the possessor of thise armies
beryth thus as follows: Latin: Portat arma de auro fymbriata sieve bordurata
de nigro ingradata cum tribus maculis perforatis de nigro: Gallice sic: Il
port dor trois mullettes fortee de sable vne bordure ingrayle de sable:
Anglice sic: He beryth gold three molettis perforatyd of sable and a bordure
ingraylyd of sable.

Now of armies borderyd and talentyd I will show example.
THere is borne in armies a certain bordure talentid: as here / blazon or coat
of arms And it is not necessary here to express the color of the talentis or
besantis: for they ben ever of gold. And it shall be said of him that beryth
these armies in this wise: Latin: Portat vnum signum capitale de rubio in campo
albo borduratum cum rubio talentatim: Gallice sic: Il port dargent vne
cheueron de geulles borduree de geulles talantee: Et anglice sic: He beeryth
silver a Cheueron of gowles borduryd with gowles talentyd.

Of ^^m^^^ borduryd having (...) cheuerons of silver. etc^.
Understand ye that certain times a bordure is borne in armies powdrid diverse
ways: other while with molettis: with rosis or with little crossis: or with
besantis or other wise. And it is called a bordure powdrid when any thing is
in that bordure: of whatsom ever sign it be / as it is said before. And these
signs as roses molettis and other are not countyd for certain nombre / For the
nombre of that powdrynge excedyth the nombre of.ix. And then that bordure is
called powdryd: as here. blazon or coat of arms And ye shall say that the
possessor of these armies beryth in this wise as folowyth: Latin: Portat vnum
scutum de rubio cum duobus signis capitalibus de albo et vna bordura
puluerisata cum talentis: Et gallice sic: Il port de geulles deux cheuerons
dargent et vne bordure de geulles pouldree talentee: Anglice sic: He beeryth
gowles two cheuerons of silver and a bordure powdryd with besantys.

Yet there is a another manner bordure that is called chekryd.
WE have yet a another bordure in armies which is called a bordure checkerid.
And it is called a checkerid bordure: for it is made of two colors by the
manner of a checker as here it apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And it shall be
said ofhym the which beryth thise armies in this wise as folowyth: Latin sic:
Portat vna^ crucem rubiam planam in campo argenteo cum vna bordura scaccata de
nigro et argento: Et gallice sic: Il port dargent vne crois plain de geulles
bordure check de sable et de argent: Anglice sic: He bears silver one croys
plain of gowles a bordure checkeryd with sable and silver.

Of bordurys gobonatyd now here is an example.
Know ye more over that yet beside these armies ye which I have spoke before
with bordurys: there is a another bordure that is called a bordure gobonatyd: as
here it shall be showed in this scochon next following. blazon or coat of arms
And it is called gobonatid for it is made of two colors quadratly Ioynid That
is to say / of black and white. And of hymthat beryth these armies ye shall
say as folowyth: Latin sic: Portat de argento et duas bendas de nigro cum vna
bordura de nigro et albo gobonata: Et gallice sic: Il port dor deux band et
vne bordure de sable et dargent: Anglice sic He beryth silver two bendys of
sable with a bordure gobonatyd of sable and silver.

And this same bordure bare that noble prince: the duke of Gloucetre brother to
that noble werryour and puissauunt king / king Henry the fyfthe. The which
ryall duke bare in his armies: the hoole armies of France and of England
quarterly with a bordure gobonatyd of silver and sable: as it shewyth in diverse
places. And to blace these armies it nedyth not to be rehercyd / for it is
suffycyently taught before in diverse places.

Item of bordurys had in armies of colourys inueckyd
THere ben yet bordurys in armies of two colors inueckyd / as here in this
figure apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And it is called a bordure inueckyd for
it is made of two colors togider inueckyd. And ye shall say of him the which
beriththyse arms: Latin sic: Portat arma quarteriata de rubio at auro cum vna
bordura de argento et nigro simul inuectis: Et gallice sic: Il port quarterlee
de geulles et dor auesque vne bordure verre dargent et de sable: Anglice sic:
He beryth quarterly gowles and gold with a bordure inueckyd of silver and
sable.

But in these bordurys there is a great dyfference among men: pretendynge
them expert and wise in this science / as specially it is open in the armies
in old time of the earl of March: whether they should be called bordures or
not / as here in this figure. blazon or coat of arms And certain men say that
men not putting a merueyllous dyfference of blasynge say / that the forsayde
earl of March: the which was called Roger Mortemer when he liuyd bare armies
in this wise to say: Latin: Portauit arma palata barrata et contraconata de
asorio et auro cum vno simplici scuto de argento: Gallice sic: Il port pale
bar gironnee de asur et dor et vne escu simple dargent: Anglice sic: He
beryth paly barry contrary coonyd of asure and gold with a simple shield of
silver.

And this opinion before rehercyd in the blasynge pleysyd many a man: the which
in no manner of wise may be true. For if these armies as it is said before were
contrary conyd: then the lowest corner of the coone of the armis That is to
say the lowyst point of the shield may never be of one color: as certainly it
is of asure.

OVer these things before rehercyd in these armies it is certain that in all
armies contrary conyd all the coonys of what someuer color the armies ben made
they mete together coonally in the myddys of the shield / As in the next figure
of the shield openly it shall be showed. wherefore as it apperyth to my reason:
trulyer they shall be blasyd on this wise Except the gretter auctoryte / that
the foresaid Earl of Narche beryth thus: Latin: Portauit arma barrata et capud
scuti palatum et angularum de asorio et auro cum quodam scuto simplici de
argento: Et gallice sic: Il port barree et vne chief palee cunnecte dasur et
dor and vne escu simple dargent: Et gallice sic: He beeryth barry and a cheyff
pale angulatyd of asure and gold with a simple shield ofe silver.

Of armies contrary coonyd here I woll enfourme you.
THere ben yet forsooth diverse noble men the which beat armis contrary conyd:
as here in this scochon aperith blazon or coat of arms and thise armies be
callid contrary conyd for this cause / for all ye colors of these arms mete
together at one cone.that is to say at the myddyst point of ye shield oonly.
For every body tryangulyd is more of length than of bread / and namely conyd
(vt pz) Therefore thoppynyon of those men the which said that tharmys before
rehercid / that is to wit of therlys armies of March were palyd barryd and
contrary conyd: is to be reprouyd. For so much that the conys of the foresaid
armies acorde not: the which of necessyte should acorde if the foresaid opinyon
were true. And of him that beryth these armies ye shall say: Latin sic: Portat
arma contraconata de blodio et albo: Gallice sic: Il port girone dasur et
dargent: Anglice sic: He beryth contrary conyd of asure and silver.

Of pilyd armies now here it shall be showed.
FOr asmoche as it is spoken before of arms: in the which the colors mete
together in the myddist point only Now folowyth of certain armies in which three
piles mete togyd in one cone / as here in this figure. blazon or coat of arms
andit shall be said of him which berith these armies Latin sic: Portat tres
pilas nigras in campo aureo: Gallice: Il port dor tres pilliers de sable
Anglice: He beryth gold three pilys of sable.

Of ballys in armies here now it shall be showed.
Nevertheless ye must consydre a dyfferencein these blasynges of these armies
before: and these that come after when ye blase them in latin tongue. For
other while this term (pila) in latin is take for to be a piece of tymbre to be
put under the pylar of a bridge or to such a like work as in thexample
before. blazon or coat of arms and other while this term (pila) is take for a
certain round instrument to play with. which instrument seruith otherwhile to
the hand and then it is called in latin (Pila manualis) as here. And other
while it is an Instrument for the foot / and then it is called in latin (pila
pedalis) a foot balle. Therefore it shall be said of him that beeryth these
armies: Latin sic: Portat tres pilas argenteas in campo rubio: Et gallice sic:
Il port geulles trois pellettes dargent: Et anglice sic: He bears gowles three
balls of silver. Certainly ye must mark that in this figure of ballys a man
may soon err. Wherefore shortly it is to be known that such ballys may have
all colors but the color of gold. For and they ben of golden colors: they
should be called talentis or besantis the which ben ever of golden color.

Of tortellis or little cakys.
THere ben also tortellis that been little cakysthe which ben gretter than
ballys and the armies be truly made: as here it is open. blazon or coat of arms
And he yt beryth thise arms beryth in this wise: Latin: Portat tres tortellas
rubeas in campo aureo: Gallice sic: Il port dor et trois torteaulx de geulles:
Anglice sic: He beryth gold and three cakes of gowles.

More over mark / that as well ballys in armies as cakys and besantis always are
hole round fygurys and not perforatyd.

Of fontayns or wells here I will speak.
NEuerthes there ben certain noble men which bear such round fygurys / the
which fygurys are called fontaynes or wellys: as here apperyth. blazon or coat
of arms The whichefontaynes evermore ben of white color for the thing the
which they represent. For they represent evermore the color of the water of
a well the which is white. And of him that beryth thise armies ye must say:
Latin sic: Portat tres fontes in campo aureo: Gallice sic: Il port dor et
trois fonteynnes: Anglice sic: He beryth of gold and three wells.

Of tynges which be other round instrument / I will speak
AFter these round fygures before rehercedthere ben certain fygures the which
ben perforatyd: as be rings / as here apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And it
shall be said of him that beryth these arms: Latin sic: Portat tres anulos
aureos in campo nigro: Gallice sic: Il port de sable et trois annelettes dor:
Anglice sic: He beryth sable and three rings of gold.

Of Tractys in armies /
Before it is said of bordures in armies. now folowyth to se of tractys or linys
/ and first of a simple tracte. and they ben called tractis for asmoche as the
field remaining of the armies as well within as wythoutand a another line is
drawn of a another color as here to the manner of a shield. blazon or coat of
arms And it it shall be said of him that beryth these armies: Latin sic: Portat
vnum tractum simplicem planum aureum in campo asorio: Gallice sic Il port
dasur vne trace plain dor: Anglice sic: He beeryth asure a plain tracte of
gold..

Of a (...)ylyd on both the ^yd^^^^^ here is an ensample
A Tracte or a line other while is ingraylydon both the parties: as here in
this figure apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And then it shall be said of him
that beeryth these arms in this wise: Latin sic: Portat vnum tractum ex
vtraque part ingradatum de auro in campo rubio: Gallice sic: Il port de
geulles vne trasse ingraillee de chacun cost dor: Anglice sic: He beryth
gowles with a tracte engrayllyd on both the sides of gold.

Or a tracte dowblyd and florysshyd it shall be showed.
THis tracte is other while doublyd: as in tharmys of the king of Scotlonde /
as here in this scochon apperyth. and the foresaid king of Scotlonde beeryth in
this wise first thus: Latin: Portat duplicem tractatum cum floribus gladioli
contrapositis et vno leone rapacide rubeo in campo aureo: Et gallice sic: Il
port dor vne double transse floretee contraree et vne lion ramppant de
geulles: Anglice sic: He beryth gold a dowble trace florysshyd contrary and a
lion rampinge of gowles.

Of tractys triplatyd and quatriplatyd otherwhyle.
ALso of these armies before rehercyd I find more dyuersyte / for there ben
certain noble men which bear these tractys triplatyd: as here in this figure.
blazon or coat of arms And some bear it quatriplatyd: as is found in diverse
armies. And ye shall say of him that beryth these arms triplatyd thus: Latin:
Portat tractum triplicatu^ de albo in ca^po aureo: Gallice sic: Il port dor vne
trasse triplee dargent: Anglice He bears gold a trace triplatyd of silver.

O a tracte simple of two colors and inueckyd an ensample.
THere ben other noble men which bear a simple tracte of.ij. colors inueckyd:
as here it shalbeshewed in this scochon. and the possessor of these arms
beryth in this wise as folowyth: Latin: Portat vnu^ tractu^ simplice^ de
coloribus asorio argenteo inuectis in scuto aureo: Gallice sic: Il port dor
vne crasse simple varree dasur et dargent: Anglice sic: He beryth gold and a
tracte simple inueckyd of asure and silver.

After tractys now it shall be spoken of fyssures or stauys
Before these fyssures it is spoken of bendis and their dyfference. Now it shall
be spoken of fyssurys. the which certain fyssurys or stauys begin in the left
horn of the shield: and are draw to the right part of the shield beneth to
the dyfference of bendes the which begin in the right horn^ of the shield and
are draw to the left side of the shield beneth. And this way must the
fyssure be draw. as here apperith in this figure. blazon or coat of arms And
ye shall understand that these fissures dyffere asmany ways as the foresaid
bendes dyffere / But it nedyth not to be rehercyd: for it is plain showed
before. There be fyssurys or stauys plain ingradid inueckyd and fusyllatyd: as
I said before in the place of bendys / And these staves bastardes are wont to
beer: or namely they should beer them. And then this fyssure is called a
staff / and in frensshe it is called a baston / But comynly it is called a
fyssure for asmoche as he cleuyth his faders arms in two parts / for that
bastard, is cloven and dyuyded from the patrimony of his fader. And such a
bastard is forboden to bear the hole armis of his fader for the reverence of
his blood. but his faders armies he may beer with such a staff as is said
before: in sign and fynall declaraco^n of his bastardy and to ye dyfference of
propre and natural heir of his fader. And when ye have any such a plain
fyssure or a staff in armies or ingraylyd inueckyd or fusyllatyd: of that same
staff ye shall say as before is rehercyd in the chapitre of bendys more
plainly. And ye bastard which beeryth these armies possessyth on this manner
as now here folowith: Latin: Portat vnam fissuram sieve baculum aureum in campo
asoreo: Gallice sic: Il port dasur et vne fees dor: Anglice sic: He beeryth
asure and a fissure or a staff of gold.

Now here I begin to speak of armies heeded as it aperyth.
THere ben certain noble men which beer armies heeded as here it apereth.
blazon or coat of arms And ye must know that thise armies ben called heeded:
when the hyer part of the shield / that is to say the heed is made of one
color or of moo than one. and that part extendyth not to the mids of the
shield: as above it shewyth by the shield. And know ye that in the heedyd armies
is a good manner of beeryng of diverse armies: as by fortune some noble man has
many londis and gretelordshyp^s by his mother: for the which londis he
intendyth to beer tharmys of his mother. and so he may do / for it is ryghtwys.
But he that dyscendyth of a noble fader / or of a gentylman. by ye which he
had any simple patrimony / Then such a noble man and he will: may beer the
hole armies of his mother in the lower part of his shield / and in such an heed
as I said before he may and he will beer ye hole armies of his fader. And it
shall be said of him that beryth these armies in this wise: Latin sic: Portat
vnum signum capitale de nigro in ca^po aureo cu^ vno capite rubio et tribus
talentis in eode^: Gallice: Il port dor vne cheueron de sable et vne cheyffe de
geulles et trois besantes en la mesmes: Anglice: He beryth gold a cheueron of
sable with a cheyf of gowles and three besantys therein.

And there ben certain noble persons the which bear in the shield before
rehercyd of gold as is said before a cheueron of sable or of some other
color and three read rosys or white or some other sygnys: as crossis:
cressantis: byrdys: or flourys / and a cheyff. some of sable / some of other
color with the sign of molettys or other tokenynge: the which nedyth not to
be rehercyd. And then shall every one of them be blasyd in his nombre like
as the field and the signs require: as by fortune some men bear thus to say.
He beeryth sable a cheueron of gold three read rosys of gowles a cheyff of
asure with three molettys perforatyd of vert. And thus of all other dyfferences.

Of Armies palyd with one quarter of a another color.
Certainly there ben some noble men thewhyche bear in their arms one quarter
of a another color differyng from the color or the colors of the shield: as
here. blazon or coat of arms In the which arms it is to be said that the
noble man the which beryth them: beeryth in this wise: Latin: Portat arma
palata de asorso et auro cu^ vna quarteria eremetica: Gallice: Il port pale
dasur and dor vne quarter dermynne: Anglice: He berith paly asur and gold with
one quarter of ermyn^. And it is to be notyd that ye must have a respect to ye
color of the pale which should ascend to the right horn of ye shield if ye
quarter^ were not there. And in ye color ye must evermore begyn^ to blase
those armies like as the quarter were not there: as before is rehercyd.

Now o^ armies checkeryd here ye shall have an example.
MOre over other while we se armies checkeryd: as here now it aperyth in this
figure folowinge. blazon or coat of arms And they ben called armies checkeryd
when they are made of two colors to the manner of a checker. and these
armysreceyue many dyfferences: as in heedis or quarters in barrys and bendis:
and other while in cheuerons / of whom it shall be spoken anon following. And
of him which possessyth these armies ye shall say: Latin sic: Portat arma
scakkata de asorio et auro: Gallice: Il port etches dasur et dor: Anglice: He
beryth checker of asure and gold.

Of cheuerons the which in english are called couples of sparrys.
WE have sothly in armies certain sygnys which are called cheuerons in frensshe.
And they ben called in latin (signa capitalia: vl^ tigna) and in english a
couple of sparrys / as here is showed in these signs: which signesby lyknesse
first were born^ of Carpentaries and makers of houses. blazon or coat of arms
For an house is never made perfyt till those sparrys ben put upon it: by ye
manner of an heed. and two such sparres or cheuerons Ioynyd together make a
capytall sign / yt is to say: a couple of sparrys. And other while two such
ben born^ in armies. and other while three: other while four as it is known.
And of him yt beryth thise armies before: ye shall say thus as folowyth: Latin:
Portat de rubio et duo signa capitalia de auro cuz tribus talentis: Gallice: Il
port de geulles et deux cheueryons dor et trois talentes: Anglice: He beryth
gowles and two cheuerons of gold with three besantys.

Of a cheueron or a sign capytall engraylyd here is showed.
ALso a cheueron is other while engraylyd as here / blazon or coat of arms And
then^e it is to be said of him which beryth these armies: Latin sic: Portat
vnum signu^ capitale ingradatu^ de albo in campo asoreo: Et gallice sic: Il
port de asur vne cheueron dargent ingraylee: Anglice: He berith asur and a
cheueron of silver engraylyd.

Of diverse and marvelous cheuerons yet I will speak.
More over yet in thise signys of cheuerons other while is found a dowte in
the blasyng of them / when they ben made of diverse colors transmutid: as here
in this scochon apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And of him which beryth these
armies ye shall say: Latin sic: Portat arma quarteriata de nigro et argento cu
vno signo capitali de dictis coloribus transmutatis: Gallice sic: Il port
quarterle de fable et dargent et vne cheueron chaungee lung de lautre: Anglice
sic: He beeryth quarterly sable and silver with a cheueron of the said colors
transmutyd.

Of cheuerons dyfferynge on the long way.
ALso these sygnys or cheuerons be dyfferryd after the long way in armies: as
here in this figure apperith. blazon or coat of arms And then of him which
beryth these armies ye shall say: Latin: Portat arma pertita scdm longu^ de
coloribus aureo et rubeo cu^ vno signo capitali de dictis coloribus
transmutates: Gallice sic: Il port party du long dor et geulles vne cheueron
chaungee lung de laultre: Anglice: He beryth party after the long way of.ij.
colors gold and gowles with a cheueron of the said colors transmutyd.

Of dowtis among Herroddis in blasing thise armies suenge
ENonge other doubts: about the blasynge of tharmys here following now next
I have herd Herrodys pretending themself very cunning in blasynge of armies
merueyllously to dreme in the blasynge of these said armies. and some hold one
opinion and some a another. blazon or coat of arms Nevertheless it is no great
need to doubt in the blasynge oftheym as to cunning men. Therefore of him yt
beryth these armies ye shall say: Latin: Portat duas pertes capitis scuti de
rubio et tercia^ part de albo ad modu^ signi capital et tres rosas de
coloribus transmutatis: Gallice: Il port lez deux perties du chief de geulles
et le troiseme de argent pertiez en manner dun cheueron et troys roses lung de
latre: Anglice: He beeryth two parts of the heed of the shield goules and the
third part silver by the manner of a cheueron and three rosys or the same
colors transmutyd.

Of armies tu^yllyd: in english / spyndyls now I woll speak
Certain gentylmen there ben and nobles which bear in their armies fusellys / Of
the nombre of whom the duke of Gloucetre that noble prince uncle to king Henry
the syxte was. For he had in his armies three fusyllys of gowles by ye manner of
a bar in a field of silver. The which certain armies this noble duke bare by
the reason of certain londis belongyng to the mount. blazon or coat of arms But
ye shall say of him yt beryth thise armies in this scochon: Latin sic: Portat
de rubio et tres fusules de argento: Gallice sic: Il port de geulles et trois
fusules dargent: Anglice: He beryth gowles and three fusules of silver. And
otherwhyle these three fusules or four ben born^ by the manner of a pale. It is
to be notyd that when three fusules or four are born^ or mo to the nombre
of.ix. which nombre if they excede: say ever more yt those armies ben poudryd
with fusules or other things and none otherwise. And so generally ye must
know yt if any thing be born^ in arms over the nombre of.ix. then^ those
armis what someuer they ben they are powdryd.

Of one fusyll born^ in arms here I will exemple.
OTher while one fusyll is born^ all one inarmys: as here in this figure it
aperyth / blazon or coat of arms in which matere I have herd certain Herrodys
doubt in their opynyons. Nevertheless it is certain yt ye shall say of him the
which beryth these armies without doubt: Latin sic: Portat de rubio cu^ vno
fusulo de auro: Gallice: Il port de geulles vne fusill dor: Anglice: He bears
gowles and a fusyll of gold.

Of a fusyll of diverse colors now here I will speak.
ALso thise fusyllis sometime are born^ of diverse colors: as here in this
figure it is showed. blazon or coat of arms But it is a more dowte how thise
armies should be blasyd than the armies before. But ye shall say of him which
berech these armies: Latin sic: Portat arma pertita extransuer so de albo et
nigro cu^ vno fusulo ex eisdem coloribus transmutatis: Gallice sic: Il port
party de trauers dargent and sable et vne fusyll de mesmes colors lung de
latre: Anglice sic: He beryth armies partyd ouerwhart of silver and sable with a
fusyll of the same colors transmutyd.

Of fusyllis by the manner of a bend here I woll somewhat say
More over such fusyllis are born^ in arms by ye manner of a bend: as here
now aperyth. blazon or coat of arms And then^e ye shall say of him which
possessyth these armies: Latin sic: Portat vnam bendam fusillatam de auro in
campo rubio: Gallice sic: Il port de geulles vne bend fusill dor: Anglice sic:
He beeryth gowles and a bend fusyllyd of gold.

Of a bar fusyllyd in armies here is an example.
ALso there ben borne in armies these fusyllys in a bar fusyllyd: as here it
aperyth. blazon or coat of arms And then^ it is to be said of him which has
thise armies: Latin sic: Portat ar de rubio en^ vna barra fusillata de arge^to:
Gallice sic: Il port de geulles vne bar fusulee dargent: Et anglice sic: He
beeryth gowles and a bar fusyllyd of silver. And some men say that the
forsayde armies began of Vueuers: for as much as Vueuers vsen such fusyllys
made of sponnen wulle.

Know ye the difference betwyx fusyllis: masculis: and losynges
NOw here ye shall know the dyfference betwyx fusyllis masculys and losyngis.
Vuherfore it is to be known that fusyllis are ever more long. Also fusyllis
are streytter ouerwharte in the belly than are masculys. And masculys are larger
ouerwhart in the belly: and shorter in length than ben fusyllis: as here in this
scochon it apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And it shall be said of him that
possesses these arms in this wise: Latin: Portat de rubio et sex masculas de
auro: Et gallice sic: Il port de geulles et.vj. mascules dor: Et anglice sic:
He beryth gowles and.vj. masculys of gold. And these masculys other while are
perforatyd as I said before in the chapter of the cross masculatyd.

Of a another manner of masculys yet here I will speak.
ALso other while are borne armies masculatyd: as here in this figure following
is showed. blazon or coat of arms And ye shall understand that those armies be
called masculatid in which the foresaid mascules begyn^ most plenteuouslyin
the right angle of the shield / and are endid toward the left part. which
certain armies in very deed are palyd / and are diuyded in to three pales if they
ben subtylly conceived. And of him yt berith thise armies it shall be said: Latin
sic: Portat arma masculata de argento et asorio: Gallice sic: Il port dargent
et dasur masculee: Anglice sic: He beryth of silver and asure masculatyd.

Of losynges how and what manner of wise they ben made.
ALso losynges no manner of wise ben made but in armies bendyd. Nor they may not
be made by themself. and they ben made always as these ben made bendid. And ye
shall have the mood very dyfference betwyx the foresaid maculatyd armies and
bended in the pictures of the foresaid armies. And ye must take this for a
general enformaco^n and instrucco^n: that certainly losynges evermore stand
upright: yt is to say / yt the highest point or the heyght ever ascends to
heaven or to a mannys heed. so ye the highest point extendyth utterly to the
heed of the shield. and of the ouerwharte corners one extendyth utterly to the
right side. and ye other corner extendyth to the left side of the shield. And
ye lowest part extendyth to ye lowest part of the shield dyametraliter: as it
is open in ye shield next before. blazon or coat of arms And so without dowte
we have the dyfference of the foresaid signys: yt is to wit / of masculys and
losyngis. Nota Also the foresaid fusyllis never ben found perforatyd nor
losynges aforsayd ben never perforatyd.

Now of a sight in arms yt is called a Saltori: a manner of a cross
THere is a another manner of sign in armies by diverse noble men borne: which
is called a Saltori. And it is made by the manner of a cross of saint Andrew:
as here now it apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And this cross is lyknyd after
certain men to an instrument made in diverse parkes: which is of a great
magnitude or largnes to the comparyson of this sign. And it is well know of
noble gentylmen and hunters: yt such saltatoryes are ordenyd in many parkys
and places to take wild bestes: which onys there entering: by ye instrument
may never goo again. wherefore in old time these signys were give to rich men
/ and other wise called (Auari) nygon^s or kepers. which suffer not their
tresours in what manner of wise they ben got to pass fro them. And of him
which possessyth these armies ye shall say: Latin sic Portat de asorio et
vnu^ saltatoriu^ de auro: Gallice: Il port dasur vng saultiere dor: Et anglice
sic: He bears asure and a saltory or a sawtry of gold.

Of armies sawtrie engradyd here I woll exemple.
HOw here ye must know that thise arms sawtre ben other while engradyd: as
here in this figure now apperyth. blazon or coat of arms And then they ben
called sawtre engradid: as it is said before in many places. As of the cross
engradyd of barrys and bendis. And of him that beryth these armies ye shall
say: Latin: Portat vnu^ saltatorium ingradatum de auro in campo asorio: Et
gallice sic: Il port de asure vne saultier dor engraylee: Et anglice sic: He
beryth asure and a cross sawtre of gold engradyd.

Of many crosses sawtre born^ in armies engradyd an example
OTherwhyle there ben borne many crossys sawtre in armies engradyd in one shield
/ other while two: other while three: as here. blazon or coat of arms And of him
that beryth these armysthus it shall be said: Latin: Portat vna^ barram planam
and tria saltatoria ingradata de auro in campo rubeo: Et gallice sic: Il port
de geulles vne bar plain et trois saultiers engreiles dor: Et anglice sic:
He beryth gowles one bar plain and three sawtre crossys engradyd of gold.

Of crownys in armies born^ by the manner of a pale.
IT is dylygently to be marked: that when we say such a lord berith three
such signys / How thise three signs are born^ in armies we say not always. For
other while these iij. signs are put in a shield in manner of a pale / and
then^ they ben called signs palyd: as here in this figure it apperyth. blazon
or coat of arms And of him that has these arms ye shall say: Latin: Portat
tres coronas de anro palatas in campo asorio: Et gallice sic: Il port dasur et
troys corones dor palees: Anglice sic: He beryth asure and three crownys of
gold palyd.

Of crownys in armies born^ barrid here I will inform you
HOw these three signs other while ben borne barryd here now apperyth in this
figure. blazon or coat of arms And then^ of him that bears these armies ye
shall say: Latin: Portat tres coronas aureas in campo asorio: Gallice sic: Il
port dasur et trois corones barrez dor: Anglice: He beryth asure and three
crowns of gold.

Of three crowns born^ in the corners of the shield.
Certainly these three crownys ben born^ in the most common way in the corners
of the shield: as here in this scochon it aperyth. blazon or coat of arms And
then ye must thus say: that these three signs ben borne in the corners of
theshelde. For that is the most common and the most famoust manner of berynge
of these three signs or any manner signs. Therefore ye shall say that such a
lord beryth this wise as here folowyth: Latin: Portat de asoreo et tres
coronas aure as. non expremendo loca: Et gallice sic: Il port dasur et troys
corones dor: Et anglice sic: He beereth asure and three crowns of gold.

Of fysshes born^ in armies in diverse wise here is a doctrine
A New doubt yet is found in arms / for as much as there was a certain man
that hight (Petrus de rupibus) in time passyd: the bishop of wynchestre:
which bare in his armies three roches after his own name. In which armies it is
doubted: whether it is ynouh to say in ye blasyng of them / yt he bare.iij.
fysshes alone: as here in this scochon. blazon or coat of arms and certainly I
think nay / for ye rule gooyng before. But it is thus to be said of ye said
Petre: Latin Portauit tres huiusmodi pisces arge^teos natantes in campo nigro
Gallice sic Il port de sable et trois roches noyant dargent. Anglice sic. He
beryth sable and three roches swymmynge of silver.

And then to the armies of Galfride Lucy: as here now it apperyth in this
figure. blazon or coat of arms And ye must say that he bare thus: Latin
Portauit tres lucios aureos in campo rubeo: Et gallice sic: Il port de geulles
et trois lucez dor: Anglice sic: He beeryth gowles and three luces of gold. The
which certain blasyng without declaraco^n here is enough For ye foresaid fysshes
are in their propre places as I said in the rule before.

But what shall be said of this man then^: the which beryth two barbellis
tornyng their backs to gyder: as here apperyth. blazon or coat of arms Ye must
say Latin sic* Portat duos barbillos aureos adinuicem terga vertentes in
scuto asoreo puluerisato cu^ crucibus cruciatis figitiuis de auro: Et gallice
sic Il port dasur poudre dez croys crocelez fichez et duex barbeaulx dos an
dos dor: Et anglice sic He beryth asure powdryd with crosses croslettis pytche
and two barbelles of gold back to back.

Of armies the which are called frectis here now I woll speak
A Certain noble baron: that is to say / the lord Awdeleye of the realm of
England bare in his armies a Frecte / which certain frecte in many arms of
diverse gentylmen is found other while read other while gold / and other
while black other while simple and other while dowble other while tryple. and
other while it is multiplied over all the shield: as here it appears. blazon
or coat of arms And ye must understand one great dyfference betwyx armies
bendyd and these armies which ben made with the foresaid frectys. wherefore it is
to be markyd: that in the bendyd armies the colors being conteynyd equally
are dyuydyd. But in thise frectes the field always abides hole: as here. and
this foresaid lord Andeley beryth: Latin sic: Portat arma frectata de auro in
ca^po rubeo: Gallice: Il port de geulles vne frecte dor: Anglice He beryth
gowles and a frecte of gold.

Of arms having beestis salientynge or tampynge.
BEstys in armies of diverse nobles are born^ rampynge: as here in this figure
following appears / blazon or coat of arms of which in the book before I have
no mention. And of him yt is possessor of these armies ye shall say: Latin
sic:Portat de rubio et vnu^ leonu^ de argento: Gallice: Il port de geulles
vngleon saliantz de argent: Anglice: He berith goules and a lion rampyng of
silver. And he is called a lion rampyng for this cause / for asmoche as the
right foot asce^dith to the right horn of the shield / and the left foot
descendyth in to the foot of the shield as apperyth in the figure. And this
same manner is obseruyd in all bestis having four fete / that is to say: in
lions: leoperdys beers: doggys with other like to them.

Of armies barryd and of labellys born^ in armies.
First note well tharmes of the fader as here / blazon or coat of arms and
then the dyfferences as it shall be showed. For certain there ben diverse noble
men which bear labellys in their armies as it shall be showed in figure after.
For which it is to be know yt such labellis are not properly called signs
in arms but differences of signs: that when it is so yt any noble man has
many leyffull getyn sons / then^ the first sone which is his faders heir:
shall bear the hole armies of his fader with some lytyl dyfference: as here / to
whom specially is ye uen a moan encreasynge. For ye first sone is in hope of
augmentaco^n and encreasynge of his patrimony. And this dyfference may be some
little molet or a cross croslet or such a like dyfference. The second brother
shall bear the hole arms of his fader with.iij. labellis to the dyfference and
in to the sign yt he is the third yt bears those armis. blazon or coat of
arms Also the third brother if there be any shall bear.iiij. labellys in token
yt he is the fourth that beryth those armis of whom the fader is the first.
the heir is the second. and the second brother is the third yt berith those
arms. And so folowith yt the third brother shall bear four labellis: as it
aperyth in this figure / blazon or coat of arms And so forth if there ben mo
bredern ye shall encreace your labellys after the form before rehercyd. And
the sons of those same bredern shall bear the same labellis. And in case that
the second brother which beryth three labellys have two sonys / certainly the
elder soneof those two which is heir to his fader shall bear the hole armies
of his fader: with also many labellys as his fader did / with a little
dyfference: as here it apperith in this scochon. blazon or coat of arms And his
second brother shall bear the hole armies of his fader with the same labellis as
his fader bare and no mo with a bordure: as here in this figure next
folowingit shall be showed / blazon or coat of arms and as it is reherced in
the chapter of bordurys.

And if there be the third brother then^ he shall bear his faders armies with the
same labellys and a bordure of a another color to ye difference of his brother:
as it shall be showed in this scochon next ensewynge. blazon or coat of arms

And the third children of those men shall bear their dyfference not in their
faders arms / but in bordurys and dyuysyons diverse.

And like as the children of the second brother berynge three labellys are
diuydyd and dyfferyd by their signs and bordur / So ye childern of ye third
brother berynge four labellis: bear ye same armies yt their fader did and also
many labellis. And they are differid by their signs and bordures: as before is
rehercid and diverse other / As other while a lion rampyng one part read a
another black.

NOw certainly of all the sygnys which are founden in armies: as of flourys
leeuys and other merueylous tokens / I can not declare here there ben so many.
But ye shall know generally that for all tharmys which lightly any man has
seen in his days: ye have rules suffycyent as I believe to discern and blase
any of them / and it be so that ye be not in your mind to hasty or to swyfte
in the dyscernynge Nor ye may not ouerrenne swyftly the foresaid rules / but
dylygently have them in your mind. and be not to full of conceytes. For he yt
woll hunte.ij. harys in one hour: or one while one / a another while a another
Lightly he lesyth both. Therefore take heed to the rules. if so be that they
ben not a general doctrine: yet shall they prouffyte for this science greatly.

Mark ye well these questyons here now following.
But now is a questyon I will proceed / and that is this. whether the armies of
the granting of a prince or of other lordys are better or of such dygnytee:
as armies of a mannys propre auctoryte taken. when that it is leyffull to every
noble man to take to him arms at his pleysure: For the which question it is
to be known that four manner wise we have armies.

The first maner^ of wise we have our own armies which we bear of our fader or
of our mother or of our predecessors. the which manner of berynge is common and
famous in which I will not stand long. for that manner is best prouyd.

The second manner we have armies by our merytis as very plainly it apperyth by
thaddyco^n of the armies of France to tharmys of England getin by that most
noble man: prince Edward the first gotten sone of king Edward the third
that time king of England after the taking of king John^ of France in the
battle of Peyters. The which certain addycyon was leyffull and ryghtwysly
done. And on the same manner of wise might a poor Archer have taken a prince
or some noble lord. and so the armies of that prisoner by himself so take
ryghtwysly he may put to him and to his heirs.

On the third manner of wise we have armies which we beer by the granting
of a prince or of some other lordys

And ye must know that those armies which we have of ye granting of a prince
or of a lord receive no questyon why that he beeryth those same. For why the
prince will not that such a questyon be asked: why he gave to any man such an
arms / as it is plain in the law of nature and Civil. For that same that
plesyth their prince has the strength of law: but if any man bare those
armies before. For that thing which is mine with a ryghtwys title without
deseruynge may not be take fro me / nor the prince may not do it ryghtwysly.

The fourth manner wise we have those armies the which we take on our one
propre auctoryte: as in these days openly we se / how many poor men by their
grace favor labor or deseruynge are made nobles Some by their prudence: some
by their manhede: some by their strength: some by their cunnyng some by other
virtues. And of these men many by their own auctoryte have take armies to be
borne to them and to their heirs / of whom it nedyth not here to reherce the
namys. Nevertheless armies that been so taken they may leyffully and freely beer
But yet they ben not of so great dygnyte and auctoryte as those armies the
which are grauntyd day by day by the auctorite of a prince or of a lord.
Yet armies by a man's propre auctoryte take: if a another man have not borne
them before: be of strength enough

And it is thopinyon of many men that an Herrode of armies may give armies: But
I say if any such armies be borne by any Herrode given / that those arms ben
of no more auctorite than those armies which ben take by a mannys own
auctoryte.

Here in this book before ben showed the treatyses perteynynge to hawkynge and
hunting with other diverse playsaunt materes belonging unto noblesse: and also
a right noble treatise of Cotarmours / as in this present book it may appear.
And here we end this last treatise which specyfyeth of blasynge of armies
Enprynted at westmestre by wynkyn the word the year of thyncarnaco^n of our
lord. M.CCCC.lxxxxvi.

heraldic woodcut Dieu et mon droit



printer's device of Wynkyn de Word


